arXiv:2106.12277v2 [cs.HC] 24 Jun 2021

#StayHome Playing LoL - Analyzing Players’ Activity and Social
Bonds in League of Legends During Covid-19 Lockdowns
Simone Petrosino

Enrica Loria

Johanna Pirker

Institute of Interactive Systems and
Data Science,
Graz University of Technology
Graz, Austria
s.petrosino@tugraz.at

Institute of Interactive Systems and
Data Science,
Graz University of Technology
Graz, Austria
eloria@tugraz.at

Institute of Interactive Systems and
Data Science,
Graz University of Technology
Graz, Austria
johanna.pirker@tugraz.at

ABSTRACT
Humans are social beings. It is therefore not surprising that the
social distancing and movement restrictions associated with the
Covid-19 pandemic had severe consequences for the well-being of
large sections of the population, leading to increased loneliness
and related mental diseases. Many people found emotional shelter
in online multiplayer games, which have already proven to be
great social incubators. While the positive effect games had on
individuals has become evident, we are still unaware of how and
if games fostered the fundamental need for connectedness that
people sought. In other words: how have the social bonds and
interaction patterns of players changed with the advent of the
pandemic? For this purpose, we analyzed one year of data from an
online multiplayer game (League of Legends) to observe the impact
of Covid-19 on player assiduity and sociality in three different
geographical regions (i.e., Europe, North America, and South Korea).
Our results show a strong relationship between the development
of Covid-19 restrictions and player activity, together with more
robust and recurrent social bonds, especially for players committed
to the game. Additionally, players with reinforced social bonds—i.e.,
people played with similar teammates—were more likely to stay in
the game even once the restrictions were lifted.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Social network analysis; Empirical studies in HCI; Empirical studies in collaborative and
social computing; Social network analysis.

KEYWORDS
Social Network Analysis, Games User Research, Game Analytics,
Covid-19, Player Community, Behavioral Analysis
ACM Reference Format:
Simone Petrosino, Enrica Loria, and Johanna Pirker. 2021. #StayHome
Playing LoL - Analyzing Players’ Activity and Social Bonds in League
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
FDG’21, August 3–6, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada
© 2021 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-8422-3/21/08. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3472538.3472551

of Legends During Covid-19 Lockdowns. In The 16th International Conference on the Foundations of Digital Games (FDG) 2021 (FDG’21), August
3–6, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 12 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3472538.3472551

1

INTRODUCTION

The Covid-19 pandemic has had a huge impact on people’s lives
and mental states. Social distancing caused a spiking feeling of
loneliness [38], correlated to depression and other serious health
repercussions [39]. As a consequence, we experienced a drastic rise
in social media usage. At the same time, entertainment platforms
such as Twitch and Youtube also saw increasing viewership in terms
of gaming activities [14]. Apart from social media, games also saw
a rapid activity increase. Steam, a game distributor, reported the
highest peak of players in its history [40] and internet traffic related
to gaming increased dramatically [45, 64]. People spent more time
playing games to socialize and cope with stress [62]. While social
media overly exposed users to the dramatic situation world-wide,
games represented a refuge and an escape from reality [20, 42].
Recent research on social play proving how multiplayer games
are a social platform [27] fostering positive feelings [48, 54], such
as connectedness [57], belonging [55], and enjoyment [21]. Those
findings were also supported by recent research on how games
impacted the live of people during Covid-19 and the social restrictions it brought. While researchers have already showed how player
participation peaked in the past year [40] and how players drew
psychological benefits in playing with others [35], little is known
about how the social bonds created within games changed. In this
context, we shifted from a player-centric analysis, focused on how
players interact and benefit from the gaming experience, towards a
network-centric investigation, by inquiring how Covid-19 restrictions impacted the social interaction patterns of players. To this end,
we conducted an in-depth analysis on the League of Legends implicit social network, built from the in-game interactions of players
during the Covid-19 crisis.

Research Questions and Contributions
Covid-19 has had a significant impact on people’s lives. This has
had the result that individuals have relied on different ways of fulfilling their need for connectedness. In the light of previous findings
that have presented arguments for games being great incubators
of social relationships, which are also transferable offline, we expected an observable change in the player networks, built on the
foundation of their in-game interactions in an online multiplayer
game (i.e., League of Legends). In other words, this work aims at

FDG’21, August 3–6, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada

understanding how and whether online multiplayer have assisted
people in difficult times. We pose the following research questions:
RQ1. How did player turnout and activity (#matches and #players)
vary across the Covid-19 phases?
RQ2. How did player social structures (clustering coefficient, communities, and focused player coefficient) vary across the
Covid-19 phases?
RQ3. Who are the players that approached the game during the
Covid-19 lockdowns (churn rate, level of activity, and social
involvement)?
RQ4. How have player networks varied across different geographical regions?
By answering these research questions, we bring the following contributions to the Games User Research (GUR) and HumanComputer Interaction (HCI) fields. First, the analysis of variations in
player engagement (RQ1) highlights how and whether players used
online multiplayer games to cope with Covid-19 and lockdowns.
The significant increase in player turnout and activity strongly suggests that multiplayer games occupy their newfound free time. This
analysis confirms this trend for both new players and committed
players taking refuge in LoL. While this rise in their activity signals
that games assumed a significant role during lockdowns, this still
does not connect with the social nature of games. Although games
were an ideal means for safely filling time and respecting the government restrictions, we moved a step forward and analyzed how
player social interaction patterns during social-distancing times.
Understanding changes in the player social structure changes (RQ2)
shows how lockdowns the social behaviors of players. One group
of players, mostly comprised of committed LoL frequenters, made
stronger and more recurrent bonds than thse prior to social distancing, and possibly finding in games the social connectedness that
they lacked in life at that moment. Moreover, players starting to play
during the lockdown weeks were more likely to remain in the game
even in later stages if they were involved in stronger connections
(RQ3). These findings not only support the conception of games being social platforms and of social interactions impacting retention
but further connect online and real life. Events occurring in the
real world have repercussions in the online game worlds, which
modify their social norms and structures to fulfill their needs that
reality cannot (temporarily) satisfy (e.g., connectedness). Finally,
this study also compares the networks across different geographical areas (RQ4), providing evidence on how the different cultures
impact the way players connect.

2

RELATED WORK

In this section, we discuss evidence of games being great incubators of sociability and connectedness. Then we show how player
telemetry data has been widely employed to gain knowledge of
game status and player experiences. Finally, we show how players
have dealt with the pandemic through social gaming experiences.

2.1

Games as social platforms

Gaming can be a positive and healthy experience [29]. Playing,
especially with other, can benefit different aspects of our life. It can
help us to relax, reduce anxiety, and improve our mood [58, 59]
and our cognitive abilities [29]. When it comes to sociability, it

Blinded, et al.

helps to learn positive skills related to cooperative and helpful
behaviors, which are also practiced in the real life [28, 29]. The
online gaming experience can produce a sense of connectedness
and belongingness to a virtual community [22]. Thus, sociality
represents a strong motivation for playing [68], which can reduce
the feeling of loneliness. As shown by other studies, solitude can
lead to a broad spectrum of mental disorders [38, 65]. However,
not all social games have the same positive effects on players. A
feeling of belonging can only be achieved when social elements
are well designed and aim at building an environment that connect
players to one another [22, 23]. As a result the focus of researcher
interest is in analyzing player social interaction patterns to extract
the rules and social norms, creating a prolific habitat for connectedness. Exploring sociability and behaviors of players can also be
approached through the help of games’ telemetry data. Towards
this, social network analysis comes in handy in investigating the
social structure of players’ social networks.

2.2

Social Network Analysis in Games

Social Network Analysis (SNA) is the discipline through which
we can describe and analyze the relation between people [60].
The literature on SNA and their application on games to learn
about players and their social behaviors are wide. SNA is widely
used to investigate many and different aspects of online games
networks such as player interactions, player retention, the social structure of the game, engagement, influence, and communities [17, 24, 30, 46, 54]. Many studies focus on multiplayer games,
which use a rich range of social features to build networks, such
as friend lists or guilds [17, 18]. Others build the network starting
from the match-making mechanism itself, linking two players if
they played together [34, 47, 51]. Studies on online multiplayer
games provided evidence on the value of games as social outlets
and how online relationships and reactions are often translated
into the real world [23]. In this context,however we could not often
verify whether events in the real world also impact virtual environments. The unprecedented pandemic has given us the chance to
investigate how social dynamics evolved when people are forced
to limit their physical, social relationships.

2.3

Gaming during a pandemic

An increase in the Covid-19 cases and deaths [10] forced countries
around the world to impose social distancing measures, which included closing borders, traveling limitations, bans on gatherings,
and closing any meeting places or facilities [19]. Governments generally made social contacts more difficult, even using mandatory
stay-at-home orders (i.e., lockdown) [13]. Many people faced the
inconvenient situation of being more lonely and isolated than usual.
Uncertainty about when the restrictions might end or become even
more serious made mental health disorders and unhealthy behavior
patterns severe problems [38, 39]. Since the beginning of the pandemic, the World Health Organization (WHO) has issued different
suggestions about keeping ourselves mentally healthy [9]. Among
them, WHO supported online gaming as a tool for social distancing [16]. Remarkable is the case of Animal Crossing: New Horizons,
which went viral during the first pick of Covid-19 cases [37]. The
game is a life simulation in which players are engaged in simple

Analyzing Players’ Activity and Social Bonds in League of Legends During Covid-19 Lockdowns

Table 1: Countries in each League of Legends area
Area
EUW

#Countries
11

NA
KR

2
1

Countries
Portugal, Spain, Germany,
Italy, France, Belgium, Netherland,
UK, Ireland, Austria, Switzerland
Canada, U.S.
South Korea

activities on their islands, such as growing plants, collecting fruits,
or interacting with villagers. Players can have social interactions
visiting other players’ islands. Furthermore, a recent Oxford study
shows how social games like Animal Crossing have a positive effect
on the mental health of players, reduce the feeling of loneliness, and
foster well-being [35]. The game encourages players to be positive
and kind in their social behaviors, taking care of their islands and
villages, helping other players, and giving gifts. Players can create
their narrative to help them handle and express their emotions and
feelings, which can be harder to express when dealing with social
distancing [20]. Different to this are the cases of players having
weddings, social events, and even funerals [41]. Mental health problems are also caused by unhealthy behaviors linked to a sedentary
existence. While exergames–i.e., integrating physical activity and
gaming features–are often recommended to promote a healthy and
sporty lifestyle, they can also boost our social experiences when
combined with social games. Through social exergames, players
could fight anxiety and sedentary habits while sharing their results to connect with and keep in contact with other people [66].
If exergames promote a healthy lifestyle and connection while
maintaining a physical distance, this was more difficult for locationbased games (e.g., Pokemon GO). Location-based games rely on
the real players’ positions to offer different game contents. Due to
the pandemic, they got special updates to keep on offering players
an engaging social experience but avoiding them to have external
social activities [43]. Games like Animal Crossing and exergames
offer mechanics close to real-world interaction, answering to that
desire for social interaction, such as having a conversation, hanging
out with friends, or having physical actives. We know less about
more “classic” games that do not entirely rely on those mechanics.
We contribute to understanding the relationship between games
and reality by filling this knowledge gap and investigating the effect
of forced social distancing on players’ activities and participation
in a multiplayer online game (League of Legends).

3

MATERIALS AND METHODS

In the following section, we detail the process through which we
gathered and analyzed player data. Our observation period extends
from September 2019 to September 2020. In this time frame, the
pandemic went through different phases. At the same time, countries reacted in different ways based on the virus spread. To better
understand players’ gaming behaviors throughout the year, we first
need to take a closer look at restrictions and social distancing measurements, which differ in every country. Moreover, later in this
section, we explain why we focused on three specific geographical
areas (Table 1) and how we built the players’ networks.

3.1

FDG’21, August 3–6, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada

Covid-19 Lockdown and Restrictions

During our observation period, each country has assumed specific
strategies. We identify three phases, based on government reports
and Covid-19 official spreading data that we detail later for each
region:
• Pre-Lockdown. This phase includes the weeks before any
form of lockdown or restrictions. In this period, the first
news about Covid-19 appeared in the media, as the cases
increased daily.
• Lockdown. This phase includes the weeks in which restrictions were issued. For instance, movements within the country or cities of residence, and, in some areas, the limitations
culminated into full-fledged lockdowns. During this period,
gatherings were discouraged or prohibited, and shops, restaurants, and entertainment facilities were closed. Please note
that we call this phase lockdown, but it also indicates a phase
in which restrictions were applied although a real lockdown
did not exist (i.e., in South Korea).
• Post-Lockdown. This phase does not necessarily overlap with
a substantial decrease in Covid-19 cases but is primarily
related to a significant decrease or even completion of lockdowns and movement restrictions.
The more precise temporal collocation of each phase changes
with the geographical area, as it is based on how countries manage
the virus spread.
West Europe (EUW). In western Europe, the first declared Covid-19
case appeared by the end of January [8]. Nevertheless, it was not
until early March that European countries began to activate serious
lockdown measures. The first country to enter into a lockdown
was Italy [33], but within a few weeks, over 250 million people
were in lockdown [32]. Social distancing measures varied slightly
from country to country. All the measures, however, included social
distancing, assembly bans, border controls (inside and outside the
country), house arrest regulations, closure of nonessential stores,
museums, entertainment venues, and schools. Lockdowns and other
forms of restrictions were lifted slightly across Europe starting in
early May due to the decrease of cases and deaths [1]. We divided
our observation period in three phases as follows as follows:
• Pre-Lockdown: week 1 - 27 (September 4, 2019 - March 11,
2020). This phase ranges from weeks where Covid-19 was
not yet known to the first cases detected across Europe [8].
• Lockdown: week 28 - 37 (March 11, 2020 - May 20, 2020).
From week 28, most of the Europe West countries entered
the lockdown/restrictions phase [25].
• Post-Lockdown: week 38 - 52 (May 20, 2020 - September
2, 2020). From week 38, most Western European countries
lifted the heavy restrictions and hard lockdown [1].
North America (NA). For countries in North America, the breakdown of phases was slightly different. As in Europe, the first cases
were confirmed both in Canada and the U.S. by the end of January.
Social distancing measures in America were less strict than in Europe. They included social distancing, bans on gatherings, border
controls (within and outside the country), closure of nonessential shops, museums, entertainment venues, and schools. Following those restrictions, masks and other protective devices became

FDG’21, August 3–6, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada

mandatory in most of North America [3, 31]. A state of emergency
was declared in all Canadian provinces by the end of March. The
same happened for the 50 U.S. states that declared the state of
emergency a few days after the U.S. president’s emergency declaration [6]. However, in the U.S., the first stay-at-home orders did
not start until late March [53]. Both Canada & U.S. started to lift
the restrictions in mid-May [15, 50]. In Canada, this is related to a
decrease in cases and deaths. Taking this information into consideration we divided and modified the three phases in the following
way:
• Pre-Lockdown: week 1 - 28 (September 4, 2019 - March 18,
2020). This phase goes from the weeks where Covid-19 was
still unknown until the state of emergency was declared both
U.S. & Canada [25].
• Lockdown: week 29 - 39 (March 18, 2020 - June 3, 2020). From
week 29, all Canadian provinces and most U.S. states declared
a state of emergency and started to impose restrictions [25].
• Post-Lockdown: week 40 - 52 (June 3, 2020 - September 2,
2020). From week 40, all Canadian provinces lifted most of
the restrictions, 23 U.S. states lifted the stay-at-home order, and most U.S. States reopened nonessential shops and
entertainment places [50, 63].
South Korea (KR). South Korea fought Covid-19 in a different way.
It is the area with least restrictions and with no imposed lockdown.
A first Covid-19 patient was reported on January 20, 2020 [36].
Less than one month after, the “Infection Disease Alert” was raised
from level 0 to 4 [4]. Compared to European and North American
countries, South Korea did not rely on enforced lockdowns, curfews,
or similar restrictions. Instead, reliance was placed on a massive
campaign of testing and on an advanced contact tracing process
to trace people who might be infected[11, 49]. In addition, the
population was advised to distance themselves socially, schools
and entertainment venues were closed the moment the pandemic
broke out. In addition, South Korea immediately closed its borders
to many other countries [5]. South Korea successfully contained
the first Covid-19 wave thanks to its previous experience with a
similar disease, the MERS, outbreak of 2015 [7]. Due to the lack of
strict and clear restrictions, which could help to separate a "before"
and "after," we decided to divide South Korea into only two phases:
• Pre-Lockdown: week 1 - 24 (September 4, 2019 - February 19,
2020). This phase goes from the weeks in which Covid-19
was still unknown to when the “Infection Disease Alert” was
raised.
• Lockdown: week 25 - 52 (February 19, 2020 - September 2,
2020). From week 25, the alert was increased, the country’s
border control increased, and the school and other facilities
closed [12]

3.2

League of Legends (LoL) - Data and
Preprocessing

League of Legends (LoL) is a multiplayer online battle arena (MOBA)
developed and supported by Riot since 2009. In every match, two
teams compete with each other intending to destroy the main base
of the opponent team (Nexus). The teams are composed of five
members, and each member has a specific role defined before the

Blinded, et al.

matchmaking phase allowing the algorithm to create a balanced
team. Teams fight on 3D maps, divided into three lanes (Top, Mid,
Bottom) and a jungle where resources can be harvested by killing
monsters. Players can communicate through an internal chat or a
ping system based on emojis, animations, or map marks.
Players are ranked according to their skills in seven tiers: Iron,
Bronze, Silver, Gold, Platinum, Diamond, and Master. Each tier
(except Master) has four subcategories named as divisions. These
can play in ranked and unranked matches, where unranked matches
are mostly used for training purposes or special in-game events. The
matchmaking for competitive matches is based on the rank/division
system. The higher the tier, the smaller the choice of players with a
different rank to play with. For example, players in the Bronze tier
can play with both Bronze and Silver tier players, whereas Platinum
players can only play with Gold or Platinum tiers.
Besides being divided by rank and expertise, LoL players are
also associated with one of eleven geographical areas. When they
register, players need to specify the geographical area of reference,
which represents the server location they will connect to. Players
in different areas cannot play together. Eventually, a player can
transfer the own account to another server paying for it. Creating
a new account in a different area is always possible and is free.
Data Collection & the Players’ Network. To perform the study, we
collected data for : (a) players’ activities, in terms of how many
matches they played, and (b) their in-game connections describing
with whom they played. In the following, we first explain how we
chose the LoL players included in the dataset and how we built the
(implicit) player network. We obtained the material used for this
study from the Riot Official API 1 system.
Players can participate in a match only with players registered
to the same area—i.e. the geographical position of the server. We
focused our analysis on three areas, North America (NA), Western
Europe (EUW), and South Korea (KR). Table 1 shows the countries
included in the server. Two reasons were the motivation behind our
decision. First, at the data collection date (September 10, 2020), those
servers represented the biggest LoL communities [2]. Second, these
three areas represent very well the different restrictions approaches
that countries worldwide have taken to fight Covid-19.
We modeled the LoL player network as an undirected graph.
Nodes represented players connected by an edge between if they
played in a match as teammates. This way of modeling players’
in-game implicit relationships is common in the GUR literature, in
studies analyzing LoL [51] and other team-based games [17, 46].
The gathering processes we followed, were identically repeated for
each geographical region (i.e., EUW, NA, and KR).
Besides choosing the geographical area, we also focused on players belonging to the Bronze, Silver, and Gold tiers. Hence, we excluded the lowest ranking (Iron) and the top rankings (Platinum,
Diamond, and Masters). The choice was motivated by these three
tiers representing the majority of the player population[51]. Additionally, players in these tiers were the ones most likely to play
together due to the LoL matchmaking system. We thus limited the
sparsity of the network by selecting these users.

1 https://developer.riotgames.com/apis

Analyzing Players’ Activity and Social Bonds in League of Legends During Covid-19 Lockdowns

Table 2: Networks Statistics

#nodes
#edges
Density
Avg. Degree
Avg. Clustering

EUW
39,396
251,003
0.0003
163.10
0.42

NA
46,421
626,451
0.0005
146.86
0.19

KR
26,550
111,795
0.0003
150.25
0.60

Step 1. We initially crawled data from a small set of players to avoid
exponential growth of the network. The Riot APIs allow
collecting players in the leaderboard, having specified the
tier and division of interest. Specifically, we retrieved the
first page of the leaderboard for each of the four divisions
of each tier (Bronze, Silver, and Gold). From those 2,460
users, we randomly selected a seed set of 100 players to
avoid having a sparse network but rather a focused view on
a part of the LoL population. For each player, we collected
the information relative to the matches they played in one
year, from September 4, 2019 - 2020.
Step 2. We obtained the two team compositions from each match.
Using this information, we built the player network by connecting the players participating in a match as teammates.
This step led to a population of 81,954 players for EUW,
82,937 players for NA, and 59,663 players for KR.
Step 3. Before retrieving the 1-year matches information for the
new players, we selected the Largest Connected Component
(LCC) of each network, leading to 39396 nodes for EUW,
46421 nodes for NA, and 26550 nodes for KR. This filtering
was required (a) to avoid an excessively sparse network and
(b) due to the APIs’ limitations. Retrieving the match information for each new player would have required an estimate
of several years.
Step 4. We collected the match information for each new player
and updated the network with the missing links, leading
to 101,283 edges for EUW, 122,423 edges for NA, and 69296
edges for KR.
Table 2 summarizes the final networks’ statistics describing the
#nodes, #edges, density, average degree, and clustering for each
region.
As a result of the data collection phase, we obtained three networks representing each a geographical region. Each network models the implicit in-game interactions of the players: the players
are connected if they have played as teammates in at least one
match. The network is undirected, weighted, and dynamic. The
weight represents how many matches two nodes played together
as teammates. The dynamicity of the network derives from the
matches having a timestamp. Hence, we can collocate a match, thus
a link, at a specific point in time, throughout the analyzed time window. A dynamic network allows evaluating the network’s metrics
evolution over time in a fine-grained way [46]. The continuity of
dynamic networks can be discretized by representing the network
as a sequence of several snapshots, without loss of information [61].
Therefore, we narrowed our view to a week-level dividing the observation period into 52 snapshots. This division in weeks provides

FDG’21, August 3–6, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada

a general overview, comparable to the Covid-19 situation in each
geographical area.
Having the network divided in weekly snapshots helps achieve
a better understanding of how players’ activities and properties
evolved through time. We needed to bring those fine-grained data
on a wider scale in order to compare them with Covid-19 evolution
in various countries. The phases represented this further coarsegrained view. The phases group together different snapshots, which
provided a way of understanding which period, during the year,
needed to be compared based on the virus evolution.
Constructs and Metrics. In this study, we collected and analyzed
the telemetry data of LoL players, describing their activity and
social bonds. The activity level of players was computed in terms
of the number of matches (#matches) they played in the snapshot
analyzed. We also measured how many players from our sample
population were active (#players). Player sociality was described
by metrics both at a player and network level. First, we evaluated
the tendency of players to either play regularly with the same
players or to play frequently with different players. We used the
Focused Player metric, as defined in [54] for the purpose. This
value ranks players based on how they interact with others. Higher
scores describe players who usually play with the same group of
other players. Conversely, lower values are associated with players
playing with different team members. The coefficient is calculated
in the following way:
FocusedPlayer =

#𝑠𝑢𝑚_𝑤𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑠
𝑑𝑒𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑒

×

#𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ_𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑑
#𝑡𝑜𝑡 _𝑚𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ

The formula is also designed to eliminate biases that may be
produced by highly active players. Besides this coefficient, we used
network-based metrics, such as modularity, number of communities,
and weighted clustering. Modularity describes the density of the
connections in the network. When the modularity score is high,
the network has dense connections within a community but sparse
links among different communities. We computed the modularity
score using the networxk 2 python library. Finally, we measured
the weighted clustering value. In SNA, the clustering coefficient
measures the extent to which nodes tend to cluster together. Hence,
how likely it is for nodes to form triangles. Weighted clustering
embeds information on edges’ weights in the formula.
We evaluated those metrics both at a network and an individual
level. We analyzed values distribution at network level and compared how these values varied through the Covid-19 phases. For this
purpose, we assessed a statistical difference between the network
properties in the three lockdown phases using the Mann–Whitney
U-test [52]. The hypothesis for this test is a 50% probability that a
randomly drawn member of the first population will exceed a member of the second population. The alternative null hypothesis can
be double-tailed (the two samples come from the same population i.e., both have the same median) or single-tailed (the values in one
population are higher than the other). It is worth noting that we
used the U-test since our data met its assumptions, namely: i) the
dependent variable is measured at a continuous or ordinal level e.g., number of matches, and the Focused Player score; ii) the independent variable consists of two categorical, independent groups,
2 https://networkx.org/documentation/stable/reference/algorithms/generated/

networkx.algorithms.community.quality.modularity.html

FDG’21, August 3–6, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada

i.e., pre-lockdown vs. lockdown, and lockdown vs. post-lockdown;
iii) the observations are independent, i.e., the groups are disjointed;
and iv) the observations are not normally distributed. We fixed
a p-value of 0.05. At a player level, we tested whether the same
features varied across the Covid-19 phases for each player. In other
work, we measured how the featured players varied throughout
the year. To this end we considered players who were retained in
each phase, and gave them the name committed players. Unlike
the previous test (Mann-Withney-U), which compares the distribution of non-dependent samples, we used the Wilcoxon signed-rank
test [56], comparing dependent samples. In this case, the samples
are matched. Hence data come from the same population. Usually, this test is used to evaluate whether a difference between pre
and post-treatment exist. For instance, whether the metric’s values
varied among pre-lockdown and lockdown for each player.
Finally, we focused a magnifying glass on players entering our
LoL network starting only from the lockdown phases: lockdown
starters. This category includes (i) new players, (ii) old players
moved from another server, or (iii) players who did not play at least
along the previous phase (pre-lockdown).

4

ANALYSIS AND RESULTS

In this section, we outline the results of our analyses. First, we
show how player turnout changed across the different phases and
networks. We then present the ways in which player activity levels and sociality changed. Finally, we describe some statistics and
properties of lockdown starters.

4.1

Players’ Turnout and Activity Level

Player turnout was modeled by measuring the number of matches
and distinct-individual players in the weeks of each lockdown phase
(i.e., pre-lockdown, lockdown, and post-lockdown). We conducted
two sets of tests for each area. First, we built three (two in the case
of Korea) populations: the number of matches in the pre-lockdown
weeks (size = #weeks in pre-lockdown), the number of matches in
the lockdown weeks (size = #weeks in lockdown), and the number
of matches in the post-lockdown weeks (size = #weeks in postlockdown). Second, we built the same three (or in Korea two) populations considering the number of players. Figure 1 shows the
#matches trend in EUW, NA, and KR during the whole year. On
approaching September (week 52), the number of matches quickly
decreased for all the regions (week 52 matches: EUW 1078, NA
1827, KR 682).
To assess a statistical differences among the different phases (or
populations) in both #matches and #players we used the Mann–Whitney
U-test [52]. Our wish was study wheter there is a significant difference between phases (p <.05) by verifying the alternative singletailed hypothesis (one population higher than the other). The results
show that the differences between the phases are statistical significant (p <.01) concerning the #matches and #players.
In Western Europe, there is a significant increment the #matches
during the lockdown compared to the pre and post-lockdown
phases (pre-lockdown and lockdown 𝑈 = 0 𝑝 < .001, lockdown and
post-lockdown 𝑈 = 150 𝑝 < .001). In other terms, the #matches in
lockdown are significantly higher than both the #matches in pre and

Blinded, et al.

post-lockdown. We also found a drop during post-lockdown compared to the pre-lockdown phase (𝑈 = 298 𝑝 < .001). An analogous
situation occurs in North America (pre-lockdown and lockdown
𝑈 = 85 𝑝 < .001, lockdown and post-lockdown 𝑈 = 143 𝑝 < .001,
pre-lockdown and post-lockdown 𝑈 = 359 𝑝 < .001). In Korea, we
also witnessed a rise in activity during lockdown compared to the
pre-lockdown weeks (𝑈 = 61, 𝑝 < .001), but we lack information on
the post-lockdown phase (see the division in phases, Section 3.1).
Similar to the number of matches situation, Western Europe also
saw an increase in the #players. The highest value for the number
of individually distinct players was detected during the lockdown
weeks, with a significant drop in the post-lockdown phase compared
to the pre-lockdown weeks (pre-lockdown and lockdown 𝑈 = 1
𝑝 < .001, lockdown and post-lockdown 𝑈 = 150 𝑝 < .001, prelockdown and post-lockdown 𝑈 = 300 𝑝 < .01). Although the
biggest turnout of individually distinct players in NA also occurred
during the lockdown, the number of players in the pre-lockdown
and post-lockdown weeks was not statistically different(lockdown
and post-lockdown 𝑈 = 143 𝑝 < .001, pre-lockdown and postlockdown 𝑈 = 356 𝑝 < .01). Finally, Korea experienced a peak of
distinct players when restrictions were applied (𝑈 = 28 𝑝 < .01).
Player activity levels describe how the number of matches changes
across the Covid-19 phases for each player. Differently from players’ turnout measuring players’ activity at a global level, in these
tests, we evaluate players’ shifts in their activity. Towards this, we
analyzed committed players. Hence, these analyses show whether
the playing habits of recurrent users were affected by the Covid-19
pandemic across the world. Compared to the whole population
committed players are: KR 8,593 (33.69%), EUW 8,462 (21.47%), NA
16,574 (35.70%).
Similar to the previous setting, we run a set of tests for each
region. In this case, the three (or two) populations are paired. Hence,
for the same region, the populations’ sizes are the same and are
equal to the number of committed players within that area. Every
player 𝑝 has a value in each population (pre-lockdown, lockdown,
and post-lockdown). To assess a statistical difference among the
different phases in the #matches played by the committed players
we used the Wilcoxon signed-rank test [56]. We wanted to verify:
i) if there is a significant difference between phases (p <.05), and
ii) verify the alternative single-tailed hypothesis (one population
higher than the other). Table 3 provides a summary of the match
distribution in the different phases for each country. Values are
normalized to the number of weeks in each phase (Section. 3.1).
Values are consistent with the previous findings. EUW had the
greatest growth proportionally in player’s activities (mean: prelockdown 0.369, lockdown 0.801) followed by NA. While in KR, the
values suggest that players who were not playing many matches
in pre-lockdown, on average, increase their activity more than the
rest of the population (std: pre-lockdown 0.807, lockdown 0.663).
In Western Europe, we found that committed players participated
in a significantly greater number of matches during the lockdown
(pre-lockdown and lockdown 𝑈 = 0 𝑝 < .001, lockdown and postlockdown 𝑈 = 150 𝑝 < .01) . Their activity suffered a significant
drop in the post-lockdown weeks. These results are coherent with
the outcomes of the player turnout tests. An analogous situation
occurs in North America(pre-lockdown and lockdown 𝑈 = 85

Analyzing Players’ Activity and Social Bonds in League of Legends During Covid-19 Lockdowns

FDG’21, August 3–6, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: #matches across the whole year. The red area represents the lockdown phase. (a) EUW (b) NA (c) KR
Table 3: EUW-NA-KR Matches distribution. Values are normalized to the number of weeks in each phase.
Min

25%

50%

75%

Max

Mean

Std

EUW

pre-lockdown
lockdown
post-lockdown

0.037
0.100
0.066

0.037
0.100
0.006

0.111
0.200
0.133

0.296
0.600
0.266

30.66
39.40
21.66

0.369
0.801
0.386

1.024
2.158
1.159

NA

pre-lockdown
lockdown
post-lockdown

0.035
0.090
0.076

0.107
0.181
0.076

0.285
0.363
0.153

0.714
0.909
0.461

22.85
42.54
33.76

0.683
0.941
0.500

1.253
2.062
1.182

pre-lockdown
lockdown

0.041
0.035

0.041
0.035

0.083
0.071

0.208
0.014

17.04
15.82

0.274
0.217

0.807
0.663

KR

𝑝 < .001, lockdown and post-lockdown 𝑈 = 143 𝑝 < .001, prelockdown and post-lockdown 𝑈 = 359 𝑝 < .01) and in Korea
(pre-lockdown and lockdown 𝑈 = 61 𝑝 < .001).
Results are summarized in Figure 2.

4.2

Players’ Sociality

Player sociality is modeled using four different metrics: i) the FocusedPlayer value, ii) weighted clustering, iii) modularity, and

iv) the number of different communities. We followed the same
process as described in the previous analyses for player activity.
First, we analyzed how sociality changed in the network using the
Mann–Whitney U-test [52]. We then verified the evolution of the
same features across the different phases for committed players using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test [56]. All the tests were repeated
for each region (i.e., EUW, NA, and KR).

FDG’21, August 3–6, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada

Blinded, et al.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2: Metrics evolution throughout the Covid-19 phases in (a) EUW (b) NA, and (c) KR. Te first three rows represent
activity metrics, while the remaining represents social metrics. Note: i) cells with - indicate a non-significant difference
between the two phases ii) metrics with C suffix are related to committed players. For accessibility reasons, the color palette
is color-blind friendly.
Network-level Sociality. In both Western Europe and North America, the networks’ FocusedPlayer values grew in the post-lockdown
weeks compared to the previous phases (pre-lockdown and postlockdown). However, the two regions differ in that, in EUW, the
lowest value was seen in the lockdown phase, whereas, in NA,
the lowest scores were in the pre-lockdown weeks. In constrast
to the other areas, Korea saw its highest FocusedPlayer values in
the pre-lockdown. We obtained similar outcomes for the weighted
clustering coefficient and the modularity score, which significantly
increased in the post-lockdown phase for EUW and NA. In Korea, the differences in weighted clustering and modularity are not
statistically significant. Finally, we can see an increment in the
#communities during the lockdown weeks in Europe and Korea. In
North America, the number of communities dropped in the prelockdown weeks, like in Korea, while, in Europe, the lowest value
was experienced in the post-lockdown phase. Results are summarized in Figure 2.

Committed Player Sociality. The results show that in all areas
committed players played more with the same people (higher FocusedPlayer values) than the rest of the network during the lockdown weeks than in the pre-lockdown phase. committed players
tend to play even more with the same players in the post-lockdown
phase, leading to the highest FocusedPlayer values. This outcome
can be observed both in the EUW (committed players lockdown
and post-lockdown 𝑊 = 18, 750, 694 𝑝 < .001, committed players pre-lockdown and post-lockdown 𝑊 = 17, 323, 162 𝑝 < .01)
and NA regions (committed players lockdown and post-lockdown
𝑊 = 74, 610, 718 𝑝 < .001, committed players pre-lockdown and
post-lockdown 𝑊 = 64, 768, 086 𝑝 < .001), as we do not have a postlockdown phase for Korea. In all regions, the weighted clustering
value is at its highest during the lockdown weeks (EUW: committed
players pre-lockdown and lockdown 𝑊 = 10, 645, 145 𝑝 < .001,
committed players lockdown and post-lockdown 𝑊 = 18, 271, 390
𝑝 < .001 NA: committed players pre-lockdown and lockdown
𝑊 = 64, 231, 460 𝑝 < .001, committed players lockdown and postlockdown 𝑊 = 61, 645, 104 𝑝 < .001.) There is no significant difference between pre and post-lockdown values for Western Europe,

Analyzing Players’ Activity and Social Bonds in League of Legends During Covid-19 Lockdowns

whereas North America experienced higher pre-lockdown values
than in the post-lockdown weeks (𝑊 = 67, 486, 190 𝑝 < .01). Finally,
we could not compute modularity and number of communities for
committed players, as they are network-level measures, and local
values for each player thus do not exist.
Results are summarized in Figure 2.

4.3

Lockdown Starters

As introduced previously, lockdown starters are players who started
to play during the lockdown phase. In the following section, we
show how substantial the presence of lockdown starters was in the
Western Europe and North America populations. The total number
of lockdown starters is 7605 (19.35%) for EUW and 4380 (9.45%) for
NA. We first studied the dropout rate, that is, the percentage of
players who started to play during lockdown but did not continue
to play in post-lockdown. The dropout rate is 54.43% for EUW
(remaining players 3465), and for NA, the rate is 35.02% (remaining
players 2846).
We thendeepen our understanding of these players by investigating how they connect with other players. For this purpose,
we compared the FocusedPlayer values for those lockdown starters
against the other players. We chose this metric because it represents the tendency of these players to play with the same players
(i.e., strong, recurrent social bonds) versus the habit to play with
different players (i.e., shallow social connections). We thus studied
this value for lockdown starters, also investigating lockdown starters
retained in the post-lockdown phase. Due to the lack of a postlockdown phase in Korea, these analyses were only performed for
the EUW and NA areas. We used the Mann-Whitney U test[52]
to compare the FocusedPlayer values of lockdown starters in the
lockdown phase with: i) the rest of the network, ii) committed players and iii) lockdown starters retained in the post-lockdown phase.
Then, we compared the FocusedPlayer scores of retained lockdown
starters in the post-lockdown phase with i) the rest of the network
and ii) committed players.
Lockdown starters, in the lockdown weeks, played with different people (low FocusedPlayer scores) more than (i) the remainder of the network (EUW: 𝑈 = 19, 168, 761 𝑝 < .001, NA: 𝑈 =
16, 629, 593 𝑝 < .001), (ii) committed players (EUW: 𝑈 = 6, 261, 885
𝑝 < .001, NA: 𝑈 = 8, 092, 504 𝑝 < .001), and (iii) lockdown starters retained in the post-lockdown phase (EUW: 𝑈 = 4, 034, 987 𝑝 < .001,
NA: 𝑈 = 1, 581, 452 𝑝 < .001), in both the EUW and NA networks.
Hence, lockdown starters retained in the lockdown weeks tended to
play more with the same people than all the lockdown starters.
Lockdown starters retained in post-lockdown, for North America, played more with the same players (high FocusedPlayer scores)
than the remainder of the network(𝑈 = 33, 284, 423 𝑝 < .01).
Whereas, the same test was no statistically significant for Western
Europe. Nevertheless, in both regions, committed players played
more together than retained lockdown starters (EUW: 𝑈 = 64, 771, 120
𝑝 < .001, NA: 𝑈 = 1, 581, 452 𝑝 < .01).

5

DISCUSSION

We identified changes in the LoL player activities and their social
structure using SNA techniques. In the following, we discuss our

FDG’21, August 3–6, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada

findings in relation to the research questions we previously proposed (Section. 1). Before talking about the limitations and future
development of this work.

RQ1: How did player turnout and activity vary
across the Covid-19 phases?
The data shows a significant increment in the number of LoL
matches and players during the lockdown weeks or movement
restrictions. The same activity increase was found in committed
players’ gaming behaviors. This finding is in alignment with the
conception of games as a coping mechanism for social isolation [62],
although it may also be related to a greater opportunity for playing
due to the forced stay-at-home orders. While all geographical areas
saw a peak in the number of matches, North America was the only
area in which there was no significant increment in the number
of players. Hence, in this area, the higher value for the number of
matches during lockdown was almost solely due to the increase in
activity of committed players.
After the restrictions were lifted, in EUW and NA, the number of
matches and players dropped significantly, also for committed players. This drop provides a good description of the situation in those
weeks that also corresponded with the start of the summer season.
At that time people were eager to socialize in person and maybe
even if possible to go on holiday. In this phase (post-lockdown),
almost half of the players who joined in the lockdown weeks were
lost (Section. 4.3), accounting for between 10% and 20% of the whole
population.
While we expected an activity peak and drop in the lockdown
and post-lockdown phases, respectively, those results alone do not
provide additional information on how LoL impacted social connections. Towards this, we studied the structure of the LoL implicit
social network built from in-game interactions (i.e., participation
in a match as teammates).

RQ2: How did player social structures vary
across the Covid-19 phases?
The huge waves of players in the lockdown phase, for Europe and
Korea, generated a perturbation in the player networks. Both regions experienced significantly lower FocusedPlayer scores in the
lockdown weeks. Hence, on average, the players population tended
to play with more different users. This result should not be interpreted as a lack of player interest in forming recurrent bonds. It
should rather be associated with the considerable increase in the
number of players. As a consequence and from a global perspective,
the matchmaking algorithm could choose among more players,
leading to a greater diversity of teammates for players relying on
automatic matching. This interpretation is supported by the analyses conducted on the North American network, where a peak in
new players of this kind was not experienced during the lockdown.
Here, we see an increase in the FocusedPlayer value compared to
the pre-lockdown weeks. We can further support this thesis by
investigating the FocusedPlayer scores for the committed players.
In all regions, the values were at their highest during the lockdown
weeks for those players. This data confirms previous theories about
games being incubators of social relationships [27, 54] and might
be a sign that players fulfilled their need for belongingness [55]

FDG’21, August 3–6, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada

and connectedness [57] in games. While some promising findings
had already emerged from in the study of Animal Crossing Players,
showing how the game fostered well-being and helped to cope with
loneliness [35, 48]. Nevertheless, LoL greatly differs from Animal
Crossing in genre and purpose. Our study provides initial evidence
that games which do not focus primarily on social mechanics and
that mimic real-world experience can also connect players socially.
The analysis of social bonds in the post-lockdown phase (Western Europe and North America) also brought interesting outcomes.
Players’ showed the highest values in the FocusedPlayer, Weighted
Clustering, and Modularity metrics. As a result some players not
only strengthened their connections during the lockdown, but their
feelings of connectedness remained even after the restrictions were
lifted. We have to acknowledge that we also saw a player population decline in post-lockdown, which might have impacted the
results for an argument inverse to the one previously presented.
The automatic matching algorithm has fewer players to choose
from. Yet, committed players had a higher FocusedPlayer value in
the post-lockdown phase than they had in pre-lockdown. In other
words, committed players found a social platform in games when
they missed real-world social contacts (lockdown), this feeling decreased slightly once they had the opportunity to meet in reality
(post-lockdown) but it was still strong than it had been previously
(pre-lockdown).

RQ3: Who are the players that approached the
game during the Covid-19 lockdowns ?
Our in-depth analysis on players joining the network during the
lockdown (i.e., lockdown starters), we provided further support for
previous research showing how sociality affects retention [54].
Lockdown starters had tendentially lower values of FocusedPlayer
than the other players in the network, probably because they entered the game later. Nevertheless, lockdown starters retained in the
post-lockdown weeks (roughly 50%) showed significantly higher FocusedPlayer scores than those who dropped out. As a result players
who found more stable connections (teammates) were more likely
to be retained even when the restrictions were lifted. In North America, we cam see an even stronger result in this respect. Lockdown
starters retained in the post-lockdown weeks showed a stronger
FocusedPlayer score than other players retained in the lockdown
phase. This result is probably due to the increase in the number of
players during lockdown (lockdown starters) being less sensitive
than in Europe–i.e., not statistically significant. Therefore, we can
conclude that lockdown starters who were retained were indeed
involved in more stable connections than those who dropped out,
but they were not necessarily involved in stronger bonds than other
retained players (joined before the lockdown).

RQ4: How have player networks varied across
different geographical regions?
Despite having already compared the findings across the different
geographical areas, we will provide more in-depth observations on
their differences and similarities in the following. The test results
from the three areas overlapped in several situations. For instance,
we saw a significant increment in player activity during lockdowns
(and other restrictions) everywhere. Nevertheless, the same player

Blinded, et al.

peak seen in EUW and KR does not occur in North America. A
peak of this kind is readily explained in Western Europe, where the
restrictions were stringent, and in some countries even more so than
in others (e.g., France, Italy, and Spain). Although the restrictions
were less stringent in Korea, we observed a similar increase, which
might be imputed not to the fear of the virus but to a feeling of
responsibility linked to the transparency with which the pandemic
was handled by the Korean government [44]. Furthermore, unlike
other regions in KR we can see a sudden peak of matches between
week 40-46. This rapid growth does not appear to be related to an
increase in restrictions or cases but rather to a major LoL online
event [26]. Finally, in North America, the increase in the number of
players was not as significant, despite the restrictions that existed.
This finding should also be contextualized with the political and
social conditions. In the U.S, which represents the majority of NA
area, the beginning of the pandemic was taken less seriously due
to some political statements [67]. Moreover, the differences in the
U.S states in terms of restriction strictness might have influenced
the population in different ways. Whereas in issues concerning
sociality, all the regions witnessed the desire on the part of a portion
of players to connect with others and build recurrent bonds in the
network, which would be durable in time (post-lockdown).

5.1

Limitations

Our work has a number of limitations. First, the study is based on
a single game. Second, our results are strongly related to the phase
division. We can argue that a different phase division could lead to
different results. In the EUW area, the restrictions are well documented and defined within a specific period. The information from
NA and KR is less accurate. To mitigate this problem, we begin/end
each phase only when the majority of countries/states/provinces
in that area started/ended most of the restrictions (related to shops,
restaurants, sports, and entertainment activities) or personal limitations (like gathering/traveling bans and stay-at-home orders).
Moreover, potential events external to the pandemic, which may
have altered the data in some weeks, were hard to detect, especially
for South Korea. Third, we could not define a precise post-lockdown
phase for KR due to the different approach to the Covid-19 outbreak
taken by South Korea’s government. Fourth, our networks were developed from small seed sets of players, although these represented
active and committed players.

5.2

Future Works

While this work takes a further step forwards for the understanding of game player social behaviors, there is still much room for
future studies. For instance, further and detailed research can be
done on the evolution of the communities and their composition
during the different phases, and which were the characteristics
of the most cohesive groups. We can also expand our findings by
conducting a more comprehensive behavioral analysis to detect
the properties and characteristics of committed players and lockdown starters, focusing on players’ forming strong, recurrent bonds.
Moreover, while, in this study, we followed a high-level approach,
analyzing statistical differences among groups of the population
in the Covid-19 stages, we can run player-centric investigations
analyzing the evolution of social behaviors. Finally, we can extend

Analyzing Players’ Activity and Social Bonds in League of Legends During Covid-19 Lockdowns

the observation period by analyzing and comparing the Covid-19
second wave to the first wave.

6

CONCLUSIONS

Social distancing and remote working (and studying) drastically
changed people’s lives, disrupting their routines and basic social
interactions. The #StayAtHome mantra, which recurred throughout the past year, brought additional impetus and force to the researching of tools that both entertain and connect. Games, for
example, saw unprecedented growth and in some cases these were
also proven to reduce anxiety and produce a sense of well-being in
their players. This rise is coherent with recent research showing
how multiplayer games foster connectedness and enable real-world
friendships. In this study, we expand the analysis focusing on how
social interaction patterns and the structure of the player social
networks were affected by Covid-19 lockdowns. We modeled three
different League of Legends player networks, each representing a
different geographical area throughout a whole year (September
2019-2020). Our findings confirmed this activity and player rise
already detected in other game genres, as well as the formation of
stronger social connections for some players. Committed players
formed more recurrent and narrower bonds during the lockdown
weeks. Additionally, new players forming stronger connections
during lockdowns were also more likely to be retained in the game
when the restrictions were lifted. These findings were similar across
the three geographical areas, where small specific differences might
also result from political and cultural differences. In conclusion,
our findings support the idea that online games can help tackle
boredom, loneliness and foster social interactions, even more so in
times when real-world connections are limited.

7

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This research is supported by funds of the state of Styria, Science
and Research (Land Steiermark, Wissenschaft und Forschung).

REFERENCES
[1] 2020. How lockdown is being lifted across Europe. Retrieved January 10, 2021
from https://www.bbc.com/news/explainers-52575313
[2] 2020. LoL Stats, Record Replay, Database, Guide - OP.GG. Retrieved September
10, 2020 from https://euw.op.gg/
[3] 2020. Mandatory mask laws are spreading in Canada | CBC News. Retrieved January 10, 2021 from https://www.cbc.ca/news/health/mandatory-masks-1.5615728
[4] 2020. Ministry of Health and Welfare.
Retrieved January 20, 2021
from https://www.mohw.go.kr/eng/nw/nw0101vw.jsp?PAR_MENU_ID=1007&
MENU_ID=100701&page=1&CONT_SEQ=353124
[5] 2020. Ministry of Health and Welfare.
Retrieved January 20, 2021
from https://www.mohw.go.kr/eng/nw/nw0101vw.jsp?PAR_MENU_ID=1007&
MENU_ID=100701&page=1&CONT_SEQ=353522
[6] 2020. Proclamation on Declaring a National Emergency Concerning the Novel
Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Outbreak.
Retrieved January 30, 2021
from https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/presidential-actions/proclamationdeclaring-national-emergency-concerning-novel-coronavirus-disease-covid19-outbreak/
[7] 2020.
South Korea learned its successful Covid-19 strategy from a
previous coronavirus outbreak: MERS.
Retrieved January 10, 2021
from https://thebulletin.org/2020/03/south-korea-learned-its-successful-covid19-strategy-from-a-previous-coronavirus-outbreak-mers/
[8] 2020. Timeline of ECDC reponse to COVID-19. Retrieved January 10, 2021 from
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/covid-19/timeline-ecdc-response
[9] 2020.
WHO - Healthy At Home.
Retrieved January 20, 2021
from
https://www.who.int/campaigns/connecting-the-world-to-combatcoronavirus/healthyathome/healthyathome---mental-health
[10] 2020. WHO Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Dashboard. Retrieved January 20,
2021 from https://covid19.who.int

FDG’21, August 3–6, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada

[11] 2021. COVID-19 Contact Tracing: Why South Korea’s Success is Hard to Replicate.
Retrieved January 25, 2021 from https://gjia.georgetown.edu/2020/10/12/particovid-19-contact-tracing-why-south-koreas-success-is-hard-to-replicate/
[12] 2021. A Timeline of South Korea’s Response to COVID-19. Retrieved January 15,
2021 from https://www.csis.org/analysis/timeline-south-koreas-response-covid19
[13] Vincenzo Alfano and Salvatore Ercolano. 2020. The Efficacy of Lockdown Against
COVID-19: A Cross-Country Panel Analysis. Applied Health Economics and Health
Policy (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s40258-020-00596-3
[14] Stephen Bijan. 2020.
This is Twitch’s moment.
Retrieved January
20, 2021 from https://www.theverge.com/2020/3/18/21185114/twitch-youtubelivestreaming-streamelements-coronavirus-quarantine-viewership-numbers
[15] Adina Bresge. 2020.
Where can you travel within Canada? A
look at COVID-19 restrictions.
Retrieved January 10, 2021 from
https://www.ctvnews.ca/health/coronavirus/where-can-you-travel-withincanada-a-look-at-covid-19-restrictions-1.5001253
[16] Katie Canales. 2020. The WHO is recommending video games as an effective way to stop the spread of COVID-19, one year after adding ’gaming disorder’ to its list of addictive behaviors.
Retrieved January 10,
2021 from https://www.businessinsider.com/who-video-games-coronaviruspandemic-mental-health-disorder-2020-4?r=DE&amp;IR=T
[17] Alessandro Canossa, Ahmad Azadvar, Casper Harteveld, Anders Drachen, and
Sebastian Deterding. 2019. Influencers in Multiplayer Online Shooters. (2019),
1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300489
[18] Chien Hsun Chen, Chuen Tsai Sun, and Jilung Hsieh. 2008. Player guild dynamics
and evolution in massively multiplayer online games. Cyberpsychology and
Behavior (2008). https://doi.org/10.1089/cpb.2007.0066
[19] Matteo Chinazzi, Jessica T. Davis, Marco Ajelli, Corrado Gioannini, Maria Litvinova, Stefano Merler, Ana Pastore y Piontti, Kunpeng Mu, Luca Rossi, Kaiyuan
Sun, Cécile Viboud, Xinyue Xiong, Hongjie Yu, M. Elizabeth Halloran, Ira M.
Longini, and Alessandro Vespignani. 2020. The effect of travel restrictions on
the spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak. Science (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aba9757
[20] Dr Natalie Coyle and Johnie J. Allen. 2020. The Psychology of Animal Crossing.
Retrieved January 10, 2021 from http://platinumparagon.info/psychology-ofanimal-crossing/
[21] Laura Dabbish, Robert Kraut, and Jordan Patton. 2012. Communication and
commitment in an online game team. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on
human factors in computing systems. 879–888.
[22] Ansgar E. Depping and Regan L. Mandryk. 2017. Cooperation and interdependence: How multiplayer games increase social closeness. In CHI PLAY 2017 Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3116595.3116639
[23] Nicolas Ducheneaut, Nicholas Yee, Eric Nickell, and Robert J. Moore. 2006. "Alone
together?" Exploring the social dynamics of massively multiplayer online games.
In Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings.
[24] Nicolas Ducheneaut, Nicholas Yee, Eric Nickell, and Robert J. Moore. 2007. The life
and death of online gaming communities: A look at guilds in world of warcraft.
In Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - Proceedings. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1240624.1240750
[25] Daniel Dunford, Becky Dale, Nassos Stylianou, Maryam Ahmed, and Irene de la
Torre Arenas. 2020. Coronavirus: The world in lockdown in maps and charts.
Retrieved January 20, 2021 from https://www.bbc.com/news/world-52103747
[26] Tyler Esguerra. 2020.
The LCK led all esports leagues in 2020
with 136.6 million hours watched.
Retrieved January 10, 2021
from https://dotesports.com/league-of-legends/news/the-lck-led-all-esportsleagues-in-2020-with-136-6-million-hours-watched
[27] Guo Freeman. 2016. Making games as collaborative social experiences: Exploring an online gaming community. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, CSCW, Vol. 26-February-2016. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, New York, USA, 265–268.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2818052.2869076
[28] Douglas A. Gentile, Craig A. Anderson, Shintaro Yukawa, Nobuko Ihori, Muniba Saleem, Lim Kam Ming, Akiko Shibuya, Albert K. Liau, Angeline Khoo,
Brad J. Bushman, L. Rowell Huesmann, and Akira Sakamoto. 2009. The effects of
prosocial video games on prosocial behaviors: International evidence from correlational, longitudinal, and experimental studies. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin (2009). https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167209333045
[29] Isabela Granic, Adam Lobel, and Rutger C.M.E. Engels. 2014. The benefits of
playing video games. American Psychologist (2014). https://doi.org/10.1037/
a0034857
[30] Mark D. Griffiths, Zaheer Hussain, Sabine M. Grüsser, Ralf Thalemann, Helena
Cole, Mark N.O. Davies, and Darren Chappell. 2011. Social interactions in online
gaming. In International Journal of Game-Based Learning. https://doi.org/10.
4018/ijgbl.2011100103
[31] Grace Hauck. 2020. What states require face masks in public? Alabama, Arkansas,
Colorado join growing list of states where it’s mandatory. Retrieved January
10, 2021 from https://eu.usatoday.com/story/news/health/2020/07/03/covid-face-

FDG’21, August 3–6, 2021, Montreal, QC, Canada

masks-states-require-public/5371503002/
[32] Jon Henley and Philip Oltermann. 2020. Italy records its deadliest day
of coronavirus outbreak with 475 deaths.
Retrieved January 10, 2021
from https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/mar/18/coronavirus-lockdowneu-belgium-germany-adopt-measures
[33] Jason Horowitz. 2020. Italy Announces Restrictions Over Entire Country in
Attempt to Halt Coronavirus. Retrieved January 13, 2021 from https://www.
nytimes.com/2020/03/09/world/europe/italy-lockdown-coronavirus.html
[34] Adele Lu Jia, Siqi Shen, Ruud Van De Bovenkamp, Alexandru Iosup, Fernando
Kuipers, and Dick H.J. Epema. 2015. Socializing by gaming: Revealing social
relationships in Multiplayer Online Games. ACM Transactions on Knowledge
Discovery from Data (2015). https://doi.org/10.1145/2736698
[35] Niklas Johannes, Matti Vuorre, and Andrew K Przybylski. 2020. Video game play
is positively correlated with well-being. PsyArXiv. November 13 (2020).
[36] Kdca. 2020. The first imported case of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV)
in Korea: Press Release: News Room.
Retrieved January 10, 2021
from https://www.cdc.go.kr/board/board.es?mid=a30402000000&amp;bid=0030&
amp;act=view&amp;list_no=365797
[37] Imad Khan. 2020. Why Animal Crossing Is the Game for the Coronavirus Moment. Retrieved January 10, 2021 from https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/07/
arts/animal-crossing-covid-coronavirus-popularity-millennials.html
[38] William DS Killgore, Sara A Cloonan, Emily C Taylor, and Natalie S Dailey. 2020.
Loneliness: A signature mental health concern in the era of COVID-19. Psychiatry
research 290 (2020), 113117.
[39] William DS Killgore, Sara A Cloonan, Emily C Taylor, Michael A Miller, and Natalie S Dailey. 2020. Three months of loneliness during the COVID-19 lockdown.
Psychiatry Research 293 (2020), 113392.
[40] Daniel L. King, Paul H. Delfabbro, Joel Billieux, and Marc N. Potenza. 2020.
Problematic online gaming and the COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of Behavioral
Addictions 9, 2 (2020), 184–186. https://doi.org/10.1556/2006.2020.00016
[41] Patrick Kobek. 2020. Animal Crossing: New Horizons Becomes Popular Host For
Birthdays, Weddings, And More. Retrieved January 13, 2021 from https://www.
thegamer.com/animal-crossing-new-horizons-host-birthdays-weddings/
[42] Willy C. Kriz. 2020. Gaming in the Time of COVID-19. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1046878120931602
[43] Samuli Laato, AKM Najmul Islam, and Teemu H Laine. 2020. Did location-based
games motivate players to socialize during COVID-19? Telematics and Informatics
54 (2020), 101458.
[44] Seow Ting Lee and Hun Shik Kim. 2020. Nation branding in the COVID-19 era:
South Korea’s pandemic public diplomacy. Place Branding and Public Diplomacy
(2020). https://doi.org/10.1057/s41254-020-00189-w
[45] Danele Lepido and Niclas Rolander. [n.d.].
Retrieved January 13,
2021 from https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-03-12/housebounditalian-kids-strain-network-with-fortnite-marathon
[46] Enrica Loria, Johanna Pirker, Anders Drachen, and Annapaola Marconi. 2020. Do
Influencers Influence? – Analyzing Players’ Activity in an Online Multiplayer
Game. arXiv (2020), 120–127. https://doi.org/10.1109/cog47356.2020.9231957
arXiv:2006.00802
[47] Alexandru Losup, Ruud Van De Bovenkamp, Siqi Shen, Adele Lu Jia, and Fernando
Kuipers. 2014. Analyzing implicit social networks in multiplayer online games.
IEEE Internet Computing (2014). https://doi.org/10.1109/MIC.2014.19
[48] Regan L. Mandryk, Julian Frommel, Ashley Armstrong, and Daniel Johnson.
2020. How Passion for Playing World of Warcraft Predicts In-Game Social
Capital, Loneliness, and Wellbeing. Frontiers in Psychology 11 (9 2020), 2165.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.02165
[49] Justin McCurry. 2021.
Test, trace, contain: how South Korea flattened its coronavirus curve.
Retrieved January 10, 2021 from
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/apr/23/test-trace-contain-howsouth-korea-flattened-its-coronavirus-curve
[50] Sarah Mervosh, Jasmine C. Lee, Lazaro Gamio, and Nadja Popovich. 2020.
See How All 50 States Are Reopening.
Retrieved January 10, 2021
from https://web.archive.org/web/20200601000454/https://www.nytimes.com/
interactive/2020/us/states-reopen-map-coronavirus.html
[51] Marçal Mora-Cantallops and Miguel Ángel Sicilia. 2018. Player-centric networks
in League of Legends. Social Networks 55, June (2018), 149–159. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.socnet.2018.06.002
[52] Markus Neuhäuser. 2011. Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney Test. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1656–1658. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-048982_615
[53] Candice Norwood. 2020.
Most states have issued stay-at-home orders, but enforcement varies widely.
Retrieved January 10, 2021
from https://www.pbs.org/newshour/politics/most-states-have-issued-stay-athome-orders-but-enforcement-varies-widely
[54] Johanna Pirker, André Rattinger, Anders Drachen, and Rafet Sifa. 2018. Analyzing
player networks in Destiny. Entertainment Computing 25, September 2016 (2018),
71–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.entcom.2017.12.001

Blinded, et al.

[55] Andrew K Przybylski, C Scott Rigby, and Richard M Ryan. 2010. A motivational
model of video game engagement. Review of general psychology 14, 2 (2010),
154–166.
[56] Denise Rey and Markus Neuhäuser. 2011. Wilcoxon-Signed-Rank Test. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1658–1659. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3642-04898-2_616
[57] Ryan Rogers. 2017. The motivational pull of video game feedback, rules, and
social interaction: Another self-determination theory approach. Computers in
Human Behavior 73 (2017), 446–450.
[58] Carmen V. Russoniello, Kevin O’brien, and Jennifer M. Parks. 2009. EEG, HRV and
Psychological Correlates while Playing Bejeweled II: A Randomized Controlled
Study. Annual Review of CyberTherapy and Telemedicine (2009).
[59] Richard M. Ryan, C. Scott Rigby, and Andrew Przybylski. 2006. The motivational
pull of video games: A self-determination theory approach. Motivation and
Emotion (2006). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11031-006-9051-8
[60] John Scott. 1988.
Social Network Analysis.
Sociology 22, 1
(1988), 109–127.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0038038588022001007
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1177/0038038588022001007
[61] Jerry Scripps, Pang Ning Tan, and Abdol Hossein Esfahanian. 2009. Measuring
the effects of preprocessing decisions and network forces in dynamic network
analysis. In Proceedings of ACM SIGKDD’09. 747–755. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1557019.1557102
[62] Deniz Şener, Türkan Yalçın, and Osman Gulseven. 2021. The Impact of COVID-19
on the Video Game Industry. Available at SSRN 3766147 (2021).
[63] Globe staff services and wire. 2020. What is the reopening plan in my
province? A guide.
Retrieved January 10, 2021 from http://web.archive.
org/web/20200607075304/https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/articlecoronavirus-rules-by-province-physical-distancing-open-closed/
[64] Patrick Shanley. 2020.
Gaming Usage Up 75 Percent Amid Coronavirus Outbreak, Verizon Reports.
Retrieved January 13, 2021
from https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/gaming-usage-up-75-percentcoronavirus-outbreak-verizon-reports-1285140
[65] Andrew Stickley and Ai Koyanagi. 2016. Loneliness, common mental disorders
and suicidal behavior: Findings from a general population survey. Journal of
Affective Disorders (2016). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2016.02.054
[66] Ricardo Borges Viana and Claudio Andre Barbosa de Lira. 2020. Exergames as
coping strategies for anxiety disorders during the COVID-19 quarantine period.
Games for health journal 9, 3 (2020), 147–149.
[67] Courtney Vinopal. 2020.
Why uncertainty about coronavirus breeds
opportunity for misinformation.
Retrieved January 13, 2021 from
https://www.pbs.org/newshour/health/why-uncertainty-about-coronavirusbreeds-opportunity-for-misinformation
[68] Yan Xu, Xiang Cao, Abigail Sellen, Ralf Herbrich, and Thore Graepel. 2011.
Sociable killers: Understanding social relationships in an online first-person
shooter game. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work, CSCW. https://doi.org/10.1145/1958824.1958854

