Understanding Privacy Attitudes and Concerns Towards Remote
Communications During the COVID-19 Pandemic

arXiv:2106.05227v1 [cs.CY] 9 Jun 2021

Pardis Emami-Naeini, Tiona Francisco, Tadayoshi Kohno, Franziska Roesner
Paul G. Allen School of Computer Science & Engineering
University of Washington

Abstract

world have been encouraged or ordered to stay at home [2–4].
Hence, they started to work from home [5], keep in touch
with family and friends remotely [6], and/or take remote
courses [7], many for the first time [8]. This made remote
conferencing tools an essential part of people’s day-to-day
lives, which albeit useful, posed potential privacy risks to people who are now regularly streaming video and audio from
their own homes [9–15].
Increasingly integrated into people’s lives and routines,
widespread remote communications will not disappear with
the end of the pandemic [16]. As people continue to work, socialize, and learn from home, it becomes imperative for their
privacy and security to be protected. This requires the designers of in-home technologies (e.g., conferencing tools) and
organizations that use them to understand the diverse needs
of users. Understanding users’ needs will enable designers
and organizations to i) inform users about potential risks, and
ii) gear their designs toward enabling users to control their
privacy and security when using such technologies.
To that end, we conducted a worldwide survey (n =220)
on Prolific [17] in May 2020, i.e., a few months into the pandemic, as people were newly settling into widespread remote
communications. We sought to conduct our study during the
transition phase of the COVID-19 pandemic, when participants were still adjusting to their new remote settings, while
remembering their normal lives before the pandemic. Our
survey covered three contexts of remote communications,
namely work from home (WFH), socialize from home (SFH),
and learn from home (LFH). In each context, without priming participants by asking directly about privacy and security,
we leveraged participants’ open-ended responses to tease out
their unbiased privacy and security attitudes and behaviors towards three aspects of remote communications: conferencing
tools, modes of remote communications (microphone, webcam), and locations of remote communications. We conducted
quantitative and qualitative analyses to answer the following
three research questions:

Since December 2019, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused
people around the world to exercise social distancing, which
has led to an abrupt rise in the adoption of remote communications for working, socializing, and learning from home.
As remote communications will outlast the pandemic, it is
crucial to protect users’ security and respect their privacy in
this unprecedented setting, and that requires a thorough understanding of their behaviors, attitudes, and concerns toward
various aspects of remote communications. To this end, we
conducted an online study with 220 worldwide Prolific participants. We found that privacy and security are among the
most frequently mentioned factors impacting participants’ attitude and comfort level with conferencing tools and meeting
locations. Open-ended responses revealed that most participants lacked autonomy when choosing conferencing tools or
using microphone/webcam in their remote meetings, which in
several cases contradicted their personal privacy and security
preferences. Based on our findings, we distill several recommendations on how employers, educators, and tool developers
can inform and empower users to make privacy-protective
decisions when engaging in remote communications.

1

Introduction

The world was hit by a pandemic caused by the novel coronavirus and the COVID-19 disease in December 2019. In
an attempt to prevent the spread of the virus, businesses and
schools around the globe shut down, and people began sheltering in their homes to practice social or physical distancing [1].
Following social distancing protocols, people around the

Copyright is held by the author/owner. Permission to make digital or hard
copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted
without fee.
USENIX Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS) 2021.
August 8–10, 2021, Virtual Conference.

1. How do people engage with different aspects of remote
1

communications in each context during the pandemic?

resulting COVID-19 pandemic [18]. To help prevent further
spread of the virus, many people have exercised social or
physical distancing, i.e., keeping a safe distance from others
who are not from the same household [19]. Consequently,
people started working, socializing, and learning from home.
As a result, the use of conferencing tools and audio and video
communications has increased dramatically.

2. How do privacy and security factor into people’s behaviors and attitudes towards aspects of remote communications in each context?
3. What approaches can be used to effectively inform and
empower users’ privacy and security decision making
related to remote communications in each context?

2.1

We also designed our survey to allow us to explore related
research questions for other technologies that we hypothesized that people would interact with more and/or have a new
relationship with during the pandemic stay-at-home orders:
smart home devices and social media platforms. Upon analyzing our results, we found that privacy and security concerns
of most participants have not changed during the pandemic,
mainly due to their lack of risk knowledge and awareness.
Stay-at-home orders, however, significantly impacted participants’ concerns and behaviors toward remote communications, which we primarily focus on in this paper. For completeness, we include the survey questions on smart home devices
and social media platforms in Appendix A and a summary of
their findings in Appendices B and C.
When being asked about conferencing tools, participants
expressed a lack of decision-making agency. In WFH and
LFH, participants reported to use the tool that was being decided for them by their employer or educator. Moreover, in all
contexts, participants felt that they had no control over activating their webcam/microphone during their remote communications. For several participants, such imposed requirements
contradicted their privacy and security preferences.
We found that participants’ privacy attitudes and concerns
towards the physical locations where their remote communications take place is context-dependent. By qualitatively
analyzing participants’ open-ended responses, we identified
two types of location-related privacy: remote privacy (privacy
from meeting attendees) and co-inhabitant privacy (privacy
from household members). The open-ended responses suggested that in SFH, participants are mainly concerned about
their co-inhabitant privacy, while valuing both remote and
co-inhabitant privacy in WFH and LFH.
Based on the outcomes of our study, we distill several
recommendations for organizations and tool developers on
how to more effectively enable users to make informed and
privacy-protective decisions with regard to their remote communications. In particular, we propose to enhance users’
decision-making process by means of inclusive, transparent,
and flexible policies on remote communications and designing privacy-protective features, which consider diverse and
context-specific privacy and security needs.

2

Privacy and Security Risks of Conferencing Tools

The pandemic has redefined home from a place of privacy
and security [20] to a shared work, socializing, and learning
space. This sudden shift from in-person to remote interactions
has led to an unprecedented increase in the use of remote communication tools [21]. Teleconferencing and video conferencing tools, such as Zoom [22], Microsoft Teams [23], Google
Hangouts [24], and WebEx [25], have all seen a massive rise
in usage thanks to people working, socializing, and learning
from home.
As people started to increasingly rely on such tools for their
daily communications, experts have become more concerned
about the wide range of privacy and security risks these tools
expose their users to [9–12]. A few of the reported concerns
include Zoombombing [26], undisclosed data mining [27],
and selling information to third parties [28]. By considering the context around remote communications, literature
has discussed the privacy and security concerns involving
remote health-related sessions [29, 30], educational communications [15, 31–33], attending online courses [34, 35], and
work-related meetings [14, 36, 37].
Experts have provided several guidelines aiming to prevent
the risks and mitigate the potential harms of conferencing
tools [38–40]. Despite being valuable sources of information,
these guidelines put the burden of protecting privacy and security mainly on the user. This is an unrealistic expectation
due to several reasons. Confirming the literature [41], our
findings showed that privacy and security aspects, although
being important, are not always the number one priority when
using and interacting with conferencing tools. Moreover, our
qualitative findings suggested that due to their roles in their organizations, users often have limited power in making privacyprotective decisions, especially in work- and education-related
contexts. In addition, the best practices reported in the current guidelines constitute a broad recipe, hoping that they
apply to all users in all contexts of remote communications.
From the literature, we already know that privacy is contextdependent [42].

2.2

Home Audio and Video Broadcasting

During the pandemic, people started to rely more and more on
the microphones and webcams of their devices to stay in touch
with their colleagues, friends and family members, or their
classmates. Only a few weeks into the pandemic, the market

Background and Related Work

Since December 2019, people around the world have been
struggling with SARS-CoV-2 (novel coronavirus) and the
2

saw a 179% jump in the sales of webcams [43], followed by
a supply shortage [44–46].
Privacy and security experts have indicated that webcams
and microphones are susceptible to risks and vulnerabilities.
Several reports showed how easily hackers take control of
users’ devices and activate their built-in webcam and microphone by exploiting the device vulnerabilities [47–52]. During the pandemic, in all contexts of remote communications,
users are at an even higher risk of such hacking incidents as
they are spending an increased amount of time using their webcams and microphones in different locations of their homes
to remotely communicate with others [53]. Users might not
be aware that their webcams and microphones are turned on
as the LED indicator lights are not always effective [54] or
they might have been deactivated by the attacker [55, 56].
To prevent hacking attacks from happening, experts frequently recommend users to cover their webcams and microphones when they are not being used [57, 58]. During the
pandemic, however, users might not be able to diligently exercise this protective approach as many are encouraged or
even forced to have their webcams and microphones on all
the time. Employers are setting always-on webcam policies
to encourage spontaneous chats among employees [59] and
using surveillance tools to closely monitor the activities of
their workforce [60, 61], in some cases even without users’
knowledge [62]. Saying no to such surveillance is not always
easy, especially during the pandemic with the heightened risk
of unemployment due to potential retaliations [63].
Remote learning is not immune to such commonplace imposed surveillance as well. School-issued devices are not
transparent about whether they spy on students by activating their webcams and microphones [64]. Some schools use
proctoring software that enables access to the students’ webcams and microphones during the exams [65, 66]. In addition,
policies are in place forcing students to have daily audio and
video interactions with their peers or teachers [67].
The aforementioned privacy-invasive webcam and microphone policies and surveillance practices allude to the ineffectiveness of the blanket and commonly referenced solutions
with respect to the rising risks of these technologies. Designing privacy-protective tools and providing usable privacy and
security guidelines for users require a deep understanding
of users’ decisions and behaviors. Our study contributes to
the body of literature by providing novel empirical evidence,
which highlights the significant impact of the context of remote communications, as well as the living conditions, on
attitudes and privacy concerns related to remote communications.

3

to advertise a product and 7 participants provided other irrelevant responses to open-ended questions. We provide the
complete list of survey questions in Appendix A, and we mention the question number in parenthesis (e.g., CQ1) when
referring to each survey question in the remainder of this section. The study protocol was approved by our Institutional
Review Board (IRB).

3.1

Participant Recruitment

Prior to the survey launch, we piloted our survey with 10
participants to identify potential issues with the survey questions, specify the compensation amount, and ensure that the
questions are all understandable and easy to follow. We then
conducted our survey on Prolific and recruited participants
who were at least 18 years old. Because of the worldwide
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, we did not restrict our
respondents to a specific region and instead, recruited participants from all around the world. The survey took on average
16 minutes to be completed, and we compensated each participant with US$5.

3.2

Survey Procedure

We started the survey by introducing our study to be about
“technology use in the home during the Coronavirus (COVID19) Pandemic.” We then asked a few questions to obtain participants’ consent to participate in our study (see Appendix A.1).
We asked questions on three contexts of remote communications: working from home (WFH), socializing from home
(SFH), and learning from home (LFH). In the survey, we
showed questions related to each context in a separate block.
We randomized the order of these blocks to mitigate the potential order bias [68]. We asked similar questions in the three
tested contexts and only changed how we referred to remote
communications in each context. Specifically, in the contexts
of WFH, SFH, and LFH, we referred to remote communications as “remote work-related meetings,” “remote personal
meetings with friends and family members,” and “remote
learning-related meetings,” respectively.
3.2.1 Context-Specific Questions
Familiarity with a situation has been shown to impact people’s risk perception toward that situation [69]. To control for
participants’ familiarity with the contexts of remote communications, at the beginning of each context, we asked participants to specify whether they have experience with remote
communications in that context (CQ1). We implemented a
logic so that respondents could see the remaining questions
of that context only if they reported to have experience with
the context in question.
To better understand our participants’ timeline for remote
communications, we asked questions to capture when they
started remote communications and how often they were engaged in remote communications before and during the pandemic (CQ2-4). In each context, we explored participants’

Methods

We launched an online worldwide survey (n =220) on Prolific
in May 2020. We initially recruited 230 participants and excluded 10 of them: 3 participants used the open-ended boxes
3

attitudes, behaviors, and privacy concerns related to three
aspects of remote communications: conferencing tools (CQ510), modes of remote communications (CQ11-14), and locations of remote communications (CQ15-19).
There are countless anecdotes that have been reported about
people’s remote communication experience during the pandemic [70]. To understand what our participants were most
concerned about in their remote communications, at the end
of each context, we asked respondents to specify the incidents
that happened to themselves or others that they perceived to
be concerning or awkward (CQ20-22).

age rate of agreement for all the codebooks was above 91%,
with a minimum of 88% and a maximum of 100%. Based on
the literature, Cohen’s Kappa inter-coder agreement of over
75% is considered as “excellent” [76]. We provide the final
codebooks in Appendix D.
3.3.2 Quantitative Analysis
For our regression analysis, we fit M = 4 Cumulative Link
Mixed Models (CLMMs) with logit as the link function to
our collected data in order to explain the dependent variables
(DVs) we asked our participants about. In each model, the DV
is a categorical variable that can take multiple ordinal values,
each of which we refer to as a response category. For all models, we treated participants’ demographic and home setting
factors as control variables. We considered Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) as the goodness of fit for the models [77].
We only report on demographic factors that helped the model
fit significantly better than the model without them. It is important to note that we did not include the interaction terms
in the final regression models as they did not improve the
model fit. For the mth model, m ∈ {1, . . . , M}, we denote the
number of possible response categories by Jm , and we denote
the corresponding number of observations, i.e., the number of
participants that answered the question corresponding to that
model, by Nm . For the nth observation, n ∈ {1, . . . , Nm }, we let
Ymn denote the observed response category. As per the CLMM
definition, for the mth model, m ∈ {1, . . . , M}, the probability that the nth observation, n ∈ {1, . . . , Nm }, falls in the jth
response category or below, j ∈ {1, . . . , Jm − 1}, is modeled
as

3.2.2 Smart Home Devices and Social Media Platforms
After context-specific questions, we asked a few questions
to explore how the pandemic impacted participants’ privacy
concerns and behaviors toward their smart home devices and
social media platforms (IQ1-9, SMQ1-8). Since these questions were not the main focus of our study, we provide their
findings along with a background in Appendices B and C.
3.2.3 Demographics and Home Settings
Finally, we asked questions to understand participants’ demographic information, as well as their home settings (DH1-16).
We placed the demographic questions at the end of the survey
to minimize the possibility of stereotype threat [71–73].

3.3

Data Analysis

To analyze participants’ responses to survey questions, we
conducted qualitative and quantitative analyses.
3.3.1 Qualitative Analysis
The first author was the primary coder, who created the
codebook for each open-ended question and kept it updated
throughout the coding process. To analyze the data, we applied structural coding [74], which is a question-driven qualitative coding approach to categorize the interview data as well
as open-ended survey responses [75]. The codebook consists
of main and sub codes. The main codes are created from the
topics of interest in the study. For example, we were interested
in understanding what factors led participants to use specific
conferencing tools during the pandemic. In the codebook, the
main code we used to answer this research question was reasons to use conferencing tools, which was then divided into
11 sub-codes (e.g., functionality) and further divided into 8
sub-sub-codes (e.g., convenience and accessibility). After the
codebook was created, the first two authors used the codebook
to independently code all the open-ended responses. Authors
had several meetings to go over the codebook and the coded responses and resolve the conflicts stemming from mismatched
understandings of the codebook. After agreeing on the definitions used in the codebook, the first two authors re-coded all
the responses. The final codebook consists of 11 main codes,
122 sub-codes, 54 sub-sub-codes, and 4 sub-sub-sub-codes.
For each codebook, the Cohen’s Kappa inter-coder agreement
was calculated after the second round of coding. The aver-

Im

logit(Pr(Ymn ≤ j)) = α j| j+1 − uparticipantn − ∑ βnIVm,i ,
i=1

where α j| j+1 denotes the threshold parameter or cut-point bei.i.d.

tween response categories j and j + 1, and uparticipantn ∼
N (0, σ2u ) denotes the random effect for the participant in the
m
nth observation. Moreover, {βnIVm,i }Ii=1
represent model coefficients corresponding to the Im different independent variables
(IVs) in the mth model, each particular to the level that was
reported in the nth observation.

4

Results

We start this section by providing information on participants’
demographics and timelines of remote communications. We
then present findings on participants’ behaviors and decisions
related to three aspects of remote communications: conferencing tools, modes of remote communications, and locations of
remote communications.

4.1

Participants

We recruited 230 participants (reduced to 220 after excluding
invalid responses) on Prolific. Our participants were mainly
4

WFH

0

0.67

5.3

4.7

0

0

2

11

14

41

41

9.3

0

59

WFH

SFH

0

0

0.48

13

6.2

8.7

0.48

8.2

5.8

2.9

34

0.48

15

39

SFH

LFH 3.6

0

4.5

1.8

0

0

0

5.4

7.2

18

17

1.8

0

45

LFH
25%

Bla
c

kb
oa
Blu rd
eJe
an
s
WeCisc
be o
x
Dis
co
rd
Fa
ce
Tim
Fa e
ce
bo
ok
Go
To
Me
eti
n
Ha Goo g
ng gle
ou
Go ts
og
le
M
Mic eet
Te ros
am of
s t
Sk
yp
e
Sla
ck
Wh
ats
Ap
p
Zo
om

0%

Figure 1: Usage of conferencing tools (in percentage) in different remote communication contexts reported by participants.

75%

Very comf.

Somewhat comf.

Somewhat uncomf.

Very uncomf.

100%

Neutral

Figure 2: Participants’ reported level of comfort with frequently used conferencing tools.

from UK (31%), Poland (15%), and US (14%). 43% of our respondents were female and 57% were male. Most participants
did not have a background in Information Technology fields
(65%) and were 18-29 years old (62%). We provide details on
participants’ demographics, home settings, and timelines of
remote communications in Appendix E. Except for questions
on the consent form (see Appendix A.1), none of the survey
questions required participants to provide an answer. For each
finding, we specify the number of participants that answered
the corresponding question.

tool they most frequently use for their remote communications. Across all contexts, most participants (WFH: 87/150,
SFH: 161/208, LFH: 75/114) were somewhat or very comfortable when using the conferencing tools for remote communications (see Figure 2). Our regression analysis indicated
that the context of remote communications significantly impacts participants’ level of comfort (see Table 1). We found
that compared to work from home, participants were significantly more comfortable when using tools to communicate
with family and friends (estimate = 1.43, p-value < 0.05) as
well as communicating in the context of learning (estimate
= 0.88, p-value < 0.05). Participants who reported to be using Google Hangouts were significantly more comfortable
(estimate = 2.13, p-value < 0.05) with their conferencing
tool than those who were using Zoom. In addition, our regression model suggested that an increase in the number of
adults in the household resulted in a significant decline in the
reported level of comfort with conferencing tools (estimate
= −1.03, p-value < 0.05).
In each context, we explored participants’ reasons behind
their choice of conferencing tools as well as their comfort
and discomfort with the tools. By qualitatively coding their
open-ended responses, we surfaced several factors impacting
participants’ decision making and comfort level toward the
use of conferencing tools.

4.1.1 Frequency of Remote Communications
When asked about the frequency of remote communications
before the pandemic, responses suggested that participants
had more experience with remote communications in the socializing context than work and learning contexts. During the
pandemic, in the contexts of WFH and SFH, most participants
(WFH: 150/220, SFH: 208/220) reported that they have been
mostly having remote meetings and communications. In the
context of LFH, about half of our respondents (LFH: 114/220)
reported to be having remote learning-related meetings.
Designing usable and privacy- and security-protective conferencing tools and guidelines in remote communications requires a deep understanding of users’ attitudes and concerns
towards remote communications. To this end, in our survey,
we captured participants’ context-specific thought process
and decision making toward three aspects of remote communications during the pandemic: conferencing tools, modes of
remote communications (webcam/microphone), and locations
of remote communications. Without priming participants, we
surfaced the role of privacy and security in participants’ decision making related to each aspect of remote communications.

4.2

50%
#Participants

4.2.1

Lack of Autonomy in Decision Making

In the contexts of WFH and LFH, participants frequently
(WFH: 70/146, LFH: 64/107) implied that they have no
agency over choosing what conferencing tool to use for their
meetings. This lack of control was due to the fact that the
tool was being selected for participants by their employers or
educators, sometimes despite their personal preferences.
In the WFH context, some participants (WFH: 21/70) reported that the required conferencing tool is aligned with
privacy and security preferences and requirements of their
employers. P16 reported to be using Microsoft Teams for
their WFH meetings: “Work requires me to only use this tool.
They say this is the most secure one out there.” Similarly
P177 discussed why their employer asked them to use Microsoft Teams for WFH meetings: “It is the only tool that the

Conferencing Tools

In all contexts, Zoom was reported to be used more frequently
than other tools (WFH: 35%, SFH: 27%, and LFH: 42%).
We found that most participants (59%) were using the same
conferencing tool for their WFH and LFH meetings and 35%
of participants were using the same application in all three
contexts. Figure 1 shows the fraction of participants who
reported using each of the conferencing tools at least once for
their remote communications across the three contexts.
In each context, on a five-point Likert scale, we asked participants to specify their level of comfort with the conferencing
5

Model No. and AIC

Dependent Variable

Independent Variable

Levels

Context (baseline=WFH)

1 (AIC=271.58)

Tool comfort level

Tool (baseline=Zoom)

Microphone usage

Context (baseline=WFH)
#Children (7-13)
Context (baseline=WFH)

3 (AIC=322.47)

Webcam usage

Age (baseline=18-29)
#Rooms
Context (baseline=WFH)

4 (AIC=349.44)

Location comfort level

Odds Ratio

Std. Err.

1.43

4.18

0.56

LFH

0.88

2.41

0.44

*

Google Hangouts

2.13

8.41

0.81

*

Google Meet

1.79

5.99

0.76

0.30

Microsoft Teams

0.98

2.66

0.76

0.20

Skype

0.80

2.23

0.74

0.27

−1.03

0.36

0.52

*

SFH

1.53

4.61

0.39

***

LFH

***

{1, 2, . . . }

#Adults
2 (AIC=266.71)

Estimate

SFH

p-value
*

−1.61

0.20

0.33

{0, 1, 2, . . . }

1.29

3.63

0.44

**

SFH

1.66

5.26

0.34

***

LFH

***

−1.49

0.22

0.34

30-49

0.98

2.66

0.46

*

50-64

2.71

15.03

2.05

0.19

{0, 1, 2, . . . }

0.31

1.36

0.14

*

SFH

1.62

5.05

0.42

***

LFH

0.66

1.93

0.36

0.06

Dining room

−0.59

0.55

0.46

0.44

Kitchen

−0.63

0.53

0.39

0.52

Living room

−1.10

0.33

0.45

*

Work room

−0.38

0.68

0.54

0.56

#Adults

{1, 2, . . . }

−0.56

0.57

0.28

*

Gender (baseline=Female)

Male

1.04

2.83

0.42

*

Location (baseline=Bedroom)

Note:

*p < 0.05

**p < 0.01

***p < 0.001

Table 1: Regression results of the CLMMs we built to explain participants’ attitudes and concerns toward various remote
communication aspects. A positive estimate of a level of an independent variable implies inclination toward an increase in the
dependent variable and vice versa.
company has approved security wise on our network.”
In LFH, such imposed decisions contradicted some participants’ (LFH: 17/64) personal privacy and security preferences, especially when they were required to use Zoom
for their learning-related meetings. P36, who reported to use
Zoom for their remote learning-related meetings, said: “That
is the tool our teacher has chosen for us. Although security is
certainly a problem.”

(WFH: 40/41, LFH: 19/21) who mentioned using a conferencing tool based on its convenience and usability, reported
to personally benefit the most from these attributes in their
remote communications. P194 reported to be using Microsoft
Teams for their WFH meetings: “Microsoft Teams allows me
to stay connected more easily.”
Unlike WFH and LFH, in SFH, several participants reported to use a conferencing tool mainly due to its perceived
ease of use and convenience for others on the call (e.g., family
members or friends), especially those with limited familiarity
with technology. P90, who was most frequently using Skype
to communicate with family members, said: “Parents are not
confident with tech, Skype was the easiest for them to set up.”

4.2.2 Usability and Features
In all three contexts, the provided features and the usability of
the tool were the second most frequently mentioned reasons
to use the tool (WFH: 41/146, SFH: 92/204, LFH: 21/107)
and the most commonly reported factors to make participants
comfortable when using the conferencing tool (WFH: 75/111,
SFH: 84/154, LFH: 42/70). P9, who frequently uses Microsoft
Teams for their work meetings, said: “I can clearly see every
file that’s been attached to our meetings, I can easily contact
with others and the quality of voice and video is just perfect.”
Unlike SFH, one of the most desirable features in the contexts
of WFH and LFH was the ability of the tool to function properly with large groups. P102, who was using Zoom for their
work meetings, said: “It supports a bigger number of people
to be in a call better than the other ones.”
In the WFH and LFH contexts, almost all participants

Some participants (WFH: 11/146, SFH: 9/204, LFH:
14/107) discussed giving up their privacy and security due
to the tools’ provided features and convenience. Almost all
participants who mentioned such trade-offs reported to be using Zoom for their remote communications. In the context of
WFH, P176 said: “Zoom offers the best features and is easy to
use. Although security is certainly a problem.” Users’ tradeoff between privacy and security and provided convenience is
a known behavior in the literature [41, 78, 79].
6

4.2.3 Familiarity with the Tool
The most mentioned reason in deciding what conferencing
tool to use to communicate with friends and family members
was how familiar the tool was to participants themselves and
also others on the call (SFH: 94/204). P54 reported to use
WhatsApp for their SFH meetings to accommodate their family members: “It’s the one my family have already installed
on their phones and know how to use.” Familiarity with the
tool was the third most frequently mentioned reason in the
contexts of WFH and LFH (WFH: 29/146, LFH: 15/107).
P84 reported to use Skype more frequently than other tools:
“The people I am calling with use Skype more than anything.
I would rather use Zoom instead.” Familiarity was also the
second most commonly mentioned contributor to participants’
comfort with conferencing tools (WFH: 22/111, SFH: 48/154,
LFH: 15/70). P12 reported why they are comfortable with using Skype for their SFH meetings: “I have been using Skype
since I was a teenager, so I’m used to it and that makes me
more comfortable when I’m talking to friends and family.”
Unlike WFH and LFH, in SFH 33% of participants, who
reported to value the familiarity with the tool the most, implied
that such familiarity partially stemmed from using the tool
in contexts other than socializing (e.g., work, learning). P10
reported to use Microsoft Teams for their SFH meetings: “My
school uses the same platform and it’s easier to be on only
one platform at the same time.”
Participants’ open-ended responses implied how familiarity
with the tool impacted their privacy and security concerns. A
few participants (WFH: 9/29, SFH: 17/94, LFH: 6/15) perceived a sense of safety when using the tool due to their
prolonged experience with the tool. P30, who used Discord
for their personal meetings, said: “I know it is very safe and
reliable because I’ve been using it for the past 3 years.” This
finding confirms the role of familiarity with technology in
reducing risk perception [69]. Besides, a few participants
associated their privacy concerns with their familiarity with
the tool. P70 discussed why they only use Discord for their
SFH meetings: “I already had account on it and also I am not
comfortable sharing my info with more companies.”

best practices and perceptions that were frequently reported
across all contexts:
• Information being encrypted (7): WhatsApp:3, Zoom:4
• Trusted brand (6): Microsoft Teams:2, Google Meet:1,
Zoom:2, Cisco:1
• No reported risk on media (6): Microsoft Teams:3, Cisco:1,
WhatsApp:1, Discord:1
• Protection from unauthorized access (5): Microsoft
Teams:2, Google Meet:2, WhatsApp:1
• Ability to set password for meetings (2): Zoom:2
• No information being stored (1): Google Meet:1
Although most participants were comfortable with using the tools for their remote communications, some participants reported being somewhat or very uncomfortable
(WFH: 17/150, SFH: 16/208, LFH: 7/114). Privacy and security were frequently mentioned as the reasons for participants’
discomfort when using the tools (WFH: 8/17, SFH: 5/16,
LFH: 3/7). Below is the list of privacy and security practices
and beliefs that made participants uncomfortable when using
the conferencing tool:
• Risks and vulnerabilities reported by the media (7): Zoom:7
• Personal space being exposed in the meeting (4): Zoom:3,
Google Meet:1
• Data being sold to third parties (2): Zoom:2
• Amount of information being collected (2): Google Duo:1,
Skype:1
We asked participants to specify how they manage their
reported discomfort with the conferencing tools. In the contexts of WFH and LFH, participants reported to address their
concerns and discomfort by sharing less with other meeting
attendees (WFH: 6/17, LFH: 2/7). Limiting the exposure was
both in terms of restricting the content that is being shared,
as well as modifying the configuration of their tool or the
camera on their computer to limit the exposure. P4 limited
the content they shared in the meeting and said: “I try not to
say anything that could be used badly.”
Unlike WFH and LFH, The most commonly mentioned
mitigation approach in the context of SFH was limiting or
avoiding the use of the tool (SFH: 9/16). P188, who reported
using Google Hangouts, said: “I will uninstall it as soon as it
is no longer needed.”
Some participants reported to take no action when being
uncomfortable when using the tools (WFH: 4/17, SFH: 5/16,
LFH: 1/7), mainly due to not being in charge of selecting
the tools, not knowing what privacy and security controls
the tool offers, or believing they have nothing to hide. P50
discussed why they do not take any action to address their
privacy concerns with Google Duo: “Lots of other people
use it too, nothing likely concerning will happen about what
information the app ... collected on me.”

4.2.4 Privacy and Security Factors
In all three contexts, the perceived privacy and security of
the tool were the third most commonly mentioned factors in
making participants comfortable when using the tool for their
remote meetings (WFH: 22/111, SFH: 20/154, LFH: 11/70).
In the context of WFH, Microsoft Teams and in SFH and
LFH, Zoom were most frequently praised for their privacy
and security practices.
When discussing their comfort with conferencing tools,
some participants did not mention a specific privacy or security practice that made them comfortable when using the tool
and instead said: “It is secure,” “It feels like a safe app,” or “I
have no privacy concerns.” We qualitatively coded the openended responses and identified several privacy and security
7

WFH

WFH

SFH

SFH

LFH

LFH
0%

25%

50%
#Participants

Always

Frequently

Rarely

Never

75%

100%

0%

Sometimes

Figure 3: Reported frequency of using webcam.

4.3

25%

50%
#Participants

Always

Frequently

Rarely

Never

75%

100%

Sometimes

Figure 4: Reported frequency of using microphone.

Modes of Remote Communications

4.3.2 Agency over Decision Making
Participants’ reasons to activate their microphone/webcam in
WFH and LFH meetings implied their lack of agency over
sharing their audio/video in their remote communications.
In these contexts, respondents reported that they were explicitly expected to activate their microphone/webcam as a
direct request by their employer or educator (WFH-Webcam:
73/101, LFH-Webcam: 66/94, WFH-Microphone: 77/127,
LFH-Microphone: 59/97). Psychology literature refers to this
type of behavior as obedience, i.e., a form of social influence
where group members change their behaviors and attitudes
due to a direct request or command from an authority figure [80]. P101, who reported to always turn on the webcam
in their remote work-related meetings, said: “There isn’t a
choice in terms of my manager requesting a meeting face to
face.” For some participants, such imposed requests contradicted their personal preferences. P75 discussed their lack of
desire to activate their webcam in work-related meetings: “If
the manager asks me to turn on the video, I have to do it, but
I personally prefer to maintain it switched off at all times.”
In the context of LFH, several participants reported being
required to have their webcam and microphone on when taking exams (LFH-Webcam: 19/66, LFH-Microphone: 23/97).
P43 discussed how they decide on when to activate their webcam during learning-related communications: “It depends if
I’m explicitly asked by the professor to turn it on (For example when I have an ‘oral exam’ since written exams are now
hard to do remotely).”
Although no participant reported to be explicitly requested
by others to activate their microphone/webcam in SFH meetings, our qualitative analysis found the implicit expectation
to be the main factor in participants’ microphone/webcam
usage. Most participants perceived lack of control over the
use of microphone/webcam and reported that they are naturally expected to turn on their microphone/webcam when
talking to their family and friends (SFH-Webcam: 134/208,
SFH-Microphone: 166/208). P183 reported: “I always turn
the webcam on during personal meetings with friends and
family because I think it is what they expect and it would be
rude not to.”
Across all contexts, participants frequently mentioned
that they would make the decision to activate their mi-

We explored participants’ attitudes and preferences toward
the use of microphone and webcam in their remote communications. In all contexts, participants reported to activate their
microphones significantly more frequently (p-value < 0.001)
than their webcams when having remote communications
(see Figures 3 and 4). Our CLMM results showed that compared to WFH, participants turned on their webcams (estimate
= 1.66, p-value < 0.001) and microphones (estimate = 1.53,
p-value < 0.001) significantly more often when having remote personal meetings with friends and family members, and
significantly less often (webcam usage: estimate = −1.49,
p-value < 0.001; microphone usage: estimate = −1.61, pvalue < 0.001) when having remote learning-related meetings. Other factors significantly impacting the frequency of
webcam and microphone usage were the number of rooms
in the home setting, age, and the number of children in the
household (see Table 1).
4.3.1 Microphone/Webcam Misuse
Accidental exposures of audio and video can lead to privacy
violations. When asking participants about awkward incidents
that had happened to them or others, across all contexts, the
misuse of microphone and webcam was mentioned in almost
all reported incidents (WFH: 29/34, SFH: 17/18, LFH: 8/10).
In these incidents, the microphone and/or webcam were capturing unintended footage of a meeting attendee without their
awareness and in some cases, without the awareness of the
household members. For example, in the context of WFH,
P194 mentioned an incident involving the microphone: “A
member of management did not remember to mute himself
while he answered his personal phone on speaker with what
sounded to be a lawyer.” P185 reported a similar incident in
the context of LFH that involved the misuse of webcam in
the meeting: “Someone in a classroom stood up naked on the
Zoom call and I guess he didn’t know until it was too late.”
In order to raise users’ risk awareness and prevent such
incidents from happening, we need to understand the underlying reasons for participants’ preferences towards different
modes of remote communications. We asked participants how
they decide to turn on their webcam and microphone when
having remote communications.
8

4.3.3

WFH 5.3

2

1.3

14

0

13

40

0.67

52

31

16

4.8

4.8

17

6.7

31

59

5.3

62

17

LFH 2.6

0.88

0.88

11

0.88

8.8

28

0

52

25

Ba
th

Ba
cky

ard

SFH

roo
Ch m
i
be ld
dro ren
o '
Din m s
ing
roo
m
Ha
llw
ay
Kit
ch
en
Liv
ing
roo
m
O
fro ut
nt sid
do e
o
bePerso r
dro na
o l
Wo m
rk
roo
m

crophone/webcam based on other meeting attendees’ behaviors (WFH-Webcam: 58/150, SFH-Webcam: 22/208,
LFH-Webcam: 27/114, WFH-Microphone: 43/150, SFHMicrophone: 18/208, LFH-Microphone: 26/114). In the context of LFH, P185 reported to sometimes turn on their webcam: “If other students have their cameras on I am more likely
to turn mine on. But if nobody has theirs on, I will probably
not turn on my camera.” This type of social influence is called
informational conformity [81], which serves as a cognitive
repair [82] and happens when group members follow others’
behaviors and directions as they are unsure about the appropriate behavior [83]. In several cases, participants reported to
comply with the crowd despite holding a different preference.
P43 reported to rarely turn on their webcam in work-related
meetings: “Depending on the other person/people, and they always prefer to have a video. I personally find it a bit stressful,
but don’t mind it too much.”
In the context of SFH, some participants (SFH: 27/208) reported to jointly decide on the expectations around the use of
microphone and webcam mostly prior to their personal meetings. P134 reported: “When we decide to meet, we choose
video or none in the meeting invite.” A few participants discussed the importance of joint decision making in accommodating meeting attendees’ preferences. P160 reported to
frequently turn on their webcam when meeting their friends:
“If I miss seeing her face, we will plan a video call. We plan
them because she has anxiety which I definitely want to accommodate for as best [as I] can.”

Figure 5: Usage of home locations (in percentage) reported by
participants who engaged in remote communication contexts.
said: “I always turn it on as I feel face to face conversations
with people create a better environment, and a higher level
of honesty. I have campaigned for a policy in work to make
video compulsory, and it has been taken up.” P43 discussed
why they preferred to have their webcam on in LFH meetings:
“It is ‘nice’ and more productive during the Q&A meetings
to have webcam on and discuss about issues/doubts about a
particular project.”

4.4

Locations of Remote Communications

We asked participants to specify which part(s) of their
homes they most frequently use for their remote meetings. Across the three contexts, participants’ bedroom
(WFH: 56/150, SFH: 83/208, LFH: 49/114), living room
(WFH: 32/150, SFH: 75/208, LFH: 25/114), and study or
workroom (WFH: 38/150, SFH: 19/208, LFH: 21/114) were
reported to be used more often than other locations. Despite being rare, a few participants reported using their bathrooms for their remote meetings (WFH: 3/150, SFH: 10/208,
LFH: 1/114). Figure 5 shows the fraction of participants that
reported to use each of the locations in their home at least once
for their remote communications across the three contexts.
In all contexts, most participants (WFH: 123/150, SFH:
178/208, LFH: 91/114) were comfortable with the locations
of their meetings (see Figure 6) while having significant differences across the contexts. The regression analysis showed
that compared to WFH, participants were significantly more
comfortable when using any given location for their remote
personal meetings (estimate = 1.62, p-value < 0.001). Other
statistically significant factors to explain participants’ level
of comfort with their meeting locations were gender (estimate = 1.04, p-value < 0.05) and number of adults in the
household (estimate = −0.56, p-value < 0.05).

Attitudes over the Modes of Communication

Our qualitative analysis indicated that participants shared diverse sentiments over activating their webcam/microphone
in remote communications. In SFH, no participant suggested
being uncomfortable with their lack of autonomy over webcam/microphone in their personal meetings. P117 discussed
why they feel comfortable to always have their webcam on
when meeting family and friends: “My family expect me to
have video on, but I don’t mind as I feel comfortable with
people who really know me and accept me for who I am. I
guess it’s a gut feeling, if I don’t feel anxious in their company
in real life face to face, I would feel comfortable on a screen.”
Unlike SFH, several participants (WFH: 21/101, LFH:
13/94) in WFH and LFH expressed negative attitudes toward
having their webcam on. P80, who reported to activate their
webcam at their employer’s request, said: “I don’t think video
is necessary for the outcome of the meeting. It would be odd
seeing colleagues in their home environment.” P84 discussed
why they do not feel comfortable with having webcam on in
their LFH meetings: “I do not want to be seen by people I have
never met, so I do not turn it on, unless I am being asked by the
teacher.” On the contrary, some participants (WFH: 16/101,
LFH: 8/94) shared positive sentiments and supported having
the webcam on during WFH and LFH meetings. P151, who
reported to always turn on their webcam in WFH meetings,

4.4.1 Remote Privacy vs. Co-Inhabitant Privacy
In all three contexts, several participants reported to select a
meeting location which they perceived to be the most private
in their homes. Especially, in the context of WFH, having
privacy was the most frequently mentioned reason as to why a
location is used for work meetings (WFH: 42/147). In the contexts of LFH and SFH, privacy was the second and third most
common reason for participants’ location-related decision
9

cided to use their bedroom for remote work-related meetings:
“I prefer using mostly my bedroom for most of my online
work/meetings as I don’t like others hearing me talk, I like
to have a little bit of ‘privacy’.” P43 reported using their bedroom to preserve their co-inhabitant privacy: “I like to have
my own little space, a bit of privacy from the rest of family
and less distractions around so I can focus on the course.”
On the other hand, some participants were uncomfortable
about others on the call seeing their personal space. These
participants reported to desire having remote privacy by selecting a less personal location that provides a “neutral” or
“professional” background with fewer details about their personal life. P195 talked about having privacy when holding
their work meetings in the study or workroom: “I don’t have
anything private there that I would be unprofessional if I had
to share my webcam with others.” P122 discussed why they
were using the kitchen for remote learning meetings: “This is
the least personal place in the house to have such meetings.”
Open-ended responses revealed potential conflicts between
remote privacy and co-inhabitant privacy. In all contexts, participants who valued their co-inhabitant privacy frequently
reported to be using their personal bedroom to have privacy
from their household members. At the same time, participants
in WFH and LFH perceived their personal bedrooms to be intimate and, therefore, not appropriate to preserve their remote
privacy. We found similar tensions with regard to using living
room for remote communications. Some participants chose to
hold their remote meetings in the living room to have remote
privacy, although having less co-inhabitant privacy due to the
interruptions by household members.

WFH
SFH
LFH
0%

25%

50%
#Participants

75%

Very comf.

Somewhat comf.

Somewhat uncomf.

Very uncomf.

100%

Neutral

Figure 6: Participants’ reported comfort level with frequentlyused meeting locations.
making, respectively (LFH: 24/114, SFH: 35/208). Moreover,
we found privacy and sense of safety to be frequently reported
(WFH: 42/123, SFH: 68/178, LFH: 24/91) as participants’ reasons to be comfortable with their meeting locations.
By qualitatively analyzing participants’ open-ended responses, we identified two types of privacy: remote privacy
and co-inhabitant privacy. Remote privacy refers to having
privacy from other meeting attendees, while co-inhabitant
privacy refers to having privacy from other household members. The types of privacy that were mentioned by participants
varied among different contexts of remote communications.
In the context of SFH, participants reported to have no concern over remote privacy as they felt comfortable with other
meeting attendees (e.g., friends, family members) viewing
their personal space. For example, P32 reported why they
feel comfortable holding their personal meetings in the living
room: “It’s my living room, it’s organized and everyone I talk
to already knows it.” P196, who reported to use their bedroom
for remote personal meetings, said: “I feel very comfortable
in my bedroom as friends generally know my place.”
Almost all participants who considered privacy when selecting their SFH meeting locations reported to be concerned
with their co-inhabitant privacy. These participants reported
to choose their meeting locations to be a personal space in
their home where they are not being disturbed or interrupted
by others during their remote meetings. Participants’ personal
space was mostly reported to be their bedroom. A few participants reported to have co-inhabitant privacy in other locations,
including living room, kitchen, and workroom. P185 reported
to use their bedroom for SFH meetings: “I feel the most comfortable in my own bedroom and I know that it will be a
private space and that the least amount of interruptions will
happen in my bedroom compared to other areas of the house.”
P25 reported why they were using the living room for personal meetings: “It is separated from the room in which my
housemate works and so less likely that he will overhear.”
Unlike SFH, in the contexts of WFH and LFH, participants’ perception of privacy was more diverse. Some participants (WFH: 19/42, LFH: 15/24) reported to prefer having
co-inhabitant privacy by detaching their meeting locations
from other household members. P47 discussed why they de-

4.4.2 Room Convenience and Equipment
Similar to participants’ attitudes toward conferencing tools,
convenience and comfort were frequently mentioned as
the deciding factor when selecting a meeting location
(WFH: 26/147, SFH: 65/208, LFH: 24/114). Especially, in the
context of SFH, participants reported that the convenience of
the location is the most important reason when choosing the
room for their remote personal meetings. P80 discussed why
they use the living room for their personal meetings: “This is
the location of relaxation and the area where my husband and
I can sit comfortably and talk to friends and family.”
Another commonly mentioned reason behind participants’
choice of meeting location in all three contexts was the presence of equipment that was needed for remote communications, including computer, desk, and books (WFH: 42/147,
SFH: 41/208, LFH: 37/114). For participants in the context
of LFH, the room equipment was the main factor in deciding
what room to use for their learning meetings. P75, who reported to use their bedroom for LFH meetings, said: “This is
the location where I have my desk and my PC in.”
4.4.3 Discomfort with Meeting Locations
Although most participants were comfortable with their selected meeting locations, some respondents reported to be
10

somewhat or very uncomfortable (WFH: 9/150, SFH: 4/208,
LFH: 3/114). Across all contexts, the main factor participants
mentioned that made them uncomfortable with a location was
the perceived invasion of remote/co-inhabitant privacy when
holding meetings there (WFH: 4/9, SFH: 1/4, LFH: 2/3). In
the LFH context, P115 reported that they are uncomfortable
with using their bedroom for remote learning-related meetings: “It is hard to get comfortable in the bedroom as it feels
like a private area to invite people in to.” P4 discussed their
discomfort with using the living room for their remote work
meetings: “I could be overheard and am not comfortable with
the webcam being on as it intrudes on my privacy.”
We asked participants how they manage their perceived discomfort with meeting locations. The open-ended responses
indicated that only participants in the WFH context took steps
to mitigate their discomfort, while in the contexts of SFH
and LFH, participants reported to take no action when being
uncomfortable with their remote meeting locations. The primary approach participants mentioned to take in the context
of WFH was to limit the information exposure, either to other
meeting attendees or their household members (WFH: 3/9).
P38, who reported to mainly use their living room for their
work-related meetings, said: “I minimise what can be seen and
test the audio quality before the meeting.” Similarly, P35 limited the work-related information from the household members: “I close my door and ask other family members [not to]
come to the living room when having work meetings.”

5

mendations on how to better protect privacy when engaging
in remote communications [38, 40, 84]. Almost all of these
guidelines are targeted toward the users, who are already struggling with an insurmountable mental pressure thanks to the
pandemic. When an awkward incident happens in a conference call, end users are not the only group to blame, as they
are only a small part of the remote communication ecosystem. Tool developers and users’ employers and educators
could play a critical role in informing and empowering users
to adopt privacy-protective behaviors while communicating
with others online.
The pandemic may not last forever, but remote communications will stay longer [16] and that requires us to critically
examine what we have learned during the pandemic. Based
on our findings, in the following, we distill several recommendations to inform and empower users, and to design more
privacy-protective tools.

5.2

Participants’ open-ended responses showed lack of autonomy
in their attitudes and behaviors toward remote communication technologies. Several participants reported to have no
control over the choice of conferencing tools for their WFH
and LFH meetings (see Section 4.2.1). Lack of active decision making was also apparent in participants’ attitudes
toward the use of webcam and microphone. Participants reported to be explicitly (WFH and LFH) or implicitly (SFH)
expected to turn on/off their webcam/camera in the meetings
(see Section 4.3.2). The qualitative findings indicated that
having limited or no control over the conferencing tools and
their features (e.g., webcam/microphone) was participants’
primary impediment to managing their tool-related privacy
and security concerns (see Section 4.2.4). To enable active
and informed decision making in remote communications, we
need to consider the context of the meeting.
Our findings suggested that WFH and LFH meetings have
similar power dynamics that are being set by an authority figure (e.g., employer, educator). By providing inclusive, transparent, and flexible policies, workplaces and education institutes can take the first step toward informing and empowering
meeting participants. To be inclusive, policies should acknowledge users’ diverse and context-specific privacy needs and attitudes. To provide holistic privacy-protective policies, future
studies should be conducted to explore other stakeholders’
perspectives of remote communications, including but not
limited to, employers and teachers.
In light of our findings, organizational policies need to
discuss the choice of conferencing tool, the use of microphone and webcam in the meetings, and the available user
controls. In addition, the policies should be flexible and open
for feedback to help meeting attendees discuss and manage
their concerns and discomfort. Items to be outlined in such
policies include:

Discussion

We first provide a brief comparison between the contexts of
remote communications. Based on our findings, we then discuss methods to inform and enable users’ privacy-protective
decision making related to remote communications.

5.1

Enabling Context-Specific Informed Decision Making

Context-Specific Privacy Concerns and
Attributes

We focused on three remote communication contexts: working from home (WFH), socializing from home (SFH), and
learning from home (LFH). In each context, we surfaced participants’ attitudes and concerns toward the use of remote
communication technologies. Our quantitative and qualitative
findings suggested several similarities and differences in participants’ attitudes, behaviors, and privacy concerns among
the three contexts. In all contexts, comfort and discomfort
with conferencing tools and meeting locations were mainly
explained by participants’ privacy and security concerns and
their perceived sense of safety. Our findings indicated that
WFH and LFH were similar in terms of the choice and the use
of conferencing tools (e.g., activating webcam/microphone).
In SFH, unlike other contexts, the decisions toward the conferencing tools and the meeting locations were primarily based
on the provided convenience.
Numerous articles have been published that provide recom11

• What conferencing tools should be used for the meetings
and why?
• What privacy and security controls are provided by the
tools?
• In what condition are users (not) required to use their microphone/webcam?
• How can users control their microphone/webcam in the
communication tools?
• How can meeting participants manage their concerns and
discomfort with the tools?

whether other household members are in the hearing range
of their remote meetings. Such features can also respect the
privacy needs of other meeting attendees, e.g., in case meeting participants are not comfortable with their voice or video
being heard or seen by individuals who are not part of the call
(e.g., household members).

5.4

As the first paper to study remote communications at the
transition of the pandemic, we surfaced participants’ attitudes,
behaviors, and concerns toward specific aspects of remote
communications in different contexts. Due to the focus of
our research and the survey methodology, we did not explore
other potentially informative research questions, which could
be studied in the future. In what follows, we will highlight
the limitations of the current work, alongside several future
research directions.
Our study used Prolific to recruit survey participants. Prior
work recommended using Prolific to recruit a diverse sample
of participants [89]. However, despite its diverse population
and similarly to other crowdsourcing platforms, Prolific participants are not representative of any average population. For
example, in Prolific, participants tend to be younger and more
educated [90]. In addition, our participants were mainly from
the UK, Poland, and the US, and we had a small number of
participants from other countries (see Table 5). Due to these
limitations, the findings of our study should not be generalized. Our study provides an overview of technology-related
perceptions and behaviors during the global COVID-19 pandemic and we believe future studies can more directly focus
on specific populations. In our study, participants’ country
of residence was not a statistically significant factor, which
might be due to the small number of participants from some
of the countries. Future studies could explore the difference
in privacy concerns and attitudes among different countries
and cultures.
As we previously mentioned, among other questions, our
survey explored how participants’ learning experience has
been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. In this study, we
only recruited participants who were at least 18 years old.
However, it is also important to understand the impact of the
pandemic and the privacy considerations of students from all
ages, which should be considered in a future study.
To ensure participants’ familiarity with the contexts of remote communications, for each context, we only asked the
survey questions of participants who reported to have familiarity with that specific context. This potential selection bias
might impact participants’ attitudes and concerns toward remote communications in each context. Similarly, due to the
nature of the job and depending on the level of experience,
crowd-source participants might be more familiar with remote communication technologies than the average population. Having familiarity with a technology has been shown to
decrease the amount of risk an individual would perceive re-

Compared to WFH and LFH, in the context of SFH, participants felt being more in control of choosing a conferencing
tool, which might be partially due to more balanced power
dynamics. However, because of the implicit expectations, several participants felt having no control over the decision to
activate their webcam/microphone in the personal meetings.
As recommended by a few of our participants, joint decision
making prior to the meeting could give meeting participants
the opportunity to discuss their concerns and decide on a
policy that accommodates and respects all of them.

5.3

Limitations

Inclusive Privacy by Design

Across all contexts, the main factor participants mentioned
to make them uncomfortable with a meeting location was
the lack of remote and co-inhabitant privacy they felt when
holding remote meetings in that location (see Section 4.4.1).
Participants who referred to remote privacy reported that they
do not feel comfortable having their home locations in the
background of their WFH and LFH meetings. On the other
hand, having a neutral or generic background was one of the
frequently mentioned factors to make participants comfortable when using a meeting location (see Section 4.4.1).
Due to the restrictions posed by the diverse working, living,
and learning arrangements, it may not be reasonable to ask everyone to find a neutral background for their remote meetings.
Tool developers can enable features to help users protect their
privacy. Some of the current communication tools, such as
Zoom [85] and Microsoft Teams [86], already allow users to
cover their real background by using virtual ones. Similarly,
tools such as Skype [87] and Google Meet [88] provide a
feature for users to blur their backgrounds.
Across all contexts, when discussing co-inhabitant privacy,
several participants reported to be uncomfortable with other
household members hearing their conversations (see Section 4.4.1). From the regression analysis, we found that an
increase in the number of household members leads to a significant decrease in the level of comfort with conferencing
tools as well as the locations of remote communications (see
Table 1). To protect people’s privacy in different contexts of
remote communications, we need to design for diverse household settings. For example, to preserve co-inhabitant privacy
in crowded settings, future remote communication devices
can be enabled with a feature to detect and notify the user
12

lated to that technology [69]. Therefore, the reported privacy
and security concerns captured by our study could be lower
than the average population’ risk perception toward remote
communications.

6

[3] M. Smith, “China forces millions of people to stay
at home as virus toll rises,” https://www.afr.com/
world/asia/china-forces-millions-of-people-to-stayat- home- as- virus- toll- rises- 20200216- p5419e, accessed: 2020-10-28.

Conclusion
[4] The
Washington
Post, “Washington
PostABC News poll March 22-25, 2020,” https :
/ / www.washingtonpost.com / context / washington post - abc - news - poll - march - 22 - 25 - 2020 /
974c3312 - 5a40 - 4764 - afb1 - 4bb6b86f1cf4/?itid =
lk _ inline _ manual _ 2&itid = lk _ inline _ manual _ 2,
accessed: 2020-10-28.

The COVID-19 pandemic has caused people around the world
to abruptly shift their in-person work, personal life, and/or
education meetings to remote ones, which could outlast the
pandemic. Therefore, to enable safe remote experience, it is
critical to design privacy-protective tools and empower users
to consider privacy and security when engaging in remote
communications. To this end, we conducted a 220-participant
survey on Prolific, in which we considered three contexts of
remote communications, namely working (WFH), socializing (SFH), and learning from home (LFH). Our quantitative
and qualitative findings indicated that concerns, attitudes, and
behaviors toward remote communications are diverse and
context-dependent. Across all contexts, privacy and security
were among the most frequently mentioned concerns that participants had. These concerns were exacerbated by the fact
that participants felt that they had no agency over decision
making about conferencing tools as well as audio and video
modes of remote communications. We provided several recommendations for tool developers and organizations to enable
users to make privacy- and security-protective choices when
engaging with remote communications.

[5] D. Thompson, “The coronavirus is creating a
huge, stressful experiment in working from home,”
https : / / www.theatlantic.com / ideas / archive / 2020 /
03/coronavirus-creating-huge-stressful-experimentworking-home/607945/, March 2020.
[6] E. Koeze and N. Popper, “The virus changed
the way we internet,” https : / / www.nytimes.com /
interactive / 2020 / 04 / 07 / technology / coronavirus internet-use.html, April 2020.
[7] A. Tugend, P. Jordan, and M. Stein, “This school year
has been unlike any other,” https://www.nytimes.com/
2020 / 10 / 14 / education / learning / pandemic - school remote-learning.html, October 2020.

Acknowledgments
We are especially grateful to our study participants. We thank
Christine Geeng for reading the draft of our paper. We are
also very thankful to our reviewers for their valuable feedback.
This work was supported in part by the NSF awards CNS1565252 and CNS-1651230 and the University of Washington
Tech Policy Lab, which receives support from the William
and Flora Hewlett Foundation, the John D. and Catherine T.
MacArthur Foundation, Microsoft, and the Pierre and Pamela
Omidyar Fund at the Silicon Valley Community Foundation.

[8] N. Daniels, “When the Pandemic Ends, Will School
Change Forever?” https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/
05/learning/when- the- pandemic- ends- will- schoolchange-forever.html, May 2020.
[9] P. Wagenseil, “Zoom security issues: Here’s everything that’s gone wrong (so far),” https : / /
www.tomsguide.com/news/zoom- security- privacywoes, November 2020.

References

[10] Z. Doffman, “Why You Should Stop Sending Links
On Facebook Messenger,” https://www.forbes.com/
sites/zakdoffman/2020/10/25/why-apple-iphone-andgoogle-android-users-should-stop-using-facebookmessenger-apps/?sh=1811fd9c33f1, accessed: 202010-28.

[1] Los Angeles Times, “Coronavirus social distancing
around the world,” https://www.latimes.com/worldnation/story/2020-04-06/coronavi-social-distancingaround-the-world, April 2020.

[2] R. Picheta, “Boris Johnson issues stay-at-home order, sending UK into lockdown to fight coronavirus
pandemic,” https://www.cnn.com/2020/03/23/uk/ukcoronavirus-lockdown-gbr-intl/index.html, accessed:
2020-10-28.

[11] C. Mihalcik, “Microsoft listened to Skype calls with
’no security’ to protect recordings, report says,” https:
//www.cnet.com/news/microsoft-listened-to-skypecalls-with-no-security-to-protect-recordings-reportsays/, accessed: 2020-10-28.
13

[12] R. Perper, “WhatsApp disclosed 12 security flaws
last year, including 7 classified as ’critical,’ after Jeff Bezos phone was reportedly hacked,”
https://www.businessinsider.com/jeff- bezos- hackwhatsapp-disclosed-security-flaws-last-year-ft-20201, accessed: 2020-10-28.

[23] M. Hachman, “Microsoft’s solution for COVID-19
is a free Teams subscription for six months,” https:
/ / www.pcworld.com / article / 3530374 / microsofts solution-for-covid-19-is-a-free-teams-subscriptionfor-six-months.html, accessed: 2020-10-28.
[24] I. Bonifacic, “Google makes Hangouts Meet features free in the wake of coronavirus,” https : / /
www.engadget.com / 2020 - 03 - 03 - google - makes hangouts - meet - features - free - in - the - wake - of coronavirus.html, accessed: 2020-10-28.

[13] Zoom, “Attendee attention tracking,” https :
//support.zoom.us/hc/en-us/articles/115000538083Attendee-attention-tracking, accessed: 2020-10-28.
[14] B. Fung and A. Marquardt, “Millions of americans are
suddenly working from home. that’s a huge security
risk,” https://www.cnn.com/2020/03/20/tech/teleworksecurity/index.html, March 2020.

[25] J. Novet, “Cisco says Webex video-calling service is
seeing record usage too, even as competitor Zoom
draws all the attention,” https : / / www.cnbc.com /
2020/03/17/cisco-webex-sees-record-usage-duringcoronavirus - expansion - like - zoom.html, accessed:
2020-10-28.

[15] M. Liberman, “Massive shift to remote learning prompts big data privacy concerns,” https :
/ / www.edweek.org / technology / massive - shift - to remote-learning-prompts-big-data-privacy-concerns/
2020/03, March 2020.

[26] T. Lorenz, “’zoombombing’: When video conferences go wrong,” https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/
20/style/zoombombing-zoom-trolling.html, accessed:
2020-10-28.

[16] M. Brenan, “U.S. Workers Discovering Affinity for
Remote Work,” https://news.gallup.com/poll/306695/
workers-discovering-affinity-remote-work.aspx, April
2020.

[27] A. Krolik and N. Singer, “A feature on Zoom secretly
displayed data from people’s LinkedIn profiles,” https:
//www.nytimes.com/2020/04/02/technology/zoomlinkedin-data.html, accessed: 2020-10-28.

[17] Prolific, “Quickly find research participants you can
trust.” https://www.prolific.co/, accessed: 2020-11-26.

[28] J. Rosenblatt, “Zoom sued for allegedly illegally disclosing personal data,” https://www.bloomberg.com/
news/articles/2020-03-31/zoom-sued-for-allegedlyillegally-disclosing-personal-data, accessed: 2020-1028.

[18] S. O’Grady, K. Bellware, M. Iati, L. Beachum, H. Denham, R. Thebault, and D. Sands, “The coronavirus
has killed at least 1 million people worldwide,”
https://www.washingtonpost.com/nation/2020/09/28/
coronavirus-covid-live-updates-us/, September 2020.

[29] T. C. Li, “Privacy in pandemic: Law, technology, and
public health in the covid-19 crisis,” 2020.

[19] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), “Social Distancing,”
https :
/ / www.cdc.gov / coronavirus / 2019 - ncov / prevent getting - sick / social - distancing.html, accessed:
2020-10-28.

[30] S. Bassan, “Data privacy considerations for telehealth
consumers amid covid-19,” Journal of Law and the
Biosciences, vol. 7, no. 1, p. lsaa075, 2020.

[20] D. G. Hayward, Home as an environmental and psychological concept, 1975.

[31] C. Venzke, “For remote learning, privacy challenges
go beyond zoombombing,” https://cdt.org/insights/
for-remote-learning-privacy-challenges-go-beyondzoombombing/, July 2020.

[21] C. Trueman, “Pandemic leads to surge in
video conferencing app downloads,” https :
/ / www.computerworld.com / article / 3535800 /
pandemic-leads-to-surge-in-video-conferencing-appdownloads.html, April 2020.

[32] S. Morrison and R. Heilweil, “How teachers are
sacrificing student privacy to stop cheating,” https:
//www.vox.com/recode/22175021/school-cheatingstudent-privacy-remote-learning, December 2020.

[22] J. Novet, “Why Zoom has become the darling
of remote workers during the COVID-19 crisis,”
https://www.cnbc.com/2020/03/21/why-zoom-hasbecome-darling-of-remote-workers-amid-covid-19outbreak.htmll, accessed: 2020-10-28.

[33] J. Duball, “Shift to online learning ignites student
privacy concerns,” https://iapp.org/news/a/shift-toonline- learning- ignites- student- privacy- concerns/,
April 2020.
14

[34] C. Caron, “How to protect your family’s privacy during remote learning,” https://www.nytimes.com/2020/
08/20/parenting/online-school-privacy.html, August
2020.

[44] C. Welch, “Webcams have become impossible
to find, and prices are skyrocketing,” https : / /
www.theverge.com / 2020 / 4 / 9 / 21199521 / webcam shortage - price - raise - logitech - razer- amazon - best buy-ebay, April 2020.

[35] V. Strauss, “As schooling rapidly moves online across
the country, concerns rise about student data privacy,”
https://www.washingtonpost.com/education/2020/03/
20/schooling-rapidly-moves-online-across-countryconcerns- rise- about- student- data- privacy/, March
2020.

[45] C. Baraniuk, “No end to covid-19 webcam shortage,”
https://www.bbc.com/news/technology- 53506401,
July 2020.
[46] B. Hill, “The covid-19 pandemic has caused a webcam shortage, and street prices are soaring,” https:
//hothardware.com/news/covid-19-webcam-shortageprices-skyrocketing, April 2020.

[36] T. Spiggle, “Can employers monitor employees who
work from home due to the coronavirus?” https :
/ / www.forbes.com / sites / tomspiggle / 2020 / 05 / 21 /
can-employers-monitor-employees-who-work-fromhome - due - to - the - coronavirus/?sh = 3a31c6202fb7,
May 2020.

[47] J. Stern, “What i learned from the hacker who spied on
me,” https://www.wsj.com/articles/what-i-learnedfrom- the- hacker- who- spied- on- me- 11549559728,
February 2019.

[37] S. Morrison, “Just because you’re working from
home doesn’t mean your boss isn’t watching you,”
https://www.vox.com/recode/2020/4/2/21195584/
coronavirus - remote - work - from - home - employee monitoring, April 2020.

[48] C. Williams, “Risk: Is this your webcam? you’re being
watched,” https://www.wizcase.com/blog/webcamsecurity-research/, September 2019.
[49] M. Kuma, “Mac malware can secretly spy on your
webcam and mic – here’s how to stay safe,” https:
/ / thehackernews.com / 2016 / 10 / macbook - camera hacked.html, October 2016.

[38] V. Safronova, “Digital hygiene in the Zoom era,” https:
//www.nytimes.com/2020/10/22/style/zoom-safetyprotocols.html, October 2020.
[39] J. Engel Bromwich, “Protecting your digital life in
9 easy steps,” https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/
17/technology/personaltech/encryption-privacy.html,
November 2016.
[40] H. Drew, “How to protect your Zoom calls,” https:
//www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2020/04/03/
zoom-video-set-up/, April 2020.

[50] K. O’Flaherty, “Zoom users beware: Here’s how
a flaw allows attackers to take over your mac microphone and webcam,” https://www.forbes.com/
sites / kateoflahertyuk / 2020 / 04 / 01 / zoom - users beware - heres - how - a - flaw - allows - attackers - to take-over-your-mac-microphone-and-webcam/?sh=
7b2fe9e22fbe, April 2020.

[41] P. Emami-Naeini, H. Dixon, Y. Agarwal, and L. F. Cranor, “Exploring how privacy and security factor into
iot device purchase behavior,” in Proceedings of the
2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, 2019, pp. 1–12.

[51] K. Johnson, “Ohio man charged for remotely controlling devices, spying on people for 13 years,” https:
//www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2018/01/
10/ohio-man-charged-remotely-controlling-devicesspying-people-13-years/1022275001/, January 2018.

[42] P. E. Naeini, S. Bhagavatula, H. Habib, M. Degeling,
L. Bauer, L. F. Cranor, and N. Sadeh, “Privacy expectations and preferences in an iot world,” in Thirteenth
Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security ({SOUPS}
2017), 2017, pp. 399–412.

[52] G. Kumparak, “Nasty facetime bug could allow others to eavesdrop on your microphone or camera,”
https://techcrunch.com/2019/01/28/nasty-facetimebug - could - allows - others - to - eavesdrop - on - your microphone-or-camera/, January 2019.

[43] D. Howley, “Americans buying ‘historic’ amount of
computers during coronavirus lockdown,” https://
finance.yahoo.com/news/americans-buying-historicamount-computers-webcams-121043910.html, April
2020.

[53] H. Coffey, “Is it safe to leave your webcam uncovered after using video chat apps?” https : / /
www.independent.co.uk / life - style / webcam - zoom privacy- safety- tech- security- hack- working- homelockdown-a9469156.html, April 2020.
15

[54] R. S. Portnoff, L. N. Lee, S. Egelman, P. Mishra, D. Leung, and D. Wagner, “Somebody’s watching me? assessing the effectiveness of webcam indicator lights,”
in Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2015, pp.
1649–1658.

[64] G. Genhart, “Spying on students: School-issued devices and student privacy,” https://www.eff.org/wp/
school - issued - devices - and - student - privacy, April
2017.
[65] D. Harwell, “Cheating-detection companies made millions during the pandemic. now students are fighting
back.” https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/
2020/11/12/test-monitoring-student-revolt/, November
2020.

[55] M. Brocker and S. Checkoway, “iseeyou: Disabling
the macbook webcam indicator {LED},” in 23rd
{USENIX} Security Symposium ({USENIX} Security
14), 2014, pp. 337–352.

[66] R. Deibert, “We’ve become dependent on a technological ecosystem that is highly invasive and prone
to serial abuse,” https://www.theglobeandmail.com/
opinion/article- the- pandemic- has- made- us- evenmore- dependent- on- a- highly- invasive/, November
2020.

[56] G. Cluley, “Webcam spying without turning on
the led? researchers prove it’s possible,” https : / /
grahamcluley.com/webcam-spying-without-turningled-researchers-prove-possible/, December 2013.
[57] T. Germain, “How to protect yourself from
camera and microphone hacking,” https :
//www.consumerreports.org/privacy/how-to-protectyourself-from-camera-and-microphone-hacking/, July
2019.

[67] S. Johnson, “On or off? california schools weigh
webcam concerns during distance learning,” https:
//edsource.org/2020/on- or- off- california- schoolsweigh-webcam-concerns-during-distance-learning/
638984, August 2020.

[58] D. Cook, “Zoom, skype, microsoft teams: Why you
should cover the camera on your phone or laptop,”
https://nationalpost.com/news/canada/hackers- canaccess-your-phone-and-laptop-cameras-heres-whyyou-should-cover-them-now, April 2020.

[68] W. D. Perreault, “Controlling order-effect bias,” The
Public Opinion Quarterly, vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 544–551,
1975.

[59] D. Safreno, “Loneliness is distracting,” https : / /
pragli.com / blog / loneliness - is - distracting/, March
2020.

[69] E. U. Weber, N. Siebenmorgen, and M. Weber, “Communicating asset risk: How name recognition and the
format of historic volatility information affect risk
perception and investment decisions,” Risk Analysis:
An International Journal, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 597–609,
2005, accessed: 2020-06-03.

[60] M. Jagannathan, “Like ‘punching a time clock through
your webcam’: How employers are keeping tabs
on remote workers during the pandemic,” https :
/ / www.marketwatch.com / story / like - punching - a time-clock-through-your-webcam-how-employersare- keeping- tabs- on- remote- workers- during- thepandemic-11596484344, August 2020.

[70] A. Nierenberg, “Students, parents and teachers tell their
stories of remote learning,” https://www.nytimes.com/
2020 / 10 / 14 / education / learning / students - parents teachers-remote-stories.html, October 2020.

[61] A. Holmes, “Employees at home are being photographed every 5 minutes by an always-on video service to ensure they’re actually working — and the
service is seeing a rapid expansion since the coronavirus outbreak,” https://www.businessinsider.com/
work-from-home-sneek-webcam-picture-5-minutesmonitor-video-2020-3, March 2020.

[71] T. Fernandez, A. Godwin, J. Doyle, D. Verdin,
H. Boone, A. Kirn, L. Benson, and G. Potvin, “More
comprehensive and inclusive approaches to demographic data collection,” 2016.
[72] C. M. Steele, “A threat in the air: How stereotypes
shape intellectual identity and performance.” American
psychologist, vol. 52, no. 6, p. 613, 1997.

[62] D. West, “How employers use technology to surveil employees,” https://www.brookings.edu/blog/techtank/
2021 / 01 / 05 / how - employers - use - technology - to surveil-employees/, January 2021.

[73] S. J. Spencer, C. M. Steele, and D. M. Quinn, “Stereotype threat and women’s math performance,” Journal
of experimental social psychology, vol. 35, no. 1, pp.
4–28, 1999.

[63] P. Cohen and T. Hsu, “‘rolling shock’ as job
losses mount even with reopenings,” https : / /
www.nytimes.com/2020/05/14/business/economy/
coronavirus-unemployment-claims.html, June 2020.

[74] J. Saldaña, The coding manual for qualitative researchers. Sage, 2015.
16

[75] E. Namey, G. Guest, L. Thairu, and L. Johnson, “Data
reduction techniques for large qualitative data sets,”
Handbook for team-based qualitative research, vol. 2,
no. 1, pp. 137–161, 2008.

[87] Team Skype, “Introducing background blur in
Skype,” https://www.skype.com/en/blogs/2019-02background-blur/, June 2019.
[88] Google, “Blur your background in Google Meet,” https:
//workspaceupdates.googleblog.com/2020/09/bluryour- background- in- google- meet.html, September
2020.

[76] J. L. Fleiss, B. Levin, and M. C. Paik, Statistical methods for rates and proportions. John Wiley & Sons,
2013.
[77] K. P. Burnham and D. R. Anderson, “Multimodel inference: understanding AIC and BIC in model selection,”
Sociological methods & research, vol. 33, no. 2, pp.
261–304, 2004.

[89] E. Peer, L. Brandimarte, S. Samat, and A. Acquisti,
“Beyond the turk: Alternative platforms for crowdsourcing behavioral research,” Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, vol. 70, pp. 153–163, 2017.

[78] E. Zeng and F. Roesner, “Understanding and improving security and privacy in multi-user smart homes: a
design exploration and in-home user study,” in 28th
{USENIX} Security Symposium ({USENIX} Security
19), 2019, pp. 159–176.

[90] Prolific Team, “What are the advantages and limitations of an online sample?” https://researcherhelp.prolific.co / hc / en - gb / articles / 360009501473 What - are - the - advantages - and - limitations - of - an online-sample-, September 2018.

[79] P. Oppmann, “In digital world, we trade privacy for
convenience,” https://www.cnn.com/2010/TECH/04/
14/oppmann.off.the.grid/index.html, April 2010.

[91] A. Malik, “Smart device hacks are up since the pandemic started,” https://www.govtech.com/security/
Smart-Device-Hacks-Are-Up-Since-the-PandemicStarted.html, September 2020.

[80] R. B. Cialdini and N. J. Goldstein, “Social influence:
Compliance and conformity,” Annu. Rev. Psychol.,
vol. 55, pp. 591–621, 2004.

[92] Parks Associates, “Parks associates: 33% of smart
home device owners report increased usage during the
COVID-19 pandemic,” https://www.prnewswire.com/
news-releases/parks-associates-33-of-smart-homedevice- owners- report- increased- usage- during- thecovid-19-pandemic-301197501.html, December 2020.

[81] M. Deutsch and H. B. Gerard, “A study of normative
and informational social influences upon individual
judgment.” The journal of abnormal and social psychology, vol. 51, no. 3, p. 629, 1955.
[82] C. Heath, R. P. Larrick, and J. Klayman, “Cognitive repairs: How organizational practices can compensate for
individual shortcomings,” in Review of Organizational
Behavior. Citeseer, 1998.

[93] Xiaomi, “New survey finds 70% of consumers improved home during COVID-19, more than half
used smart devices,” https://www.prnewswire.com/
news-releases/new-survey-finds-70-of-consumersimproved- home- during- covid- 19- more- than- halfused-smart-devices-301201817.html, January 2021.

[83] M. Sherif, “A study of some social factors in perception.” Archives of Psychology (Columbia University),
1935.

[94] V. Sivaraman, H. H. Gharakheili, A. Vishwanath,
R. Boreli, and O. Mehani, “Network-level security and
privacy control for smart-home IoT devices,” in Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and Communications (WiMob), 2015 IEEE 11th International Conference on. IEEE, 2015, pp. 163–167.

[84] B. Chen, “The Dos and Don’ts of Online Video
Meetings,” https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/25/
technology / personaltech / online - video - meetings etiquette-virus.html, March 2020.
[85] Zoom, “Virtual Background,” https://support.zoom.us/
hc/en- us/articles/210707503- Virtual- Background,
2020, accessed: 2020-11-21.

[95] D. Lee, “Amazon Alexa heard and sent private chat,”
https://www.bbc.com/news/technology- 44248122,
May 2018.

[86] J. Spataro, “Custom backgrounds in Microsoft
Teams make video meetings more fun, comfortable, and personal,” https : / / www.microsoft.com /
en - us / microsoft - 365 / blog / 2020 / 06 / 12 / custom backgrounds-microsoft-teams-video-meetings-funcomfortable-personal/, June 2020.

[96] A. Ng and M. Wollerton, “Google calls Nest’s hidden
microphone an “error”,” https://www.cnet.com/news/
google - calls - nests - hidden - microphone - an - error/,
February 2019.
17

[97] N. Statt, “Amazon’s Alexa isn’t just AI — thousands
of humans are listening,” https://www.theverge.com/
2019 / 4 / 10 / 18305378 / amazon - alexa - ai - voice assistant-annotation-listen-private-recordings, April
2019.

[107] C. International and I. Society, “The trust opportunity: Exploring consumers’ attitudes to the internet of
things,” https://www.internetsociety.org/wp-content/
uploads/2019/05/CI_IS_Joint_Report-EN.pdf, May
2019.

[98] A. Taylor, “It may have been terrifyingly easy for a
stranger to hack into a baby monitor and curse at a
2-year-old,” https://www.businessinsider.com/foscambaby-monitor-hack-2013-8, August 2013.

[108] R. Holmes, “Is COVID-19 Social Media’s Levelling Up Moment?” https://www.forbes.com/sites/
ryanholmes/2020/04/24/is-covid-19-social-mediaslevelling-up-moment/?sh=39c55bff6c60, April 2020.

[99] J. Bugeja, A. Jacobsson, and P. Davidsson, “On privacy
and security challenges in smart connected homes,” in
2016 European Intelligence and Security Informatics
Conference (EISIC). IEEE, 2016, pp. 172–175.

[109] K. Saravanakumar, K. Deepa et al., “On privacy and
security in social media–a comprehensive study,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 78, pp. 114–119, 2016.
[110] M. Chewae, S. Hayikader, M. H. Hasan, and J. Ibrahim,
“How much privacy we still have on social network?”
International Journal of Scientific and Research Publications, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 2250–315, 2015.

[100] T. Riley, “The cybersecurity 202: Smart home devices
with known security flaws are still on the market,
researchers say,” https://www.washingtonpost.com/
politics / 2021 / 02 / 04 / cybersecurity - 202 - smart home - devices - with - known - security - flaws - are still - market - researchers - say/?utm _ campaign =
wp _ the _ cybersecurity _ 202&utm _ medium =
email&utm _ source = newsletter&wpisrc =
nl_cybersecurity202, February 2021.

[111] S. Cohen, “Privacy risk with social media,” https:
//www.huffpost.com/entry/privacy-risk-with-social_b_13006700, November 2017.
[112] J. Nicas, M. Isaac, and A. Swanson, “Tiktok said
to be under national security review,” https : / /
www.nytimes.com/2019 /11/01 /technology/tiktoknational-security-review.html, November 2019.

[101] Forrester Research, “There’s a growing blind spot
for your security team during the pandemic: IoT
devices,” https://www.zdnet.com/article/theres- agrowing-blind-spot-for-your-security-team-duringthe-pandemic-iot-devices/, August 2020.

[113] J. Hawley, “S.3455 - no tiktok on government devices
act,” https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/
senate-bill/3455, July 2020.
[114] T. Nabity-Grover, C. M. Cheung, and J. B. Thatcher,
“Inside out and outside in: How the COVID-19 pandemic affects self-disclosure on social media,” International Journal of Information Management, p. 102188,
2020.

[102] D. J. Dubois, R. Kolcun, A. M. Mandalari, M. T.
Paracha, D. Choffnes, and H. Haddadi, “When speakers are all ears: Characterizing misactivations of iot
smart speakers,” Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing
Technologies, vol. 2020, no. 4, pp. 255–276, 2020.

A

[103] J. Granjal, E. Monteiro, and J. S. Silva, “Security for
the internet of things: A survey of existing protocols
and open research issues,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1294–1312, 2015.

Survey Questions

A.1

Informed Consent

This is a survey about technology use in the home during
the Coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic by researchers at
the University of Washington, in Seattle, Washington, USA.
The University of Washington’s Human Subjects Division
reviewed our study, and determined that it was exempt from
federal human subjects regulation. We do not expect that this
survey will put you at any risk for harm.
In order to participate, you must be at least 18 years
old and able to complete the survey in English. We expect
this survey will take about 20 minutes to complete. If you
have any questions about this survey, you may email us at
hometechnology@cs.washington.edu.

[104] O. Arias, J. Wurm, K. Hoang, and Y. Jin, “Privacy and
security in internet of things and wearable devices,”
IEEE Transactions on Multi-Scale Computing Systems,
vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 99–109, 2015.
[105] S. Sicari, A. Rizzardi, L. A. Grieco, and A. CoenPorisini, “Security, privacy and trust in internet of
things: The road ahead,” Computer networks, vol. 76,
pp. 146–164, 2015.
[106] J. Caltrider. (2017, November) 10 fascinating things
we learned when we asked the world “how connected
are you?”. https://goo.gl/92JDfq.

• I am 18 years or older.
◦ Yes ◦ No
18

• CQ7: During the COVID-19 pandemic, in your current
environment, how do you feel about using this tool for
your remote work-related meetings?
◦ Very uncomfortable ◦ Somewhat uncomfortable ◦
Neither uncomfortable nor comfortable ◦ Somewhat
comfortable ◦ Very comfortable

• I have read and understand the information above.
◦ Yes ◦ No
• I want to participate in this research and continue with
the task.
◦ Yes ◦ No

A.2

• CQ8: (If in CQ7, Very uncomfortable or Somewhat uncomfortable is selected) What about this tool makes you
uncomfortable when using it? [Open-ended]

Context-Specific Questions (CQ)

In the contexts of WFH, SFH, and LFH, we referred to remote
communications as “remote work-related meetings,” “remote
personal meetings with friends and family members,” and
“remote learning-related meetings,” respectively. Here we
only provide the questions for the WFH context.

• CQ9: If in CQ7, Very uncomfortable or Somewhat uncomfortable is selected) How do you manage your discomfort when using this tool? [Open-ended]

• CQ1: Have you been mostly having remote work-related
meetings from home during the COVID-19 pandemic?
◦ Yes ◦ No

• CQ10: If in CQ7, Very comfortable or Somewhat comfortable is selected) What about this tool makes you
comfortable when using it? [Open-ended]

The rest of the context-related questions will only be
presented if the answer is “Yes.”

• CQ11: During the COVID-19 pandemic, how often do
you turn on your device’s webcam when having remote
work-related meetings?
◦ Never ◦ Rarely ◦ Sometimes ◦ Frequently ◦
Always

• CQ2: Before the COVID-19 pandemic, how often have
you had remote work-related meetings from home?
◦ Never ◦ Once or twice a year ◦ Once every 4-6
months ◦ Once every 2-3 months ◦ Once every month
◦ Once every 2-3 weeks ◦ Once every week ◦ Not
every day, but more than once a week ◦ Every day

• CQ12: How do you decide whether or not to turn on
your device’s webcam when having remote work-related
meetings? [Open-ended]

• CQ3: During the COVID-19 pandemic, how many hours
a week do you spend in remote work-related meetings
from home?
◦ Less than 1 ◦ 1 to 5 hours ◦ 6 to 10 hours ◦ 11 to
15 hours ◦ 16 to 20 hours ◦ 21 to 25 hours ◦ 26 to 30
hours ◦ 31 to 35 hours ◦ 36 to 40 hours ◦ Over 40
hours

• CQ13: During the COVID-19 pandemic, how often do
you turn on your device’s microphone when having remote work-related meetings?
◦ Never ◦ Rarely ◦ Sometimes ◦ Frequently ◦ Always
• CQ14: How do you decide whether or not to turn on
your device’s microphone when having remote workrelated meetings? [Open-ended]

• CQ4: During the COVID-19 pandemic, how long have
you been having remote work-related meetings from
home?
◦ Since last week ◦ Since two weeks ago ◦ Since three
weeks ago ◦ Since one month ago ◦ Since more than
one month ago

• CQ15: During the COVID-19 pandemic, which area of
your home do you usually hold your remote work-related
meetings in? If you use more than one location, please
select the one you use most frequently for remote workrelated remote meetings.
◦ Backyard ◦ Bathroom ◦ Bedroom (yours) ◦ Bedroom (your children’s) ◦ Dining room ◦ Hallway ◦
Kitchen ◦ Living room ◦ Outside front door ◦ Study
or workroom ◦ Other (please specify [Open-ended])

• CQ5: During the COVID-19 pandemic, what conferencing tools do you mostly use for your remote work-related
meetings? If you use more than one tool, please select
the one you use most frequently.
◦ BlueJeans ◦ Google Hangouts ◦ Google Meet ◦
GoToMeeting ◦ Microsoft Teams ◦ Skype ◦ Slack
◦ UberConference ◦ Zoom ◦ Other (please specify
[Open-ended])

• CQ16: During the COVID-19 pandemic, how do you
feel about using this location to have remote workrelated meetings?
◦ Very uncomfortable ◦ Somewhat uncomfortable ◦
Neither uncomfortable nor comfortable ◦ Somewhat
comfortable ◦ Very comfortable

• CQ6: Please explain why you have been using the tool
that you have specified more frequently than other tools.
[Open-ended]
19

• CQ17: (If in CQ16, Very uncomfortable or Somewhat uncomfortable is selected) What about this location makes
you uncomfortable when having remote work-related
meetings there? [Open-ended]

pandemic ◦ have not changed compared to before the
pandemic ◦ have slightly decreased compared to before
the pandemic ◦ have strongly decreased compared to
before the pandemic

• CQ18: If in CQ16, Very uncomfortable or Somewhat
uncomfortable is selected) How do you manage your
discomfort when using this location for having remote
work-related meetings? [Open-ended]

• IQ7: (If in IQ6, Have strongly increased [...] or Have
slightly increased [...] is selected) Please explain why
your privacy-related concerns about the data collection
by your smart home devices have increased compared to
before the pandemic. [Open-ended]

• CQ19: If in CQ16, Very comfortable or Somewhat comfortable is selected) What about this location makes you
comfortable when having remote work-related meetings
there? [Open-ended]

• IQ8: (If in IQ6, Have strongly decreased [...] or Have
slightly decreased [...] is selected) Please explain why
your privacy-related concerns about the data collection
by your smart home devices have decreased compared
to before the pandemic. [Open-ended]

• CQ20: During the COVID-19 pandemic, have you or
people you know ever experienced an awkward incident
while having remote work-related meetings?
◦ Yes ◦ No

• IQ9: (If in IQ6, Have not changed [...] is selected) Please
explain why your privacy-related concerns about the data
collection by your smart home devices have not changed
compared to before the pandemic. [Open-ended]

• CQ21: (If in CQ18, Yes is selected) Please describe the
incident. [Open-ended]

A.4

• CQ22: (If in CQ18, Yes is selected) Please describe what
you or people you know have done in response to the
incident. [Open-ended]

A.3

Social Media Related Questions (SMQ)

• SMQ1: How many social media platforms (e.g., Facebook, Twitter) are you a member of?
◦ 0 ◦ 1 ◦ 2 ◦ 3 ◦ 4 ◦ More than 4

IoT-Related Questions (IQ)

• SMQ2: (If in SMQ1, 0 is not selected) What social media
platforms are you a member of? [Open-ended]

• IQ1: How many smart home devices (e.g., smart speakers, smart security cameras) do you currently have at
home? If you have more than one unit for each type of
device, please count them all.
◦ 0 ◦ 1 ◦ 2 ◦ 3 ◦ 4 ◦ More than 4

• SMQ3: (If in SMQ1, 0 is not selected) Have you made
any changes about how you use the social media platforms during the COVID-19 pandemic?
◦ Yes ◦ No

• IQ2: (If in IQ1, 0 is not selected) What smart home
devices do you currently have? [Open-ended]

• SMQ4: (If in SMQ3, Yes is selected) Please explain the
changes you have made. [Open-ended]

• IQ3: (If in IQ1, 0 is not selected) In which rooms of
your home are each of your smart devices located? Please
specify the location of all the smart devices you currently
have. [Open-ended]

• SMQ5: (If in SMQ1, 0 is not selected) During the
COVID-19 pandemic, my privacy-related concerns about
using social media platforms
◦ have strongly increased compared to before the pandemic ◦ have slightly increased compared to before the
pandemic ◦ have not changed compared to before the
pandemic ◦ have slightly decreased compared to before
the pandemic ◦ have strongly decreased compared to
before the pandemic

• IQ4: (If in IQ1, 0 is not selected) Have you made any
changes regarding your smart devices during the COVID19 pandemic (e.g., changes to behaviors around devices,
changes of device locations, and changes to device settings)?
◦ Yes ◦ No

• SMQ6: (If in SMQ5, Have strongly increased [...] or
Have slightly increased [...] is selected) Please explain
why your privacy-related concerns about using social
media platforms have increased compared to before the
pandemic. [Open-ended]

• IQ5: (If in IQ4, Yes is selected) Please explain the
changes you have made. [Open-ended]
• IQ6: (If in IQ1, 0 is not selected) During the COVID-19
pandemic, my privacy-related concerns about the data
collection by my smart home devices
◦ have strongly increased compared to before the pandemic ◦ have slightly increased compared to before the

• SMQ7: (If in SMQ5, Have strongly decreased [...] or
Have slightly decreased [...] is selected) Please explain
why your privacy-related concerns about using social
20

media platforms have decreased compared to before the
pandemic. [Open-ended]

• DH12: In which country do you currently reside? [List
of countries provided by Qualtrics]

• SMQ8: (If in SMQ5, Have not changed [...] is selected)
Please explain why your privacy-related concerns about
using social media platforms have not changed compared
to before the pandemic. [Open-ended]

• DH13: What is your current employment status?
◦ Full-time employment ◦ Part-time employment ◦
Unemployed ◦ Self-employed ◦ Home-maker ◦ Student ◦ Retired

A.5

Demographics and Home Settings

• DH1: Including yourself, how many adults 18 years of
age and above live in your current home?
◦ 1 ◦ 2 ◦ 3 ◦ 4 ◦ 5 ◦ More than 5

• DH14: (If in DH13, Unemployed or Retired is not selected) The organization you work for is in which of the
following?
◦ Public sector (e.g., government) ◦ Private sector (e.g.,
most businesses and individuals) ◦ Non-for-profit sector

• DH2: How many children at or above the age of 13 and
under the age of 18 live in your current home?
◦ 0 ◦ 1 ◦ 2 ◦ 3 ◦ 4 ◦ 5 ◦ More than 5

• DH15: Do you have a background in technology?
◦ Yes ◦ No
• DH16: (If in DH14, Yes is selected) Please specify what
your technical background is. [Open-ended]

• DH3: How many children at or above the age of 7 and
under the age of 13 live in your current home?
◦ 0 ◦ 1 ◦ 2 ◦ 3 ◦ 4 ◦ 5 ◦ More than 5

B

• DH4: How many children under the age of 7 live in your
current home?
◦ 0 ◦ 1 ◦ 2 ◦ 3 ◦ 4 ◦ 5 ◦ More than 5

Smart Home IoT Devices

Privacy and security concerns toward smart home IoT devices
are not unique to the pandemic. However, their associated
privacy risks have increased as people tend to spend more
time at home [91]. In our study, we explored the impact of
the pandemic on participants’ attitudes and privacy concerns
toward their smart home devices.

• DH5: Who do you share your home with? (check as
many as apply)
◦ No one ◦ Roommate(s) ◦ Spouse(s)/Domestic partner(s) ◦ Children ◦ Parent(s) ◦ Other (please specify
[Open-ended])

B.1

Background

As people spend more time at home due to the pandemic, the
demand for smart home IoT devices has seen a sharp surge.
In a recent survey conducted by Parks Associates, 33% of
smart home device owners reported an increase in the usage
of their smart home devices during the pandemic compared to
before the pandemic [92]. In another study, more than half of
the participants reported purchasing new smart home devices
during the pandemic [93].
The risks and vulnerabilities of smart home devices are not
new to privacy and security researchers. Prior to the COVID19 pandemic, several articles have reported on an array of
privacy and security challenges and issues related to smart
home devices [94–99]. During the pandemic, due to the surge
in purchasing and using smart home devices, many of which
having poor privacy and security practices [100], users are
now exposing themselves and potentially others to an even
higher level of risk. Reports have shown that attacks against
IoT devices have more than doubled as compared to before
the pandemic [91]. IoT consumers increasingly set up their
smart home devices on the same network as their work-related
computers, consequently increasing their workplaces’ attack
surface [101]. Moreover, a study has shown that smart speakers can be mistakenly triggered up to 19 times per day and on
each activation, keep a recording of up to 43 seconds [102],
which is clearly disconcerting when having sensitive work,
social, or learning-related meetings.

• DH6: Do you have shared wall(s) with your neighbors?
◦ Yes ◦ No
• DH7: How many bedrooms does your home have?
◦ 0 ◦ 1 ◦ 2 ◦ 3 ◦ 4 ◦ 5 ◦ More than 5
• DH8: How many rooms other than bedrooms does your
home have?
◦ 0 ◦ 1 ◦ 2 ◦ 3 ◦ 4 ◦ 5 ◦ More than 5
• DH9: What is your age?
◦ 18-29 years old ◦ 30-49 years old ◦ 50-64 years old
◦ 65 years and older
• DH10: What is your gender? [Open-ended]
• DH11: What is the highest degree you have earned?
◦ No schooling completed ◦ Nursery school ◦ Grades
1 through 11 ◦ 12th grade—no diploma ◦ Regular
high school diploma ◦ GED or alternative credential
◦ Some college credit, but less than 1 year of college
◦ 1 or more years of college credit, no degree ◦ Associates degree (for example: AA, AS) ◦ Bachelor’s
degree (for example: BA. BS) ◦ Master’s degree (for
example: MA, MS, MEng, MEd, MSW, MBA) ◦ Professional degree beyond bachelor’s degree (for example:
MD, DDS, DVM, LLB, JD) ◦ Doctorate degree (for
example: Ph.D., EdD)
21

Reports published prior to the pandemic showed that consumers of smart devices are concerned about the privacy and
security practices of such devices [103–106]. As an example,
a survey by Consumers International and the Internet Society
reported that 63% of respondents found the data collection of
smart devices to be “creepy” and more than half did not trust
their devices to respect their privacy [107].
Literature has discussed consumers’ IoT-related privacy
and security concerns prior to the pandemic and no study
has been conducted to explore the impact of the pandemic
on users’ privacy and security concerns and attitudes. As
part of our survey, we asked questions to understand how the
pandemic has changed participants’ privacy perception and
behavior related to their smart home devices.

B.2

no reason to change their concerns mainly due to not having
heard about or personally experienced new risks during the
pandemic. P123 discussed why their privacy concerns have
not been impacted: “I haven’t seen any disturbing news about
privacy during a pandemic.” Some participants attributed their
lack of awareness to having the same knowledge about the
risks of their smart home devices compared to before the
pandemic. P39 reported: “I knew the potential risks before
and I still do. I haven’t seen anything new that would change
my opinion.”
Lack of Initial Concern. Several participants reported that
they always had little or no privacy concerns with the data
practices of their smart home devices and that the pandemic
has not impacted that (16/78). Most of these participants reported to have at least one smart speaker with voice assistant
(11/16) and some had smart TVs (5/16). P34, who had a smart
TV in their living room, said: “I have never been concerned
about it so the pandemic has not changed it. I believe that
mass data is necessary and helpful overall.”
Although the pandemic did not impact most participants’
privacy concerns toward their smart home IoT devices, some
participants (15/78) reported that their IoT-related privacy
concerns have grown during the pandemic, primarily due to
increased awareness and interaction with their devices.

Results

Out of 103 participants who reported to have at least one smart
home device, 74% had a smart speaker with voice assistant
(e.g., Amazon Echo, Google Home). Other common smart
home devices that participants had were smart security camera
(23/103), smart TV (22/103), and smart light bulb (12/103).
Most participants reported to place their smart devices in
their living room (57/103), about half placed them in the
bedroom (49/103), some in the kitchen (31/103), and a few in
the bathroom (16/103).
B.2.1 Attitudes and Concerns
Without prompting participants about the privacy and security
of smart home devices, we asked them whether they changed
anything about their smart home devices during the pandemic.
Only four participants reported to have made changes to their
smart home devices and almost all reported to become more
aware of the presence of the microphones on smart speakers
and to turn them off when they are not needed. P174 reported:
“During the pandemic, I’ve been more diligent about turning
the microphone off, especially in my work/study room, so
it doesn’t get triggered by errant phrases or record sensitive
conversations.” Similarly, P160 discussed the change they
applied to their Google Home Mini that is placed in the their
bedroom: “I’ve left voice recognition off. I really don’t like
that anyone can ask it to do things, I don’t want to be shocked
awake in the morning.”
To capture the impact of the pandemic on privacy-related
concerns, we asked participants to specify how their concerns toward the data collection of their smart home devices
have been impacted by the pandemic. In addition, we asked
participants to provide the rationale behind their answers.
Most participants (78/103) reported that the pandemic has not
impacted their IoT-related privacy concerns, due to several
reasons.

Increased Risk Awareness. Participants frequently reported
that they became more aware of the privacy risks of their
smart home devices during the pandemic (11/15). Some of
these participants attributed their heightened risk awareness
to the increased privacy-focused media reports during the
pandemic (6/11). P146 reported: “I have heard so much about
privacy issues on the news because of the quarantine so now
I’m a little more worried about how much data companies
track.”

Lack of Risk Awareness. Participants’ justifications as to
why the pandemic has not impacted their privacy concerns
suggested their lack of risk awareness as the most frequent
reason (38/78). Participants commonly reported that they have

During the pandemic, social media platforms have seen an
unprecedented growth in user engagement [108]. This increase in interaction could increase users’ exposure to online
risks, including phishing attacks, identity theft, and cyber-

More Frequent Device Usage. The second reason contributing to participants’ increased privacy concerns was spending
more time around the smart home devices and having more
interactions with them during the pandemic (8/15). This increase in device usage is aligned with a recent survey conducted by Parks Associates [92]. P175, who had a smart
speaker and smart TV in their living room, reported: “We use
them more during the pandemic, and although they are not
devices that can collect a lot of personal info, the worries are
still there.” P174, who had a smart speaker in their workroom,
discussed their increased privacy concerns: “I don’t want it to
be recording sensitive work information that I discuss aloud.”

C

22

Social Media Platforms

bulling [109–111]. We explored the impact of the pandemic
on participants’ attitudes, privacy concerns, and risk awareness toward their social media platforms.

C.1

that their privacy concerns with social media has not been
impacted. Open-ended responses suggested several reasons
as to why privacy concerns toward social medial platforms
were not impacted during the pandemic.

Background

Lack of Risk Awareness. Lack of risk knowledge and awareness was the most frequently reported reason as to why some
participants’ privacy concerns toward social media platforms
have not been impacted during the pandemic (61/155). P71,
who reported to be active on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram
said: “I am not aware of social media platforms changing their
data practices over the pandemic. Thus, my concern stays the
same on those platforms.” P39 attributed their lack of awareness to media reports: “I haven’t seen any news recently that
would change my knowledge about the potential risks of my
social media accounts.”

Similar to smart home IoT devices, the use of social media
platforms has been soaring due the COVID-19 pandemic. Stay
at home orders have caused more people using social media
platforms to stay connected with their colleagues, family, and
friends. A study showed that during the pandemic, social
media platforms have seen a 61% increase in usage [108].
Such an increase has led privacy experts and lawmakers to
be concerned about users’ privacy during the pandemic [112,
113].
In addition to an increase in usage, the pandemic might
have potentially exposed social media users to a greater harm
by impacting the content people share due to their change in
risk assessment when posting online [114]. The change in
usage and content sharing on social media exacerbates the already alarming privacy risks and concerns of these platforms,
including identity theft attacks, phishing attacks, cyberbulling,
and malware attacks [109–111]. However, from the literature,
it is unclear whether users acknowledge the intensified risks
and harms of social media during the pandemic and how their
risk perception has impacted their behaviors toward such platforms. Our study contributes to the literature by investigating
how the pandemic has influenced users’ concerns, attitudes,
and behaviors toward their social media platforms.

C.2

Perceived Efficacy. To some participants (27/155), their unaffected privacy concerns were mainly due to their perception
of having autonomy over protecting their privacy. The two
common approaches participants reported to adopt to manage
their privacy on social media were posting less sensitive information and changing the privacy settings (e.g., who can
view the posts). P86 discussed how they protect their privacy
by limiting their online activities: “I knew from the start what
were the privacy-related risks of social media. That’s why I
don’t really post sensitive information anymore.” P176 talked
about their privacy-protective social media settings: “I already
have my privacy settings tightly controlled so have had no
need to adjust them.”

Results

Lack of Initial Concern. Similar to IoT-related privacy concerns, some participants (25/155) reported that their privacy
concerns related to their social media platforms have not
been changed during the pandemic as they have never had any
concern about such platforms. P24, who had Twitter and Facebook accounts, said: “I have no concerns about my accounts
so they haven’t changed during the pandemic.”

Almost all (214/220) of our participants reported to be active on at least one social media platform. The most frequently used platforms were Facebook (174/214), Instagram
(151/214), Twitter (119/214), and Reddit (86/214).
C.2.1 Attitudes and Concerns
19% of participants (40/214) who were active on at least one
social media platform reported to change how they use their
social media platforms during the pandemic. Most participants reported to have increased their interactions with social
media (28/40). P56, who was active on Facebook, said: “I
have been on it more, accessing news. I also use Facebook’s
messenger feature to chat with friends and ex-colleagues.”
Some participants, on the other hand, reported to lessen their
interactions with social media. P141, who reported to have
accounts on several platforms, said: “I use social media less
since people were panicking about COVID-19 in the beginning and I didn’t want to consume so much stressful content.”
We asked participants to specify how the pandemic has impacted their privacy-related concerns toward social media platforms. Most participants reported that the pandemic did not
impact their privacy concerns (155/204). Quite surprisingly,
68% of participants (18/28) who increased their interactions
with social media platforms during the pandemic, reported

Unchanged User Behavior. Some respondents (25/155) reported that the pandemic has not affected their concerns toward the privacy practices of their social media platforms
since their interactions with their accounts stayed the same
as compared to before the pandemic. P95, who reported to
have LinkedIn and Facebook accounts, said: “I use them in
the same way as before and I didn’t see any difference so no
need for extra concern.”
A few participants (25/204) reported that they became more
concerned about their social media platforms during the pandemic, mainly due to heightened risk awareness and increased
platform usage.
Increased Risk Awareness. Several participants reported
that during the pandemic, they became more aware of the
privacy risks of social media platforms (19/25). P23 discussed
their privacy concerns related to oversharing on social media
23

E

during the pandemic: “I am now more aware that when you
are stressed or sad you tend to overshare, especially if you
do not have any other outlets, and I am concerned for people
especially during the pandemic time since I have seen that
many do not realize they share a lot of sensitive information
that can be easily collected by other people.” P61 mentioned
how they became more aware of the potential privacy harms
of social media during the pandemic: “I have had more time to
think how my privacy can be breached through social media,
so I have deleted information and closed my privacy settings
more.”

Timeline

Before the pandemic

Increased Platform Usage. Increased interactions with social media platforms reported to be the second most frequent
reason as to why some participants became more concerned
with their online platforms (14/25). P175, who had Reddit,
Discord, and Twitter accounts, said: “I’m using social media
a lot more, and people have tried to get into my e-mail, and
I have personal information on some accounts.” P4, who reported being active on Facebook and Instagram, discussed
why they became more concerned with social media: “These
days more people are using social media, so they might become easier to hack.”

D

Participants’ Information

During the pandemic

Codebooks

Context

Meeting Frequency
Never
Once/twice a year
Once every 4-6 months
Once every 2-3 months
Once every month
Once every 2-3 weeks
Once every week
> once a week
Every day
< 1 (hour/week)
1-5 (hour/week)
6-10 (hour/week)
11-15 (hour/week)
16-20 (hour/week)
21-25 (hour/week)
26-30 (hour/week)
31-35 (hour/week)
36-40 (hour/week)
> 40 (hour/week)

WFH
53%
6%
4%
4%
3%
4%
6%
11%
9%
25%
44%
13%
7%
6%
1%
1%
2%
1%
0%

SFH
33%
7%
6%
7%
6%
10%
13%
12%
6%
35%
41%
14%
3%
2%
1%
1%
1%
1%
1%

LFH
60%
14%
5%
3%
2%
2%
3%
5%
6%
11%
40%
16%
12%
11%
7%
3%
0%
0%
0%

Table 2: Frequency of engaging in remote communications.

The codebooks are available at:
https://gist.github.com/SOUPS-COVID-Privacy/
97b6f6caeb13d5091314e6458049617d.

24

Context

Experience Duration
Since last week
Since two weeks ago
Since three weeks ago
Since one month ago
Since more than one month ago

WFH

SFH

1%

1%

LFH
7%

0%
3%
5%
91%

1%
2%
3%
93%

5%
9%
18%
61%

Table 3: Summary statistics of how long participants were experiencing the three contexts under study.

Question

Responses

Shared wall(s) with
neighbors

Yes

No

54%

46%

No one
3%

Roommate(s)
3%

Spouse(s)/Domestic partner(s)
19%

Children
11%

Parent(s)
21%

Other: Siblings
25%

#Adults 18+ years old

1
12%

2
45%

3
22%

4
17%

5
4%

More than 5
0%

#Children between
13 and 18 years old

0
81%

1
12%

2
6%

3
1%

4
0%

5
0%

More than 5
0%

#Children between
7 and 13 years old

0
86%

1
14%

2
0%

3
0%

4
0%

5
0%

More than 5
X%

#Children under
7 years old

0
83%

1
12%

2
5%

3
0%

4
0%

5
0%

More than 5
0%
More than 5

Housemates

#Bedrooms
#Rooms other
than bedrooms

0

1

2

3

4

5

0%

14%

28%

41%

14%

3%

0%

0
4%

1
11%

2
17%

3
27%

4
26%

5
15%

More than 5
0%

Table 4: Breakdown of participants’ home settings.

Age
18-29
30-49
50-64

Gender
62%
34%
4%

Highest Degree

Female 43% No schooling completed
Male
57% Nursery school
Grades 1 through 11
12th grade—no diploma

Country of Residence
0% UK
0% Poland
2% US
3% Italy

Regular high-school diploma
21% Portugal
GED or alternative credential
0% Spain
Some college credit, < 1 year of college
4% Greece
1+ years of college credit, no degree
16% Canada
Associate’s degree (e.g., AA, AS)
4% Other
Bachelor’s degree (e.g., BA, BS)
37%
Master’s degree (e.g., MA, MS, MBA)
Professional degree (e.g., MD, JD)
Doctorate degree (e.g., Ph.D., EdD)

Employment

31% Full-time
15% Part-time
14% Unemployed
7% Self-employed
7%
4%
3%
2%
17%

Tech Background
41%
17%
6%
8%

Yes
No

Home-maker
3%
Student
25%
Retired
0%
Public sector
23%
Private sector
67%
Non-profit sector 10%

13%
0%
0%

Table 5: Participants’ demographic information. Only countries with at least 5 participants are listed.

25

35%
65%

