arXiv:2106.10651v1 [eess.IV] 20 Jun 2021

Implementing a Detection System for COVID-19 based on
Lung Ultrasound Imaging and Deep Learning
Carlos Rojas-Azabache1 , Karen Vilca-Janampa1 , Renzo Guerrero-Huayta2 , Dennis Núñez-Fernández2
1
Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos
2
Universidad Nacional de Ingenierı́a
Lima, Peru
{carlos.rojas6,10140251}@unmsm.pe,{rguerreroh,dnunezf}@uni.pe

Abstract

2. Previous works
In the last year, and during the course of the pandemic,
different solutions have been proposed for the early diagnosis of COVID-19 based on machine learning, deep learning
and artificial intelligence techniques among others. Most
of these solutions make use of medical images taken from
ultrasound scans, computed tomography scans and chest Xrays. However, each methodology and imaging source used
has had advantages and disadvantages. We will evaluate the
most interesting proposals below.

The COVID-19 pandemic started in China in December
2019 and quickly spread to several countries. The consequences of this pandemic are incalculable, causing the
death of millions of people and damaging the global economy. To achieve large-scale control of this pandemic, fast
tools for detection and treatment of patients are needed.
Thus, the demand for alternative tools for the diagnosis
of COVID-19 has increased dramatically since accurated
and automated tools are not available. In this paper we
present the ongoing work on a system for COVID-19 detection using ultrasound imaging and using Deep Learning
techniques. Furthermore, such a system is implemented on
a Raspberry Pi to make it portable and easy to use in remote
regions without an Internet connection.

In [10], the authors use a novel deep neural network,
which is derived from Spatial Transformation Networks,
and also make use of images taken with ultrasound scanners. This predicts the quantification of the severity of
COVID-19 infection and provides the spatial localization
of pathological features in ultrasound images. In [5], which
was developed in 2020, X-ray, ultrasound and computed tomography images are used, together with a convolutional
neural network based on the VGG-19 model and using
transfer learning, reaching an accuracy of 84% for computed tomography, 86% for chest X-ray and 100% for ultrasound.

1. Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic originated in Wuhan, China,
in December 2019 and since that time it has resulted in 176
million infections and the deaths of more than 3.79 million people (as of June 2021) [11]. COVID-19 has now
spread to various parts of the world and variants have even
appeared in different geographic areas, which still continue
having negative consequences. The most detrimental effects
have been the death of millions of people, the collateral effects on those who have recovered, the damage to the world
economy, and the increase in the level of global poverty.
To counteract these effects and efficiently manage the pandemic, early detection of COVID-19 and isolation measures
must be maintained [1]. However, most early detection
tools lack practicality, are expensive, and cannot be used
in remote regions. The progress of Deep Learning methodologies has allowed us in recent years to diagnose diseases
with high accuracy, thus tools have been developed for the
prediction of COVID-19 based on Deep Learning.

In another work of the same year, [7], a COVID-19 detection system is proposed that uses X-ray imaging together
with deep learning techniques with relatively high accuracy.
However, the use of X-rays makes the system costly, impractical, and it cannot be used repeatedly on a person to
follow up their recovery due to its radiation. In another
recent work, [2], they make use of about 1000 ultrasound
images of three classes of patients: with COVID-19, with
bacterial pneumonia and healthy patients. Thus, they perform the training of a convolutional neural network, which
they called POCOVID-Net, and which gave a sensitivity of
96% and a specificity of 79%. However, the low number
of images considered may not provide a high generalization
capability.
1

3. Ultrsound imaging
There are different imaging sources (ultrasonography,
chest radiography and computed tomography) that can be
used to predict whether a person has COVID-19 or is
healthy. However, the risks and benefits of each type of
imaging source will depend on the individual patient and
the stage of disease progression.
Currently, the preferred imaging source for COVID-19
pneumonia is computed tomography (CT) since it is characterized by ground-glass opacity (GGO) abnormalities early
in the disease, followed by the crazy paving pattern and, finally, consolidation in the later stage of the disease [8] [3].
Although CT scans are very useful, their cost is very high
and their availability in health centers is very limited, and
even more so in remote health centers. In addition to this,
the process of sterilization and cleaning of the CT scanner
causes delays in the care of other patients.
Another popular method used to detect COVID-19 cases
is chest X-ray, but several requirements must be met for its
use. To be able to use, it requires trained personnel who
have a license to use radiation, a good maintenance service
of the equipment is needed, and certain requirements are
required such as permissions because radiation is used, it
is also necessary that the place where it is used meets with
various regulations. We must also emphasize that this procedure is not used for detection, it is used only for control.
Due to the advantages of ultrasound imaging mentioned
above, this type of imaging source will be used in this
project. More precisely, we will employ lung ultrasound
images due it is a low-cost and highly available method that
does not use ionizing radiation

Figure 1. Diagram of the proposed COVID-19 detection system

5. CovidSET-Peru

4. Overview of the system

The dataset used for this project was collected in different private clinics in the city of Lima, and extracted with
different brands of portable ultrasound scanners. The identification of the individuals were completely eliminated by
the specialists of the clinics and only the ultrasound images
without raw data were provided to us. We decided to name
it ”CovidSET-Peru” and one of the final intentions of this
project is to leave it free in a repository so that researchers,
developers and interested people can use it freely in future
projects. We are confident that this data set will be useful
for implementing better COVID-19 detection systems.

As objectives of this work we have the construction of
a portable system that uses lung ultrasound images for the
automatic detection of COVI-19 and that can explain such
detection. For this purpose we will use convolutional neural networks to perform the classification and segmentation
tasks. The final model will be used on a Raspberry Pi embedded platform to perform classification and segmentation
on new images. Due to the relatively high processing capacity needed, a Movidus neural co-processor will be used,
which will allow us to have a fast response, almost in real
time and without the need of internet access since the inference process is performed in the embedded device.
In summary, see Fig. 1, the images are extracted with
the Raspberry Pi from an ultrasound scanner, then these
images are pre-processed and fed to a classification neural
network (VGG-19) and a segmentation neural network (UNet). Once the inference has been carried out, we will be
able to visualize the classification and the areas where the
prediction was made.

Currently, We are still collecting the images, organizing them and performing the manual classification and segmentation by specialists. Initially, we planned to have 50
videos, from which we will extract a total of 750 images for
COVID-19 cases and 750 images for healthy cases. The
extraction of the images was based on frame extraction.
As more images become available, this dataset will be increased in future versions. The images are presented in
512x512 pixels in grayscale format.
2

6. Proposed CNN architectures
Before using the images as feed to the convolutional neural networks, a scaling to 224x224 pixels and a conversion
to grayscale will be performed. In addition, for training, a
data augmentation will be used, performing horizontal and
vertical displacements, reflection in both axes and noise addition, thus obtaining at least 10 times the initial amount of
images [6].
For the classification task, we have been taken into account and studied the architectures from previous works.
Thus, the models used for the classification of chest X-ray
images such as VGG-16 [9] and COVIDX-Net, which is
based on different architectures (VGG-19, DCNN, DenseNet 201, InceptionV2, Resnet-101, Inception V3, MobileNet V2 and Xception) [4] were analyzed. From these
it was concluded that the most suitable model is the VGG16 architecture. The proposed architecture will have the
structure shown in Fig. 2. For a more optimal model
construction, we will use transfer learning, employing the
POCOVID-Net convolutional network [2]. In this way, the
full connection layers will be trained to classify the lung
ultrasound images found in the proposed CovidSET-Peru
dataset.
For the segmentation task, we make use of the U-Net
architecture and some hyper parameters were modified in
order to work with our collected dataset and to produce an
accurate segmentation. As Fig. 3 shows, the U-Net consists
of a contract and an expansive path. The contraction section
is made of many contraction blocks. Each block takes an input applies two 3X3 convolution layers followed by a 2X2
max pooling. During the contraction, the spatial information is reduced while feature information is increased. The
expansive path combines the feature and spatial information. Each block passes the input to two 3X3 CNN layers
followed by a 2X2 upsampling layer. At the final layer a
1x1 convolution is used to map each 64-component feature
vector to the desired number of classes. In total the network
has 23 convolutional layers.

Figure 3. U-Net based architecture for segmentation

7. Evaluation and metrics
For the evaluation of the VGG-16 based scoring architecture, 5-fold cross-validation will be used to get a more realistic measure of the efficiency to correctly classify images
with COVID-19 signs. And for the evaluation of the UNet based segmentation architecture, the Intersection over
Union (IoU) metric will be used, as it provides more accurate information on the degree of segmentation.

8. Conclusions
This paper presents the progress of the development of a
portable system that makes use of lung ultrasound images in
conjunction with two deep neural networks for the rapid detection of COVID-19. The final system will be implemented
on a Raspberry Pi to perform inference. In this work we are
also proposing a dataset which we are collecting and at its
completion will be freely available. Although this project is
interesting, we are still implementing the dataset.
An important aspect of this project is the use of ultrasound images. Thus, we use lung ultrasound because it does
not use ionizing radiation, has low cost and has a high availability in health centers. Another advantage is that it can be
used several times to evaluate the patient’s condition, which
is not possible with chest X-rays or CT scans. Another positive aspect of this project is its explainability, as it not only
provides a prediction, but also shows the areas of why the
prediction was made.
At the end of this project, a positive contribution will be
made and especially to people living in remote areas, since
it will provide a tool for the diagnosis of COVID-19 and the
follow-up of COVID-19 patients in their recovery.

Figure 2. VGG-16 based architecture for classification

3

References
[1] T. Ai, Z. Yang, H. Hou, C. Zhan, C. Chen, W. Lv, Q. Tao, Z.
Sun, and L. Xia. Correlation of Chest CT and RT-PCR Testing for Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in China: A
Report of 1014 Cases. Radiology, 296(2):E32–E40, 08 2020.
1
[2] Jannis Born, Gabriel Brändle, Manuel Cossio, Marion Disdier, Julie Goulet, Jérémie Roulin, and Nina Wiedemann.
Pocovid-net: Automatic detection of covid-19 from a new
lung ultrasound imaging dataset (pocus), 2020. 1, 3
[3] Michael Chung, Adam Bernheim, Xueyan Mei, Ning Zhang,
Mingqian Huang, Xianjun Zeng, Jiufa Cui, Wenjian Xu,
Yang Yang, Zahi A. Fayad, Adam Jacobi, Kunwei Li,
Shaolin Li, and Hong Shan. Ct imaging features of 2019
novel coronavirus (2019-ncov). Radiology, 295(1):202–207,
2020. PMID: 32017661. 2
[4] Ezz El-Din Hemdan, Marwa A. Shouman, and Mohamed Esmail Karar. Covidx-net: A framework of deep learning classifiers to diagnose covid-19 in x-ray images, 2020. 3
[5] M. J. Horry, S. Chakraborty, M. Paul, A. Ulhaq, B. Pradhan,
M. Saha, and N. Shukla. Covid-19 detection through transfer learning using multimodal imaging data. IEEE Access,
8:149808–149824, 2020. 1
[6] M. J. Horry, S. Chakraborty, M. Paul, A. Ulhaq, B. Pradhan,
M. Saha, and N. Shukla. Covid-19 detection through transfer learning using multimodal imaging data. IEEE Access,
8:149808–149824, 2020. 3
[7] Eui Jin Hwang, Hyungjin Kim, Soon Ho Yoon, Jin Mo Goo,
and Chang Min Park. Implementation of a deep learningbased computer-aided detection system for the interpretation of chest radiographs in patients suspected for covid-19.
Korean journal of radiology, 21(10):1150–1160, Oct 2020.
32729263[pmid]. 1
[8] F. Pan, T. Ye, P. Sun, S. Gui, B. Liang, L. Li, D. Zheng, J.
Wang, R. L. Hesketh, L. Yang, and C. Zheng. Time Course
of Lung Changes at Chest CT during Recovery from Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). Radiology, 295(3):715–
721, 06 2020. 2
[9] M. Qjidaa, A. Ben-fares, Y. Mechbal, H. Amakdouf, M.
Maaroufi, B. Alami, and H. Qjidaa. Development of a clinical decision support system for the early detection of covid19 using deep learning based on chest radiographic images.
In 2020 International Conference on Intelligent Systems and
Computer Vision (ISCV), pages 1–6, 2020. 3
[10] S. Roy, W. Menapace, S. Oei, B. Luijten, E. Fini, C. Saltori,
I. Huijben, N. Chennakeshava, F. Mento, A. Sentelli, E.
Peschiera, R. Trevisan, G. Maschietto, E. Torri, R. Inchingolo, A. Smargiassi, G. Soldati, P. Rota, A. Passerini, R. J. G.
van Sloun, E. Ricci, and L. Demi. Deep learning for classification and localization of covid-19 markers in point-of-care
lung ultrasound. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging,
39(8):2676–2687, 2020. 1
[11] WHO. Who covid-19 situation reports. In World Health
Organization report, Geneva, 2019. 1

4

