Innovation in Large-scale agile - Benefits and Challenges
of Hackathons when Hacking from Home
Rasmus Ulfsnes1[0000-0002-4966-8242], Viktoria Stray1,2[0000-0002-6032-2074], Nils Brede
Moe1[0000-0003-2669-0778] and Darja Šmite3, 1[0000-1111-2222-3333]
1

SINTEF, Trondheim, Norway
{rasmus.ulfsnes, nils.b.moe}@sintef.no
2
Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
stray@ifi.uio.no
3
Blekinge Institute of Technology, Karlskrona, Sweden
darja.smite@bth.se

Abstract. Hackathons are events in which diverse teams work together to explore, and develop solutions, software or even ideas. Hackathons have been recognized not only as public events for hacking, but also as a corporate mechanism
for innovation. Hackathons are a way for established companies to achieve increased employee wellbeing as well as being a curator for innovation and developing new products. Sudden transition to the work-from-home mode caused by
the COVID-19 pandemic first put many corporate events requiring collocation,
such as hackathons, temporarily on hold and then motivated companies to find
ways to hold these events virtually. In this paper, we report our findings from
investigating hackathons in the context of a large agile company by first exploring the general benefits and challenges of hackathons and then trying to understand how they were affected by the virtual setup. We conducted nine interviews,
surveyed 23 employees and analyzed a hackathon demo. We found that hackathons provide both individual and organizational benefits of innovation, personal
interests, and acquiring new skills and competences. Several challenges such as
added stress due to stopping the regular work, employees fearing not having
enough contribution to deliver and potential mismatch between individual and
organizational goals were also found. With respect to the virtual setup, we found
that virtual hackathons are not diminishing the innovation benefits, however,
some negative effect surfaced on the social and networking side.
Keywords: Large-scale software development, work-from-anywhere, innovation, hackathon.

1

Introduction

Innovation in large companies is important but is often harder to implement than in
start-ups where it is a natural and necessary part of the regular work. Large companies
have a high number of employees, many of them creative, but teams and team members
are often bounded to work only on the company strategy [1]. Creating an environment

2
that fosters innovation and creativity requires employees to be motivated, and management needs to provide time and space for innovation to occur [1]. Therefore, to address
the challenge of bringing new products to the market, many large software companies
tend to approach innovation in a systematic way [1]. One example of such approach is
implementing an innovation program for internal startups [2]. Google and Atlassian
had their 20% time program [3], where developers are given 20% of their time to work
on a project, or initiative of their own choosing. Another approach is to allocate days
when all software developers in a company work on delivering a software product improvement of their choice. This can be facilitated in a hackathon, a short and time bound
event, where participants work together to explore, and develop solutions, software or
even ideas. Large-Scale Agile organizations have utilized hackathons increasingly as a
mechanism for innovation in the last 20 years [3]–[5].
Due to Covid19, company activities such as hackathons had been first postponed
and eventually organized through virtual platforms such as MS Teams, Zoom, and
Slack. Further, as many companies have announced their Work from anywhere (WFA),
strategy (Twitter, Spotify, Facebook, Salesforce), it is likely that structured innovative
processes like hackathons will be organized virtually in the future too.
This unique situation has provided an excellent opportunity to understand not only
how the shift from physical to a virtual hackathon affects the benefits and challenges
of hackathons, but also how large-scale agile organizations can embrace a WFA future.
Even though there has been an increasing amount of literature on hackathons [7], and
some literature on virtual hackathons [6] the literature regarding virtual hackathons for
software companies, and especially the shift from physical to virtual, is scarce.
Motivated by the importance of innovation in large-scale agile and how large-scale
agile organizations can embrace the WFA future, our research questions are:
RQ1: What are the benefits and challenges of hackathons?
RQ2: How are benefits and challenges affected by moving to a virtual hackathon?
Our chosen way to investigate this question was to perform a case study in a multinational software company utilizing large-scale agile methodologies. We observed the
company employees during their virtual hackathon and inquired about the recognized
benefits and challenges of hackathons for the company and their employees, and how
the virtual hackathon compared to the previous physical hackathons.

2

Background

Hackathons have been around for over 20 years, first appearing with OpenBSD and
SUN microsystems in 1999 [8]. The word originates from the combination of the words
“hack” and “marathon” [8]. There are multiple alternative names for hackathons, such
as hackfest, jam, codefest, bug bash [5], as well as other more obscure names such as
Delivery Day [4] and FedEx Day [3]. These events all contain similar elements, such
as a limited and defined amount of time and the goal to create some kind of minimum
viable product (or at least something to show at a demo). Hackathons can be open
events organized by universities, cities, municipalities, or internal corporate events.

3
Hackathons vary in how they are organized and executed, how ideas are structured,
where it takes place (physical or virtual), and whether or not it is a competition [6].
These characteristics of hackathons provide different benefits and challenges. Falk
Olesen and Halskov [7] emphasize that hackathon organizers need to tune its characteristics in order to achieve the wanted benefit for the target group.
Hackathons are not only a benefit for the organization, but also for the individual
participants, providing opportunity for individual development, goals and learning
skills. There are also different categories of benefits that are identified in hackathons.
Falk Olesen and Halskov [7] provides three categories, structure learning, structuring
process and enabling participation.
While hackathons provide benefits such as improving and fostering internal innovation, expanding competencies, and networking [3], [4], [6], [9]–[12], several challenges
have been reported. Examples of challenges are prototypes that do not get sufficient
follow-up work [7], [9], [12], stress by putting regular work aside [4] and issues associated with hacker culture and toxic masculinity deferring especially women [10].
Contradictions and tradeoffs are something apparent in the hackathon phenomenon,
regardless of its formats. Diversification is both a benefit for learning and networking
and a potential hinder for effective work during the hackathon [9]. Another contradiction is that the individual participants want to learn one specific technology or skill,
disregarding whether or not that is useful for the organization [13].

3

Research methodology and approach

Our exploratory case study was conducted in a multinational agile software company
identified here as “Ares” due to confidentiality. The company was founded in the early
2000s and develops content distribution software for mobile devices. Ares’s developers
are located in two locations and are utilizing agile methodologies. Ares organizes a
voluntary hackathon every year. Ideas are submitted, and put up for voting based on
managerial input. The employees then vote for three ideas they would like to work on.
The teams are constructed based on the votes and managerial input to ensure good team
sizes and diversity. The hackathon lasts two days, teams are self-organized, and at the
end, all teams present a demo of their work. There are no awards or jury involved.
In this case study, we first analyzed a demo from a recent hackathon in the company.
Based on the demo and previous research [3], [4], we developed an interview guide
containing different areas for questions: Background, Motivation, Idea generation, Cooperation, Hackathon organization, Expectations, Benefits, Challenges, Virtual.
Eight semi-structured interviews with people from four different teams were conducted. They represented different skills and roles within the company, including developers, lead architects, senior engineers, and an advertisements operations manager.
The interviews were conducted in Norwegian or English, recorded, transcribed and
qualitatively coded using descriptive coding, followed by a holistic overview and a thematic analysis [13]. Finally, to validate the qualitative findings and elicit additional
data, we conducted a survey with 23 respondents.

4

4

Results

In this chapter, we present our results by starting with the characteristics of hackathon,
which provide a context for understanding our findings.
How often? – Once a year. To our surprise, even though the participants were very
positive towards hackathons, they did not want to conduct them too often. One participant explained, “It's such a nice activity it's something like your birthday. If it would be
every month, it would become a bit more boring. It would be just another Hackathon.”
How long? – Time boxed. This is an inherent part of the hackathon, which often
means that participants do not have time to finish the project. Opinions about time boxing differ. As one states, “You should stop working when you are finished with the
hackathon. Either you prove that something works, or you hopefully had fun.” This is
in contrast to those who said that continuation of the project was important to them.
Which ideas? – Whichever. The freedom to pitch and develop any idea gives a
motivational boost and incentive to participate. As one explains, “… with a more open
approach, you can create ideas which might sound cool, but you can't really integrate
it into your company. However, on the other side, those ideas might be something new
which your company could work on.” Also, the opportunity to explore personal interests was important, one example being the idea of developing a guitar tuner popular
among guitar players.
With whom? – Whomever. The informants noted that the learning and team building across disciplines and skills was a vital aspect of participating in the hackathon. In
other words, indicating that a diverse team, with different skill-levels was good. This
however was contrasted by the importance for the participants to succeed. One of the
participants expressed, “If I constructed the teams, I probably would have chosen different people”
What’s at the end? – Demo, no competition. One informant explained, “The demo
is everything about the hackathon, the hackathon is not successful if you do not have
something to show at the demo.” That being said, the focus on the demo can also make
some people reluctant to join, as one stated: “I haven't participated in hackathons earlier. I worried that I would not contribute enough because you need to deliver a product
and present it at the end.”
4.1

Benefits of Hackathons in Large-Scale Agile

Based on the interviews we will now present the general benefits of hackathons categorized into individual and organizational. We report the benefits of most importance,
based on the rating provided by the survey respondents (see Table 1).
Table 1 Rated benefits of hackathons
#

Individual - Benefits

Organizational - Benefits

1
2
3
4
5
6

Test new ideas fast
Break from ordinary work
Fun from being with colleagues
Build new stuff
Build a network with colleagues
Expand skills and expertise

Teambuilding
Ability to take advantage of emergent market opportunities
Build a sense of belonging to the company
Employees with broader skills and expertise
Increased marketability and talent attractiveness
Knowing who knows what (build employee network)

5
Our findings show that innovation is a key benefit both for the individuals and for
the organization, recognized as the ability to test new ideas fast and to take advantage
of emerging market opportunities. One informant said, “It was a product idea I had
wanted to develop for a while and finally there was a hackathon so I could check if it
worked.” Other interviewees also mentioned that given the right business case, hackathon products could be launched. One explained: “Two years ago, we made a feature
that was put directly into production, actually four weeks later, it was done properly.
Hackathon proved it was possible and it fit well into the existing product line.”
Having a break from ordinary work was highly valued by individuals. One interviewee explained: “It's kind of relaxing for the people, for the company. Well for the
team itself because you are not doing exactly what you are paid for.”
Teambuilding was rated as the top organizational benefit and having fun from being
with colleagues was rated third as the individual benefit. One informant explained, “In
hackathons, what normally happens is that the main outcome, at least in our experience, tends to be the social aspect of it, the teambuilding." Another stated, “you will
remember other important parts of the hackathon than just the work or who was the
winner, for example, the fun you had with your colleagues and the knowledge you
gained.”
Increased marketability and talent attractiveness are achieved due to the individual
benefits, but also because the hackathon in itself is a company practice that gives an
edge during the recruitment process. The individual expands their skills and expertise
by working on topics and technology where the participant did not have much prior
knowledge and thus utilizing the hackathon for learning, providing the organization
with higher and broader skilled employees. Building network among colleagues and
having employees that know who knows what increase the inter-team communication
and give employees new insights into and respect for one another’s role and work.
4.2

Challenges of Hackathons in Large-Scale Agile

Even though there are clear benefits of hackathons, employees also mentioned some
challenges, we mention the challenges corroborated by the survey. The complete list of
challenges is shown in Table 2.
The top individual challenge was related to hackathons adds stress. Even though
hackathons are mostly a welcomed break, the timing for running a hackathon is not
always good. As someone explained, “you have pressure during your workday, and
you need to get something finished and you look at hackathon as something in the way
that is just disturbing you from important work.” This challenge is echoed two challenges on the organizational side – stopped production for a time and increased employee stress.
Mismatch in skills and desires due to the team diversification was another top challenge. The optimal team structure was not always obvious. One participant described
that the team members did not always have the same desires and motivation for participating in the hackathon. One interviewee explained, “It was challenging that we had
different goals we wanted to achieve. I wanted my product to be launched while the
others wanted to expand their skills on machine learning.”

6
Table 2. Challenges of hackathons
Individual - Challenges

Organization - Challenges

Overhead of hackathon adds additional stress
Mismatch in skills leads to slower development
Being unable to complete projects is somewhat
frustrating
Lack of confidence is a barrier for joining
Mismatch in individual goals for learning leads to
disagreement in the teams
Bad communication and coordination due to mismatch in individual goals

Stops production for a time
Employees do not partake in hackathon benefits
Mismatch in skills leads to less time spent on
emerging products
No-continuation plan leads to discontinued projects
Employees are acquiring non-relevant skills
Increased employee stress

Being unable to complete the hackathon projects is somewhat frustrating. Even
though the employees are well aware that the hackathon is timeboxed, they still have a
desire to finish their products. A participant explained, “I am not allowed to work on it,
I have other work tasks. That’s a downside with hackathons.” This results in developers
feeling dissatisfied as their goals remain unfulfilled, as someone explained, “You know,
the worst feeling you can have is when you write code and after some time it gets forgotten and no one ever uses it.”
Virtual Hackathons – What are the Changes?
The ability to take advantage of emerging market opportunities achieved through
hackathons are not impacted by a virtual hackathon. The idea generation and idea voting are similar to the previous hackathons, the only difference is that the teams work
and collaborate virtually. As one says, “But from a technical point of view, to just develop something, you can always use Slack or whatever, or just Google meet and call.”
In addition to this, our findings show that the number of hours spent on virtual hackathon is less than when it is held physically. “During the first hackathon we stayed in
the office up until midnight.” In contrast, in the virtual hackathon, the employees started
by dividing the work, then worked focused individually, continuously coordinating
through Slack and using virtual meeting rooms for discussions and planning: “We did
the first meeting when we split the work. So, after a few hours we met again. We have
this approach, let's just give it a try. Then a few hours later we had another meeting,
and we tracked our progress quite often.”
A break form ordinary work through hackathons is especially welcome after stressful periods such as migrations, or as one says in a pandemic,” Especially in these pandemic times. You know we are working from home. So, we want to meet people in real
life and hackathons are one way to just, you know, meeting and collaborating”.
We see a reduction in the benefit of having fun with colleagues: “It was not as fun
as it used to, hackathons are usually more fun than over video during Covid, in my own
home.” Most employees mentioned that they would prefer to have the hackathon in the
same physical location in order to socialize and have a good time. Lastly, disagreements
due to mismatch in individual goals seems to be harder to solve through virtual meetings.

7

5

Discussion

Noting the lacking research on internal corporate hackathons [9], we will now discuss
our research questions. Our first research question was “What are the benefits and challenges of hackathons?” Consonant with [3] and [4], we found that providing dedicated
days for developers may lead to innovation and new product development, and that
there are benefits both on the individual and company levels as seen in Table 1. Developer involvement, productivity, competence and well-being are thus important factors
for large-scale agile companies that foster innovation. We also found that learning and
networking are important benefits, as corroborated by [7], [10]. In addition, just providing time to take a break from regular work and having fun is important for the wellbeing of the employees. In addition to the different levels of benefits, we also see a
clear link between the characteristics of hackathons and the benefits that emerge from
them. We also find tradeoffs between some of the benefits. For example, building new
stuff vs teambuilding as our findings show that tailoring the teams for diversification
might take away the team’s ability to perform during the hackathon, corroborating Falk
Olesen and Halskov [7] where the skills wanted by the individual did not match that of
the organization. Our findings showed that some employees were frustrated when their
product was not continued, this confirms a challenge with hackathon continuation as
also reported in previous research [5], [12]. We also found additional challenges such
taking a time away from everyday work, whether it was good timing or not, corroborated by [4]. Personal desires and goals could also pose a challenge where teams could
not agree on common goals.
Our second research question was “How are benefits and challenges affected by
moving to a virtual hackathon?” Our results suggest that the shift from physical to virtual hackathons in large-scale agile does not seem to change the innovation benefits or
worsen the challenges that much. We found that the number of hours spent on the
hackathon decreased compared to physical hackathons, and the work was more divided
and focused between the participants. The employees were producing good quality
demo prototypes and were happy with the outcome. The findings suggest that having
fun with colleagues has decreased in virtual hackathons, since physical hackathons provide more encouragement and room for socializing, which was not provided in the virtual hackathon.

6

Conclusion and future work

Our results suggest that virtual hackathons in large-scale agile organizations benefits to
the individuals’ opportunity to test new ideas, take a break from regular work and acquire new skills, and provide the organization with new products, refreshed employees
and a more competent workforce. However, practitioners should be aware that challenges can include additional stress, and dissonance in hackathon teams due to differences in experience and personal goals.
Future research should focus on collecting more data about virtual hackathons in
other large-scale agile organizations to further develop the insights into how virtual

8
hackathons can be organized and improved. When doing this, one could consider using
the SPACE framework for developer productivity suggested by Forsgren et al. [14].
The framework recognizes multiple productivity dimensions for large-scale agile organizations, both on an individual, team and organizational level that are similar to our
findings on hackathons.

7

References

[1] H. Edison, X. Wang, R. Jabangwe, and P. Abrahamsson, “Innovation initiatives in large
software companies: A systematic mapping study,” Inf. Softw. Technol., vol. 95, pp. 1–14,
2018.
[2] T. Sporsem, A. Tkalich, N. B. Moe, and M. Mikalsen, “Understanding Barriers to Internal
Startups in Large Organizations: Evidence from a Globally Distributed Company,” ArXiv
Prepr. ArXiv210309707, 2021.
[3] N. B. Moe et al., “Fostering and Sustaining Innovation in a Fast Growing Agile Company,”
in Product-Focused Software Process Improvement, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, pp.
160–174.
[4] H. T. Barney, N. B. Moe, T. Dybå, A. Aurum, and M. Winata, “Balancing individual and
collaborative work in agile teams,” 2009, pp. 53–62.
[5] M. Komssi, D. Pichlis, M. Raatikainen, K. Kindstrom, and J. Jarvinen, “What are Hackathons for?,” IEEE Softw., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 60–67, 2015, doi: 10.1109/ms.2014.78.
[6] C. Kollwitz and B. Dinter, “What the hack?–towards a taxonomy of hackathons,” 2019, pp.
354–369.
[7] J. Falk Olesen and K. Halskov, “10 Years of Research With and On Hackathons,” 2020,
doi: 10.1145/3357236.3395543.
[8] G. Briscoe and C. Mulligan, “Digital Innovation: The Hackathon Phenomenon,” p. 13.
[9] A. Nolte, E. P. P. Pe-Than, A. Filippova, C. Bird, S. Scallen, and J. D. Herbsleb, “You
Hacked and Now What? -Exploring Outcomes of a Corporate Hackathon,” Proc. ACM
Hum.-Comput. Interact., vol. 2, no. CSCW, pp. 1–23, 2018.
[10] L. Paganini and K. Gama, “A preliminary study about the low engagement of female participation in hackathons,” 2020, doi: 10.1145/3387940.3392163.
[11] M. Flores et al., “How Can Hackathons Accelerate Corporate Innovation?,” in IFIP Advances in Information and Communication Technology, Springer International Publishing,
2018, pp. 167–175.
[12] A. Nolte, I.-A. Chounta, and J. D. Herbsleb, “What Happens to All These Hackathon Projects?,” Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., vol. 4, no. CSCW2, pp. 1–26, 2020, doi:
10.1145/3415216.
[13] J. Saldaña, The coding manual for qualitative researchers, 2nd ed. Los Angeles: SAGE,
2013.
[14] N. Forsgren, M.-A. Storey, C. Maddila, T. Zimmermann, B. Houck, and J. Butler, “The
SPACE of Developer Productivity,” Queue, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 20–48, 2021, doi:
10.1145/3454122.3454124.

