Self-Nudging and the Citizen Choice Architect
Reijula, Samuli1 and Hertwig, Ralph2
1 Theoretical Philosophy / TINT, University of Helsinki, Finland
2 Center

for Adaptive Rationality, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, Germany
12 April 2020
Forthcoming in Behavioural Public Policy

Abstract
This article argues that nudges can often be turned into self-nudges: empowering interventions
that enable people to design and structure their own decision environments—that is, to act as
citizen choice architects. Self-nudging applies insights from behavioral science in a way that is
practicable and cost-effective but that sidesteps concerns about paternalism or manipulation. It
has the potential to expand the scope of application of behavioral insights from the public to the
personal sphere (e.g., homes, offices, families). It is a tool for reducing failures of self-control and
enhancing personal autonomy; specifically, self-nudging can mean designing one’s proximate
choice architecture to alleviate the effects of self-control problems, engaging in education to
understand the nature and causes of self-control problems, and employing simple educational
nudges to improve goal attainment in various domains. It can even mean self-paternalistic
interventions such as winnowing down one’s choice set by, for instance, removing options.
Policy makers could promote self-nudging by sharing knowledge about nudges and how they
work. The ultimate goal of the self-nudging approach is to enable citizen choice architects’
efficient self-governance, where reasonable, and the self-determined arbitration of conflicts
between their mutually exclusive goals and preferences.

Keywords— nudging, choice architecture, boosting, self-control, agency, overconsumption

Homer’s Odyssey tells the story of Greek hero Odysseus and his long journey home from the Trojan
war. The goddess Circe warns him about the Sirens, beautiful but deadly enchantresses whose
singing lures sailors to their deaths on the rocky shores of their island. Reconciling Circe’s advice
with his own curiosity about the Sirens’s song, Odysseus instructs his men to plug their ears with
1

The citizen choice architect

beeswax and tie him to the mast of the ship, leaving him there no matter what he says. As they pass
the island, Odysseus–bewitched by the Sirens’s song–begs his men to untie him. Unable to hear the
song, the crew see the Sirens for what they are: dangerous monsters. Acting on Odysseus’s orders,
they ignore their spellbound captain and row the ship, and Odysseus, to safety.
Informed by Circe’s advice and aware of his limited capacity for self-control (or, to use older
terminology, willpower), Odysseus resisted temptation by making strategic adjustments to the
external world. He manipulated the physical environment by having his men tie him to the mast.
In addition, he harnessed the social environment by first inoculating his crew against temptation
(having them plug their ears with wax), then recruiting them as guards. The literature on self-control
contains numerous examples of strategies that counteract a lack of self-control by modifying physical
and social aspects of a person’s external world or mental aspects of a person’s internal world.
Schelling (1984) offered the example of pregnant women, who, anticipating a temporary shift in
their preferences for pain relief during labor, ask hospital staff not to have nitrous oxide available in
the delivery room. Building on Ainslie (1992) and Ainslie (2001) and Rachlin (2000), Bénabou and
Tirole (2004) examined self-control strategies that rely on manipulating the mental environment;
they found that good habits and personal rules in organizing one’s mental space can help people
avoid impulsive behavior.
Many modern temptations are no less insidious than those faced by Odysseus. Environments
created by market economies that rely on consumption-based growth often exploit people’s biological,
psychological, social, and economic vulnerabilities, making it ever easier for people to overconsume
(e.g., Swinburn et al. 2011; Roberto et al. 2015; Wu 2017). Take, for instance, the ubiquity of
high-caloric, low-cost processed foods and sweetened sodas (Nestle 2013; Nestle 2015). Highly
engineered, mass-produced foods and drinks have unleashed novel surges of pleasure—and addiction
(Cross and Proctor 2014). Most of the world’s population now lives in countries in which overweight

2

The citizen choice architect

and obesity kill more people than underweight does (Swinburn, Egger, and Raza 1999). In 2016, 39%
of adults worldwide were overweight and 13% were obese (WHO 2018), and in 2012, problematic
dietary habits were estimated to be associated with around 45% of cardiometabolic deaths in the
US (Micha et al. 2017). The manipulative information environment is another pervasive modern
temptation. The information ecology–defined by the internet, smartphones, social media, e-mail,
and other online technologies–has created a ”check-in” impulse, a ”mental itch constantly in need
of being scratched” (Wu 2017, p.186). Like junk food, a low-quality information product offering
affirmation, sensationalism, and instant gratification tends to be cheaper and more readily available
than high-quality information (Johnson 2015).
People with more self-control–i.e., the ”effortful regulation of the self by the self” (Duckworth
2011, p. 2639)–seem better able to achieve their long-term goals, as measured in terms of health,
wealth, and other dimensions of human flourishing. According to Moffitt et al. (2011), the capacity
for self-control in the first decade of life predicts adult outcomes including income, savings,
occupational prestige, and physical and mental health. Against this background, how best can society,
individuals, and policy makers respond to the incessant challenges to self-control that characterize
the modern world? Policy makers’ traditional tools include economic incentives and disincentives
such as taxation (e.g., taxing sugary drinks), subsidies (e.g., promoting healthy food consumption;
see Thow, Downs, and Jan 2014) and regulations (e.g., limiting access to sugary drinks in schools).
Our focus here is not on these traditional tools for steering citizens’ behavior but on self-deployed
control strategies (see Duckworth, Milkman, and Laibson 2018). Rigid strategies in the spirit of
having oneself tied to the mast are impractical for regulating the intake of food, drinks, drugs, and
information. For instance, most people are reliant on digital technology in their working lives,
meaning that a radical digital detox (as suggested by commentators such as Otto 2016) is out of the
question. Legal means of self-regulation are also limited; in many countries, the law does not allow

3

The citizen choice architect

individuals to enter into binding agreements with their future selves (e.g., banning themselves from
casinos). And research into the effectiveness of voluntary strategies for self-control–from saving
loose change to joining Weight Watchers–shows mixed results and relatively low adherence rates
(Dansinger et al. 2005).
In this article we take another approach, arguing that insights from behavioral science often
associated with nudging (see Thaler and Sunstein 2008) offer a rich repertoire of tools for selfdeployed strategies of self-control. We begin by outlining our notion of self-nudging. We then
distinguish categories of nudges and summarize the ethical and practical problems of nudging that
others have identified. Subsequently, we describe self-nudging as a way of translating behavioral
science insights into policy, showing how it can contribute to the discussion on bounded rationality
and failures of self-control. Finally, we relate this new approach to the boosting program (Hertwig
and Grüne-Yanoff 2017), discussing practical issues associated with the delivery and implementation
of self-nudging interventions.

From nudging to self-nudging
For me, the cues are aural (the ping, the French horn) and visual (pop-ups on the screen).
I already knew that putting the phone on silent wasn’t enough to break the habit, but ...
out of sight could be out of mind. In the mornings, preparing breakfast, I found that it
helped to leave the phone in another room. In the car, it went in the glove compartment.
When walking around, I’d put it in a zippered pocket.
— Jerome Groopman (2019)

Nudges are nonregulatory and nonmonetary interventions that steer individuals’ behaviors toward
their ultimate goals (e.g., being healthier, wealthier, and happier) without eliminating any options
4

The citizen choice architect

or significantly changing the economic incentives.1 Consider Thaler and Sunstein’s (2008) school
cafeteria example: Acting as a choice architect, the fictional director of food services for a large
city’s schools attempts to guide students towards making healthy food choices (without changing
the options available) by manipulating psychologically important but economically insignificant
aspects of the choice architecture. She rearranges the order of items so that healthy options are
positioned early in the line and unhealthy desserts and French fries are moved away from eye-level
shelves (for systematic reviews of positional influences and nudge effects on food choice, see Broers
et al. 2017; Bucher et al. 2016). As in this example, nudges target aspects of the choice architecture
toward which a fully rational homo economicus would be indifferent (e.g., order, defaults, framing),
but which matter a great deal to real-world decision makers. Nudges have been applied in domains
as diverse as savings, highway safety, consumer protection, energy use, climate change, obesity,
education, poverty, and health (Sunstein 2016).
Importantly, the individual being nudged need not be aware of the nudge, let alone of the
psychological mechanisms harnessed by the choice architect. In fact, some interventions may be
more effective if people know nothing of the intervention or how it works (Holden, Zlatevska, and
Dubelaar 2016; but see Loewenstein et al. 2015). Take the effect of changes in food placement on
food choice. Food placement is a prominent nudging strategy that follows the rationale that people
are less likely to eat food that is harder to reach; simply moving it further away will reduce its
consumption (Bucher et al. 2016). Altering placement is the nudging intervention with the largest
effect on fruit and/or vegetable choice (with 𝑑 = .39) featured in Broers et al.’s (2017) meta-analysis.
We consulted all 12 articles (14 studies) that were included in their meta-analysis (their table 1). In
no single study were participants informed about the specific changes that experimenters made to the
choice architecture, nor were they told about the psychological mechanism underlying this strategy.
1For a careful analysis of the concept(s) of nudge, see Mongin and Cozic (2018)).

5

The citizen choice architect

Consider another example: ”by changing the size of dishware, portion sizes may be reduced leading
to unconscious changes in actual food intake” (Bucher et al. 2016, p. 2253). Those being nudged are
not necessarily aware of it, and they are even less aware of the psychological mechanisms at work
(see also Bovens 2008). That said, there are also cases in which the principles underlying a nudging
intervention are made public. For example, the guidelines for behavioral policy interventions issued
by the Obama administration required that the principles of the intervention should always be
publicized. Importantly, however, even if the explanation is made public, it is unlikely that everyone
affected will make the effort to inform themselves.
It is common for an information asymmetry to exist between policy makers and the people being
nudged, with policy makers having more and better information. Targeting this asymmetry opens
up a new class of policy interventions. We propose that knowledge about nudges and how they
work can be actively shared with a target audience, thereby enabling people to address what they
perceive as failures of self-control. Let us return to Odysseus and the Sirens. The advice Circe gave
Odysseus turned him from a naïve, unsuspecting subject into a psychologically sophisticated agent:
he became aware of his vulnerability to enchantment. Perhaps even more importantly, Circe shared
a behavioral tool that enabled him to cope with anticipated failures of self-control and to pursue
both his short-term and long-term goals: to hear the Sirens’ song and to get home safely.
Following this logic, we propose that–if properly informed and instructed–people can enlist
nudges for purposes of self-regulation. We refer to this concept as self-nudging.2 Self-nudges
require awareness of a link between one’s behavior and the architecture of the environment, as well
as knowledge of a procedural competence that can help to break (or modify) that link. By facilitating
the use of self-nudges, public officials and policy makers could enable citizens to become choice
2The concept of self-nudging has been used by, for instance, Torma, Aschemann-Witzel, and Thøgersen (2018)
and Service and Gallagher (2017), and is sometimes mentioned in passing (e.g., Bovens 2008, Footnote 5; Halpern
2016, chapter entitled ”Well-being: Nudging ourselves, and each other, to happier lives”). To the best of our knowledge,
however, there has not yet been a systematic proposal to harness self-nudging for policy purposes.

6

The citizen choice architect

architects in their own right, designing their proximate choice architectures in ways that nudge them
in desirable directions. From the perspective of public choice architects, facilitating a self-nudge
intervention means, first, identifying a choice environment involving a behavioral problem–typically
a failure of self-control–that could be avoided or mitigated by redesigning aspects of the environment,
and, second, designing and communicating an effective strategy that enables individuals to make
the necessary changes in the environment. Specifically, citizens must be informed about the likely
causes and determinants of the behavioral problem in question, and how and why the self-nudge
could help to address it. This approach is not as out-of-the-ordinary as it may sound. As Schelling
(1978) observed, ”many of us have little tricks we play on ourselves to make us do the things we
ought to do or to keep us from the things we ought to foreswear” (p. 290). For instance, many of
us balance letters to be mailed on the front door handle, or keep our daily medication next to our
toothbrush. Others learn to avoid temptation by keeping only small amounts of alcohol in the house
(Wertenbroch 1998), or deliberately imposing a ”waiting period” on themselves by leaving their
credit card at home when contemplating a major purchase. Still others use ”mental accounting”
to save for future goals (Thaler 1999; Drexler, Fischer, and Schoar 2014), transferring part of
their salary to a separate bank account earmarked for a specific purpose. All such changes in our
proximate choice architecture can also be seen as self-nudges.
What these examples of self-control strategies have in common is that a purely economically
rational agent would see no sense in any of them. Yet the simple modifications of the proximate choice
environment can help real-life decision makers to control their immediate impulses. Conceptualizing
nudges not just as policy tools reserved for behavioral scientists and public policy experts, but
as self-nudging tools to which the public can be initiated has a number of benefits. First, the
growing number of nudging interventions informed by behavioral science could also be harnessed
as self-nudges. Second, nudging interventions could expand the scope of application to the private

7

The citizen choice architect

domain, which tends to remain beyond the reach of public choice architects. Third, self-nudging
can avoid some of the ethical and practical problems of nudging, as we describe shortly. Let us next
consider a classification of nudges that can also inform categories of self-nudges.

Categories of nudges
Although many nudging interventions work by exploiting a cognitive bias or decisional inadequacy
to push a decision maker toward a desirable choice, not all are ”non-educative” nudges in this strong
sense (Sunstein 2016). Others, such as the provision of information, reminders, or disclosures,
can be regarded as ”educative nudges.” In principle, both educative and noneducative nudges can
be turned into self-nudges. However, noneducative nudges are likely to require more sharing of
knowledge about the underlying mechanism, as this knowledge is not necessarily part of people’s
lay theories of behavior or folk psychology.
Different nudges target different aspects of the choice architecture. Focusing on categories of
nudges that could, at least in principle, be transformed into self-nudges, we consider five categories
and functions (based on Sunstein 2016, and Madrian 2014).
1. Encouraging planning: reminders and prompts. Lack of planning may lead to bad choices,
especially when there are competing demands on people’s attention. Prompting people to plan in
advance and reminding them (e.g., by text message) to follow through has been shown to improve
goal attainment in various domains (e.g., voting and vaccination; Milkman et al. 2011; Nickerson
and Rogers 2010).
2. Framing and priming. Different ways of framing a situation may lead to contrasting choice
behaviors. For instance, one and the same food product could be labelled as 90% fat-free or as
containing 10% fat, and these logically equivalent framings could induce substantially different

8

The citizen choice architect

choices. Similarly, the same set of options in a social situation may lead to different choices
depending on whether the situation comes across as a collaborative effort or as a competition among
participants (Liberman, Samuels, and Ross 2004).
3. Manipulating accessibility: order and arrangement. The order and perceptual salience of
options in choice situations also matter (e.g., Bucher et al. 2016). What people see first when they
enter a cafeteria or open a webpage influences their choices. Similarly, reducing inconvenience
in the process of, for instance, applying for financial aid for college can increase the chance that
students apply for aid and decrease the chance that applicants give up (Madrian 2014)).
4. Eliciting social comparisons and exerting social pressure. People often figure out what
appropriate behavior in a situation is by considering what others do (Cialdini and Goldstein 2004).
Telling people that ”most people pay their taxes on time” or having them compare their energy use
with that of their neighbors may promote the desired behavior (Halpern 2016).
5. Providing defaults. Nudge interventions may also target the choice process itself—for example,
by setting default options that will hold if the chooser does nothing. It has been demonstrated that
switching from an opt-in to an opt-out architecture increases desirable target behaviors (vaccination
rates and green-energy use; Madrian 2014; for a meta-analysis of default effects, see Jachimowicz
et al. 2019).
With these categories in mind, we turn to various ethical and practical problems of nudging.

Ethical and practical problems of nudging
One key argument in favor of self-nudging is that it addresses various concerns that have been raised
about the ethics of nudging (e.g., Glaeser 2006; Rebonato 2012; White 2013, but see also Sunstein
2015)–or at least substantially reduces their force. Here we outline five major criticisms.

9

The citizen choice architect
1. Autonomy. Some nudges ”typically work better in the dark” (Bovens 2008, p. 209). There are
two issues at play here. One is that the fact that a person is being nudged is not being disclosed to
them, can be seen to undermine their autonomy (see also House of Lords 2011). The second issue
is that people are often unaware of the mechanisms behind the nudge that changes their behavior.
To the extent that a nudge exploits cognitive limitations or biases, it shapes behavior in ways that
are not necessarily transparent to the chooser. Although nudges aim not to be paternalistic in the
sense of putting someone else’s normative judgments in the place of the agent’s own, some of them
nevertheless change behavior by means other than rational persuasion (Hausman and Welch 2010).
According to several influential accounts, “the exercise of human agency consists in judgment and
behavior ordered by self-conscious reflection about what to think and do” (Doris 2015, p. x). From
this perspective, bypassing a decision maker’s reflective or deliberative processes threatens their
personal autonomy. The crux of the argument becomes clearer if we compare nudge interventions
with traditional policy interventions, such as fiscal and regulatory measures (e.g., taxes on cigarettes
or laws stipulating that motorcyclists must wear helmets). Such interventions are highly visible, and
this visibility safeguards against arbitrary and unreasonable government interference: citizens are
able to scrutinize the interventions and hold governments accountable. In this sense, traditional
policy interventions treat people as autonomous individuals. Nudges, in contrast, can bypass the
processes of deliberative thinking (recall positional effects on food choice) and may thus undermine
decision makers’ autonomy.
2. Reversibility. Concerns about autonomy are amplified by related worries about reversibility.
One defining condition of a nudge is that its effects must be easy for the targeted individual to
reverse. Rebonato (2012; see also Mills 2018) argued that nominal reversibility–that is, reversibility
in principle–is not the same as reversibility in practice. He suggested that there may even be a
trade-off between a nudge’s effectiveness and its reversibility. For example, if a nudge works on

10

The citizen choice architect

everyone, the fact that only a small fraction of decision makers reject the nudge (e.g., 99.97% of
Hungarians were, by default, presumed to be organ donors because they had not registered otherwise;
Johnson and Goldstein 2003) suggests that it may be nominally but not actually reversible. Although
many nudges are both visible and public (e.g., graphic health warnings; automatic enrolment in
savings plans), others may fly under the radar of the chooser (e.g., unconscious changes in food
intake due to positional or order effects), making opting out difficult. Hence, in terms of autonomy
and freedom of choice, a nudge may, somewhat paradoxically, be ethically more problematic than a
transparently coercive paternalistic intervention: the latter can be more readily detected, deliberated
on, and contested.
3. Public versus private domain, and unintended side effects. Nudges are by design local
solutions restricted to particular choice settings. Consequently, policy makers are typically only able
to influence public choice contexts by nudging—although it is conceivable (and often desirable) that
nudging that affects behavior repeatedly (e.g., healthy food choices) generalizes to decisions that are
not made in public (Hertwig 2017). Yet many of the behaviors associated with self-control problems
lie outside the public sphere, making them difficult for public choice architects to reach. Safe from
the eyes of friends and colleagues and from social control and regulatory measures, people may
be prone to making late-night visits to the fridge or indulging in a secret chocolate habit. Last but
not least, the public nature of nudging interventions may have unintended side effects analogous to
moral licensing (Khan and Dhar 2006): the beneficial behavior brought about by a nudge might be
canceled out by undesirable behavior elsewhere (Grüne-Yanoff 2016; Hertwig 2017). For example,
being nudged to eat healthily in the school cafeteria might lead to indulgence at home.
4. Preference identification. A necessary condition for a nudge to be successful (not just
harmless) is that the policy maker knows what makes choosers better off, by their own standards.
This raises two problems, one epistemic–methodological and the other conceptual (see Grüne-Yanoff

11

The citizen choice architect

and Hertwig 2016). First, how can the policy maker obtain reliable information about the chooser’s
true preferences? The standard revealed preference interpretation favored by many economists,
according to which preferences must be inferred from observed behavior, does not seem like a
promising option. The revealed preference approach is assumed to be less biased by cheap talk,
strategic considerations, and unreliable introspective abilities. Yet given that observable behavior
seems to be driven by a mix of impulsive desires and more reflective judgments, it is not clear how
the “real” or true preferences should be inferred from observed behavior (Infante, Lecouteux, and
Sugden 2016). In straightforward cases, informal intuitive assessments by policy makers may well
be sufficiently accurate. In more complicated contexts, however, it is not safe to assume that experts
truly know what is good for choosers, ”as judged by themselves” (Thaler and Sunstein 2008, p. 5).
Furthermore, in some contexts, choosers explicitly do not want experts to make decisions for them
(e.g., medical or end-of-life decisions; Frey, Herzog, and Hertwig 2018). The problem is even more
difficult when the targeted population of choosers has heterogeneous preferences (Grüne-Yanoff and
Hertwig 2016): one-size-fits-all nudges typically assume that everybody wants the same thing. But
can policy makers really assume that everybody wants to save for retirement, for example? In many
cases, the assumption of preference homogeneity is questionable, and thus undermines a nudge’s
goal of enhancing welfare (see Reijula et al. 2018).
The problem of preference identification is particularly acute when nudges are applied to
self-control problems. Consider an example put forward by Ariely and Wertenbroch (2002). You
go a restaurant that serves a set dinner. Because you are on a diet, you decide beforehand to skip
the dessert. But when it is served, you end up eating it anyway, only to regret it afterwards. Such
self-control problems appear to involve preferences that are inconsistent over time, as short-term
impulsive desires compete with long-term goals. It is important to distinguish between preferences
that conflict across time and those which are consistent but increase future costs to the public (e.g.,

12

The citizen choice architect

lead to higher healthcare premiums or social welfare spending). For instance, someone may crave
sweets of all kinds. He knows the price is weight gain—but considers this a price worth paying.
Another person lives according to the maxim that it is not the years in your life that count—it is the
life in your years. Being true to herself, she hardly saves. A public choice architect who expects
both choosers to face health risks and financial risks years down the road may diagnose failures
of self-control. Yet both choosers’ behavior is fully rational and consistent with their short- and
long-term preferences.
But let us assume for the sake of argument that a choice architect is able to identify a chooser’s
long-term preferences and discovers they are in conflict with their short-term preferences. Even
then, it is not clear why long-term preferences are considered indicative of a person’s well-being.
This has often simply been assumed. Nudges are frequently portrayed as ways of defending the
long-term self against externalities imposed on it by the impulsive short-term self (Whitman and
Rizzo 2015). In many cases, strengthening the long-term self may be beneficial to overall well-being,
and one may argue that long-term preferences reflect the kind of enduring desires and plans that
are central to personal identity, and hence worth defending (Bratman 2007). Nonetheless, equating
true preferences with long-term preferences is a nontrivial conceptual move. Indeed, Elster (1979),
Cowen (1991), and Ainslie (2001) cite counterexamples: overdiscipline can lead to rigidity and loss
of enjoyment, and strengthening self-control does not necessarily enhance well-being (as exemplified
by misers and anorexics).
Taken together, the prevailing uncertainty about what makes choosers better off, by their own
standards, challenges the idea that nudging interventions will automatically enhance people’s
welfare. It is difficult to measure welfare or happiness, and invariably associating well-being with
long-term prudence is conceptually problematic. Against this background, critics of nudging with
politically conservative leanings have argued in favor of noninterventionism and a laissez-faire

13

The citizen choice architect

approach—of letting things take their own course. We do not share this view. Rather, we believe
that behavioral science insights have great potential for improving public policy. In the following,
we consider how the behavioral insights gleaned from the nudging approach could inform another
policy approach–self-nudging–that is less subject to the practical and ethical problems we have
reviewed.

Self-nudging: categories and examples
The taxonomy of nudges outlined above provides a blueprint for the categories of self-nudges that
could, in principle, be shared with citizen choice architects. Some of those categories of nudges
lend themselves readily to being mapped onto categories of self-nudges; others, such as priming, are
arguably more difficult to self-deploy. Note that the following examples serve as illustrations rather
than evidence-based policy interventions, as they have not been subjected to empirical testing.
1. Self-deployed reminders and prompts. Of the categories of nudges identified, reminders and
prompts are probably most likely to be part of a decision maker’s intuitive behavioral repertoire.
People stick reminders on the door so they cannot leave home without seeing them, write and update
to-do lists, and use digital calendars to remind them about friends’ birthdays. In principle, people
could employ such ”notes to self” more widely to remind them of behaviors they would like to
pursue in situations where they might be tempted to act otherwise. Take, for example, someone who
worries about the environmental impact of her food consumption. Although she is aware that meat
and dairy have an outsize environmental impact and that dietary changes can deliver significant
environmental benefits (Poore and Nemecek 2018), she finds dietary behavior change very hard.
Being a self-nudger, she reminds herself of her goal by sticking an illustration of the greenhouse
gas emissions associated with various sources of protein to her refrigerator (Moskin et al. 2019).

14

The citizen choice architect

Another illustrative reminder and behavioral prompt can help in daily traffic. A car driver can tape
a note to their car door handle as a reminder to use the ”Dutch reach” method (opening the door
with the other hand in order to look back over one’s shoulder for cyclists). In theory, these kinds of
reminders and prompts help establish behavioral routines, meaning that they become superfluous in
the long run.
2. Self-deployed framing. Different ways of framing the same choice can be used to elicit
different behaviors. In Mark Twain’s (1969) The Adventures of Tom Sawyer, Tom is punished with a
chore: whitewashing a fence. When he is teased about his punishment, he frames the task in such
positive terms (”Well, I don’t see why I oughtn’t to like it. Does a boy get a chance to whitewash a
fence every day?”; p. 49) that his friends pay him for the ”privilege” of doing the chore themselves.
Tom uses framing to steer others’ behavior, but in principle, framing can be employed to guide
oneself as well. Take the example of reward bundling, which refers to reframing a discrete choice
as a choice drawn from a set of extended sequences of rewards. Ainslie et al. (2018, pp. 3–4)
introduced reward bundling by means of the following example: Imagine a person deciding between
jogging in miserable weather or staying in bed for another hour. One approach to framing this choice
is to view it as a decision between different activities and experiences over the hour in question.
Another approach is to frame the situation as a choice about the kind of person she wants to be in
the future: someone who jogs only in perfect conditions, or someone who will maintain their fitness
rain or shine. If she believes that her choice today is the best predictor of how she will choose in the
future, she may choose to jog today.
Charitable giving offers another example of how people can frame situations for themselves to
render choices easier or harder. Sussman, Sharma, and Alter (2015) found that fundraisers could
increase contributions by framing donations as exceptional (i.e., uncommon and infrequent) rather
than ordinary (i.e., common and frequent) expenses. Framing appears to affect donors’ mental

15

The citizen choice architect

budgeting processes and diminish the extent to which they considered the effect of the donation
on their budgets. In Sussman et al.’s study, people were nudged to donate more. But someone
who wants to steer their charity donations could apply the same logic to themself and frame the
contributions as either ”exceptional” or ”ordinary” expenses, thereby making it easier to increase or
decrease the magnitude of their donations, depending on their preferences.
3. Self-deployed changes of accessibility, defaults, and friction. Two major design principles
of choice architecture are the positioning of objects (e.g., foods) and defaults and, by extension,
their cognitive and visual accessibility (Van Gestel, Kroese, and De Ridder 2018; Jachimowicz et al.
2019). Self-nudgers could harness both the repositioning nudge (Van Gestel, Kroese, and De Ridder
2018) and the default nudge. For example, rearranging the refrigerator and kitchen cupboards may
be an effective way of controlling one’s cravings for sugar and promoting healthier food choices.
People could be encouraged to redesign their ”personal cafeteria” along the same lines as the school
cafeteria: positioning default foods such as fruit and vegetables at eye level and moving temptations
such as chocolate cookies to the back of the cupboard.
Torma et al.’s (2018) study of an organic food box subscription offers another example of an
opportunity for self-nudging through planning and reorganizing decision environments. Earlier
research indicated that preordering food may lead to healthier food choices (VanEpps, Downs,
and Loewenstein 2016). Torma and colleagues studied a scheme in which customers signed up
to have organic groceries delivered to their doorstep. The hypothesis was that moving from daily
supermarket shopping to a preorder scheme would replace a set of low-involvement decisions
with high-involvement decisions, and thus facilitate healthier and more environmentally friendly
food choices. Many of the customers interviewed had noticed an intention–behavior gap in their
shopping behavior and were dissatisfied with being commercially “nudged” into impulse buys in
the supermarket. Most believed that the self-nudge of the box scheme helped them to align their

16

The citizen choice architect

behavior with their pro-environmental intentions, and to adopt a healthier and more sustainable diet.
The box scheme implements several tools from the nudger’s toolkit: it manipulates defaults and
reorganizes (and gently restricts3) the available options, making some more accessible than others.
It is hard to think of a modern environment with an architecture more skillfully designed to capture
and command control over human behaviors than the online world. Choice architectures online are
constructed with the primary goal of maximizing commercial interests (e.g., Wu, 2016). However,
as Kozyreva, Lewandowsky, and Hertwig (2019) noted, the very properties of online environments
that make it possible to manipulate users’ behavior can also be harnessed by individuals to foster
their own self-control and motivation. Online environments permit–although rarely encourage–a
relatively high level of control over one’s choice architecture: users can strategically set their own
defaults (e.g., by changing their web browser default home page from a social media site to a
high-quality news site to tame the check-in impulse; Marulanda-Carter and Jackson 2012; Wu
2017), adjust or turn off notifications, use grayscale to decrease the salience of eye-catching visual
notifications, and install ad blockers. Following the lead of the temptation-resisting children in
Mischel’s (2015) marshmallow test, self-nudgers can also remove their digital device from sight
(see also Groopman 2019, aforementioned attempts at self-nudging). To the extent that these simple
modifications to the choice architecture affect frequent behaviors, they can make a meaningful
difference. They provide ways of habitually avoiding self-control dilemmas and thus provide people
with a means for what Gillebaart and Ridder (2015) refer to as effortless self-control.
A close relative of the category of accessibility manipulations are manipulations that vary the
convenience of an option. Consider the jar of chocolate spread that always seems to be empty. One
self-nudging intervention is to make enjoying the spread slightly less convenient by putting it in the
3Self-nudgers can also apply self-paternalistic interventions (Kuklin 1991). This category does not feature in the
above nudge taxonomy because nudging by definition excludes hard paternalistic interventions such as removing or
forbidding choice options. Self-nudgers, in contrast, can put hard constraints on their own behaviors without curbing the
liberty of another person.

17

The citizen choice architect

fridge: the wait between taking the jar out of the fridge and being able to spread the contents gives
the consumer a brief ”cooling-off” period. Introducing just a little self-deployed inconvenience, or
friction, may often be enough to reduce the behaviors people seek to control (e.g., consuming digital
media, eating tasty but unhealthy food, making unwise purchases). By the same token, spotting
frictions and removing them may help render desired behaviors more likely.
4. Self-deployed social comparison and social pressure. Another design principle that the
self-nudger could adopt is to use commitment devices (Schelling, 1978) that enlist the social world.
In their book Think Small, Service and Gallagher (2017) describe ways of using social pressure to
precommit oneself. For example, someone who wants to start exercising regularly could make a
public commitment to their colleagues. They could even appoint a ”commitment referee”–someone
who tracks transgressions and enforces a specified penalty in cases of failure (e.g., having to wear
the shirt of a rival football team for a day). Moreover, self-nudgers seeking to motivate themselves
could strategically select their social comparison group: rather than measuring themselves against
a representative peer group, they could construct a mental sample of healthy-living colleagues
and friends. Or a self-nudger concerned about his alcohol consumption could find out how his
consumption ranks against that of others and use this “rank” framing in a note to himself, thus
motivating himself through social comparisons and norms (e.g., Schultz et al. 2007; but the process
of perceiving peers’ alcohol consumption may be prone to overestimation as demonstrated in Giese,
Stok, and Renner 2019).
Let us conclude this initial outline of categories of self-nudges by clearing up a possible
misunderstanding. In advocating self-nudging techniques as a means of enhancing self-control, we
do not mean to suggest that self-control is the sole cause of various detrimental behaviors. There is
little reason to assume that people’s capacity for self-control is any worse than it was in the past
(in fact, it seems that aspects of self-control such as delay of gratification have increased slightly;

18

The citizen choice architect

see Protzko 2020). Rather, we suggest that many commercially constructed environments–such as
the modern dietary or information environment–are being deliberately modified to hijack people’s
desires and impulses (Cross and Proctor 2014; Wu 2017; Dallacker, Mata, and Hertwig 2019).4
The problem is not that people have mysteriously lost their ability for self-control but that past and
existing levels of self-control no longer suffice to enable self-governance in these finely tuned choice
environments. Boosting consumers’ ability to redesign their proximate environment and thus regain
at least some of their lost choice autonomy would thus appear desirable.

Self-nudging avoids the ethical and practical problems of nudging
We do not suggest that self-nudges can solve every self-control problem. Like other policy tools,
self-nudging has its limitations: it requires active participation from the people involved, and the
details of how to design efficient self-nudging interventions is largely an open research question.
We suggest, however, that self-nudging reduces or even eliminates some important drawbacks for
which nudging has been criticized.
Autonomy. Because people are educated to nudge themselves, self-nudging does not give rise to
concerns about individual autonomy. No outside party modifies the choice environment or behavior
in ways that bypass rational deliberation. Critics of nudging point out that making one’s own
mistakes and learning from them may play an important role in personal growth (Rebonato 2012).
As we discuss below in the ’Self-nudging and internal conflict’ section, we believe that self-nudges,
unlike nudging, enhance self-understanding and provide strategies for negotiating conflicts between
impulsive tendencies and long-terms goals. And precisely this learning process can motivate people
to self-nudge: only after recognizing a problem and developing the desire to change will people
4Such environments, constructed by commercial choice architects, often rely on psychological insights that are
also used for nudging, but they lack the normative constraint of a nudge: they do not necessarily steer people towards
behavior considered as desirable, as judged by themselves.

19

The citizen choice architect

look for a tool that can help them manage the problem. We should emphasize that self-nudges differ
from classic educational interventions in that there is often no need to invest substantial time and
effort in acquiring new skills to address undesirable behavior. Self-nudges enable the chooser to
smartly manipulate or even experiment with the external environment—consider again the case
of the modern online environment—in order to create everyday choice architectures that promote
desired choices. In this sense, they enhance rather than undermine autonomy.
Reversibility. Self-nudges escape the reversibility–effectivity dilemma described above. The
individual determines how difficult it will be to reverse a self-nudge; self-nudges fall on a continuum
ranging from gentle prods and reminders to drastic modifications of the decision environment to be
experienced by the future self. Even self-nudges that are difficult to reverse do not involve the power
asymmetry characteristic of nudges in which an assumedly naïve chooser faces a knowledgeable
policy maker.
Public versus private domain and unintended side-effects. As mentioned earlier, nudges
implemented by public choice architects rarely reach—or should reach—people in the privacy of
their homes. Self-nudging extends this scope, bringing previously inaccessible personal choice
contexts into the realm of benevolent design. Self-nudging also permits a focus on repeated
rather than one-off behaviors, which are often the target of nudging interventions (e.g., enrolling
in a pension plan). Finally, self-nudging can also, at least in principle, enable people to reverse
course when they realize that their self-deployed nudge has unintended side effects. This is not a
trivial advantage given that relatively little is known about the long-term effects of many nudging
interventions (Frey and Rogers 2014).
Preference identification. It is less obvious how self-nudging could help to tackle the problem
of preference identification. Although most of the nudging literature assumes that policy should
promote long-term preferences over impulsive desires, it is rare for arguments supporting this

20

The citizen choice architect

principle to be explicitly formulated. The principle ultimately seems to hinge on the notions of
personal identity and happiness employed (see Hausman 2011; Fumagalli 2016). It may be that
informed preferences should not always reflect the need for self-control, but a healthy balance
between self-control and self-liberation (Cowen 1991).
How (and when) does a person know what they ultimately want or need? Behavioral science
research suggests some methods (e.g., mental contrasting) for clarifying one’s goals (Oettingen and
Gollwitzer 2004). Admittedly, no self-nudge can be perfectly neutral with respect to the internal
process of bargaining between conflicting desires: impulses, temptations, and procrastination versus
persistence, abstinence, and action, for example. It is conceivable that becoming an avid self-nudger
and manager of one’s life might promote a rigid, legalistic, and overly disciplined approach; lapses
of willpower due to self-deception, exposure to temptation, or opportunities for moral licensing
might be reduced, but at the cost of spontaneity and richness of experience. Some recent suggestions
regarding the use of nudges for self-help purposes reinforce such concerns. A micromanaged life
driven by repeated milestones and reward schedules will surely lead to loss of spontaneity (e.g.,
Service and Gallagher 2017, pp. 196–197). Likewise, misers and people struggling with compulsive
behavioral patterns constitute prime examples of the results of excessive self-control.
That said, failures of self-control are undoubtedly a more serious cause of human suffering
than over-discipline. As Schelling (1985) wrote more than 30 years ago: ”I offer the personal
judgment that, by and large, people are more in need of greater efficacy in devising rules for
their own behavior than in danger of shortsighted self-binding activity” (p. 360). We agree:
contemporary phenomena such as obesity, the opioid epidemic, and smartphone addiction are
examples of how chemicals, technologies, and manipulative choice environments threaten individual
autonomy on a broad scale, with significant individual and social consequences. Commercially
constructed choice environments have immense potential to manipulate and steer behavior. It seems

21

The citizen choice architect

reasonable to promote self-nudging for self-control purposes to enable people to navigate these
environments–especially as it is ultimately up to the individuals themselves how they use these
tools. Self-nudging can be seen as a menu of solution ideas that can be consulted whenever people
perceive an internal conflict that stops them reaching their goals.

Self-nudging and internal conflict
Research on boundedly rational agency suggests that the preference identification problem itself
may result from a contestable view of human agency and rationality. As we have noted, a common
way of modeling self-conflict is to view it as a conflict between two sets of preferences: one
describing short-term objectives; the other, long-term objectives. Research on intertemporal choice
(Ericson and Laibson 2019) has shown that humans and animals naturally engage in hyperbolic
time discounting, which can lead to seemingly irrational preference reversals when they opt for
smaller-sooner rewards over larger-later ones. Perhaps, then, the dynamically consistent exponential
discounting characteristic of homo economicus should be regarded not as the natural baseline of
real-world humans and animals, but as a triumph of self-control. It may be that adult humans (at
least sometimes) appear to act in accordance with normative theories of rationality because they are
operating in environments in which various cultural, social, and individual self-control resources
are available (Ainslie 2001).
This suggests a novel way of thinking about preferences, identity, and the self: ”Preferences that
are temporary aren’t aberrations anymore, but the starting place for a strategic understanding of
functions that used to be thought of as organs: the ego, the will, or even the self” (Ainslie 2001,
p. 198). In other words, no set of preferences, or short- or long-term desires, need be seen as
fundamental. Instead, Ainslie describes the various desires inhabiting human bodies and minds as

22

The citizen choice architect

being constantly engaged in limited warfare: the behaviors they recommend are conflicting, but
only in part. They tap into the same material resources (the body) and hence recognize the need
to engage in mutually beneficial bargaining. Just as bargaining processes may lead to remarkably
stable political institutions, they may also produce stable behavioral patterns. The internal rules
(such as ”never drink beer before 6 p.m.”) that emerge from such processes tend to be followed
almost ritualistically, and breaking them may feel like violating a social or even moral norm.
This viewpoint provides a novel perspective on nudging interventions: sensitivity to framing and
choice architecture does not necessarily reflect irrational aberrations from baseline rational agency.
Instead, rational agency is sometimes approximated thanks to good habits, rules, and scaffolding
institutions. Information provided in the form of self-nudges could be seen as the contribution of
psychological research to that scaffolding. Thus viewed, self-nudging need not be regarded merely
a means of impulse control or behavioral self-management. On the contrary, people who see the
self as a population of competing desires within a single mind are able to embrace self-conflict and
adopt the role of a citizen behavioral scientist experimenting with self-nudges and properties of the
environment to determine how they influence behavior. At the risk of sounding lofty, we propose
that self-nudges could serve as tools for promoting self-knowledge and internal negotiation between
the various needs and desires inhabiting people’s minds and bodies. The self-nudging perspective
emphasizes the material and practical aspects of this negotiation process: the way people design
their choice environments shapes the kinds of affordances and temptations they face in everyday life.

Self-nudges are boosts
According to proponents of the nudge approach, real-world decision makers are fallible, inconsistent,
ill-informed, unrealistically optimistic, and myopic; they suffer from inertia and self-control problems

23

The citizen choice architect

(Thaler and Sunstein 2008; see also Halpern 2016). This portrayal of people’s decision-making
competences has its roots in the heuristics-and-biases program (e.g., Kahneman et al. 1982;
Kahneman 2003; Kahneman 2011. The cumulative weight of these cognitive and motivational
deficiencies has “raised serious questions about the rationality of many judgments and decisions that
people make” (Thaler and Sunstein 2008, p. 7) and both necessitates and enables a new approach to
public policy. The innovative core of the nudge approach lies in the insight that policy makers can
harness individuals’ cognitive and motivational deficiencies and, in combination with a tailored
choice architecture, steer people toward behaviors that are consistent with their well-being.
As Hertwig and Grüne-Yanoff (2017; see also Grüne-Yanoff and Hertwig 2016) recently pointed
out, however, the portrayal of the human decision maker as systematically imperfect is not the
only legitimate one. Behavioral science evidence also supports a distinct kind of intervention,
namely ”boosts,” which Hertwig and Grüne-Yanoff have defined as interventions that target
competences rather than immediate behavior: they may enlist human cognition (e.g., decision
strategies, procedural routines, motivational competences), the environment (e.g., information
representation or the physical environment), or both. The goal is to preserve personal agency and
enable individuals to exercise that agency. Consequently, if people endorse the objectives of a
boost–say, risk literacy, financial planning, or healthy food choices—they may choose to adopt it;
if not, they may decline to engage with it. The objective must thus be transparent to the boosted
individuals. They can then harness the new or ”boosted” competence to make choices for themselves
(e.g., whether to undergo a medical test, consume a particular food, or choose a certain type of
investment; see, e.g., Kaufmann, Weber, and Haisley 2013; Dallacker, Mata, and Hertwig 2019;
Dallacker, Hertwig, and Mata 2019; Franklin, Folke, and Ruggeri 2019).
Self-nudging is a valuable addition to the booster’s toolkit, especially when the goal is to enhance
self-control. For example, some biases in human cognition may be so robust that changing them

24

The citizen choice architect

by means of boosting would be short-lived, or require too much time or effort. A self-nudge can
enable people to steer clear of these biases by manipulating the proximate choice architecture. To
do so–and this is where self-nudging and other boosts part ways with traditional nudging–they need
to be let in on the secret of why a particular change in the choice architecture achieves a goal, and
how it can be implemented. Self-nudges, like all boosts, require a sufficient level of motivation
and cognitive capacity on the chooser’s part. If their cognitive resources are compromised or their
motivation is low, they are unlikely to engage in self-nudging. Having said that, one advantage of
self-nudges is that, to the extent that they operate through the environment (e.g., defaults), they may
work efficiently even when–and precisely because–motivation and cognitive capacities are limited.5

Returning control
The idea of self-nudging has relatives and predecessors. One is Schelling’s (1978; 1984; 1985)
notion of rules and self-commitment devices. Schelling (1985) considered how best to design the
rules that people impose on themselves in order to prevent themselves from, for instance, eating too
much or driving after drinking. Schelling’s concern was with situations in which preferences may
shift dramatically: ”the coldblooded determination of rules for the hotblooded encounter” (p. 365):
A good rule, if you must sit before a bowl of glistening salted peanuts during an hour’s
conversation, peanuts being what you are trying to eat as few of as possible, is not to eat
the first peanut. Even if your diet allows a few peanuts, it may be easier to draw the line
at zero than to stop at your quota after you have whipped your appetite into a frenzy
with the first few peanuts. Knowing that the taste of peanuts excites the appetite further
5One reviewer asked us whether there are also self-boosts. To some extent, all boosts are self-boosts, at least in the
long run. Like self-nudges, boosts (e.g., statistical reasoning boost, anti-mathematics anxiety boost; see Hertwig 2017;
Hertwig and Grüne-Yanoff 2017) are initially communicated by a policy maker to the target audience; subsequently,
however, boosts must be self-deployed. In this sense, boosts are self-boosts.

25

The citizen choice architect

can help you design a rule–designing the rule can occur when there are no peanuts
present and you are not even hungry–that is more readily enforced than a rule to stop
after some number of peanuts. (p. 365)
Self-nudges can, of course, also be presented in the form of rules (see Box 1); the difference is
that they emphasize the external choice architecture and should, ideally, be informed by empirical
evidence obtained in research on the effectiveness of specific nudges.
The notion of letting choice architecture do some of the work that is otherwise delegated to
self-control and cognitive oversight was also highlighted by Wansink (e.g., Wansink, Just, and Payne
2009). Although Wansink’s empirical work has been subjected to sharp criticism and review, leading
to numerous retractions and corrections, his broader idea that empowering people to personally
control their food choice architecture (e.g., by not eating with the TV on; Dallacker, Hertwig, and
Mata 2018; or storing tempting foods in less convenient locations) has the benefit, like self-nudging,
of not requiring people to have the discipline to diet or to relinquish self-governance.
Self-nudging can also be related to the research on self-regulating health-related behaviors (e.g.,
Mann, De Ridder, and Fujita 2013) in the sense that self-nudges can be understood as strategies
that people use to protect their goals from being disrupted by competing goals, temptations, or
distractions. The conceptually most interesting part of self-nudging is not, however, conscious,
effortful inhibition–”one of the most studied goal striving strategies from a psychological perspective”
(Mann, De Ridder, and Fujita 2013, p. 493)–but smartly setting up the choice architecture in
accordance with one’s goals. Self-nudging, like other self-regulating behavior, emphasizes selfefficacy–that is, boosting people’s confidence in being able to exercise control over their behavior
and environment to reach their own goals (Bandura 1997).
The concept of stimulus control, an indispensable entry in any textbook on behavioral therapy
(e.g., Bootzin and Perlis 2011), is another important predecessor to self-nudging. Stimulus control
26

The citizen choice architect

refers to control over the discriminative stimulus (i.e., the antecedent stimulus that has regulates
behavior because in the past that behavior was reliably reinforced in the presence of that stimulus).
It is key to behavioral therapy across a range of health problems such as sleep disorders, obesity, and
substance abuse. Like self-nudging, it focuses on changes in the proximate environment or choice
architecture. For instance, stimulus control in the context of weight control could mean:
altering the environment that activates eating and modifying it to help in avoiding
overeating. Stimulus control includes proper purchase of food items, excluding energydense processed food from the shopping basket and introduction of more fruits and
vegetables. Others include altering the amount of food served on the table or reducing
the size of plates and containers, concentrating on eating without being distracted by
television or reading material and reducing proximity to food. (Jacob and Isaac 2012, p.
29)
In a narrow sense, stimulus control refers to the voluntary or automatic changes (see also Bugg
and Crump 2012) to the environment–for instance, in terms of inserting or removing a stimulus—to
change the likelihood of a specific desirable or undesirable behavior. Similar to self-nudging, the
goal of any behavioral therapy is that once the therapy or learning phase is terminated, control
over the stimulus resides with the person concerned. Stimulus control rests on a different line of
psychological theorizing and evidence than does nudging but shares with self-nudging an emphasis
on individual agency and control over the choice environment.
To conclude, the idea of self-nudging has various theoretical relatives. One important task for
the future will be to work toward integrating these theories and to identify across these lines of
research the best evidence-based ways to return self-regulation, autonomy and control over their
immediate choice environments to the citizen.

27

The citizen choice architect

How to communicate self-nudges
For citizens to become choice architects in their proximate choice environments, they must be aware
of the existence of a behavioral problem, and of how changes in the choice architecture can address it.
Self-nudging implies not only learning a ”trick”; it also requires some insight into the psychological
mechanisms behind it (cf. Marchionni and Reijula 2019). To this end, laypeople need to be let in
on behavioral scientists’ privileged knowledge of nudging and of how the choice architecture is
assumed to function.6 This does not imply that they need to become behavioral scientists. Concepts
such as cognitive and visual accessibility, cooling-off periods, defaults, and precommitment devices
are relatively intuitive and easy to grasp and easy to experiment with (see, e.g., Groopman 2019).
Ultimately, to what extent providing citizens with ”open access” to behavioral science knowledge
can help them achieve their ultimate goals is an empirical question.
The organic food box scheme studied by Torma, Aschemann-Witzel, and Thøgersen (2018) is a
concrete example of a self-nudging opportunity set up by a private company. NGOs, government
agencies, and consumer protection offices could provide similar services (e.g., voluntary sign-ups for
a social media group to monitor energy use) through various communication channels. For example,
Lieder et al. (2019) examined how AI-supported apps could help people reach their goals. More
traditional means of communication include e-mail and fact boxes. Take, for instance, the UK health
services, which send out millions of e-mail reminders per year (Gigerenzer and Muir Gray 2011;
Haynes et al. 2013). Reminding people not to miss an appointment is an effective nudge in its own
right, but those e-mails could also include a link to a fact box presenting a related self-nudge. Fact
6In light of severe global health risks such as obesity, it may seem puzzling that most people do remarkably little to
construct safer choice architectures for themselves. Why is that? One reason could be that people tend to attribute
responsibility for such health risks to the individual, whereas much research suggests that the increase in obesity is
primarily due to environmental changes and thus favors obesity-prevention measures that target the environment (Mata
and Hertwig 2018). If people perceive the causes of risky behaviors to reside in the individual, they may underestimate
the extent to which simple changes in the choice architecture can affect their behavior.

28

The citizen choice architect

boxes communicate the best available evidence about a specific topic in an easily understandable
manner. They were initially developed in the medical domain to contrast the benefits of a medical
intervention against potential harms in a clear tabular format that enables people with no medical
or statistical background to make competent decisions (Schwartz, Woloshin, and Welch 2009;
McDowell et al. 2016). Box 1 presents a fact box on implementation intentions. Prompting people
to form an implementation intention (e.g., by writing down a date and time to get a flu shot) has
often been classified as a nudge (Thaler and Sunstein 2008; Milkman et al. 2011). Here our goal is
to enable people to employ it strategically in terms of a self-nudge.
Box 1. Fact box explaining how a self-nudge based on implementation intentions can help
people reduce snacking and sugar consumption.
This fact box explains how to design action plans in order to reduce the likelihood of snacking
and consuming added sugar.
What is the problem? Inability to overcome an unhealthy snacking habit (e.g., sweets,
potato chips) and to reduce the consumption of added sugar.
What could help to solve the problem? Changing your eating habits is difficult. Even
diabetics have difficulties limiting their intake of sugary foods and adopting healthier diets,
which can cause serious health problems. Research in psychology has demonstrated that
prompting people to develop concrete plans to overcome specific obstacles makes it easier for
them to perform a desired behavior [1, 3]; one area in which this has been shown is healthy
eating [4].
Why does developing IF-THEN plans help? It is far easier to make goals than to reach
them. Research suggests that formulating concrete IF-THEN plans can help people to attain
their goals. A plan taking the form “If situation x arises, I will do y” is called an implementation

29

The citizen choice architect
intention. Implementation intentions are useful because they create a mental association between
the desired behavior and a specific future situation. By doing so, they help you not only to
get started with your plan, but also to stay on track: Implementation intentions reduce the
effort you need to carry out a behavior by making it more automatic, and protect that behavior
against competition from other plans, distractions, and temptations. [2] In other words, simple
IF-THEN plans specify when, where, and how to reduce the gap between where you are and
where you would like to be.
How can I use IF-THEN plans? First, write down a plan of what exactly you intend to eat
on a particular weekday (for breakfast, lunch, and dinner). Second, formulate five IF-THEN
plans hat specify what you will do if you come up against an obstacle.
For example:
• If a colleague invites me for coffee, I’ll buy a banana instead of a piece of cake.
• If I feel the urge to snack while watching TV, I’ll get some vegetable sticks with my favorite
low-calorie dip.
• If my children have ice cream, I’ll pour myself some berries over nonfat Greek yogurt.
How effective are implementation intentions?
Meta-analytical studies (statistical analyses combining the results of multiple independent
studies) have shown that IF-THEN plans can help people achieve their goals (implementation
intentions have medium to large effects on goal attainment [1–4]). They help people overcome
common problems such as getting started with an intended behavior and staying on track when
experiencing difficulties. When combined with imaging how you would like to be in the future,
IF-THEN plans can help your behavior in line with intentions, including in sustainable food

30

The citizen choice architect
consumption [5], time management [6], getting an influenza shot [7].
References
1. Gollwitzer, P. M., Sheeran, P. (2006). Implementation intentions and goal achievement:
A meta-analysis of effects and processes. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology,
38, 69–119.
2. Gollwitzer, P. M. (2014). Weakness of the will: Is a quick fix possible? Motivation and
Emotion, 38(3), 305–322.
3. Adriaanse, M. A., Vinkers, C. D. W., De Ridder, D. T. D., Hox, J. J., De Wit, J. B. F.
(2010). Do implementation intentions help to eat a healthy diet? A systematic review and
meta-analysis of the empirical evidence. Appetite, 56(1), 183–193.
4. Chen, X., Wang, Y., Liu, L., Cui, J., Gan, M., Shum, D. H. K., Chan, R. C. K.
(2015). The effect of implementation intention on prospective memory: A systematic
and meta-analytic review. Psychiatry Research, 226(1), 14–22.
5. Loy, L. S., Wieber, F., Gollwitzer, P. M., Oettingen, G. (2016). Supporting sustainable
food consumption: Mental contrasting with implementation intentions (MCII) aligns
intentions and behavior. Frontiers in Psychology, 7, 607.
6. Oettingen, G., Kappes, H. B., Guttenberg, K. B., Gollwitzer, P. M. (2015). Self-regulation
of time management: Mental contrasting with implementation intentions. European
Journal of Social Psychology, 45(2), 218–229. Milkman, K. L., Beshears, J., Choi, J.
J., Laibson, D., Madrian, B. C. (2011). Using implementation intentions prompts to

31

The citizen choice architect
enhance influenza vaccination rates. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
108(26), 10415–10420.
Fact boxes like the one shown in Box 1 could be designed for a wide range of self-nudges. In
the context of healthy eating, these include defaults, ordering effects, and even the architectural
properties of the family meal (see Dallacker, Hertwig, and Mata 2018). We propose that a fact
box describing a self-nudge should include five main pieces of information: (1) a description
of the behavioral problem; (2) a description of a suitable self-nudge; (3) an explanation of the
psychological mechanisms underlying the self-nudge, and how it can help to mitigate the problem;
(4) an actionable description of how to implement the nudge (if necessary, with links to additional
tools and resources, e.g., a hyperlink to an app); (5) if available, a list of the possible benefits
and potential side effects (in terms of easily understandable effect sizes). This fifth dimension
is ambitious. Research-based interventions should not be oversold but communicated truthfully.
Little evidence on the benefits and harms of self-nudges is yet available; currently it would need
to be extrapolated from the nudging literature or from the relevant primary literature (as in our
example of implementation intentions). Consider, for example, the essential topic of potential
side effects of a self-nudge. Having steered oneself to exercise a desired behavior such as not
eating that first peanut (Schelling 1985), an individual may feel justified in engaging in behaviors
that they would otherwise avoid, such as drinking another glass of wine. The risk of this kind of
“moral self-licensing” (e.g., Monin and Miller 2001) may increase when people successfully nudge
themselves. Whether it indeed occurs is an empirical question. But if it does, this information
would need to be communicated in the fact box. Similarly, while social comparisons have often
been found to be useful for goal achievement, they may also compromise performance (Gollwitzer
et al. 2009)–a finding that a fact box would need to communicate.
As a valuable starting point, Duckworth, Milkman, and Laibson (2018) have reviewed the

32

The citizen choice architect

evidence for various self-deployed (situational and cognitive) self-control strategies. Obviously
there is also a need for research into the effectiveness of self-nudging. Such research would permit
policy makers to build up a repertoire of self-nudges and communicate their respective strengths
and weaknesses to the public (e.g., in fact boxes and apps). This is a vision for the future—but one
in which researchers who otherwise disagree about people’s decision-making competences (see
Hertwig and Grüne-Yanoff 2017) may be able to join forces.

Conclusion
Commercial choice architects have become proficient in hijacking people’s attention and desires
(see, e.g., Nestle 2013; Nestle 2015; Cross and Proctor 2014; Wu 2017), making it difficult for
consumers to exercise agency and freedom of choice. Even in the best of circumstances, the potential
for public choice architects to nudge people toward better choices in their personal and proximate
choice environments is limited. Against this background, we suggest that policy makers should
consider the possibility of empowering individuals to make strategic changes in their proximate
choice architecture. There is no reason why citizens should not be informed about nudges that can be
turned into self-nudges and, more generally, about the design principles of choice environments (e.g.,
defaults, framing, cognitive accessibility). We suggest that self-nudging is an untapped resource that
sidesteps various ethical and practical problems associated with nudging and can empower people
to make better everyday choices. This does not mean that regulation or nudging should be replaced
by self-nudging; indeed, self-nudging can benefit enormously from the ingenuity of the nudging
approach and the evidence accumulating on it. But, as the adage goes, give someone a fish, and
you feed them for a day. Teach someone to fish, and you feed them for a lifetime. We believe that
sharing behavioral insights from psychology and behavioral economics will provide citizens with a

33

The citizen choice architect

means for taking back power, giving them more control over the design of their proximate choice
environments–in other words, qualifying them as citizen choice architects.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Mattea Dallacker, Jutta Mata, Susan Michie, Michiru Nagatsu, Cass
Sunstein, Susanne Uusitalo and Claus Vögele for helpful comments on the concept of self-nudging
and Susannah Goss for editing the manuscript.

Financial support
Samuli Reijula’s research was funded by the Academy of Finland and the Kone Foundation.

34

The citizen choice architect

References
Ainslie, G. (1992). Picoeconomics: The strategic interaction of successive motivational states within
the person. Cambridge University Press.
— (2001). Breakdown of will. Cambridge University Press.
Ainslie, G. et al. (2018). Do people bundle sequences of choices? An experimental investigation.
Experimental Economics Center, Andrew Young School of Policy Studies . . .
Ariely, D. and K. Wertenbroch (2002). “Procrastination, deadlines, and performance: Self-control
by precommitment”. In: Psychological science 13.3, pp. 219–224.
Bandura, A. (1997). “Self-efficacy: The exercise of control”. In: H. Freeman, New York, NY.
Bénabou, R. and J. Tirole (2004). “Willpower and personal rules”. In: Journal of Political Economy
112.4, pp. 848–886.
Bootzin, R. R. and M. L. Perlis (2011). “Stimulus control therapy”. In: Behavioral Treatments for
Sleep Disorders. Elsevier, pp. 21–30.
Bovens, L. (2008). “The ethics of nudge”. In: Preference Change: Approaches from Philosophy,
Economics and Psychology. Ed. by M. J. Hansson and T. Grüne-Yanoff. Berlin: Springer, Theory
and Decision Library A, pp. 207–20.
Bratman, M. E. (2007). Structures of agency: Essays. Oxford University Press.
Broers, V. J. et al. (2017). “A systematic review and meta-analysis of the effectiveness of nudging
to increase fruit and vegetable choice”. In: The European Journal of Public Health 27.5,
pp. 912–920.
Bucher, T. et al. (2016). “Nudging consumers towards healthier choices: a systematic review of
positional influences on food choice”. In: British Journal of Nutrition 115.12, pp. 2252–2263.
Bugg, J. M. and M. J. Crump (2012). “In support of a distinction between voluntary and stimulusdriven control: A review of the literature on proportion congruent effects”. In: Frontiers in
psychology 3, p. 367.
Cialdini, R. B. and N. J. Goldstein (2004). “Social influence: Compliance and conformity”. In: Annu.
Rev. Psychol. 55, pp. 591–621.
Cowen, T. (1991). “Self-constraint versus self-liberation”. In: Ethics 101.2, pp. 360–373.
Cross, G. S. and R. Proctor (2014). Packaged pleasures: How technology and marketing revolutionized
desire. University of Chicago Press.
Dallacker, M., R. Hertwig, and J. Mata (2018). “The frequency of family meals and nutritional
health in children: a meta-analysis”. In: Obesity Reviews 19.5, pp. 638–653.
— (2019). “Quality matters: A meta-analysis on components of healthy family meals.” In: Health
Psychology 38.12, p. 1137.
Dallacker, M., J. Mata, and R. Hertwig (2019). “Toward simple eating rules for the land of plenty”.
In: Taming uncertainty. Ed. by Hertwig, Ralph, Pleskac, Timothy, and Pachur, Thorsten. MIT
Press, pp. 111–130.

35

The citizen choice architect

Dansinger, M. L. et al. (2005). “Comparison of the Atkins, Ornish, Weight Watchers, and Zone diets
for weight loss and heart disease risk reduction: a randomized trial”. In: Jama 293.1, pp. 43–53.
Doris, J. M. (2015). Talking to our selves: Reflection, ignorance, and agency. Oxford University
Press.
Drexler, A., G. Fischer, and A. Schoar (2014). “Keeping it simple: Financial literacy and rules of
thumb”. In: American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 6.2, pp. 1–31.
Duckworth, A. L. (2011). “The significance of self-control”. In: Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 108.7, pp. 2639–2640.
Duckworth, A. L., K. L. Milkman, and D. Laibson (2018). “Beyond willpower: Strategies for reducing
failures of self-control”. In: Psychological Science in the Public Interest 19.3, pp. 102–129.
Elster, J. (1979). Ulysses and the sirens: Studies in rationality and irrationality. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Ericson, K. M. and D. Laibson (2019). “Intertemporal choice”. In: Handbook of Behavioral
Economics: Applications and Foundations 1. Vol. 2. Elsevier, pp. 1–67.
Franklin, M., T. Folke, and K. Ruggeri (2019). “Optimising nudges and boosts for financial decisions
under uncertainty”. In: Palgrave Communications 5.1, pp. 1–13.
Frey, E. and T. Rogers (2014). “Persistence: How treatment effects persist after interventions stop”.
In: Policy Insights from the Behavioral and Brain Sciences 1.1, pp. 172–179.
Frey, R., S. M. Herzog, and R. Hertwig (2018). “Deciding on behalf of others: a population survey
on procedural preferences for surrogate decision-making”. In: BMJ open 8.7, e022289.
Fumagalli, R. (2016). “Decision sciences and the new case for paternalism: three welfare-related
justificatory challenges”. In: Social Choice and Welfare 47.2, pp. 459–480.
Giese, H., F. M. Stok, and B. Renner (2019). “Perceiving college peers’ alcohol consumption:
temporal patterns and individual differences in overestimation”. In: Psychology & health 34.2,
pp. 147–161.
Gigerenzer, G. and J. A. Muir Gray (2011). Better doctors, better patients, better decisions.
Envisioning healthcare 2020. London: MIT Press.
Gillebaart, M. and D. T. de Ridder (2015). “Effortless self-control: A novel perspective on response
conflict strategies in trait self-control”. In: Social and Personality Psychology Compass 9.2,
pp. 88–99.
Glaeser, E. (2006). “Psychology and Paternalism”. In: U Chi L Rev 73, p. 133.
Gollwitzer, P. M. et al. (2009). “When intentions go public: Does social reality widen the intentionbehavior gap?” In: Psychological science 20.5, pp. 612–618.
Groopman, J. (Oct. 21, 2019). “Can brain science help us break bad habits?” In: The New Yorker.
url: https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2019/10/28/can-brain-science-help-us-break-bad%20habits.
Grüne-Yanoff, T. (2016). “Why behavioural policy needs mechanistic evidence”. In: Economics &
Philosophy 32.3, pp. 463–483.
Grüne-Yanoff, T. and R. Hertwig (2016). “Nudge versus boost: How coherent are policy and theory?”
In: Minds and Machines 26.1, pp. 149–183.
36

The citizen choice architect
Halpern, D. (2016). Inside the nudge unit: How small changes can make a big difference. Random
House.
Hausman, D. M. (2011). Preference, value, choice, and welfare. Cambridge University Press.
Hausman, D. M. and B. Welch (2010). “Debate: To nudge or not to nudge*”. In: Journal of Political
Philosophy 18.1, pp. 123–136. (Visited on 04/24/2020).
Haynes, L. C. et al. (2013). “Collection of delinquent fines: An adaptive randomized trial to assess
the effectiveness of alternative text messages”. In: Journal of Policy Analysis and Management
32.4, pp. 718–730. (Visited on 04/24/2020).
Hertwig, R. (2017). “When to consider boosting: some rules for policy-makers”. In: Behavioural
Public Policy 1.2, pp. 143–161.
Hertwig, R. and T. Grüne-Yanoff (2017). “Nudging and boosting: Steering or empowering good
decisions”. In: Perspectives on Psychological Science 12.6, pp. 973–986.
Holden, S. S., N. Zlatevska, and C. Dubelaar (2016). “Whether smaller plates reduce consumption
depends on who’s serving and who’s looking: a meta-analysis”. In: Journal of the Association
for Consumer Research 1.1, pp. 134–146.
House of Lords (2011). Behaviour change (second report).
Infante, G., G. Lecouteux, and R. Sugden (2016). “Preference purification and the inner rational
agent: a critique of the conventional wisdom of behavioural welfare economics”. In: Journal of
Economic Methodology 23.1, pp. 1–25.
Jachimowicz, J. M. et al. (2019). “When and why defaults influence decisions: A meta-analysis of
default effects”. In: Behavioural Public Policy 3.2, pp. 159–186.
Jacob, J. J. and R. Isaac (2012). “Behavioral therapy for management of obesity”. In: Indian Journal
of Endocrinology and Metabolism 16.1, pp. 28–32. (Visited on 04/24/2020).
Johnson, C. A. (2015). The information diet: A case for conscious comsumption. " O’Reilly Media,
Inc."
Johnson, E. and D. Goldstein (2003). “Do defaults save lives?” In: Science 302.5649, pp. 1338–1339.
Kahneman, D. (2003). “A perspective on judgment and choice: mapping bounded rationality.” In:
American psychologist 58.9, p. 697.
— (2011). Thinking, fast and slow. 1st ed. Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 512 pp.
Kahneman, D. et al. (1982). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Cambridge
university press.
Kaufmann, C., M. Weber, and E. Haisley (2013). “The role of experience sampling and graphical
displays on one’s investment risk appetite”. In: Management science 59.2, pp. 323–340.
Khan, U. and R. Dhar (2006). “Licensing effect in consumer choice”. In: Journal of marketing
research 43.2, pp. 259–266.
Kozyreva, A., S. Lewandowsky, and R. Hertwig (2019). “Citizens versus the internet: Confronting
digital challenges with cognitive tools”. In: (under review).
Kuklin, B. (1991). “Self-paternalism in the marketplace”. In: U. Cin. L. Rev. 60, p. 649.

37

The citizen choice architect

Liberman, V., S. M. Samuels, and L. Ross (2004). “The name of the game: Predictive power
of reputations versus situational labels in determining prisoner’s dilemma game moves”. In:
Personality and social psychology bulletin 30.9, pp. 1175–1185.
Lieder, F. et al. (2019). “Cognitive prostheses for goal achievement”. In: Nature human behaviour
3.10, pp. 1096–1106.
Loewenstein, G. et al. (2015). “Warning: You are about to be nudged”. In: Behavioral Science &
Policy 1.1, pp. 35–42.
Madrian, B. C. (2014). “Applying insights from behavioral economics to policy design”. In: Annu.
Rev. Econ. 6.1, pp. 663–688.
Mann, T., D. De Ridder, and K. Fujita (2013). “Self-regulation of health behavior: social psychological
approaches to goal setting and goal striving.” In: Health Psychology 32.5, p. 487.
Marchionni, C. and S. Reijula (2019). “What is mechanistic evidence, and why do we need it for
evidence-based policy?” In: Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A 73, pp. 54–63.
Marulanda-Carter, L. and T. W. Jackson (2012). “Effects of e-mail addiction and interruptions on
employees”. In: Journal of Systems and Information Technology.
Mata, J. and R. Hertwig (2018). “Public beliefs about obesity relative to other major health
risks: representative cross-sectional surveys in the USA, the UK, and Germany”. In: Annals of
Behavioral Medicine 52.4, pp. 273–286.
McDowell, M. et al. (2016). “A simple tool for communicating the benefits and harms of health
interventions: a guide for creating a fact box”. In: MDM Policy & Practice 1.1.
Micha, R. et al. (2017). “Association between dietary factors and mortality from heart disease,
stroke, and type 2 diabetes in the United States”. In: Jama 317.9, pp. 912–924.
Milkman, K. L. et al. (2011). “Using implementation intentions prompts to enhance influenza
vaccination rates”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108.26, pp. 10415–
10420.
Mills, C. (2018). “The choice architect’s trilemma”. In: Res Publica 24.3, pp. 395–414.
Mischel, W. (2015). The marshmallow test: Why self-control is the engine of success. Little, Brown.
Moffitt, T. E. et al. (2011). “A gradient of childhood self-control predicts health, wealth, and public
safety”. In: Proceedings of the national Academy of Sciences 108.7, pp. 2693–2698.
Mongin, P. and M. Cozic (2018). “Rethinking nudge: not one but three concepts”. In: Behavioural
Public Policy 2.1, pp. 107–124.
Monin, B. and D. T. Miller (2001). “Moral credentials and the expression of prejudice.” In: Journal
of personality and social psychology 81.1, p. 33.
Moskin, J. et al. (Apr. 30, 2019). “Your questions about food and climate change, answered”. In:
The New York Times.
Nestle, M. (2013). Food politics: How the food industry influences nutrition and health. Vol. 3. Univ
of California Press.
— (2015). Soda politics: Taking on big soda (and winning). Oxford University Press, USA.
Nickerson, D. W. and T. Rogers (2010). “Do you have a voting plan? Implementation intentions,
voter turnout, and organic plan making”. In: Psychological Science 21.2, pp. 194–199.
38

The citizen choice architect
Oettingen, G. and P. M. Gollwitzer (2004). “Goal setting and goal striving”. In: Emotion and
motivation. Perspectives on social psychology. Malden: Blackwell Publishing, pp. 165–183.
Otto, D. (2016). Digital Detox: Wie Sie entspannt mit Handy & Co. leben. Springer.
Poore, J. and T. Nemecek (2018). “Reducing food’s environmental impacts through producers and
consumers”. In: Science 360.6392, pp. 987–992.
Protzko, J. (2020). “Kids these days! Increasing delay of gratification ability over the past 50 years
in children”. In: Intelligence 80, p. 101451.
Rachlin, H. (2000). The science of self-control. Harvard University Press.
Rebonato, R. (2012). Taking liberties: A critical examination of libertarian paternalism. Palgrave
Macmillan.
Reijula, S. et al. (2018). “Nudge, boost or design? Limitations of behavioral policy under social
interaction”. In: The Journal of Behavioral Economics for Policy 2.1, pp. 99–105.
Roberto, C. A. et al. (2015). “Patchy progress on obesity prevention: emerging examples, entrenched
barriers, and new thinking”. In: The Lancet 385.9985, pp. 2400–2409.
Schelling, T. C. (1978). “Egonomics, or the art of self-management”. In: The American Economic
Review 68.2, pp. 290–294.
— (1984). “Self-command in practice, in policy, and in a theory of rational choice”. In: The
American Economic Review 74.2, pp. 1–11.
— (1985). “Enforcing rules on oneself”. In: JL Econ. & Org. 1, p. 357.
Schultz, P. W. et al. (2007). “The constructive, destructive, and reconstructive power of social
norms”. In: Psychological science 18.5, pp. 429–434.
Schwartz, L. M., S. Woloshin, and H. G. Welch (2009). “Using a drug facts box to communicate drug
benefits and harms: two randomized trials”. In: Annals of Internal Medicine 150.8, pp. 516–527.
Service, O. and R. Gallagher (2017). Think small: The surprisingly simple ways to reach big goals.
Michael O’Mara Books Limited London.
Sunstein, C. R. (2015). “The ethics of nudging”. In: Yale J. on Reg. 32, p. 413.
— (2016). “The council of psychological advisers”. In: Annual Review of Psychology 67, pp. 713–
737.
Sussman, A. B., E. Sharma, and A. L. Alter (2015). “Framing charitable donations as exceptional
expenses increases giving.” In: Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied 21.2, p. 130.
Swinburn, B. A. et al. (2011). “The global obesity pandemic: shaped by global drivers and local
environments”. In: The Lancet 378.9793, pp. 804–814.
Swinburn, B., G. Egger, and F. Raza (1999). “Dissecting obesogenic environments: the development
and application of a framework for identifying and prioritizing environmental interventions for
obesity”. In: Preventive medicine 29.6, pp. 563–570.
Thaler, R. H. (1999). “Mental accounting matters”. In: Journal of Behavioral decision making 12.3,
pp. 183–206.
Thaler, R. and C. Sunstein (2008). Nudge: improving decisions about health, wealth, and happiness.
New Haven ; London: Yale University Press.

39

The citizen choice architect

Thow, A. M., S. Downs, and S. Jan (2014). “A systematic review of the effectiveness of food taxes
and subsidies to improve diets: understanding the recent evidence”. In: Nutrition reviews 72.9,
pp. 551–565.
Torma, G., J. Aschemann-Witzel, and J. Thøgersen (2018). “I nudge myself: Exploring ‘selfnudging’strategies to drive sustainable consumption behaviour”. In: International journal of
consumer studies 42.1, pp. 141–154.
Twain, M. (1969). The adventures of Tom Sawyer; Tom Sawyer Abroad; Tom Sawyer, detective.
Nelson Doubleday.
Van Gestel, L. C., F. M. Kroese, and D. T. D. De Ridder (2018). “Nudging at the checkout counter–A
longitudinal study of the effect of a food repositioning nudge on healthy food choice”. In:
Psychology & health 33.6, pp. 800–809.
VanEpps, E. M., J. S. Downs, and G. Loewenstein (2016). “Advance ordering for healthier eating?
Field experiments on the relationship between the meal order–consumption time delay and meal
content”. In: Journal of Marketing Research 53.3, pp. 369–380.
Wansink, B., D. R. Just, and C. R. Payne (2009). “Mindless eating and healthy heuristics for the
irrational”. In: American Economic Review 99.2, pp. 165–69.
Wertenbroch, K. (1998). “Consumption self-control by rationing purchase quantities of virtue and
vice”. In: Marketing Science 17.4, pp. 317–337. (Visited on 04/24/2020).
White, M. (2013). The manipulation of choice: Ethics and libertarian paternalism. Springer.
Whitman, D. G. and M. J. Rizzo (2015). “The problematic welfare standards of behavioral
paternalism”. In: Review of Philosophy and Psychology 6.3, pp. 409–425.
WHO (2018). Obesity and overweight. Fact sheet. url: http : / / www. who . int / mediacentre /
%20factsheets/fs311/en/.
Wu, T. (2017). The attention merchants: The epic scramble to get inside our heads. Vintage.

40

