A new model for scientific publications: A Managing Editor’s
view
OÑATI SOCIO-LEGAL SERIES VOLUME 10, ISSUE 1 (2020), 220-245: THE POLICY OF CULTURAL RIGHTS:
STATE REGULATION, SOCIAL CONTESTATION AND CULTURAL DIVERSITY
DOI LINK: HTTPS://DOI.ORG/10.35295/OSLS.IISL/0000-0000-0000-1112
RECEIVED 09 DECEMBER 2019, ACCEPTED 07 FEBRUARY 2020

LEIRE KORTABARRIA, MANAGING EDITOR ∗
Abstract
In this essay, we will first set out the context in which Oñati Socio-Legal Series was
created. We will then aim to offer a non-exhaustive view of what an open access journal
is and what it implies for scholars and for publishers, and the, sometimes, stark
differences in each one’s view. From here, we will move on to draw a succinct
description of the implications of the mainstream journal publishing scheme, with a
stress on the commercial and economic implications. We will then narrow the focus and
zero in on the case of Oñati Socio-Legal Series. Drawing on the case of this journal, we will
argue why it is possible to expand a 100% free Open Access journal model, with no
charges whatsoever on the authors, and why it is necessary for the scientific community.

Key words
Open Access; Oñati Socio-Legal Series; journals; IISL

This paper is a development of a presentation titled Story of a (Unique) Journal: ‘Oñati Socio-Legal Series', given
by Leire Kortabarria at the Linking Generations for Global Justice International Law and Society Congress,
celebrated at the IISL, in Oñati (Spain), between 19 and 21 June 2019.
The author wishes to thank and acknowledge the work of the founders of the journal Oñati Socio-Legal
Series (Sol Picciotto, Carlos Lista, Anne Boigeol, Ulrike Schultz, Joxerramon Bengoetxea, Luigi Cominelli
and Cristina Ruiz López), the first Administrative Director of the IISL, José Antonio Goyenaga, who fully
supported the creation of OSLS; the members of the RCSL and its current President, Ulrike Schultz; the
scientific directors of the IISL that she has worked with (Vincenzo Ferrari and Noé Cornago); the previous
Publications officer and technical editor of OSLS from whom I took over my duties and learned the skills
needed for it (the aforementioned Cristina Ruiz); the chairs of the panel The Role of Academic Journals in the
Global Socio-Legal Field in the Linking Generations for Global Justice congress, Pierre Guibentif and Masayuki
Murayama; and all the authors, guest editors, and reviewers who have contributed to building,
strengthening and consolidating OSLS and eventually making it the success that it already is. Thank you for
your work, your enthusiasm, and your generosity, and for all that I have learned and continue to learn from
this experience.
∗ Publications officer of the Oñati International Institute for the Sociology of Law and Managing Editor of
Oñati Socio-Legal Series. Email address: l.kortabarria@iisj.es

220

A new model…

Resumen
En este artículo, primeramente dibujaremos el contexto en el que se creó Oñati
Socio-Legal Series. A continuación, nos proponemos ofrecer una visión general de lo que
constituye el acceso abierto y de sus implicaciones para académicos y editoriales, y las
diferencias, a veces enormes, entre ambas perspectivas. Después, describiremos
brevemente las implicaciones del escenario dominante en la publicación de revistas
científicas, poniendo el acento en las implicaciones comerciales y económicas.
Estrecharemos luego el ámbito y nos centraremos en el caso de Oñati Socio-Legal Series.
Sirviéndonos del ejemplo de esa revista, argumentaremos por qué es posible expandir
un modelo 100% de acceso abierto, sin imposición de cobros a los autores, y por qué un
modelo así es necesario para la comunidad científica.

Palabras clave
Acceso abierto; Oñati Socio-Legal Series; revistas científicas; IISJ

221

Kortabarria

Table of contents
1. Background: the birth of Oñati Socio-Legal Series at the
Oñati International Institute for the Sociology of Law ..................................................... 223
2. Toward a definition of Open Access: the market vs. the academia ............................ 225
3. Academic publishing as market ....................................................................................... 228
3.1. Some examples of publication fee policies ............................................................ 231
4. Oñati Socio-Legal Series’s model ........................................................................................ 233
4.1. 2018: A change of tide .............................................................................................. 236
4.2. Improvements ........................................................................................................... 237
4.3. Into the future............................................................................................................ 241
References ................................................................................................................................ 243

222

A new model…

1. Background: the birth of Oñati Socio-Legal Series at the Oñati International
Institute for the Sociology of Law
Oñati Socio-Legal Series (hereinafter, “OSLS” or “the journal”) is a law and society journal
founded in 2011 in the context of the Oñati International Institute for the Sociology of
Law (hereinafter, “IISL” or “the Institute”). The Institute had been founded in 1989 as
the most visible result of the joint venture between the Research Committee on Sociology
of Law (RCSL), a relevant branch of the International Sociological Association, and the
Basque Government. Since its birth, the IISL had been thriving, in its geographical
position in Oñati, an 11,000-inhabitant town in the Basque Country (Spain), as an
attracting center for sociological and legal research. Its yearly programme had two
pivotal series of activities: the International Master’s programme on sociology of law, for
which it counted on the involvement and teaching of members of the RCSL; and the
workshop programme, running roughly from April to July (sometimes September),
whereby groups of academics from all over the world held two-day meetings on any
selected topic.
All this activity meant that the Institute was brimming with new research and emerging
scholarship, which naturally required publishing venues. During its first long decade of
existence, the IISL was able to offer publication in a collection named Oñati Proceedings,
where the workshop papers were collected and published as-is. Later on, the Institute
signed contracts with two publishing houses: Dykinson (contract signed in 1999) and
Hart (contract signed in 2001), and a book series was started up by each publishing
house: Oñati Derecho y Sociedad (in Spanish, by Dykinson) and Oñati International Series
in Law and Society (in English, by Hart, later Bloomsbury-Hart).
Up until 2011, the Proceedings series and the two book series were the main publication
venues that the IISL offered to its workshop participants and to its visitors. The book
series overlapped and eventually took over from where the Proceedings series – and other
publishing ventures – had left off. The Proceedings series naturally ended in 1995. Other
publication series included the the Oñati Working Papers (1994 to 1995), the Oñati Papers
(1997 to 1999), and a previous but short-lived book series published with Ashgate,
spanning from 1996 to 2000 and producing seven titles.
After the two book series had been established and deep-seated as reliable, longstanding, and reputable publishing options for the Oñati visitors and scholars, still, a
scientific journal was perceived as needed, because the academia increasingly needed
the fast turnaround that only an on-line platform could provide.
The project was birthed by a small group of scholars who were all closely involved with
the IISL. The group included Sol Picciotto, who was at the time the Scientific Director of
the Oñati International Institute for the Sociology of Law; and other members of the
RCSL such as Carlos Lista, Anne Boigeol, Ulrike Schultz, Joxerramon Bengoetxea and
Luigi Cominelli; and, among the IISL staff, Cristina Ruiz López, who was the
Publications officer at the time, and José Antonio Goyenaga, the Administrative Director
of the IISL, who gave full support. These scholars, technical experts, and administrators,
were endeavoring to create a practical publishing tool to serve the needs of the groups
of scholars that chose the IISL for their scientific workshops, which ran yearly at the IISL

223

Kortabarria

from March or April to July. 1 They outlined the basic traits of the publication early on: it
had to be Open Access, and it would use the repository SSRN to spread the papers
worldwide; the papers would stem from the workshops and bilkuras; while English,
Spanish, Basque, and French would be its official languages, it would accept
contributions in any language; and the review method would be double blind peer
review. The agreement on those basic identity signs was tight, and this opened the path
to a quick launching of the new publication.
At the time, the pressure already existed on academics to publish their papers and
divulge knowledge and research findings, and usually had either of two choices: to
prepare and submit a book proposal to a publishing house – either Hart, the house that
to this day still collaborates with the Institute to produce the Institute’s own book series,
or a publishing house chosen and negotiated with by the workshop organizers on their
own accord –, or to publish their papers in a journal of their choice. In 2011, as is still
true today, most journals had a pay-per-read policy, in the form of reader subscriptions
(usually paid for by the libraries) and/or relied on what is now called Article Publishing
Costs (APC), a system that has gradually gained popularity and has been established as
the default, whereby the author, or the group of authors collectively, pay some fees in
order to have their papers published. As the publishing scheme has gradually become
one of concentration of journals and titles in very few, very large publishers with a
corporative and, therefore, profit-driven rather than knowledge- or academic-driven
logic, the prices that the authors have to pay have stabilized –on the top end of the scale.
This reality, albeit not so starkly, was already of application in 2011.
The “publish-or-perish” logic was in full force back then, too, so academics were left
with a non-choice choice: to publish in a closed online environment – such as their
institutional repository, which may or may not agreeably host their academic work
produced under the auspice of another institution – or in a universal, well-established
and very reputable, but increasingly onerous or even, for some, prohibitive journal. To
publish in a conventional book format was another option, but one which was already
showing some signs of exhaustion and obsolescence –for one, even if electronic books
were already being offered, single chapters were not always offered as a separate, and
individually citable item
This team’s bet was on completely free dissemination of knowledge, and this aim
materialized in the journal Oñati Socio-Legal Series. 2 With this journal, academics had a
safe, reliable, and accessible platform that served its purpose: to simply offer a free venue
to have the articulated knowledge out there and to help it reach its audience. In
compliance with its all-inclusive spirit, at the time OSLS implemented a personalized
version of the usual guidelines for scientific journals – eg it offered more options for
reviewers to accept or recommend revisions for the reviewed paper rather than decline
its publication, because the aim was to offer an opportunity to all scholars, especially to
1 The workshops are a scientific event where anywhere from five to fifteen scholarly papers on socio-legal
topics were presented, discussed, and enriched with contributions, every week, which easily resulted in a
minimum of 50 presentations or papers per year.
2 The model was not completely new within the IISL, as it had been preceded by a journal titled Sortuz
(“creating”, in Basque), specifically aimed at nascent scholars, preferably the alumni/alumnae from the
IISL’s International Master’s Programme for the Sociology of Law. Oñati Socio-Legal Series originated with a
much broader scope than Sortuz.

224

A new model…

those who did not have a straightforward access to other publication venues. Though it
must be noted that the more lenient policy did not apply to review methods, as doubleblind peer review has always been OSLS’s review system.
The journal was already set up to become a rarity in the already well-populated scenario
of academic journals, even in the relatively reduced field of law and society: a journal
that was a strong proponent of the fully open access model, one whose aim was to
provide universal access both to authors/editors and to readers/users to knowledge. The
knowledge articulated and delivered through OSLS would be mostly written in English,
the lingua franca of science, including social science and law – and this, despite the
geographical location of the IISL (Spain) and the fact that it was located on the perimeter
of the English-speaking sphere of influence, both physically and metaphorically. 3
With all of its peculiarities, OSLS was already a Gold Open Access journal, according to
most of the categorizations in use today (and it went even further, as we will soon
explain): a journal where the accepted, proofread, copy-edited article was freely
accessible from the moment it is put online (Burtle 2019).
Furthermore, OSLS made a conscious effort to offer authors and the general public a
freshly edited version of the paper, by means of its association with the repository Social
Science Research Network (SSRN), through a paid membership that the IISL signed up
for despite its already modest financial resources. The functioning was such that, as soon
as an accepted paper was worked through by the technical editor of OSLS together with
the author, appropriately copy-edited to fit OSLS’s style guidelines, and proofread for
minor errors, was put on SSRN, making it fully citable and ready to be shared from the
get-go. OSLS actively publicized the paper and encouraged its sharing through posting
information about it, and its link, on the Institute’s social media. To date, the IISL’s user
profile on SSRN is still up, though it ceased to be updated in April 2019.

2. Toward a definition of Open Access: the market vs. the academia
Before moving any further, let’s take a look at the vast field of Open Access, what it
means for academics, what it means for big publishers, and where OSLS positions itself
in it.
There have been many attempts to reach a universal and long-standing definition of
Open Access. A comprehensive summary can be found in Suber (n.d.). He makes a point
that open Access is “compatible with copyright, peer review, revenue (even profit),
print, preservation, prestige, quality, career-advancement, indexing, and other features
and supportive services associated with conventional scholarly literature” (Suber n.d.)
Several reputed databases and sources rely on the definition given by the Budapest Open
Access Initiative:
By ‘open access’ to this literature, we mean its free availability on the public internet,
permitting any users to read, download, copy, distribute, print, search, or link to the
full texts of these articles, crawl them for indexing, pass them as data to software, or use
them for any other lawful purpose, without financial, legal, or technical barriers other
It is located in the Basque Country, north of Spain, near the border with France –its academic founders had
been scholars from the Research Committee on Sociology of Law of the International Sociological
Association, who had been mostly of French, Italian, and Spanish origins and traditions.

3

225

Kortabarria

than those inseparable from gaining access to the internet itself. The only constraint on
reproduction and distribution, and the only role for copyright in this domain, should
be to give authors control over the integrity of their work and the right to be properly
acknowledged and cited.

The definition says nothing about the accessibility of entry, ie the firewall for the author
to have his or her work published in open access.
However, there are also different kinds of Open Access. The types or “flavors” most
used and talked about are Green OA, Gold OA, and hybrid. Again, there is not one hardand-fast rule to know what each label comprises. The following definition provided by
scholar Daniel Mietchen is quite appropriate and descriptive of what real practice is:
Gold stands for publications available directly from the publisher, whereas Green
means that a version is available somewhere else (e.g. on an author's institutional
website, or in a repository), a practice commonly referred to as "self-archiving". Note
that neither of these two terms imply anything about reuse rights or about who
shoulders the costs of publishing. (Mietchen 2015)

Then there is Diamond Open Access, which is “a form of Gold Open Access in which
there is no author fee (APC)”. So Diamond OA includes all of the Gold OA traits, plus
the no-cost advantage (Open Access Academy n.d.)
The biggest contrast between definitions comes from whether it is the academic or the
Open Access supporters, or the publishers that propositions them. As Open Access
Glossary contributor Jon Tennant (2015) says, the terms and types of Open Access “have
been largely ‘hi-jacked’ by publishers to mean different things [from what the open
access community means] (...). Gold OA is often equated with an 'author pays' model of
access, whereby an article-processing charge (APC) is levied to conform to the definition
provided by [Mietchen]. Green OA, on the other hand, is often used to describe an item
in a repository subject to an embargo period” (Tennant 2015).
To simplify matters, we could say that, if these terms are defined by the Open Access
movement, a large opinion current within the academe, or other critics, Open Access is
defined by how the final product reaches the general public and what the conditions are
to be granted access. Whereas if they are defined by the publishing groups, then Open
Access is part of a definition of a product offered to the academics, ie one option that
they have to have their work published, and which comes with a standard set of
conditions, one of which is almost always an APC. In fact, part of the aims of the Open
Access movement have gradually shifted: initially, this movement sought free access of
contents, and now, on a second stage of the movement, the main concern is about the
permissions on these contents (López Borrull, quoted in Subarroca 2019), ie. Data
mining, attribution, republication or reproduction, etc. This is furthered by the fact that
the most relevant indexing platforms put a primus on interconnection of data and
metadata, and on the crescent notion of influence of a scientist, measured by number
and impact of publications, number of citations made and received, reviews done,
editorial work done, and so on. So, permission to access and to use the data becomes
essential, and this is one of the key factors for the rise of open access publications.

226

A new model…

The fact that the “Diamond” standard rarely appears on classifications gives us an idea
of how depopulated it actually is 4 (or, arguably, how little interest or trust it entices from
the academe). And the main reason seems to be the fact that the logic of zero cost to the
publisher vastly dominates the publishing scheme nowadays – so much so that, in fact,
Open Access has come to imply a fee that authors have to pay for publishing, because
the content always comes at a cost for the publisher that, since it goes unpaid for at the
receiving end, has to be covered, then, by the provider of the content –ie the author. This
is a such widely accepted equation that the mainstream open access movement does not
posit free publication and free access together in the same journal, but rather abolition
of the double payment system where journals get paid both for accepting publications
and for distributing them to the reader.
As hinted right above, however, Diamond Open Access journals seem to still not be
considered reliable enough by many. Part of the debate is reflected in a 2017 article by
Robert Harington on The Scholarly Kitchen, where he argues that “[t]here is a big barrier
to entry for a Diamond OA journal program in that it requires a large investment,
perhaps greater than investments needed for starting a journal program from scratch”.
In a comment to the cited article, another contributor, David Crotty, points out that “the
majority of journals in DOAJ are Diamond, but they produce a minority of OA articles
(...), because [w]hen one is relying on volunteer labor, as Diamond OA journals often do,
there are limits to the quantities one can process”. David Mainwaring, of Cambridge
University Press, correctly noted, in a 2016 paper, that “there exists at present a disparity
between the quantity of OA political science publications and their impact on the field”,
something that was true of law and society and other social science fields, too. He added
that the 2013 JCR for political science and international relations included only three
English-language OA journals ranked in DOAJ. Furthermore, he noted a lack of “highprofile, scholar-driven projects” in the field (Mainwaring 2016).
As a result of all of this, perhaps, Open Access is now, by default, a paid-for model, and
this seems to be a standard that is universally accepted both by publishers and by
academics (Boucherie 2018).
It is interesting to note that the technical concepts for accessibility of the work, ie Open
Access versus Subscription-based, go attached, in the minds of academics, with a whole
host of notions about costs, ease or difficulty of access, work processes and routines,
technical requirements, and others (Esrafilzadeh, quoted in Sakellaropoulou 2019). It
also seems safe to say that part of those associations was that which equaled
subscription-based journals with – up to now – higher reputation, but this is beginning
to change. Another very strong assumption is that of Open Access with APCs, and this
produces requests to the publishing groups to “more transparency around costs”
(Esrafilzadeh, quoted in Sakellaropoulou 2019).

4 In many contexts, “Diamond OA” is not even part of the taxonomy. E.g., Web of Science has the following
categorization of indexed Open Access Journals and items: DOAJ Gold (journals on the Directory of Open
Access list), Other Gold (hybrid items and journals not on DOAJ), Bronze (traditional journal, but free-toread at publisher's discretion), Green Published (final published version, deposited in a repository) and
Green Accepted (in a repository, accepted for publication, peer reviewed, but not yet published).

227

Kortabarria

So we find now that it is the publishers, not the academia, the part that has successfully
managed to expand their definition of what open access constitutes, so much that it has
been largely internalized by the academia. 5 To sum up the logic on which publishers
operate, they almost always charge authors for publishing in open access, whereas
publishing in subscription-based journals can be free of costs, as it’s the receiving end
that is paying for the costs of producing the contents as a readable and usable product.
This is true, too, when the item published is a book. For example, Palgrave provides the
following list of prices:
TABLE 1
Type
Monograph / Edited
collection
Pivot (mid-length format)
Chapter

Pounds
11,000

Dollars
17,000

7,500
1,600

12,000
2,600

Table 1. Cost of publication with Palgrave.
(Prepared by author with data from Palgrave.com.)

In this case, the open Access publication charge (called “Book processing charge” or
“Chapter processing charge”) covers “all the costs of commissioning, copyediting and
proofreading, production, dissemination and promotion” of the authors’ work,
“including online hosting and indexing”.
Oñati Socio-Legal Series, as we will see, constitutes a prime example of the Diamond
standard, therefore (a) defying the mainstream logic on which publishers, authors, and
libraries operate, and, more importantly, (b) proving that it is not only feasible to bet on
its model of free, open access publication, but that it can constitute an example of
academic success.

3. Academic publishing as market
We have explained why the Diamond standard is rarely claimed and, even, a marginal
label. It is because it exists in contrast to the all-permeating logic and offer from the
publishing market, which, according to many, is increasingly distanced from the needs,
wishes, aspirations, and basic foundations of academic writing; and, perhaps ironically,
because it seems to be distrusted as a solid venue for publication by the same group that
it aims to contribute to.
Actually, the Diamond standard is not so rare. In October 2019, the DOAJ website hosts
13,892 journals, most of which (10,084) do not have APCs (this can be checked by
running a search on the site). There are a variety of Creative Commons licenses
represented, with most (3,689) claiming a CC-BY license, which grants universal
authorization to copy, distribute, display and perform the work and make derivative
works and remixes based on it only if they give the author or licensor the credits
(attribution) in the manner specified by these. This would mean that these journals are
all Diamond OA. OSLS has the CC-BY-NC-ND license, which gives full permission to
Even in formal statements that reflect the many criticisms from a large part of the academic community to
today’s domineering publishing scheme, the wording reveals this internalization. See the San Francisco
Declaration on Research Assessment, recommendation #9, available from: https://sfdora.org/read/
5

228

A new model…

all the actions listed in the CC-BY license, while at the same time protecting the author
from a third party gaining any benefit from illegitimate use of his or her work.
This would account for a largely populated Diamond OA modality; however, it must be
noted that, according to DOAJ itself, fewer than half of the 12,582 journals that were
listed in DOAJ in January 2019 were included in either Scopus or Web of Science (DOAJ
2019), which does not necessarily mean that they are of lesser quality than the ones that
are included, but it does make them less attractive, at first glance, to any scholar wishing
to publish his or her work.
Publishing the results or the proceedings of a scientific research is reported to have
originated back in 1665, and has always been associated with increased prestige, creating
“a sense of competition among scientists to be the first to publish a new scientific finding
(…). If the journal is a prominent one, publication endows the author with an extra
measure of prestige” (National Research Council 2003, ch. 2). It is worth noting that the
inception of scientific publishing and the increasing competition brought along the need
for Journals to position themselves as high as possible in a quality and reputability
ranking.
Soon afterwards came another consequence: the number, frequency and quality (today
measured by impact factors, and number and origin of citations, among others) of any
given author’s publications became a relevant criterion to measure his or her quality as
a scientist or researcher and, consequently, as a member of an organization, a University
or any other institution, with the consequential effect on job prospects, ability to escalate
in the academic hierarchy, ability to land fruitful collaborations, and, ultimately,
probability of financial and commercial prospects (Siegel, cited in NRC 2003, chap. 2).
This scheme has continued and even strengthened until today, and publishing is, more
than ever, an essential marker to the survival and thriving of any academic’s career,
because “publishing (…) is a requirement – a key performance indicator – at many
universities” and publishing rates “can play a role in determining who will be granted
tenure” (Scribendi n.d.).
What it all comes down to is simply that academics need to publish, not only for
reputation, but because it can derive very practical consequences for them and their
career prospects. This need (demand) from a large group of people was ultimately the
age-old call for a commercial answer, therefore developing into a large niche of academic
publishing within the publishing market, which provides, as market does, an answer to
an existing demand with the aim of a financial counterpart.
But academics can’t always choose where they send their articles, so they are likely to
“supply the articles without monetary reward” (The Guardian 2019).
The Guardian, in its 4 March editorial, decries the “disastrous capitalism” that academic
publishing has come to reflect, and highlights the contrast between the scholar who
gains no benefit from publishing his or her paper (or often even has to make payments)
and the scientific publisher, who “routinely report profit margins approaching 40% on
their operations”. The Guardian goes on to denounce that Elsevier, one of the major
academic publishing conglomerates today, agglutinating products such as Scopus or
Mendeley, claiming to publish “one way or another 25% of the scientific papers” in the
world, “made profits of more than £900m [in 2018], while UK universities alone spent

229

Kortabarria

more than £210m in 2016 to enable researchers to access their own publicly funded research;
both figures seem to rise inexorably despite increasingly desperate efforts to change
them” (The Guardian 2019; emphasis my own).
Concerns have arisen from members of academia themselves, denouncing that academic
journals and conferences “prey on” the academics’ necessity, “draining money and
thousands of hours of free labor” from the academics (Price 2018).
And, reasonably, what corporation would be remiss to get ahold of the scientific
publishing market? This is a market that apparently functions in a very similar way to
other kinds of publishing – conventional printed books, news outreaches, etc. – but is
actually very different, and with unthinkable profit potential. The scenario has quickly
mimetized with the general publishing market logic, reproducing the concentration
patterns, so much that, according to a research work carried out by Larivière and
colleagues (2015), an analysis of the – then – 45 million documents indexed in the Web
of Science reveals that Reed-Elsevier, Springer, Wiley-Blackwell, Taylor & Francis and
Sage published more than half of all academic papers in the peer-reviewed literature in
2013. Joshua Krisch (2015), an author who refers to this very research work, states that
“[i]n 1973, the five largest publishing houses controlled only 20 percent of scientific
papers published. By 2006, that number had already risen to 50 percent. That means
about half of the science that comes out this year will be behind a paywall, where only
universities and individuals who pay for the science will get to see it”.
Stephen Buranyi manages to sum it up in a couple of paragraphs – one could replace
“Elsevier” with “Thompson Reuters” and – in these days – very few other names, and it
would still be exactly the same:
Elsevier’s business model seemed a truly puzzling thing. In order to make money, a
traditional publisher – say, a magazine – first has to cover a multitude of costs: it pays
writers for the articles; it employs editors to commission, shape and check the articles;
and it pays to distribute the finished product to subscribers and retailers. All of this is
expensive, and successful magazines typically make profits of around 12-15%.
The way to make money from a scientific article looks very similar, except that scientific
publishers manage to duck most of the actual costs. Scientists create work under their
own direction – funded largely by governments – and give it to publishers for free 6; the
publisher pays scientific editors who judge whether the work is worth publishing and
check its grammar, but the bulk of the editorial burden – checking the scientific validity
and evaluating the experiments, a process known as peer review – is done by working
scientists on a volunteer basis. (Buranyi 2017)

The knack is in the final part, ie the one that explains where the profit comes from for
Elsevier or any other big publisher:
The publishers then sell the product back to government-funded institutional and
university libraries, to be read by scientists – who, in a collective sense, created the
product in the first place. (Buranyi 2017; bold in original text)

In fact, it is even worse than that: authors more often than not have to pay bulky fees – frequently footed
by public or private institutions, governments, universities, etc., but not always – in exchange of having their
original work published.

6

230

A new model…

Elsevier and other big publishing corporations derive their huge profit, then, indirectly,
from the taxpayers, who provide the public financing without having a say on what it
should be spent on. Furthermore, most of the journals with a pay-per-publishing policy
also enforce a pay-per-access policy, whereby the public has to pay in order to access the
content, which remains secured by a paywall, so the general public is often unaware of
such contents, let alone able to access them.
Universities and public libraries then pay considerable amounts in the form of
subscriptions, to access a content that they have already paid for producing, to some
capacity or other –adding much more value to it, at any rate, than the publishing house,
which, according to some academics, such as Samuel Gershman, a postdoctoral research
fellow in the Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, adds “very little value”, because the publishing house “does not add text
and references to research papers – academics do” (Gershman 2014).
Others have already claimed for the need of a change of the values at play. Academic Icy
Lee, in a paper published in the journal Language Teaching, set out to “challenge the
assumption that knowledge contribution should be solely or mainly gauged on the basis
of the venue of publications” (Lee 2014). Ironically, this claim was made in a paper
whose content was protected by a paywall and was part of the Cambridge University
core journal collection.
Most publishing groups, to some extent or another, participate in having generated or
maintaining this statu quo. This has prompted boycott movements, such as The Cost of
Knowledge, started in 2012 and alive to this day; as well as counter-movements both
from publishers and from academia. What this debate shows is that there is at least a
considerable group of academics and institutions, mostly university libraries, that are
very critical of the mainstream publishing scenario, and that many wish for, or are
actively working toward an alternative model.

3.1. Some examples of publication fee policies
Wiley
TABLE 2
Journal title
Review of European, Comparative &
International Environmental Law
European Law Journal 7
Journal of Law and Society
Law & Policy
Law & Society Review

Full APC (Article Publication Charge) (in
Euros)
2,083
2,500
2,083
2,100
2,100

Table 2. Wiley APCs.
(Data from 10 January 2019.)

On 31 January 2020, the Editorial and Advisory Boards of the European Law Journal resigned en masse from
their positions, and they signed a letter where they explained the reasons for this decision, in what seems to
be another expression of the increasing clash between publishers’ and academics’ priorities (Mendes and
Schepel 2020).

7

231

Kortabarria

Remarkably, Wiley has an APC applicable even for OnlineOpen, which is an option to
make a paper immediately freely available to anyone, including non-subscribers.
It is of note that Oñati Socio-Legal Series offers an equal option, First Online, whose charge
for the authors is zero.
Oxford academic journals
Oxford also applies charges for an open Access publication, which they call Oxford Open
Initiative. The charges vary from £1000 to £2500.
Cambridge academic journals
Interestingly, Cambridge warns potentially interested authors that “many gold [Open
Access] Journals charge no fees, though it is notable that the larger Gold OA Journals
(…) typically do impose an Article Processing Charge (APC)”. In the case of Cambridge,
in early 2019 they were charging £1695 / $2700 for OA in hybrid journals and fees ranging
between no charge and £600 / $900 in the full OA journals.
CUP’s website offered a comparison between charges applied by several major
publishers, which are summed up in the following table:
TABLE 3
Publisher
Cambridge University Press
Elsevier
PLOS
SAGE
Springer
Taylor & Francis
Wiley

APC range
$600-4,500
$100-5,000
$1,600-3,000
$400-3,000
$3,000
$500-2,950
$1,300-5,200

Table 3. APC charges applied by several publishers.

Of the listed publishers and APC ranges, Cambridge’s, Elsevier’s, Sage’s, Springer’s, and
Wiley’s were hybrid Journals, and PLOS’s and Taylor & Francis’s were open Access
Journals, even though the ranges were all very similar.
Brill
Brill has both open Access and subscription journals. Within subscription Journals, there
is the option to publish in open Access, and APCs are 1,950 euros. Brill states that for
open Access publication in open Access Journals, “sometimes fees also apply”.
Springer
Springer has Journals that cover 24 fields of knowledge. Law and social sciences are
represented, too, though not largely.
In their website, Springer reminds that “publishing is not without cost” and that APCs
are “a way to recoup those costs”. Springer applies an APC in open Access Journals, and
none in subscription-based Journals, as the costs are covered by the subscriptions. An
overview of their open Access journal portfolio and the fees listed reveals fee brackets
that are very similar to those we have just seen in other big publishers (Springer Nature
2019).

232

A new model…

Elsevier
Elsevier also applies an upfront payment, or APC, for open Access publication. Prices
are set on a per journal basis, ranging from $150 to $6,000 excluding tax.
Now, what does an APC cover?
As well as permanent, immediate, and worldwide access to the full article text, the APC
usually covers:
-

Editorial work: peer review, administrative support, commissioning content,
journal development.

-

Technical infrastructure and innovation: development, maintenance and
operation of online journal system and websites.

-

Production of articles: formatting and mark-up of articles and inclusion in
indexing services

-

Marketing of journal and content: making sure readers and authors know
about the work published in the title

-

Customer service: responding to authors and readers

This description is from Elsevier’s pricing policy webpage, but the same or extremely
similar concepts apply for all or most big publishers. The core concept here is that
publication means work, which means a cost, which is then covered by extracting an
APC from the author (or the institution behind him or her).

4. Oñati Socio-Legal Series’s model
Oñati Socio-Legal Series works on a completely different logic:
-

It is 100% non-profit, deriving no financial benefit nor imposing fees to either
of the parties: public and authors. In fact, it is a product by the Oñati
International Institute for the Sociology of Law Foundation, which is, by
definition and as stated in its Statutes (Gobierno Vasco n.d.), a not-for-profit
institution, which reverts any revenue it may ever have from any channel to
sustaining its mission.

-

Adds value to the product, by offering rigorous guidelines and policies,
among which some non-essential policies are flexible (within reason) in order
to accommodate legit and reasonable preferences by authors and editors, for
example, when it comes to language(s) used in the papers, extension, or
submission deadline; a very timely review and edition process; a First Online
publication service; an orderly and standardized layout of spelling, grammar,
and referencing ; 8 a very readable layout and appearance; 9 and a Digital
Object Identifier (DOI), which is usually not in the hand of individual authors

8 In 2018, OSLS launched its own Grammar and Spelling guidelines, and it has its own referencing style,
based on APA / Harvard style but stretching it just enough to ensure that authors from both Sociology and
Law – its two main areas of interest, which usually overlap but to different degrees – feel comfortable with
it. The Grammar and Spelling guidelines consist on a basic and easy-to-follow rules that can be negotiated
with individual authors in a justified way, within reason.
9 These underwent renewal and update, and OSLS came out with a fresh layout and website design in
February 2020.

233

Kortabarria

or editors to supply and thus is not something that any individual selfpublishing author could add to a paper.
Oñati Socio-Legal Series gets its modest financing from the same general source that the
IISL gets it from: the yearly budget that the Basque Government, one of the founders of
the IISL, allocates for it. The budget is always dependent on the ability and criteria of the
Basque Government rather than on the objective needs, projects, and plans that the
Institute may present or express.
It is not that OSLS is cost-free and, much less so, that it puts out a sub-par product. The
opposite is true: OSLS is a high-quality journal despite its exceedingly modest budget and
its complete lack of APCs. The reality is that, as is true of any existing entity, OSLS is a
product of its circumstances.
OSLS model is not cost-free; in fact, as long as it is financed by a government, it is
supported by the taxpayers, who then have to foot all of the management and
publication costs. And, as far as this is so, it is only obvious that it will never have the
financing that other journals have, because no public financing system can afford a
journal that imposes a 1,000-euro fee for each article that it publishes.
OSLS does not have, and has never had a direct, nominal financing source, because its
budget is part of the Institute’s general budget, whose funds are decided upon, and
provided by the Labour and Justice branch of the Basque Government, who is attentive
to the Institute’s needs, but ultimately has full competence on administration of
resources. It is the Institute that has to adapt to the financing that it gets every year.
OSLS’s particular needs are just one more item on a list, and the financing that the
Institute gets is undivided. Along with Europe’s financial crisis starting in 2008, the
financing that the Institute has been nurturing off has diminished, so that it is now
roughly half of what it used to be in the pre-crisis years. Likewise, the Institute has its
own management, and the Publications section –just like the rest of the departments and
sections that the Institute is compartmentalized into– does not get a steady or nominal
budget for its need.
As of 2019 – and, in fact, since the very beginnings of the Institute –, the Publications
service is managed and offered by one staff member only, who, together with
supervision and policy enforcement from the Scientific Director of the IISL and his/her
Chief Editor team and of OSLS’s Editorial Board, carries out all the daily and effective
tasks to ensure the ongoing existence of OSLS, and is endowed with a reasonable and
bona fide freedom of decision to ensure professional and appropriate governance of the
journal, always having the best interest of the journal and of the Institute as compass.
The gross amount of any given financing quota is not affected by that specific year’s (or
semester’s) workload, changes in production, or any other circumstance of the existence
and management of OSLS. Nor is it by the fact that OSLS’s technical editor has other
duties too, in her quality of IISL’s publication officer.
We can go as far as to say that OSLS does not have a financing of its own. Its needs are
covered as part of a larger project such as the IISL.
So we see that OSLS has been running since 2011 as a professional journal, managed by
employees of the Oñati IISL, and it has never been an amateur journal done in someone’s
free time. It is quite simply a journal that, because of the particular nature and

234

A new model…

circumstances of the academic body that publishes it –the Oñati IISL–, has been severely
limited to adopt any APCs, and is, as a result, offering a product and a service that are
severely underrated and whereby authors and editors get many benefits for a very
modest price, if at all.
Such a 100% free journal would naturally appeal to many scholars as an appropriate
venue for publication of their papers. While it is true that Oñati Socio-Legal Series was not
competing – nor intending to compete – in the top league of socio-legal journals, its
publications were still perfectly valid and respectable – it was and has always been a
serious journal created by a reputed scientific institution backed by a well-known body
such as the RCSL – and they constituted official journal publications, therefore apt to be
included in any academic résumé or annual activity report.
And appeal it did, as shown by its frantic publishing activity from years 2012 to 2018,
which can be traced with a look at the Archived issues from those years, always on
display on the official site (http://opo.iisj.net/index.php/osls/issue/archive). Being
largely dependent on the Institute’s workshop activity, Oñati Socio-Legal Series did not
have a stable periodicity or a given number of paper output among its priorities – the
priority was always to provide a means of publication for the Institute’s users and
stakeholders, and so its output largely varied from one year to another, with five issues
one year, seven another, then six, and sometimes even nine. Within each issue, the
number of papers was also unrestricted: anywhere from five papers on, plus an
introduction, was acceptable as long as the papers reached a minimum threshold of
quality. Some years, publication frequency was extremely irregular, with as many as
three or four issues being published in December.
This unique panorama was the direct result of OSLS’s founding vocation and
willingness to provide to all that maintained a minimum level of quality in their writing,
in the name of worldwide dissemination of knowledge and supplying the academia and
the general public with free and easy access to that knowledge, enhancing scientific
debate, and encouraging continuous improvement of academics and of science itself. As
far as these points go, OSLS constituted a story of success, as it was fulfilling the aims
that it had been set up against.
Not only that, but it also came to prove that one of the most alarming phenomena in
academic publishing nowadays, that of the so-called predatory journals (Evans 2019),
could be fought against – simply by leaving the financial profit factor out of the equation.
This was the silver lining. The cloud being this: at more than one single point, OSLS was
on the verge of dying of success.
The reason for this is not only what was apparent – a unique journal that would
nevertheless resist standardization according to any scientific guideline in use, and
therefore be always a maverick by all conventional (and conventionally acceptable)
publishing options, norms, or hierarchizations, constituting itself an oddity that nobody
could ascertain for how long would survive – but a result of its inner logic and working:
with close to 100 papers to manage, find reviewers for, work on back and forth with the
authors, lay out, and so on, the shrinking financing and resources that it still survived
on, and the one technical manager who had other responsibilities aside from

235

Kortabarria

management of Oñati Socio-Legal Series and was therefore never a full-time journal
manager, it would seem reasonable to foretell a rapid folding of the whole project.
The revulsive that Oñati Socio-Legal Series needed was one of reputation. Because Oñati
Socio-Legal Series, 100% free and open access as it was, as part of a non-profit
organization, still needed the fuel of publishable, quality papers in order to exist. And
these papers could not always be relied on to come from the IISL workshops, because
not all that material was of publishable quality – many papers were on an initial stage,
and many authors, for different reasons, were not able or willing at the moment to keep
working on them; other papers were unsuitable for publication for other reasons.
There was an inside debate, among the founding fathers and mothers of OSLS and
leaders of the Institute, whether OSLS should be open to contributions and submissions
from any and all academics around the world who wrote about law and society; this
option was favored by some but not by others, and although the option was in fact
opened, publications by academics independent from the IISL and its activity always
remained marginal – these articles were, in fact, grouped up in a single issue per year,
typically titled “Investigations” and launched in December. So OSLS could not
realistically compete with other journals – but, in reality, it still did, because one paper
published somewhere else was one paper not published in OSLS, and vice versa.

4.1. 2018: A change of tide
By force of its popularity in the small world of academics in the law and society field,
and out of the dedication of the team behind it –leaders as well as technicians–, OSLS
had managed to outgrow its modest original berth and target public, and garner
attention from scholars in all stages of their career, all over the world.
Year by year, the amount of submissions from scholars independent or never involved
with the IISL went up – since 2012, the yearly miscellaneous issue of OSLS devoted to
grouping all individual / independent submissions, together with above average theses
penned by IISL master’s alums, and book reviews had gone from six items in 2012 and
2013 to around ten in 2015 to 2017, to slightly decrease to six in 2018, however this is not
really indicative of a fall in the number of submissions, but rather of a conscious raise on
the bar of minimum quality implemented around that date by OSLS, as we will analyze
later. At the time that this was first drafted (July 2019), OSLS had published five
individual papers, had declined 9, and was managing 10 more, all of which were in
review. By October 2019, these amounts had risen to 11, 11, and 10.
As the journal scenario continued to transform, and become even more resembling of
what it is today, and the risk of death by success became more and more likely between
2015 and 2018 for OSLS for the reasons explained before, the debate about the present,
future, and essence of OSLS continued. As previous leaders and directors of the Institute
left and were replaced by others, new opinions and visions started to emerge. As
Vincenzo Ferrari (2016-2018) and then Noé Cornago (2018-2020) took over Scientific
Direction of the Institute – and therefore the main editorial duty for Oñati Socio-Legal
Series by becoming the leader of the Chief Editors team –, changes began to be enforced.
One hallmark of this was a meeting held by Vincenzo Ferrari, Sol Picciotto, and Leire
Kortabarria, in which several initial changes were agreed upon and reflected in a
rewriting of the journal policies.

236

A new model…

Especially from 2018 on, the following were only the most relevant of many
improvements that were approved and gradually implemented on Oñati Socio-Legal
Series:
-

Deep revision, update and completion of the journal policies (under “About
the Journal”, http://opo.iisj.net/index.php/osls/about ), and inclusion of a
specific
section
about
“Ethics
and
Responsibility”,
(http://opo.iisj.net/index.php/osls/about/editorialPolicies#custom1 )

-

Update of the Editorial Board, to reflect the diversity of persons and areas of
expertise that Oñati Socio-Legal Series thrives on and nurtures

-

Launching of OSLS’s own Grammar and Spelling guidelines, along with
restatement of its preferred referencing and citation style

-

Clear statement of the noncommittal spirit of OSLS –it is no longer a mere
vehicle for straightforward publication of workshop papers, but a general
law and society journal that is open and welcoming to all researchers and
authors in the area, from all over the world, and from any other institutions.
The yardstick for publication in OSLS would no longer be the academic origin
of papers (ie IISL workshops or, to a much lesser degree, IISL master
graduates’ tesinas) but their quality –as would be expected from any scientific
journal.

The previous point in particular, which was staged in the mentioned internal meeting
celebrated in mid-2018 and later decisively developed under the direction of Noé
Cornago, has marked OSLS’s own moment of truth, its will to move on up against all
odds and dare to step into the stellar league, or stay in its comfort zone, where it was
well-known and respected but where it had already hit its own ceiling. It signified the
overcoming of the initial focus, opening the journal to an all-encompassing, universal
level, and for the first time acknowledging the journal’s and the Institute’s ambition,
aspirations, and aims for scientific excellence in all its work areas.

4.2. Improvements
Other more gradual improvements came along too and were a by-product of several
factors, including the impetus that this top-level decision had brought, as well as the zeal
of the team behind OSLS and the motivation garnered at the sight of the level of
acceptance, appreciation and potential that lay behind OSLS.
Because the reality was, after all, that Oñati Socio-Legal Series, unbeknownst to most,
already had one foot in the major league of journals:
(1) For one, OSLS had been increasingly cited and referenced in other articles by
scholars all over the world – tracing these citations was never easy for the team,
because OSLS was not a part of the major indexation platforms or of the big
publishers’ portfolios, and did not have easy access to referencing trackers.
However, far and between, notices of those references and cites came to the

237

Kortabarria

knowledge of the team behind OSLS, and were properly distributed and
reported on the Institute’s social media networks. 10
This success is verifiable with data collected by Google Scholar, which, by June 2019, had
the following record for Oñati Socio-Legal Series:
TABLE 4
Publication

H5-index

H5-median

Law & Society Review

23

31

Journ. Emp. Law St.

22

35

Law & Social Inquiry

20

28

Ann. Rev. of Law & Soc. Sci.

17

27

Social & Legal Studies

16

24

Journal of Law and Society

12

17

Oñati Socio-Legal Series

9

16

Journ. of Leg. Pl. and Unofficial Law

8

12

Déviance et Société

8

9

Droit et Societé

7

8

Direito e Praxis

6

7

American Society of International Law

5

8

Diritto e Società

3

7

Droit et Cultures

3

4

Sociologia del Diritto

3

3

Table 4. h5 and h5-median indexes for several law and society journals.
(Source: Own preparation with data from Google Scholar (data from June 2019)).

(2) Its Open Access license and encouragement for dissemination and republication
of the papers had placed it as an exception among journals – and a very attractive
one.
As is recorded in the minutes of the IISL Publications Committee discharge meeting, the
2019 volume of OSLS spanned for 1,400 pages and included more than 60 original
articles, plus one book review, and an introduction for each monograph. Moreover,
between September 2018 and February 2019, six new issues were set up and were in
production. For these, more than 40 papers had been received and processed. Other 10
individual papers had been received and managed. For these 50 papers, more than 100
reviewers had been contacted. For each paper, an average of 4 contacts were made before
two people had accepted to review, or either after someone had accepted to review but
had not completed the task.
With this, the turnover rate of papers had increased (ie the timeframe and deadlines had
shortened) by several months, hence having more reviews done and putting out papers

10 As of May 2019, thanks to its (paid for) association with CrossRef, OSLS has become a participant in
CrossRef’s “Cited-By” program, whereby OSLS provides all metadata for every paper that is deposited in
CrossRef for a DOI assignment, and, in turn, can query for a brief XML report of registered citations of its
own papers. Filling in all the metadata fields is not mandatory, but is another token of the added value that
OSLS offers to its contributors.

238

A new model…

at a more rapid rate than ever before, another quality indicator and another factor of
added value for authors.
The difference between this scenario and the one that domineered the history of OSLS
up until then was one of internal policies and the difference that the new policies were
making; where OSLS had been struggling to process and publish most of the
submissions back then, with the consequences already described that placed it bordering
risk of extinction, it was now doing a much-needed pre-selective work, where, on the
one hand, it was formally requesting of issue editors to work as gatekeepers and prereviewers, and, on the other, it relied on an increased editorial work of its own editors
in chief, a team that was strengthened in 2019 with the inclusion of two more members.
To complete this, where review results had recommended major revisions and had
signaled fundamental weaknesses of any given paper, OSLS had usually leaned toward
facilitating publication, wherever possible, whereas now every case was assessed and, if
the final result was that the paper needed more work than could reasonably be done
within a reasonable deadline, it was politely declined.
Later on, in October 2019, another quality and rigour landmark was formally set: the
commitment of OSLS to publishing no fewer than 6 and no more than 8 papers per issue,
and no fewer than 6 issues per volume (ie per year), with occasional exceptions for
special issues, ie thematic issues proposed by academics not directly involved with the
Institute at the time of the proposal, but judged of publication merit for quality of the
proposal, and opportunity or low frequency of the main topic in the records of OSLS.
In parallel to this, the OSLS team made a conscious effort to raise the bar in the review
department, by endeavoring to enroll experts previously unrelated to the IISL as
reviewers. This way, a three-fold goal was fulfilled: first, the review was always
unbiased by the person’s previous experience or knowledge of OSLS and its previous
policy and philosophy; second, a new person heard about OSLS; and, third, as a result
of the former, one new potential author, returning reviewer, workshop candidate, or
visiting professor to the IISL was earned.
Due to its well-established and respected status, OSLS has succeeded at garnering
interest in academics from all over the world who are willing and keen to review for us,
therefore establishing a large roster of reviewers who, all together, cover all areas of
Sociology of Law and contribute to keep up the quality of our publications. OSLS can
now attest to an international, diverse and inclusive pool of reviewers from several
countries in all continents and continues to appoint or accept new qualified reviewers.
Throughout its history since 2011, OSLS has received reviews from 1,200 scholars and,
from May 2018 to May 2019, papers reviewed by 170 scholars were published.
As is reflected in an inside report prepared by the OSLS managing editor and IISL
Publications officer, Leire Kortabarria, in September 2019, Oñati Socio-Legal Series had
enrolled 180 new academics as reviewers, between January 2018 and September 2019; an
average of eight new reviewers per month. Of these, 45% had been referred by workshop
chairs (ie guest editors of the issues), 32,5% had been found through a search on
specialized and reliable online sources (Google Scholar, Publons, and, later, Web of
Science) by the technical editor; and 20,5% had been referred by the Scientific Director,
Noé Cornago.

239

Kortabarria

As far as geographical origin goes, a very similar proportion of them (between 23% and
26%) came from South and Central America, the US and Canada, Spain and the Basque
Country, and the rest of Europe, with only 4% coming from Australia (which,
surprisingly or not, is the place of origin of relatively many workshop and visiting
scholar program participants).
In May 2019, Oñati Socio-Legal Series associated with CrossRef, and started to assign a
unique DOI to every published article, right from the moment they get published on
First Online.
(3) Indexations: As of 2019, Oñati Socio-Legal Series is indexed on the following
platforms and databases:
-

SSRN (though update of this site was halted in April 2019).

-

Redib

-

ISOC-CSIC

-

Latindex

-

MIAR

-

Google Scholar

-

Dialnet

-

DOAJ

-

Erih Plus

-

ANVUR (Italy's National Evaluation Agency for University and Research)

-

Qualis

Between January and July 2019, Oñati Socio-Legal Series formally applied for indexation
on Scopus (maintained by Elsevier) and Web of Science Core Collection (maintained by
Clarivate Analytics). And the year ended on news that couldn’t possibly have been
better, and more confirming of the fact that OSLS was on the right track: Clarivate,
producer and provider of Web of Science, the largest scientific reference database in the
world (more than 90 million records in October 2019, and counting), had found OSLS to
comply with the standards required to be included in the Emerging Sources Citation
Index (ESCI) of the Web of Science Core Collection. As stated by Clarivate 11 Journals are
selected for inclusion in the Web of Science Core Collection using a single set of twenty
eight evaluation criteria Journals, of which Twenty four are quality criteria (designed to
select for editorial rigour and best practice at the journal level), and four are of impact.
Web of Science considers this collection of 21,000 journals (in November 2019) to be its
“gold list” and a reference for scholars and researchers worldwide. Of these, 7,000 are
ESCI journals, considered high quality journals.
(4) Openness. In accordance with its proclaimed policy, scope, and aims, OSLS is
now more open than ever to special issues proposed and co-edited by
independent (ie: not previously involved with the IISL) academics as well as
issues that, while being monographic, as is OSLS’s tradition, do not stem from

https://publons.freshdesk.com/support/solutions/articles/12000051870-what-is-the-web-of-science-corecollection
11

240

A new model…

workshops held at the IISL. The chief editors’ team assesses each proposal that
comes through, and one of the criteria on application is how well the global topic
addressed fits the interest of OSLS and the current debates in the (academic)
world. Ideally, this will result in an internal and external debate of ideas, theses,
and views. For instance, in 2018, OSLS published “Sex Work in the Early 21st
Century – Law, Policy and Reality” (https://doi.org/10.35295/osls.iisl/0000-00000000-0990 ), which did come as a result of a workshop, and in early 2019, an issue
that did not, and which sustained the opposite view as that from the former – the
issue was “Pornografía y prostitución en el orden patriarcal: perspectivas
abolicionistas”
(https://doi.org/10.35295/osls.iisl/0000-0000-0000-0949).
Therefore, OSLS reflected a current debate about regulation (or absence thereof)
of prostitution. And, as of 2019, there are proposals for prospective issues about
topics within the fields of human trafficking, especially minors, big data and IA,
and indigenous peoples’ rights, to name a few.
(5) Independence. As could be seen from the data and extracts of policies from the
largest publishers, the most common scheme is for a journal to be part of a
portfolio maintained by a publishing group. OSLS is set apart from this model in
that it has always been and remains to be an independent publication, which is
published by a non-profit institution. This ensures to the author that no
commercial or financial criteria will be used to gauge quality of contributions
(Lee 2014) and that no other policy than what is stated on the official journal
website will be observed or enforced at any point in the publication process.

4.3. Into the future
The results of all these efforts were verifiable at the time of the first draft of this
presentation, as of July 2019. OSLS is a more regular, more rigorous, more rounded-out
and, in short, a better journal than it has ever been. And later, in October 2019, this is
amply and indisputably confirmed by the endorsement that inclusion in the Web of
Science Core Collection signifies.
OSLS has earned the interest and attention from reputed institutions, as well – as an
example of that, the University of Tubingen (Germany) contacted the Institute in May
2019 with a formal request to include not only OSLS papers, but all of the IISL’s
published papers in their repository of the Criminological Information Service and thus
disseminate them around their circle of users. The agreement is attested on each of these
institutions’ websites: https://krimdok.uni-tuebingen.de/Content/partners#content and
http://www.iisj.net/en/library/about-library
The accomplishments of the team past and present behind OSLS boil down to two bullet
points: one, being able to bring OSLS to a higher level of quality despite the Institute’s
modest resources; and, two, to subsist and become even more productive than 10 years
ago.
OSLS has proven that a model of 100% open Access journal, which is based on
professional handling and Management of the journal –by technical rather than
academic personnel, under the auspices and guidance of academic authorities–,is

241

Kortabarria

feasible, sustainable on the long run, and able to meet the most refined demands of
academic quality and rigour, as well as technical excellence to satisfy the needs of its
sustainers, the members of the academia.
This results in the ultimate ideal of the Open Access dissemination of knowledge:
researchers “save time [in access to the contents] and can even avoid doing research on
already known subjects (...). This allows them to ask more ambitious questions. There is
also an economic saving and the researcher gains visibility, because the impact of the
research is more ample” (López Borrull, quoted in Subarroca 2019). We concur with
Christopher May that “as an academic community we need to be much clearer that open
access publications are a benefit both to the research community but also to the intrainstitutional prestige economy”, and that open access work should be cited, and that the
academic community should ensure that “what is published in alternative locations is
of the highest quality and we draw our peers' attention to it” (May 2019, 13-14).
As to the more ample impact, it is widely acknowledged and accepted that publishing
in Open Access has a direct favourable effect on a journal's Impact Factor, as proved by
Web of Science Group itself and verifiable by any registered user of their InCites
resource. Open Access publications receive more citations than subscription
publications. “We can conclude than open access publications improve the impact [of a
publisher], they attract more citations” (Rachel Mangan, personal communication,
webinar Información de acceso abierto de Web of Science: todo lo que necesita saber, 21
November 2019).
Back to our case example, Oñati Socio-Legal Series, as a concluding remark, we can now
say that OSLS’s near-future challenges can be ciphered in but one predicament: To be
considered on the same level as any other journal in socio-legal studies… because facts
have proven that it has earned that place.
In all its modesty, OSLS can rightfully claim to embody a model of academic publishing
that puts a premium on the free dissemination of knowledge, on the advancement of its
scientific field, and on the benefit that the whole world of academia can reap from its
contribution, regardless of their financial potency, rather than on the business part of
publishing. Disregarded in the past as an unfeasible business model, OSLS continues to
prove sceptics wrong by reinforcing its tenets and guiding principles with each issue
that it makes available on the Internet.
An aggravating circumstance still weighs on the perceived value and merit of the
journal: the fact that no payment being required for publishing still is generally equaled
with a lesser value or lesser academic weight. In order to counteract this perception,
there are formulas that OSLS can explore and implement in the near future, such as
enforcing an APC waiver for authors, thus informing them of the value of the
management and production work of a publishable paper, and highlighting that OSLS
still favours a 100% open access model by enabling them to waiver these fees. Zero cost
does not equal zero value, quite the opposite; the value of OSLS lies on its non-business
business model rather than on the financial gain it could claim.

242

A new model…

References
Boucherie, S., 2018. “Predatory” vs trustworthy journals: What do they mean for the
integrity of science? Elsevier [online], 15 August. Available from:
https://www.elsevier.com/connect/predatory-vs-trustworthy-journals-what-dothey-mean-for-the-integrity-of-science [Accessed 9 December 2019].
Budapest Open Access Initiative [online]. Available from:
https://www.budapestopenaccessinitiative.org/read [Accessed 9 December 2019].
Buranyi, S., 2017. Is the staggeringly profitable business of scientific publishing bad for
science? The Guardian [online], 27 June. Available from:
https://www.theguardian.com/science/2017/jun/27/profitable-business-scientificpublishing-bad-for-science [Accessed 9 December 2019].
Burtle, L., 2019. Open Access: Types of OA. Georgia State University Research Guides
[online]. Available from:
https://research.library.gsu.edu/c.php?g=115588&p=754380 [Accessed 9 December
2019].
Díez, E., 2017. El indignante nuevo sistema de acreditación para el profesorado
universitario [El diario de la educación [online], 22 November. Blog post. Available
from: https://eldiariodelaeducacion.com/blog/2017/11/22/el-indignante-nuevosistema-de-acreditacion-para-el-profesorado-universitario/ [Accessed 9 December
2019].
DOAJ (Directory of Open Access Journals), 2019. Myth-busting: All open access
journals can be listed in DOAJ. DOAJ News Service [online], 17 September.
Available from: https://blog.doaj.org/2019/09/17/myth-busting-all-open-accessjournals-can-be-listed-in-doaj/ [Accessed 9 December 2019].
Evans, I., 2019. Pressures in system cause researcher concerns over quality, per new
peer review survey. Elsevier [online], 16 September. Available from:
https://www.elsevier.com/connect/pressures-in-system-cause-researcherconcerns-over-quality-per-new-peer-review-survey?sf221581182=1 [Accessed 9
December 2019].
Gershman, S., 2014. The Exploitative Economics of Academic Publishing. Footnote.co
[online], 18 March. Available from: http://footnote.co/the-exploitative-economicsof-academic-publishing/ [Accessed 9 December 2019].
Gobierno Vasco, n.d. Fundación Instituto Internacional de Sociología Jurídica de Oñati.
Registro de fundación [online]. Available from: http://www.euskadi.eus/gobiernovasco/-/fundacion/fundacion-instituto-internacional-de-sociologia-juridica-deonati/ [Accessed 9 December 2019].
Harington, R., 2017. Diamond Open Access, Societies and Mission. The Scholarly Kitchen
[online], 1 June. Available from:
https://scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org/2017/06/01/diamond-open-access-societiesmission/ [Accessed 9 December 2019].

243

Kortabarria

Krisch, J.A., 2015. These Five Corporations Control Academic Publishing. Vocativ
[online], 10 June. Available from: https://www.vocativ.com/culture/science/fivecorporations-control-academic-publishing/ [Accessed 9 December 2019].
Larivière, V., Haustein, S., and Mongeon, P., 2015. The Oligopoly of Academic
Publishers in the Digital Era. PLOS ONE [online], 10(6). Available from:
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0127502 [Accessed 9 December 2019].
Lee, I., 2014. Publish or perish: The myth and reality of academic publishing. Language
Teaching [online], 47(2). Available from:
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0261444811000504 [Accessed 9 December 2019].
Mainwaring, D., 2016. Open access and UK social and political science publishing.
European Political Science [online], 15(2). Available from:
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1057/eps.2015.83 [Accessed 9 December 2019].
May, C., 2019. Academic publishing and open access: Costs, benefits and options for
publishing research. Politics [online], 1-16. Available from:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0263395719858571 [Accessed 9 December 2019].
Mendes, J., and Schepel, H., 2020. What a Journal Makes: As we say goodbye to the
European Law Journal. Verfassungsblog [online], 4 February. Available from:
https://verfassungsblog.de/what-a-journal-makes-as-we-say-goodbye-to-theeuropean-law-journal/ [Accessed 4 February 2020].
Mietchen, D., 2015. What is the difference between “Green” and “Gold” Open Access?
[Answer #1]. Stackexchange.com [online], 16 August. Available from:
https://academia.stackexchange.com/a/51997 [Accessed 9 December 2019].
National Research Council (US) Committee on Responsibilities of Authorship in the
Biological Sciences, 2003. Sharing Publication-Related Data and Materials:
Responsibilities of Authorship in the Life Sciences [online]. Washington, DC: National
Academies Press (US). Available from:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK97158/ [Accessed 9 December 2019].
Open Access Academy, n.d. Types of Open Access. Open Access Academy [online].
Available from: http://www.oaacademy.org/types-of-open-access.html [Accessed
9 December 2019].
Price, D., 2018. Academic Publishing is An Exploitative Farce. Medium [online], 28 May.
Available from: https://medium.com/@devonprice/academic-publishing-is-anexploitative-farce-b367ceadd3c5 [Accessed 9 December 2019].
Sakellaropoulou, R., 2019. International Open Access Week: How open access engaged
a global community about using material science to tackle climate change. The
Source [online], 21 October. Available from:
https://www.springernature.com/gp/researchers/the-source/blog/blogposts-openresearch/open-access-publishing-australia/17274126 [Accessed 9 December 2019].
San Francisco Declaration on Research Assessment [online]. Available from:
https://sfdora.org/read/ [Accessed 9 December 2019].

244

A new model…

Scribendi, n.d. Publish or Perish: How to Survive in Academia [online]. Blog post.
Available from: https://www.scribendi.com/advice/publish_or_perish.en.html
[Accessed 9 December 2019].
Springer Nature, 2019. Open access journals. The world's most significant open access
portfolio [online]. Available from: https://www.springernature.com/gp/openresearch/journals-books/journals [Accessed 9 December 2019].
Subarroca, M., 2019. “Existe un problema con las revistas científicas a las que se paga
dos veces: por leerlas y por publicar en ellas en acceso abierto”. Universitat Oberta
de Catalunya. News [online], 18 October. Available from:
https://www.uoc.edu/portal/es/news/entrevistes/2019/039-alex-lopez.html
[Accessed 9 December 2019].
Suber, P., n.d. Open Access Overview [online]. Available from:
http://legacy.earlham.edu/~peters/fos/overview.htm [Accessed 9 December 2019].
Tennant, J., 2015. What is the difference between “Green” and “Gold” Open Access?
[Answer #3]. Stackexchange.com [online], 17 August. Available from:
https://academia.stackexchange.com/a/51999 [Accessed 9 December 2019].
The Cost of Knowledge [online]. Manifesto. Available from:
http://thecostofknowledge.com/ [Accessed 9 December 2019].
The Guardian, 2019. The Guardian view on academic publishing: disastrous
capitalism. Editorial. The Guardian [online], 4 March. Available from:
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2019/mar/04/the-guardian-viewon-academic-publishing-disastrous-capitalism [Accessed 9 December 2019].

245

