The Long Arm of the Arab State
Gerasimos Tsourapas
Department of Political Science and International Studies
University of Birmingham

ABSTRACT
Under what conditions do authoritarian states exercise control over populations abroad?
The securitisation of cross-border mobility has been a common theme in examining
immigration policies in the Global North. The securitisation of emigration and diasporas in
non-democratic contexts remains neglected; this is particularly true with regard to Arab
states’ extraterritorial authoritarian practices. This article argues that authoritarian states
develop a range of migration policies that are driven by the contradictory pressures of
economic and political imperatives or, put differently, an illiberal paradox: if a state does
not expect economic gains from cross-border mobility, it is more likely to securitise its
emigration policy; otherwise, it is more likely to securitise its diaspora policy. The article
illustrates this trade-off via a most-similar comparison of Algeria, Libya, Tunisia, and
Morocco. Drawing on Arabic and non-Arabic primary and secondary sources, it sketches
a novel area of research on migration and security.

This is an author-generated, pre-print version of the following article:
Tsourapas, Gerasimos. ‘The Long Arm of the Arab State.’
Ethnic & Racial Studies (forthcoming, 2019).

1

I. INTRODUCTION
The 2 October 2018 assassination of Jamal Khashoggi, a Saudi journalist, inside Saudi
Arabia’s Istanbul consulate served as a brutal demonstration of transnational authoritarian
power. Khashoggi, living in self-imposed exile in the United States since 2017, proved
unable to escape the long arm of the Arab state, which has developed complex mechanisms
to engage with political dissent beyond its territorial borders. This dimension of states’
policy-making has yet to constitute a dedicated research agenda. Scholars have identified
how governments develop elaborate strategies in response to international immigration,
including heightened attention to the policing of state borders, a re-evaluation of citizenship
and naturalisation laws, or the externalisation of immigration processes to third states. Yet,
as the Khashoggi case indicates, states – particularly outside the Western liberal democratic
context – also develop practices that aim to securitise their own citizens’ cross-border
mobility. Therefore, if we are to move away from politics of immigration, how do
authoritarian emigration states’ security concerns affect their policy-making?
This article addresses this question by identifying the trade-off that authoritarian states face
between migration and security: on the one hand, they wish to reap the economic benefits
associated with large emigrant populations – primarily an influx of remittances, but also
diaspora’s investment in the home country, skills acquisition and training, a reduction in
unemployment, and so on; on the other hand, authoritarian states also face the political need
to maintain control of emigration flows, to monitor the movements of political dissenters,
and to contain diasporas’ activism abroad. Authoritarian emigration states’ policy-making
can best be understood via the management of the trade-off between the political imperative
to prevent emigration and the economic urge to embrace it. The article distinguishes
between authoritarian states’ securitisation of emigration and diaspora policy and puts forth
a two-pronged argument.1 On the one hand, if a state does not expect economic gains from
its citizens’ cross-border mobility, it is more likely to securitise its emigration policy: it
will focus on tighter border controls, introduction of “exit” restrictions, and so on. On the
other hand, if a state approaches its citizens’ cross-border mobility as an economic
opportunity, it is more likely to securitise its diaspora policy: it will focus on monitoring
communities abroad, repressing expatriates’ activism, and so on.
The article examines the interplay between migration, security, and development within
authoritarian contexts in an inductive, exploratory manner. It traces how a closer
examination of the securitisation of migration processes across North Africa via four
illustrative cases – Algeria, Libya, Tunisia, and Morocco. It begins with a review of the
relevant scholarship that identifies a large body of work on the securitisation of migration,
but one marked by a lack of scholarly engagement on policies developed in authoritarian
states. It proceeds to examine an established theory of immigration states’ policy-making
– Hollifield’s notion of the liberal paradox – and considers how it may be reformulated in
order to address practices within authoritarian emigration states. A comparative case-study
approach allows for a closer analysis of the securitisation of emigration and diaspora
For analytic clarity, I approach emigration and diaspora policy-making as distinct processes (Tsourapas 2015, 2196–97),
with the former referring to processes governing the physical “exit” from a country, while the latter targeting those that are
already outside the physical boundaries of the sending state.
1

2

policy-making in the Middle East building on a mix of qualitative data, including archival
data, media reports in English and Arabic, as well as elite interviews. In the concluding
part, the article examines how a focus on the illiberal paradox would allow for a fuller
understanding of the trade-off between migration and security beyond the four authoritarian
states examined here and paves the way for future research.

II. THE MIGRATION-SECURITY NEXUS IN CONTEXT
While migration is not a new phenomenon, the discussion of the interplay between crossborder mobility and national security has gained significant traction only over the last
twenty years. The field of security studies incorporated cross-border mobility in the
aftermath of the Cold War via a focus on the migration-security nexus (Huysmans and
Squire 2010). Insofar as national security is concerned – as opposed to human security –
the literature’s main focus has been on immigration and advanced industrialised countries
of destination (Weiner 1992; Rudolph 2003). Work by Copenhagen School scholars and
others on securitisation – or, in brief, the socially-constructed notion of a specific issue as
a security threat (Karyotis and Skleparis 2013) – has also come to include immigration and
asylum (Bigo 2002). This is not to say that the Global South has been absent within debates
on security responses to migration; rather, that there is a tendency to focus on the security
implications for countries of destination, whether they are located in the West (Zolberg,
Suhrke, and Aguayo 1989), the non-West (Whitaker 2003), or both (Greenhill 2010;
Loescher 1992). The securitisation of emigration by countries of origin has yet to be
explored as a separate field of inquiry.
By focusing on authoritarian emigration states,2 we are able to identify two specific
dimensions of securitisation: firstly, a number of states choose to securitise citizens’
freedom of movement (Alemán and Woods 2014; Dowty 1989). This was particularly
prominent during the Cold War period, marked by the construction of the Berlin Wall and
the German Democratic Republic’s shoot-to-kill policy towards anyone aiming to cross it
(for an overview, see Tsourapas 2019, 3–18). For a number of these states, emigration
constituted a major threat to economic development, as per the early literature on ‘brain
drain’ (Bhagwati 1976). Restrictive emigration policies have persisted beyond the end of
the Cold War as a number of countries – from Central Asian states to Cuba and from the
Turkey to North Korea have sought to impose controls on their citizens’ freedom of
movement. In this line of thinking, the migration-security nexus centres on the need to limit
their citizens’ mobility in order to keep them under firm state control.

Authoritarianism is defined as per Linz’s classic definition of ‘political systems with limited, not responsible, political
pluralism, without elaborate and guiding ideology, but with distinctive mentalities, without extensive nor intensive political
mobilization, except at some points in their development, and in which a leader or occasionally a small group exercises power
within formally ill-defined limits but actually quite predictable ones’ (Linz 1964, 255). Authoritarian emigration states include
‘the set of institutions, practices, and mechanisms regulating cross-border mobility’ developed in such systems (Tsourapas
2018a, 403).
2

3

A second dimension of securitisation that relevant literature focuses on is transnational: for
Glasius, authoritarian elites project their power abroad via extraterritorial authoritarian
practices, as they conceive ‘of the state as a collection of people to be governed, more than
as a territorial entity’ (Glasius 2017, 2). Scholars have recently examined authoritarian
emigration states’ de-territorialised security practices: they aim to repress diaspora groups
abroad (Moss 2016; Adamson 2018), to develop a number of surveillance tactics in order
to monitor their behaviour (Brand 2002), to mobilise pro-regime activists (Hirt and
Mohammad 2017), to employ migrants as instruments of soft power (Tsourapas 2018a), or
to prioritise certain diaspora communities over others (Tsourapas 2015; Koinova 2018). In
this context, the migration-security nexus centres less on citizens’ cross-border mobility,
for there appears an implicit understanding of cross-border mobility as an economic
opportunity; rather, it focuses on those residing beyond the territorial borders of the
authoritarian countries of origin.
Taken together, how may these two dimensions shed light on the interplay between
emigration and security? Some see states as having abandoned emigration controls;
autocracies ‘are more likely to allow citizens to travel or migrate’ and to focus their efforts
on diaspora, rather than emigration, policy-making (Glasius 2017, 1). Yet, this is not
entirely accurate: following the 2006 coup d’état attempt , Turkey banned the “exit” of all
academics from the country; until 2013, even talk of unauthorised travel abroad carried a
six-month prison sentence for Cuban citizens. One might assume that authoritarian states
tend to control both emigration and diaspora communities; yet, notable cases do not fit into
this expectation: Tunisia, for instance, did not exercise strict control over citizens’
emigration. Instead, elites have been particularly interested in monitoring their political
behaviour once abroad (Brand 2006, 92-132). This paper presents a first attempt at
overcoming this divide between emigration and diaspora politics without losing the unique
insights that stem from close observation of securitisation processes in authoritarian
contexts.

III. GRAPPLING WITH THE ILLIBERAL PARADOX
The observation that states’ security concerns have led them to engage with cross-border
mobility in different manners, with only some aiming to tightly control emigration, is not
novel in the migration studies literature. Indeed, one of the main theorists of this tension
within liberal democratic contexts has been James F. Hollifield, who identified an inherent
contradiction in liberal democracies’ immigration policies. On the one hand, they seek to
control their borders and restrict immigration because of domestic political reasons. On the
other hand, they wish to encourage immigration under an economic rationale. Any attempt
to understand immigration policy-making would need to consider states’ contending
wishes to prioritise economics versus security demands or, as Hollifield describe it, the
liberal paradox (Hollifield 2004). Beyond immigration, to what extent would a comparable
framework allow for a better understanding of how security concerns affect emigration
policy-making within countries of origin?
4

In contrast to Western democracies, authoritarian states are arguably confronted with an
illiberal paradox. With regard to immigration policy-making, a number of autocracies
paradoxically choose to enact liberal immigration laws (Natter 2018). At the same time, the
illiberal paradox points to a trade-off between the political and economic drivers of
authoritarian states’ emigration policy-making: on the one hand, autocracies seek to control
their borders and restrict emigration because of domestic political reasons linked to security
risks or regime survival. On the other hand, they wish to encourage emigration under an
economic rationale that highlights developmental gains. In this lies a tension not unlike the
contradiction faced by democratic countries of destination. However, whereas the key to
understanding the security dimension of the migration-development nexus within
democratic immigration states lies in the liberal paradox, authoritarian emigration states
need to be understood via the illiberal paradox. In order to maintain a competitive
advantage, these states need to keep their economies open to trade, investment, and
emigration; yet, this movement of people involves significant political risks.
The theoretical expectations of authoritarian emigration states’ policy-making are driven
by this illiberal paradox. In terms of measurement, the developmental importance of labour
emigration lies primarily in skills acquisition, managing unemployment, and attracting
economic remittances (cf. De Haas 2005), whereas regime stability constitutes the main
security concern in authoritarian states (cf. Gerschewski 2013). Authoritarian states that do
not expect developmental gains from citizens’ cross-border mobility are more likely to
securitise their emigration policy, for they are primarily concerned about domestic threats
to regime stability. Tight controls on citizens’ emigration have been instituted by numerous
states that do not associate emigration with economic development – from the German
Democratic Republic or the Soviet Union to, more recently, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. In contrast, states that expect developmental gains from citizens’ crossborder mobility are more likely to securitise their diaspora policy, for they are concerned
about extraterritorial threats to regime stability. States such as Eritrea, China, or the Central
Asian republics may have abandoned tight controls on citizens’ emigration in order to
attract economic remittances but have simultaneously securitised their diaspora policymaking.
To demonstrate the workings of the illiberal paradox empirically, I put this exploratory
framework to test with a discussion of the four Arab states in North Africa: Algeria, Libya,
Morocco, and Tunisia, examined from independence until the events of the 2011 Arab
Uprisings. The objective of the case-selection strategy is the achievement of maximum
variance along authoritarian emigration states’ policy-making. Of the four cases, Morocco
and Tunisia have consistently securitised their diaspora policy - as will be shown, this is
due to the two states’ consistent prioritisation of labour emigration as a form of
development. In contrast, Algeria and Libya have shifted between securitising their
emigration and diaspora policies, as per the expectations of the illiberal paradox
framework. A basic scope condition expects the existence of consolidated authoritarian rule
within the country of origin – therefore, this analysis ends in 2011 in order to exclude
transitional or hybrid regimes (such as post-2011 Tunisia, Algeria or Morocco) or states
embroiled in internal conflict (as in post-2011 Libya).
5

I employ a mix of qualitative data, including archival data and media reports in English and
Arabic that I triangulate via secondary sources in English and French. I also draw on
existing work on migration policy-making across the four case-studies in order identify
each country’s developmental priorities. It bears repeating that the article’s framework
refers to labour migration, rather than forced displacement. Due to space limitations, I do
not engage in long discussions on migration stock and bilateral flows; a number of excellent
political demography works may be consulted on this matter (Birks and Sinclair 1980;
Fargues 2004; Winckler 2009; Natter 2014).

Table 1
Authoritarian Emigration States and the Illiberal Paradox in North Africa
Algeria

Securitisation of diaspora, 1962 – 1973

Securitisation of emigration, 1973 – 2011

Libya

Securitisation of emigration, 1951 – 1969

Securitisation of diaspora, 1969 – 2011

Morocco

Securitisation of diaspora policy-making, 1956 – 2011

Tunisia

Securitisation of diaspora policy-making, 1956 – 2011

IV. THE ALGERIAN EMIGRATION STATE
Algeria marked the first attempt by an authoritarian emigration state in the Middle East to
address the tensions of the illiberal paradox. After the brutal Algerian War, the country
gained independence from France in 1962 (McDougall 2017), while Algerians continued
to enjoy a degree of freedom of movement between the two countries (Gillette and Sayad
1984). By 1965, over half a million of Algerian nationals resided in France. Despite rising
restrictions on immigration by the French state, this number would grow exponentially via
family reunification processes. The large population of Algerians constituted a significant
development opportunity, primarily with regard to remittances (Trebous 1970): numerous
bilateral agreements with France as well as Belgium and Germany demonstrated the
economic importance of emigration for the Algerian state – at the time, freedom to leave
the country was guaranteed is a constitutional right. But how did the authoritarian
emigration state address potential security issues that could arise from its citizens’ freedom
of movement?
Algeria was the first state in the Middle East to develop an institutionalised mechanism
aimed at reconciling the economic need for large-scale emigration with the security
imperative for control over expatriates’ political behaviour. The strategy involved the
transformation of the Federation de France organisation belonging to the National
Liberation Front (Front de Libération Nationale, or FLN, a major party in the Algerian war
of independence) into the Friendship Society of Algerians in France (the Amicale des

6

Algériens en France, or AAF) in 1957.3 The AAF ostensibly constituted an organisation
that represented the interests of Algerian emigrants abroad, tasked with the provision of
Arabic-language classes and culture to the growing expatriate community across France. It
also mediated between the Algerian community and the French institutions. Early on,
Algeria identified the need to reach out to those migrants who integrating into European
societies. As one AAF official in France stated:
‘In Algeria the children are Arabs in an Arab milieu … The children born in
France are in a completely different milieu … The immigrant child is a bit
deprived. He feels a stranger in school, and then on holidays over there he
doesn’t speak Arabic. His cousins treat him as French’ (Grillo 2006, 193).
The AAF staff were always recruited from Algeria, rather than from the expatriate
community. Over the years, the organisation established offices in every part of France that
had an Algerian consulate. The AAF would also organise numerous events, film shows,
and annual celebrations – at some point, it even published a French-language journaled
entitled L'Algérien en France (Grillo 2006, 270). Overall, the AAF ‘enjoyed a complete
monopoly of the organisation of the Algerian emigrant community in France’ (Collyer
2006, 840).
In addressing the tensions of illiberal paradox, the Algerian state identified the
developmental benefits of emigration (cf. Collyer 2012); thus, it proceeded to securitise its
diaspora policy. It did so via the AAF’s transformation into an extension of the Algerian
state in France. The AAF provided effective surveillance of Algerians abroad, and reported
directly to the Algerian Ministry of the Interior: ‘the structure of the Amicale’s links outside
the offices resembles the cell organizations favoured by the FLN during the Algerian War.
Some of those now prominent in Algerian affairs in Lyon were also active locally during
that war.’ In fact, ‘this network enables the Amicale, and thereby the consulate, to be
informed about what is happening to Algerian citizens in the quartiers and the factors’
(Grillo 2006, 270).
‘Under [President Houari] Boumediene, the Algerian state has a clear vision of
the role it wants to play in Paris. Europe is divided into nine regions, themselves
divided into sections. The Amicale employs up to five hundred people led
without qualms by its first president, Mahmoud Guennez, an excellent instructor
and a good organizer during the War of Independence. In 1959, this colonel was
sent to France to help the FLN activists. Six years later, this "terrorist" chairs the
first meeting of the Amicale des Algeriens en Europe’ (Beau 1995, 87)
Given the responsibility to ‘maintain the allegiance’ of emigrant communities, the AAF
aimed to prevent its compatriots from succumbing to the ‘cancers’ of liberalism, socialism,
and communism, which were expected to plague ‘naïve’ migrants residing in ‘decadent’
host societies (Laurence 2012, 56). Its second president, Abdelkrim Gheraieb, would boast
about how the AAF was tasked with monitoring dissent and reporting back to Algiers:
‘once a month, Boumediene would summon me, very worried about the actions of political
opponents in France’ (Beau 1995, 88). At some point, the AAF ‘reportedly sent daily
3

The AAF later became known as Amicale des Algériens en Europe.

7

detached reports to Algiers regarding developments in the community in France’ (Brand
2011, 5). Driss El Yazami, a Moroccan educated in Paris and, since 2004, the President of
the Euro-Mediterranean Foundation of Support to Human Rights, recounts how the AAF
would direct its members to harass North African expatriates affiliated with the Arab
Workers Movement (Mouvement des travailleurs arabes, or MTA):
‘They were really savages … the Amicale people, they would punch us… many
times, they came to take our leaflets and throw them out, all that … And we
would physically fight them many times … Let’s just say that the movement we
were most opposed to … was the AAF’ (Fillieule and Sommier 2018).
A distinct policy shift in 1973 further attests to the expectations of the illiberal paradox:
when increasing immigration restrictions in France and across Europe diminished the
developmental value of labour emigration, Algeria shifted towards the securitisation of
labour emigration. It was able to use its oil resources to relax its dependency on migration;
in fact, on 19 September 1973, Boumediene banned Algerians from emigrating to France
altogether (Fargues 2004, 1360). As the illiberal paradox thesis would expect, the post1973 Algerian state put all its efforts into controlling emigration, instead (cf. Collyer
2012).4 Partly because of the shift in the Algerian state’s interests and partly because of
domestic politics in Europe, the AAF gradually lost its power and centrality in managing
the affairs of the Algerian diaspora. At the same time, the Algerian state prioritised the
development of a ‘discourse that discouraged emigration and policies that offered socioeconomic securities as part of a nascent welfare state’ (Natter 2014, 12). Overall, the
Algerian experience demonstrates how the illiberal paradox sheds light onto the workings
of the authoritarian emigration state: when approaching cross-border mobility as a
developmental opportunity (1962-1973), Algeria attempted to securitise its diaspora policy
via the AAF; from 1973 onwards, once the developmental importance of cross-border
mobility diminished, Algeria shifted towards a securitisation of emigration policy, instead.

V. THE LIBYAN EMIGRATION STATE
Oil-rich Libya is traditionally approached as a country of immigration or, more recently,
transit migration (Bredeloup and Pliez 2011l; for an overview of Libyan history, see
Vandewalle 2012). Political scientists have examined how Libyan elites employed the
status of the country both as a transit and as a host country of migrants for economic and
foreign policy gains in its migration diplomacy (Tsourapas 2019, 188-196); yet, little has
been written on the country’s complex emigrant policy. While emigration flows never
reached the high figures of other Middle Eastern and African states, Libya experienced
sustained labour emigration, particularly temporary mobility of students and high-skilled
professionals, dispersed across multiple host states. Initially, under King Idris, the first ruler
of post-independence Libya (1951-1969), the state did not see any clear developmental
benefit to cross-border mobility and chose to prioritise the control of borders and the

4

I am grateful to an anonymous reviewer for pointing out Algeria’s rationale behind this policy shift.

8

provision of tight exit restrictions for Libyan citizens. The need to use migration in order
to train the country’s workforce was not an issue: Libya relied on foreigners (primarily
Egyptian and Palestinian professionals) to staff its bureaucratic apparatus, as was standard
practice with other newly-independent Arab states of the time (Tsourapas 2019, 74-77).
The shift towards perceiving cross-border mobility as a developmental opportunity for
Libya came in the last few years of Idris’ rule and under Muammar Gaddafi, who seized
power in 1969. Eager to rid Libya of its dependence on foreigners and consolidate a process
of ‘Libyanisation’ of the country’s economy (Maghur 2010, 3), Gaddafi encouraged the
emigration of Libyans for skill-acquisition purposes and expanded a programme for
scholarships to study abroad. Gradually, the regime would grant exit visas to allow Libyan
youth to pursue training and educational opportunities abroad (the requirement of exit visas
was formally dropped in 1991). Already in 1968, Prime Minister Abdul Hamid alBakkoush would state that an educational priority for Libya was ‘to establish specialised
schools to promote competence in foreign languages, in order to enable the student to
continue his higher studies abroad’ (Libyan Review, 1968). 3,939 students were sent
abroad in the 1976-77 academic year alone; by 1981, 2,900 Libyans were studying in the
United States and some 2,000 in the United Kingdom (Ibrahim, 1987, 98). In 2010, it was
estimated that approximately 12,000 students were dispatched to over 52 countries
worldwide (Aldoukalee, 2013).
As the Gaddafi regime loosened the grip on emigration, the illiberal paradox thesis suggests
that there arose the need to address the security vacuum with regard to emigrants’ behaviour
abroad. Indeed, the Libyan state gradually securitised its diaspora policy that aimed to
extend control over Libyan emigrants’ activities abroad (for a full analysis, see Tsourapas
2018b, 6-9). Unlike Algeria, however, the Libyan regime relied less on surveillance and
more on overt violence. In the United Kingdom, this included efforts in mobilising Libyan
students against potential anti-regime activists, organised by Omar Sodani in the 1980s.
This is not to suggest that the Libyan diaspora was composed solely of political opponents
to the Gaddafi regime – many Libyans decided not to return home for family or economic
reasons, for instance; yet, the Gaddafi regime tended to view these Libyans as traitors to
the state. Gaddafi would refer to them as kullāb ḍāla (“stray dogs”) and promise vengeance
on behalf of the state. ‘Teams of rough and ready revolutionaries moved in and took over
the Libyan embassies (now named “people’s bureaus”) around the world and began rooting
out the “stray dogs” who were engaged in anti-regime activities’ (Pargeter 2012, 103–4).
The long arm of the Libyan state went beyond national borders as state agents attempted
political assassinations of citizens who had relocated abroad. Many of these campaigns
were reportedly spearheaded by Moussa Koussa, nicknamed mab'ūth al-mawt (“envoy of
death”). In 1980, Koussa was formally removed from his position as public envoy in
London when he publicly admitted these practices to the London Times: ‘We killed two in
London and there were another two to be killed ... I approve of this’ (The Times, 11 June
1980). Earlier in May, the assassin of Salem Fezzani, a Libyan living in Italy shot dead in
his restaurant in Rome, declared ‘I was sent by the people to kill him. He is a traitor and an

9

enemy of the people’ (quoted in Pargeter 2012, 105). As Salem al-Hassi, once Libya’s
Intelligence Chief recounts:
‘For years, the Gaddafi intelligence services went after opposition leaders in the
capitals of many countries, in Europe, the United States and Arab countries. A
great number of opposition leaders were handed over Gaddafi by Arab and
European countries. A great number were kidnapped in Arab and European
countries’ (quoted in Asharq al-Awsat 2012).
The illiberal paradox arguably allows for a better understanding of how the Gaddafi
regime’s wish to employ emigration as a developmental opportunity contrasted with its
wish to maintain firm control over all Libyans’ activity. Thus, the regime addressed this
paradox via the intense securitisation of Libya’s diaspora policy. In a 1994 report, the
United States’ Department of State notes:
‘Libyan nationals' right of return is theoretically fully protected, even for
opponents of General Qadhafi. However, this ‘right’ may be more nearly an
obligation; the regime often calls on students, many of whom receive a
government subsidy, and others working abroad to return on little or no notice
and without regard to the impact on their studies or work. Libyans who study
abroad are interrogated on their return home’ (US Department of State 1994).
One of the most chilling was the case of Al-Sadek Hamed al-Shuwehdy, who had emigrated
to pursue an engineering degree in the United States. He was publicly executed in 1984, in
the middle of a stadium full of thousands of school children and students, who had been
brought in for the occasion. After he tearfully confessed that he has joined the “stray dogs,”
a gallows was brought into the arena and al-Shuwedhy was hanged on live state television
(Black, 2011).
Overall, Algeria’s shift from the securitisation of diaspora between 1962 and 1973 to the
securitisation of emigration, from 1973 onwards, was reversed in the Libyan case. Libya’s
initial securitisation of emigration between 1951 and 1969 was replaced by the
securitisation of diaspora, from 1969 onwards. As per the illiberal paradox, these shifts are
dictated by domestic elites’ understanding of the developmental value of emigration:
Algeria’s oil resources allowed it to relax its dependency on economic remittances,
particularly when faced with Western European restrictions on North African labour. In
Libya, Gaddafi recognised the developmental value of emigration for skills acquisition and
training, rather than economic remittances; thus, Gaddafi’s post-1969 aim of developing
its national workforce became linked with the securitisation of the Libyan diaspora.

VI. THE MOROCCAN EMIGRATION STATE
Labour emigration has been part and parcel of the Moroccan state since gaining
independence in 1956 (see Iskander 2010). Similar to Algeria, patterns of mobility were
affected by the long experience of colonialism that had led Moroccans to France, primarily
through Algeria. Recruitment agreements with France and Germany in 1963, as well as
Belgium and the Netherlands (in 1964 and 1969, respectively), formalised a pattern of
10

migration into Europe that was regulated by the Ministry of Labour. The Moroccan state,
or Makhzen, prioritised the economic benefits of emigration early on: from 1968 onwards,
state economic development plans were based on maximising labour emigration –
primarily as a way to attract economic remittances, as in Algeria. The tightening of Western
European immigration rules led many Moroccans to pursue employment in Libya and the
Arab oil-producing countries from the 1970s onwards. More recently, Moroccans have also
sought irregular entry channels into Europe.
The tensions that the illiberal paradox highlights are evident in Morocco’s emigration and
diaspora policies. The decision to adopt a liberal emigration policy for developmental
reasons suggests a need to securitise the Moroccan diaspora. Indeed, both Mohammed V
or, his eldest son, Hassan II – the two monarchs that ruled Morocco in the 20th century –
extended significant resources towards the country’s diaspora communities in Europe.
Morocco appeared to have based its approach to Algeria, as it developed friendship
societies under the Fédération des Amicales des Marocains, or amicales, from 1973
onwards. Reminiscent of the Algerian case, Moroccan amicales ‘openly intimidated and
harassed oppositional groups, and engaged in public violent encounters with opponents,’
while in the Netherlands they were consistently referred to as ‘the long arm of King Hassan’
(Bouras 2013, 1226; cf. Van Heelsum 2002). The organisations’ leaders were often
recruited from the Moroccan intelligence services and would supply names of activists and
trade unionists back to Rabat; these migrants would be duly detained upon their return
home (Sahraoui 2015, 525). Under Hassan II, particular attention was paid to mosques,
ensuring that they were loyal to the monarch’s religious leadership, who is Amir alMu'minin, or the Commander of the Faithful, according to the Moroccan constitution
(Obdeijn, De Mas, and Hermans 2012, 229).5 Overall, the Moroccan amicales were tasked
with preventing migrants from organising themselves politically and, by extension,
becoming a force of political opposition abroad (De Haas 2007).
The timing of the Moroccan state’s decision to institute its amicales in 1973, as Algeria
shifted away from the securitisation of its diaspora policy, can be explained by the illiberal
paradox framework. Morocco lacked Algeria’s oil resources and considered labour
emigration more important for its development – thus, the shift in the economic salience of
emigration led to a stronger securitisation of the Moroccan diaspora. This is demonstrated
by the fact that, unlike Algeria, the Makhzen also sought to avoid Moroccans abroad being
perceived as political agitators by the host states; involvement in European politics would
jeopardise migrants’ status and, by extension, the inflow of valuable remittances into
Morocco. It is not accidental that the participation of Moroccans in post-1968 French
industrial strikes via the Association des Marocains de France (AMF), organised by exiled
leader of the Left Mehdi Ben Barka, was perceived as a treasonous act by Rabat (Lacroix
2015, 91–92). Migrants who had participated in these strikes would have their passports
seized upon return to Morocco (Iskander 2010).

Many thanks to the anonymous reviewer for suggesting this information. For additional information on the politics of
Morocco’s religious reforms at home and abroad, see Maghraoui (2009).
5

11

Not surprisingly, many Moroccans who did not belong to the amicale, or who had
participated in the AMF or other organisations, were afraid to return home (Official Journal
of the European Communities 1976). Brand describes how, ‘concerned with the image of
the country abroad, the regime sought to discourage social agitation by or among its
nationals.’ In fact, ‘Moroccans who were active in labor union struggles in Europe often
encountered difficulties upon returning to the kingdom, having been denounced either by
consular authorities or by members of the Amicales’ (Brand 2002, 9).
The Makhzen did not treat emigration as a politically-suspect act, as in Libya; nor did
Morocco attempt to strengthen linkages with a diaspora that had integrated – albeit only
partially – in European host states, as in the case of Algeria. Instead, King Hassan II tackled
the illiberal paradox by treating populations abroad as “subjects,” addressing them as such
and denying that they may ever lose their marocanité. ‘They will never be integrated’ he
declared on French television in 1993. ‘I discourage you, in relation to my people, the
Moroccans, from attempting a misappropriation of their nationality because they will never
be 100% French’ (Sahraoui 2015, 525).
Overall, Morocco suggests a different approach to the illiberal paradox than Algeria or
Libya, which did not hesitate to shift their securitisation policies in 1973 and 1969,
respectively. The fact that post-independence Morocco has highlighted the importance of
labour emigration in its developmental strategy led to the consistent securitisation of its
diaspora policy-making. The tightening of immigration in Western Europe after 1973 led
the Makhzen to intensify this process of securitisation via the feared amicales. The fourth
case-study discussed below, Tunisia, pursued a similar approach to the migrationdevelopment nexus.

VII. THE TUNISIAN EMIGRATION STATE
Finally, Tunisia is considered an archetypical emigration state, which perceived of crossborder mobility as a main mechanism for addressing structural unemployment and other
political economy issues that plagued the post-independence North African state (see
Natter 2015; Brand 2006). Traditional destinations initially included France and Germany,
with whom Tunisian elites signed recruitment agreements in 1963 and 1965, respectively.
Additional agreements with Belgium (1969), the Netherlands (1971), and Libya (1971)
followed, while Italy has emerged as a major country of destination in the last three
decades. Achieving high rates of emigration has traditionally been considered a
developmental goal for the Tunisian state; remittances covered approximately 42% of its
trade deficit in the late 1980 (Brand 2002). More than 11% of its population (or,
approximately 1,2 million Tunisians) were residing abroad in 2012 (Natter 2015, 9).
The recognition that labour emigration constitutes an important instrument for economic
within the authoritarian setting of post-independence Tunisia suggests – as per the illiberal
paradox thesis – the securitisation of the state’s diaspora policy-making. Indeed, the
Tunisian regime developed an extensive network of Amicales des Travailleurs Tunisiens

12

en France in Paris, Lyon, Marseille, and Nice in the late 1950s (and later in other locations
within France and across Western Europe). Similar to the other two North African
countries, Tunisia presented these as socio-cultural institutions (Simon 1979). They were
presented as relatively innocuous institutions that sponsored ‘folk groups from Tunisia,
sports teams, the celebration of certain religious occasions, and Arabic language
instruction. Thus, they were meeting places where the Tunisian community could gather
for events that helped preserve ties with the homeland’ (Brand 2006, 111).
Interestingly, the post-1973 Western European restrictions on immigration led to an
intensification of the Tunisian state’s efforts to control its citizens abroad, as in the case of
Morocco. Reminiscent of the Moroccan state’s appeals against migrants’ politicisation in
their host states, the Tunisian Minister of the Interior advised Tunisians in France that ‘your
role is to preserve this outstanding image of Tunisiens résidents à l'étranger and to fight
with us against these intruders who are generally as useless at home as they are abroad’
(Ibid., 112). At the same time, Tunisia’s weak post-1987 economic performance and its
increased reliance on economic remittances coincided with the intensification of its
repressive tactics against Tunisian expatriate communities abroad and the denial of
passport renewals for political activists abroad (cf. Natter 2015). This confirms the
expectation of the illiberal paradox framework.
While little is known on the activities of the Tunisian amicales, a broad consensus exists
that they were considered to be ‘extensions of the consulates, if not the … police’ of the
Tunisian state (Grillo 2006, 193). Their ties with the ruling Socialist Destourian Party in
Tunisia (Parti Socialiste Destourien, or PSD) were clear from early on (Bel-Air 2016).
Geisser conducted interviews with Tunisians in France who argued that ‘the majority of
[the institutions’] presidents were ignorant and barely knew how to read or write. They
applied party orders without thinking’ (Geisser 2012). Attempts at intimidation,
particularly vis-à-vis Tunisian members of the Islamist Ennahda Movement were common:
‘Yes, the Tunisian amicale watched us [and their leaders] would even come to see our
parents in order to dissuade us from participating in this or that activity, threatening to
transmit this information to the consulate’ (Ibid.).
What distinguishes the Tunisian state’s approach vis-à-vis the illiberal paradox from its
North African counterparts lies in its attempts to address the tensions between security and
economics by involving the diaspora communities in the state apparatus. In this, Tunisia
did not employ explicit violence or repression abroad in the way that the Libyan or Algerian
sending states. Instead, the Tunisian amicales followed Morocco’s example of putting forth
the image of the “good citizen abroad” but took it to its logical conclusion: Tunisia aimed
to implicate the migrants themselves in the enforcement of certain sets of rules and
practices that, ultimately, aimed to lead to control and obedience. Billadi, for instance, the
Arabic-language journal that was disseminated to the diaspora from 1974 onwards featured
articles written by Tunisians abroad. The amicales did not behave in an overly top-down
manner, as an extension of the state abroad; instead, by inviting Tunisian diaspora member
to partake in their administration, the amicales aimed to become part of the diaspora itself.

13

This is reflected in the oft-quoted saying that al-Tunisiyuun f-il-kharij fi qalb al-watan
(‘Tunisians abroad are in the heart of the homeland’).
Rather than persecuting political opponents by arresting them upon their return home – as
in the cases of Algeria, Libya, or Morocco – the Tunisian state employed return migration
as a reward for loyalty: select members of the Tunisian diaspora were invited back to Tunis
every year in annual expatriate conferences, where they met with party and government
officials. The sending state’s response to the participation of Tunisians abroad in protests
or demonstrations was not to exercise violence, but to task the diaspora itself with
ostracising these agitators. In 1973, in his address to a group of emigrants, Tunisia’s
Minister of the Interior would state that ‘your role is to preserve this outstanding image [of
Tunisians abroad] and to fight with us against these intruders who are generally as useless
at home as they are abroad’ (cited in Simon, p. 144). This instrumental appeal to patriotism,
which tasked diaspora members with surveying and enforcing a state-led image of Tunisia
abroad, was indicative of how power also worked in a more diffuse manner within the home
state itself (Tsourapas 2013).6

VII. CONCLUSION
Relevant scholarly work has yet to examine the interplay between cross-border mobility
and security outside the context of immigration policy-making in the Global North. This
article engaged in a comparative analysis of four Arab states in North Africa in order to
understand how authoritarian states attempt to securitise migration processes. It built on
the emigration dimension of the illiberal paradox, which allows a focus on the tension that
authoritarian states face between the economic benefits and political risks associated with
cross-border mobility. In Morocco and Tunisia, state elites’ view of labour emigration as
vital for economic development led to consistent attempts at securitising diaspora policymaking. In fact, the securitisation of diaspora policy-making became more pronounced
when remittances became more important for the Moroccan and Tunisian economies (post1973 and post-1987, respectively). In Libya and Algeria, however, elites chose to securitise
the state’s emigration policy when cross-border mobility was not expected to reap
developmental benefits (before 1969 and after 1973, respectively).
A cursory examination of other authoritarian states identifies similar responses to the tradeoff between security and development, both within the Arab world and beyond. Those that
approach cross-border mobility as a developmental opportunity – such as Jordan, Turkey,
and China – have all attempted to securitise their diaspora policies to varying degrees. In
light of worries about religious extremism or anti-regime political activism, they respond
to the trade-off between development and security via extraterritorial authoritarian
practices of repression, monitoring, and control. However, those states that do not see
cross-border mobility as producing strong economic benefits – such as Iran, the Gulf
Brand and others consider this a strategy of encadrement, which refers to the unique manner with which the Tunisian aimed
to govern populations abroad. For analyses on this, see Brand (2006, 92–132); Dazey & Zederman (2017).
6

14

Cooperation Council states or, in the past, Cuba or Egypt under Nasser – have been more
likely to securitise their emigration policies. They attempt to tackle the trade-off between
migration and security via tighter restrictions on citizens’ cross-border mobility.
The illiberal paradox thesis arguably allows for a shift in the scholarly discussion on the
securitisation of cross-border mobility to the Global South and offers a more nuanced
understanding of authoritarian emigration states’ policy-making. The exploratory
framework offered in this article invites further research that will focus on in-depth, withincase analysis via single-case studies, as well as expanded cross-case comparisons. A
particular area of further research could be the diversity of securitisation practices across
authoritarian states – for instance, under what conditions states engage in violent repression
of diaspora communities? At the same time, a second area that demands attention is the
importance of the country of destination: what are the implications for the illiberal paradox
thesis if the host state is a liberal democracy (as in North African migration to Western
Europe) or equally authoritarian (as in Egyptian or Jordanian migration to the Gulf)?
Bringing the literature on securitisation in further conversation with work on migration and
diasporas would allow a deeper understanding of heretofore-unexamined authoritarian
practices.

Acknowledgements
The author is grateful to the three anonymous reviewers and the journal editors for their
feedback and attention, as well to Katharina Natter and Mathilde Zederman for their help
in developing the paper’s argumentation. Earlier versions of this paper were presented at
two workshops organised by the University of Toronto and Coventry University,
respectively. Thanks are due to Bahar Baser, Matthew Light, Willem Maas, and to
workshop participants for their valuable insights.

15

Bibliography
Adamson, Fiona. 2018. “Sending States and the Making of Intra-Diasporic Politics: Turkey
and Its Diasporas in Europe.” International Migration Review.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0197918318767665.
Alemán, José, and Dwayne Woods. 2014. “No Way Out: Travel Restrictions and
Authoritarian Regimes.” Migration and Development 3 (2): 285–305.
Beau, Nicolas. 1995. Paris, Capitale Arabe. Paris: Éditions du Seuil.
Bel-Air, Françoise De. 2016. “Migration Profile: Tunisia.” Migration Policy Centre Policy
Brief No. 8. Florence: European University Institute.
http://cadmus.eui.eu/bitstream/handle/1814/45144/MPC_PB_2016_08.pdf. Accessed
on 11 January 2019.
Bhagwati, Jagdish N. 1976. “Taxing the Brain Drain.” Challenge 19 (3): 34–38.
Bigo, Didier. 2002. “Security and Immigration: Toward a Critique of the Governmentality of
Unease.” Alternatives 27 (1): 63–92.
Birks, J. S., and C. A. Sinclair. 1980. International Migration and Development in the Arab
Region. Geneva: International Labour Office.
Bouras, Nadia. 2013. “Shifting Perspectives on Transnationalism: Analysing Dutch Political
Discourse on Moroccan Migrants’ Transnational Ties, 1960–2010.” Ethnic and
Racial Studies 36 (7): 1219–31.
Brand, Laurie A. 2002. “States and Their Expatriates: Explaining the Development of
Tunisian and Moroccan Emigration-Related Institutions.” Working Paper No. 52. La
Jolla, CA: University of California - San Diego.
———. 2006. Citizens Abroad: Emigration and the State in the Middle East and North
Africa. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2011. “Migrants and Sending States: Reflections on the Relationship.” CARIM
Analytic and Synthetic Notes 2011/32. Florence: European University Institute.
Available at:
http://cadmus.eui.eu/bitstream/handle/1814/16205/CARIM_ASN_2011_32.pdf?seque
nce=1. Accessed on 11 January 2019.
Bredeloup, Sylvie, and Olivier Pliez. 2011. “The Libyan Migration Corridor.” Migration
Policy Institute.
Collyer, Michael. 2006. “Transnational Political Participation of Algerians in France. ExtraTerritorial Civil Society Versus Transnational Governmentality.” Political Geography
25 (7): 836–49.
———. 2012. “Moving Targets: Algerian State Responses to the Challenge of International
Migration.” Revue Tiers Monde, no. 210 (August): 107–22.
Dazey, Margot, and Mathilde Zederman. 2017. “Oppositions Islamistes à Distance.
Mobilisations Tunisiennes Et Égyptiennes En France (1990-2016).” Revue Française
De Science Politique 67 (5): 837–55.
De Haas, Hein. 2005. “International Migration, Remittances and Development: Myths and
Facts.” Third World Quarterly 26 (8): 1269–84.
———. 2007. “Between Courting and Controlling, the Moroccan State and ‘Its’ Emigrants.”
Oxford: Centre on Migration, Policy and Society, Oxford University.
Dowty, Alan. 1989. Closed Borders: The Contemporary Assault on Freedom of Movement.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Fargues, Philippe. 2004. “Arab Migration to Europe: Trends and Policies.” The International
Migration Review 38 (4): 1348–71.
Fillieule, Olivier, and Isabelle Sommier. 2018. Marseille Années 68. Paris: Presses de
Sciences Po.

16

Geisser, Vincent. 2012. “Quelle Révolution Pour Les Binationaux? Le Rôle Des FrancoTunisiens Dans La Chute de La Dictature et Dans La Transition Politique.”
Migrations Société 24 (143): 155–78.
Gerschewski, Johannes. 2013. “The Three Pillars of Stability: Legitimation, Repression, and
Co-Optation in Autocratic Regimes.” Democratization 20 (1): 13–38.
Gillette, Alain, and Abdelmalek Sayad. 1984. L’immigration Algérienne En France. Paris:
Éditions entente.
Glasius, Marlies. 2017. “Extraterritorial Authoritarian Practices: A Framework.”
Globalizations 15 (2): 179–97.
Greenhill, Kelly M. 2010. Weapons of Mass Migration - Forced Displacement, Coercion,
and Foreign Policy. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Grillo, R. D. 2006. Ideologies and Institutions in Urban France: The Representation of
Immigrants. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hirt, Nicole, and Abdulkader Saleh Mohammad. 2017. “By Way of Patriotism, Coercion, or
Instrumentalization: How the Eritrean Regime Makes Use of the Diaspora to Stabilize
Its Rule.” Globalizations 15 (2): 232–47.
Hollifield, James F. 2004. “The Emerging Migration State.” International Migration Review
38 (3): 885–912.
———. 2015. “The Politics of International Migration: How Can We ‘Bring the State Back
In’?” In Migration Theory: Talking Across Disciplines, edited by James F. Hollifield
and Caroline F. Brettell, 3rd ed., 183–237. New York: Routledge.
Huysmans, Jef, and Vicki Squire. 2010. “Migration and Security.” In The Routledge
Handbook of Security Studies, edited by Myriam Dunn Cavelty and Victor Mauer,
169–79. London: Routledge.
Iskander, Natasha. 2010. Creative State: Forty Years of Migration and Development Policy
in Morocco and Mexico. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Karyotis, Georgios, and Dimitris Skleparis. 2013. “Qui Bono? The Winners and Losers of
Securitising Migration.” Griffith Law Review 22 (3): 683–706.
Koinova, Maria. 2018. “Sending States and Diaspora Positionality in International
Relations.” International Political Sociology 12 (2): 190–210.
Lacroix, Thomas. 2015. Hometown Transnationalism: Long Distance Villageness Among
Indian Punjabis and North African Berbers. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Laurence, Jonathan. 2012. The Emancipation of Europe’s Muslims: The State’s Role in
Minority Integration. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Linz, Juan J. 1964. “An Authoritarian Regime: The Case of Spain.” In Cleavages, Ideologies,
and Party Systems: Contributions to Comparative Political Sociology, edited by Erik
Allardt and Yrjö Littunen, 291–342. Helsinki: Transactions of the Westermarck
Society.
Loescher, Gil. 1992. Refugee Movements and International Security. London: International
Institute for Strategic Studies.
Maghraoui, Driss. 2009. “The Strengths and Limits of Religious Reforms in Morocco.”
Mediterranean Politics 14 (2): 195–211.
Maghur, Azza. 2010. “Highly-Skilled Migration (Libya) - Legal Aspects.” CARIM Analytic
and Synthetic Notes 2010/31. Florence: European University Institute. Available at:
http://cadmus.eui.eu/bitstream/handle/1814/13685/CARIM_ASN_2010_31.pdf?seque
nce=1&isAllowed=y. Accessed on 11 January 2019.
McDougall, James. 2017. A History of Algeria. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Moss, Dana M. 2016. “Transnational Repression, Diaspora Mobilization, and the Case of the
Arab Spring.” Social Problems 63 (4): 480–98.
Natter, Katharina. 2014. “Fifty Years of Maghreb Emigration.” Oxford: International
Migration Institute Working Papers.

17

———. 2015. “Revolution and Political Transition in Tunisia: A Migration Game Changer?”
Washington, DC: Migration Policy Institute.
https://www.migrationpolicy.org/article/revolution-and-political-transition-tunisiamigration-game-changer. Accessed on 11 January 2019.
———. 2018. “Rethinking Immigration Policy Theory Beyond ‘Western Liberal
Democracies.’” Comparative Migration Studies 6 (1).
Obdeijn, Herman, Paolo De Mas, and Phillip Hermans. 2012. Geschiedenis van Marokko.
Amsterdam: Bulaaq.
Official Journal of the European Communities: Information and Notices. 1976. Office for
Official Publications of the European Communities. Available at:
https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=PWgNAQAAMAAJ&q=moroccan+amicale&d
q=moroccan+amicale&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwj479DN8ObbAhWoKcAKHYZ
tDIkQ6AEIJzAA. Accessed on 11 January 2019.
Pargeter, Alison. 2012. Libya: The Rise and Fall of Qaddafi. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Sahraoui, Nina. 2015. “Acquiring ‘Voice’ Through ‘Exit’: How Moroccan Emigrants
Became a Driving Force of Political and Socio-Economic Change.” The Journal of
North African Studies 20 (4): 522–39.
Simon, Gildas. 1979. L’espace Des Travailleurs Tunisiens En France: Structures Et
Fonctionnement D’un Champ Migratoire International. Poitiers: G. Simon.
Trebous, Madeleine. 1970. Migration and Development - The Case of Algeria. Paris:
Development Center of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development.
Tsourapas, Gerasimos. 2013. “The Other Side of a Neoliberal Miracle: Economic Reform
and Political De-Liberalization in Ben Ali’s Tunisia.” Mediterranean Politics 18 (1):
23–41.
———. 2015. “Why Do States Develop Multi-Tier Emigrant Policies? Evidence from
Egypt.” Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 41 (13): 2192–2214.
———. 2018a. “Authoritarian Emigration States: Soft Power and Cross-Border Mobility in
the Middle East.” International Political Science Review 39 (3): 400–416.
———. 2018b. “Theorizing State-Diaspora Relations in the Middle East: Authoritarian
Emigration States in Comparative Perspective.” Mediterranean Politics, August, 1–
25. https://doi.org/10.1080/13629395.2018.1511299.
———. 2019. The Politics of Migration in Modern Egypt: Strategies for Regime Survival in
Autocracies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
US Department of State. 1994. “1993 Human Rights Report: Libya.” Available at:
https://www.refworld.org/docid/3ae6aa184c.html. Accessed on 11 January 2019.
Van Heelsum, Anja. 2002. “Explaining Trends, Developments and Activities of Moroccan
Organisations in the Netherlands.” Paper for the Sociaal Wetenschappelijke
Studiedagen.
Vandewalle, Dirk. 2012. A History of Modern Libya. Second Edition. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Whitaker, Beth Elise. 2003. “Refugees and the Spread of Conflict: Contrasting Cases in
Central Africa.” Journal of Asian and African Studies 38 (2–3): 211–31.
Winckler, Onn. 2009. Arab Political Demography: Population Growth, Labor Migration and
Natalist Policies. 2nd ed. Brighton: Sussex Academic Press.
Zolberg, Aristide R., Astri Suhrke, and Sergio Aguayo. 1989. Escape from Violence: Conflict
and the Refugee Crisis in the Developing World. New York: Oxford University Press.

18

