"x"
"1" "Sverrir Steinsson.  2017. “Neoclassical Realism in the North Atlantic: Explaining Behaviors and Outcomes in the Cod Wars.”  Foreign Policy Analysis  13(3): 599-617."
"2" "Abstract.  Three  things are puzzling about the Cod Wars ,  three  militarized interstate disputes spread over 2 0  years . First, they  occurred  between two democratic NATO allies ,  members of a Western security community. Second, Iceland came close to withdrawing its NATO membership and closing the  US  base on Icelandic soil, which would have adversely affected the balance of power in the North Atlantic and jeopardized Iceland’s core security interests. Third, Iceland, a microstate, won each of these   disputes .  Historians and political scientists have consequently found it problematic to account for the se  puzzling disputes.  This study proposes a Neoclassical Realist account for  the  occurrence and outcomes of the Cod Wars.  I argue that t he disputes occurred due  to  (i)  powerful domestic pressures on statesmen to escalate  and (ii) elite miscalculation .  As  the disputes escalated and  Iceland’s Western alignment was  put at greater risk,  statesmen in both countries, mindful of the dangers of re-alignment, were able to resolve the conflicts in the end. The outcomes of the disputes reflect how  British statesmen were able to make greater concessions due to weaker domestic constraints than those faced by Icelandic leaders. Iceland therefore reached a highly favorable agreement in all Cod Wars."
"3" "Introduction"
"4" "Both the occurrence and outcomes of the Cod Wars are problematic  for  theories of conflict and cooperation in international relations. Given the great costs and risks for both sides, their mutual membership in NATO, their close historical ties, the considerable  Icelandic dependence on British trade, the democratic nature of both states, and their  mutual  dependence on the US,  it  goes against  conventional and academic wisdom that the two states would engage in a conflict over modest fishing interests in the North Atlantic.   That Iceland, a microstate, came close to withdrawing from NATO, closing the  US  base on Icelandic soil and damaging its special relationship with the US over  a  fishing dispute with the UK is also puzzling. Despite  the great size asymmetry, and the costs and risks incurred in particular by Iceland ,  the  Iceland ers  essentially emerged victorious from all  three  disputes.  Such conflict resolutions run contrary to expectations that  the strong defeat the weak when  interests  clash , especially when hard capabilities come into play  and both sides are committed to winning ."
"5" "The se  puzzling  aspects of the Cod Wars remain  largely unexplored. Historians have written extensively about the Cod Wars (Ingimundarson 1996, 2002, 2011; Guðmundsson 1999, 2000, 2006; Jóhannesson 2004, 2006, 2007) but these texts  are descriptively rich narratives that unfortunately provide few theoretical explanations for the events. Some political scientists have written  about  the Cod Wars but  most  examine the disputes superficially.   The Cod Wars  have confounded scholars of different stripes as they think about realism ( e.g.  Jóhannesson 2007, Keohane and Nye 2011, 87-88), liberalism ( e.g.  Hart 1976; Russett 1993, 21–22; Gleditsch and Hegre 1997, 289; Hellmann and Herborth 2008; Lebow 2010, 198) and asymmetric conflicts ( e.g.  Kissinger 1982, 172-173; Habeeb 1988).   The Cod Wars are a tough case , in particular,   for liberal IR theory  to explain, as  democr atic , economic   and institutional  ties  made the disputes worse ,  if anything  (Hellmann and Herborth 2008) ."
"6" "I propose a Neoclassical Realist account of the Cod Wars. I argue that elite miscalculation about the costs and risks of the disputes coupled with heavy domestic pressure on elites to escalate led to the outbreak of each Cod War. During each Cod War, domestic pressures forced statesmen to take actions that they considered unwise and risky: actions that jeopardized core security interests. British decision-makers sent the Royal Navy into the contested waters ;   a provocative move . Due to the nationalist fervor that ensued in Iceland  over  the entry of the Royal Navy into contested waters, Icelandic statesmen were forced to threaten to leave NATO and/or close the  US base  on Icelandic soil. Icelandic statesmen came  uncomfortably  close in each Cod War to implement their threats, which would have adversely altered the balance of power in the North Atlantic for NATO and compromised Iceland’s core security interests."
"7" "However, since Icelandic statesmen were aware that the implementation of these threats would be  contrary to  Iceland’s  core  security interests  (the loss of the military and non-military benefits of its special relationship with the United States) , they managed ,  despite significant  domestic opposition ,  to delay the implementation of the threats for long enough to reach an agreement with the UK. When it became clear to the UK and other NATO members that Iceland was at serious risk of withdrawing from NATO and Icelandic politicians had little bargaining room, the UK gave in to most of Iceland’s demands even though the British public and interest groups disapproved. Iceland won the Cod Wars  because  domestic pressures on Icelandic statesmen not to concede were far greater than similar domestic pressures on British statesmen.  While domestic pressures  and elite misperception led to distorted foreign policies in the short-term, elites went to great lengths to fashion  acceptable  agreements to the disputes when the disputes looked set to permanently alter the  security environment  for the worse."
"8" "A  Neoclassical Realis t Account of  the Cod Wars"
"9" "Neorealism posits that the anarchic structure of the international system logically leads states to act in certain ways.  With  no guaranteed limits on the behavior of states in anarchy, states have to engage in self-help behavior and accumulate power to be secure (Mearsheimer 2001, 66-68). One type of cooperation is, however, bound to occur and  be meaningful:  alliance formation. As there is no world government to guard states against potential hegemons, states will attempt to curtail the  rising powers by forming all iance s  and  balancing against them  (Waltz 1979, 116).  Neor ealists are not concerned  with  the internal characteristics of states. States will, despite their differences, ultimately behave in similar way s  (Waltz 1979, 51-54). States that fail to act accordingly will, over time, cease to exist (Waltz 1979, 118).  Neor ealists point to the persistent patterns of self-help and balances of power throughout history and across different leaders and types of states as evidence of the enduring logic of anarchy.   Neor ealism is not meant to explain the foreign policies of states, only general patterns in international relations (Waltz 1979, 72). After all, to explain why one state’s foreign policy differs from another, one would have to examine  the internal characteristics of states , which  n eor ealism does not do."
"10" "Neoclassical realists  use neorealist insights about general patterns in international  relations  to construct a theory of foreign policy .  They recognize  the importance of anarchy in explaining gen eral patterns of behavior but a re also willing to examine how the effects  of anarchy on state behavior a re affected by  internal factors, such as  elite worldviews,  ideology, national character,  political culture ,  government structure and  economic structure . To neoclassical realists, anarchy is  a  “permissive condition, rather than an independent causal force” (Taliaferro et al. 2009, 7). Anarchy and the distribution of power create systemic incentives and constraints on states, compelling them to pursue similar strategies, making  n eor ealist predictions correct over the  long term .   The  central problem  for neoclassical realists though is that the so-called “transmission belt” between systemic incentives and the actual foreign policies selected by states will be imperfect (Rose 1998, 146-147, 158). “In the shorter term... the policies states pursue are rarely objectively efficient or predictable based upon a purely systemic analysis” (Taliaferro et al. 2009, 4)."
"11" "According to Ripsman et al. (2016),  foreign policy choices will not always reflect systemic imperatives because  (i) leaders do not necessarily perceive systemic imperatives correctly; (ii) the international system does not necessarily provide clear signals about threats and opportunities; (iii) even when leaders interpret the threats and opportunities correctly, they do not necessarily respond rationally; and (iv) even states do perceive systemic imperatives correctly and respond rationally, they may be unable to mobilize  the state’s  resources effectively. These “clarity”  and “mobilization”  problems allow  internal  factors to shape foreign policy  choices .  The domestic constraints faced and perceptions  held by elites therefore pose a set of intervening variables between the independent variable (the relative distribution of power) and the dependent variable (a state’s foreign policy) ( Rose 1998, 154; Taliaferro et al .  2009, 20 ).  It is therefore hard for  n eoclassical  r ealism  to  explain general patterns of behavior ,   as opposed to  specific foreign policies  (Taliaferro et al. 2009, 20) , with some exceptions ( Ripsman et al. 2016)."
"12" "In the case of the Cod Wars, a neoclassical realist account would expect statesmen to attempt to satisfy both domestic pressures (maintain the government by meeting the demands of coalition partners, the legislature, public opinion, the media, and special interest groups) and international pressures (keep their state secure by keeping Iceland in NATO, keeping the US base in Iceland, and maintaining the balance of power in the North-Atlantic). In a clash between domestic and international interests, statesmen should, unless  ”clarity” and “mobilization” problems  are exceptionally severe, prioritize meeting international pressures. In other words, the disputes will be resolved when the security interests of either state become so jeopardized as to outweigh domestic pressures."
"13" "I  propose  a  n eoclassical  r ealis t account for   the Cod Wars .  The events of the Cod Wars cannot be explained by purely structural factors, innenpolitik alone or through a “Rationalist Explanations for War” model (see Fearon 1995).  My account of the Cod  Wars relies on all three approaches but privileges the role of structural factors.  I argue   that  statesmen ’s attempts to pursue conflicting fishing rights in a manner consistent with their states’ core security interests  we re distorted by  elite  miscalculation and domestic constraints  (see  t able 1).  These distortions led to the outbreak of the Cod Wars and dangerous escalations during the Cod Wars. Nonetheless, statesmen  managed to  avert disaster in each Cod War by  expertly  maneuvering through domestic dissent to find agreements that kept  both states’ core security interests  in the Cold War  intact."
"14" "Table 1. A Neoclassical Realist  a ccount of the Cod Wars"
"15" "Systemic incentives"
"16" "Intervening variables"
"17" "Actual foreign policy"
"18" "Dispute o utcomes"
"19" "Icelandic decision-making"
"20" "Extend fishery limits at minim al  cost."
"21" "Retain  NATO  membership ,  the  US base   and  special relationship with the US ."
"22" "Elite miscalculation: Underestimati on of  British resolve."
"23" "Ideology:  W eak public support for Western alignment."
"24" "Political culture: Political parties encouraged to outbid each other and adopt extreme policies."
"25" "Economic structure: A lack of important economic sectors other than the fishing sector."
"26" "Nationalism: The object of the disputes takes on an indivisible nature as the disputes escalate."
"27" "L arge demands."
"28" "Hurried  unilateral extensions ."
"29" "Threats to exit NATO."
"30" "Threats to close down the  US base ."
"31" "Almost implementing the aforementioned threats."
"32" "Highly favorable agreement on fishery limits."
"33" "Iceland  retains  NATO  membership . ,the base and special relationship with the US . ."
"34" "British decision-making"
"35" "Prevent Iceland’s extension of fishery limits and territorial limits at a minim al  cost."
"36" "Do not push Iceland to withdraw from NATO or close the  US base ."
"37" "Do not undermine relations with the US and other NATO allies."
"38" "Elite miscalculation: Underestimati on of  Icelandic resolve."
"39" "Elite unpreparedness: Lack of timely, informed and deliberated strategies."
"40" "Interest group influence: The trawling industry  encourages escalation ."
"41" "Bureaucratic influence:  Greater influence by the  MAF/MAFF  than by the Foreign Office."
"42" "L arge demands."
"43" "Unwillingness to believe Icelandic rhetoric."
"44" "Sending the Royal Navy to contested waters."
"45" "Putting Iceland in a position whereby it almost implemented the threats to leave NATO or close the  US base ."
"46" "Unfavorable agreement on fishery limits and territorial limits."
"47" "Iceland remains a NATO member."
"48" "The  US base  remains in Iceland."
"49" "The UK remains in high standing among its NATO allies."
"50" "The systemic stimuli (independent variables)   strongly  shape the foreign policy choices  (dependent variables)  but on ly after being distorted by  intervening variables  (elite miscalculation and domestic pressure;  see table 1).  In other words, the study is consistent with neorealism in so far as systemic forces push the two states towards particular outcomes but that other factors intruded on  and distorted  the  path  towards those outcomes.  The intervening variables observed in this study are variations of those commonly found in neoclassical realist case studies (e.g.  Lobell  et al. 2009, Ripsman et al. 2016).  In British-Iceland ic  negotiations in the lead-up to the Cod Wars, statesmen from both countries were pulled from the ideal point that they preferred. In the ca se of Icelandic statesmen, much  of Icelandic society used  the  highly salient (both in terms of economic gains and nationalism)  matter to pressure the statesmen, as parties, media and the public demanded more extreme concessions from the British. In the case of British statesmen, simple misperception coupled with industry pressure limited the fishery limit concessions that British statesmen felt  could be reasonably offered ."
"51" "These  domestic  pressures would  increase  on  statesmen from both countries after conflict initiation  until British misperceptions were corrected  (but domestic pressures remained)  and core security interests became noticeably tightly wound up in the outcome of each Cod War.   That the disputes would occur  three  times and escalate so far each time is indicative of  pathologies in both states’  processes for determining  foreign policies. That the disputes over these modest fishing rights would resolve amicably at a crisis point in each dispute is indicative of how statesmen yield to  systemic imperatives  when they clearly see them , and  do not undermine their  states’  position in the greater geopolitical battle against the Soviet Union."
"52" "Prior to the on-set of each Cod War, three stages repeat . First, e conomic downturns, reduced catches and a growing need for conservation make  the  Icelanders push for an extension of fishery limits.  International trends in favor of more expansive fishery limits make the Icelandic demands seem  within reason .  Second,  statesmen from both states attempt  to find a bargain  that avoids the potential costs and risks of  a unilateral extension .  Third,   the  two sides fail to locate a mutually acceptable bargain. Domestic pressures  le a d statesmen in both countries to make excessive demands and refuse to budge, in particular Icelandic statesmen. British statesmen were not fully aware of these domestic pressures on Icelandic statesmen , making the British statesmen less conciliatory .   Consistent with neoclassical realism, these clarity problems mean that neither side fully realizes that the disputes will put both states’ core security interests at risk, and are willing to pander to domestic interests  to obtain the best deal on fishing rights  instead."
"53" "After the on-set of  each  Cod War, four stages repeat . First,   Icelandic statesmen  decide to harshly enforce the new limits , even though they   worried about potential   British retaliation .  D omestic politics made it unfeasible for Icelandic leaders to exercise caution in enforcing the new extensions.  While they  pursue d  policies that they found unwise and dangerous , they  still be lieved that the disputes   remained  manageable and that core security interests were not at risk."
"54" "Second,  the British government raised the stakes by sending the Royal Navy to contested waters to protect the British trawler fleet, due to trawling industry pressure (ultimatums to leave the contested waters unless protected by the Royal Navy) and the undue influence of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries (which influenced British  actions in these disputes far more than the Foreign Office).  The status quo of  clashes at sea  between Icelandic patrols and British trawlers , and spoilage of British catches ,  worked for the resolved Icelanders  but not  for the  exposed  British trawlermen .  British statesmen do not fully realize the implications of this, as they do not show a major concern that Iceland’s continuing alignment with the West lies in the balance."
"55" "Third,  the British escalation leads to a nationalistic backlash in Iceland, with  the Icelanders com ing   uncomfortably  close to withdrawing from NATO and/or closing the  US base  on Icelandic soil.   Icelandic government s, fearing imminent collapse and replacement with more extreme governments  bow to public pressure and  make the threats .  However, c onsidering these actions unwise, Icelandic statesmen managed to delay acting on the m .  Consistent with neoclassical realism, the statesmen sideline domestic concerns when the systemic imperatives are more clearly visible and core security interests hang in the balance."
"56" "As to the credibility of the Icelandic threats,  it is important to note that Iceland only reluctantly joined NATO and agreed to have a US military presence on the island. N ATO membership and US basing were  highly contentious in Icelandic politics. There were riots outside of the Icelandic parliament both when Iceland  joined NATO in 1949 and signed the US Defence Agreement in  1951. Both agreements were seen as temporary solutions to the international instability at the time. Survey data is sparse and unreliable but of the data available, a 1955 survey showed that less than a third of Icelanders supported the US base on Icelandic soil and less then half supported NATO membership (Ingimundarson 1996, 294-296). Historical accounts hold that attitudes towards the US  and NATO became increasingly positive throughout the Cold War (Ingimundarson 1996, 2002). A 1972 survey, for instance, shows 72% support for retaining Iceland’s NATO membership (Ingimundarson 2002, 187). The issues, however, remained highly contentious. Political parties ran on policies to end the basing agreement and/or withdraw Iceland’s NATO membership. Excluding threats specific to the Cod War s , two governments in the 1950s and 1970s had manifestos to abrogate the US basing agreement. NATO membership and US basing remained the two most contentious issues in Icelandic politics throughout the Cold War."
"57" "Whether Icelandic elites would actually go through with the threats is unclear. US policymakers and NATO policymakers deemed it likely at least. While Icelandic statesmen believed that it was contrary to Iceland’s security interests go through with the threats, the Cod Wars devel oped in such a way as to put even pro-Western  statesmen on the brink of doing it, both to sustain their coalition governments and prevent more extreme governments from taking office. The Icelandic government during the Second Cod War had run on a platform to remove the US military base, so the risk of going through with the threats was greatest during the Second Cod War."
"58" "Fourth, British statesmen concede to most of Iceland’s demands  when the UK’s systemic imperatives become clear .  Icelandic statesmen were clearly under significant domestic pressure not to budge , and NATO allies had grown worried and dismayed, so it was clear to the UK that core security interests were on the line ."
"59" "Table 2. The stages of each Cod War"
"60" "Before or after Iceland’s unilateral extension"
"61" "Stage of dispute"
"62" "Reasons why"
"63" "Before"
"64" "Iceland pushes for an extension ."
"65" "International legal developments."
"66" "Economic downturn."
"67" "Reduced catches."
"68" "Need for conservation."
"69" "Attempt at a mutually preferable bargain ."
"70" "Avoiding the costs and risks of a unilateral Icelandic extension ."
"71" "Bargaining fai lure ."
"72" "Domestic pressures led to unrealistic demands and harsh rhetoric."
"73" "Elites miscalculate the other side’s resolve."
"74" "After"
"75" "Iceland harshly enforces its new fishery limits ."
"76" "Maintaining  the   coalition government  and/or preventing a more extreme government to form."
"77" "UK sends the Royal Navy into contested waters ."
"78" "Pressure by the trawling industry."
"79" "MAF /MAFF  influence  on government decision-making."
"80" "Elite miscalculation of Iceland’s resolve."
"81" "Iceland comes close to withdrawing from NATO  and/ or closing the  US base ."
"82" "Maintain government and prevent a more extreme government to form."
"83" "UK concedes ."
"84" "Stop Iceland from withdrawing from NATO or closing down the  US base ."
"85" "In a comprehensive presentation of neoclassical realism by Ripsman et al. (2016), it is argued that the restrictiveness of the international system determines the impact that intervening variables - leader images, strategic culture, state-society relations and domestic institutions – have on foreign policy outcomes. When the international system is less restrictive, these internal variables may shape foreign policy choices, but are unlikely to do so in a highly restrictive international system. This study is consistent with this view. Both British and Icelandic decision-makers understood themselves to have considerable leeway in how to deal with the fisheries question  at first . Had the international environment been more restrictive, it is unlikely that Icelandic and British decision-makers would have let the Cod Wars occur. Were US support less reliable to Iceland, the USSR more directly hostile to both Iceland and the UK, and the international environment more volatile, statesmen from both sides would have been wary to start the Cod Wars, fight them in such aggressive ways, bring Iceland to the brink of its NATO membership and almost lead to the abr ogation of the Iceland-US defens e agreement."
"86" "A lack of clarity about the systemic imperatives allowed statesmen on both sides to be influenced by elements that caused suboptimal foreign policy choices. As a result of  the constraints faced by statesmen, the intervening variables exerted distorting influence in the short term in each Cod War, but statesmen corrected course and chose optimal policies when security risks were made clear. Had it been clear to both Icelandic and British statesmen prior to the on-set of each Cod War that these disputes about the loss/gain of a couple of thousands of tons of fish would  jeopardize  Iceland ‘s  NATO membership and the US-Iceland  D efense  A greement, and to a British loss of standing among its allies, it is unlikely that statesmen would go start the disputes."
"87" "Walt (2002, 211) argues that \"neoclassical realism tends to incorporate domestic variables in an ad hoc manner, and its proponents have yet to identify when these variables have greater or lesser influence”. In my study though, I highlight how statesmen acted in very consistent ways with systemic  imperatives  when push came to shove (when risks were great and the systemic imperative readily apparent) and opted for suboptimal policies when risks seem ed more distant and manageable.  Neoclassical realis m has  also been criticized for focusing too narrowly on the foreign policy choices of great powers, with some suggestions that it cannot explain the foreign policy choices of non-great powers  as well (Ripsman et al. 2016).  Jervis (1978, 172-173) ,  for instance,   argue s  that the greater vulnerability of small states to coercion forces them to be more closely attuned to international pressures.  However, this study shows that neoclassical realism is as appropriate for explaining Iceland the micro-state’s foreign policy choices as it is the United Kingdom the great power’s ."
"88" "The Cod Wars"
"89" "First Cod War (1958-61)"
"90" "The Icelanders were intent on expanding their fishery limits  from four miles to 12 miles  quickly after the Proto Cod War   (1952-1956)  ended .  Iceland’s dependence on fishing meant that  there were significant domestic interests tied to an extension of fishery limits.  F ish products accounted for more than 90% of Iceland’s total exports at the time  (Thór 1995, 256) .  Declining fish stocks in the waters off Iceland   also  created pressing incentives to prevent overfishing (Thór 1995, 171-172). An expansion would have led to greater catches, the expulsion of competing trawler fleets and conservation of important fishing grounds. 12-mile limits  were  in line with where the international community seemed to be heading on the questions of territorial waters and fishery limits  (Jóhannesson 2007, 164) . For the British trawling  industry, the loss of the 4-12  mile zone would have been very costly  in terms of fish catches, precedents for other distant fishing grounds and loss of maneuverability for the Navy ."
"91" "Recognizing  the costs and risks that a unilateral extension entailed ,  the two sides attempted  to reach a negotiated settlement . The British knew that the Icelanders were highly resolved and that the Navy might have to stay in Icelandic waters for a considerable amount of time  to protect British trawlers . British statesmen also knew that Iceland was a fragile member of the Western Alliance, and were warned by the US that escalation could lead to domestic pressure against Iceland’s NATO membership and the US base on Icelandic soil (Ingimundarson 1996, 380, 382 ; Guðmundsson 2006, 102 ).  The Icelanders also showed caution ,  delay ing   a planned extension of  fishery limits   in  September 1958  over fears  that it  would dismay the  US (Ingimundarson 1996, 377; Jóhannesson 2007, 163-164) . Icelandic statesmen  also knew that an  escalation in the dispute  might lead to greater animosity towards the US and NATO,  making it difficult for  pro- Western Icelandic statesmen to  justify NATO membership  and the  presence of the  US base   on Icelandic soil ."
"92" "British failures to meet Iceland halfway can be attributed to intelligence failures, failures of the government to prepare timely and deliberated policies ,  and trawling industry pressure.  British miscalculation of resolve made it difficult for the two sides to locate a bargain.   High-level British officials  believed that  the  Icelanders  were divided on the issue of the 12-mile extension , and  that the Icelandic government did not have the resolve to go through with its  NATO threats   (Jóhannesson 2007, 197).  It was thought  that the Icelanders would withdraw some  of their  demands  in the wake of a unilateral extension  (Thór 1995, 187, 189).  This  belief  stemmed from  the discourse of the  Icelandic  opposition parties and their news outlets, and the divisions within the  Icelandic coalition  government  (Guðmundsson 1999, 68-69; 2006, 100, 111) .   Also, Jóhannesson (2007) describes how the British failed to form an informed and deliberated policy on fishery limit extensions, which contributed to the failure of the 1958 Law of the Sea Conference to reach a conclusion. The failure of the Conference pushed Iceland to go ahead with a unilateral extension. At lower levels in the British bureaucracy, preparations for the 1958 Geneva Conference only began four months prior to the conference (Jóhannesson 2007, 166). The first Cabinet discussion in five years on British policy on territorial waters occurred a week prior to the 1958 Law of the Sea Conference. The discussion was brief and saw the Cabinet adopt a fairly unyielding stance (Jóhannesson 2007, 168-169)."
"93" "Domestic politics in Iceland both contributed to British confusion and forced Icelandic statesmen to extend quicker, make tougher demands and adopt harsher rhetoric. Pleading with the British to understand their domestic quandary, Icelandic statesmen  threatened that they would be forced to withdraw from NATO and close the  US base  if the Royal Navy entered the 12 miles (Guðmundsson 2006, 100). Even though pro-Western statesmen in the three-party Icelandic coalition government  (Progressive Party, Social Democratic Party, and Socialist Party)  believed it unwise to extend in September 1958, a unilateral extension could not be avoided. Had the government not extended the fishery limits in September 1958,  the  Socialist Party  would most likely have left government   and new elections held  (Thór 1995, 175-176).  The Progressive Party and the Social Democratic Party consequently went along with its coalition partner and  extended the fishery limits.  However, i n a last-ditch effort to prevent a unilateral extension,  Social Democrats and  the  Progressive Party secretly  reached out to NATO  and the UK with a moderate proposal. If accepted,   this agreement  would  likely  have   led to the collapse of the fragile coalition government and pit  the  parties against public opinion (Jóhannesson 2007, 188).   The two parties were essentia lly prepared to sacrifice the coalition government in exchange for a bargain that avoided a Cod War, which illustrated a concern with systemic imperatives over party interests."
"94" "When these  last-ditch  negotiations  with the British  fell apart, the Social Democratic s  “most reluctantly gave in”  to the hard-liners  in government  (Jóhannesson 2007, 189).  The choice facing the leaders from the two moderate parties in the leftwing government was to  either let the coalition government collapse  while  maintain ing  Iceland’s security interests or extend the fishery limits unilaterally and possibly risk Iceland’s security interests.  The  choice for Iceland’s leaders was between the  certainty  of failing to meet their domestic goals and the  possibility  that they might fail to  meet their international goals. The Social Democrats and the Progressive Party (which adopted a hard line shortly  prior  to the Social Democrats ) consequently chose the certainty of  meet ing  the ir  domestic goals  at a risk to Iceland’s international interests  by   approvin g   the unilateral extension ."
"95" "Believing that the Icelanders lacked resolve, Harold Macmillan , the British prime minister,  sent the Navy into the contested waters  to protect British trawlers  shortly  after Iceland’s extension . He suspected that this would expose the empty rhetoric of the Icelandic government ,  and  rile Icelandic elites and the public against the Socialist Party, which the British government believed had pushed Iceland to this point.  Th is decision was also partly the result of  trawling industry  pressure  and  the influence of t he  MAF/MAFF , the government department most beholden to the interests of the trawling industry (Jóhannesson 2007, 262-264).  British statesmen d id  not see the risks to core security interests as pressing at this point in the conflict, as they doubt ed  the Icelanders’ resolve  to  involve  NATO and the US base ."
"96" "The entry of  the Royal  Navy  into the contested waters , with subsequent c onfrontations  at sea,  agitated  the Icelandic public.  Icelandic ministers and officials warned  the British  that public pressure might lead the government to break off diplomatic relations with the UK and withdraw from NATO  (Jóhannesson 2007, 214-215 , 217 ). Iceland  also  became less willing to compromise with the UK. As the chief negotiator for Iceland noted, the 12 miles  now  assumed an “almost religious importance” for  the  Icelanders (Jóhannesson 2007, 236). The Socialist Party pressured its coalition partners to refuse to meet the British at the negotiating table after the entry of the Navy into disputed waters (Guðmundsson 2006, 99-100). The attempts by moderates to hold the government together were for naught, as the fragile leftwing government collapsed in on itself over  economic policy  in December 1958 . A volatile and risky dispute was consequently left in the hands of a new government."
"97" "The  rightwing government formed in the fall of 1959  was likewise constrained by  domestic  politics from resolving the dispute. Due to  its  small parliamentary majority,  individual  hard-liner MPs in the governing parties  were  veto players (Guðmundsson 1999, 68). The domestic political situation in Iceland did not favor a conclusion to the First Cod War, short of full victory. During negotiations in July 1960, Icelandic officials  even  had difficulties convincing the Icelandic public of the utility of negotiations with the British  (Guðmundsson 2006, 101-102) . Icelandic statesmen  consequently tried to conduct negotiations  with the British  unbeknownst to the public  (Guðmundsson 1999, 91).  Unless the UK would meet Icelandic demands, there would be no end to the dispute.  Even as the British  moved closer to  Icelandic demands , public pressure prevented Iceland from  offering any significant concessions  in return .  When  negotiations were re-started in the fall of 1960 after the UK met tough preconditions, the Icelandic government was harshly criticized domestically (Jóhannesson 2007, 265-267).  Thousands protested against  any  deviation from 12-mile limit s  (Jóhannesson 2007,  268- 271 ; Guðmundsson 1999, 75-76 ).  There was considerable pressure on the Icelandic government to close the  US base  and leave NATO over the dispute.  Having had some leeway prior to the outbreak of the Cod War, Icelandic statesmen were now greatly constrained by domestic politics, finding themselves at risk of  a suboptimal foreign policy choice:  leaving  NATO and closing  the NATO base."
"98" "The Cod War was growing costly and futile for the British government  at this point . Navy ships were costly to maintain, their involvement in Icelandic waters diverted them from other duties, and the  rough  Icelandic waters damaged them (Jóhannesson 2007, 213). For these reasons, the Navy could not be kept in the disputed waters indefinitely. As the Commander-in-Chief of the Home Fleet noted ,  the dispute was “ now exerting a serious and adverse effect upon the weapon efficiency of the fleet ”  (quoted in Jóhannesson 2007, 234). Once there was little hope to achieve  satisfactory fishing rights , no prospects of achieving narrow territorial limits, and the dispute started to escalate and jeopardize the UK’s  core security  interests, British leaders started to look for a way out. They consequently went a long way to meet Icelandic demands,  even if it meant  standing up to the British trawling industry ."
"99" "The British conceded to most of Iceland’s demands towards the end of  1960  but due to  Icelandic politics , the  negotiations could not be concluded  immediately .  It took  several weeks after the  completion of a provisional  agreement for the Icelandic government to publicly announce the agreement and put it to a vote in the Althing (Guðmundsson 1999, 107).  Opposition parties harshly criticized t he agreement ,  but the re was enough of a majority   to get the agreement through the Althing  (Jóhannesson 2007, 281) .   Icel and achieved 12- mile fishery limits but agreed to  the British demand of  refer r ing  any future disputes to the ICJ."
"100" "In this Cod War, there were two Icelandic governments; one that started the Cod War in a permissive environment where risks to core security interests seemed distant and appeared manageable, and one taking charge of a Cod War in a highly restrictive  environment  where both systemic imperatives and domestic pressures were obvious. The  decision of the first governme nt to start the conflict  makes sense given the distant systemic imperatives and the glaring domestic pressures. The decision of the second government to fight against domestic  interests  to  maintain Iceland’s NATO membership and US defense agreement also makes sense within a neoclassical realist approach, as  going through with those threats would have   been the self-defeating. The British went into the Cod War, miscalculating the Icelanders’ resolve and capabilities, and allowing domestic interests and undue influence from MAF /MAFF  within the foreign policy bureaucracy to lead the British government into taking seemingly distant risks to its core security interests. As those risks became more obvious, British statesmen surrendered  under   unfavorable terms ."
"101" "Second Cod War (1972-73)"
"102" "By the end of the 1960s,  economic conditions in Iceland  - collapse of the herring fisheries, the decline in cod stocks and the decline of the Icelandic economy (Thór 1995, 196; Ingimundarson 2002, 120-121) -  created powerful incentives for  Icelandic politicians to call for an extension of fishery limits  to 50 miles , even if it meant that Iceland would renege on the  clause  of future referral to the  ICJ .  A new leftwing coalition government formed after the 1971 elections , with  a  unilateral exten sion  as its top priority   (Guðmundsson 2006, 102-103). The government  was  however  divided on the timing of the extension.  The Socialist Party was once again the hard-liner party in a three-party government.  The Socialist Party wanted  an expansive and early extension  whereas the Progressive Party and Union of Liberals and Leftists wanted to  extend  more cautiously  and  pursue  negotiations first  (Ingimundarson 2002, 119-121).   The British would not  surrender the 50 miles easily.  As in the  previous  Cod War, t he British trawling industry  would be hurt by the loss of the 12-50 mile zone, and the precedent it would set  in the UK’s other fishery disputes ( Hart 1976, 20-21;  Ingimundarson 2002, 144)."
"103" "Failure to reach an agreement would be costly and risky  for both sides .  Revoking  Iceland’s d efense  a greement  with the US, which the  new leftwing  Icelandic government threatened to do,   would likely l ead to the loss of   the many  politi cal - economic benefits of Iceland’s  special relationship with the US.  This is precisely why most elites in the government did not want to abrogate the US Defense Agreement, even though it was the  official  policy of the government (Ingimundarson 2002, 127-129, 141). The Socialist Party was the only coalition partner unambiguously in favor of closing the  US base .  An  extension also meant that an agreement with the E uropean Economic Community (EEC)  to  halve trade barriers on fish imports from Iceland, could not come into effect (Hart 1976, 20). For the UK, it was , as ever,  important  to keep Iceland aligned with the West and maintain the balance of power in the North Atlantic .   Both British and Iceland ic  statesmen believed that the dispute could be resolved before any escalation  with broader security implications .  Statesmen in both countries had concerns about any potential conflict’s impact on Iceland’s Western alignment, but these risks were distant wherea s the domestic imperatives were  immediate.  As a result, the statesmen were not as cautious as they should have been."
"104" "The UK miscalculated  Iceland’s  power  in the lead-up to the Second Cod War . The first  miscalculation  concerned the potential role that the US would play in the dispute. The British  knew  that Iceland was  increasingly  important to the US  since the end of the first Cod War – for tracking Soviet submarines in the North Atlantic and serving as a  frontline in any war against the Soviet Union (Ingimundarson 2002, 36-37, 133) -  but was unsure as to any  possible  American interference on Iceland’s behalf in case the dispute escalated. To alleviate American fears, British diplomats explained to American diplomats prior to the unilateral extension that they would prevent the dispute from escalating as the First Cod War had (Ingimundarson 2002, 151-152). Th is shows that the  British  believed that the dispute could be managed, so as to not jeopardize US interests and provoke the US to get involved. Whereas the British were uncertain about any US involvement, Icelandic statesmen  were inclined to  believe that the US could and would interfere on their behalf in the dispute and put pressure on the UK to settle (Guðmundsson 2006, 106).   Both sides consequently believed that the dispute was soluble and that the odds were in their favor."
"105" "The British were also unaware of a new and effective weapon that the Icelanders intended to use: wire-cutters. This new weapon allowed the Icelanders to more effectively sabotage the catches of British trawlers.  The wire-cutters would play a central role in this Cod War by contributing to the ultimatum of the trawling industry , which led  the British  government  to send the Royal Navy  into the contested waters .  Another miscalculation   concerned  Iceland’s resolve. British officials mistakenly believed that Icelandic leaders lacked the will go through with their threats. There were   good  reasons to doubt whether the government was willing to  act on the seemingly self-defeating threats to close the  US base  or withdraw from NATO   (Ingimundarson 2002, 128-129 , 141 ) .  The only thing that  undoubtedly  united the new Icelandic government was a willingness to extend unilaterally, but whether the government would risk NATO membership and the US base to achieve improved fishery limits was unclear  (Ingimundarson 2002, 127-128). The British, as in the First Cod War, were inclined to believe that only the Socialist Party was willing to  actually implement the threat s  (Hart 1976, 22-23)."
"106" "These disagreements and uncertainties prevented both sides from finding a mutually acceptable agreement.  In the weeks prior to the extension, the Icelandic foreign minister, Einar Ágústsson, tried as a last resort to appeal for US help in pressuring the UK. Ágústsson’s fears were that an escalation of the dispute would create pressure on the Icelandic government to expel US forces and compromise its NATO membership (Ingimundarson 2002, 154). Other  p ro-Western members of  the Icelandic government , along with Icelandic diplomats,  had previously  insisted  that Iceland’s NATO membership hung on the line  unless NATO rallied behind the Icelanders  (Ingimundarson 2002, 157).  The US did not intervene on Iceland’s behalf at these early stages though, other than by encouraging the UK to show caution (Ingimundarson 2002, 154-155, 158).  It was therefore clear prior to the extension that  Iceland’s Western alignment  would invariably be connected to the fishery dispute in the absence of a favorable resolution.  The only question among the prescient statesmen on the Icelandic side was how much time the y  would have to resolve the dispute after its outbreak. At this time, while risky, the outbreak of the Second Cod War was still seen as manageable."
"107" "Unable to reach a mutually acceptable agreement, both sides believe that an unrecognized unilateral extension was preferable to cowing to the other side’s demands.   The Icelandic govern ment  agreed to extend, at the latest, on  1 September  1972.  Waiting any  longer  was domestically   unfeasible  and could have le d to the collapse of the leftwing government.  The domestic pressure   was strong enough to make  all parties  and  parliamentarians  in Iceland  (even the pro-Western Independence  Party  and Social Democratic  P art y   which had  taken a cautious stance on the fishery question during  the 1971 election  campaign )  jump on the bandwagon and support the extension (Ingimundarson 2002, 148).  As in the previous Cod War, immediate domestic pressures exerted more influence on statesmen  in the lead-up to this Cod War  than the more distant security threats that a Cod War taken too far would entail."
"108" "After the extension, pro-Western  ministers  in the Icelandic government continued  their attempts  to engineer a feasible agreement. This was made difficult by the Socialist Party’s threats to leave the coalition government unless their coalition partners met their  extreme  demands , such as  enforc ing  the new limits in a belligerent manner  by  using wire-cutters to spoil British catches and endangering British seamen.  The Icelandic belligerence dismayed British diplomats, hinder ing  productive negotiations.  Negotiations were also difficult  due to the Socialist Party’s rhetoric and actions . Lúðvik Jósepsson,  socialist and  Minister of Fisheries,  prevented  negotiations  from getting off the ground  with the British immediately after the extension in September 1972 . He set  extreme  and unrealistic  preconditions for negotiations   (Ingimundarson 2002, 162).  A ttempts were made  from late September to the end of 1972  to reach a temporary agreement but internal divisions in the Icelandic government over what concession s   to make   made it difficult   to reach an agreement ( Hart 1976, 29-30;  Ingimundarson 2002, 165-166 ; Guðmundsson 2006, 104 )."
"109" "Moderate Icelandic statesmen managed to get Icelandic patrolships to show greater caution; leaving some British trawlers alone and not using wire-cuttings indiscriminately  (Jóhannesson 2006, 83) . However, there was only so much that moderate Icelandic  statesmen could do to temper the violence.  As the Second Cod War escalated, hard-liners within the two moderate governing parties put pressure on their  moderate  party leaders to take a harder stance. Under immense  domestic  pressure  in the spring of 1973 , the pro-Western ministers of the Icelandic government  declared their intention to initiate the revision process of the US Defence Agreemen t  unless the US  pressured  the UK into making concessions. By the end of the revision period, Iceland would be free to unilaterally revoke the agreement and  close the  US base  (Ingimundarson 2002, 214- 216 ). Ingimundarson (2002, 216) argues that ministers from the Progressive Party , one  of  the  moderate governing parties,  were willing to raise the stakes  in this manner  to appease dissidents within the party and to prevent the Socialist Party from leaving government."
"110" "There is evidence that the British government resisted sending the Navy in so as to not  infuriate the Icelanders , jeopardize Iceland’s Western  alignment  and dismay NATO allies  (Ingimundarson 2011, 104).   It was not until  beleaguered British trawlermen gave the British government an ultimatum to leave the contested waters  that  the government bowed to the demands of the trawling industry and  sent warships into the 50 miles  (Hart 1976, 39 ;  Guðmundsson 2006, 104).  Due to this industry pressure, and possibly due to loss aversion, the British government took a great risk by sending in the Navy; an action it had promised the US not to take in the lead-up to the conflict."
"111" "The entry of the Royal Navy created a full-blown crisis . There was a massive nationalist backlash in Iceland (Ingimundarson 2002, 222).  10-15% of the  Icelandic population turned out to  protest against the British action , with p rotesters  throwing  rocks at and defac ing  the British embassy (Ingimundarson 2002, 226). Even firmly pro-Western politicians were now willing to withdraw Iceland from NATO unless the UK  would withdraw its warships (Ingimundarson 2002, 226-227).  S upport for NATO and the base was  even  declining  within the Independence Party, by far the most pro-Western party in Iceland  (Ingimundarson 2002, 227, 235-236). The Icelandic government was under serious pressure to escalate. The Icelandic government declared that it would withdraw its ambassador to the UK and would under no conditions negotiate with the British unless the warships were withdrawn (Thór 1995, 210)."
"112" "NATO  had been  reluctant to get actively involved in mediating the dispute due to fears that the Icelanders would be encouraged to use its NATO membership as blackmail (Ingimundarson 2002, 224-225). NATO only began to take initiative to resolve the dispute once Iceland began to threaten to withdraw from NATO and break off diplomatic relations with the UK (Guðmundsson 2006, 107).  After a failed attempt by Joseph Luns, the Secretary General of NATO, to get the two sides to the bargaining table, Iceland initiated the six-month revision process of the Defense Agreement (Ingimundarson 2002,  241-242,  245). The future of the  US base  was no w  in peril. It was at this point that the United States finally got actively involved in the dispute .  William Rogers, US Secretary of State, planned a proposal with Luns on how to get Iceland and the UK to the bargaining table (Ingimundarson 2002, 249). They proposed that the UK withdraw its warships but that Iceland ic patrol ships  leave British trawlers alone in return.  The  Iceland ic government  could not agree to that due to fears that  this concession  would be made public (Ingimundarson 2002, 249)."
"113" "Highly publicized clashes at sea in September 1973  created immense pressure on the Icelandic government to go through with an earlier promise to break off diplomatic relations with the UK (Ingimundarson 2002, 262). On  27 September  1973, the Icelandic  government announced that diplomatic relations with the UK would be broken off on  3  October 1973, unless the Navy withdrew from the 50 miles (Ingimundarson 2002, 263).  The UK now found itself in a hopeless position, as Icelandic statesmen were incapable of compromise and looked set to adversely impact the balance of power in the North Atlantic.  Via NATO  pressure , the UK  agreed  one day prior to the deadline  to withdraw the Navy from the 50 miles and to hold negotiations later  that month  even without a promise by Iceland to leave British trawlers alone ( Hart 1976, 45;  Ingimundarson 2002, 263)."
"114" "Even   as the UK  conceded to most of Iceland’s demands  at these negotiations, the Socialist Party demanded more  favorable terms  and delayed the negotiations. When a provisional agreement was finally achieved between the two governments, the Socialist Party continued to try to spoil the negotiations. The Socialist Party leaked a report of the negotiations with the intention to derail them via public pressure (Ingimundarson 2002, 266). This attempt failed though, as the Icelandic public did not rail against the highly favorable agreement. The  Althing consequently approved the  agreement, achieving temporary 50-mile limits for Iceland  (Ingimundarson 2002, 267-268)."
"115" "It was in this Cod War that the Icelanders came closest to going through on one of its threats against the Western alliance. Pro-Western statesmen within a divided government and  constrained by  a hostile public managed to delay and hold firm in the hopes that the British would concede. Once the British realized belatedly that core security interests were at risk, through pressure by its allies and  the apparent credibility of Icelandic statesmen’s threats, they conceded to the Icelanders at  a  cost to public opinion at home."
"116" "Third Cod War (1975-76)"
"117" "Iceland’s dependence on fishing meant, just as with previous extensions, that it was important to extend the fishery limit to 200 miles.  A  1975 report  painted a dark picture of the state of cod stocks in the waters off Iceland . The   Icelanders would be forced to reduce their fishing significantly  unless  foreign  fleets  could be excluded  from the waters  (Jónsson 1981, 19 ; Thór 1995, 218-222 ). Losing the  fruitful  12-200 mile zone would have been a significant blow  to a British trawling industry in dire straits  (Jónsson 1981, 11-12;  Habeeb 1988, 121;  Guðmundsson 2006, 108; Jóhannesson 2006, 112). At the time, it was apparent that 200 - mile  exclusive economic zones  would eventually be formalized in international law (Thór 1995, 217). The British were in fact eager to extend their own fishery limits to 200 miles but were unable to do so due to their membership in the  European Economic Community , which prohibited unilateral extensions (Jónsson 1981, 11). The goal was therefore to delay the Icelandic extension and obtain reasonable temporary catch quotas in the 12-200 mile zone before 200-mile limits were formalized in international law."
"118" "The same costs and risks  of the  previous Cod War  applied to  this one.  The  two-party   Icelandic  government was fairly pro-Western (the Independence Party was firmly pro-Western whereas the Progressive Party was more evenly split in its  attitudes ) and the Icelandic public was arguably at its most supportive of NATO  membership  and the  US  base (Ingimundarson 2002, 169). Nonetheless, escalation of the dispute was likely to drag  the two issues  into the dispute, as had been the case in previous Cod Wars .   A new Cod War  would  also make it more difficult for  Iceland  to  conclude its agreement with the EEC  on lower fish tariffs  (Jóhannesson 2006, 112). The Icelandic government also  calculated that Icelandic unilateralism might reduce support for 200-mile fishery limits at coming Law of the Sea conferences  and delay the inevitable  (Jónsson 1981, 102).   Icelandic statesmen therefore approached the issue with caution  and tried to negotiate a settlement ."
"119" "Negotiations were not fruitful however.   British  statesmen  overestimated their bargaining power, believing the Icelanders to lack resolve, miscalculating international legal developments and disbelieving Icelandic claims about conservation.  The British doubt ed  the resolve of the Icelandic government. It did not seem likely that the new pro-Western Icelandic government would wager its NATO membership or expel US forces over the issue ju dging by its behavior since  formation in 1974 (Guðmundsson 2000, 78).  This was however a miscalculation by the British, as subsequent events will show.  The British  also  miscalculated legal developments. The British did not expect  the  UN Convention on the Law of the Sea  to reach an agreement on  exclusive economic zones  in the near future (Guðmundsson 2006, 108), even though there were  clear  signs that 200-mile limits would soon be accepted. Whereas the British miscalculated legal developments,  the  Icelanders followed legal developments closely and were inspired to extend due, in part, to the perception that 200-mile limits would  soon be the norm  (Thór 1995, 217; Jóhannesson 2006, 151)."
"120" "The British also appeared fairly uninformed about the  issues at hand . They, for instance,   cas t  doubts on the accuracy of Icelandic  conservation  claims (Jóhannesson 2006, 113). According to Guðmundsson (2006, 108), Roy Hattersley, the head of the British delegation during negotiations, was  during the height of the Third Cod War  taken “completely by surprise” when scientists from both Iceland and the UK declared that the  fish stocks in the disputed waters were overexploited. A  post-dispute report  by the British Parliament “criticized Hattersley’s lack of understanding on the poor condition of the fish stocks and blamed him for the outcome of the dispute” (Guðmundsson 2006, 108).  This shows how individual statesmen and the organization of the foreign policy apparatus matter in terms of forming optimal or suboptimal foreign policy choices."
"121" "Unable to resolve the issue in negotiations,  Icelandic leaders faced significant  pressure from the public,  opposition parties and  within the  coalition  government   to go  ahead with  a  unilateral extension.  Pro-Western politicians in the Independence Party were reluctant to jeopardize Iceland’s  core  security interests where as the Progressive Party was less so  (Ingimundarson 2011, 135). The Icelandic Prime Minister tried to get his coalition partners in the Progressive Party to accept 65,000-ton catch quotas for the British for a period of two years  in the 50-200 mile zone , but they would not accept the proposal (Guðmundsson 2006, 109).  Unable to postpone the extension any longer, the Icelandic government declared 200-mile limits in November 1975."
"122" "As in the previous Cod War, the new limits were harshly enforce d . Clashes at sea ensued , leaving the British trawler fleet in a difficult position  again . Unwilling to settle with the Icelanders prior to the on-set  of this  C od  W ar due to elite miscalculation and unpreparedness, British statesmen now escalated the dispute due to pressure from a domestic source.   The British trawler fleet in the disputed waters threatened to abandon the waters and give Iceland  de facto  recognition of its newly claimed limits unless  given naval protection  (Jónsson 1981, 22-23; Ingimundarson 2011, 135-136).  With its back against the wall, the British  government  chose to send the Royal Navy into  the  contested waters.  T he British  showed some caution though, as  restraints  were imposed on the Navy  that made  the naval protection less effective  but limited  the risk of mishaps . Ingimundarson (2011, 137), for instance,  notes how requests from  the  Navy  for permission to use gunfire and cut the trawling wires of Icelandic trawlers  were  rejected. The UK also  later  withdrew the Navy temporarily from the disputed waters so as to facilitate negotiations but sent it back into the disputed waters when negotiations failed.  The British government was aware of the risks involved, as shown by their caution, but went ahead anyway due to the immediate  and significant  domestic costs that would have been incurred by letting the trawler fleet leave and giving Iceland  de facto  recognition of the 200 miles."
"123" "The entry of the Navy into the 200 miles led to demonstrations in Iceland.  P ressure from opposition parties on the Icelandic government magnified (Jónsson 1981, 34-35).  E ven MPs of the pro-Western Social Democratic Party criticized the government for being too tepid and conciliatory (Jónsson 1981, 80-81).  The Progressive Party became noticeably more combative in its rhetoric after the Navy entered the disputed waters, and was not as hesitant to threaten Iceland’s NATO membership as it had been in earlier stages of the dispute (Jónsson 1981, 52).  To appease the public and prevent the collapse of the coalition government,  the Icelandic government chose to escalate  (Jóhannesson 2006, 126 ; Jónsson 1981, 82 ).   Iceland banned  British military aircraft from using the  US base  in Keflavík and denied British vessels access to Icelandic ports (Ingimundarson 2011, 135).  The government also  used  Iceland’s NATO membership as a bargaining chip , threatening to leave the alliance  (Ingimundarson 2011, 135-136)."
"124" "When the British re-sent the Royal Navy into the contested waters after a temporary withdrawal meant to facilitate negotiations with the uncompromising Icelanders, Iceland  broke off diplomatic relations with the UK.  It was at this point that concerned  NATO  allies began to pressure   the UK  (Jónsson 1981, 61-62). Even the United States, which had attempted to stay out of th e  dispute,  involved itself . In the weeks prior to the conclusion of the dispute, “the United States government finally took some initiative in solving the dispute and put pressure on the British to give in” (Guðmundsson 2006, 110).  The situation was untenable for the British government . There was  little hope of accomplishing favorable fishing rights in the 50-200 mile zone,  and the British were  now risking Iceland’s withdrawal from NATO and the ire   of its allies.  Statements from the British foreign minister after this cod war suggest that pressure from other NATO  members  had a great say in British calculations (Jónsson 1981, 99).  It was ultimately through mediation by Luns that the British agreed to withdraw its warships (without Icelandic counter-concessions)  to facilitate  negotiations (Ingimundarson 2011, 136).  As the risks to the UK’s core security interests became clear, British statesmen opted to largely sideline domestic interests to facilitate an unfavorable end to this Cod War."
"125" "Even when the two sides reached a provisional agreement, one highly favorable to Iceland, the “sensitive domestic political situation” in Iceland made it difficult for Icelandic leaders to  accept and ratify  the deal (Ingimundarson 2011, 137). All opposition parties in Iceland opposed the provisional agreement (Jónsson 1981, 98). According to Ingimundarson (2011, 137), “there were protests in Iceland against the agreement on the grounds that the British should not be allowed to fish anything”. Nonetheless, the Icelandic government signed the agreement , which ensured 200-mile limits for Iceland . The  June 1976  agreement gave the British the right to catch 30,000 ton within the 200 miles for the next six months, which was roughly the same catch that they would have  gotten had they accepted the Icelandic proposal in November 1975 (Jóhannesson 2006, 144; Ingimundarson 2011, 137-138)."
"126" "As in previous Cod Wars, the Icelandic government pursued the fisheries question with an intent to appease the more immediate domestic interests, expecting the core security interests to not be put in immediate jeopardy. As the Icelanders failed to calculate British resolve, those core security interests would be dragged into the dispute and put at serious risk. British statesmen, miscalculating Icelandic resolve badly and misunderstanding the issues at stake, failed both to prevent the outbreak of the conflict and chose to escalate when the trawling industry put the government up against the wall. This caused the core security interests of both states to be put in jeopardy, leading NATO allies to pressure the less domestically constrained British government to concede to the Icelanders, which it did."
"127" "Conclusion"
"128" "The Cod Wars  we re  three  militarized interstate disputes fought by three different British governments and  five  different Icelandic governments.  This   study  provide s  the first comprehensive  account of  why the Cod Wars occurred, why they escalated so  badly and how Iceland emerged  as the victor in each Cod War.  Elite miscalculation about the costs and risks of the disputes coupled with heavy domestic pressure on elites to escalate led to the outbreak of each Cod War. Domestic pressures forced statesmen to take actions that they considered unwise and risky, such as the British decision to send the Royal Navy into the contested waters, and the Icelandic threats to leave NATO and/or close the US base on Icelandic soil. Icelandic statesmen came uncomfortably close in each Cod War to  implement their threats, which would have adversely altered the balance of power in the North Atlantic for NATO and compromised Iceland’s core security interests."
"129" "Icelandic statesmen managed, despite significant domestic opposition, to delay the implementation of the threats for long enough to reach an agreement with the UK. When it became clear to the UK and other NATO members that Iceland was at serious risk of withdrawing from NATO, the UK gave in to most of Iceland’s demands despite domestic opposition. Iceland won each of the Cod Wars due to the fact that domestic pressures on Icelandic statesmen not to concede were far greater than similar domestic pressures on British statesmen. While domestic pressures and elite misperception led to distorted foreign policies in the short-term, elites went to great lengths to fashion acceptable agreements to the disputes when the disputes looked set to permanently alter the security environment for the worse."
"130" "Other theories provide insufficient explanations for why the Cod Wars occurred and why Iceland won them. For instance, the liberal focus on institutions, democracy and trade to the exclusion of power politics is not helpful in explaining the Cod Wars. As previous studies (e.g. Hellmann and Herborth 2008) have shown, the supposedly pacifying aspects of the liberal peace contributed to the escalation of the Cod Wars, if anything. That said, the liberal factors set a threshold that prevented large number of casualties or outbreak of actual war. Liberal and realist theories also overlap in that the UK was wary of its reputation among allies and to world opinion. As Keohane and Nye (2011, 87-88) note, the UK was constrained in responding aggressively to and bullying Iceland, as it would have adversely affected its dealings in all other areas across the world."
"131" "The British concerns about perception within a “society of states” may also lead some credence to ideas within the English School. It could be argued that the British, through their extensive diplomatic relations and dealings, were constrained by norms in their dealings with a Western ally, such as Iceland, whereas the newly independent and diplomatically inexperienced Iceland did not feel compelled to oblige by the same norms. However, while the British were  restrained in their use of force , these norms were insufficient at preventing the outbreak of conflict in the first place and explaining the belligerent rhetoric on both sides."
"132" "Neorealism correctly predicts that Iceland remains a NATO ally throughout the Cold War and retains the US special relationship. What neorealism cannot explain is ho w close Iceland and the UK got  t o pushing Iceland out of NATO,  and the US out of Iceland , and why both sides incurred costs that could have been avoided through bargaining.  Neorealism is  also   un helpful in explaining the outcomes of the Cod Wars.  This is in contrast to n eoclassical realism , which  explains why the conflicts occurred, why the conflicts got so severe and why Iceland won them all. It is only by  considering systemic stimuli in the context of   internal variables  – the character of elites, national culture, economic structure and state-society relations – that we are able to make sense of Icelandic and British divergence from  optimal foreign policy choices .  This study adds to the existing neoclassical realist literature by analyzing the foreign policy choices of a weak power,  showing  t hat a small state, such as Iceland, would deviate from systemic imperatives in the short-medium  term . This study contradicts suggestions that small states are less susceptible to domestic pressures ( e.g.  Jervis 1978 )."
"133" "References"
"134" "Arreguín-Toft, Ivan. 2001. “How The Weak Win Wars: A Theory Of Asymmetric Conflict.”  International Security  26(1): 93-128."
"135" "Fearon, James D. 1995. “Rationalist Explanations for War.”  International Organization  49(3): 379-414"
"136" "Gleditsch, Nils Petter and Havard Hegre. 1997. “Peace and Democracy: Three Levels of Analysis.”  Journal of Conflict Resolution  41(2): 283-310."
"137" "Guðmundsson, Guðmundur J. 1999. “Þau eru svo eftirsótt Íslandsmið... [The Desirability of the Icelandic Grounds].”  Saga  37: 63-115."
"138" "Guðmundsson, Guðmundur J. 2000. “Þorskar í köldu stríði [Cods in a Cold War].”  Ný saga  12(1): 67-81."
"139" "Guðmundsson, Guðmundur J. 2006. “The Cod and the Cold War.”  Scandinavian Journal of History  31(2): 97-118."
"140" "Habeeb, William. 1988.  Power and Tactics in International Negotiations: How Weak Nations Bargain with Strong Nations . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press."
"141" "Hart, Jeffrey A. 1976.  The Anglo-Icelandic Cod War of 1972-1973 . Berkeley: Institute of International Studies, University of California."
"142" "Hellmann, Gunther and Benjamin Herborth, 2008. “Fishing in the mild West: democratic peace and militarised interstate disputes in the transatlantic community.”  Review of International Studies  34(3), 481-506."
"143" "Ingimundarson, Valur. 1996.  Í eldlínu kalda stríðsins [In the Firing Line of the Cold War].  Reykjavík: Vaka-Helgafell."
"144" "Ingimundarson, Valur. 2002.  Uppgjör við umheiminn [Settling Scores with the Outside World].  Reykjavík: Vaka-Helgafell."
"145" "Ingimundarson, Valur. 2011.  The Rebellious Ally . Dordrecht: Republic of Letters Publishing."
"146" "Jervis, Robert. 1978. “Cooperation Under the Security Dilemma.”  World Politics  30: 167-214."
"147" "Jóhannesson, Guðni Th. 2004. “How ‘Cod War’ Came: the Origins of the Anglo- Icelandic fisheries dispute, 1958-61.”  Historical Research  77(198), 543-574."
"148" "Jóhannesson, Guðni Th. 2006.  Þorskastríðin þrjú: Saga landhelgismálsins 1948-1976 [The Three Cod Wars] . Reykjavík: Hafréttarstofnun Íslands."
"149" "Jóhannesson, Guðni Th. 2007.  Troubled Waters: Cod War, Fishing Disputes, and Britain’s Fight for the Freedom of the High Seas, 1948–1964 . Reykjavík: North Atlantic Fisheries History Association."
"150" "Keohane, Robert O. and Joseph S. Nye, Jr. 2011.  Power and Interdependence , 4th ed. New York: Longman."
"151" "Kissinger, Henry. 1982.  Years of Upheaval . Boston: Little, Brown and Company."
"152" "Lebow, Richard Ned. 2010.  Why Nations Fight.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press."
"153" "Lobell, Steven E, Norrin M Ripsman, and Jeffrey W Taliaferro. 2009.  Neoclassical Realism, The State, And Foreign Policy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press."
"154" "Mearsheimer, John J. 2001.  The Tragedy of Great Power Politics . New York: Norton. EPUB e-book."
"155" "Olson, Mancur and Richard Zeckhauser. 1966. “An Economic Theory Of Alliances.”  The Review of Economics and Statistics  48(3): 266-279."
"156" "Rathbun, Brian. 2008. “A Rose By Any Other Name: Neoclassical Realism As The Logical And Necessary Extension Of Structural Realism.”  Security Studies  17(2): 294-321."
"157" "Rose, Gideon. 1998. “Review: Neoclassical Realism and Theories of Foreign Policy.”  World Politics  51(1): 144-172."
"158" "Russett, Bruce. 1993.  Grasping the Democratic Peace . Princeton: Princeton University Press."
"159" "Schweller, Randall L. 2008.  Unanswered Threats . Princeton: Princeton University Press."
"160" "Steinsson, Sverrir. 2016. “The Cod Wars: A re-analysis.”  European Security  25(2): 256-275."
"161" "Taliaferro, Jeffrey W. 2004. “Power Politics And The Balance Of Risk: Hypotheses On Great Power Intervention In The Periphery.”  Political Psychology  25(2): 177-211."
"162" "Taliaferro, Jeffrey W., Steven E. Lobell and Norrin M. Ripsman. 2009. “Introduction: Neoclassical realism, the state, and foreign policy.” in  Neoclassical Realism, the State and Foreign Policy , edited by Steven E. Lobell, Norrin M. Ripsman, and Jeffrey W. Taliaferro, 1-41. New York: Ca mbridge University Press."
"163" "Thór, Jón Th. 1995.  British Trawlers and Iceland 1919-1976 . Gothenburg: University of Gothenburg."
"164" "Toje, Asle and Barbara Kunz. 2012.  Neoclassical Realism In European Politics . Manchester: Manchester University Press."
"165" "Walt, Stephen M. 2002. “The Enduring Relevance of the Realist Tradition.” in  Political Science: State of the Discipline ,  edited by Ira Katznelson and Helen Milner, 197-230. New York:  W.W. Norton."
"166" "Waltz, Kenneth Neal. 1979.  Theory of International Politics . Reading: McGraw-Hill."
