Assessing Problems and Prospects of Solid Waste Management in Malaysia

Innocent A. Jereme
Institute for Environment and Development (LESTARI)
National University of Malaysia (UKM), Malaysia
E-mail: innoviva2001@yahoo.com
Rawshan Ara Begum
Institute of Climate Change (IPI)
National University of Malaysia (UKM), Malaysia
Basri Abdul Talib
Faculty of Economics and Management
National University of Malaysia (UKM), Malaysia
Chamhuri Siwar
Emeritus Professor
Institute for Environment and Development (LESTARI)
National University of Malaysia (UKM), Malaysia
E-mail: csiwar@ukm.my
Md. MahmudulAlam
PhD Student, Institute for Environment and Development (LESTARI)
National University of Malaysia (UKM), Malaysia
E-mail: rony000@gmail.com

Citation Reference:
Jereme, I.A., Siwar, C., Begum, R.A., Talib, B.A., and Alam, M.M. 2015. Assessing
Problems and Prospects of Solid Waste Management in Malaysia, e-Bangi, Vol. 10(2), pp.
70-87. [ Online Link ]

This is a pre-publication DRAFT copy.
The published article is copyrighted by the publisher of the journal.

1

ABSTRACT
Malaysia has seen a high rate of economic growth in past couple of decades hand in hand
with an ever increasing size of population. As a consequence, the issue of sustainable waste
management has become an important priority for policymakers and other stakeholders of the
society. Although there are potentials to recycle up to 80 per cent of the total dry wastes
collected, currently most of them are deposited into various landfill sites. Waste treatment
facilities are also insufficient in the country. The government has introduced SWM Act 2007
along with other initiatives to improve the waste management scenario, but more needs to be
done to be able to recycle and treat a major portion of the wastes. Based on studies on the
state of Selangor in Malaysia, this paper this paper attempts to analyse the waste management
scenario of Malaysia and the problems and prospects of waste recycling there. The paper will
help the policy makers, waste management strategists, local administrators and researchers in
the field to formulate sustainable policies and identify further areas of study in the relevant
field.
Keywords: Recycling, landfills, waste management, solid waste, environment, Malaysia

1. INTRODUCTION
Waste management refers to the collection, transportation, processing, recycling or disposal
of waste materials, usually one produced by human activities in an effort to reduce their
effects on human health and aesthetics or amenities. Waste management is a polite term for
garbage management. As long as humans have been living in settled communities, solid
waste or garbage has been an issue of concern. Modernisation generates far more solid wastes
than early humans ever did. Daily life generates several pounds of solid waste per consumer,
not only directly in the home, but indirectly in factories that manufacture goods purchased by
consumers.
The issue of waste disposal management has recently gained widespread attention in
virtually all states of Malaysia. With the communities facing rapidly increasing disposal
costs, the opinion leaders denouncing the amount of materials being thrown away as
environmentally and ethically unsound, the lawmakers struggling for sustainable solutions –
pressure is mounting on manufactures and packagers of consumer goods to minimise the
amount of refuse. Amidst these changing circumstances, some laws have recently been
passed making waste management a national issue in Malaysia and many others have similar
laws on their agenda (Yahaya 2007a).
Hand in hand with the high rate of economic growth in the past few decades, the
population of Malaysia have grown from 21,793293 in 2000 to 28,339273 in 2010/11.
Considering these economic and population growths together, Malaysia is generating more
wastes now in comparison to any previous point of time in history. It is estimated that about
18,000 tons of wastes are generated in Malaysia per day and this figure is expected to
increase at the rate of 2% every year. Out of these, 75% of the wastes generated are collected
and disposed at dumpsites or landfills that are not sanitary. In Kuala Lumpur, only 5% of the
wastes generated in the city are recycled and the rest goes to landfills (Yassin 2006).

2

As of April 2007, there were 291 landfill sites in Malaysia to dump wastes, out of
which only ten were sanitary landfills; of these 291 sites, 112 were closed and the remaining
179 were still in operation. It is expected that solid waste generation in Malaysia will reach
30,000 tons per day in 2020 (Yahaya 2007a). A waste reduction study conducted by the
Local Government Authority indicates that food waste and other organic waste constitute
47% of the total wastes generated, followed by paper 15%, plastics 14%, and others
constitute the rest (Yassin 2006). In 2020, there is target to recycle 20% of the total wastes
generated, 15% for intermediate processing and the remaining 65% to be deposited at various
landfill sites. Besides, the existing legislations on waste management were reviewed to
improve solid waste management by privatizing it and to increase recycling awareness in the
country (MHLG 2003).
This alarming situation in waste disposal management prompted the Malaysian
Government to launch the 6th Malaysia Plan (MP) for 1991-1995, with an emphasis on
diversifying the sources of growth of the wastes. The 7th Malaysia Plan (MP) for 1996-2000
also focused on the quality of life and the environment. As the population continued to grow
and available lands were becoming scarce for acquiring landfill sites due to opposition by
residents and community leaders, in the 8th Malaysia Plan (MP) for 2001-2005, a National
Recycling Program was re-launched with these objectives as follows:
a. Inculcate the habit of recycling among the population;
b. Reduce operational cost of solid waste management;
c. Minimize the volumes of waste disposal by landfills;
d. Reduce utilization of raw materials; and
e. Improve awareness and cooperation among stakeholders (MHLG 2003).
Under the 9th-10th Malaysia Plans and with the implementation of the Solid Waste
Management Bill, the recycling and disposal of solid waste will be privatised in order to
improve services, relinquish the financial burden and include the private sector. These
concessionaries are responsible for collection, storage, transportation, treatment and recycling
of all of the country‟s non-hazardous wastes (Market Watch 2011).
Taking this background information into consideration, this study attempts to
understand the waste situations, waste management, waste recycling situation, recycling
problem, and potentials of recyclable materials in Malaysia.
2. WASTE MANAGEMENT SCENARIO IN MALAYSIA
Malaysia started the privatization of waste management operation in 1994 (Budzik et al.
2002). Gradually waste collection and public space cleansing service are being taken over by
Alam Flora Sdn Bhd. To smooth the process, the consortia were instructed to take over the
solid waste management over an interim period. The full-flash privatization is still to be
determined by the government pending legislation based on the new National Waste Bill.
Until the privatization is fully implemented, most aspects of solid waste management will be
continued to be in the realm of Local Government.
Although the current large–scale privatization entails a more comprehensive transfer
of activities and function than the previous semi-privatization measures, the public sector
cannot pass all responsibilities onto the private sector. Since the waste management
privatization was initiated on national level, the Federal Government will be responsible for
3

ensuring that the consortia conform to the standards, and rules and legislation as required by
the Government. This is done via the Department of Local Government at the Ministry of
Housing and Local Government (MHLG) while the Department of Environment (DOE) its
responsibilities lie mainly in general pollution control and Environmental Impact Assessment
(EIA) of waste treatment facilities (Hassan 2002). The federal government has now taken
over management of solid waste with the creation of the National Solid waste Department
and the bill was signed into law this 2011.
The actual operationalization of the MHLG‟s responsibilities lie significantly with the
local authorities, who will remain central in terms of enforcing laws and regulations and
ensuring that private sector meets required standard and quality (MHLG 2003). As part of the
privatization process, the fees for the waste management services are now no longer the
responsibility of the local authorities but must be managed by the waste management
company. The particulars of this financial aspect of the waste services have not yet been
addressed, but as the fee is not planned to be included in the semi-annual assessment rates
imposed by the local authorities, a separate fee must be introduced. The introduction of such
a fee meets some political and public opposition in Malaysia (Hassan 2002). The fees have
not been settled till date between the private companies with the government as it has some
political undertone because the public don‟t want to pay for perceive unseen service.
The interim period status of the solid waste service provision has resulted in
uncertainty by both the concessionaires and the Local Authority‟s especially the wait for the
imminent National Waste Bill and the issues of service fees are creating some implications in
regards to further development and final realization of the privatization process. It can be
argued that these uncertainties pertain to a reluctance to invest in new resources and
equipment by various stakeholders has resulted in relative short-term planning.
2.1 Waste collection and transportation
Waste collection in Selangor is managed by the Alam Flora Sdn, though they employ private
collection companies to deal with the actual waste collection. In the waste concession area of
Alam Flora Sdn Bhd, private waste contractors are responsible for more than 50% of the total
amount of waste collected. Community collection initiatives so called community self-help or
“gotongroyong” activities also have a role in collection activities. Collections times vary
from 2-3 times a week, and collection methods will also vary, common collection points e. g.
containers where household are required to bring their waste in front of the house for easy
collection. Door to door is another common collection method in Selangor especially for
individual houses and link houses (Karen et al. 2003).
2.2 Waste recycling in Malaysia
In Malaysia, there are three types of recyclables such as Paper, plastics and bottles, but very
little of the waste is recycled. In Kuala Lumpur for example, the current recycling rate is at 4.
5% of the waste generated. There is a plan to increase it to 16% by 2005 and 20% by 2020
(MHLG 2003), which is still valid till date.
A newspaper article published in The New Sunday Times, describes the Malaysia
attitude towards recycling as a Not-In-My-Backyard (NIMBY) syndrome when it comes to
issues of waste. People are also wary but still Malaysians only recycle less than 5% of all the
4

waste (New Sunday Times 2002). This opinion is supported by other sources that claim that
the waste consciousness in Malaysia is poor, and most people don‟t wish to take a more
personal endeavour in a matter mostly associated with dirt, filth and odours.
However true this statement may be, Malaysians have begun to recycle more as
Malaysia launched first official recycling program in the peninsular Malaysia at sometimes in
1993 and was initiated by the MHLG. The stated objectives of the national recycling program
was (i) to divert valuable resource in the waste stream from disposal and (ii) to help control
cost of managing waste (Karen et al. 2003). The recycling program of most Local
Government was envisioned as comprising of setting up of buy-back centres and the
placement of drop off containers for recyclables at strategic locations such as schools,
shopping malls, and so on. According to the report at the start of the national recycling
program, 23 Local Government of peninsular Malaysia had volunteered to become
participants of the program. But because of poor planning and lack of public participations
the number of participants of the program declined to only 10 Local Government in 1998,
many of the Local Government then chose not to continue with their recycling program.
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government (MHLG) re-launched the recycling
programs in December 2000 to make a difference from the first failed launching of the
program. In this second launching of the recycling program, participants were chosen by the
MHLG, 29 Local Government of Peninsular Malaysia were chosen based on several criteria.
One of these criteria was the volume of waste generated by the municipalities. MHLG
provided every participant with special drop-of containers for recyclables and these
containers must be placed at strategic locations of the municipalities.
To encourage public participation in this second recycling program, the MHLG
engaged the services of one of the local public relation company in the city to carry out
productions of pamphlets, posters and billboards, and commercial advertisement, and even
recycling song to spice up the occasion. Also in addition to this, many of the major cities in
Malaysia several buy-back centres established for easy deposition of recycling materials.
Another big difference in this second national program was the MHLG involved
several companies that were known to be major producers of recyclable materials to
participate in the recycling program. It initially involved only 23 municipalities when the
program was first launched but later evolved up to 145 municipalities across the country. The
main objectives are to reduce the costs of solid waste management/operation as well as to
conserve resources.
Although recycling activities could be said to be on the rise, the materials recycling
industry in Malaysia is demanding much larger quantities of recyclables. For example,
Malaysia News Print Industries Sdn Bhd was forced to import 50% of its materials, and
Kuala Lumpur Glass Manufacturing Sdn Bhd also imported 20% of their materials (New
Sunday Times 2002). This data is still same as the material recycling rate is still 5% till now,
and raw material is not enough for these local companies.
2.3 Waste treatment
In Malaysia waste treatment and disposal facilities for waste in general is still lacking behind.
The few incinerators that do exist do not have the capacity to deal with the exiting amount of
5

waste and direct dumping are therefore the most applied method to dispose waste. No waste
to energy facilities exists in Malaysia; although composting alternatives are being studied but
no concrete activities have been undertaken (CAP 2001). Plans are underway to construct
several new incineration plants in Malaysia; public opposition plays a large role in the
approval of incineration site. One incineration is located in Southern Kuala Lumpur with a
capacity of 1. 500 tons/day, taking about 50% of Kuala Lumpur‟s daily waste generations.
In 1990 there were about 230 Landfills in Malaysia with an average of 15 hectares
each. More than 80% of the landfills have an estimated remaining lifetime of two years.
Almost all landfills in Malaysia are developed and operated on ad-hoc basis and the
management and operation are generally poor as a result of this. About 60% are open dumps
and do not have adequate facilities such as weighing bright, fence and cover materials.
Furthermore, no site suitability studies have been undertaken and there is a lack of pollution
control and measuring in particular for leachate and gas emissions (Karen et al. 2003).
2.4 Waste management practices in Malaysia
Malaysia like every other developing country is facing problem of waste management. Waste
management and recycling is largely influenced by the lack of planning and implementation
in accord with the waste management hierarchy of reduce, reuse and recycling (3R)
(Agamuthu et al. 2009). This has resulted in a waste management system based almost on
waste disposal on landfills. Solid waste disposal is therefore one of the major issues in
Malaysia waste management practices today.
Many landfills are not properly managed and maintained, and few or none of the
landfills have EIA or other site suitability evaluations performed. Due to this, landfills are
often located too close to residential areas or other public areas. Many landfills are also
located near streams and rivers, which not only cause river pollutions, but also ground water
is at risk of contaminations. Uncontrolled emissions of greenhouse gasses are also
problematic-especially methane. Waste are dumped in rivers, drains and streams that often
not collected, and little or nothing or no waste is composting take place which means that the
waste takes up spaces, and landfill life time are often much shorter than their expected time
of existence. The issue of illegal dumping is also relevant in this regard (Wai 2007).
2.5 Post waste material management and disposal
Transportation and collections of waste are another concern in Malaysian waste management
practices, especially in urban areas, e. g Kuala Lumpur, where some streets are narrow and
compactor trucks are unable to pass (Mokhtar et al. 2002). The most visible part of solidwaste management is collection and transportation. After the collection of waste from their
homes, offices, or industries people have no interest in where it is taken or what is done to it.
Very few residents have seen disposal sites such as incinerators or landfills. Door-to-door
collection is provided to all landed properties. Those living in apartments and illegal
settlements have to bring their waste to the community bins. Generally the collection of waste
is done three times a week on alternate days except on Sunday. In some apartments, shops,
and business offices the collection of waste is done daily, except Sundays. In vegetable
markets the collection is done daily including Sunday. In areas of unplanned or illegal
settlements, collection is done once or twice a week.
6

But on festive occasions such as Chinese New Year or the end of Ramadan (fasting)
month, frequent collection service is provided. The collection and transportation system in
Malaysia is fairly common. From the 1980s this activity has been privatized (Lee 2007).
Since major settlements are under local authorities, collection and transportation is available
to all residents except those living in isolated areas such as the hilly region. On Penang
Island, the infrastructure is relatively better, and almost 95% of the residents are provided
with a solid-waste collection service. There is no special service provided to collect garden
waste as it is included in household waste. Sometimes it is left along the roadside or burned.
Some bigger municipal authorities provide a special service once a week to collect garden
waste.
For this service, the owners need to cut the waste into manageable pieces or bag the
leaves to facilitate collection. On-call, chargeable service is also available in some local
authorities. The local authorities are required to submit reports on the status of recycling in
their areas. Unfortunately, according to the ministry, the response has been poor, and with
unreliable data (New Strait Times 2001).
3. WASTE MANAGEMENT LEGISLATIVE AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
In the waste management legislations in Malaysia, it is not just only the Ministry of Housing
and Local Government (MHLG) that sees to the issue of waste management. There are other
related bodies of the Federal Government that are also involved in the overall planning of
waste management at the conception stage together with the MHLG. These main
stakeholders are the Department of Environment (DOE) and Economic Planning Unit (EPU).
Though, the EPU does not have competence and responsibilities in relation to waste
management, which are important to take into considerations but help finance new projects
(MHLG 2003).
These departments don‟t work in isolations of other but together in making overall
legislation on waste management for the state or regional and local authorities to implement
at grass root levels.That means that the Federal, State and Local Authorities have significant
roles to play in waste management stream in Malaysia. All these federal agencies are
involved in waste management as decisions-makers within their areas of authorities. They are
not directly involved in daily functioning and performance of waste management services,
but in their role as planners and developers of sound legislative framework and control the
coherence existence between local, regional/state and federal waste management plans
(Karen et al. 2003). When the issue of privatizations came up, these agencies became an
important strategic partner in coordinating and planning since they must be the central and
coordinating body in ushering in different private waste concessionaries in Malaysia e. g,
Alam Floral Sdn Bhd. A look into the roles of these agencies who calls the shot in waste
management at federal levels, region/state and local government in waste management in
Malaysia will help understand the legislative framework of the Malaysian waste management
system.
In Malaysia, waste management is still under the Local Government. The powers of
the Local Authorities are set by several legislations including the Local Government Act
1976, the Street, Drainage and Building Act 1974 and Urban and Country Planning Act 1996.
Local Authorities are however required to create their own bylaws to enforce the legislation
(Karen et al. 2003). As the waste management responsibilities are under the jurisdiction of
7

the Local Governments, whether under their own operations or contracted out “there is
certainly no need to enact laws to regulate themselves (Local Government) and the
contractors are bound by contract” (Hassan 2002).
The MHLG are responsible for the implementation of waste management and
recycling rules at the Local Government level, and thus has a key role in the preparation of
waste management and recycling policies, strategies and plans. MHLG processes requests for
funding of projects and pass these to the Economic Planning unit (EPU) within the Prime
Ministers Department. For MHLG process requirement for funding, it is also the
responsibility of MHLG to provide guidelines for the waste management and recycling and to
advise and assist Local Authorities on all issues relating to waste management (Karen et al.
2003).

FEDERAL

MHLG

DOE
STATES

EPU
LOCAL
AUTHORITIES
Figure 1: Stakeholders of Waste Management in Malaysia
Source: MHLG (2003)
Malaysia as at 2003 has no national solid waste management act, but this has recently
been approved in 2010. But before the approval the laws and regulation in the field of waste
management are spread over arrange of Acts. The framework for environmental regulation in
Malaysia is the Environmental Acts for waste treatment facilities (Karen et al. 2003). These
issues are primarily characterized by a concern for public health and sanitation matters and
not by a more holistic and integrated approach to waste management involving aspects of
environmental and urban planning, social-economics, geology, etc. (Hassan 2002).
i. Department of environment (DOE)
This federal department has the principal responsibilities for preventing and controlling of
pollution as well as the quality of the country‟s environment. All powers of this department
were derived mainly from environmental Quality Acts of 1974. DOE has written guidelines
for the preventions of pollutions for industries and have established national emissions
effluent standards, likes the Clean Air Regulations of 1979, the Environmental Quality,
(sewerage and industrial Effluent) regulations of 1979 and the Environmental Impact
Assessment (prescribe premise) order of 1987.
On the issues relating to waste management in 1979, the DOE has made it mandatory
for all new municipal landfills in the country and solid waste facilities such as composting
8

plant, incinerators, recycling facilities to submit an Environmental impact assessment for
approval to the Director-General of DOE before executions.
In 2000, the DOE has received nine preliminary reports of EIA on sanitary landfill
projects which were approved for construction, DOE roles may be viewed as broadly concern
on final disposal of waste, because it‟s environmental and public safety implications. The
departments have also prepared a guidebook called “Recommended Code of Practices for the
Disposal of Solid Waste on Land” which contains basic technical information‟s and
suggestions on site selection, construction, operation and closure of sites that were utilized
for disposal of solid waste.
The DOE thus have been directed towards regulating and monitoring the hazardous
waste situation of the country. The other roles that are important DOE is playing in Malaysia
have been limited to review and approval of EIA reports of solid waste facilities such as
landfills and incinerators. The DOE also assists local authorities through the states in
providing them with officers to provide them with technical trainings.
ii. Economic Planning Unit (EPU)
EPU is not directly involved in solid waste management, but EPU in general is the central
planning agency for the Federal Government of Malaysia while this agency is the main
agency that prepares and reviews the country‟s five year development plan, it is also the
initiator and coordinator of many large federal government projects.
As a federal authority responsible for privatization process of the solid waste
management sector, EPU plays a significant role-especially during the continued waste sector
privatization interim period. It also helps in financing new studies and projects for local
authorities (MHLG 2003).
iii. State Authorities
Under the legal framework of Malaysia, the State Government is responsible to create local
government. In additions, the responsibilities of most states of peninsular Malaysia states, for
the local authorities include i) defining the administrative boundaries of each local authorizes,
ii) appointment of the president and the President and Council members. Regarding to solid
waste management and recycling, the state government through its agents, process state own
properties, to be used as municipal solid waste disposal sites. In fact, the state helps to
promote and coordinate activities related to waste recovery and recycling to assure people‟s
acceptance of the program and to avoid duplications. It undertakes manpower development
training programs for local authorizes who are involved in recycling programs.
iv. Local Authorities
Local authorities are the implementing agencies and have direct responsibility over solid
waste collections, treatment and disposal. The fact that waste management and recycling is
the responsibilities of the local authorities; it gives these local authorities stakeholders some
level of autonomy in their role as decision makers. Not only do they coordinate all sorts of
waste management functions-including the operations between private and public actors and
planners too.
9

As soon as the interim privatization is over, the role of the local government in
Malaysia waste management and recycling will change. Here the local authorities are still
responsible for the implementations and enforcements of matters regarding waste
management and recycling. Even if they have to outsource to another organization to perform
it on their behalf, such as Alam Flora, but as far as waste management has not been fully
privatized, local authorities must still conduct some of the tasks that Alam Flora SdnBhd will
eventually be taking over in the future. The local authorizes will still have responsibilities for
regulating and evaluating the services performed by Alam Flora SdnBhd, creating awareness
of government recycling programs and waste related issues. The figure 1 below shows
stakeholders in Malaysian waste management legislative framework.
3.2 New Initiative: New National Solid Waste Department
In April 2007 the much anticipated National Solid Waste Department has been created
making waste a national issue, and taking the responsibility of waste from Local Authorities‟
(Yahaya 2007b). To change the Act as Law, it has been postponed for the third time, and
approved in 2010 with the following changes. However the bill has been signed into law in
2011.
 A standard and integrated system of waste management through promoting a more
efficient operating procedure;
 Cost-efficient waste management by commissioning regional landfills within the state
boundaries; and
 Private sector waste management enterprises applying for licenses will be vetted based on
cost effectiveness of the projects, their environmental friendliness and technological
capabilities.
Moreover, a service committee at the state level will allow the local councils to offer
suggestions to the concessionaries. It will also be made compulsory for homeowners to
separate wastes into dry wastes and wet wastes within two to three years on the enactment of
the law, when kitchen wastes will be collected twice a week and recyclable or dry wastes will
be collected once a week. This will reduce the quantity of landfill wastes into half and extend
the lifespan of the sites.
In order to encourage a higher recycling rate take-back and deposit rebate schemes
will be implemented, where people will be encouraged to return recyclable wastes such as
plastic containers for a token sum of money, leading to a hygienic environment for the
scavengers. Additionally, lorries will unload in sheds so that the scavengers can carry out
their jobs before the wastes go to their destined landfills. There are also plans to utilise
kitchen wastes as composts (New Sunday Times 2009).
With the creation of the National Solid Waste Department, it means a total overhaul
of the old system when solid waste management was under the control of Local Council
which has been the system since 1976. This means more fund are needed for the
concessionaires who will not act in temporary basis. There should be no more excuse from
the concessionaries to perform below expectations as their contract will become permanent,
enabling them acquire more modern equipment and can engage seasonal experts in their
management. Local Authorities will now play an advisory role, enabling them to concentrate
in other areas, like, planning, health and revenue collection.
10

But it is not yet rosy for solid waste management in Malaysia, even with the recent
takeover of waste management by the Federal Government from States and district councils.
A report (Sun Paper 2010) on Sungai Petani in Penang said, recently a concessionaire
appointed by the federal government for the southern region reported that things has become
worse. In view of this, the Local Authorities have neglected largely the departments in charge
of cleansing of solid waste. Public cleansing and management should be the responsibility of
Local Authorities.
Apart from small countries like Singapore and Brunei, there are very few other
countries in the world where public cleansings are a Federal matter. The one Billion Ringgits
allocated to the department, if it is given to the Local Authorities, there is no doubt it will
improve their capacity. The Local Authorities had not been up and doing in keeping their
municipalities clean. They surely need assistants from federal Government to perform well.
4. PROSPECTS OF WASTE RECYCLING IN MALAYSIA
There will always be wastes. The issue is how to manage it as a resource and not as a
problem, so that it will not have negative impacts on people and the environment. A
significant challenge facing developing countries is the search for appropriate solution for
collecting, treating and disposal of waste or reuse of waste materials generated in municipal
and community areas. Recycling of waste is a challenge confronting many developing
countries as urban cities are in the increase of population and so is the waste generated. There
is low level of recycling in many developing countries; either because of ignorance or apathy
towards recycling (Wai 2007).
Recently the Selangor state government is considering a proposal to recycle and turn
it into an income generating venture as most local council spend up to 30% of their local
budget on rubbish collection and some up to 60% (Daily Metro 2008). The recent creation of
a National Solid Waste Department is stepping in the right direction as this will relieve the
Local of the financial burden of managing waste (Yahaya 2007a).
The traditional method that the country has been using is to use the landfills for waste
disposal of waste, and overtime buries them with soil. But Landfills require huge plots of
land and usually fill up very quickly. Some big landfills have been closed down due to
reaching their capacity, as well as the suitability of the locations which use to be far away
from residential areas, but are no more due to population and township growth. Some
examples are the Kelana Jaya dumpsite (now filled with condos, a stadium and commercial
development). Subang Airport road used to stink badly whenever you use the road to airport,
but is now a residential area with condos and houses. Sri Kembangaan/ Air Hitan were also
closed down and also Selaying Landfills (Wai 2007).
The alternatives of landfills like incinerators, particularly of gigantic types but still
unknown status Broga incinerator in Semenyih which courted controversy due to questions
about its location in a catchment area as well as the Japanese contractor which has a
questionable project back in his home country. Nobody likes to have a waste processing plant
behind his or her backyard. The incinerator was first proposed to be in Puchong but was
relocated due to residence and political pressures. Something has to be done to cope with its
11

ultimate disposal. The government is to tackle the problem even though the idea of smaller,
more efficient and manageable incinerator would be idea than the biggest incinerator.
People living in the peninsula especially Selangor should be encouraged to cultivate
the habit of reducing waste by recycling as in developed countries where it has become of
thing habitually even from younger age (Wai 2007). The high economic growth in recent
years in Selangor requires a sustainable means of managing waste. The recently created
National Waste Department has been a way forward to that effect.
Selangor government could borrow a leaf from Europe where recycling has become a
habit of life as in the case of the Cliff Borough Council in East London. The Cliff Borough
Council in East London, in 2001-2002, recycling rate was just 9. 7% but it jumped to 48% in
2003-2004, and reached to 50% by December 2004, suggesting that CBC may become UK‟s
biggest performing local authority. The study of RCR suggested that a well-designed
communication campaign and an effective marketing strategy is the key to achieving success
in recycling programs.
There is a proposal by the government for some years to enforce compulsory garbage
separation in Selangor. It is not an easy thing to do even though it could have succeeded in
some countries like Taiwan, as their culture values and geographical location differs from
that of Malaysia. The fact that policy worked in Taiwan does not mean it workshere;
therefore Malaysia should find policy that should be wholly accepted by her citizenry (Wai
2007).
The state has now intensified its effort through integrated waste management system
of reducing waste through sustainable waste management of 3R and final disposal.
Awareness of this program is being carried out through campaigns, mass media and lectures.
At the same time the State Government is facilitating through the Ministry of Housing and
Local Government to provide facilities such as waste bins and collection centres households
(MHLG 2006).
Recently residents in Selangor are required to separate their waste into organic and
inorganic waste for easy collections and recycling by Alam Flora Sdn Bhd. Although the new
rule attracts no penalty for failing to do so, household waste could be refused to be collected
by Alam Flora for failing to separate their waste accordingly (Bavani 2009). On the other
hand Shopping Malls in the state are now required not to give plastic bags on every last
Saturday of the month to shoppers. Shoppers who insist on collecting bags are required to pay
20 cents for each plastic bag collected and the money will be channelled to the charity homes
in Selangor chosen by the state. Below are Figures 2 and 3 showing the current recycling rate
and recycling target for Selangor in the year 2020.

Waste hierarchy






Reduce
Reuse
Recycling
Intermediate
Processing
Disposal

5% recovery

95% landfill
12

Figure 2: The current waste management system in Selangor
Source: Ministry of Housing and Local Government (2003)
From the figure 2, it shows that the current waste recycling and recovery is only 5%
of the total waste generated in the state while the rest 95% is sent to landfill. Land has been
the traditional method system of waste disposal in Selangor.
This trend has been going on for ages in Malaysia, as there are abundant lands to
deposit waste. But with the increase in population and high growth of economy in Malaysia
in the last decade, there are calls for a more sustainable system to dispose waste without
much environmental effect as land is running out and becoming expensive to build landfills.
The use of “sustainable landfills” by some authorities could have been the reason
behind the recent construction of the biggest landfill in Malaysia, the Bukit Tagar sanitary
landfill in Ulu Selangor 50 km north from Kuala Lumpur in Selangor which started operation
in 2005 occupying a capacity of 1,700 acres of land with 120 metric tons of air space.
Malaysia has to develop sustainable methods of waste management, but at the same
time accept that achieving this goal is long way off. But for the moment recycling is the only
sustainable method to reduce waste.
Figure 3 shows the strategic recycling target of Selangor Government with integrated
waste management of reduce, reuse, recycling, intermediate processing and final disposal to
increase waste recycling rate and recovery in the 8MP till 2020. This target is feasible if
appropriate policies and technology are in place.

Waste hierarchy
(Target 2020)

15% recovery






20% recycle



Reduce
Reuse
Recycling
Intermediate
Processing
Disposal

65% landfill

Figure 3: Waste recycling targets for Selangor in the 8MP for 2020
Source: Ministry of Housing and Local Government (2003)
13

There is still insufficient emphasis being played by local authorities and others on the
whole of question of re-use. We are all familiar with these sticky labels that enable us to
reuse old envelopes, but have many of operators of business or local authorities that can reuse
our items. That notwithstanding, the Selangor Government is encouraging, households;
offices to either give out their old materials to those in need when refurnishing their offices or
homes than throwing it into the waste stream. Reusable bags are sold at some shopping malls
that are also biodegradable. People are encouraged to buy household items that are refillable,
like hair cream, beverages and some soft drinks with plastic bottles etc. so as to reduce waste
at households‟ level.
Recycling has become a known issue since the launching of the first national
recycling program in 1993 and the launched of it in December 2000 in Malaysia. The
Selangor Government has in many ways disseminating this massage to her citizens, that
recycling is a sustainable means of managing waste so as to attain the state target of 20%
diversion of waste sent to landfills in 2020.
This is being made possible by provisions of waste bins at strategic places in the state
and privatizing waste management. Households are encouraged to separate their waste into
wet and dry waste for easy collections and recycling, though not compulsory. But for
Malaysia to achieve her target of 20% recycling rate in 2020 more proactive measures has to
be taken by making waste separation compulsory at household levels and with the imposition
of fines for failing to separate their waste.
Other waste hierarchy plans of Selangor to be achieved in 2020 is the establishing of
an intermediate processing facility in state where recyclable materials will be sorted by types,
compacted, baled and sold to many manufacturing companies in the countries that use
secondary raw materials for productions and also for export. Intermediate processing
facilities will process and market newspapers, mixed paper, cardboard, plastic, tin can, glass
and aluminium received from various parts of the state of the country and for export as well.
5. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Disposing of wastes in a landfill is one of the most traditional methods of disposal, and it has
been a common practice in most countries, even in Selangor, Malaysia, as has been
mentioned earlier. However, a properly designed and well managed landfill – which is a
relatively inexpensive method of depositing waste materials – can improve the hygienic
wellbeing of people significantly. Due to opposition in Selangor for establishing new landfills
and the issue of NIMB, landfills are located far away from residential areas in the state which
increases cost of disposal for the local councils. The state has a target of only 65% of wastes
to be deposited into landfills in 8MP in 2020 from its present rate of 95%. This is a step in a
right direction, which has reduced the cost for waste management in the state (MHLG 2003).
The SWM Act 2007 introduced by the Government which has now become legal
emphasis compulsory system of waste hierarchic of the 3Rs: reduce, reuse, and recycle. This
is an important campaign included in the Act. The implementation and enforcement of the
3Rs are also listed in under the act. Solid waste generators are required to reduce the
generation of solid waste; to use environmentally friendly materials; to limit the generation,
import, use, discharge, and disposal of specified products; to implement coding and labelling
on products to promote recycling; and to utilize any method to reduce the adverse impacts of
14

municipal solid waste on the environment, i. e. to reduce, reuse, and recycle of MSW (Lee
2007).
Although waste minimization is emphasized in the Act, the techniques to reduce
waste generation are not specified and the options are too generalized (Agamuthu et al.
2009). Failure to comply with the law will make the offender liable to a fine of up to
RM10,000 (US$2632) or up to 6 months imprisonment, or both. The government of Malaysia
has plans to manage household waste efficiently to ensure a clean, fresh, and sustainable
environment. For all these initiatives yield the desirable results, it should be followed by
monitoring to insure if the goals set up are being achieved.
Unlike the people of the western countries and Japan, Malaysians have not fully
embraced the recycling activities. Those who do it are very small in number and do it for
economic reason only. This is evident as only 5% of the wastes are recycled in Kuala Lumpur
– which is lower than the rate outside of Kuala Lumpur – and the rest are sent to the landfills.
In Malaysia there are abound potentials for recyclable materials, as much as 80% of
the wastes generated could be recycled and this could be utilized to reduce overall waste
generation. But inadequate policy and lack of separation at source for waste materials have
been militating factors to increase recycling in Malaysia. Recycling activities can gradually
be accepted if the policy and technology are friendly as it can help reduce disposal cost for
local authorities and accompany economic benefits.
Many developed countries have greatly accepted the policy of „pay-for what -you
throw-away “program. Unit pricing has been an effective means to reduce waste through
increasing cost for households. It is generally believed by the developed world that when you
know that if you generate much waste you will pay for it. That intrinsic believe of high cost
of waste disposal by households will surely compel them to be careful how to generate waste
in their households and to recycle more of their waste. This policy have highly motivated
households to cultivate recycling habit more though difficult to implement in developing
countries like here, but could gradually be implemented with time and the people will be used
to the system.
Policy implementation whereby communities are involved in policy formation is very
important for effective recycling program as it helps create sense of belonging and ensure the
policies effectiveness in their locality. In addition recycling should be made mandatory rather
optional and as well as source separation of waste at households. There is need for recycling
convenience as it suits the community.
Thus, there is a need for aggressive campaigns based on the concept of 3R. Policy
implementation should be vigorously implemented and not based on theory which has always
been the system before. Failure of sound implementation has always been the bane in the past
for most recycling programs. If recycling is adopted it will help generate employment, reduce
greenhouse gas and energy consumption, conserve natural resources, and reduce the cost of
disposal for the local councils. Recycling has the potentials to reduce overall waste
generation and at the same time an entrée point to participation in environmental awareness.
REFERENCES
15

Agamuthu, P. , Hamid, F. S. and Khidzir, K. 2009. Evolution of solid waste management in
Malaysia: impacts and implications of the solid waste Bill 2007, Journal of Mater
Cycles Waste Management, 11: 96-103.
Bavani, M. 2009. Separate your waste from June 1, The Star, April 29. (online)
<http://thestar.com.my/metro/story.
asp?file=/2009/4/29/central/3782260&sec=central>
Budzik, M. Jonathan,M. , Luciano, A. and Juliana, P. 2002. Waste Management Overseas The Malaysian experience, Dec. (online)<http://www.ecowaste.
com/swanabc/papers/budz01.htm> (accessed on Dec, 2002)
Child, R. 2004. Resource Conservation and Recycling, Cliff Borough Council Recycling
Progress Report in Eastern London.pp.1-25.
Connett, P. 2010. Incineration: A poor solution for the 21st century, (online) <http://www.
slideshare. net/FrankieDolan/incineration-a-poor-solution-for-the-21st-century-by-drpaul-connett> (accessed on 10 October 2012)
Consumers Association of Penang (CAP). 2001.The proposed thermal waste treatment Plant
for waste management in Kg Bohol, Mukin Sungai Besi, Kuala
Lumpur.(online)<http://www.surfforever.com/sam/pressurelease/kgbohol.
html>(accessed on 10 October 2012)
Daily Metro. 2008.Money in recycling, 7 May.
Lee, G. B. 2007. National Reports: Malaysia. In Solid Waste Management: Issues and
Challenges in Asia,Report of the APO Survey on Solid-Waste Management 2004–05,
Environmental Management Centre, Mumbai, India. (online) <http://www.apotokyo.org/00e-books/IS-22_SolidWasteMgt.htm>(accessed on 10 October 2012)
Hassan, M. 2002. Environmental Management in Malaysia: E. I. A process in Malaysia.
Ministry of Resources and Environment.
Karen, A. K. , Nash, A. , May, L. C. and Knudsen, 2003. Household Hazardous Waste
Management and Stakeholder‟s involvement in Kuala Lumpur. Department of
Environment, Technology and Social Studies, University of Roskilde,
Denmark.(online)
<http://rudar.ruc.dk/bitstream/1800/206/1/Household%20_Hazardous%20_Waste.pdf
> (accessed on 10 October 2012)
Wai, Ko-chi.2007.Reduce, Reuse and Recycle. (online)
<http://waikc.blogspot.com/2007/06/reduce-reuse-recycle.html> (accessed on 10
October 2012)
Ministry of Housing and Local Government (MHLG) 2003.Overview of solid waste
management in Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, Local Government Department.
Ministry of Housing and Local Government (MHLG) 2006.Waste management and the
Challenges, Kuala Lumpur, Local Government Department.
Mokhtar, M. B., Peterson, P. J. ,andFariz, A. 2002. Approaches towards sustainable
environmental and national resources management for ASEAN
regions.LESTARI,UKM, Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia.
Market Watch 2011. The9th-10th Malaysian planThe Environmental Sector in Malaysia
New Strait Times.2001.Waste management‟s and recycling problems: data issues. 16 April.
New Sunday Times.2002.National New Solid Waste Department, October.
New Sunday Times.2009.Not-In-My-Back-Yard Syndrome (NIBM).18 January.
Perunding.2001. Solid Waste Management in Malaysia: Overview and Information Paper,
Danish Cooperation in Environment and Development, March.

16

Polprasert, C. 1998. Organic waste recycling. Asian Institute of Technology,
Thailand.(online) <http://llrc.mcast.edu.
mt/digitalversion/Table_of_Contents_132294. pdf>(accessed on 10 October 2012)
Sun Paper. 2010. Sungai Petani in Penang.13 April.
Yahaya, N. 2007a.Solid waste management, Conference on climate change preparedness.
National Solid Waste Department. Kuala Lumpur.11 September.
Yahaya, N. 2007b.The New National Solid Waste Department. The New Sunday Time, 1
January.
Yassin, M. 2006. Speech given in the Waste Management Conference, Ministry of Local
Government and Housing, Kuala Lumpur, 16 May.

17

