ACHIEVING NET BENEFITS

A ROAD MAP FOR CROSS-SECTORAL POLICY DEVELOPMENT IN RESPONSE TO
THE UNINTENDED USE OF MOSQUITO NETS AS FISHING GEAR

Short. R1,2, Addison, P.3, Hill, N.4,5, Arlidge, W.3, Arthur, R.6, Berthe, S.7, Castello y
Tickell, S.3, Coulthard, S.8, Lorenz, L.9, Sibanda, M.10, Milner-Gulland, E.J.3
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

IMPERIAL COLLEGE LONDON, DEPARTMENT OF LIFE SCIENCE, SILWOOD PARK, BUCKHURST RD., ASCOT, UK
EUROPEAN CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENT AND HUMAN HEALTH, UNIVERSITY OF EXETER MEDICAL SCHOOL, ROYAL CORNWALL HOSPITAL, TRURO, UK
INTERDISCIPLINARY CENTRE FOR CONSERVATION SCIENCE, DEPARTMENT OF ZOOLOGY, UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD, UK
ZOOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON, REGENT’S PARK, LONDON, UK
CENTRE FOR ECOLOGY AND CONSERVATION, UNIVERSITY OF EXETER, PENRYN, CORNWALL, UK
MRAG LTD, 18 QUEEN STREET, LONDON, W1J 5PN, UK
VECTORWORKS, JOHNS HOPKINS BLOOMBERG SCHOOL OF PUBLIC HEALTH CENTRE FOR COMMUNICATION PROGRAMS, BALTIMORE, MD, USA
NORTHUMBRIA UNIVERSITY, DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SCIENCES AND LANGUAGES, SANDYFORD RD, NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE, UK
DEPARTMENT OF DISEASE CONTROL, LONDON SCHOOL OF HYGIENE & TROPICAL MEDICINE, KEPPEL STREET, LONDON, UK
WWF UK, LIVING PLANET CENTRE, RUFFORD HOUSE, BREWERY ROAD, WOKING, UK

Executive summary
Aims of the paper
The use of mosquito nets as fishing gear (equipment) has caused increasing alarm and
grown in global prevalence for at least the past ten years across developing nations, with
limited individual and no concerted policy responses from the relevant management sectors.
The potential negative impacts of the activity are increasingly recognised to span the
domains of public health, food and nutrition security, biodiversity conservation and
sustainable development (Short et al., 2018).
Whilst the potential for negative impacts of mosquito net fishing (MNF) has received
inadequate attention, the benefits the activity represents have been entirely missing from the
narrative thus far. Credence must be given to underlying drivers of MNF alongside the
existing and growing dependence of fishing individuals and communities on the activity, and
critically the yet to be acknowledged potential opportunities MNF represents in light of
related socio-economic and environmental change. MNF, which has been portrayed as a last
resort of the poor, is increasingly posited to improve livelihoods beyond its subsistence value,
promote gender equity due to high female engagement, and potentially access underutilised
nutritional resources.
A global-level response to MNF is now overdue, with a need to both develop and implement
policies in an interdisciplinary, collaborative nature given the broad impacts. Thus far
advances have been hindered by a paucity of detailed understanding of MNF, something
which is increasingly being addressed but should be further supported, with the issue largely
treated as a hot potato. This paper utilises the outputs of a first cross-sectoral workshop and
broad, representative expertise from health, environment and development to road map a
way forward for multi-level, cross-sectoral policy development.
There is a need to address MNF as an issue of potentially high risk from both environmental
and developmental perspectives, with application of the precautionary principle alongside
development of a strategic research agenda to better assess risk-benefit trade-offs. This
paper addresses policy needs towards these goals at a range of levels of governance,
providing a structure for future research direction and adaptive management, defining
organisational and sectoral responsibilities alongside specific policy responses where
appropriate. As such, this document aims to inform strategic policy development of multiple
levels of governance, but is particularly targeted at high level institutions, such as the WHO
and the FAO, who are yet to be effectively engaged in the ongoing conversations surrounding
MNF.

2

Recommendations in summary
1. We recommend that the WHO, FAO, UNDP and other UN agencies recognise the
need for strategic, collaborative policy development across multiple levels of
governance to address the public health, food security and biodiversity conservation
threats of the use of mosquito nets as fishing gear.
2. We recommend the development of an adaptive management framework for MNF,
starting with an initial cross-sectoral values mapping process at a range of scales,
facilitated by the aforementioned agencies and utilising case studies.
3. We acknowledge the continued importance of mosquito net distribution programmes
in tackling malaria and recommend that current and future programmes employ a
policy of a MNF mitigation hierarchy throughout the relevant stages of distribution.
4. We recommend the identification of Key Affected Areas (KAAs) where parallel policies
to the mitigation hierarchy are developed according to local contexts including:
- Use and development of alternative, tailored vector control
- Collaborative efforts towards integrated development programmes specifically
tackling drivers of MNF including investment, education and facilitation of
social equity and female empowerment.
- Adaptive strategies applied to current fisheries management and specifically a
focus on ensuring appropriate use of enforcement measures.
5. We recommend using an integrated, cross-sectoral approach to policy at each step
which is critically supported in data collection through information and capacity
sharing, and data management/use by a centralised database of open source
information. Key to effective delivery of these initiatives will be adoption of a common
language across sectors.
6. We recommend drawing on existing goals and advice within sectoral documents,
including the Global Technical Strategy for Malaria and Voluntary Guidelines for
Securing Sustainable Small-Scale Fisheries, and building these in to a concerted effort
to create an enabling policy environment for addressing MNF across sectors.
7. We recommend the engagement of NGOs across public health, development and
conservation remits in policy development, particularly facilitation of dialogues at the
local level, data sharing and capacity.
8. We recommend the close marrying of private donors and business with high level
efforts to create an enabling policy environment, responding as a driving force of
diversification and innovation in interventions.
9. We recommend the engagement of academic institutions in furthering our
understanding of MNF and enabling evaluation and adaptive responses to policy,
alongside a role of fostering and supporting innovations in support of private
business.
10. A range of existing, adaptable and novel interventions are proposed from an
interdisciplinary brainstorm (Appendix I), though it should be noted this is not
intended to be exhaustive.

3

Expert contributors to this report:
Dr. Prue Addison Interdisciplinary Centre for Conservation Science (ICCS), Uni.
William Arlidge
Dr. Robert Arthur
Sara Berthe
Kitty Brayne
Sofia Castello y Tickell
Dr. Sarah Coulthard
Elizabeth Drury O’Neill
Dr. Nick Hill
Dr. Amy Lehman
Peni Lestari
Dr. Lena Lorenz
Dr. Kate McIntyre
Prof. E.J. Milner-Gulland
Dr. Helen Pates Jamet
Dr. Melita Samoilys
Rebecca Short
Mxolisi Sibanda
Prof. Rick Welsh

4

Oxford, UK
ICCS, University of Oxford, UK
MRAG, UK

VectorWorks, Johns Hopkins University, US
Blue Ventures, UK
ICCS, University of Oxford, UK
Northumbria University, UK
Stockholm Resilience Centre, Sweden
Zoological Society of London (ZSL), UK
Lake Tanganyika Floating Heath Clinic, USA
Wildlife Conservation Society, Indonesia
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, UK
Independent
ICCS, University of Oxford, UK
Vestergaard Frandsen, Switzerland
CORDIO East Africa, Kenya
Imperial College London, UK; ICCS, UK; ZSL, UK
Worldwide Fund For Nature (WWF UK)
Syracuse University, USA

Introduction
Mosquito nets continue to be a key part of efforts to tackle malaria worldwide, a disease
which is still estimated to kill more than 400,000 people a year and has wide-reaching social
and economic impacts in 91 countries (WHO, 2015). These nets, once a somewhat
inaccessible commercial product but which are now widely distributed for free or subsidised,
are credited with 68% of an estimated 663 million averted malaria cases since 2000 (Bhatt et
al., 2015a). Sub-Saharan Africa continues to bear the heaviest burden of malaria; around
91% of deaths, and consequently the majority of net distribution efforts are concentrated
here (WHO, 2017). The technological development of mosquito nets over recent years has
increased their viability as a tool towards eradication of malaria. Beyond the initial provision
of physical protection to individuals, Insecticide Treated Nets (ITNs) first aimed to provide a
chemical barrier, followed by development of Long Lasting Insecticide treated Nets (LLINs)
which removed the need for regular re-treatment and which are considered current best
practice (WHO, 2014b). For the purposes of this document we will refer to all of these nets
simply as Mosquito Nets (MNs).
Reports of the alternative use of MNs as fishing gear, used to actively target fish in water
columns and living on substrates, began to emerge in the early 2000s (Srivastava, Sarkar &
Patiyal, 2002; Jiddawi & Öhman, 2002), coinciding with the advent of mass distribution efforts.
The practice appears to have increased exponentially ever since and prevalence of MN
fishing has recently been posited as far broader and more frequent than previously
appreciated at the global level (Short et al., 2018). Although there have been numerous
reports of Mosquito Net Fishing (MNF) in the media, little empirical investigation has been
conducted, save for a handful of localised case studies; some of which present the issue as
negligible in terms of scale and impact on anti-malarial efforts, and others which suggest it is
a significant and growing problem particularly in terms of fishery sustainability (McLean et al.,
2014; Bush et al., 2016; Eisele, Thwing & Keating, 2011; Minakawa et al., 2008).
When considering the MNF problem at scale, a number of sometimes competing and
frequently anecdotal narratives have emerged in the media and limited literature. First, some
authors suggest MNF may be having a negative impact on efforts to reduce malaria. Malaria
interventions globally are currently united under a goal of Universal Coverage (UC). UC is
defined as universal access to, and use of LLINs by populations at risk of malaria and is an
official World Health Organisation (WHO) policy (WHO, 2014a). From the perspective of those
tackling malaria using MNs, and in the context of significant investment in mass/continuous
distributions towards the goal of UC, any alternative use of nets may be seen as detrimental
to these efforts under the assumption that every net used for fishing could otherwise be
used on a bed. UC as a goal is intended to offer everyone at risk of malaria the same level of

5

protection as a right, but there are also more fundamental implications of reduced bed
coverage on malaria incidence as a whole. At a threshold level of coverage within a given
community, the impact of those sleeping under LLINs (and these nets must be treated) may
confer a degree of protection to the wider population not sleeping under nets through what
is termed an epidemiological ‘mass effect’. This is where mortality of mosquitoes from
interaction with the net insecticides has an abatement impact on their population as a whole,
reducing transmission across whole communities (Killeen et al., 2017a). Even a relatively
small reduction in coverage may have a significant impact on infection rates. The actual
impact of MNF on coverage is unknown, however recent studies have suggested that impacts
on total net loss (attrition) of misuse in general, and particularly for fishing, may be minimal at
the broad scale (Kilian 2018, unpublished).
Second, some authors suggest capture of juvenile fish, due to small mesh sizes, threatens
fishery sustainability and therefore food security. Small scale fisheries, where MNF occurs,
contribute around two thirds of global catches for direct human consumption (FAO, 2015)
with 90% of these fisheries are in the world’s poorest nations who are reliant on them for
their main source of protein and key nutrients (FAO, 2005). So the implications of MNF for
nutritional impacts on human health are potentially severe. Current fisheries management
centres on ensuring fishing practices are selective in terms of species and sizes (Garcia et al.,
2012). This size-based management aims to allow both individuals smaller than of value, and
juveniles of target species which have not yet had a chance to breed to escape by ensuring
mesh sizes are larger (Sissenwine & Shepherd, 1987). The mesh size of mosquito nets is
necessarily small, at ~1-3mm, and is capable of indiscriminately catching juveniles of most
species. This is also seen to undermine efforts to avoid ‘growth overfishing’ whereby capture
of juveniles and small adults, which are more valuable in terms of yield once they grow larger,
means the potential of the fishery is not realised (Diekert, 2012). As such, the predominant
view is that fine mesh nets are detrimental to sustainable fisheries and is a key reason this
document is required. However, consideration needs to be given to recent counterarguments to these management approaches, of particular relevance to MNF.
There is increasing evidence that current management paradigms side-line the hugely
beneficial role that small-bodied fish can play in a sustainable fishery, and that the
consequences of this is an additional marginalisation of the most vulnerable, such as MN
fishers, whose gears are therefore banned. Balanced harvest theory emphasises the
sustainability of harvesting fish according to how productive they may be at varying life
stages, promoting capture of highly productive juvenile phases and forage fish. Small-bodied
fish constitute a disproportionately valuable resource, particularly when eaten whole, where
they provide key micronutrients such as Vitamins A, D and B12, Iron, Zinc and Calcium
(Thilsted et al., 2013) crucial for overall health and development, but particularly important
for successful malaria recovery (Shankar, 2000), especially in children (Caulfield, Richard &
Black, 2004). Small fish are also easier to dry and can therefore be stored and transported
long distances, increasing the catchment of their nutritional benefit (Kolding, van Zwieten &
6

Mosepele, 2015). A balanced harvest scenario inclusive of small-bodied individuals therefore
has the potential to produce higher yields concurrent to enhanced nutrition. These small
individuals are only accessible with fine mesh nets. It may therefore be speculated that MNF
catch is not necessarily damaging to the fishery but may indeed be beneficial in terms of
concurrent high yields and nutritional security (Kolding & Zwieten, 2014).
Third, some authors argue that the ready availability of MNs may encourage new entrants to
fisheries and increase overall pressure, which further threatens sustainability. Engaging in
MN fishing requires no capital investment, no seafaring knowledge, and no fishing
experience meaning that it is open to anyone with a net in proximity to a body of water.
Fisheries suffering from high fishing pressure over significant areas may experience
‘recruitment overfishing’ whereby the numbers of new recruits to the population are not
enough to sustain the fishing rate (Sissenwine & Shepherd, 1987). The expansion of pressure
on small-bodied species/life stages may impact the balance of the associated ecosystems.
However, such concerns are purely theoretical. Our current understanding of what these
impacts might be is poor and likely to be highly context-specific, dependent on the habitats,
previous state of the fishery and how MNF is conducted.
The issue of MNF is a complicated one and concerns are not limited to the
predominant/direct issues discussed above. Additional environmental concerns surround
impacts on associated biodiversity; the use of MNs in shallow water and fragile ecosystems
where trampling and physical damage from nets is highly likely (Mangi & Roberts, 2006).
Some concern has been expressed over the impact of net insecticides leaching in to water
bodies. LLINs currently employ pyrethroid-class insecticides which, although of low toxicity to
mammals, can be highly toxic to other aquatic organisms (Hill, 1989) and are capable of
killing small fish on contact. Shallow waters are often host to nursery grounds for species
that occupy other habitats during subsequent life stages, so negative impacts on these
habitats may have population-level effects. With new fishing gears and techniques often
comes conflict, particularly in cases where these gears receive negative attention such as MN
fishing has had (Pomeroy et al., 2007). Blame for new and/or damaging fishing gears is often
laid with itinerant fishers which may lead to extreme reactions, even violence (Cassels, Curran
& Kramer, 2005). Gender issues may also cause conflict; MNF may be an acceptable and
accessible activity for women when its profitability is low, but this can change if and when the
activity becomes more profitable, with men then excluding women from a resource they are
reliant on (Williams, Williams & Choo, 2002). Inshore fisheries may indirectly conflict with
deeper water and often more commercial fisheries through depletion of nursery grounds
and juvenile capture (van der Elst, 2003).

There is currently little evidence of where, to what extent and on whom MNF may have
negative impacts. However, theoretically and empirically there is growing evidence of the
positive impacts MNF has on individuals and communities. There is a critical need to consider
7

who MN fishers are, whether users are opportunists or driven by poverty and other factors.
In reality, this is not a ‘new’ or ‘emerging’ activity, though evidence shows expansion. Some
may have been engaging in the activity for more than a decade, for some it is likely key to
bridging seasonal starvation periods (Short et al., 2018; Abbott & Campbell, 2009) and
providing the aforementioned critical micronutrients. For others MNF is likely to be an
adaptive response to social and environmental change including desertification and political
instability or conflict (McLean et al., 2014). Aside from the potential role as a food and income
‘crutch’ (Bene, Hersoug & Allison, 2010), the characteristics of this activity may also mean it
has conveyed significant livelihood advantages to communities, with potential over the long
term. The ease of use, cultural acceptability and lack of capital investment requirements
means opportunities for autonomy for women and the marginalised, which may drive
increased equity in fisheries and confer significant developmental advantages (Ranis, Frances
& Alejandro, 2000). Further investigation in to the positive impacts of MNF and the
opportunity costs involved in management, particularly on the vulnerable, are imperative.
Underpinning, or perhaps undermining all of these broad concerns is a lack of evidence;
basic characterisation of the issue, knowledge of distribution, demographics, socio-economic
role or proximate and ultimate drivers and impacts. It is absolutely critical that approaches to
MNF, whilst supported by centralised policies, be developed in a context-dependent way,
supported by adequate science. There is a critical need for policy makers to maintain
objectivity when considering approaches to MNF as whilst the current narrative largely paints
negative picture of the activity, there is significant potential for consideration of the
opportunities MNF may present for multiple stakeholders. The workshop and outputs
presented here were explicitly delivered with these considerations in mind. Whilst this
document aims to present a road map towards formation of effective policies to address
MNF, the suggestions herein should be considered as under the precautionary principle and
will only be useful with a foundation goal of collaborative and efficacious information
gathering.

1. The need for cross-sectoral policy development
8

1.1.

Addressing a cross-cutting issue – a first workshop

The complex and far reaching potential impacts of MNF straddle issues of food & livelihoods
security, biodiversity conservation, and public health, cutting across many targets within the
United Nation’s Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs; Table 1). Effective responses to the
issue need to bring together the variety of sectoral bodies charged with delivering on these
targets. The drivers of MNF are multifactorial; encompassing those of poverty, sustainable
and equitable access to resources, and human conflict. Policy and legislatory responses are
justifiably required from the multiple sectors concerned with public health, environmental
protection, development and natural resource management. This policy brief is the product
of a collaborative workshop hosted by researchers from the Interdisciplinary Centre for
Conservation Science, Oxford University, at the Oxford Martin School, UK in November 2017.
Cross-sectoral representatives from industry, NGOs, science and policy with a broad suite of
fisheries, conservation, public health (including specifically malaria focused) and development
expertise were invited to participate in a first-of-its-kind discussion about policy development
specifically for MNF, from global to local scales.

1.1.

A global public good – but who is responsible?

MNs are considered a vital public health intervention, so much so that access to their
protection can be viewed as a right and therefore MNs as a public good (Guyatt Helen L. et
al., 2002). However, where does the responsibility lie when considering mitigation of
unintended consequences of their mass distribution, such as fishing? Currently there is no
legal responsibility for distribution programmes to ensure correct use of MNs, and clarity on
the actual risks to both food security and biodiversity is urgently needed. However, morally
an obligation arguably exists for both distributors and end users to ensure that nets
distributed for malaria prevention are used for their intended purpose, and disposed of
responsibly once finished with.
Some urgency is necessary to resolve these obligations as globally net distribution
programmes continue to expand as well as introducing new, ‘next generation’ nets. These
nets are designed to address the increasing resistance of mosquitoes to Pyrethroids and
instead employ Chlorfenapyr or Pyriproxifen insecticides for impregnation (Ngufor et al.,
2016; N’Guessan et al., 2016). These are more likely to be a risk to humans, with the former
considered highly toxic, and there will need to be strong reassurances that risks of potential
entry to human food chains, due to nets being used for fishing and drying fish, have been

9

TABLE 1 - INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS AND ASSOCIATED TARGETS FOR WHICH MOSQUITO NET FISHING IS OF PARTICULAR RELEVANCE.

Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs)

Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) – Aichi Targets

Convention/
agreement

Goal

Specific target

Mosquito Net Fishing relevance

Target 6

By 2020, all fish and invertebrate stocks
and aquatic plants are managed and
harvested sustainably, legally and applying
ecosystem based approaches, so that
overfishing is avoided, recovery plans and
measures are in place for all depleted
species, fisheries have no significant
adverse impacts on threatened species
and vulnerable ecosystems and the
impacts of fisheries on stocks, species and
ecosystems are within safe ecological
limits.

-

Target 10

By 2015, the multiple anthropogenic
pressures on coral reefs, and other
vulnerable ecosystems impacted by climate
change or ocean acidification are
minimized, so as to maintain their integrity
and functioning.

-

MNF may cause damage to seagrass beds and coral reef ecosystems through
physical damage and overfishing.

Goal 2 - End
hunger,
achieve food
security and
improved
nutrition and
promote
sustainable
agriculture

2.1 By 2030, end hunger and ensure
access by all people, in particular the poor
and people in vulnerable situations,
including infants, to safe, nutritious and
sufficient food all year round.

-

2.2 By 2030, end all forms of malnutrition,
including achieving, by 2025, the
internationally agreed targets on stunting
and wasting in children under 5 years of
age, and address the nutritional needs of

-

MNF may undermine small-scale fisheries (those which utilise coastal or
freshwater resources for subsistence, recreation, or artisanal fishing, typically
with dispersed local ownership) of particular importance to poor and vulnerable
people.
MNF may provide unique access to fisheries for poor and vulnerable people
who may otherwise be excluded.
MNF may compromise fisheries management efforts in areas where adjacent
communities are heavily reliant on fish for food security.
At least in the short term people may be heavily reliant on MNF for provision of
fish.

-

-

-

Mosquito Net Fishing (MNF) undermines current fisheries management efforts
MNF may be conducted in fragile and vulnerable ecosystems, causing damage
from the gear and trampling.
MNF may be cause damage beyond targeted fisheries resources to other
invertebrate stocks because of its small mesh size.
MNF may be encouraging new entrants to fisheries, increasing overall pressure
on resources.

adolescent girls, pregnant and lactating
women and older persons.

-

The provision of small-bodied fish, particularly those eaten whole, are
increasingly appreciated as key for provision of critical micronutrients of
particular relevance to childhood nutrition and development.

3.3 By 2030, end the epidemics of AIDS,
tuberculosis, malaria and neglected
tropical diseases and combat hepatitis,
water-borne diseases and other
communicable diseases.

-

MNF may be reducing bed coverage rates and therefore decreasing efficacy of
anti-malarial efforts.
Reduced coverage rates, even at low levels, may reduce the ‘mass effect’ on
mosquito populations and wider malaria rates.

3.8 Achieve universal health coverage,
including financial risk protection, access to
quality essential health-care services and
access to safe, effective, quality and
affordable essential medicines and
vaccines for all.

-

Goal 5 Achieve
gender
equality and
empower all
women and
girls

5.A Undertake reforms to give women
equal rights to economic resources, as well
as access to ownership and control over
land and other forms of property, financial
services, inheritance and natural resources,
in accordance with national laws.

-

Goal 14 Conserve and
sustainably
use the
oceans, seas
and marine
resources for
sustainable
development

14.4 By 2020, effectively regulate
harvesting and end overfishing, illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing and
destructive fishing practices and
implement science-based management
plans, in order to restore fish stocks in the
shortest time feasible, at least to levels that
can produce maximum sustainable yield as
determined by their biological
characteristics.

-

Goal 3 Ensure healthy
lives and
promote wellbeing for all at
all ages

-

-

-

-

The commodification of MNs for a purpose other than protection from
mosquitoes may serve to restrict access for the most vulnerable and/or
incentivise alternative uses of MNs.
MNF May have a bearing on the ‘universal coverage’ goal for MNs for people in
at risk areas set by the World Health Organisation.
MNF may remove physical and cultural barriers to women entering fisheries
MNF may significantly contribute to ability for women to engage in savings
schemes.
The co-operative approach largely necessary to engage in MNF may encourage
formation of informal co-operatives for women.

MNF may undermine current fisheries management efforts, though actual
impacts are unknown.
MNF is broadly illegal, consequently catches and prevalence go unreported and
are not incorporated in to scientific assessments.
MNF largely occurs in small-scale fisheries where localised co-management (the
sharing of power and responsibility between the government and local resource
users) is often the endorsed mode of management – the socio-economic
complications of MNF make enforcement of bans difficult in these scenarios.

14.7 By 2030, increase the economic
benefits to Small Island developing States
and least developed countries from the
sustainable use of marine resources,
including through sustainable
management of fisheries, aquaculture and
tourism.

-

Current evidence of MNF occurs almost exclusively in LDCs (Short et al., 2018).
In the short term at least MNF has economic benefits to fishers in LDCs.

14.B Provide access for small-scale
artisanal fishers to marine resources and
markets.

-

MNF may provide access to previously un-utilised marine resources (juvenile
and small-bodied fish).
The characteristics of MNF and availability of nets means fisheries resources
may be made accessible to a broader range of user groups.
The storage and transport potential of small-bodied fish may allow access to
additional, increasingly distant markets for fishers.

-

Copenhagen Consensus Post 2015 – Smart Development
Goals

People

Lower chronic child malnutrition by 40%.

-

-

These recommendations focus on dietary supplements, however, the role of
naturally available sources warrants attention for increased access to nutrients
independent of AID.
Fish are increasingly deemed to be of critical importance to global nutrition
development.
Small-bodied fish provide significant contributions of protein and important
micronutrients and are best targeted with small-mesh gears such as MNs.
MNF is often conducted by women. Female provisioning in some scenarios can
provide more and better quality nutrition for children than reliance on just male
provisioning (with subsequent positive impacts on overall development).

Halve malaria infection.

-

MNs are a critical tool in the prevention of malaria
The extent of alternative use of MNs is unknown, but MNF may be an important
driver of trade-offs.

Planet

Halve coral reef loss.

-

MNF may threaten coral reefs due to physical damage and ecosystem effects of
overfishing.

Prosperity

Improve gender equality in ownership,
business and politics.

-

MNF can be a significant leg-up for women in communities where they may
otherwise be excluded from economic development opportunities.

assessed and addressed. A similarly recent WHO-endorsed promotion of Piperonyl
Butoxide, which is combined with Pyrethroids to increase their efficacy, may also increase
concerns over harm to wildlife (National Pesticide Information Centre, 2000; Protopopoff et
al., 2018). Therefore there is a need to ensure that any shift to new ways of treating nets
goes along with strong policies and responsibilities for safe disposal.
The control of harmful fishing practices is justifiably the remit of national fisheries
ministries. Currently, national policies towards MNF largely focus on enforcement of gear
bans under mesh-size regulations (or sometimes MNF-specific legislation) which may be
harmful to particularly vulnerable groups (Short et al., 2018). Enforcement of fisheries laws
in the regions of concern is often severely limited by a lack of capacity and funding. In
reality much of the enforcement of small-scale fisheries in these regions is facilitated by
NGOs, community fishing councils, Beach Management Units (BMUs) and the like through
co-management efforts. As an issue of social (and particularly gender) equity, which can fail
to be effectively addressed by co-management schemes (Diamond, Squillante & Hale,
2003), this form of governance would be an unlikely silver bullet, particularly if we assume
that MNF is an activity of ‘last resort’. Additionally, when dealing with the particularly
vulnerable, those enacting these governance systems from within their own communities
may be the most conflicted in use of these methods, further compromising the scope of
effective enforcement. The common use of gear confiscations and burning (including
ceremonial), the scale of which can be large and should not be underestimated (Geoffrey
Furber, Ripple Africa, pers. comms), conflicts with the goals and messaging of MN
distribution efforts.
The efficacy of ban policies against the use of MNs for fishing has not been assessed at a
local scale or otherwise and it is difficult to determine if or where enforcement may be
active. The prevalence of the problem at a local level (e.g. Darkey & Turatsinze, (2014), Short
et al., (2018), and Larsen et al., (2018) would certainly suggest that enforcement of MNF
bans in many countries by actors external to the community would be prohibitively
expensive for already poorly resourced ministries. Vulnerable groups of people fishing
close to the shore are more visible and possibly less confrontational. Inappropriate
evaluation indicators such as the rate these individuals are arrested may mask the
ineffectiveness of MNF bans whilst also having little positive impact on fishery sustainability.
Additionally, the strict differentiation of responsibility between sectors is largely unhelpful,
and means that complex, cross-sectoral issues can fall through the cracks. There is a need
to engage more across relevant sectors and expertise to adopt policies which address the
underlying drivers of illegal extractive activities while also addressing health, poverty
reduction and biodiversity conservation goals. MNF is a prime example of why this is
important.

13

1.2.

Current policies are conflicting or failing

High-level policies from both the health and environmental management perspectives
either give little consideration to the impacts of the prevalence of MNF, or do not holistically
tackle its impacts to fishing communities. The predominant response to the rise of
mosquito net fishing has been that of fisheries ministries to legislate against the activity,
either utilising existing fisheries restrictions on mesh sizes or to introduce novel legislation
specifically for this gear e.g. Mozambique where MNF offenses now carry a potential 3-5
year prison sentence. By criminalising the activity you inherently exclude it from
management and make it harder to measure and control (Adger, 2006), relying on strong
enforcement to make this policy effective. In the case of mosquito net fishing enforcing
against inshore, visible fishers (with brightly coloured nets) who, in the case of some
marginalised users, may be less likely to question the enforcement or flee can be an easy
way of making it look like enforcement is effective; i.e. facilitate a healthy arrest rate.
Significant jail sentences are likely to negatively impact the most vulnerable users and be
ineffective deterrents if this is a fishery of last resort. These impacts are of particular
concern in the case of female users who may therefore be disproportionately targeted. This
policy of enforcement is also in direct conflict with efforts to prevent malaria if potentially
useful nets are burned or confiscated, which is unlikely to be politically sustainable. There is
a real danger for mosquito nets to become a scapegoat for the wider problems of
overexploited fisheries. Whilst this certainly doesn’t refute a role of MNF in declining
catches, targeting a single unsubstantiated issue would be detrimental to overall
management. The potential socio-economic issues arising from this targeted enforcement
may be great and anecdotal reports are of MN fishers left in desperate states. The risk of
forcing people in to more damaging activities, such as dynamite or cyanide fishing which
proliferates in areas of severe desperation should be considered.
Goals of universal coverage (UC) and the methods employed to achieve UC do little to limit
the presence of excess nets in distribution areas (Bhatt et al., 2015b) or to address the
choices people make as to whether to use a net on their bed or for fishing (Honjo & Satake,
2014); something we need to understand much better. Aiming for universal coverage may
be seen as a pragmatic approach to achieving levels of coverage that drive a ‘mass effect’
on mosquitoes, whereby mortality rates from insecticide contact may have a populationlevel effect and improve the effective protective range of nets (Howard et al., 2000).
However, increasingly effective methods are being developed that optimise delivery modes
and numbers thereby making distribution efforts more cost-effective and potentially limit
net availability for alternative use (Killeen & Smith, 2007). Opportunities exist both to
understand the dynamics and drivers of MNF and to adapt current policy to avoid negative
socio-economic and ecological impacts, and to bridge sectoral gaps to develop synergistic
policies that can have broader benefits.
14

1.3.
Feedbacks inextricably link sectoral impacts; expert
objectives align
Potentially the strongest illustration of the need for cross-sectoral collaboration in
mitigating MNF is the complexity of the potential feedbacks of the activity, rooted as it is
within health, economic, cultural and ecological aspects of the communities where it
occurs. The food security aspect of MNF has serious ramifications for human health, both
positive and negative, particularly the impact of nutritional status on resilience to and
recovery from malaria (Shankar, 2000), which need to be addressed. Similarly, a feedback
exists between compromised health and an increased likelihood for an individual to engage
in illegal fishing activities which are less labour-intensive, such as MNF (Fiorella et al., 2017).
Additionally, fishers operating in a compromised ecosystem with few alternative
opportunities for food or income and the additional burden of disease are at serious risk of
becoming poverty trapped and perpetuating this cycle of issues.
Whilst much discussion has focussed on the negative impacts of MNF, the positive
contributions to autonomy for the marginalised, improved food security and livelihoods in
the short term pose a question as to how and by whom opportunity costs may be borne.
Successful engagement of the development sector in development of interventions to limit
the activity will be key, and indeed inform how we might turn control of MNF into
opportunities for introduction of sustainable livelihoods for the most vulnerable. In many
regions, the conservation of biodiversity and particularly coral reefs is key to maintenance
and expansion of tourism incomes, including through opportunities for community-based
management (Picard, 2015). Finally, avoiding conflicts between subsistence, small-scale and
commercial fishers is key to long term sustainability in fisheries management. If MN fishers
continue to be seen to undermine stocks at large then this will be challenging. Whilst this
inter-weaving of impacts and their associated feedbacks makes MNF a complicated issue, it
also means that, at heart, sectoral motivations with respect to this activity are subject to
large overlaps, leading to the conclusion that a highly collaborative, interdisciplinary
response will be pivotal to successful management.

15

OBJECTIVE SETTING
The first task of the 2017 workshop was to address the synergistic and
antagonistic aspects of feedbacks associated with MNF. The following crosssectoral objectives aimed to guide development of recommendations
(Section 2) and engage policy makers across sectors toward common goals:
Healthy people exist in a healthy environment where nobody in waterbased communities dies from malaria, sustainable fisheries are supporting
ecosystem function and meeting nutritional needs.
-

Improved understanding of the drivers and impacts of MNF, as well as
identification of Key Affected Areas (KAAs) is incorporated in to current
management objectives across sectors, with its priority increased.

-

Policy is geared towards removing the want/need for MNF and moves
away from reliance on post-hoc enforcement policies.

-

Policy-making is evidence-based and data collection is collaborative
and inclusive at the local level.

-

Tailored vector control is accepted as a policy and cost-effective
assessment methods developed.

-

Implementation of interventions is participatory and collaborative at the
local level.

-

Gender equity is incorporated in to MNF-focused policy and effectively
promoted where MNF issues exist.

-

Equity and procedural justice is core to delivery of interventions, with
these ideals reflected when incorporated in to local institutions and
governance.

2. Interdisciplinary identification of policy avenues
A two-day workshop was held at the Oxford Martin School on 31st Oct – 1st Nov 2017. The
workshop employed a mixture of expert knowledge elicitation methods. Invited experts
were either segregated for intra-sectoral discussions with subsequent contribution to
plenary discussions, or randomly mixed in to representative cross-sectoral groups for both
brainstorming and refinement activities. Refer to Appendix II for a more detailed
methodology. A core aim of the workshop was to consult these experts to elicit key policy
arenas in which the MNF issue could and should be addressed. This discussion centred on
16

the individual decision-maker, appreciating that the choice to use a MN for malaria
prevention or for fishing is affected by both push and pull influences, whereby individuals
may be both attracted and forced in to fishing and that both are impacted by current
policies.
Four key avenues were identified through workshop discussions (Figure 1) and some
examples of specific interventions are given below. Appendix I contains a thorough analysis
of key interventions relevant to the policies which were discussed:

FIGURE 1 - PROPOSED MITIGATION HIERARCHY AND PARALLEL, CROSS-SECTORAL POLICIES FOR ADDRESSING MOSQUITO NET FISHING IN MALARIAL
ZONES.

2.1.

Reduce, repurpose, recycle: the mitigation hierarchy

The ready availability of both new and used nets has been posited as a significant incentive
for MNF (Short et al., 2018; Bush et al., 2016). The current WHO policy sets guidelines at a
broad population level of 1 net for every 1.8 people to achieve UC. This is designed to
necessarily optimise net distribution for practical reasons of resource availability, and
unfortunately these targets are still hampered by such limitations, with studies showing
that the predominant limiting factor for coverage remains net availability (Koenker, Ricotta
& Olapeju, 2018). However, it has been argued that the level at which these
recommendations are set may oversimplify optimisation and lead to over- (and indeed

17

under-) supply at local levels (Bhatt et al., 2015b). Moving away from global, blanket
guidelines, modelled and empirical studies could aid understanding and optimisation of
vector control efforts better at a local scale. Methods already used to understand the mass
effect and environmental and social characteristics impacting local epidemiology could be
employed at these finer scales to improve efficiency and minimise oversupply (not by
reducing nets delivered, but by delivering them to the appropriate households) whilst also
optimising the ‘mass effect’ (Killeen & Smith, 2007; Hawley et al., 2003; Bhatt et al., 2015b;
Dlamini et al., 2017). Further development of such methods could constitute a potential
win-win for those addressing MNF and for coverage targets.
The ‘public good’ argument for access to nets by all is a strong one, however this argument
is better posited as a right to protection from malaria vectors, rather than a right to a
mosquito net specifically. Other vector control methods can be considered under this
argument and yet remain underutilised and underdeveloped (Killeen et al., 2017a), for
example, coating the walls and other surfaces of a house with a residual insecticide (Indoor
Residual Spraying; IRS) or use of grassroots larval source management methods which
reduce potential breeding grounds for mosquitos. For those nets which are distributed, a
key objective should be to ensure that practice is geared towards maximising intended use,
firstly by removal of physical, social and educational barriers to hanging the nets over beds
(inclusive of research and development for new net designs). There is significant evidence
of a positive effect on bed coverage of removing barriers to use (Pulford et al., 2011).
Highlighting the potential long-term and negative impacts of MNF and promoting
sustainable and equitable fisheries use to target communities should also be encouraged.
Integrated education, social marketing and behaviour change programmes may be applied
to this goal.
Delineating nets as either ‘new’ (fit-for-purpose), ‘end of life’ (no longer fit-for-purpose), or
‘unserviceable’ (in need of disposal) is necessary for management and has important policy
implications. The influence of MN condition may be best viewed on a spectrum of policy
interventions as part of a ‘mitigation hierarchy’, where end users may first be actively
encouraged to repair nets for continued use on beds (a recommendation already
supported by WHO). Once nets are deemed beyond repair for use on beds, they may be
repurposed for a number of beneficial vector control uses such as window screening or
covering water sources to prevent use for mosquito larvae. These policies will require
appropriate and clear communications on care and repair and categories of beneficial
repurposing for success. The Alliance for Malaria Prevention has already drafted key
repurposing recommendations which should be promptly reviewed and adopted.

Finally, the nets should be safely disposed of. Advice from the WHO on disposal of nets
post-use is currently limited to recommendations for safe disposal via incineration (WHO
Global Malaria Programme, 2014) – a policy which does not account for shortages of waste
18

collection and incineration facilities in many affected countries. Overall, WHO discourages
collection of MNs for disposal or recycling unless the potential risks to the universal
coverage goal are mitigated, about which there is no clear advice (WHO Global Malaria
Programme, 2014). We would argue that this may have perverse impacts in KAAs, beyond
the consequent availability of nets for fishing; retaining nets beyond their useful life can
impact insecticide resistance in mosquitoes (Norris et al., 2015), and with an urgent need to
tackle plastic pollution globally, to have no disposal policy for 1.4 billion plastic nets is
negligent. Recycling of MNs is a valid policy option when coupled with development of a
collection model that can both relieve strain on waste disposal systems and identify gaps in
coverage through needs assessment. Collection models need to consider locally
appropriate incentives. Where this recycling is not possible, better policy on safe disposal
needs to be developed.

2.2.

Alternative vector control

The distribution of MNs is currently the largest malaria prevention intervention employed in
developing nations, both in terms of investment and operational scale (Bhatt et al., 2015a).
However, numerous other interventions exist at various levels of development, deployment
and mainstreaming which may be considered underutilised in a policy and funding
environment that favours MN distribution. MNs have resonated strongly with the public
and generate significant funding, both direct (personal donations) and indirect (national
taxpayer contributions to the Global Fund), thanks to the tangible nature of ‘give a net, save
a life’ marketing. Whilst this has advanced the capabilities of international efforts and
National Malaria Control Programmes (NMCPs) to deliver nets, it has arguably neglected the
deployment and therefore development of alternative methods. Indeed, in developed
nations success in malaria control has mainly been achieved through mosquito-proof
housing and environmental management (Killeen et al., 2017b). A unilateral reliance on
WHO-endorsed products by many countries has stifled innovation in both the development
of new MNs and alternative vector control tools due to prohibitively long and bureaucratic
approval processes, which can be seen to perversely inhibit the private sector from
advancing the fight against malaria. As malaria rates have begun to increase, it is
increasingly realised that the reliance on a single tool in the collective toolbox for fighting
this complicated disease is ineffective and potentially even harmful to overall efforts.
There is an opportunity, and a renewed appetite, to diversify vector control interventions
away from reliance on MNs (Killeen et al., 2017a, 2017b). This diversification could be
particularly effective in tackling issues such as MNF, alongside issues of insecticide
resistance and intervention fatigue. Whilst a goal of universal coverage of health
interventions for at risk populations remains key, the goal of universal coverage of MNs may
become less so as other interventions become mainstream. Indoor Residual Spraying (IRS),
already broadly deployed in regions of high risk, has been hampered in up-scaling by
19

historical issues of DDT use and negative publicity for insecticides more generally
(Hlongwana et al., 2013; Sadasivaiah, Tozan & Breman, 2007). Methods are being developed
for more appropriate mosquito-proofing of households in developing settings e.g. eave
tubes (Knols et al., 2016). Grass roots innovations in larval source management may
alleviate environmental concerns over a focus on larvicide use and legitimise this further as
a viable broad-scale intervention. At the level of household/individual protection,
insecticide-treated clothing may protect people both inside and outside their homes
(Killeen et al., 2017b). For a comprehensive review of current, re-purposed and developing
tools in the toolbox refer to Killeen et al., 2017; ‘Developing an expanded vector control
toolbox for malaria elimination’. A key direction for this diversification may be to focus on
cross-sectoral collaborative approaches to improving housing quality for mosquito
protection, with all of the associated health, development and security benefits this would
also bring.

2.3.

An integrated livelihoods & development approach

Global policies on fisheries management increasingly seek to marry food security and
ecological objectives towards sustainability under the umbrella of ecosystem-based
management (EBM). EBM seeks to incorporate the connections between economic, food
security, cultural and wellbeing contributions from fisheries in to management in a more
holistic effort which also aims to protect biodiversity as a whole over single stock foci
(Bianchi & Skjoldal, 2008). Renewed efforts through the EBM movement would therefore
also seek to diversify management strategies from a singular focus on effort and gearbased methods towards adaptive, stakeholder-driven methods that employ a full toolbox of
appropriate spatial, temporal, technological and rights-based tools. In cases such as MNF
where poverty drivers are acute, development and livelihood-enhancement options are
potentially more effective. Similarly, fisheries and health ministries may do well to adopt
policies which complement each other’s’ objectives on this issue, combine and enhance
data gathering to avoid duplication of effort and develop mutually beneficial policies which
enable localised tailoring of interventions.

When it comes to drivers, and therefore interventions, MNF is primarily an issue of local
livelihoods, vulnerability, food and nutrition security and secondarily one of health and
environment. This does not divert the need for policy responses from health and natural
resource management bodies, but does pose an opportunity for holistic responses with
win-win outcomes across these sectors and others. Addressing the issues which push
people into activities that they know are illegal, damaging and ultimately unsustainable
requires perspectives that are much broader than simply malaria prevention or fisheries
governance. To address the root cause of MNF would require a truly interdisciplinary
approach to both future research and interventions, and could potentially reap benefits
much broader than reduced malaria prevalence.
20

To be effective, alternatives to MNF will need to address opportunity costs for both those
highly dependent on its contribution to subsistence, and those who may have enhanced
their individual or household wellbeing from increased food and/or incomes. Critically,
these alternatives would need to address the potential for a reduction in MNF leading to
decreased provision of protein and vital micronutrients, at least in the short term, as well as
decreased ability of MNF households to weather seasonal or longer starvation periods. This
in itself is representative of the broader need for a culture change in food security policy;
an often disproportionate focus on agriculture over wild harvesting, and a disproportionate
focus on protein provision over other nutritional value where fisheries are concerned
(Thilsted et al., 2014). Both of these are increasingly appreciated as detrimental to the
efficacy of policies promoting health and wellbeing of poor households.
MNF represents an example where broad-scale policy-making risks overlooking the
importance of both small-scale aquatic food and micronutrient provision. Further research
in these areas should be a priority, as should the consideration of modes of access to these
resources. Any prohibitive intervention needs to have a good understanding of the tradeoffs involved for both communities and individuals currently engaging in MNF, including
long and short term disadvantages in terms of nutritional status. Aside from those directly
benefitting in coastal areas, the potential contribution to inland nutrition by these easily
dried and transportable fish would need to be much better understood if policymakers
wish to avoid negative impacts from interrupting the market chain of what is potentially an
important resource. Alternatives would also need to be culturally relevant and sustainable,
with appropriate market development and education to maintain this in to the future,
building resilience for environmental and societal change. Specific thought needs to be
given to displaced peoples, migrants and those living in conflict areas that may be
particularly prone to malaria, hunger and MNF. For these people, ‘stop-gap’ interventions
may be necessary in the short term.

2.3.1. MNF and gender mainstreaming
Both in terms of integrating development goals into interventions, and also because of the
reportedly high representation of female fishers in MNF (Short et al., 2018) and the general
lack of attention to, but growing appreciation of, the importance of women in fisheries
(Harper et al., 2013, 2017), it would be folly to ignore the benefits of women’s
empowerment and potential opportunities that MNF brings. One reason MNF is likely to be
so appealing to women is due to a culture of inequity in access to and distribution of
fisheries resources, which rarely provide for an entire household when harvested by men.
Women all over the world have therefore developed complicated economic strategies with
which to fill these gaps (Porter et al., 2008). These inequities may restrict women to
exploiting marginal aquatic areas, such as ditches, rice fields and shallow marine habitats
21

such as seagrass beds (de la Torre-Castro et al., 2017); areas where small fish proliferate
and fine mesh nets are an advantage. MNF is one of very few opportunities open to women
in many communities to a) directly engage in a primary fishing activity which is broadly
culturally accepted, b) directly provide a source of high quality nutrition and/or trade-off for
staple food sources independent of men and c) gain an independent source of income
which can be invested in wellbeing enhancements that have broad personal and societal
benefits, such as education, housing improvements and entrepreneurship.
Investment in women can have a disproportionately positive community-wide impact and
women can be more disposed to investment in the future and more likely to engage in
savings schemes (Ranis, Frances & Alejandro, 2000; Porter & Mbezi, 2010). MNF may
promote autonomy for women through independent access to food and income which
could be considered a small step towards more equitable access and use of fisheries
resources for women were this activity to be capitalised upon. These benefits should not be
negated in the pursuit of effective interventions – a particularly pertinent point when
considering the efficacy of bans. Secondly, the self-organisation, development of markets
and general promotion of financial literacy that may be associated with activities such as
MNF present an opportunity for development interventions. Where women engaging in
purely agricultural activities may spend the majority of their days alone on their family plot,
fishing is a sociable and necessarily co-operative activity which not only contributes to
women’s wellbeing, but also social and economic mobility. Investing in other strategies for
maintaining these benefits, by capitalising sustainably on MNF's contributions to gender
equality and creating further opportunities for women, would probably have a huge impact
on reducing the prevalence of MNF.

2.4.

Adaptive management applied to current policy

Whilst we have made arguments against the sole use of current enforcement policy for
MNF, we also appreciate the role it must play in addressing cases of MNF where the drivers
of the activity may be less directly connected to poverty. Whilst current evidence points to
MNF remaining a subsistence or artisanal activity, larger-scale activities and threats of
commercialisation have also been identified, such as use of the catch from MNF in animal
feed production. External actors and market drivers may have a significant impact on the
scale at which MNF is conducted. Where these drivers are significant, monitoring and
enforcement is likely to be necessary.
In these scenarios, which are likely to be complicated and still ultimately linked to poverty,
adaptive fisheries co-management initiatives as part of EBM, recognising the role of
communities and individuals and including them in development of contextually
appropriate legislation and delivery of enforcement. Co-management is grounded in
community participation, aiming for fully inclusive and representative development of
22

management plans with local people. Government ministries and NGOs play a supporting
role and deliver the scientific bases for these plans, with an interdisciplinary team critical to
successful guidance (Berkes, 2009).. It would also be prudent for malarial interventions and
co-management initiatives to aim to complement one another and include goals of human
wellbeing development, involving relevant expertise in this area when necessary, and
combining education and behaviour change efforts to align messaging and increase impact.
Additionally, market-based drivers and external influences should be addressed with
appropriate mechanisms that target organisations/buyers throughout the market chain.

23

3. Sectoral recommendations: translation to governance and action
3.1.

International policy makers (WHO & FAO)

From the arguments presented here it is clear that there are significant benefits to be
reaped from encouraging a cross-sectoral approach to policy development for MNF, and
this will ideally start from the top levels, including the United Nations. There is a need to
support collaborative actions, particularly engagement of the Food and Agriculture
Organisation as perhaps the most meaningful organisation in terms of fisheries
management, whilst appreciating the central role that the World Health Organisation must
continue to play. Specifically for MNF, the WHO and FAO should collaboratively support
identification of key affected areas for MNF, both areas of current activity but also areas of
risk due the dynamic nature of the issue and potential impacts of social and environmental
change. Policy should then support the role of adaptive management in addressing MNF in
these areas, determining common ground, and importantly a common language, between
sectors for development of a broad-scale adaptive management framework alongside
promotion of context-dependent, win-win solutions.
Framework development should begin with the facilitation of a one-off, cross-sectoral
values-mapping process at a variety of scales. The goal of this process would be to explicitly
recognise areas of agreement and difference between stakeholder sectors on the issue of
MNF, building on the information within this report. Conducting this exercise at a range of
levels from first local (utilising case studies) to international will ensure rigour in the
outputs, which can then be used directly to inform an adaptive management framework for
a particular intervention area that accounts for issues at all levels. The establishment of a
centralised database of localised information, to which all sectors may contribute, would be
a pivotal tool in the delivery and communication of successes/failures in adaptive strategies
and should be a priority for international policy development. The additional benefits of
such a database to the devolved targets of the various sectors, both in terms of practical
data provision and in terms of building a collaborative culture would be great.
A key role for international policymakers in tackling MNF will be to spearhead a culture
change in policy development that enables innovation in vector control. Moving away from
reliance on MNs, both in key affected areas for MNF but also for other problem areas, will
require efforts to change the investment landscape and provide incentives for increased
engagement of researchers, business and the private sector, both operationally for
research and development but with the additional benefit of diversifying funding.
Importantly, but bearing in mind the need to promote and design these adaptive
management strategies in parallel, there is a need for the WHO to provide a vastly more
24

comprehensive set of MN disposal and repurposing policies, inclusive of better
environmental and human health safety standards and appreciation of national waste
disposal limitations. These recommendations align well with the strategic visions of both
the WHO Global Technical Strategy for Malaria (GTSM) and the Roll Back Malaria Action and
Investment to Defeat Malaria (AIM) reports (World Health Organization, World Health
Organization & Global Malaria Programme, 2015; Global Partnership to Roll Back Malaria,
2015) which lay out the necessary policy developments needed in 2016-2030 to achieve
current targets. Both reports commit to increased engagement across sectors in order to
‘strengthen the enabling environment’, policies which support an integrated development
approach within which MNF should be a key consideration. The goal of ensuring enabling
policy environments is mirrored in the FAO’s Voluntary guidelines for securing sustainable
small-scale fisheries in the context of food security and poverty eradication, which
highlights the need to better embed the sector in a wider institutional and policy context
(FAO, 2015).
All three documents also contain recommendations for the advancement of gender
equality and give some credence to the critical interplay between food security and health,
and specifically malaria. However, the recommendations from WHO and RBM focus solely
on agriculture and do not account for the huge nutritional importance of fisheries and
subsequent impact on overall health and wellbeing, and therefore the role of MNF, a gap
we feel needs to be urgently addressed. Accordingly, the FAO will play a key role in
endorsing adaptive policies towards fisheries management specifically for MNF, recognising
the unique feedbacks involved in MNF to avoid negative impacts of inappropriate top-down
and/or blanket enforcement policies. This will require a parallel culture change and difficult
conversations over challenges to the impacts of MNF, particularly where they are
erroneously seen to be ubiquitous. Innovation and a more rapidly adaptive policy
environment are central to the policies outlined, and information regarding MNF should be
incorporated into research and development plans. We believe that better data collection
and sharing across organisations, and use of that data for evidence-based interventions
and participatory action is particularly important, accounting for the difficult decisions being
made by those in severe poverty.

3.2.

National implementing bodies

At the national level it will be critical for government ministries responsible for fisheries
management (and law enforcement), education, public health and development to begin to
align policies on MNF and develop action plans which account for localised characteristics
of MNF. This will require better co-operation on information gathering and incorporation of
MNF-specific data needs into micro-planning (needs assessment) processes for MN
distribution and other malaria interventions, such as those recommended by the Alliance

25

CROSS-SECTORAL STEERING GROUPS:
The facilitation of a values-mapping process would provide an opportunity
for the development of cross-sectoral steering groups to operate at
international, and national levels. Key affected areas would be specifically
addressed by regional groups (where the issue is cross-border) to provide
guidance for national and local level implementation of the adaptive
management framework. A key role would be to identify and engage
expertise to guide delivery for interdisciplinary aspects of interventions,
ensuring modes of communication between disparate groups who may not
have an obvious obligation to do so under the current modes of
management.
Additionally, the steering groups can act as a proactive policy feedback
mechanism for evaluation of the framework, direction of research and
development funding as issues arise, and a conduit for information of value to
public engagement efforts. At the uppermost level this group should
comprise of representatives from key United Nations programmes (WHO,
FAO, UNDP, UNEP), The Alliance for Malaria Prevention (AMP), international
conservation and development NGOs and key academic groups with
relevant expertise in natural resource management and population health
evaluations.
At regional and national levels it will be important to include significant
operational expertise from delivery of conservation and fisheries
management (e.g. co-management), MN distribution and evaluation
programmes and existing integrated development programmes to formulate
context-appropriate advice for implementation. Generating funding for both
an urgent values-mapping process, and the facilitation of the cross-sectoral
steering groups must be a first priority.

for Malaria Prevention (Erskine & Rockwood, 2013). Fisheries and development bodies
should be involved in MN distribution planning processes from the start to identify and
assuage potential problem areas, and this should also extend to subsequent surveillance,
monitoring and evaluation efforts. Importantly, local, district, provincial and national (or the
equivalent) authorities need to ensure they are communicating across hierarchies to
mitigate geographical inequalities in opportunity costs and the potential for conflict. This
will additionally ensure traceability and accountability for MN distribution programmes,
identifying issues such as net leakage and corruption in the early stages of a programme.

26

Consequent policy and action plan development should aim to remain collaborative. For
example, behaviour change programmes can integrate messages across delivery modes
such as schools, health clinics and fishing councils. Operationally, many sectors employ
similar methods for deployment and evaluation of interventions, use similar modes of
access and communication, and many of the messages delivered align with overarching
sustainable development goals – opportunities to combine or enhance these operations to
achieve multiple sectoral objectives should be sought. An additional benefit of this will be to
limit duplication of effort and greatly improve the quality of information gathered. The
development of multi-sectoral action groups, which are advocated for within the AIM report
and have shown great success, critically need to engage with the fisheries sector wherever
appropriate. National bodies should also aim to support the identification of KAAs and in
the short-term feed back information on the scale and variability of MNF to both
international bodies and also academic researchers seeking to better understand the
characteristics and drivers of this activity.

3.3.

Non-Governmental Organisations

Engagement from NGOs is required for an effective response to MNF at local and national
levels, with broad support for policies set at the international level. Public health,
development and conservation-focused organisations all have a critical capacity to act as a
unifying gateway to local information, governance and influence. NGOs should be engaged
particularly for facilitation of dialogues at the local level, including for neutral engagement of
MN fishers themselves, needs evaluations and values-led discussions of community-led
interventions. For those NGOs focussed on conservation and/or fisheries management,
particularly those supporting co-management initiatives, incorporation of MNF into
management and critical challenges to enforcement-centric policies when engaging with
local governance would be of benefit. The diversification of vector control will critically need
to be supported by malaria-focussed NGOs with appropriate donor support and alignment
of goals. Accordingly, the targeting of public support and prominence of public campaigns
must be adapted to new strategies. NGOs can play a crucial role in guiding evidence-based
interventions, including informing academic research, and should be sought and consulted
on issues of surveillance, monitoring and data collection.

3.4.

Private donors and business

Donors and private business can both respond to and influence policy direction. However,
this is something that has been expressed as lacking in terms of malaria interventions,
particularly vector control, resulting in a paucity of investment in innovation to address
emerging challenges. Donors can both direct and respond to the actions of private
business, depending on the challenge they seek to meet. Under a freer investment
27

landscape with our recommended international policy changes, responsible developments
from the private sector would be at the centre of improving adaptive capacity to meet
challenges such as MNF and reduce the dependence on MNs as an intervention, including
through innovative funding channels that marry this sector with national implementing
bodies, NGOs and research bodies. Opportunities exist for engagement and promotion of
responses from a wide variety of companies, from pharmaceuticals, to tech, to
communications.
Endorsement of products and strategies by the WHO will remain critical to funders.
However, the promotion of a rapidly responsive policy environment would address
temporal barriers and improved communications as well as the open integration of
interdisciplinarity and engagement of external expertise into future developments. This
may serve to cut out some of the prohibitive barriers. For example engaging with human
development NGOs may serve to highlight a number of operational barriers to delivery and
success of an intervention during development stages, allowing adaptive capacity to be
worked into product design. Similarly, funders should seek to release funds for field trials of
new products under varying contexts independently of direct R&D funds. Platforms and
seed funding opportunities which facilitate mixing of sectors, interdisciplinary conversations
and opportunities for collaboration that engage with private business and showcase needs
to donors (e.g. hackathons, competitively commissioned design solutions) should be
encouraged both externally (governments/UN etc.) and within private companies.

3.5.

Academic research & funders

Academic research has the potential to support much of the decision-making involved in
employing adaptive management policies, as well as playing a pivotal role in innovation,
research and development of new vector control products. Funding and research effort
should be directed towards research which seeks both to set baselines for understanding
the role of MNF in socio-ecological systems in order to inform development of appropriate
interventions, and to improve the collection and use of data for monitoring and evaluation
of subsequent interventions employed. Priorities include understanding gender aspects of
MNF (the role played and benefits accrued by women in particular), the nutritional impact
of MNF across vulnerable groups and assessing MNF impacts on fisheries and benthic
habitats. The promotion of interdisciplinary science and robust methods to answer these
questions should be at the core of funding objectives, alongside active involvement of incountry researchers and research institutions.
Academic research has been highlighted by the GTSM as central to fostering and sharing
innovations and solutions to global malaria challenges. This is particularly true for the
creation of new tools and vector control strategies which may enable adaptive

28

management policies to be employed in key MNF affected areas, with wider benefits.
Academic and private sector collaborations should be fostered to advance these efforts
and provide guidance to one another on specific development needs for both operational
and economic viability of new solutions.

FIGURE 2 – BASIC ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORK FOR MOSQUITO NET FISHING INTERVENTIONS.

29

4. Developing implementation
In the development of adaptive strategies to MNF, and vector control generally, a critical
appraisal of current and future interventions as part of a ‘toolbox’ is key at a range of scales,
including for MN distribution itself. This should aim to identify potential contextual issues
and key stumbling blocks, providing advice as to applicability, cost-effectiveness, current
state of development (and therefore needs) and complementarity with other interventions.
Interdisciplinary expertise should be sought for all assessments. In Appendix I an
assessment of interventions for responses to MNF challenges is provided from a
brainstorm undertaken at the interdisciplinary workshop in November 2017, drawing on
cross-sectoral expertise using the assessment framework (Figure 2).
Whilst ‘Evidence of success/failure’ is clearly a necessary aspect of these assessments, we
include this as a given under aspects of ‘Planning for success’ and would advocate for a
more structured approach to gathering this evidence based on our previous
recommendation for the support of a centralised database, rather than encouraging adhoc assessments by implementation teams. This is in no way intended to be an exhaustive
list, neither are interventions to be considered in isolation. Some address MNF very
specifically, whilst others seek to address underlying drivers of MNF. However, we hope that
this example of a framework may act as clear evidence of the need and potential
additionality from an interdisciplinary approach, an illustration of the feasibility of adaptive
management, and a catalyst for a rapid change to the policy culture surrounding malaria
vector control and MNF.

30

APPENDIX I – INTERDISCIPLINARY ASSESSMENT OF INTERVENTIONS IN RESPONSE TO MOSQUITO NET FISHING CHALLENGES IN KAAS. *N.B. NUMEROUS ALTERNATIVE VECTOR CONTROL SOLUTIONS EXIST OR ARE IN DEVELOPMENT BUT WERE NOT
ASSESSED BY THE GROUP OWING TO A DEARTH OF VIABLE KNOWLEDGE. CONTINUED DEVELOPMENT AND INNOVATION WAS HOWEVER A KEY OUTPUT OF THE INTERVENTIONS DISCUSSION.

Intervention

Scalability

Cost-effectiveness

Collaborative requirements

Additionality

Information/data needs

Identified pitfalls

Appropriate for most
permanent/semipermanent dwelling
types.

More expensive than
MNs but can be more
durable.
Protection for
household over
individuals.

Could operate
through current
health intervention
bodies.
Architectural and
design engineers.

Minor housing
improvements.
Marginalised groups
more likely to be
covered.

General dwelling
designs
& family structures.
Culturally appropriate
aesthetics

Uptake hampered by
aesthetics.
Outdoor sleepers not
covered.

Housing
improvements

Need to adapt to
dwelling types.
Simplest dwellings
may not be suitable or
need additional work.

Development sector.
Private housing
industries.

Already prevalent –
infrastructures exist in
many places.
Requires re-treatment
~2 years and specialist
treatment.

Benefits to general
health, standard of
living, social mobility.
Knock-on benefits –
able to invest in other
improvements.
Jobs for locals a winwin.

General dwelling
designs
& family structures
Culturally appropriate
aesthetics.
Local capabilities.
Local acceptability

Requires continued
investment in
maintenance.
May exclude poorest
households.

Increased indoor
residual spraying
(IRS)

Highly context
dependent.
Dwellings needn’t be
fully proofed for
effective protection.
Very long-lasting.
Can be less costeffective than MN
distribution. Reapplication every ~6
months.
Protection for
household over
individuals.
Re-supply possibly
costly.
Could be made
cheaper with
increased use (bulk).

Social marketing &
education.
Modes of distribution.

Can use outdoors
(currently area of
increasing risk).
Covers groups and
individuals.

Local acceptability.
Research in to efficacy
in different
environments.
Health impacts (largely
unknown)

Efficacy of different
products variable –
needs more
research/recommend
ations list?
Acceptability and use
is variable.

Various different
scales – from large
operations on lakes to

Specialists required.
Community-LSM can
be combined with

N/A

Potential larval
sources.

Some methods may
be damaging to
environment and

Mosquito-proof
housing solutions
e.g. eave tubes,
screening, wall
linings

Increased use of
spatial repellents e.g.
coils, vapourisers

Increased use of
Larval Source
Management e.g.

Successful use in lots
of various settings.
Lots of different
products available –
can adapt to
environment.
Continuous supply
system needed.
Already being scaled
up, but localised
tailoring needed.

Relatively specialist.
Could be combined
with other door-todoor activities.
Environmental
management.

Contributions to
insecticide resistance.
Safe use of DDT.
Aesthetics and smell
not appealing.
Invasive.

community standing
water management,
larviciding
Use of less
durable/cotton nets
(tear when used for
fishing?)

Easy to switch to
different nets but
would need separate
distribution

Community-based
fisheries comanagement (e.g.
Locally Managed
Marine Areas w/MNF
exclusion)

Can be complicated
initially but often
models of comanagement are
replicable to a great
degree.

Alternative income
generation (nonfishery e.g. alt.
livelihoods
(aquaculture),
microcredits, Village
Savings and Loans
Associations)

Needs to be locally
specific (w/prior
research) but
generalised models
can be followed.

promotion of
community LSM e.g.
well covering

other education &
behaviour change
messaging

Identification of
hotspots.

More need for redistribution more
frequently (less
durable), significant
disadvantage over
more durable nets
Opportunity costs for
some in the short
term.
Implementation costs
can be high.
Better, more
sustainable incomes
in long term.

Significant policy
change

N/A

Identification of high
MNF-risk areas.
MNF net alteration
methods – will this
have desired effect?

Fisheries ministries,
local NGOs (scientific
guidance),
development NGOs
(e.g. gender
mainstreaming),
strong buy in from
local leaders
(relationship building)
and fishers.
Education &
behaviour change.

Understanding of
drivers of MNF locally
(avoid harm).
Detailed
characterisation of
fishery and market
chain needed.
State of relevant
ecosystems/fish
stocks.

Very costly set-up but
with potentially very
high returns.

Would work best if
fully collaborative at
range of scales with
fisheries mgmt.,
development,
conservation & health.
Should be combined
with communitybased fisheries mgmt.

Sustainable use of
resources promoted
throughout fishery =
long term food
security.
Community
empowerment.
Promotion of equity in
resource use and
inclusion of women
aids development.
Biodiversity
protection.
Huge additional
benefits across
communities – likely to
be response to
multiple issues inc.
MNF.
Can have impacts
across all aspects of
sustainable
development.

In-depth
characterisation of
current livelihoods,
local resources,
opportunities viable
for expansion, cultural
influences,
available/growing
markets.

impact insecticide
resistance – larviciding
water bodies,
introduced species, or
large scale habitat
alteration.
Creation of market to
fishing communities
for more durable nets
distributed elsewhere
– premium on tough
nets.
Reliance on
enforcement of MNF
bans could hurt most
vulnerable w/out
appropriate
alternatives.
Migrant fishers can be
excluded from
management.

Sustained input and
effective
monitoring/evaluation
necessary.
Need to ensure MNFspecific niche is filled.
Must address food
and nutrition security.
Focus on MNF can
look like rewarding
illegal activity.

Women’s
empowerment &
gender
mainstreaming
(fishery and/or nonfishery)

Will require localisedtailoring, though some
lessons are
transferable.

Potentially costly but
with very high returns.

Reduce net
oversupply and
improve distribution
efficiency e.g. spot
checks, household
data verification

Could be scaled to all
NMCPs or target KAAs.

Several aspects could
be costly and require
significant manpower
on top of distribution
costs.

Promote positive net
re-purposing for
worn nets e.g.
covering water
bodies, use in
agriculture

Could be scaled to all
NMCPs.

Develop disposal
mechanisms for ‘end
of life’ nets

Very challenging in
rural areas, and even
some urban settings
which lack existing
wastecollection/disposal
mechanisms.

Huge benefits could
be reaped from
increasing genderresearch and inclusion
across all sectors and
operations, with a
specific objective to
understand and
address role of MNF.
Collaborations with
other on-the-ground
organisations,
particularly for data
provision and
evaluation, could
significantly cut costs.

Shown to have large
impact on overall
development efforts,
sustainable resource
use, and human
wellbeing.

Detailed planning to
navigate cultural
difficulties.
Characterisation of
current livelihoods.
Identification of
opportunities.

Culturally difficult in
some regions.
Requires sustained
input.

Waste reduction –
impact on marine
debris and landfill.
Information collected
would be useful for
numerous other
initiatives.

Corruption may
persist.

Very cost-effective –
additional value in
MNs

Other sectors can
reinforce messaging
and advise on nonvector control uses
that are safe/useful
e.g. in agriculture.
Education &
behaviour change.

Very expensive in
areas with no current
system. Even if just
focused on MNs
would require
logistical costs.

Could operationally
combine with a) MN
distribution (e.g.
exchange programme)
or b) concerted effort
to improve overall
waste management by
governments.

Waste reduction.
Additional vector
control e.g. larval
source management
by covering wells etc.
Positive uses in food
production,
construction etc. (very
useful resource)
Could bring significant
improvements to local
sanitation, air quality
(reduce open air
burns) and reduce
ecological damage
(marine litter, ghost
fishing).
Opportunity for
energy generation

Detailed supply-chain
information (not
always available)
Detailed census data
alongside
characterisation of
localised living
conditions.
Research in to local
repurposing – what is
potentially harmful?

Tracking of distributed
nets would need to be
accurate for exchange
programmes, net
leakage at all scales
could reduce
coverage long term.
Definition and mode
of I.D. of ‘end of life’
nets.

Current WHO policy
for safe final disposal
is incineration –
facilities may not exist.

Messaging may be
confusing, sectoral
priorities may have an
influence.
Impact on insecticide
resistance will likely
remain unknown.

Develop recycling
mechanisms for ‘end
of life’ nets

Expensive to facilitate
through state.
Community-collection
model (e.g. Net-Works;
net-works.com) could
present scaling-up
option.

Dependent on value
of recycled products.
Costly start-up.

Private sector
involvement for
research, marketing
and investment.
Circular economy
advocates.
NGOs (conservation
or development)

Alter net design –
less fit-for-fishing
and/or more fit-forpurpose e.g.
biodegradable
materials

Would depend on
ultimate cost of
product.
Ideally would be
tailored (physical
design) to different
scenarios so scaling
not main priority

Unknown – costs
would need to be kept
low to be competitive.

Private sector & WHO
(rapid assessments
and
recommendation).
Can incorporate
needs in to existing
research.
Combine with
recycling/disposal
research.

with incinerator
investment.
Waste reduction.
Community collection
model brings
additional incomes
and microfinancing
opportunities to
communities.

Enhancements to
vector control efficacy.
Increased social
acceptability of MNs
(e.g. more
comfortable)

Potential processes,
products and markets.
Receptiveness to
community collection.
Definition and mode
of I.D. of ‘end of life’
nets.

Nuanced
understanding of
flaws in current MN
designs.
Comprehensive
review of deployment
methods for fishing.

Health-related issues
from residual
insecticides on
products.
In theory MNs should
be a temporary
resource (in
elimination of malaria)
– impact on
investment?
Commodification of
MNs?
Potential for
inappropriate MNs to
be distributed to
some communities.

APPENDIX II – BRIEF WORKSHOP METHODOLOGY

Background
The primary aim of the workshop was to enable an open and solutions-focused discussion regarding the
issue of the use of mosquito nets as fishing gear. The event brought together a mixture of operational and
research staff with positions closely associated with marine conservation, fisheries management, public
health and human development, to represent a broad range of perspectives and expertise. As a poorly
understood issue, the workshop focused on a two stage discussion around: a) defining the problem and
what we know and don’t know; b) determining appropriate avenues for policy development going forward,
and reviewing existing or novel interventions that may contribute to these recommendations.
The structure of the workshop allowed free flowing conversation, open opinions and new ideas, whilst
drawing on aspects of structured decision making (SDM) to facilitate constructive and practical outputs
which explicitly recognise conflicts, uncertainties and variable priorities. To achieve this, the workshop
operated under the Chatham House Rule, whereby attendees were free to use the information discussed
in the workshop, but the source of any information or views could not be identified.

4.1.1. Selection of participants
Participants were invited based on several years of networking and discussions, which largely relied on
snowball sampling and the results of an extensive literature review, conducted by the first author. Prior to
formal recruitment a breakdown of necessary expertise and organisational representation was drafted to
ensure best possible balance. Financial barriers to participation from, for example, NGO representatives
were removed thanks to kind support from the Oxford Martin School, Imperial College London and the
Zoological Society of London.

Participants were provided with a brief background document prior to the workshop in accessible
language which aimed to provide basic context and enable a minimum knowledge-level for all participants
across relevant sectors. A recommended reading list of key literature was also provided. Prompts were
provided throughout the workshop alongside guiding questions, as designed by the author, to ensure
activities were performed and questions were addressed according the pre-planned structure but
building in flexibility given the nature of the subject. For breakout sessions, each group were designated a
facilitator who was provided with detailed instructions. All plenary sessions were formally facilitated by Dr.
Prue Addison.

Defining policy needs; identification of drivers and impacts
Attendees were split into sectoral groupings as per their expertise: Conservation (C), fisheries and
development (F&D), health (malaria, H). Groups then independently brainstormed the questions below,
with a prompt to think about extent, geographic spread, timescale, severity and their confidence in their
assessments. Groups then reconvened in plenary in order to discuss and categorise the outputs.

35

What positive and/or negative consequences do your sectoral group feel may be attributed to MNF?
What do you perceive are the likely drivers of the decision for a person to use a mosquito net for fishing?
NB – this decision context implies that anyone owning a net knows what its intended purpose is and the
consequences of not using it on their bed; this may not always be the case so please allow for this in your
thinking.

Cross-sectoral objective setting
Attendees were once more split into sectoral groups in order to brainstorm some potential objectives for
MNF, in order to guide future research and decision-making (ultimately policy development). Whilst the
groups sought an ultimate ‘end’ objective, they were also encouraged to focus on key ‘means’ objectives
which would facilitate the achievement of that end, and whether objectives were long or short term.
Groups could be selfish as to their own sector's goals here, and facilitators worked the groups towards the
end objective if appropriate.
What do you, as a group, ultimately want with respect to MNF? What would an ultimate goal/change for the
future look like?
The workshop attendees re-convened in plenary to discuss each group's objectives and honed down a
final set of key objectives, removing any overlaps/redundancy

Identification of synergies and conflicts
Attendees were randomly mixed so that all sectors were represented in each of four groups. The
objectives set previously were then re-discussed in light of the mixed perspectives:
Can we have all of these objectives?

Participants were asked to group objectives which may work well together/complement one another, and
identify any hindrances or conflicts between objectives for further discussion.

Operationalisation and feasibility
In this creative session, groups were once again randomly mixed with representatives of each sector in
each group, and asked to come up with as many existing, adaptable and/or novel potential interventions
for management of MNF. Groups were also encouraged to think about which existing policy avenues each
intervention might be relevant to.

What specific interventions exist (or are thought of now) which may be implemented or adapted to achieve the
set objectives? What are the policy mechanisms by which they could be employed?

36

37

Notes

Knowledge needs?

Note
s

Pitfalls

Notes

Collaborative
needs?

Scalability

Notes

Additional
benefits?

Operational
synergies?

Evidence of
success?

+/++/+++

Cost

Notes

Obj. hampered

Reference #

Obj. addressed

Intervention

These interventions were then grouped in plenary as per the policy mechanisms they were most relevant
to, with the addition of a grouping for ‘translation to governance’, which were actions that could be taken
to better incorporate the issue of MNF into governance at a variety of scales. Attendees self-nominated
themselves to a policy group in an area of interest and the groups split-off to conduct feasibility
assessments for interventions using the following guide:

Contact: reshort86@gmail.com
Citation:
Short. R, Addison, P., Hill, N., Arlidge, W., Arthur, R., Berthe, S., Castello y Tickell, S., Coulthard,
S., Lorenz, L., Sibanda, M., Milner-Gulland, E.J. (2019) Achieving net benefits: A road map for
cross-sectoral policy development in response to the unintended use of mosquito nets as
fishing gear.

Contributors:
Brayne, K., Drury O’Neill, E., Lehman, A., Lestari, P., McIntyre, K., Pates Jamet, H., Rowcliffe,
M., Samoilys, M., Welsh, R.

All images © Rebecca Short

This road map was produced as part of Dr. Rebecca Short’s doctoral thesis ‘Disentangling the net:
The socio-ecological dynamics of mosquito net fishing’ funded by the NERC Doctoral Training
Programme, Science and Solutions for a Changing Planet, Grantham Institute, Imperial college
London.
Additional funds were contributed by:
The Zoological Society of London Conservation and Policy Department, through the Our Sea Our Life
project.
The Daisy Balogh Fund, Institute of Zoology, Zoological Society of London.
In-kind contributions towards workshop hosting from the Oxford Martin School.

38

References
Abbott, J.G. & Campbell, L.M. (2009) Environmental histories and emerging fisheries
management of the Upper Zambezi river floodplains. Conservation and Society. 7 (2),
83–99.
Adger, W.N. (2006) Vulnerability. Global Environmental Change. [Online] 16 (3), 268–281.
Available from: doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2006.02.006.
Béné, C., Hersoug, B. & Allison, E.H. (2010) Not by Rent Alone: Analysing the Pro-Poor
Functions of Small-Scale Fisheries in Developing Countries. Development Policy
Review. 28 (3), 325–358.
Berkes, F. (2009) Evolution of co-management: Role of knowledge generation, bridging
organizations and social learning. Journal of Environmental Management. [Online] 90
(5), 1692–1702. Available from: doi:10.1016/j.jenvman.2008.12.001.
Bhatt, S., Weiss, D.J., Cameron, E., Bisanzio, D., et al. (2015a) The effect of malaria control on
Plasmodium falciparum in Africa between 2000 and 2015. Nature. [Online] 526
(7572), 207–211. Available from: doi:10.1038/nature15535.
Bhatt, S., Weiss, D.J., Mappin, B., Dalrymple, U., et al. (2015b) Coverage and system
efficiencies of insecticide-treated nets in Africa from 2000 to 2017. eLife. 4, e09672.
Bianchi, G. & Skjoldal, H.R. (2008) The ecosystem approach to fisheries. FAO (ed.). Wallingford,
UK ; Cambridge, MA : Rome, CABI ; Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations.
Bush, E.R., Short, R.E., Milner-Gulland, E.J., Lennox, K., et al. (2016) Mosquito Net Use in an
Artisanal East African Fishery. Conservation Letters. [Online] 10 (4), 451–459. Available
from: doi:10.1111/conl.12286.
Cassels, S., Curran, S.R. & Kramer, R. (2005) Do Migrants Degrade Coastal Environments?
Migration, Natural Resource Extraction and Poverty in North Sulawesi, Indonesia.
Human Ecology. [Online] 33 (3), 329–363. Available from: doi:10.1007/s10745-0054142-9.
Caulfield, L.E., Richard, S.A. & Black, R.E. (2004) Undernutrition as an underlying cause of
malaria morbidity and mortality in children less than five years old. American Journal
of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. 71 (2), 55–63.
Darkey, D. & Turatsinze, R. (2014) Artisanal Fishing in Beira, Central Mozambique. J Hum
Ecol. 47 (3), 317–328.

39

Diamond, N.K., Squillante, L. & Hale, L.Z. (2003) Cross currents: navigating gender and
population linkages for integrated coastal management. Marine Policy. [Online] 27
(4), 325–331. Available from: doi:10.1016/S0308-597X(03)00044-7.
Diekert, F.K. (2012) Growth Overfishing: The Race to Fish Extends to the Dimension of Size.
Environmental and Resource Economics. [Online] 52 (4), 549–572. Available from:
doi:10.1007/s10640-012-9542-x.
Dlamini, S.V., Liao, C.-W., Dlamini, Z.H., Siphepho, J.S., et al. (2017) Knowledge of human
social and behavioral factors essential for the success of community malaria control
intervention programs: The case of Lomahasha in Swaziland. Journal of Microbiology,
Immunology and Infection. [Online] 50 (2), 245–253. Available from:
doi:10.1016/j.jmii.2015.05.003.
Eisele, T.P., Thwing, J. & Keating, J. (2011) Claims about the Misuse of Insecticide-Treated
Mosquito Nets: Are These Evidence-Based? PLoS Medicine. [Online] 8 (4), e1001019.
Available from: doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001019.
Erskine, M. & Rockwood, J. (2013) AMP Toolkit 2.0 - A toolkit for mass distribution campaigns to
increase coverage and use of long-lasting insecticide-treated nets. [Online]. Available
from: https://coregroup.org/wp-content/uploads/mediabackup/Webinars/Malaria/AMPToolkit.pdf [Accessed: 30 August 2018].
FAO (2005) Increasing the contribution of small-scale fisheries to poverty alleviation and food
security. FAO technical guidelines for responsible fisheries 10. Rome, Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
FAO (2015) Voluntary guidelines for securing sustainable small-scale fisheries in the context of
food security and poverty eradication. Rome, Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations.
Fiorella, K.J., Milner, E.M., Salmen, C.R., Hickey, M.D., et al. (2017) Human health alters the
sustainability of fishing practices in East Africa. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences. 201613260.
Garcia, S.M., Kolding, J., Rice, J., Rochet, M.-J., et al. (2012) Reconsidering the Consequences
of Selective Fisheries. Science. [Online] 335 (6072), 1045–1047. Available from:
doi:10.1126/science.1214594.
Global Partnership to Roll Back Malaria (2015) Actions and Investment for a Malaria-free
world: 2016-2030. Geneva, World Health Organization.
Guyatt Helen L., Gotink Marinus H., Ochola Sam A. & Snow Robert W. (2002) Free bednets
to pregnant women through antenatal clinics in Kenya: a cheap, simple and

40

equitable approach to delivery. Tropical Medicine & International Health. [Online] 7 (5),
409–420. Available from: doi:10.1046/j.1365-3156.2002.00879.x.
Harper, S., Grubb, C., Stiles, M. & Sumaila, U.R. (2017) Contributions by Women to Fisheries
Economies: Insights from Five Maritime Countries. Coastal Management. [Online] 45
(2), 91–106. Available from: doi:10.1080/08920753.2017.1278143.
Harper, S., Zeller, D., Hauzer, M., Pauly, D., et al. (2013) Women and fisheries: Contribution
to food security and local economies. Marine Policy. [Online] 39, 56–63. Available
from: doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2012.10.018.
Hawley, W.A., Phillips-Howard, P.A., ter Kuile, F.O., Terlouw, D.J., et al. (2003) Communitywide effects of permethrin-treated bed nets on child mortality and malaria
morbidity in western Kenya. The American journal of tropical medicine and hygiene. 68
(4_suppl), 121–127.
Hill, I.R. (1989) Aquatic organisms and pyrethroids. Pesticide Science. [Online] 27 (4), 429–
457. Available from: doi:10.1002/ps.2780270408.
Hlongwana, K.W., Mavundza, E.J., Mohapi, E.P., Kruger, P., et al. (2013) Vector-control
personnel’s knowledge, perceptions and practices towards insecticides used for
indoor residual spraying in Limpopo Province, South Africa. Parasites & Vectors.
[Online] 6, 118. Available from: doi:10.1186/1756-3305-6-118.
Honjo, K. & Satake, A. (2014) N-player mosquito net game: Individual and social rationality in
the misuse of insecticide-treated nets. Journal of Theoretical Biology. [Online] 342,
39–46. Available from: doi:10.1016/j.jtbi.2013.11.001.
Howard, S.C., Omumbo, J., Nevill, C., Some, E.S., et al. (2000) Evidence for a mass community
effect of insecticide-treated bednets on the incidence of malaria on the Kenyan
coast. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. 94 (4), 357–
360.
Jiddawi, N.S. & Öhman, M.C. (2002) Marine Fisheries in Tanzania. AMBIO: A Journal of the
Human Environment. [Online] 31 (7), 518. Available from: doi:10.1639/00447447(2002)031[0518:MFIT]2.0.CO;2.
Killeen, G.F., Kiware, S.S., Okumu, F.O., Sinka, M.E., et al. (2017a) Going beyond personal
protection against mosquito bites to eliminate malaria transmission: population
suppression of malaria vectors that exploit both human and animal blood. BMJ
Global Health. [Online] 2 (2), e000198. Available from: doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2016000198.
Killeen, G.F. & Smith, T.A. (2007) Exploring the contributions of bed nets, cattle, insecticides
and excitorepellency to malaria control: a deterministic model of mosquito host41

seeking behaviour and mortality. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine
and Hygiene. [Online] 101 (9), 867–880. Available from:
doi:10.1016/j.trstmh.2007.04.022.
Killeen, G.F., Tatarsky, A., Diabate, A., Chaccour, C.J., et al. (2017b) Developing an expanded
vector control toolbox for malaria elimination. BMJ Global Health. [Online] 2 (2),
e000211. Available from: doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2016-000211.
Knols, B.G.J., Farenhorst, M., Andriessen, R., Snetselaar, J., et al. (2016) Eave tubes for
malaria control in Africa: an introduction. Malaria Journal. [Online] 15. Available from:
doi:10.1186/s12936-016-1452-x.
Koenker, H., Ricotta, E. & Olapeju, B. (2018) Insecticide-Treated Nets (ITN) Access and Use
Report.
Kolding, J. & Zwieten, P. van (2014) Sustainable fishing of inland waters. Journal of Limnology.
[Online] 73 (s1). Available from:
http://www.jlimnol.it/index.php/jlimnol/article/view/jlimnol.2014.818 [Accessed: 18
May 2016].
Kolding, J., van Zwieten, P.A. & Mosepele, K. (2015) Where there is water there is fish–Smallscale inland fisheries in Africa: dynamics and importance. In: A History of Water Series
III, Volume 3: Water and Food. 3. London, I.B. Tauris. p.
Larsen, D.A., Welsh, R., Mulenga, A. & Reid, R. (2018) Widespread mosquito net fishing in the
Barotse floodplain: Evidence from qualitative interviews Ryan E. Wiegand (ed.). PLOS
ONE. [Online] 13 (5), e0195808. Available from: doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0195808.
Mangi, S.C. & Roberts, C.M. (2006) Quantifying the environmental impacts of artisanal
fishing gear on Kenya’s coral reef ecosystems. Marine Pollution Bulletin. [Online] 52
(12), 1646–1660. Available from: doi:10.1016/j.marpolbul.2006.06.006.
McLean, K.A., Byanaku, A., Kubikonse, A., Tshowe, V., et al. (2014) Fishing with bed nets on
Lake Tanganyika: a randomized survey. Malar J. 13 (395), 10–1186.
Minakawa, N., Dida, G.O., Sonye, G.O., Futami, K., et al. (2008) Unforeseen misuses of bed
nets in fishing villages along Lake Victoria. Malaria Journal. [Online] 7 (1), 165.
Available from: doi:10.1186/1475-2875-7-165.
National Pesticide Information Centre (2000) Piperonyl Butoxide Technical Fact Sheet.
[Online]. Available from: http://npic.orst.edu/factsheets/archive/pbotech.pdf
[Accessed: 13 April 2018].
N’Guessan, R., Odjo, A., Ngufor, C., Malone, D., et al. (2016) A Chlorfenapyr Mixture Net
Interceptor® G2 Shows High Efficacy and Wash Durability against Resistant
42

Mosquitoes in West Africa John Vontas (ed.). PLOS ONE. [Online] 11 (11), e0165925.
Available from: doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0165925.
Ngufor, C., N’guessan, R., Fagbohoun, J., Todjinou, D., et al. (2016) Efficacy of the Olyset Duo
net against insecticide-resistant mosquito vectors of malaria. Science translational
medicine. 8 (356), 356ra121–356ra121.
Norris, L.C., Main, B.J., Lee, Y., Collier, T.C., et al. (2015) Adaptive introgression in an African
malaria mosquito coincident with the increased usage of insecticide-treated bed
nets. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. [Online] 112 (3), 815–820.
Available from: doi:10.1073/pnas.1418892112.
Picard, D. (2015) Making ecotourism sustainable: refocusing on economic viability. Lessons
learnt from the “Regional strategic action plan for coastal ecotourism development
in the South Western Indian Ocean”. Journal of Sustainable Tourism. [Online] 23 (6),
819–837. Available from: doi:10.1080/09669582.2015.1019512.
Pomeroy, R., Parks, J., Pollnac, R., Campson, T., et al. (2007) Fish wars: Conflict and
collaboration in fisheries management in Southeast Asia. Marine Policy. [Online] 31
(6), 645–656. Available from: doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2007.03.012.
Porter, M. & Mbezi, R.G. (2010) From Hand to Mouth: Fishery Projects, Women, Men and
Household Poverty. Canadian Journal of Development Studies. [Online] 31 (3), 21.
Available from: doi:10.1080/02255189.2010.3673726.
Protopopoff, N., Mosha, J.F., Lukole, E., Charlwood, J.D., et al. (2018) Effectiveness of a longlasting piperonyl butoxide-treated insecticidal net and indoor residual spray
interventions, separately and together, against malaria transmitted by pyrethroidresistant mosquitoes: a cluster, randomised controlled, two-by-two factorial design
trial. The Lancet. [Online] 391 (10130), 1577–1588. Available from:
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30427-6.
Pulford, J., Hetzel, M.W., Bryant, M., Siba, P.M., et al. (2011) Reported reasons for not using a
mosquito net when one is available: a review of the published literature. Malar J.
[Online] 10 (10). Available from: http://www.biomedcentral.com/content/pdf/14752875-10-83.pdf [Accessed: 26 November 2014].
Ranis, G., Frances, S. & Alejandro, R. (2000) Economic Growth and Human Development.
World Development. 28 (2), 197–219.
Sadasivaiah, S., Tozan, Y. & Breman, J.G. (2007) Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) for
Indoor Residual Spraying in Africa: How Can It Be Used for Malaria Control? [Online].
American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. Available from:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1724/ [Accessed: 13 April 2018].

43

Shankar, A.H. (2000) Nutritional modulation of malaria morbidity and mortality. The Journal
of infectious diseases. 182 (Supplement_1), S37–S53.
Short, R., Gurung, R., Rowcliffe, M., Hill, N., et al. (2018) The use of mosquito nets in fisheries:
A global perspective. PloS one. 13 (1), e0191519.
Sissenwine, M.P. & Shepherd, J.G. (1987) An Alternative Perspective on Recruitment
Overfishing and Biological Reference Points. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic
Sciences. [Online] 44 (4), 913–918. Available from: doi:10.1139/f87-110.
Srivastava, S.K., Sarkar, U.K. & Patiyal, R.S. (2002) Fishing methods in streams of the Kumaon
Himalayan region of India. Asian Fisheries Science. 15 (4), 347–356.
Thilsted, S.H., James, D., Toppe, J., Subasinghe, R., et al. (2014) Maximizing the contribution
of fish to human nutrition. In: ICN2 Second International Conference on Nutrition. 2014
FAO and World Health Organisation. p.
Thilsted, S.H., Subasinghe, R.P., Arthur, J.R., Bartley, D.M., et al. (2013) The potential of
nutrient-rich small fish species in aquaculture to improve human nutrition and
health. In: Proceedings of the Global Conference on Aquaculture 2010. Farming the
waters for people and food. [Online]. 2013 FAO/NACA. pp. 57–73. Available from:
http://www.cabdirect.org/abstracts/20133399224.html [Accessed: 11 April 2016].
de la Torre-Castro, M., Fröcklin, S., Börjesson, S., Okupnik, J., et al. (2017) Gender analysis for
better coastal management – Increasing our understanding of social-ecological
seascapes. Marine Policy. [Online] 83, 62–74. Available from:
doi:10.1016/j.marpol.2017.05.015.
van der Elst (2003) Local solutions to challenges of West Indian Ocean fisheries
development. NAGA, WorldFish Center Quarterly. 26 (3), 14–17.
WHO (2014a) WHO recommendations for achieving universal coverage with long-lasting
insecticidal nets in malaria control.
WHO (2014b) WHO recommended long-lasting insecticidal nets. [Online]. 2014. Available from:
http://www.who.int/whopes/Long_lasting_insecticidal_nets_06_Feb_2014.pdf
[Accessed: 24 August 2017].
WHO (2015) World Malaria Report 2015. World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
pp157.
WHO (2017) World Malaria Report 2017. World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
pp196.

44

WHO Global Malaria Programme (2014) WHO recommendations on the sound management of
old long-lasting insecticidal nets. [Online]. 2014. Available from:
http://www.who.int/malaria/publications/atoz/who-recommendation-managing-oldllins-mar2014.pdf [Accessed: 24 August 2017].
Williams, M.J., Williams, S.B. & Choo, P.S. (2002) From women in fisheries to gender and
fisheries. WOMEN IN FISHERIES: POINTERS FOR DEVELOPMENT. 13.
World Health Organization, World Health Organization & Global Malaria Programme (2015)
Global technical strategy for malaria, 2016-2030.

45

