"x"
"1" "Open Smart Cities Guide V1.0"
"2" "Publishing and Licensing Information"
"3" "Prepared by Prof. Tracey P. Lauriault (Carleton University), Rachel Bloom ( OpenNorth ), and Jean- Noé  Landry ( OpenNorth )."
"4" "OpenNorth  2018."
"5" "This work is licensed under an   Attribution- NonCommercial - ShareAlike  4.0 International License  (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0) ."
"6" "Publication History"
"7" "First published in April 2018."
"8" "Amendments issued since publication"
"9" "Date                         Updated"
"10" "2018-04-27   Privacy : Federal, provincial, and territorial privacy protection authorities publish public letter  to Minister of Infrastructure and Communities"
"11" "About this Guide"
"12" "This guide is an output of  Open Smart Cities in Canada , a research project led by  OpenNorth  and funded by Natural Resources Canada’s  GeoConnections  program."
"13" "OpenNorth , founded in 2011, is Canada’s leading not-for-profit organization specializing in open data and civic technology. We are an active member of a global community working in favor of inclusive and innovative ecosystems, improving government transparency and  accountability, and increasing public participation in democracy towards enhanced citizen and community well-being. Guided by our core values and strong track record in applied research, we work to enhance data standards, shared governance models, and mult i-stakeholder and multi-sectoral partnerships."
"14" "Acknowledgements"
"15" "Open Smart Cities in Canada  is a collaborative project. We would like to thank smart city representatives from the cities of Edmonton, Guelph, Montréal, and Ottawa and officials from the provi nces of British Columbia and Ontario for sharing their time, expertise, and experiences with us. Furthermore, this project benefits from contributions made by the project’s core team of experts and researchers. We are grateful to Professor Tracey P. Lauria ult (Carleton University), David Fewer, LL.M., (Canadian Internet Policy and Public Interest Clinic (CIPPIC)), and Professor Mark Fox (University of Toronto) for providing their expert advice on the design of research and its outputs. Finally, we thank gra duate students Stephen Letts and Carly Livingstone (Carleton University) for research assistance and editing over the course of the project."
"16" "Financial support is provided by   GeoConnections , a national collaborative initiative led by Natural Resources Canada.  GeoConnections  supports the inte gration and use of the Canadian Geospatial Data Infrastructure (CGDI), an online resource that improves the sharing, access and use of open geospatial information."
"17" "Scope"
"18" "This document intends to guide city stakeholders (public officials, civil society, tec hnology innovators, private sector, academics, residents, etc.) toward formulating and strategically aligning practices with their agreed upon and unique Open Smart City vision. The Open Smart City definition and guide are relevant to city leaders and comm unity leaders at multiple levels of governance (e.g., provincial, territorial, and federal)."
"19" "How we came to define an Open Smart City V1.0"
"20" "The Open Smart City V1.0 definition is  the end result  of a one-year collaborative research project. The research  team first set out to understand what a contemporary smart city looks like.  A socio-technological data assemblage approach was used to inform the collection of documents produced by smart city vendors, think tanks, associations, consulting firms, standard s organizations, conferences, civil society organizations, including critical academic literature, government reports, marketing material, specifications and requirements documents (see  our smart  city E-Scan ). In addition, to better understand emerging smart cities in Canada, four case studies were conducted for the cities of Edmonton, Guelph, Ottawa and Montreal and one inter-jurisdictional case study was conducted about the Ontario Smart Grid (se e the  Open Smart Cities in Canada: Assessment Report ). Case studies reflect a collection of strategy, mission, and vision related documents, an inventory of smart city related projects and a series of semi-structured  interviews."
"21" "We discovered that, although there are many definitions for a smart city and that no two smart cities are the same due to a combination of factors such as local context, governmentalities, political economies, and the actors involved, to name  a few, essentially smart cities can be boiled down to a form of data and networked urbanism (see   our definition of smart city  below). Data and networked urbanism, even when driven in Canada by good intentions and best practices in terms of digital strategies, has its shortcomings, namely that it remains a form of innovation and efficient driven technological solutionism that is  not necessarily integrated with urban plans, with little or no public engagement and little to no relation to contemporary open data, open source, open science or open government practices (see  Open Smart Citi es in Canada: Webinar 2 ). Data and networked urbanism  is  already part of city management and operations and broader considerations of data governance (e.g., data sovereignty, data residency and ownership) do not always inform procurement and corporate part nerships and proprietary solutions are the norm."
"22" "To better understand what an Open Smart City might look like, we looked for international best practices that included open data, open source, open science, open and interoperable standards or open governm ent practices including civic technology, different forms of meaningful public engagement, as well as smart cities with a public interest focus or guided by values and ethical principles (see  ethical governance below ).  D uring the course of this research we also discovered a number of concerns related to smart city technologies, such as mission creep emergent from private-public partnerships, surveillance, platform lock-in, biased Artificial Intelligence (AI) and machine l earning, unsustainability of the life cycle management of Internet of Things (IoT) devices, lack of transparency of and access to proprietary solutions and an over emphasis on technology and a lack of focus on the resolution of complex and systemic social,  economic and environmental urban issues. Numerous iterations of an Open Smart City definition were formulated, reviewed, debated, and revised by international experts. The definition was also taken out for a ‘test drive’ in 3 public fora and was well rece ived. We finally settled on the Open Smart City V1.0 definition provided below and have agreed that it will evolve as the concept matures and as new actors in domains such as law, ethics, urban planning, geography, cybersecurity, community development and  so on provide input. We have already begun to see  some public outcry with data and networked versions of the smart city resulting from the Waterfront Toronto’s Sidewalk Labs project and we expect that as that project evolves there will be more demand for m ore open, transparent, accountable and democratic processes when it comes to data and networked urban space. In addition, we expect to see a number of new smart city examples in large and small cities and communities across the country as  Infrastructure Canada’s Smart Cities Challenge  unfolds, and it is hoped that this Open Smart City definition will be useful to these projects, and that they will provide an example of wh at an Open Smart City typifies."
"23" "We recognize that an Open Smart City does not yet exist, but we did find  a number of  initiatives, programs, and practices as well as useful reports in Canada and globally that are Open Smart City like. The Open Smart City  V1.0 Guide is being released as a living document that we will continue to refine, improve and grow as new examples and best practices emerge."
"24" "We look forward to your feedback, suggestions and contributions."
"25" "Sincerely,"
"26" "The Open Smart Cities in Canada Team"
"27" "Open Smart Cit y  Definition  V1.0"
"28" "For the purpose of this project a city is defined in the  most simple  way possible as follows:"
"29" "A  city  is a co mplex and dynamic socio-biological-physical system. It is a territorially bound human settlement governed by public city officials who manage the grey (i.e., built form), blue (i.e., water) and green (i.e., land) environment and the people they serve as pe r their legal and jurisdictional responsibilities. Cities are much more complex than this, however, for the purpose of this exercise, we have limited ourselves to a functionalist and an administrative definition."
"30" "Our observations indicate that how smart c ities are framed and how they are being rolled out best resemble the following definition:"
"31" "Smart cities  in the common sense of the term and as per their current manifestations are “[technologically] instrumented and networked [cities], [with] systems [that are] interlinked and integrated, and [where] vast troves of big urban data are being generated [by sen sors] and used to manage and control urban life in real-time”.    Public administrators and elected officials invest in smart city technologies and data analytical systems to inform how to innovatively, economically, efficiently and objectively run and mana ge the cities they govern. Predominately, a smart city is about quantifying and  managing infrastructure, mobility, business and online government services and a focus oriented toward technological solutionism."
"32" "An  Open Smart City   is where residents, civil  society, academics, and the private sector collaborate with public officials to   mobilize data and technologies when warranted   in an ethical, accountable and transparent way to govern the city as a fair, viable and  liveable  commons and balance economic dev elopment, social progress and environmental responsibility."
"33" "An  Open Smart City  includes the following five characteristics:"
"34" "Governance   in an Open Smart City is  ethical ,  accountable , and  transparent . These principles apply to the governance of social and technical platforms which includes data, algorithms, skills, infrastructure, and knowledge."
"35" "An Open Smart City is  participatory ,   collaborative  and  responsive . It is a city where government, civil society, private sector, the media, academia and residents meaningfully participate in the governance of the city and have shared rights and responsibiliti es. This entails a culture of  trust  and  critical thinking  and  fair ,  just ,  inclusiv e and informed  approaches."
"36" "An Open Smart City uses data and technologies that are  fit for purpose , can be  repaired and queried , their  source code are o pen , adhere to  open standards , are interoperable, durable,  secure , and where possible  locally procured and scalable . Data and technology are used and a cquired in such a way as to   reduce harm and bias ,  increase sustainability  and enhance flexibility. An Open Smart City may defer when warranted to automated decision-making and therefore designs these systems to be legible, responsive, adaptive and accountable."
"37" "In an Open Smart City,  data manage ment  is the norm and   custody and control over data   generated by smart technologies is held and exercised in the public interest. Data governance includes sovereignty,   residency ,  open by default ,   security ,   individual and social privacy , and  grants people authority over their personal data ."
"38" "In an  Open Smart City , it is recognized that data and technology are not the solution to many of the systemic  issues  cities face, nor are there always quick fixes.  These problems require innovative, sometimes long term, social, organizational, economic, and political processes and solutions."
"39" "Overview of Guide"
"40" "The  Open Smart Cities Guide V1.0  is structured according to the five characteristics of an Open Smart City and will include relevant tools, resources, examples and applications from  Canada and abroad. As discussed, this is intended as a living document, and new material will continually  be added over time."
"41" "Governance   in an Open Smart City is   ethical ,  accountable ,  and  transparent .  These principles a pply to the governance of social and technical platforms which include data, algorithms, skills, infrastructure, and knowledge."
"42" "According to the UN Habitat for a Better Urban Future,   governance  is defined as:"
"43" "“the enabling environment that requires ade quate legal frameworks, efficient political, managerial and administrative processes to enable the local government response to the needs of citizens. It can be defined as the many ways that institutions and individuals organize the day-to-day management o f a city, and the processes used for effectively realizing the short term and long-term agenda of a city’s development. Urban governance is the software that enables the urban hardware to function. Effective urban governance is characterized as democratic  and inclusive; long-term and integrated; multi-scale and multilevel; territorial; proficient and conscious of the digital age”."
"44" "Open Government provides an additional dimension to urban governance, as described in the   Open Government Partnership (OGP) .  The following lists  the   open government declarations  that OGP members commit to and it is recommend that smart c ities be guided by these:"
"45" "Increase the availability of information about governmental activities"
"46" "Support civic participation"
"47" "Implement the highest standards of professional integrity throughout administrations"
"48" "Increase access to new technologies for openness and accountability"
"49" "The OGP website includes a number of useful   resources  and relevant   thematic areas  that smart cities actors ca n refer to and apply in their smart city governance models. The OGP also endorses the   Open Data Charter  which will be discussed later in this guide."
"50" "The following principles, documents and projects will help Open Smart City actors formulate an ethical, accountable and transparent Open Smart City governance model. Ideas from these can be used to guide agre ement on the creation of the Open Smart City mission, vision and mandates and the drafting of strategic Open Smart City plans, roadmaps and key performance indicators."
"51" "Ethical Governance:"
"52" "Ethical principles are starting to appear in smart city plans and  the following are some examples:"
"53" "The following  principles are part of smart city strategies  and plans for the cities of  Montreal ,  New York ,  Barcelona  and  Helsinki , as well as the  Province of Ontario :"
"54" "equity, inclusivity, protection of trust, technological  sovereignty (the ability of citizens to set the terms of use and intended purpose of technology), honesty, accessibility to government information, openness & open architectures, honesty,   privacy by design , and fairness."
"55" "These principles are discussed throughout this Guide, and found not only in smart and digital strategies, but also in some urba n strategic plans (i.e.,  Helsinki  and  New York )."
"56" "La  ville   intelligente  au service du bien  commun  a report published by the  Province of Quebec’s Commission De  L’éthique   En  Science et  en   Technologie   offers ethical guidelines for smart cities that ser ve the public interest. The guide identifies  risks  and  includes checklists, ethical questions for public officials to ask and principles geared to specific scenarios."
"57" "The  Barcelona City Council  has introduced ethical clauses in their Information Communica tion Technologies (ICT)  calls for tender .  Barcelona is also a member of the   Electronics Watch project   which calls for responsible public procurement, employment rights and safety regulations in the electronics industry and in the global ICT supply chain."
"58" "The  Ontario Smart Grid   Data Strategy Advisory Council  created a   Smart Metering Entity: Third Party Access Implementation Plan  which recommends the establishment of a Data Access and Ethics R eview Committee. This Committee would determine whether uses for smart meter data by third parties are fair and ethical. Although not open data, the plan to allow third party access to smart meter data exemplifies an approach for governing data derived fro m smart technology systems."
"59" "In 2006, The  City of Chicago  formed a   Mayor’s Advisory Council on Closing the Digital Divide  to make recommendations to address unequal resident access to the Internet and technology, as is articulated in the   City that Networks Report.  One of their main recommendations was to create a new nonprofit organization led by phil anthropic, municipal, and technology representatives and community leaders to focus on digital inclusion, civic outreach, and digital literacy and skills training."
"60" "The  City of Barcelona’s whistleblowing platform ,   Bústia   Ètica ,  enables a secure way for citizens to anonymously report cases of corruption. The platform was born out of the Citizen Advisory Council for the   Barcelona City Office for Transparency ."
"61" "Governance Structures and Participation:"
"62" "Official or formal participation and resident representation in the governance of s mart cities are not yet the norm in Canadian cities, but some cities leaning toward this approach. The following are some examples of where cities have multi-sectoral participation in their governance structures:"
"63" "The  Cities of Guelph  and  Edmonton  aim to ha ve departments and  residents  representatives on their smart city leadership committees. In  Edmonton , branch managers from relevant departments, such as Environmental Strategies, Transit, Information Technology, and Economic Development are represented on t he Smart City Steering Committee. In  Guelph , representatives from the Geographic Information Systems (GIS), security and physical location security, and digital subcommittees will be included in their IT Governance Committee."
"64" "In addition,  Ontario’s Indepen dent Electricity Systems Operator (IESO)  has consulted extensively with external experts via their   Data Strategy Advisory Council  about their plan to enhance the value of and allow third party access to Ontario smart meter data. Outreach includes  consultations with information privacy experts (i.e.,   Privacy Analytics  and   Information and Privacy Commissioner of Ontario ), 73 local distribution companies in Ontario (e.g., Hydro Ottawa and Guelph Hydro),  and other industries that have allowed third party acc ess to data, (i.e., Statistics Canada,  the Canadian Institute for Health Information, and the Municipal Property Assessment Corporation)."
"65" "Cooperative and Multi-jurisdictional Governance:"
"66" "Canada is a federation of 10 province and 3 territories and over 3000 cities which are the lowest level of government and are the responsibility of provinces. Across the country there may be any number of other jurisdictional arrangements such as the Natio nal Capital Commission in the  Outaouais  region, regional municipalities, metropolitan areas  and etc.  Collaboration is an essential component in Canada and especially so in the case for smart cities because different levels of government have different juri sdictional responsibilities  and also  different laws, regulation and policies apply depending on where a smart city is deployed."
"67" "For example, Canadian utilities such as water, gas, and electricity are not solely governed by cities, but are instead governed  by a complex set of multi-jurisdictional and multi-sectoral actors, regulation, laws, and governing entities that are unique to each province and specific to each utility. The following is an example of the smart electricity grid for the Province of Ontari o. A city however can develop its own arrangement into the smart grid and generate alternative energy flows as seen in the   GridSmartCi ty  cooperative , which the  City of Guelph  has considered collaborating with."
"68" "●  For example, the  Province of Ontario Smart Grid  is regulated by the   Ministry of Energy  while the system is governed and licensed by the   Ontario E nergy Board   (OEB)   that delegates authority to 73 local distribution companies (LDCs)   that are members of the   Electricity Distributors Associat ion   (EDA).   Data collected by smart meters in homes and businesses are  partially anonymized and delivered to the provincial   Independent Electricity System Operator   (IESO)   by the L DCs   so that they may be assessed and used for billing. These data are also governed by the   Ontario's Freedom of Information and Protection of Personal Information Act (FIPPA) ."
"69" "Accountable Governance:"
"70" "Digital accountability platforms are beginning to  emerges  as methods for residents to oversee and present proposals and this Guide will have more  on this throughout."
"71" "Decidim  is the  City of Barcelona ’s participatory democracy platform that allows residents to track City pr oject consultation processes and the status of project proposals. Barcelona promotes it as an  open source digital commons  that allows citizens, organizations, and public institutions to democratically self-organize by enabling the co-production of strategi c planning and participatory budgeting, and to allow for distributed decision-making."
"72" "New York City’s smart city  is informed by a   Digital Playbook  t hat includes real   case studies  with a set of specified principles (e.g., make government simple, welcome all residents, an d protect residents’ trust). Some of the projects are location based services to find and apply to   pre-kindergarten centers  around the city and a program called   Home-Stat   that  partners with existing homeless response and prevention programs to introduce new innovations to engage, identify, and transition people experiencing homelessness to services and ultimately permanent housing. This also includes the visualizing of a b road set of data about street homelessness and the City’s responses to homelessness."
"73" "While industry driven, the  City of  Montreal  has a   Conseil Avis  D éveloppeurs  et  Novateurs  (ADN), an external stakeholder committee to monitor the progress of projects adopted by the smart and digital city program between 2014-2017.  The Conseil was chaired by the Mayor at the time and included representatives from local businesses, consultant firms, academia, and the public sector. Information about the progress of projects was tracked through an online forum called   je  fais  MTL ."
"74" "Transparent Governance:"
"75" "The following are examples where the cities have provided the means for residents to find out about decision-making."
"76" "The  City  of Montreal ’s smart city office,   Bureau Ville  Intelligente  et  Numerique  (BVIN) , oversees the deployment of smart city projects and has doc umented how resident input informed their smart city strategy focus areas. This includes public input from resident consultations in town halls and public libraries, survey responses, and an analysis of  311  service requests."
"77" "The  City of Helsinki ’s   Open Software Development team  published an   Application Programming Interface (API) for accessing documentation about city decision-making .  This API enables developers to query data on municipal  meetings, agendas, and  decisions. The API is free to use and modify and is published on the team’s   GitHub repository ."
"78" "The  City of Montreal  has ad opted the   Open Contracting Data Standard  and provides a   procurement data visualization tool . This online tool showcases municipal spending on products and services. These “raw” procurement data can also be downloaded and queried with an API."
"79" "Members of the  Open Government Partnership (OGP)   are actively engaged in  a number of  themes   related to transparency that include  wording for commitments ,  resources  and  stories  which open smart cities proponents can use in their strategies and deployments.  Some of the related  Themes are : Access to Information, Audits and Controls, Asset Disclosure, Conflict of Interest, and many more ."
"80" "The  Open Contracting Standard Partnership  is an organization that aims to make governments more transparent by advocating public disclosure of contracts, contracting and procurement. They have developed the  Open Contracting Data Standard  that many are adopting including the  City of Montreal  just mentioned."
"81" "An Open Smart City is  participatory ,   collaborative ,  and   responsive .  It is a city where government, civil society, the private sector, the media, academia and residents meaningfully participate in the governance of the city and  have shared rights and responsibilities. This entails a culture of   trust   and   critical thinking   and   fair ,  just ,  inclusive ,  and   informed   approaches."
"82" "Cities are the level of government closest to residents and where practices of consultation and participation in governance, urban plans and development projects are most common. Although Canadian cities do not necessarily have open government plans and ar e not members of the   Open Government Partnership (OGP) , public engagement is welcomed especially when it comes to open data, digital strategies and advisory committees to council. The following are examples and tools to encourage meaningful participation in Open Smart City governance and the co-creation of sm art city policies."
"83" "Participation:"
"84" "The   International Association for Public Participation's (IAP2) Public Participation Spectrum  is a tool to assess public participation. In addition, the   AP2 Core Values for Public Participation  can be used to help align decisions with the interests of affected people and organizations but also to  self assess  different forms of engagement. These values are endorsed by the   OGP ."
"85" "The  City of Montreal  smart city office is working with a team dedic ated to improving physical accessibility around Montreal. This collaboration entails working on a project to  crowdsource data about the accessibility of public facilities and publish these in an online map."
"86" "Residents have much to contribute and should be p art of the official governing structures ( e.g , city council advisory committees) and engage them in co-creation processes. Some cities, like Guelph and Edmonton, plan to include resident representation in their smart city leadership committees."
"87" "Collabora tion:"
"88" "Infrastructure Canada’s Smart Cities Challenge  called for smart city submissions to include resident engagement in the creation of their proposals and as part of their pro jects. The following are a  examples of forms  of smart city collaboration and co-creation."
"89" "In the  City of Montreal , close to one thousand residents attended the   je  vois  Montr eal  event to consult on and suggest smart city projects. Some of these were adopted by the City’s smart city office and incorporated into the   Smart and Digital City Action Plan ."
"90" "The  City of Guelph  collected via their   Citizen Relationship Manager software  requests for projects from residents that have been adapted into City requests for proposals for new technologies."
"91" "Responsiveness:"
"92" "The following are processes to facilitate dialogue and to enlist residents into pr oblem resolution while also being inclusive and responsive to a broad spectrum of needs and abilities."
"93" "The   Civic User Test Group  is a  City of Chicago and Cook County,  I llinois community of residents who are paid to test civic websites and apps. The   Smart Chicago Collaborative , is a local organization devoted to making people’s lives in the city better through technology have published   their user testing methodology  to ensure that projects are useable, transparent and scalable."
"94" "Standards for open data  are sets of agreed upon specifications for how some kinds of data should be made publicly available. It can  be argued that they support the accessibility and interoperability of public information and services ( e.g , transit, service requests, and public health inspections). For example, cities across Canada ( Edmonton ,  Guelph ,  Montreal , and  Ottawa ) use the   Open311   specification to collect geo-tagged service request data from residents about non-emergency issues (e.g., potholes, waste col lection, and noise complaints). The city responds by addressing cases and updating their information. The   Open Data Standards Directory  provides a set of metrics for evaluating whether standards like Open311 promote collaborative and accessible approaches for specifying data that are made publicly available."
"95" "Critical Thinking:"
"96" "Critical thinking in an Open Sm art City context is about being receptive to challenges and this includes challenging current ways of thinking about partnerships, programs, spending and plans  and fostering an environment to welcome feedback that may not always be enthusiastic. This means  welcoming critique, argument and debate and possibly pointing out failures and learning from them.  This would be from the public but also within city administrations. It may also be the solicitation of academic research and social theory."
"97" "In  Dublin , the   Programmable City Project   actively works with decision makers of its smart city program,  Smart Dublin , to translate the research into policy  interventions and to affect the thinking and work of public sector officials and bodies."
"98" "Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency in Machine Learning   (FAT/ML)  is an annual event where critical AI scholars publis h and share data science and AI papers."
"99" "Fair and Just Debate:"
"100" "Measures to assess how a city is City’s doing must include an  assessment of inequality  and  recognize that conflict are inherent characteristics of any city . Thus, fact-based methods to observe the quality of life and the well-being of inhabitants and their environment should also be supplemented with qualitative indicators."
"101" "In an Open Smart City ,  qualitative and quantitative indicator and assessment approaches  are recommended as forms of knowledge to assess the success of programs and to identify areas that require further attention. Furthermore, there should be processes in place to not only exa mine the results, but also to critically assess and discuss with stakeholders if the chosen assessment system is adequate. It is understood that an indicator system is reliable if it is consistent across time. Here it is suggested that the system should al so be flexible and scalable to capture the dynamics of a  city, or  be what is referred to as living indicators.     See the information box below for examples of both living and quantitative indicators."
"102" "City Indicator Systems"
"103" "There are a number of city indi cator systems which frame cities as being resilient (e.g.,   Rockefeller Foundation ) , sustainable (e.g.,   UN Millennium and Sustainable Development Goa ls ), and smart (e.g.,   ITU - KPIs for Smart Sustainable Cities  and the   ISO 37120 monitored by the World Council on City Data ) . These are globally recognized indicator systems that aim to offer fact-based evidence, oversight and transparency as it pertains to smart city progress."
"104" "Limitations of Quantitative Indicators"
"105" "While these types of indicators are useful to city managers,  they come with numerous limitations:"
"106" "Indicator systems  aligned with data and technology driven smart city solutions  can  downplay or obfuscate   contested and messy institutional, social, and economic processes that are often at the root of urban issues and  that are  hard to measure issues such as: food insecurity, social exclusion  and  stigmatization, structural forms of violence, drug addiction  and  opioid crisis , etc."
"107" "Indicator  sets  and frameworks  don’t typically capture intersectional differences  of well-bei ng and access to municipal services related to identity such as: ethnicity, gender, religion, and language."
"108" "Indicator systems often lack nuance , for instance, indices for smart sustainable cities do not account for the full production cycle of the deployme nt of sensor-based technologies that are made of materials that depend on the exploitation of environment (e.g., e-waste and toxic batteries) and labor (e.g., conflict minerals) and that have a high replacement rate. Furthermore, they  often fail to account  for elements of the city that are enjoyable and meant to be experienced, such as   urban agriculture  or creative architecture ."
"109" "The Need for Qualitative Indicators"
"110" "Overall, most quantifiable and fact-based indices for the smart/resilient/sustainable city typically fail to reflect broader and more complicated notions of fairness, justice, or equality. Broader, more inclusive, and nuanced qualitative processes may need  to be developed to capture complex issues.  Subjective methods to assess well-being, such as those proposed by the   OECD Subjecti ve Measures of Well-Being , are a good start ."
"111" "Also, to support critical debate about contested issues, living indicators     are recommended especially during the formulation of Open Smart City visions, missions and plans. The engagement of the public in O pen Smart City frameworks and visions would include specifying where, how, why, when and by whom a social conflict emerges.  Justice and fairness here can be assessed in terms of representation and contestation."
"112" "For example, vocal concerns and misgivings a bout the   National Inquiry into Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls  have openly signaled about the lack of well-being experienced by a group of people.  One of the issues raised by the   Native Women’s Association of Canada  has been   the lack of data about how many indigenous women and girls go missing in  Canada each year ."
"113" "Therefore,  what gets counted and who counts matters , as is pointed out by Gwen Phillips of the  British Columbia First Nations’ Data Governance Initiative  in   Indigenous Data Sovereignty and Reconciliation  and by Marilyn Waring in   Who’s Counting ."
"114" "Indicators that arise from community-based groups on the front lines of urban crises (e.g., homelessness, opioid addiction, and domestic abuse cases) and resistance to the status quo better capture a city’s complexity  and should inform the Open Smart City."
"115" "Trust:"
"116" "Transparency, justice, the welcoming of critical debate, and the creation of data and technology literacy programs foster an environment of collaboration, understanding, and trust."
"117" "For  Array of Things  pro ject in the  City of Chicago , project administrators meaningfully engaged residents on their plans to install a network of sensors around the city by providing IoT technology literacy and solicited input about how and where to install these sensors. Engagem ent also included the co-creation of the project’s  governance and privacy policies ."
"118" "The advocacy group   Tech Reset Canada  has been active in monitoring plans and activities of   Sidewalk Labs  in Toronto. Sidewalk Toronto is a  joint effort by W aterfront Toronto and Alphabet Inc. , the holding company that owns Google, to develop a connected and digitally advanced neighborhood on Toronto’s Eastern Waterfront neighborhood. Civic technology advocates have publicly voiced concerns about signs of miss ion creep whereby this corporate pilot project may   get rolled out across other areas of Toronto  and may not be in the public interest."
"119" "Inclusive and Informed Approaches:"
"120" "Inclusiveness entails taking proportionate  measures to ensure that access to digital services, skills, and knowledge is equal regardless of gender, physical ability, or level of income. It also ensures that people with relevant skill sets are informing and actively participating in shaping the Open  Smart City."
"121" "Gender equity  is a value in  the  City of  Barcelona’s Digit al City Plan  that aligns with encouraging and supporting women to pursue careers in science and technology. The city emphasizes inclusion of women in their educational and digital skills training initiatives and events focused on gender equity in science a nd technology (see   fem.talent )."
"122" "Code for Canada  includes programs for digital literacy and training that are designed to b e inclusive to women. Their   Ladies Learning to Code  program offers workshops, courses and  meetups in spaces where women are explicitly welcomed to participate."
"123" "Connect Chicago  is a citywide digital inclusion and literacy initiative focused on  increasing access to the Internet and digital learning opportunities. The program consists of a network of over 900 people training others in digital skills, running computer centers throughout the city, and helping residents improve their lives through te chnology. The program’s 25 projects are operationalized by representatives from the public sector, nonprofits, and other entities and governed by the  Connect Chicago Steering Committee  that is made up of representatives from  key government agencies, institutional funders,  and program partner organizations. The program has also formed a   meet up group  to coordinate  roundtable discussions of topics related to digital inclusion. The Chicago   Smart Health C enters , originally funded by the federal government, is another program that places trained health information specialists, called Health IT Navigators, in clinics in low income areas to assist patients to connect to their own medical records and find reli able health resources online."
"124" "Smart Cities for All  aims to make ICT in smart cities more accessible for people with disabilities and elderly  people.The  initiative works with expert organizations and companies  to create and   implement  their accessibility Toolkit  and promote strategie s to build more inclusive smart cities. Tools included identifying international standards for accessibility such as  ETSI EN 301 549 ,   Section 508 of the US Federal Government’s Rehabilitation Act , and the  World Wide Web Consortium’s (W3C) Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0  or  ISO/IEC 40500:2012 .  It is part of a Global Stra tegy for Digital Inclusion by the  G3ict which is the Global Initiative for Inclusive ICT . Their objective is to infuse accessibility into smart city programs to improve human  rights, civic engagement, and business outcomes."
"125" "An Open Smart City uses data and technologies that are   fit for purpose ,  can be   repaired and queried ,  their   source code are open ,  adhere to   open standards ,  are interoperable, durable,   secure ,  and where possible   locally procured   and scalable. Data and technology are used and acquired in such a way as to   reduce harm and bias ,  increase sustainability   and enhance flexibility. An  Op en Smart City  may defer when warranted to automated decision-making and therefore designs these systems to be legible, responsive, adaptive and accountable."
"126" "Open smart cities enable ethical, transparent, accountable, and cooperative models of governance  and meaningful civic engagement and some of these properties can be embodied in the design of technologies, processes and data practices. The following are examples of how these are applied in real terms."
"127" "Fit for Purpose:"
"128" "Technologies that are fit for p urpose are appropriate (comply to a standard) as per its intended use. For  example  a smart lamp post should not also be a surveillance instrument, the quality of the data collected for a device should meet standards and only the necessary data should be co llected."
"129" "Smart cities deploy IoT technologies and require special considerations and standards related to privacy & transparency, infrastructure, security, and operations &  sustainability. The  City of New York   NYC guidelines on IoT deployment  provides a set of guidelines for each of these areas."
"130" "3Gict  is working toward developing  standards, technologies and policies to ensure that the smart city is accessible with their  Smart City and Digital Inclusion  programs and resources."
"131" "Some cities have their own units devoted to data analytics, open software, and cybersecurity. Examples of these include the  City of Helsinki ’s   Open Software Development   team,   The City of Chicago ’s  Information Security Office , and  Edmonton ’s   Analytics Center of Excellence  and   Spatial Center of Excellence (SPACE ) . These units reflect a commitment to internally f ostering digital skill sets of city personnel."
"132" "Repaired and Queried:"
"133" "Technologies that can be repaired and queried provide users access to the tools, diagnostics, documentation, and software that are required to repair devices and to see into the  often black  boxed data, AI, software and code."
"134" "The   Right to Repair Association  advocate for state governments in the US to adopt right to repair legislation. The association wants vendors to allow end users of their technology to access d iagnostic tools and manuals and ask that suppliers make these easily available."
"135" "The  City of Helsinki ’s open APIs ecosystem,   CitySDK , ensures that data about public inform ation (e.g., service requests, mobility and transport, access to public facilities, and events) are open and can be queried and repurposed into scalable applications with via automatic processes. The API ecosystem was formulated by Helsinki’s smart city of fice,   Forum  Virium  Helsinki , and is accompanied by a   Harmonized Smart City APIs “Cookbook”  to help smart city representatives and software developers  know what cities use APIs and how to scale them to their city. The first recommendation of this Cookbook is that APIs for public information should always respond to an articulated public need an d be designed to match that intended purpose and make the API easy to use.  This is also an example of technology that is fit for purpose."
"136" "Open Source:"
"137" "Open source  refers to computer software with s ource code that is made available under an open source license and can be modified and repurposed with no or minimal restrictions (such as specifying attribution, reuse of copyleft, etc.). Open source software is mostly made available free of charge. Open  source is different than software that is free to use whereby there is no  cost  but the source code is not transparent and there are restrictions in terms of the modification or repurposing of that source code."
"138" "The  UK Government ’s   Digital Service Standard  specifies that new source code be open source. To aid in the procurement of open source technologies, the UK governme nt has published a guide and an   Open Source Procurement Toolkit .   T he City of Guelph has  cited the Toolkit in the open source procurement section of their   Open Government Action Plan Initiative Interim Report."
"139" "The   Canadian Internet Policy and Public Interest Clinic   (CIPPIC) has published a   Frequently Asked Q uestions (FAQ)  webpage about differences between  open source and proprietary software and the types of open licenses for software."
"140" "New York City’s Mayor's Office of Data Analytics  has released a beta version of their   Open Analytics Library , a project to showcase and educate the public about how city agencies are using data and open source software to  understand and address urban issues. This project not only posts the source code to GitHub, but also explains the methodology (i.e., scoping, data, analysis, pilot, and handoff) for each project in a way that is human readable and relatively easy to under stand."
"141" "The  City of Chicago ’s smart data platform, which can link to and apply situationally aware analytics to city data, is built on an open source base and has a public facing component called   OpenGrid  which is hosted online and allows anyone to visualize and apply analytical functions to geo-tagged open data."
"142" "The   ThingsNetwork  is an open source and decentralized approach to building an IoT network. Member communities of the network can contribute source code, place a gateway on the console, and plug and play with t heir applications."
"143" "Open Standards :"
"144" "Open Smart City standards are considered to have properties that embody the public good. The defining characteristics of open standards are: (1) they use well-defined procedures that guarantee public participation in the ir creation and (2) they have liberal terms of access that allow public use of standardized technologies.  Open standards are typically vendor-neutral, flexible/ repurposable , and enable decentralized data interoperability and portability across discrete sy stems and applications."
"145" "UK Government’s Digital Service Standard , in addition to their principle of open source, also specifies the use of   open standards and common platforms  for public services. To help public services ac hieve the open standards requirement, the UK Government has published an   open standards principles  guide about working with open standards, which includes ensuring that technical standards are maximally adhered to as possible."
"146" "A policy guideline in the  City of Montreal ’s  Smart and Digital City Strategy  is an open, interoperable, and technological architecture. Accordingly, this is a part of the City’s smart city procurement. Specifically, the smart city office in Montreal specifies openness in their request for proposals to pilot APIs."
"147" "The  City of  Helsinki’s  3D semantic model  uses open standards, open data, and open source to  query, link and visualize geospatial information about the City. These data have been applied to planning the installation of solar panels, flood simulation, and informed programs that seek to reduce greenhouse gas emissions."
"148" "The   Open and Agile Cities Initiative   is a city-driven, non-profit organization working to provide data interoperability and portability across and within multiple cities. The approa ch uses the following open components in its design: an open API ( FI-WARE NGSI Specification ), a set of data models ( citySDK ), and an open source and open data platform ( CKAN )."
"149" "Cybersecurity and Data Security:"
"150" "Open Smart Cities ensure that smart city technologies and infrastructures are protected from  being hacked via a cyberattack and that data are protected from improper access and for privacy. There are  a number of  cybersecurity standards and frameworks for system components, architectures, and operations and research on data protection. Cities can e nlist public confidence by ensuring that personal information is secured and especially so when they are transparent about their cybersecurity and data security policies and practices."
"151" "Getting Smarter about Smart Cities: Improving data privacy and data security   is a report published by the Government of Ireland Data Forum , a panel of experts from across industry, civil society, academia, and the public sector, about privacy and security implications for smart cities and how to address them. The report includes recommendations for public agencies that deploy technologies fo r data driven and networked urbanism to better mitigate potential privacy and security risks and harms. Recommendations include more transparency about data protection and privacy policies (e.g.,   Transport for London   and the City of   Chicago’s Department of Innovation and Technology )  as well as market; technology; policy, regulatory, and legal; and governance and management solutions. Obse rvable examples of harms related to security and privacy for smart cities, as well as their solutions, are framed in a multi-faceted and comprehensive manner."
"152" "The Citizen Lab  is an interdisciplinary laboratory base d at the Munk School of Global Affairs at the University of Toronto. Its focus is research development, high level strategic policy and legal engagement related to the intersection of Information Communication Technologies (ICT) with human rights and globa l security. The Lab has  a number of  useful resources on its website."
"153" "The  Canadian  Multistakeholder  Process: Enhancing IoT Security  is a collaborative  endeavour  to develop secure the IoT in Canada and abroad. I t is led by the following core team actors Internet Society (ISOC), Innovation, Science and Economic Development (ISED), the Canadian Internet Policy and Public Interest Clinic (CIPPIC), and the Canadian Internet Registration Authority (CIRA). There are a  number of  very useful resources related to vulnerabilities, standards, policies ,  and etc. for the proponents of open smart cities to consider when developing their road maps and deploying technologie s."
"154" "Reduction of Harm and Bias:"
"155" "Reducing harm and bias means that  algorithms and automated processes do not unjustly or exploitatively target services, police, or penalize persons . The following are examples and resources  to make automated process more accountable, responsive, and legible :"
"156" "New York City ’s Council has pas sed   a bill to establish a task force  to make recommendations on how to share more information about the software the City uses and how municipal agencies may  address instances where people are harmed by automated decision-making . The original bill spec ified an initiative to create an inventory of software that City agencies use and allow citizens to directly audit software. City officials cited issues with the bill in its original form, and these included “legal and practical constraints” such as IP res trictions by proprietary software vendors, ability to accurately identify the valid source code of many older systems, and concerns about cybersecurity and personal privacy breaches. These concerns raised by City officials in front of NYC Committee of Tech nology suggest that transparency and accountability are at risk of being impeded by broad assertions of corporate secrecy about technology. Nonetheless, the creation of a task force demonstrates a discussion about ensuring automated decision-making among l ocal public agencies are fair and accountable to their affected residents."
"157" "In Europe, the   EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)   right to explanation  will soon come  into force and will legislate a right to explanation to improve transparency about decision-making, access, and algorithms. It has been argued that a subject-centric approach to the explanation of automated processes that focuses on  particular regions  of  automated models related to a query is promising as a method to reveal how algorithms work and to ensure that their makers are responsible, and that processes are explicable, and human centered."
"158" "Community Control Over Police Surveillance  (COPS) is a civil liberties partnership that aims to ensure that a regulated pro cess is in place to examine automated programs that target and police people. To date, 20 cities across the United States have been working to pass COPS legislation that would “ ensure residents, through local city councils are empowered to decide if and ho w surveillance technologies are used, through a process that maximizes the public’s influence over those decisions .”"
"159" "Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency in Machine Learning (FAT/ML) ,  as was   referenced  earlier, is an annual event to discuss and recognize challenges for ensuring non-discrimination, due process, and understandability in decision-making raised by machine learning. The o rganization that coordinates the event publishes  principles for   accountable al gorithms and a social impact statement for algorithms ."
"160" "Local and Sustainable Procurement:"
"161" "Locally procured refers to the procurement, adoption and use of technologies created by local small and medium enterprises wherever possible. Locally procured technologies may be strategically linked with initiatives by the public sector to shape and direc t grassroots types of innovation and this type of procurement strategies ensure that large multinational monopolies are not the only game in town. This may require the scaling down of projects to enable companies to bid on smaller parts of Open Smart City  projects and later help them scale up should the project be successful."
"162" "While procurement laws may limit a City’s ability to locally procure, there are tools and advice available to help them consider local technological solutions for their smart city.   The Forum for the Future’s Sustainable Pr ocurement Tool ,   discussed in more detail below , describes strategies to support local procurement . These include specifying minimum response times for suppliers and improving local outre ach and training, as well as local advertising."
"163" "The  City of Montreal ’s  Smart and Digital City Strategy  includes as a goal the growth of a localized economic technology cluster. The creation of   InnoCité  MTL ,  Canada’s first smart city accelerator , and of the strategic fundi ng of venture capital firms, such as   Capital Intelligent MTL , has actively supported the City’s strategic goal of supporting innovative startups in Montreal create technologies  for improving urban issues."
"164" "Guelph ’s   Civic Accelerator Program  is another example in Canada of reaching out to local suppliers for innovative solu tions to address city’s business needs. The program implements a collaborative and transparent approach to pilot new technologies with small and medium enterprises that address various business needs."
"165" "One approach of note for forming public and private par tnerships to pilot smart city technologies is the Open Innovation Platform (OIP), strategically implemented by the  City of Helsinki .  The aim of the OIP is to build platform management and develop competences and foster the growth and internationalization  of small and medium enterprises. If it succeeds, the platform will enable new tools for managing platforms that are shaking up the information economy (e.g., Airbnb and Uber). Furthermore, it will strategically specify a neutral environment in which actors  enter into public-private-people partnerships to share spaces to pilot technologies."
"166" "Balancing Sustainability:"
"167" "Openness for smart cities entails balancing sustainability by also mitigating the contamination of the environment via e-waste and unsustainable labor practices via procurement processes and innovative initiatives to promote the reuse of materials."
"168" "The  Forum for the Future’s Sustainable Procurement Tool  considers the full life cycle cost of Information Technologies (IT). The toolkit includes a tender  review spreadsheet and challenges rogue spending and consumption (i.e., spending that is unnecessary or  unjustified). It also includes a spreadsheet to assess sustainability impacts related to promoting fair working conditions; reducing soil, water, and a ir pollution; reducing energy consumption and causes of climate change; and reducing consumption of materials, packaging and water.  Furthermore, it encourages creating specifications to design-in sustainability, such as requiring information about whether  the product is upgradeable/reparable, its minimum usage life/service intervals, maximum recycled content, maximum hazardous materials content, and renewable energy. Finally, the whole Life Cost Tool automatically evaluates in Excel lower operating and dis posal costs of products that are relatively more sustainable. The Toolkit also provides an opportunity to support localized services and products by specifying shorter response times (only where relevant)."
"169" "The   City of Seoul Sharing City   initiative aims to promote platforms for sharing that  benefit a sense of community well-being and increase sustainability through reusing material resources. The   Seoul Sharing Promotion Committee   acts as the public-private governance mechanism for the initiative and is comprised of representatives from academia, legal circles, the press, businesses, nonprofits, and research institutes,  as well as the directors and general officials who are responsible for economic, welfare, transportation, and innovation affairs."
"170" "In an Open Smart City,   data management   is the norm and   custody and control over data   generated by smart technologies is held and exercised in the public interest. Data governance includes sovereignty,   residency ,   open by default ,   security ,   individual and social privacy ,   and   grants people authority over their personal data ."
"171" "Data Management:"
"172" "Data manag ement considers the  full lifecycle management of data  from collection to preservation and this includes technologies, source code, sensors, etc."
"173" "There are a number of well-established institutions such as the  Center for O pen Science  and  Spatial Data Infrastructures  that have mature multi- stakeholder, -jurisdictional and -sectoral policies, principles, governance structures and practices for the deployment of sensors and the management, access, and visualization of data that are geospatial, big and small. The geomat ics community and scientists (i.e. meteorologists, transportation, hydrographers etc.) have been using remote and sensor-based technologies, situationally aware analytics, augmented reality and 3D visualization and algorithms to model urban and environment al systems and complexity for decades but are largely absent from smart city discussions. For additional resources on the management of complex and large datasets, see the   GeoConnections  Operational Policies  documents on data preservation, licenses, sensitive data, etc."
"174" "The research community in  Canada will soon be mandated by the Tri-Agency (i.e.,    Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC))  to de velop   research management plans   and to deposit their data into trusted digit al repositories. Organizations such as the   Portage Network ,   CASRAI  and   Research Data Canada   are key resources in this area."
"175" "These institutions have great insights into best data management practices related to archiving, interoperability, theory informed statistical modeling, data accuracy and precision, and avoidance of bias from aggregated spatial data (modifiable areal unit  problem (MAUP), boundary effects, etc.). The following are examples of documents and organizations that exemplify best practices in these domains:"
"176" "Arctic Spatial Data Infrastructure  Strategic Documents"
"177" "Open Science: org + (i.e.   Ocean Network Canada )"
"178" "Ope n Geospatial Consortium  (see their   Smart Cities Spatial Information Framework  and   Future City Pilot Phase 1 )"
"179" "Data Custody and Residency:"
"180" "Custody of data in th is context refers to ensuring that data are transported safely, are stored where national jurisdiction can reach, and that business rules are in place for proper data management and protection. Data residency is a critically important consideration for Ope n Smart Cities because many firms that provide cloud computing for smart cities (Google, Microsoft, etc.) store their data in servers outside of Canada, such as in the United States where there are limited protections against snooping and surveillance by g overnment and where Canadian law does not apply. The following resources explain why this might cause issues, and how some Cities have innovatively retained control of sensitive and crucial data stored abroad."
"181" "The report,   Seeing Through the Cloud: National Jurisdiction and Location of Data, Server, and Networks Still Matters in a Digitally I nterconnected World ,  explains why national jurisdiction matters when outsourcing  eCommunications  and how it could affect which third parties can legally access data, and on what terms. The report includes recommendations to Canadian organizations as they d ecide whether to outsource their  eCommunications ."
"182" "Sensitive and crucial data processed by the  Government of Estonia ’s digital services platform are copied to servers in Luxembourg.   These servers are located within a “ Data Embassy ”, and their governance is granted the same protections a fforded by a diplomatic mission .  The Data Embassy makes it possible for critical services to resume even if local data centers are stopped or disturbed fo r any reason. However, its unique legal set up makes it distinct from a typical disaster recovery center."
"183" "Open by Default:"
"184" "Open Knowledge International ’s  definition of open data and content states that these should   be freely used, modified, and shared by anyone for any purpose . Open by default is a principle of the   International Open Data Charter  that is endorsed by the OGP whereby governments must make the data they produce accessible to the public b y default while also adhering to relevant policy, legislation and leading practices related to the privacy and security of personal information. Many cities have open data programs but that does not mean that smart city data are open. It is suggested here  that Open Smart City’ data be open by default."
"185" "In Canada, governments at multiple levels have officially adopted the   International Open Data Charter , and these  include the  City of Edmonton ,  Government of Ontario , and  Government of Canada .   OpenNorth , one of the Charter’s international stewards, is actively working to map principles laid out by the Open Data Charter onto smart cities."
"186" "In the  City of Montreal , some of the data from the metropolitan area’s   central mobility center   is pushed to the open data portal. Th ese data include information about how the system standardizes the transportation  data  so it may be repurposed by anyone. Many cities in Canada also publish real-time transit data via the  GTFS-RT  open data format."
"187" "The  City of Helsinki  is a pioneer in deploying IoT projects that support the reuse of open data and it is main strategic consideration for Finland’s   Six City Strategy   for smart cities."
"188" "In the  City of Chicago , real time and geo-tagged ‘raw’ data collected from Chicago’s   Array of Things  urban sensing project are published as open data on the City of Chicago’s open data platform and   Plenario , a web-based portal for searching and downloading open data."
"189" "Organizations that work to help gove rnments uphold the principle of open by default include   OpenNorth , the   Open Data Institu te ,   Powered by Data ,  and   Open Knowledge International ."
"190" "Privacy:"
"191" "Privacy refers to the power to selectively reveal oneself to the world.  There is an array of types of privacy to consider, such as identity, bodily, locational, and communications.   Advocates for a National Data Strategy for Canada   note that more needs to be done to implement laws for data protectio n and privacy that are adapted to cases where data is treated as an economic asset. The following provide techniques and resources about privacy concerns and legal and regulatory gaps raised by smart cities:"
"192" "The implementation   plan to allow third party access to  smart meter data in Ontario   uses   privacy by design  as a core guiding principle for both enhancing the data’s value by geocoding the data and allowing third party access to these data.   Privacy by design   entails  deploying industry best practices to de-identify data and conducting multiple re-identification risk assessments throughout the piloting stage and after."
"193" "The   Future of Privacy Forum  provides   a central repository  for privacy relate d guidance documents, best practices, reports, codes of conduct, and other resources that can help local policymakers, technologists, and citizens navigate issues and concerns raised by smart cities. It also provides a   webpage  that identifies actors and technologies that make up smart cities and what they mean for privacy."
"194" "The   Surveillance Studies Centre  is a Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC) of Canada funded research initiative with a mandate to advance the surveillance studies field through collaboration via workshops, lectures  and seminars, empirical work, a visiting scholar program, publishing, community outreach, liaising with policy and activist groups, and student training."
"195" "Federal, provincial, and territorial privacy protection authorities  urged the Minister of Infrastructure and Communities in a public letter to take steps  to ensure the privacy and security of personal information are considered in the selection, design, and implementation  of the winning proposals in the federal government’s Smart Cities Challenge. The letter refers to privacy risks and lists important privacy and security measures that should be built into proposals, such as data-minimization, de-identification, data govern ance and privacy management program, privacy impact assessments and threat risk assessments, community engagement and project transparency, and consent. Furthermore, the  Office of the Information and Privacy Commissioner of Ontario (IPC)  has developed a  fact sheet  to help the public understand smart cities and how they can impact  an individual's privacy. This fact sheet asserts that, “municipalities need to take steps to ensure that the non-personal information collected by their private sector partners is available as a public resource.”"
"196" "Personal Data Management:"
"197" "Control of data  refers to the ability to influence how and for what purpose data are used. It is often defined by the  agreements  governments enter into with technology vendors. Infrastructures and models exist that emphasize that people  are able to  access and exert author ity over their personal data."
"198" "Finland 's human centric approach to personal data management and processing is called   MyData . This approach uses open infrastructure s that allow individuals to change services and avoid proprietary lock-ins (i.e., data portability articulated in the   EU   GDPR ) and provides the means to consent as to how and with whom personal data are shared. The model assumes a right for individuals to obtain their personal information and use it freely and emphasizes that sectors coop erate with one another to ensure that individuals may access their data across all areas of life (public health, taxes, education, etc.). The model was created by   Open Knowledg e Finland  and a paper about technical, legal, and  business implications of the model was commissioned by Finland’s Ministry of Transport and Communications."
"199" "e-Estonia   is the national platform to streamline a range of public services across sectors for both Estonians and Non-Estonians. Services offered by the platform are  i -Voting, e-Tax, e-Business, e-Banking, e-Ticket, e-School, e-Residency. Estonia’s X-Road, the   open source  interoperability infrastructure for exchanging data across services, can transmit large datasets and perform searches across multiple datasets in corporated in e-Estonia. e-Estonia  ensures security and integrity of personal data by utilizing blockchain technologies and encrypting and digitally signing all outgoing data . An individual may access all data that E-Estonia contains about them and any que ries to their data are logged."
"200" "Finland  has combined their  National Data Exchange Layer  with  Estonia ’s   X-Road  interoperability layer. In Finland, the exchange layer will e nable an interface (i.e.,   Soumi.fi ) that will provide a view of what the government knows about an individual citizen. In addition, the infrastructure will allo w third parties to pool and repurpose data for applications related to a specific sector, but also reinforce Finland's human-centric and consent driven model for personal data management,   myData  . In 2017,   a law  was passed to mandate that Finnish public  services connect to it. Notably,   X-Road   is the first data exchange platform to   automatically exchange data between two countries  (Estonia and Finland)."
"201" "The   Green Button Initiative , originally developed by the United States Department of Energy, was  adopted by Ontario’s Ministry of Energy  to enable consumers of energy access to their ene rgy use data via an open data format and an open API. The latter allows customers to actively grant and revoke access by third parties to their energy use data at  anytime . The open API furthermore ensures data portability so that consumers may choose from  multiple applications and services based on their specific needs."
"202" "In an   Open Smart City ,   it is recognized that data and technology are not always the solution to many of the systemic issues cities face, nor are there always quick fixes. These problems require innovative, sometimes long term, social, organizational, economic, and political proc esses and solutions."
"203" "It is the idea that it is “ not just a ‘right to use technology’, which is precisely where many smart city initiatives stop, but rather the right to shape the city using human initiative and technology for social purposes to make citi es better. ”"
"204" "-   Hollands (2014) ."
"205" "This  Op en Smart City Guide V1.0  recognizes that open smart cities are socio-technological systems and that technology combined with human initiative and vision should benefit and  empower people and social movements. These initiatives are propelled by human values  and principles of accountability, transparency, ethics, equity, openness, human rights, and inclusivity. Thus, we emphasize that efficiency and progress should not be the key drivers for the deployment of smart city technology. Our fifth characteristic of  an Open Smart City would also recognize the right to disconnect and the right to be anonymous in a connected city."
"206" "Concluding Remarks: Limitations & Strengths"
"207" "In this  Open Smart City Guide V1.0  we explain the difference between an Open Smart City and the  contemporary manifestations of the data and networked version of smart cities. We covered quite a bit of ground, and we are also acutely aware that much is missing from this guide. For example, we could have developed the guide to align with the best pract ices pertaining to typical components of a smart city as described in our  smart city environmental-scan (E-Scan)  (e.g., smart buildings, smart energy, and smart mobility). We could have developed principles and guidel ines related to a specific field of technology, such as the autonomous car and robotics. We could also have approached the structure of this report according to a software stack or an IoT service and delivery model. Finally, we could have developed it with  much broader consultation, and each of the 5 characteristics could be research agendas in and of themselves. Thus, we could have sent the guide for consultation with legal, privacy and civil liberties associations, or to software engineers, IoT specialist s, cybersecurity experts, platform architects, database modelers and data scientists, convened with industry associations, standards bodies, alliances and think tanks, or met with community developers, digital rights advocates and a host of makers and civi c technology groups."
"208" "All of that was unfortunately out of project scope, but none are beyond the realm of future possibilities. We did however set a baseline for Open Smart Cities and accomplished the following:"
"209" "We studied smart cities and conducted   a smart city E-Scan   and shared the results in our  first international webinar . We also amassed a large quantity of research literature that will be deposited in a digital repository for futur e examination."
"210" "We then dove deeper and created an  Assessment Report  that included case studies for  four Canadian cities  and the  Ontario Smart Grid . We also gained knowledge about a selection of  International Best Prac tices  and shared these findings in  our second webinar ."
"211" "Thirdly, we collaborated with the  Canadian Internet Policy and Public Interest Clinic (CIPPIC)  on the creation of  an  Open Smart Cities Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ).   This FAQ seeks to answer common legal and regulatory questions about smart city techn ologies."
"212" "In addition, two  masters  students participated in this research and have gone on to pursue their own smart city research agendas."
"213" "Finally, we defined what an Open Smart City might be, which was reviewed among a selection of smart city experts, and  we test drove the ideas at a few events and feedback informed this Open Smart Cities Guide and we disseminated those findings in our third and last webinar."
"214" "We view this  Open Smart City Guide V1.0   as a starter kit  for Open Smart City actors.  We are creating this as a living document that will dynamically grow as more resources become available, and as we receive additional input from stakeholders and experts. This guide could be useful for stakeholders currently sh aping the Sidewalk Labs project in Toronto, and we look forward to the submissions for   Infrastructure Canada’s Smart Cities Challenge  where we may see some Open Smart City examp les."
"215" "We would love to hear your thoughts, critiques and/or be pointed to people, projects, practices and additional resources.  Please feel free to email  info@opennorth.ca  for more information or to provide input."
"216" "Check out the links below for more outp uts from   Open Smart Cities in Canada ."
"217" "Open Smart Cities in Canada: Assessment Report"
"218" "Open Smart Cities in Canada: Executive Summary of Environmental Scan and Case Studies"
"219" "Open Smart Cities FAQ"
"220" "Webinar 1"
"221" "Webinar 2"
"222" "Webinar 3"
"223" "References:"
"224" "“Barcelona City Council ICT Public Procurement Guide”. Open  Digitisation   Programme  from Barcelona City Council’s Office for Technology  and Digital Innovation."
"225" "Edwards, Lilian, and Michael Veale. (2017).  Slave to the Algorithm? Why a “Right to an Explanation” is Probably Not the Remedy You Are Looking For .  Duke Law and Technology Review 16: 18."
"226" "Hollands, Robert G. (2015). Critical interve ntions into the corporate smart city.  Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society , Volume 8, Issue 1, 1, Pages 61–77,  https://doi.org/10.1093/cjres/rsu011 ."
"227" "Kaika , Maria.  ‘Don’t call me resilient  again!’:  the  New Urban Agenda as immunology… or… what happens when communities refuse to be vaccinated with ‘smart cities’ and indicators.  Environment and Urbanization 29, no. 1: 89-102. 2017."
"228" "Kitchin , R. (2016)  Getting smarter about smart cities: Improvi ng data privacy and data security.  Data Protection Unit, Department of the Taoiseach, Dublin, Ireland."
"229" "Kitchin , R. (2015).  Data-driven, networked urbanism .  Programmable City Working Paper 14.   http://www.spatialcomplexity.info/files/2015/08/SSRN-id2641802.pdf ."
"230" "Martínez- Ballest é , A., Pérez-Martínez, P.A. and  Solanas , A. (2013). The Pursuit of Citizens’ Privacy: A Privacy-Aware Smart City Is Possible.  Communications Magazine, IEEE  51(6): 136 – 141."
"231" "Raunio , Mika, Nadja  Nordling ,  Taina   Ketola , Jukka P. Saarinen, and  Anniina   Heinika ngas . (2016).  Open Innovation Platforms: An Approach to City Development.  Tampere: 6Aika."
"232" "Russell, Andrew L. (2014).  Open standards and the digital age . Cambridge University Press."
"233" "UK Cabinet Office. (2012).  All about Open Source: An Introduction to Open  Source Software for Government IT V2.0.   https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/open-source-procurement-toolkit ."
