PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing journalism’s expectations of future publics in its
sociotechnical systems

ABSTRACT
To understand news rhythms, scholars have primarily studied how the rituals and routines of
news organizations align with the practices and expectations of audiences. The rhythms of
today’s networked press, though, are set not only by journalists and consumers, but also by
largely invisible digital infrastructures: software, data, and technologies from outside newsrooms
that are increasingly intertwined with journalistic work. Here, we argue that the rhythms of the
contemporary, networked press live in the materials, practices, and values of hybrid, time-setting
sociotechnical systems, a new concept we call anticipatory news infrastructure. We explicate
this concept through a typology of sociotechnical dynamics, showing how the networked press is
poised to sense events, structure journalistic work, predict and commodify traffic, architect
audience relations, and categorize content. We argue that these infrastructures anticipate
possible public life, thus creating anticipation publics through their largely invisible power to
shape expectations of journalists and audiences alike.

KEYWORDS
Digital online journalism, news production, time, anticipation, infrastructure, sociotechnical
public, press technology

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

1

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

INTRODUCTION
What news does digital journalism expect and how can we see these expectations in its
infrastructures? Highlighted by an “infrastructural turn” in media studies (Plantin and
Punathambekar, 2018; Braun, 2015; Parks and Starosielski, 2015), news is increasingly seen to
emerge not only from the rituals and routines of journalism, but also from a mix of social and
technological forces living in social media, platform designs, online participation cultures,
content commodification, and debates about data, algorithms, and artificial intelligence (van
Dijck et al., 2018). We know that the contemporary, networked press extends far beyond news
organizations, but we know little about how its extensions change how it makes time. Here, we
focus on one type of news time (anticipation), trace its articulation through an illustrative set of
sociotechnical news-making infrastructures, and use these articulations to inductively develop
the novel sensitizing concept (Blumer, 1954) of “anticipatory news infrastructures” that explains
how the online press is prepared for certain kinds of news.
In years past, news emerged from a powerfully structured beat system. News happened
where journalists were pre-positioned, publishers and advertisers had economic interests, and
audiences expected news to be. This system manifested materially: the television camera’s “live
shot” was ready to see news within its frame; White House correspondents were invested in
seeing news come from the executive branch; newspapers’ business sections were poised to see
stock markets, mergers, and economic debates (while few had labor sections covering workers’
rights, collective bargaining, or minimum wage debates). News happened where the press was
ready to see news.

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

2

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

Such organizationally and professionally situated anticipatory journalism continues, but it
has broadened. It is now also intertwined with computational architectures that are often
invisible to audiences and journalists—engineering cultures, proprietary data architectures,
algorithmic designs, and social media platforms. Journalism is ready for some kinds of news
because human and nonhuman actors and forces converge: professional journalists, editorial
standards, platform companies, algorithmic logics, machine learning patterns, advertising
economies, reader attention, brands and reputations, legal interpretations of free speech, and
norms of political participation all converge. Together, this mix of forces creates the conditions
under which online news is defined, produced, circulated, interpreted, and acted upon (Ananny,
2018; Deuze and Witschge, 2017; Chadwick, 2013; Carlson, 2015a; Ananny, 2013; Anderson
and Kreiss, 2013). It is materially predisposed to see—literally able to anticipate—some kinds
of news and some kinds of public life.
We are only beginning to understand how these sociotechnical forces anticipate news, but
we argue here that they are infrastructural. They intertwine computational processing,
journalistic judgment, socially constructed expectations, and normative assumptions about what
public life should concern. In the traditions of interpretive social science that invert and interpret
material infrastructures (Bowker and Star, 1999; Star, 1999) and “black boxes” (Anderson and
Kreiss, 2013; Steen, 2014) in order to discover practices and forms of power that span human
and nonhuman action, we analyze meetings among computation, journalism, temporality, and
publicness to build the “sensitizing concept” (Blumer, 1954) of anticipatory news
infrastructures. A sensitizing concept does not “prove” a theory nor stand as a “definitive
concept.” Rather it “yields a meaningful picture” of a social world by giving “apt illustrations”

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

3

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

of “empirical instances” that a community of interpretation agrees is a useful way of orienting
people to a phenomenon. When aspects of the picture are judged to be wrong, irrelevant, or “not
covered adequately by what the concept asserts and implies,” the concept is revised to be more
analytically useful and give a better picture of empirical dynamics (Blumer, 1954).
We see anticipatory news infrastructures as a sensitizing concept that explains how the
networked press expects, classifies, shapes, and assembles some kinds of news. As our typology
shows, the concept defines a new way of understanding news beats as sociotechnical
arrangements that sense events, structure journalistic work, predict traffic and commodification,
architect audience interactions, and categorize content. To be sure, the concept will no doubt
require revision as new sociotechnical forces of journalism emerge, but the concept offers a way
to see what the networked press sees—to know how it is ready for news and, thus, what kinds of
public life it prepares people for.
NEWS TIME
People’s shared senses of time have both biological and sociological rhythms, reflected in and
structured by time-keeping technologies. Although each person’s physiology is unique, our
common biological features—our bodies rest, heal, age, and die—define a shared foundation for
social time (Flaherty, 1999). Our individual experiences of time are tensions between an
individual drive to define time and the collective power of time-making forces beyond our
control (Flaherty, 2011).
Social understandings of time are reflected in, and structured by, time-keeping
technologies that Peters (2015) calls “logistical media.” Such calendars, public clocks, and

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

4

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

watches denote and connote time, marking its passage and signaling its meaning. They help us
keep time, impose time upon us, and show how people structure and understand time differently.
Calendars are allowed to interrupt to remind us of appointments. Clock towers broadcast time
and convene people with their chimes. Eschewing a wristwatch might suggest our freedom from
time-keeping—a mark of social privilege or a relationship to a physical world—but when we
replace it with a cell phone, we show how persistent time-keeping technologies are, and how
hard it is to escape technologically mediated time. People’s relationships to time-keeping
technologies show how social, political, economic, and technological forces create time, and
which kinds of time—and sociotechnical forces—people wish existed (Sharma, 2014).
Journalism scholars (Gans, 1979; Schudson, 2000; Tuchman, 1973; Usher, 2014) suggest
two broad types of time in news work: inside-out time and outside-in time. Inside-out time
shows journalists own priorities and might include the decision to issue a breaking news alert,
conserve resources and halt a long-term investigation, accelerate reporting to avoid being
scooped by a rival, or update a story to maintain the appearance of novelty (making news look
fresh to advertisers and search engines alike). Outside-in time comes from beyond the
newsroom. A government’s morning press briefing can drive a day’s news cycle; a natural
disaster may reorient coverage for days or weeks; election campaigns reorient news
organizations toward politics for months; quarterly reports, monthly employment statistics, and
State of the Union addresses are all highly anticipated, ritualized staples of journalism that set
reporting rhythms.
Tensions between inside-out time (a deadline) and outside-in time (a crisis) surface when
news organizations need to coordinate labor, maintain revenue-earning rhythms, and manage

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

5

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

audiences’ expectations. The press’s collective focus on recency and novelty (Bell, 1995) can
make journalists feel a constant pressure to work faster, produce more stories, and stay connected
to more information sources in case one sparks a story. Among “digital first” journalists, this
“intensification” (Cohen, 2018: 10) manifests as an expectation to constantly monitor social
media and create a personal system of alerts, to guard against the fear that something
newsworthy has escaped attention. Reporters say they feel pressured to extend their work hours,
blend their personal and professional information practices, and have content constantly visible
and circulating online (Cohen, 2018; Usher, 2018; Bødker and Brügger, 2017; Örnebring, 2010).
Journalists need to set time for audiences and give them a constant sense of novelty, but they also
need to be ever-ready for news that might come from an increasingly large number of places—
they need temporal coping mechanisms to organize time, set expectations, and anticipate news.
ANTICIPATORY NEWS
News both marks time (yesterday’s news is old, today’s news is relevant, year-end reviews
define eras) and manages expectations (journalists guess and predict what might happen
tomorrow). But managing beliefs about future events creates thorny conundrums for journalists
schooled in traditions of objectivity. If they use their own judgments of importance, relevance,
and likelihood to get ready for news that has not yet happened, how can they claim to be neutral
observers of worlds that contain truth? Where do journalists get their authority to report on the
future? Anticipation shows journalistic values. Tracing journalists’ assumptions about the
future is a way to see journalists own interpretations of which past events they think were most
significant and might recur. Gauging journalists’ expectations about the future is a way to see

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

6

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

what kind of autonomy they think they have from the past and the future—how they see their
freedom from history and expectations as they try to focus on present news.
Neiger and Tenenboim-Weinblatt (2016) show how journalists anticipate by making
three kinds of future: updating, analysis, and projection. Grounded in a sense of the immediate
future, updating concerns events that have just happened, that currently hold journalists’ and
audiences’ attention, and that beg the question “what happened next?” Analysis is similarly
rooted in past events, but it focuses on the potential significance of events, on what power an
event might have to shape future events. Projection is the most precarious genre of future,
relying on journalists’ own judgments about long-term trends, how events can exemplify or
challenge trends, and what kinds of analogies or comparisons audiences see as plausible. In each
genre, journalists ground speculations both in the past and in norms about which futures they and
audiences see as reasonable, significant, likely, or publicly relevant. Together, they are a
“subjunctive voice” (Zelizer, 2010) that strays from simply reporting on past events and invites
audiences to ask “what if?”
Anticipation genres are publicly powerful when they help audiences imagine some
futures over others. Sonnevend (2018) sees journalistic imagination in reporters’ willingness to
elevate mundane moments into journalistic events that sustain ongoing reporting. If audiences
see these speculations as relevant, they give journalists, public officials, and advertisers
permission for anticipating (Neiger, 2007). Journalists can prepare audiences for futures that
they see as relevant to their vision of the public and its needs. Such power can have limits,
though. When journalistic anticipation prevents audiences from seeing or feeling any other
futures than those that the media predicts—such as the press’s inability to imagine anything other

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

7

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

than a US-led war following the 9/11 attacks (Grusin, 2010)—journalism shows how its
anticipations can help to create outcomes. If people cannot imagine being a member of any
public other than the one that the press expects, then journalism exerts a power to create social
life, not just report on it.
ANTICIPATION AS SOCIOTECHNICAL INFRASTUCTURE
In an essay analyzing time in professional journalism, Schudson argues that
‘timeliness’ in news is defined in practice not only by the recency of a reported
event but by its coincidence with the searchlight of the journalistic institution.
‘Timeliness’ operates not by Greenwich mean time but by a cultural clock, a
subtle and unspoken understanding among journalists about what is timely and
what events are genuinely ‘new.’” (Schudson, 1986: 82)
This “cultural clock” reflects journalism’s temporal investments. As it organizes audience
attention and ritualizes its own production practices it makes stable ontological categories like
“breaking”, “old”, or “public” that become inseparable from journalism’s sociotechnical
infrastructures. For example, television journalism’s “live shot” (Katz, 1992) trains a camera
somewhere that may not be newsworthy at precisely that moment, but it points somewhere
journalists expect news to be. Its assemblage of cameras, satellites, cables, camera operators,
journalists, subjects, and competitors is organized to anticipate news—to see potential, novelty,
suspense, and newsworthiness there and then (Tenenboim-Weinblatt and Neiger, 2017). This
infrastructural encoding of journalistic anticipation reframes the press’s traditional beat system
as a sociotechnical assemblage. News appears not just where reporters and sources are
positioned, but where news infrastructure is trained to look. Beats and infrastructures can
defend journalists against charges of bias—it is the world not reporters that triggers stories and

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

8

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

holds audiences—but, when viewed critically, they can also reveal patterns of interest,
systematic inclusion and exclusion, and habits of expectation that elide unchallenged
assumptions about what news might appear if beats and infrastructures looked elsewhere and
otherwise.
What does it mean for sociotechnical phenomena like anticipatory journalism to be
infrastructural? Star and Bowker (2006) define infrastructure as enabling, networked, routinized,
and often invisible relationships among people and materials that are embedded in culturally
maintained practices. Infrastructures ensure that particular kinds of work can be coordinated,
standardized, and relied upon, and they do so with an understanding that our perception of
infrastructure always depends on our position within a network of people and materials.
Depending on your view, expertise, and investments, infrastructure is something that is
foregrounded and struggled over, or backgrounded and assumed to function. Infrastructure “is
both the thing and the story. It is the transparent and the spectacular. It is seamless in its
operation and can be disastrous in its failure.” (Parks, 2015: 115)
Infrastructures that appear to be seamless often only become visible and salient when
they break down. Unless you are a computer technician, facilities supervisor, or train engineer,
the relationships among people and machines that sustain servers, furnaces, and railroads are
largely invisible to you, and very likely part of a sociotechnical environment you assume exists
and works reliably. These assumptions are rich starting points for learning about sociotechnical
power—for doing “infrastructural inversions” (Bowker, 1994) that turn infrastructures insideout, question the assumptions that built them, highlight the practices and values that maintain
them, and illustrate the types of power they advance (Larkin, 2008; Nye, 2007).

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

9

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

Infrastructures are simultaneously social processes, materialized images of the future, and
strategies for managing possible outcomes. By creating stable, invisible, assumed relationships
between people and materials, infrastructures anticipate, enabling some practices and outcomes.
Jasanoff (2015) sees anticipation playing out in social imaginaries that “collectively held,
institutionally stabilized, and publicly performed visions of desirable futures, animated by shared
understandings of forms of social life and social order attainable through, and supportive of,
advances in science and technology.” Performing and animating such imaginaries appears in
seemingly mundane anticipation work: “practices that cultivate and channel expectations of the
future, design pathways into those imaginations, and maintain those visions in the face of a
dynamic world.” (Steinhardt and Jackson, 2015: 443) And controlling this dynamic world is a
key motivation of anticipation; envisioning and preparing for futures is a key “strategy for
managing uncertainty.” If work, materials, expectations, and outcomes can all be aligned
through stabilized, predictable relationships, those relationships become a type of disciplinary
power that curbs desire and makes repression unnecessary (Foucault, 1980). People will
“internalise regimes of anticipation through technical practices” (Mackenzie, 2013: 391) and
self-police the radical, chaotic, unpredictable forces that challenge expectations. Subversive
forces can be blunted with “hope(s) for a future conceptualized, produced, distributed,
consumed, and invisibled.” (Clarke, 2016: 86)
Such anticipation work is political and affective because it shows which kinds of
freedom, self-realizations, and security people can imagine, what kinds of influences they expect
to be under, what they can reasonably expect, and what they must guard against (Adams et al.,
2009). Affective anticipation is a particularly powerful stance that plays out in emergency

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

10

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

preparedness and planning as centralized powers inculcate in people “anticipatory states” (Choi,
2015) that teach them how to imagine governing themselves in a crisis. Drills create
“atmospheres and sensibilities” that move people “outside of their comfort zone,” (Anderson and
Adey, 2011: 1101) force the “suspension of normal habits,” (1102), and create an emotionally
charged “interval” or “tensed time-space where disaster is not-yet, action is demanded, decisions
are weighted with consequence, and action is animated by necessity and urgency.” (1105)
Planning tries to create “affective equivalence” (1105, italics in original) between a drill and an
imagined future. Anticipatory infrastructures are successfully when they can create this
equivalence, making futures that can be imagined, felt as real, and governed.
DIMENSIONS OF ANTICIPATORY NEWS INFRASTRUCTURES
With these understandings—that networked news time is a sociomaterial negotiation between
outside-in and inside-out forces, that news anticipation reveals journalism’s temporal judgements
and investments, and that anticipatory power can be read through infrastructural relations—we
now present an emerging typology of anticipatory news infrastructures and conclude by
reflecting on their public significance.
We build this typology as a way to develop the sensitizing concept of anticipatory news
infrastructures by analogizing across cases (Vaughan, 2014) and building concepts through
abductive analysis (Timmermans and Tavory, 2012). Our empirical work is based in a corpus of
trade press discussions of digital journalism practices and innovations (from 2010-2018) that
Carlson (2015b) defines as “metajournalistic discourse,” preliminary semi-structured interviews
with journalists and news organization technologists, and our own close readings of news
organizations’ infrastructures—our own effort to conduct an “ethnography of infrastructure” by
Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

11

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

“inverting” sociotechnical relationships (Star, 1999) and purposefully attending to the “wider
relations” that uniquely characterize digital objects of study (Marres, 2017), instead of
prematurely limiting their roles. To “un-blackbox” the closed, commercial infrastructures we
aimed to explain, we drew upon the innovative frameworks of the “walkthrough method” (Light
et al., 2016), algorithms as culture (Seaver, 2017), and algorithmic audits of journalistic systems
(Diakopoulos, 2015). These methods of “seeing” infrastructure helped us to identify and
understand the logics of the temporalities at work in digital journalism.
We see five anticipatory dynamics in the systems news organizations use to create,
interpret, and circulate news: event sensing; work structuring; traffic and commodification
prediction; architecting audience interactions; and content categorization. We briefly summarize
each dimension and illustrate its articulation through news infrastructures.
Sensing Events
News organizations imagine and prepare to attend to events through computational, data-based
relationships to non-news organizations. That is, journalism defines “events” through a
constellations of actors, relationships, data, thresholds, and imagined consequences that,
together, determine whether a context is newsworthy enough for reporting resources, advertising
investment, and audience attention. News organizations create assemblages of human and
nonhuman actors—including data from other organizations—to read signals thought to be
potentially relevant, derive events from those signals, and translate those events into traditional,
human-readable news stories.

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

12

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

For example, the Los Angeles Times’s QuakeBot system is primed to generate news
stories on California earthquakes that have been sensed by the United States Geological Survey
(USGS). When the USGS’s statewide network of geo-sensors (sensors it maintains in
partnership with CalTech and University of California Berkeleyi) detects a seismic event, it
sends an email to its subscribers, including the Los Angeles Times. The Times parses the USGS
email for the quake’s time, location, magnitude, and impact area, and uses this information to
populate the fields of a pre-drafted story template and publish the story to its website and Twitter
feed. QuakeBot’s rules assign “adjectives like ‘powerful’ or ‘weak’ depending on magnitude
and ‘shallow’ or ‘deep’ depending on depth.” (Meyer, 2014). The Times’ infrastructure—
servers, software, reporter labor, publishing platforms—are only engaged when the USGS’s
infrastructure— sensors, scientists, alerts, email list—is triggered. What results is an article that
quickly tells the Times’s audiences what the Times-USGS data assemblage knows, in the familiar
language of an event-driven news story. The result looks simple, but it depends upon a complex
and mutually triggered set of sensors, alerts, thresholds, and pre-determined journalistic
judgments that has been trained to anticipate a data context as a newsworthy event. Los Angeles
public radio station KPCC maintains a complementary website “Earthquake Tracker” that,
similarly, draws on USGS data (through application programming interface instead of an email)
to catalogue and visualize seismic events that KPCC’s programmers have decided are significant
and relevant to its audience (Take Two, 2014). Like QuakeBot, in conjunction with USGS data
sensors and information stores, Earthquake Tracker anticipates events and creates publicly
familiar news stories.

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

13

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

Relying on different data assemblages, other systems like CityBeat, Tracer, and NewsBot
similarly anticipate and detect newsworthy events. Designed through collaboration among
journalists, user interface designers, and data scientists, CityBeat monitors Twitter and Instagram
for data signals that journalists see as potentially newsworthy: text and imagery, particular
keywords, geotags of certain areas, and posts that have been shared or commented upon rapidly
in a short period of time. The system creates a “detected events” list where journalists can get
ideas for stories, sources, and interviewees (Schwartz et al., 2015). By algorithmically reading
social media data for patterns that journalists define as newsworthy, CityBeat formalizes and
automates the anticipation of events that might be relevant and worthy of reporting time and
audience attention.
Similarly, Reuters Tracer system was designed “to automatically detect global breaking
news.” (Liu et al., 2016: 216) It monitors English-language tweets for 16 topics that the
International Press Telecommunications Council defines as newsworthy.ii It then ranks and
clusters tweets, assigns newsworthiness and verification scores (based on Tracer’s
operationalizations of journalists’ news judgments), and extracts what it defines as newsworthy,
verified events. Like CityBeat, Tracer embeds journalists’ expectations of high-quality,
newsworthy events that might emerge from social media, creating an infrastructure for
anticipation.
Finally, Quartz’s NewsBot is a Slack-based platform that news organizations can
customize to detect newsworthy events. NewsBot monitors any data stream for pre-determined
key words and patterns that journalists see as potentially newsworthy. Instead of centralizing
event prediction within a single event-detection algorithm (like CityBeat and Tracer), NewsBot

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

14

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

lets news organizations create their data monitors, decide what they see as relevant, and set their
own thresholds and patterns for detecting events.
Taken together, these systems—QuakeBot, Earthquake Tracker, CityBeat, Tracer, and
NewsBot—show a data-driven approach to sensing newsworthy events that extends far beyond
any single newsroom. The predictive capacity of these systems depends on the stability of
myriad data sets and platforms not intended to be part of news work, and on relationships,
sensors, patterns, and thresholds that collectively formalize and codify journalistic anticipation.
Structuring Journalistic Work
Some anticipatory news infrastructures are designed not only to sense events, but to organize and
report on events that have already been identified. They work within events to structure
engagement, offering evidence of what journalists expect to happen and what roles they see
themselves playing. Three fact-checking infrastructures designed for news events in which
sources are expected to state misinformation illustrate the infrastructural dynamics of anticipated
event engagement.
For example, NPR created an infrastructure to fact-check the 2016 US presidential
debates in real-time. They used a real-time transcription service (Verb8tm) to generate text of
the candidates’ statements, populated a Google doc with this text, and created and pretested a
workflow to coordinate 18 fact-checking reporters annotating a single document in real-time.
NPR published its fact-checking in near real-time: after copyediting the transcript and
annotations, and with editorial approval, the fact-checker’s annotations were converted to

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

15

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

HTML, and published not only to NPR’s own website but also to the websites of member and
partner stations across the country (Fisher, 2016).
Inspired by NPR’s live annotation of President Trump’s press conference, Vox Media
also designed an infrastructure to fact-check the president’s 2017 State of the Union address in
real-time, though they published their annotations shortly after the event ended. Using the
OpenCaption system—a service that instantly shares CSPAN event transcripts over the web—
Vox engineers automatically populated a Google Doc with a transcript of the president’s speech
as it was delivered (not the prepared text). Vox journalists designed and practiced a workflow
they expected to follow during the address—how to annotate, what terminology and identifiers to
use, which team members would play which roles—so multiple journalists could simultaneously
annotate the Google Doc (Passarelli et al., 2017). The Vox and NPR infrastructures anticipated
the news: work practices were encoded and coordinated through technologies; hybrid
communities of journalists and engineers formed communities of practice that standardized
workflows and set success expectations; the systems were extensible beyond a single event; and
other sociotechnical contexts (e.g., transcription services and Google docs) were enrolled into the
systems. News organizations imagined an event through these intertwined, infrastructural
materials and practices which structured their coverage, reduced risks of error, bounded work
within a time period and set of events that they expected would need fact-checking, and invested
in sociotechnical relationships that could be reused for future, similar events.
Another approach to anticipatory fact-checking infrastructure builds upon these two.
Envisioned by Duke University’s “Tech & Check Cooperative,” and led by PolitFact founder
Bill Adair, the FactStream system combines and leverages existing fact-checking systems into a

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

16

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

“holy grail” of real-time, automated claim verification. Though not yet fully operational,
FactStream combines ClaimBuster (a tool that “mines lengthy transcripts for claims that factcheckers might want to examine”), the Internet Archive’s “Talking Point Tracker” (that flags
claims repeatedly made by particular politicians), TruthGoggles (a system to automatically
evaluate the veracity of online news articles), Digital Democracy (a project to extract claims
from government videos), and a proprietary database of claims and fact-checks that the
partnership does not disclose (Schmidt, 2018). Although it still needing manual processing by
fact-checkers, FactStream debuted a prototype at the 2018 US Presidential State of the Union
address, as a first attempt to knit together various fact-checking architectures and practices. Its
shows how an assemblage anticipates and structure works by enrolling (Callon, 1986) humans
and nonhumans into a network of relations.
All three systems make assumptions about where misinformation originates, the events
that amplify it, countermeasures needed, and the effect of fact-checking on audiences. No
system, for example, involves audiences or crowdsources fact-checking, anticipates or
incorporates campaigns’ responses to fact-checking, or questions the idea that fact-checking
improves political discourse. These anticipatory news infrastructures see and define
misinformation events in particular ways, creating a scope of sociotechnical action out of which
solutions are expected to emerge and be successful.
Predicting Traffic and Commodification
Although many online news organizations earn revenue through a mix of subscriptions,
memberships, grants, and crowdfunding, publishers largely agree that the economics of online
news require them to aggressively pursue, retain, and predict audiences’ attention, both on their
Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

17

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

own websites and in larger social media environments of platforms and apps. To varying
degrees and through different methods, news organizations monitor and try to predict audiences’
preferences—tracking what they like, share, comment on, and spend time with—so that they
might identify potential markets for personalized coverage and targeted advertisementsiii. Such
modeling can then drive myriad decisions. News organizations can better guess which topics,
headlines, ledes, media, and publication rhythms will translate into reader loyalty, new
subscribers, and advertiser value.
Analytics dashboards produced by companies like Google, Adobe, Omniture, and
Chartbeat now populate many newsrooms and are key sites of prediction. Journalists’
relationships to such dashboards reveal newsroom expectations about which stories are expected
to trend, which traffic predictions can be trusted, which patterns fail to materialize Petre (2015);
Petre (2018), and how resistance against dashboard algorithmic predictions show journalists own
understandings of audiences and their professional ethics (Christin, Forthcoming).
While newsrooms often use dashboards to understand their sites’ past traffic flows and
patterns (Petre, 2015) they also use analytics predictively. They use traffic data infrastructures to
guess how traffic might flow if they were to make some publishing decisions versus others. An
early example of this was Visual Revenueiv, software that tracked “story views and headline
clickthroughs in real time and compare[d] them to historical benchmarks.” It would recommend
to editors the “best stories to put in each page position for optimal traffic in the near future,”
promising to “take any piece of content created over the last day or 2 days…and model how well
that’s going to perform in any given position about 15 minutes into the future.” (Sonderman,
2011) Similarly, JumpTime’s “Traffic Valuator” system finds the path through a website that is

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

18

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

most likely to generate the greatest amount of advertising revenue. By anticipating which pages
a visitor is likely to view, and in which order, advertising can be dynamically displayed and
updated to generate the best advertising exposure and the most website revenue (Sonderman,
2011). Combining this power to predict traffic and direct click-paths with the dynamically
written headlines and ledes that generate views, what emerges is a network of code, prediction
models, advertising valuations, and user actions that, together, create an anticipatory news
infrastructure that can optimize the commodification of news website traffic. The Washington
Post even recently disclosed that it had run a “popularity prediction experiment”: it built
regression models to learn which story features and website conditionsv, for which readers,
correlated with the most popular news stories. It then used this model to predict which stories
were likely to attract reader engagement, helping editors to “more efficiently allocate resources
to support a better reading experience and richer story package.” (Wang and Han, 2017)
As with architectures for sensing events and prefiguring engagement, systems for
predicting traffic and commodification are infrastructural. They are software codifications of
operationalizations that automate analysis, often with little oversight or understanding of the
automation. They are not simply neutral tools but are inextricably intertwined with journalists’
senses of what it means to know an audience and predict its preferences, while still retaining
editorial autonomy and doing more than responding to audience expectations. And they show
how a community of practice—a newsroom—is actually a convergence of practices and values
that originates outside of journalism from companies like Google and ChartBeat, while
ultimately aligning with and seamlessly routinizing within journalistic work.
Architecting Audience Interactions

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

19

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

There are also aesthetic and experiential aspects to anticipatory news infrastructures that
publishers use to create user experiences and nurture relationships with audiences. In these
dimensions, news organizations imagine and predict which interactions will sustain audience
engagement, embedding into infrastructure the relationships that publishers think audiences will
want, need, or value.
For example, news organizations use interface design techniques to sense whether a
reader is about to leave their site, intervening before she (and her advertising revenue) can exit.
Holding a reader’s attention amidst a surfeit of potential information attractions is a general
challenge, but the specific goal of sensing a reader’s wandering gaze leaves clues about how
news organizations anticipate and codify engagement. Time.com, NBCNews.com and
LATimes.com, for example, used a “continuous scroll” design to ensure that users would never
experience an end. Instead, after finishing an article, they would immediately be shown the next
story, and so on, in the hopes that an unbroken trail of content without boundaries from one story
to the next would build readers’ anticipation and dissuade them from leaving. Time.com
reported a drop in its “bounce rate—the percentage of visitors who leave the site after viewing
only one page”—of 15% (Kirkland, 2014: , np). The “continuous scroll” becomes an
infrastructural element—grounded in a material design, a model of human practice, and a desired
outcome—that makes the story a site of anticipation and blurs its beginning and end, delicately
recasting it as something that both satisfies and promises more to come. The New Yorker takes a
complementary approach, but accepts the inevitability of user departures and tries to make it
easy for them to come back. The site tries to guess when a user is about to leave the site--e.g., if
a user stops scrolling down a page, or starts quickly scrolling back and forth—and intervenes

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

20

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

with either another story that designers hope might retain their attention, or a pop-up notification
(Lichterman, 2015a: np)
In contrast, the Economist aims to give readers a “sense of completion” that calms their
fears of not “being completely informed.” By not linking to other news sites within stories,
clearly visualizing an story’s end, and publishing dense articles meant to convey gravitas and
exhaustiveness (Ingram, 2015: np), it tries to counter a reader’s expectation that there is more to
be learned beyond what The Economist has told them. The Economist designs toward the point
of completion, anticipating what is needed to make readers feel sated. The more successfully it
can predict what satiation feels like, the better it can make readers expect and want nothing more.
Two other architectures show how news sites try to anticipate and satisfy readers. First,
knowing that they would make future errors in their stories, the NPR created a feature for its
mobile app that informs listeners of corrections. When a correction was significant enough—
significance being an editorial judgment that had to be anticipated and codified—the app
“determined who had heard the original segment...[and] emailed the correction to that list of
users.” (LaFrance, 2017: 23) NPR wanted an ongoing relationship with listeners, anticipated that
they could earn listeners’ trust by planning for a moment it considered likely (issuing a
correction), and encoded that anticipation in an architecture (significance thresholds triggering
corrections and messages to a dynamically updated email list).
Another class of anticipatory interactions are emerging around news alerts (Brown,
2017). In 24/7 online news cycles with few regularly scheduled convenings—most people no
longer gather around any version of the six-o’clock news—and itinerant online traffic spanning
global time zones, news organizations must plan when to interrupt audiences with breaking news
Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

21

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

alerts. Planning interruptions entails some version of the following: publishers identify a class of
topics or events that may warrant a breaking news alert, they build infrastructures and practice
workflows for producing alerts, they issue alerts, gauge audience reactions to them, and adjust
their technologies and practices according to how well they have anticipated people’s
sensitivities and thresholds for newsworthiness in crowded and noisy online news environments.
Nearly every online news organization has some version of an alert infrastructure that
represents what they expect to happen, and what they anticipate audiences wanting. NBC’s
“Breaking News” combined editorial judgment with social media observation to issue mobile
pre-alerts that “notify users that a story could evolve into a major story,” (Lichterman, 2015b) in
part by sensing a user’s location and guessing whether the event is close enough to be of interest
(Ellis, 2014). The Washington Post designed a system to anticipate what other news
organizations will do, algorithmically judging the similarity and quality of competitors’ alerts to
help guide their own reporters’ work and their own audience’s expectations. The Guardian’s
Mobile Innovation Lab experimented with an alert system tailored to readers’ interests and
emotional preferences. They automatically detected the sentiment of future events, aligned those
sentiments with user preferences, and dynamically adjusted the language and frequency of their
alerts (Bilton, 2016). Though they differ in their approaches to timeliness, automation,
thresholds of significance, and definitions of success NPR (Jensen, 2018), the New York Times
(Spayd, 2016), BuzzFeed (Lichterman, 2017a), and the Wall Street Journal (Lichterman, 2017b)
all have similar teams anticipating the contexts and preferences of readers, building
infrastructures that can automatically alert and orient audiences to events that journalists expect
to be newsworthy.

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

22

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

Categorizing Content
Finally, a seemingly innocuous but significant dimension of anticipatory news infrastructure
entails managing indexes that refer to news and stabilize its circulation. Most story indexes are
static and stable (web address that do not change and always point to the same story), but some
anticipate changes and point to different content at different times. When journalists expect
updates and when ledes are unstable, web addresses become places to see which events news
organizations anticipate responding to, and how stories are expected to change.
For example, if a reader went to the New York Times URL
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/31/us/politics/donald-trump-mexico.html at 9:33am PT on August

30, 2016, she would have seen a story headlined “What to Watch For on Donald Trump’s Visit
to Mexico and Immigration Speech” with speculations on “what is expected to be the most
frenzied—and perhaps the most important—day of his campaign.” If she revisited the same
URL at 8:44am the next day, she would have seen a story describing what happened on the visit,
how the speech had been received. The earlier story anticipating the visit had disappeared,
replaced with an account of what happened. Rather than being a stable index to a story, the URL
became a more dynamic referent—a single container for what journalists expected, and then an
account of what happened. The counter, though, only referred to one time period or another—
there was no relationship between the anticipation and the reporting.
Partly as a response to the expectation that publishers change articles without warning or
documentation, the NewsDiff (2012) system was designed to monitor news websites for story
changes and show users story versions. But NewsDiff is not indexing all news, it anticipates
salient or track-worthy changes coming from a small set of five publishers—it only anticipates
Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

23

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

important changes coming from those sites. By giving a consistent URL to a changing story that
itself is anticipating a future event, journalistic institutions encode assumptions about story arcs
into technical infrastructure. Projects such as NewsDiff anticipate that a URL’s content will
change and try to guard against invisible updates by documenting story variations.
The Sunlight Foundation’s (2016) Politwoops system is premised in a similar expectation
of change, and preserves politicians’ deleted tweets for the public record. (The URLs of deleted
tweets would simply show that a tweet was deleted, but its content would be lost if not archived.)
A seemingly simple goal—maintaining URL content—reveals both an expectation (that
politicians regret and delete tweets) and a normative goal (that regretted and deleted tweets
should be archived and available). Just as the stability of the Times’s URLs show whether
journalists see updates as significant enough for a new URL—making it impossible for readers to
see afterward what the Times thought Trump was going to say, without using NewsDiff—
Politwoops sees all URLs as worthy of preservation and anticipates index instabilities.
Politwoops expects online change and tries to stabilize sources so that they might be reliable
resources for future journalists.

CONCLUSION
Today’s news happens not just where journalists are ready to see news happening, but where
news infrastructures have been designed to look. Part of appreciating the myriad forces and
values of the contemporary networked press means understanding how infrastructures of humans

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

24

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

(journalists, designers, audiences) and nonhumans (data sets, algorithms, interfaces), together,
construct ways of seeing social worlds and translating those visions into familiar forms of news.
We suggest a new concept—anticipatory infrastructures—as an analytical and
empirical container for understanding how future imaginaries are embedded in sociotechnical
infrastructure. Anticipatory news infrastructures in particular articulate where news comes from
by encoding—in intertwined materials, practices, values—ways of seeing, interpreting,
interacting with, and resisting the contingencies of the networked press. These infrastructures
model online attention, prepare for outcomes, prefigure engagements with events and audiences,
and show how the networked press tries to navigate an uneasy balance of reporting on worlds
that are versus preparing for worlds that might be.
Although not an exhaustive typology (future infrastructures will undoubtedly reveal
new anticipatory dynamics), we suggest that the networked press anticipates events, event
engagements, online traffic and commodification, user experiences and relationships, and news
content variations. Together, these modes of anticipation show how journalism: continues to see
the world in terms of beats (now situated in organizational routines and infrastructural designs);
manages uncertainty and mitigates risk by using infrastructures to organize its labor and allocate
its resources; and, most fundamentally, creates new kinds of anticipatory publics by predicting—
through infrastructure—information flows, social entanglements, and normative priorities.
That is, infrastructures do not just circulate news, they assemble publics (Ananny,
2018; Finn, 2018)— subjects are imagined and publics are convened through modes of
anticipation. The five modes of anticipation we describe here draw on and articulate different
imaginations of “anticipated publics.” By expecting and planning for relationships between
people and data, practices and values, anticipatory infrastructures can be future-oriented
Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

25

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

conventions that make it more or less possible to see some social relationships and some
collective issues over others. As Grusin (2010) showed how premediation can make some
futures more or less imaginable, anticipatory infrastructures suggest how some publics—
convened, for example, through anticipatory news infrastructures—may be more or less
realizable.
Anticipatory news infrastructures seem to see publics in two ways. First, they see
readers as attention that can be captured, investments and connections that can be convened and
oriented toward some issues, relationships, and outcomes versus others. Second, anticipatory
news infrastructures try to stabilize and fix news, expecting that there are pre-existing publics
that need to be informed, nurtured, and reassured in online environments that are dynamic, not
always truthful, and intertwined with cultures and practices of social platforms driven by values
other than journalism. If news organizations can know audiences well enough—through
infrastructures—to trace them and their desires, then they can do the public service that
normatively set them apart from other information organizations: they can show support
democratic self-governance, show people which goods and challenges are inextricably shared,
and what kinds of interventions need collective action – the journalist-technologists building the
networked press can help turn audiences into publics. This kind of value-driven infrastructure
design may take journalism away from its familiar terrain of objectivity and distanced reporting,
but a networked press that has encoded its anticipatory infrastructures with public values has the
potential to create publics.
The key, though, is to know the logics of anticipatory news infrastructures, what
futures they see and create, and which sociotechnical interventions steer infrastructures closer to
or further from ideal publics. As new types of technologies continue to emerge—artificial
Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

26

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society

intelligence, virtual reality, Internet of Things—and journalists take up these technologies, it will
become imperative to interrogate their role within news infrastructures, to understand what kinds
of events and outcomes they see, and what kinds of social relations they create. In proposing the
general idea of anticipatory infrastructures—and anticipatory news infrastructures in particular—
our aim is to suggest a concept that might become a diagnostic, a way of understanding
anticipation as a publicly powerful idea.

REFERENCES
Adams V, Murphy M and Clarke AE. (2009) Anticipation: Technoscience, life, affect, temporality.
Subjectivity 28: 246-265.
Ananny M. (2013) Press-public collaboration as infrastructure: Tracing news organizations and
programming publics in application programming interfaces. American Behavioral Scientist 57:
623-642.
Ananny M. (2018) Networked press freedom: Creating infrastructures for a public right to hear,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Anderson B and Adey P. (2011) Affect and Security: Exercising Emergency in ‘UK Civil Contingencies’.
Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 29: 1092-1109.
Anderson CW and Kreiss D. (2013) Black boxes as capacities for and constraints on action: Electoral
politics, journalism, and devices of representation. Qualitative Sociology 36: 365-382.
Bell A. (1995) News time. Time & Society 4: 305-328.
Bilton R. (2016) The Guardian is experimenting with interactive, auto-updating push alerts to cover big
stories. Available at: http://www.niemanlab.org/2016/06/the-guardian-is-experimenting-withinteractive-auto-updating-push-alerts-to-cover-big-stories/.
Blumer H. (1954) What is Wrong with Social Theory? American Sociological Review 19: 3-10.
Bødker H and Brügger N. (2017) The shifting temporalities of online news: The Guardian’s website from
1996 to 2015. Journalism 0: 1464884916689153.
Bowker GC. (1994) Science on the run: Information management and industrial geophysics at
Schlumberger, 1920-1940, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bowker GC and Star SL. (1999) Sorting things out: Classification and its consequences, Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press.
Braun JA. (2015) This program is brought to you by: Distributing television news online, New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press.
Brown PD. (2017) Pushed beyond breaking: US newsrooms use mobile alerts to define their brand.
Available at: https://academiccommons.columbia.edu/doi/10.7916/D8NC771Q.
Callon M. (1986) Some elements of a sociology of translation: domestication of the scallops and the
fishermen of St Brieuc Bay. In: Law J (ed) Power, action and belief: A new sociology of
knowledge. London, UK: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 196-233.

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

27

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society
Carlson M. (2015a) The many boundaries of journalism. In: Carlson M and Lewis SC (eds) Boundaries of
journalism: Professionalism, practices and participation. New York, NY: Routledge, 1-18.
Carlson M. (2015b) Metajournalistic discourse and the meanings of journalism: Definitional control,
boundary work, and legitimation. Communication Theory: n/a-n/a.
Chadwick A. (2013) The hybrid media system: Politics and power, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Choi VY. (2015) Anticipatory States: Tsunami, War, and Insecurity in Sri Lanka. Cultural Anthropology
30: 286-309.
Christin A. (Forthcoming) Metrics at Work: How Web Journalists Make Sense of their Algorithmic
Publics in the United States and France, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Clarke AE. (2016) Anticipation work: Abduction, simplification, hope. In: Bowker GC, Timmermans S,
Clarke AE, et al. (eds) Boundary objects and beyond: Working with Leigh Star. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 85-120.
Cohen NS. (2018) At work in the digital newsroom. Digital Journalism: 1-21.
Deuze M and Witschge T. (2017) Beyond journalism: Theorizing the transformation of journalism.
Journalism 19: 165-181.
Diakopoulos N. (2015) Algorithmic accountability: Journalistic investigation of computational power
structures. Digital Journalism 3: 398-415.
Ellis J. (2014) The notification knows where you are: Breaking News debuts news alerts tied to your
location. Available at: http://www.niemanlab.org/2014/06/the-notification-knows-where-you-arebreaking-news-debuts-news-alerts-tied-to-your-location/.
Finn M. (2018) Documenting Aftermath: Information Infrastructures in the Wake of Disasters
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fisher T. (2016) How NPR transcribes and fact-checks the debates, live. Available at:
https://source.opennews.org/articles/how-npr-transcribes-and-fact-checks-debates-live/.
Flaherty MG. (1999) A watched pot: How we experience time, New York, NY: New York University
Press.
Flaherty MG. (2011) The textures of time: Agency and temporal experience, Philadelphia, PA: Temple
University Press.
Foucault M. (1980) Power/knowledge: Selected interviews and other writings 1972-1977, New York,
NY: Pantheon.
Gans H. (1979) Deciding what's news, New York, NY: Vintage.
Grusin R. (2010) Premediation: Affect and mediality after 9/11, New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
Ingram M. (2015) The Economist wants to sell you the illusion of completeness. Available at:
http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:VAZwlAvrwxIJ:www.mathewingram.co
m/work/2015/04/01/the-economist-wants-to-give-you-a-sense-of-completeness-even-if-thats-anillusion/.
Jasanoff S. (2015) Future imperfect. In: Jasanoff S and Kim S-H (eds) Dreamscapes of Modernity:
Sociotechnical Imaginaries and the Fabrication of Power. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press, 1-33.
Jensen E. (2018) You call that breaking news? Available at:
https://www.npr.org/sections/ombudsman/2018/05/18/611994190/you-call-that-breaking-news.
Katz E. (1992) The end of journalism? Notes on watching the war. Journal of Communication 42: 5-13.
Kirkland S. (2014) Time.com’s bounce rate down 15 percentage points since adopting continuous scroll.
Available at: https://www.poynter.org/reporting-editing/2014/time-coms-bounce-rate-down-15percentage-points-since-adopting-continuous-scroll/.
LaFrance A. (2017) All the News That’s Fit for Me. Nieman Reports 71: 20-27.
Larkin B. (2008) Signal and noise: Media, infrastructure, and urban culture in Nigeria: Duke University
Press Books.

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

28

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society
Lichterman J. (2015a) Can’t finish a New Yorker story online? Available at:
http://www.niemanlab.org/2015/10/cant-finish-a-new-yorker-story-online-the-magazine-willnow-send-you-an-email-reminder-to-come-back/.
Lichterman J. (2015b) Push it: How Breaking News notifies users of news stories before they become big.
Available at: http://www.niemanlab.org/2015/08/push-it-how-breaking-news-notifies-users-ofnews-stories-before-they-become-big/.
Lichterman J. (2017a) 3 things BuzzFeed News thinks about before sending a push alert. Available at:
http://www.niemanlab.org/2017/05/3-things-buzzfeed-news-thinks-about-before-sending-a-pushalert/.
Lichterman J. (2017b) Iterate, iterate, iterate: How The Wall Street Journal made its push notifications
more attention-worthy. Available at: http://www.niemanlab.org/2017/01/iterate-iterate-iteratehow-the-wall-street-journal-made-its-push-notifications-more-attention-worthy/.
Light B, Burgess J and Duguay S. (2016) The walkthrough method: An approach to the study of apps.
New Media & Society.
Liu C, Wang W, Zhang Y, et al. (2017) Predicting the Popularity of Online News Based on Multivariate
Analysis. 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer and Information Technology (CIT).
9-15.
Liu X, Li Q, Nourbakhsh A, et al. (2016) Reuters Tracer: A Large Scale System of Detecting & Verifying
Real-Time News Events from Twitter. Proceedings of the 25th ACM International on Conference
on Information and Knowledge Management. Indianapolis, Indiana, USA: ACM, 207-216.
Mackenzie A. (2013) Programming subjects in the regime of anticipation: Software studies and
subjectivity. Subjectivity 6: 391-405.
Marres N. (2017) Digital Sociology: The reinvention of social research, London, UK: Polity.
Meyer R. (2014) How a California earthquake becomes the news: An extremely precise timeline.
Available at: http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/03/how-a-californiaearthquake-becomes-the-news-an-extremely-precise-timeline/284506/.
Neiger M. (2007) Media oracles: The cultural significance and political import of news referring to future
events. Journalism 8: 309-321.
Neiger M and Tenenboim-Weinblatt K. (2016) Understanding journalism through a nuanced
deconstruction of temporal layers in news narratives. Journal of Communication 66: 139-160.
NewsDiffs. (2012) About NewsDiffs. Available at: http://newsdiffs.org/about/.
Nye DE. (2007) Technology matters, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Örnebring H. (2010) Technology and journalism-as-labour: Historical perspectives. Journalism 11: 5774.
Parks L. (2015) Water, energy, access: Materializing the internet in rural Zambia. In: Parks L and
Starosielski N (eds) Signal traffic: Critical studies of media infrastructure. Chicago, IL:
University of Illinois Press, 115-136.
Parks L and Starosielski N. (2015) Signal traffic: Critical studies of media infrastructure. Chicago, IL:
University of Illinois Press.
Passarelli P, Sukumar K and Mark R. (2017) Annotating President Trump’s inauguration speech.
Available at: https://storytelling.voxmedia.com/2017/1/20/14329600/annotation-feature-vox.
Peters JD. (2015) The marvelous clouds, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Petre C. (2015) The traffic factories: Metrics at Chartbeat, Gawker Media, and The New York Times.
Available at: http://towcenter.org/research/traffic-factories/.
Petre C. (2018) Engineering Consent. Digital Journalism 6: 509-527.
Plantin J-C and Punathambekar A. (2018) Digital media infrastructures: pipes, platforms, and politics.
Media, Culture & Society: 0163443718818376.

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

29

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society
Schmidt C. (2018) Automated, live fact-checks during the State of the Union? Available at:
http://www.niemanlab.org/2018/01/automated-live-fact-checks-during-the-state-of-the-union-thetech-check-cooperatives-first-beta-test-hope-to-pull-it-off/.
Schudson M. (1986) Deadlines, datelines, and history. In: Manoff RK and Schudson M (eds) Reading
news. New York, NY: Pantheon Books, 79-108.
Schudson M. (2000) The sociology of news production revisited (again). In: Curran J and Gurevitch M
(eds) Mass media and society. London: Arnold, 175-200.
Schwartz R, Naaman M and Teodoro R. (2015) Editorial algorithms: Using social media to discover and
report local news. Ninth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media. Oxford, UK:
Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, 407-415.
Seaver N. (2017) Algorithms as culture: Some tactics for the ethnography of algorithmic systems. Big
Data & Society 4: 2053951717738104.
Sharma S. (2014) In the meantime: Temporality and cultural politics, Durham, NC: Duke University
Press.
Sonderman J. (2011) New generation of Web analytics applies ‘big data’ to newsroom decisions.
Available at: https://www.poynter.org/reporting-editing/2011/new-generation-of-web-analyticsapplies-big-data-to-newsroom-decisions-visual-revenue-jumptime/.
Sonnevend J. (2018) Interruptions of time: The coverage of the missing Malaysian plane MH370 and the
concept of ‘events’ in media research. Journalism 19: 75-92.
Spayd L. (2016) Why’d You Do That? How The Times Decides to Send News Alerts. Available at:
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/25/public-editor/whyd-you-do-that-how-the-times-decides-tosend-news-alerts.html.
Star SL. (1999) Ethnography of infrastructure. American Behavioral Scientist 43: 377-391.
Star SL and Bowker GC. (2006) How to infrastructure. In: Lievrouw LA and Livingstone SM (eds)
Handbook of new media: social shaping and social consequences of ICTs. London, UK: Sage
Publications, 151-162.
Steen M. (2014) Upon opening the black box and finding it full: Exploring the ethics in design practices.
Science, Technology, & Human Values 40: 389-420.
Steinhardt SB and Jackson SJ. (2015) Anticipation work: Cultivating vision in collective practice.
Computer Supported Cooperative Work. Vancouver, British Columbia: ACM, 443-453.
Sunlight Foundation. (2016) Politiwhoops US is back! Available at:
https://sunlightfoundation.com/2016/02/09/politwoops-u-s-is-back/.
Take Two. (2014) Introducing KPCC's new Earthquake Tracker. Available at:
http://www.scpr.org/programs/take-two/2014/01/14/35528/introducing-kpcc-s-new-earthquaketracker/.
Tatar A, #233, #233, et al. (2011) Predicting the popularity of online articles based on user comments.
Proceedings of the International Conference on Web Intelligence, Mining and Semantics.
Sogndal, Norway: ACM, 1-8.
Tenenboim-Weinblatt K and Neiger M. (2017) Temporal affordances in the news. Journalism 19: 37-55.
Timmermans S and Tavory I. (2012) Theory Construction in Qualitative Research:From Grounded
Theory to Abductive Analysis. Sociological Theory 30: 167-186.
Tuchman G. (1973) Making news by doing work: Routinizing the unexpected. American Journal of
Sociology 79: 110-131.
Usher N. (2014) Making news at The New York Times, Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Usher N. (2018) Breaking news production processes in US metropolitan newspapers: Immediacy and
journalistic authority. Journalism 19: 21-36.
van Dijck J, Poell T and de Waal M. (2018) The Platform Society, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

30

PRE-PRINT – NOT COPY EDITED | Accepted for publication at New Media & Society
CITATION: Ananny, Mike & Finn, Megan. (In press). Anticipatory News Infrastructures: Seeing
journalism’s expectations of future publics in its sociotechnical systems. New Media & Society
Vaughan D. (2014) Analogy, cases, and comparative social organization. In: Swedberg R (ed) Theorizing
in Social Science : The Context of Discovery. Redwood City, CA: Stanford University Press, 6184.
Wang S and Han E-H. (2017) Inside the Washington Post’s popularity prediction experiment.
Zelizer B. (2010) About to die: How news images move the public, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

i

The USGS also has a worldwide network of seismic sensors it maintains through international partnerships.
https://iptc.org/standards/newscodes/
iii
For example, a body of work among computational data scientists is focused on building anticipation models that
produce reliable predictions of news story engagement given the least amount of time and the smallest number of
previous engagements with similar content Tatar A, #233, #233, et al. (2011) Predicting the popularity of online
articles based on user comments. Proceedings of the International Conference on Web Intelligence, Mining and
Semantics. Sogndal, Norway: ACM, 1-8, Liu C, Wang W, Zhang Y, et al. (2017) Predicting the Popularity of Online
News Based on Multivariate Analysis. 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer and Information
Technology (CIT). 9-15.
iv
Later acquired by Outbrain and rebranded as a “discovery platform” for general web analytics.
v
Signals analyzed for the regressions included, for example, an article’s category and publication date, an author’s
name, the text’s sentiment, the time between story publication time and its appearance on social media channels.
ii

Posted to SocArXiv September 27, 2019

31

