Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

Page |1

Explaining the Rise of Moralizing Religions:
A test of competing hypotheses using the Seshat Databank

Peter Turchin,1,2 Harvey Whitehouse,3 Jennifer Larson*,4 Enrico Cioni,5 Jenny Reddish,1 Daniel Hoyer,6, 7
Patrick E. Savage,8 R. Alan Covey,9 John Baines,10 Mark Altaweel,11 Eugene Anderson,12 Peter Bol,13 Eva
Brandl,14 David M. Carballo,15 Gary Feinman,16 Andrey Korotayev,17 Nikolay Kradin,18 Jill D. Levine,5 Selin
E. Nugent,19 Andrea Squitieri,20 Vesna Wallace,21 Pieter François3
1

Complexity Science Hub Vienna, Austria
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA
3
Centre for the Study of Social Cohesion, University of Oxford, Oxford UK
4
Department of Modern & Classical Languages, Kent State University, Kent, OH, USA
5
Seshat: Global History Databank, Evolution Institute, San Antonio, FL, USA
6
George Brown College, Toronto, Canada
7
Evolution Institute, San Antonio, FL, USA
8
Faculty of Environment and Information Studies, Keio University, Fujisawa, Japan
9
Department of Anthropology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA
10
Faculty of Oriental Studies, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
11
Institute of Archaeology, University College London, UK
12
Department of Anthropology, University of California Riverside, Riverside, CA, USA
13
Department of East Asian Languages and Civilizations, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
14
Department of Anthropology, University College London, UK
15
Department of Anthropology and Archaeology Program, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA
16
Negaunee Integrative Research Center, Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, IL, USA
17
National Research University, Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia
18
Institute of History, Archaeology and Ethnology, Vladivostok, Russia
19
Institute for Ethical AI, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, UK
20
Historisches Seminar, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany
21
Department of Religious Studies, University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA, USA
2

*Corresponding author, email: jlarson@kent.edu
Date: April 15, 2021
SocArxiv Preprint: doi:10.31235/osf.io/2v59j

Abstract
The causes, consequences, and timing of the rise of moralizing religions in world history have been the
focus of intense debate. Progress has been limited by the availability of quantitative data to test
competing theories, by divergent ideas regarding both predictor and outcomes variables, and by
differences of opinion over methodology. To address all these problems, we utilize Seshat: Global
History Databank, a large storehouse of information designed to test theories concerning the
evolutionary drivers of social complexity. In addition to the Big Gods hypothesis, which proposes that
moralizing religion contributed to the success of increasingly large-scale complex societies, we consider
the role of warfare, animal husbandry, and agricultural productivity in the rise of moralizing religions.
Using a broad range of new measures of belief in moralizing supernatural punishment, we find strong
support for previous research showing that such beliefs did not drive the rise of social complexity. By
contrast, our analyses indicate that intergroup warfare, supported by resource availability, played a
major role in the evolution of both social complexity and moralizing religions. Thus, the correlation
between social complexity and moralizing religion would seem to result from shared evolutionary
drivers, rather than from direct causal relationships between these two variables.

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

Page |2

Introduction
Religious constructs relating to supernatural agency, ritual efficacy, and the afterlife have been
documented across the ethnographic record and likely have deep roots in our species’ evolutionary
history (Boyer 2001; Hood, Hill, and Spilka 2009). By contrast, moralizing religions, in which moral
behavior between humans is a principal concern of supernatural agents or powers, appear to be a much
more recent cultural innovation (Norenzayan and Shariff 2008; Henrich et al. 2010; Bellah 2011; Botero
et al. 2014; Watts et al. 2015; Purzycki et al. 2016; Strathern 2019). Here we use the term ‘moralizing
religion’ to refer to clusters of beliefs and practices postulating a system of supernatural punishment
and reward for morally salient behavior, where such systems are primarily concerned with the way
humans interact with other humans, rather than how they interact with supernatural forces. “Moralizing
supernatural punishment and reward” (MSP), on the other hand, refers to the presence of such beliefs
and practices in any degree. This new terminology does not assume that the supernatural mechanism
involved is agentic (as in the case of phrases like ‘Big Gods’ or ‘moralizing gods’), nor does it emphasize
only sanctions rather than incentives (as in the case of phrases like ‘broad supernatural punishment’)
(Willard et al. 2020). This approach also acknowledges that the process of supernatural moral
enforcement in human affairs involves religious traditions operating as systems, rather than relying on a
single aspect of religious belief, such as an all-seeing punitive deity. Broadening our approach to moral
enforcement in this way allows us to explore a wider range of dimensions of religion that may have been
involved in the evolution of sociopolitical complexity. In this paper we use a similarly broad definition of
sociopolitical complexity (SPC) that aggregates social scale (e.g., population and territory), levels of
hierarchy, as well as sophistication of government institutions, information systems, and economic
exchange (Turchin et al. 2018, see also Methods).
All the so-called ‘world religions’ recognized today exhibit primary concern for interpersonal
morality through systems of moralizing supernatural punishment, and scholars have long debated why
that may be so (Darwin 1871; Wilson 2002). An influential trend in the evolutionary theorizing of religion
proposes that belief in all-knowing, morally-concerned, punitive deities—‘Big Gods’—facilitated
increases in social complexity (Swanson 1960; Roes and Raymond 2003; D.D.P. Johnson 2005;
Norenzayan and Shariff 2008; Norenzayan 2013). One formulation of the Big Gods theory (Norenzayan
et al. 2016) begins with the premise that religious beliefs and behaviors originated as an evolutionary
byproduct of ordinary cognitive tendencies, such as mind-body dualism (Bering 2006) or teleological
reasoning (Kelemen 2004). By exploiting these intuitive biases, culturally evolved beliefs in supernatural
surveillance and punishment increased the ability of groups to sustain complex social organizations and
successfully scale up and expand. Competition among cultural groups gradually aggregated these
elements into cultural packages, in the form of organized religions. Thus, Big Gods coevolved with larger
and more complex societies (Norenzayan et al. 2016:6). A variant of the Big Gods theory proposes that
‘broad supernatural punishment’ (including non-agentic forces such as karma) contributed to the
transition to large-scale, complex sociopolitical organization in different parts of the world (Watts et al.
2015; Raffield, Price, and Collard 2019).
Entangled with theories exploring the relationship between MSP and socio-political complexity
is the fact that rising complexity itself is often seen as resulting from the evolutionary demands of
increasingly intense intergroup competition in the form of warfare. Several theorists have argued that
warfare is a critical factor explaining the rise and spread of MSP (Turchin 2006, 2016; Bellah 2011;
Geertz 2014; Martin 2014). Specifically, they propose that the intensification of military competition
between polities placed increasing evolutionary pressure to develop cultural systems that foster withingroup cooperation and cohesion—characteristics thought crucial to success in between-group rivalries
(Whitehouse et al. 2017). Alternative explanations for the evolution of MSP have focused on (among

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

Page |3

other things) animal husbandry (Peoples and Marlowe 2012), resource scarcity (Botero et al. 2014), and
rising affluence and material security (Baumard et al. 2015).
What most theories of the evolution of MSP have in common is the idea that belief in
supernatural punishment motivates prosociality (i.e., behavior that facilitates cooperation) in ways that
contribute to the flourishing of complex societies. However, efforts to demonstrate empirically that
there is a link between adherence to a moralizing religion and prosocial behavior have, so far, proven
inconclusive (McKay and Whitehouse 2014; Kavanagh, Jong, and Whitehouse 2020). While religiosity has
often been shown to predict self-reported prosociality (Brooks 2006), studies using behavioral measures
of prosociality have produced mixed results (Annis 1976; Darley and Batson 1973; Smith, Wheeler, and
Diener 1975; Grossman and Parrett 2011; Hofmann et al. 2014; Ge et al. 2019; Townsend et al. 2020).
Moreover, there is evidence, from the past as well as from research in contemporary populations, that
religiosity can trigger prejudice and antisocial attitudes towards minorities and outgroups in ways that
would be more likely to foment conflict rather than cooperation in large-scale societies (M.K. Johnson,
Rowatt, and LaBouff 2012; Scheepers, Gijsberts, and Hello 2002; Siegman 1962; Whitley 2011). One of
the most pervasive problems with efforts to demonstrate the possible role of MSP in fostering prosocial
behavior is the lack of precision regarding how exactly beliefs in supernatural punishment motivate
cooperation, as distinct from other features of religion, such as group bonding through collective rituals
or moving in synchrony, found in all kinds of societies, not only those which postulate mechanisms of
supernatural moral enforcement (Feinman 2016). What features of religion are most useful in different
kinds of societies, and what specific beliefs in supernatural punishment and reward might, under the
right circumstances, contribute to an increase in sociopolitical complexity? Our goal in this paper is to
help to clarify many of these key issues.
Previous comparative research on MSP and moralizing religions has depended on the availability
of cross-cultural data on the topic. Data compilations, such as the Standard Cross-Cultural Sample (SCCS,
White 2008) and the Ethnographic Atlas (Murdock 1967), have been exploited to produce a number of
insights (Swanson 1960; Peregrine 1996; Roes and Raymond 2003; D.D.P. Johnson 2005; Brown and Eff
2010; Peoples and Marlowe 2012; Botero et al. 2014), and these are revisited in our discussion section.
However, such repositories of cultural information have serious limitations that restrict their application
in testing theories of cultural evolution. First, these databases promote a global “ethnographic present”
that largely excludes modern European populations and large-scale complex societies of the past. Many
entries draw exclusively on dated summaries of contact-era accounts, or ethnographic research
conducted with indigenous populations living under colonial rule, strongly influenced by the scholarly
discourse of the mid-20th century. Second, synchronic or static databases, such as the SCCS and the
Ethnographic Atlas, cannot tell us how societies change over time, and thus provide only limited insight
into the causal mechanisms at work in cultural evolution (Turchin 2018). Although some researchers
have treated the social institutions of contemporary small-scale societies as a window into Pleistocene
foragers or early Neolithic villages, all extant societies are inevitably affected by the more complex
societies that surround them or by the spread of moralizing religions. One way to get around these
problems is to use the methods of phylogenetic analysis developed in evolutionary biology (Mace and
Holden 2005; Thomas E. Currie and Mace 2012; Watts et al. 2015). However, this approach can be highly
sensitive to assumptions underlying the phylogenetic analysis, as demonstrated by efforts to reconstruct
the origins of the Indo-European linguistic family (Bouckaert et al. 2012) and the debates these have
prompted (Anthony and Ringe 2015; Chang et al. 2015; Pereltsvaig and Lewis 2015).
Here we showcase a relatively new approach to testing theories on the cultural evolution of
MSP, large-scale prosociality, and sociopolitical complexity using Seshat: Global History Databank
(Turchin et al. 2015; François et al. 2016; Turchin, Hoyer, et al. 2020), which systematically samples past
societies around the world from the Neolithic to the Industrial Revolution. Seshat data are resolved at

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

Page |4

100-year intervals, enabling us to fit dynamic regression models with lagged predictor variables, thus
greatly increasing the statistical potential to empirically test causal theories. In another paper
(Whitehouse et al. 2021), we seek to establish when and where beliefs in moralizing supernatural
punishment as primary religious concerns first appeared in world history and show that such beliefs did
not drive the rise of social complexity. Here we expand that analysis in two major ways. First, in addition
to social complexity, we consider other predictor variables suggested by a broader range of theories,
including intensity of warfare, resource abundance, and animal husbandry. We regard this as an
important first foray into a very large topic, recognizing that other potential drivers of social complexity,
such as interregional trade, craft specialization, and urbanization, may have coevolved together with
new forms of religious, economic, and military institutions that should also be explored in future
analyses of Seshat data. Second, whereas previously we focused only on the earliest appearance of
moralizing supernatural punishment as a primary religious concern, here we consider a more varied and
nuanced set of outcome variables. This is a significant advance because the great variety of religious
practices in past populations is not easily categorized as either moralizing or not.
In early formulations of the Big Gods theory (Swanson 1960; Norenzayan 2013) proponents
characterized such gods in ‘all or nothing’ terms, and claimed that only big societies have Big Gods, while
small-scale societies lack them. More recently, at least some proponents of the theory have described
the phenomenon more as a continuum. Thus, in a recent article Singh, Kaptchuk, and Henrich (2021)
conclude that although moralizing supernatural punishment may be present in a broad range of
societies, “the trend in the cultural evolution of religion has been an expansion of deities’ scope,
powers, and monitoring abilities.” Another example is the proposal that local moralizing gods may
provide sufficient support for cooperation in smaller societies but become less effective in larger multiethnic empires, where gods associated with universally applicable morals and global provenance over
human affairs are required (e.g., Purzycki et al. 2016; Lang et al. 2019). Such conclusions, while
suggestive, still await thorough empirical investigation. Here we fractionate MSP into a variety of more
precisely specified dimensions, including the degree to which supernatural agents were thought to care
about the moral behavior of adherents, the power they had to monitor and enforce moral norms, the
focus of their concerns (did these apply to whole populations, elite individuals, or rulers only, for
example?), and the scope of punishments (were sinners singled out for punishment, or did entire
communities suffer for one individual’s transgressions?). We also distinguish between punishments
meted out in this life versus the afterlife, as well as between agentic and impersonal supernatural
powers.

Methods
Overview

Translating knowledge constructed by historians, archaeologists, and scholars of religion about past
societies into coded data that can be analyzed with statistical methods is not a straightforward task. Our
knowledge about religions in past societies is obviously incomplete. Experts often disagree and offer
divergent interpretations from the available evidence; there are multiple ways in which the information
in human narratives can be summarized to create computer-readable data; and there are many thorny
issues to address in statistical analysis (for example, how should missing data and expert disagreement
be handled?). Previous work utilizing Seshat data (Turchin et al. 2018; Mullins et al. 2018) developed
methods for dealing with these issues in various ways, suited to the research questions at hand.
Solutions require collaboration and debate, often inspired by critical engagement. Our work is guided by
a strong commitment to open science and the aim to be as transparent as possible in our approaches to
data gathering and analysis in order to facilitate fruitful discussion and help progress the scientific study
of world history (Whitehouse et al. 2020).

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

Page |5

Whereas the data on the predictor variables pertaining to social complexity, warfare, and
agricultural productivity were already available in Seshat, while the data-gathering strategy for these
variables has been described elsewhere (Turchin et.al. 2015, 2016, 2018, 2020b, 2021), the MSP data
was gathered following a strategy described in the detail in the Supplementary Online Materials. An
early draft of this paper was made publicly available more than a year before submitting it for
publication to enable scholars and analysts to propose alternative approaches and analyses, with the
goal of collectively investigating how such decisions affect the results. The aim was not to achieve
universal consensus but to sharpen our interpretations and draw attention to areas that remain
contentious. Seshat is designed on the understanding that historical and archaeological data are
debatable and dynamic rather than authoritative and static.
Testing theories about cultural evolution, and especially the role that religion played in it,
requires a massively interdisciplinary approach. In particular, we benefit from humanities scholars
adding, correcting, or providing alternative interpretations in the sections of the analytic narrative on
which they have expertise. Similarly, we benefit from social scientists proposing additional or alternative
ways of encoding information in analytic narratives into machine-readable data. Finally, we benefit from
computational and quantitative scientists refining our statistical methods or offering alternative
analytical approaches. The Seshat project has already demonstrated that such a transdisciplinary
collaboration is both possible and fruitful by bringing together humanities scholars and social and
quantitative scientists (Turchin, Whitehouse, et al. 2020). Our goal in this target article is even more
ambitious, insofar as we propose to expand the scale of this collaboration beyond the Seshat project to
explicitly include a broader network of voices, including potential critics. In this way, we hope that
critique and discussion can be channeled in productive directions and will result in an overall
advancement of the field.

Structured Analytic Narratives

Analytic Narratives (Bates et al. 1998; Bates et al. 2000) are formalized written accounts focusing on indepth case studies. As part of the Supplementary Online Materials for this paper, we have compiled a
group of analytic narratives pertaining to moralizing religions in world history, which will be developed
as an edited volume. The goal is to employ the specialized knowledge possessed by historians,
archaeologists, anthropologists, and scholars of religion to build and test generalizable theories
concerning the factors driving the rise and spread of MSP and moralizing religions. Theories necessarily
impose structure on the data by specifying which aspects of past societies are crucial for properly
adjudicating between contrasting accounts. Our analytic narratives on moralizing aspects of religion are
organized by space and time. Although the selection of regions represented in the analytic narratives
was primarily determined by the availability of data previously compiled in the Seshat Databank (see
below), we welcome further expansion of geographical coverage as additional scholars become involved
in the project.

Developing a Coding Scheme for Quantitative Data Analysis

Moralizing supernatural punishment. Capturing variation in religious beliefs and practices across time
and space requires a conceptual scheme capable of disambiguating a wide range of features that are
theoretically important. For example, to test hypotheses concerning the role of MSP in the rise of social
complexity, we seek to capture features that could plausibly facilitate cooperation as increasingly
anonymous social interactions become harder to monitor and as cross-cutting structural tensions in
society grow more elaborate. We also attempt to capture the degree of penetration of a particular
religion into the region under consideration.
The Natural Geographic Areas (NGAs; see SOM for details) covered in this paper were primarily
determined by the availability of data previously compiled in the Seshat Databank. This approach was

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

Page |6

essential in order to explore the possible causal influence of key factors—socio-political complexity,
intensity of interpolity competition, and production/resources—on the rise and spread of MSP. We thus
restrict our analyses in this paper to regions where we have structured, reliable data on these potential
predictor variables. We have described our data gathering strategy for these variables elsewhere
(Turchin et al., 2018). Our unit of analysis, here as in all other Seshat papers, is not the NGA, but a Seshat
polity, which we define pragmatically as an independent political unit ranging in scale from villages
(independent local communities) through simple and complex chiefdoms, to states and empires (Turchin
et al. 2018). We populate our list by determining each historical polity that occupied each of our sample
regions (NGAs) over time, starting with the early modern period and working back in time to the
Neolithic, or as far as available evidence allows (see Turchin et al. 2015; François et al. 2016; Manning et
al. 2017).
For each of the polities in our sample, we gathered data for seven variables on supernatural
moral enforcement (full details in the SOM). All variables were “binary” in the sense of attempting to
capture presence or absence of a particular religious feature. Obviously, the extent to which it is
possible to code variables in this way varies between different world regions and chronological periods.
We discuss this issue at greater length below (under the heading “Assessing the Effect of Uncertainty in
Quantifying MSP”). As usual, we employed the Seshat approach to capturing uncertainty and
disagreement as well. Thus, codes of “absence” and “presence” could be modified with “inferred”.
“Unknown” was also a possible code. Finally, a code of “absent or present” (which is different from
“unknown”) could be used to code a particular aspect of MSP during transitional periods that cannot be
precisely dated. These seven variables on moralizing supernatural punishment (Table 1) were combined
into an integrated measure of moralizing supernatural enforcement (see the next section). Three
additional variables code two other characteristics of religions which include MSP. First, Afterlife, which
reflects whether punishment is delayed until after the death of the transgressor and ThisLife if it
happens before (we use two separate variables because all four combinations of presence/absence are
possible). Second, Agency, which reflects whether punishment/reward is administered by a
supernatural agent, such as a deity or spirit (as opposed to being administered by an impersonal
supernatural force, such as karma).
Primary

The principal concerns of supernatural agents or forces pertain to cooperation in
human affairs (as opposed to the behavior of humans towards the supernatural)

Certain

Moralizing supernatural punishments and/or rewards are certain and predictable
(rather than arbitrary or capricious)

Broad

Moralizing supernatural punishments and/or rewards enforce norms across a broad
range of moral domains (instead of just a few domains)

Targeted

Moralizing supernatural punishments and/or rewards are targeted specifically at
culpable individuals (instead of the whole group)

Rulers

Moralizing supernatural forces or agents punish and/or reward rulers

Elites

The elites of the polity subscribe to moralizing supernatural punishments and/or
rewards

Commoners

The commoners of the polity subscribe to moralizing supernatural punishments
and/or rewards

Table 1. Summary of the supernatural moral punishment/reward variables used in constructing the
measure of MSP. For more details, see SOM.

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

Page |7

Sociopolitical Complexity (SPC). Current theories disagree about whether high levels of MSP help to
drive the rise of sociopolitical complexity (Norenzayan et al. 2016), or if the causal influence goes the
other way around (Baumard et al. 2015; Whitehouse et al. 2021). Some argue that as societies grow,
evading punishment for norm violations becomes easier, while surveillance and enforcement become
harder (Norenzayan 2013). On this view, rising complexity puts evolutionary pressure on societies to
adopt cultural systems that ‘offload’ surveillance and enforcement to moralizing gods or forces.
Following previously established procedures (Turchin et al. 2018), we aggregated 51 Seshat
variables coding different dimensions of sociopolitical complexity into eight “complexity characteristics”:
polity population size, population size of the largest settlement, polity territory size, levels of hierarchy,
polity-produced infrastructure, sophistication of government institutions, information systems, and
sophistication of economic exchange. Our investigation of the dimensions of sociopolitical complexity
(SPC) characterizing polities in the Seshat sample indicated that they are well captured with the first
Principal Component, which explains more than three-quarters of variance in the data (Turchin et al.
2018). We use this principal component, SPC1, as our measure of complexity. In order to make SPC1
easily interpretable, we scale it in such a way that it corresponds to log10(Polity Population). In other
words, polities with SPC1 = 3 have, on average, populations of 1000, and SPC1 = 6 corresponds to
polities with populations of 1,000,000.
Warfare Intensity. As we noted in the Introduction, the positive relationship between MSP and SPC may
arise as a result of both these factors responding to the evolutionary demands of increasingly intense
intergroup competition in the form of warfare. We characterize this evolutionary intergroup pressure
through the intensity of warfare, which we measure with two proxies. The first proxy is based on 46
Seshat variables capturing various kinds of military technologies (metals used in weapons or armor; the
sophistication of projectile weapons, hand-held weapons and body armor; transport animals used in
warfare; and defensive structures, such as fortifications). We combine these variables into an overall
measure of the sophistication of military technology, MilTech (Turchin, Korotayev, et al. 2020). The
second warfare proxy is the presence of cavalry (mounted warriors or soldiers). We single out this
variable as a potential predictor because several hypotheses explaining the rise of moralizing ‘world’
religions during the Axial Age (c.800–200 BCE) identify as the major driving force the new forms of
horse-based warfare, which emerged among societies in the Pontic-Caspian Steppe and then spread to
the rest of Eurasia (and, ultimately, the whole world) (Jaspers 1953; Turchin 2006; Bellah 2011). The
data on the spread of mounted warfare are from Turchin et al. (2016).
Resource Scarcity vs. Greater Affluence. Two prominent theories make opposite predictions about the
role of resource abundance in the evolution of MSP. Botero et al. (2014) review several studies
suggesting that beliefs in moralizing high gods promote cooperation in situations of increased
environmental risk. Furthermore, ecological threats can strengthen mechanisms of norm enforcement
in human groups (Gelfand et al. 2011). Analysis of a large set of historical data about cultural, linguistic,
and ecological factors found that populations inhabiting resource-scarce or uncertain environments
have greater tendency to adopt beliefs about moralizing high gods (Botero et al. 2014).
Invoking recent ideas in evolutionary psychology, Baumard et al. (2015), conversely, proposed
that increasing affluence and declining uncertainty have predictable effects on human motivation and
reward systems, moving individuals away from ‘‘fast life’’ strategies (resource acquisition and coercive
interactions) and toward ‘‘slow life’’ strategies (self-control techniques and cooperative interactions).
These authors adapted Morris’ (2013) “energy capture” measure as a proxy for affluence and concluded

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

Page |8

that economic development, not political complexity or population size, accounts for the rise of
moralizing religions in North China, North India, and the Eastern Mediterranean.
Not only do the theories proposed by Botero et al. and Baumard et al. offer contrasting takes on
the same relationship—moralizing religion and resource abundance/scarcity—but questions have also
been raised about the proximate measures used in their analyses. The Botero et al. study utilized data
from the Ethnographic Atlas to obtain measures of religious practices, political complexity, and
economic characteristics; we noted above limitations of this dataset, which a static database that undersamples large-scale societies. The Baumard et al. approach combines coarse-grained data (for example,
on the ‘Mediterranean’) with fine-grained dynamics of individual societies (e.g., ‘Greece’) at specific
points in time. Both the theoretical and empirical aspects of this study have been criticized (Thomas E
Currie ; Mullins et al. 2018; Purzycki et al. 2018).
Despite these shortcomings, these works offer intriguing and valuable insights into the possible
role of ecological and economic factors in the emergence of moralizing religion. Here, we attempt to
add some clarity to these debates by utilizing a quantitative approach for agricultural productivity (as a
proxy for resource abundance), SPC, and moralizing religion, based throughout on the same polity-level
unit of analysis, while utilizing a global sample of past societies and following the development of key
variables in time. For productivity specifically, we use a synthetic measure of a polity’s agricultural
practices (Agri). Agri is measured in tons of the main carbohydrate crop (wheat, rice, maize, root
vegetables, etc.) per hectare per year (see Turchin et al. (2021) for details). In addition, we conduct tests
of the effect of environmental variables, using the approach of Botero et al. (2014) to reduce a variety of
environmental characteristics to two predictor variables (the first two principal components).
Pastoralism. The final hypothesis that we test here was formulated by Peoples and Marlowe (2012). In
their analysis of the beliefs in High Gods, using the Standard Cross-Cultural Sample, they found that the
incidence of active and moral High Gods to be highest in pastoralist societies. Their explanation of this
pattern invoked instability and violence, characterizing the fraught pastoralist life and the ease with
which their primary resource (livestock) can be stolen. “When drought devastates pasture, disease
decimates herds, and constant violence over grazing rights becomes unrelenting, a bond of cooperation
within one group or tribe must provide a survival advantage when challenged by other feuding groups”
(Peoples and Marlowe 2012: 264).

Aggregating Binary Codes into an Overall Measure of Moralizing Religion

We aggregated the seven characteristics into a single measure of moralizing supernatural punishment
(MSP) in the following way. If all characteristics were present, the aggregated moralizing religion
variable was set to 1 (the maximum). Each code of absent reduced the maximum by half; that is, the
overall score was multiplied by 0.5. The minimum of the aggregated measure, thus, is 0.5 7 ≈ 0.008.
Unknowns were treated as missing data and are dropped from the analysis.
This procedure assumes multiplicative effects. We also reran all analyses with an alternative,
additive aggregation scheme (equating present with 1, absent with 0, absent/present with 0.5, and
adding together these numerical scores).
The resulting MSP measure (whether multiplicative or additive) is a categorical variable with 15
levels (due to “half-tones” introduced by transitional periods absent/present). It is used as the response
(dependent) variable in dynamic regression analyses.
Additionally, we explored whether the immediacy of punishment (in this life, or the afterlife)
and the mechanism of punishment (by a supernatural agent or supernatural force) affects our results.
To do this we constructed three additional measures that reflected only moralizing punishment/reward
in the afterlife, only that in this life, and only that administered by supernatural agents. For example,
MSPafter, relying on punishment in the afterlife, was calculated by setting MSP to zero if AfterLife =

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

Page |9

absent. The other two measures, MSPthis and MSPagen, were constructed analogously by setting MSP to
zero if ThisLife or Agency were coded as absent.

Assessing the Effect of Uncertainty in Quantifying Moralizing Religion

Our knowledge about past societies is imperfect and has many gaps. Thus, the statistical methods we
use in testing various theories about the evolution of complex societies need to deal effectively with
such uncertainty. Our goal should be to avoid the two extremes of either assuming that we know more
than we really know, or the opposite, of treating imprecise or incomplete knowledge as no knowledge at
all. The analytic strategy that we adopt in this paper involves running all the analyses for scenarios that
span these two extremes and examining how this affects our results.
Suppose we have reasonably certain knowledge that some or most aspects of moralizing
religion were absent in a particular society at a certain time T. Such knowledge could result from having
enough written material produced by the society itself; or, perhaps, there are credible reports from an
external observer. Can we make inferences about the state of MSP prior to time T? One scenario results
from the assumption that if these elements were attested as absent at a certain point in time (A), then
they were similarly absent at any preceding time. We would use the code of inferred absence (A*, with
an asterisk indicating inference) and extend it back in time as long as there is absence of rapid cultural
change resulting from, for example, conquest, migration, or close cultural contact with a different
culture. In the absence of such catalysts, which are often visible archaeologically, culture typically
changes slowly. Our data further indicates that declines in MSP are particularly rare (and much rarer
than increases). The first inference scenario assumes that we can ignore such rare events.
The alternative would be to assume that no inferences can be made about the past and to treat
such data points as unknown (U). At the analysis stage, we would simply omit the rows in the data
matrix that contain such missing values. There are problems with this highly conservative approach,
however. First, to renounce the ability to make judicious historical inferences on a case-by-case basis is
to throw out what we do know about the cultures in question. Second, row deletion could lead to biased
estimates because there are often systematic differences between the complete and incomplete cases.
Some regions of the world have been subject to greater levels of research effort than others. Omitting
many of the lesser-known cases, due to their larger proportion of missing values, would give too much
weight to later or better-known societies and certain geographical areas. A third drawback to the
conservative approach is that it reduces the sample size and, thus, our ability to detect causal influences
in cultural evolution. For these reasons, we consider row deletion to be an inferior approach.
Nevertheless, as we said at the beginning of this section, we conducted an analysis with row deletion in
order to determine whether (and how much) this change in method affects our conclusions.

Statistical Analyses
Descriptive Statistics
All analyses reported in this article are based on the Equinox2020 data release of the Seshat Databank
(Turchin, Hoyer, et al. 2020) and were performed in R version 4.0.2 (2020-06-22). To explore and
summarize the relationship between moralizing religion, predictor variables, and time, we first examine
basic statistics and perform a correlation analysis. Results are presented in a correlation matrix.
Correlation analysis among element concentrations was performed with R PerformanceAnalytics
package.
Relative Timing
We examine temporal interrelations in the dynamics of socio-political complexity and moralizing religion
by looking at the relative timing of increases in these variables. This analysis advances a previous paper
on the topic (Whitehouse et al. 2021) by employing a more nuanced and quantitative measure of the
various constituent elements of moralizing religion identified above. The goal is to offer clarity on the

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

P a g e | 10

competing theories about the reasons that MSP arose, when and where they did, and, more
significantly, why they have come to play such a dominant role in religious practice around the world
today.
First, we ask when each region in our sample crosses into “high complexity” territory, using the
threshold of SPC1 = 5.3 (see Results: Correlations below for how this threshold was chosen). Next, we
define a relative time scale (RelTime) with 0 at the time when the SPC1 trajectory crosses the 5.3
threshold. Thus, RelTime = –1000 corresponds to a time point 1,000 years before crossing the threshold,
and RelTime = 500 corresponds to 500 years after that event. Only 19 NGAs cross this threshold and are
thus retained in this analysis. To determine the relative timing between the increases in moralizing
religion and SPC1, we calculate delMSP = MSP(t+1) – MSP(t), where t is time in centuries.
Regression Analyses
To investigate the relationship between MSP and the potential predictor variables, we fitted a dynamic
regression model to the data. This approach has been previously described (Turchin 2018) and applied
(see Turchin et al. 2018, 2019, 2020b) to Seshat data. It allows us to examine the effects of predictor
variables (SPC1, MilTech, Cavalry, Agri, and others, see previous section) while controlling for serial
autocorrelations, geographic cultural diffusion, and shared cultural history. The regression model used
to examine the factors affecting MSP takes the following form:

𝑌, = 𝑎 +

𝑏 𝑌,

+𝑐

exp −

𝛿,
𝑌,
𝑑

+ℎ

𝑤 , 𝑌,

+

𝑔 𝑋

,,

+ 𝜖,

On the left side, 𝑌 , is the response variable quantifying MSP in a polity occupying NGA i at time t. We
sampled polities (or quasipolities) within specific NGAs (Natural Geographic Area – see above) at century
intervals (time step Δt = 100 years). The first term on the right side of the equation, a, is the regression
constant (intercept). The second term represents the autoregressive terms, meaning the influences of
previous occurrences of MSP within an NGA, with τ = 1, 2,… (number of centuries) referring to timelagged values of Y. For example, this means that 𝑌 ,
accounts for the presence or absence of MSP 100
years before t. The third term accounts for the potential influences of geographic diffusion on MSP, with
c representing the regression coefficient for importance of diffusion and using a negative-exponential
form to relate the distance between society i and society j (δi,j) to the influence of j on i. Here d scales
the effect of distance on geographic diffusion. We use d = 1000 km because this value approximates the
average distance between neighbor NGAs. We avoid potential issues of endogeneity by again applying
𝑌,
to produce a weighted average of the occurrence of MSP in geographic proximity to i in the
previous century, with weight diminishing to 0 as distance between i and j increases. The fourth term
accounts for potential shared cultural history where w represents the influences of linguistic similarity.
This weight is set to 1 if society i and society j share the same language, 0.5 for the same linguistic genus,
0.25 for the same linguistic family, and 0 if they are different linguistic families. Linguistic genera and
families were derived from Glottolog (Hammarström et al. 2017) and the World Atlas of Language
Structures (Dryer and Haspelmath 2013). The penultimate term reflects the influence of predictor
variables where 𝑔 are regression coefficients and 𝑋 , , are time-lagged predictor variables. Finally,
𝜖 , is the error term.
Confidence Intervals
Post-regression diagnostic tests indicate that the distribution of residuals does not conform to the
Normal. For this reason, we use nonparametric bootstrap (Efron and Tibshirani 1993) to estimate
confidence intervals associated with regression coefficients. To approximate the confidence intervals we

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

P a g e | 11

resample, with replacement, the data to create 1,000 bootstrapped data sets. We then calculate the
statistics of interest (regression coefficients associated with various predictors) and construct the
frequency distribution of the 1,000 bootstrapped values. The 95 percent confidence interval is then
approximated by eliminating the smallest 25 and largest 25 values and the P-value is approximated by
the proportion of statistical values greater than 0 (if the hypothesis we test is that the effect of the
predictor is positive), or less than 0 (otherwise).
Does the Earliest Appearance of Minimal MSP Predict Increases in Social Complexity?
Our first empirical test of the Big Gods hypothesis, which investigated whether moralizing gods tend to
appear before significant increases in social complexity (Whitehouse, François, Savage, et al. 2019), was
critiqued (Beheim et al. 2019) on the grounds that little could be known about prehistoric beliefs in Big
Gods. We addressed that criticism using new data and analyses (Whitehouse et al. 2021), using the first
appearance of beliefs in moralizing supernatural punishments as a primary concern of a religious
tradition as the key threshold that must be passed in order to say that Big Gods were present. Using this
measure, we did detect a significant effect of Big Gods on sociopolitical complexity. Nevertheless, a
primary concern with moralizing supernatural punishment tends to occur relatively late in the evolution
of religions. Here we examine how much a measure of moralizing supernatural punishment that moves
the threshold significantly back in time for a given society affects our results.
To address this question, we defined “Minimal Moralizing Supernatural Punishment” (minMSP)
equated to 1 if any element of MSP (primary, certain, broad, targeted, ruler, elite, commoners) is
present and 0 if none are present. By definition the appearance of minMSP either precedes MSP is
Primary or coincides with it.

Results
Temporal Patterns

We first examine how incidence and degree of MSP has changed with time (Figure 1). The heat map (red
color indicates high density of points) suggests two hotspots: one corresponds to low values of
moralizing religion and another one corresponds to high values. As time advances, an increasing
proportion of trajectories migrate to the high-level hotspot. The earliest transition is observed in Egypt,
which precedes the next earliest shift by nearly 2,000 years. The next two trajectories, Mesopotamia
and North India, make the transition to high levels of MSP in mid-first millennium BCE, which
corresponds to the Axial Age as it is traditionally dated (Mullins et al. 2018; Hoyer and Reddish 2019).
The majority of transitions, however, happen later—after 1 CE or in the Post-Axial Period. This
concentration of transitions is captured by the yellow “bridge”, which connects the two red hotspots.
Only two sample trajectories early in this period (North China and Italy) are shown in order not to clutter
Figure 1.

Correlations of MSP with Predictor Variables
Figure S2 in the Supplementary Online Materials presents the basic statistics and correlations between
the predictor variables and moralizing religion (also including calendar date to show how all variables
evolve with time). The focus of Seshat is on agrarian polities, that, is the period between the Neolithic
and Industrial Revolutions. The distribution of sampled time periods peaks between 1500 and 1800.
Earlier periods are less well sampled, partly because the adoption of agriculture as a dominant
subsistence practice occurred at different times in different world regions, and partly because earlier
periods are less well known (for how we deal with the general problem of missing values, see Turchin et
al. 2018).

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

P a g e | 12

Figure 1. Change in MSP in sample regions over time. The dots are a scatter plot of MSP against time
(negative values BCE, positive CE). The color heatmap indicates the density of points (blue areas indicate
absence of values, red areas delineate high density “hotspots,” and green and yellow areas indicate
intermediate densities). Lines connect the dots for five illustrative regions where MSP was adopted
early: Egypt (red), Mesopotamia (blue), North India (green), North China (yellow), and Italy (brown).
The distribution of SPC1 has two peaks. The first peak corresponds to mid-range societies with a
modal polity population of a few thousand (these are typically organized as simple or complex
chiefdoms), while the second peak includes large-scale societies with populations of a million or more
(typically organized as states and empires). The breakpoint occurs at SPC1 = 5.3, corresponding to polity
population = 200,000 (this is also the threshold at which polities tend to transition to the state-level of
organization, see Turchin et al. 2019).
The frequency distributions of two other variables are characterized by similar bimodality:
MilTech and MSP. The distribution of MSP is even more bimodal than SPC1: most polities are
characterized by low values (MSP < 0.2), or by high values (> 0.8), with a few values in between. As we
saw in Figure 1, this pattern results from a relatively rapid transition from low to high MSP levels,
compared to periods before and after this transition. The plot of MSP against SPC1 shows that the
relationship between these two variables is nonlinear: MSP increases very slowly for SPC1 values below
5.3, followed by rapid rise beyond this threshold.
The distribution of agricultural productivities is unimodal, but with a long right tail. The scatter
plot suggests that the relationship between moralizing religion and Agri may be nonlinear, with middle
ranges of Agri corresponding to highest values of MSP. We will investigate whether adding nonlinearity
in this variable improves the model fit in Dynamic Regression Analysis.

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

P a g e | 13

Cavalry is a binary variable with 0 = absence and 1 = presence. Transition periods between
absence and presence, when the precise timing of the switch is uncertain are coded as 0.5, but such
transitions are rare.
Examining cross-correlations, we observe that SPC1, MilTech, and Cavalry all correlated strongly
with MSP. However, such correlation analysis cannot reveal causal interconnections between variables.
We now proceed to using the temporal component of Seshat to empirically test such theories.

MSP and Complex Societies: Relative Timing
The smoothed delSPC1 curve peaks at RelTime = 0 and is symmetric around the peak. This result
confirms that the average rate of increase in SPC1 is fastest at the time when it crosses the 5.3 threshold
(this creates the bimodal distribution of SPC1). Next, we observe that most increases in moralizing
religion occur after RelTime = 0 (Figure 2). As the smoothed delMSP curve indicates, the average time
lag between crossing the high complexity threshold and the transition from low to high moralizing
religion is about 300 years. While there is much variation, the great majority of MSP increases come
after the peak in SPC1 increase. Thus, these temporal relations are not consistent with an interpretation
that the causality flows from MSP to SPC1.

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

P a g e | 14

Figure 2. Temporal relations between increases in SPC1 and MSP. RelTime is time relative to crossing
SPC1 = 5.3 threshold. Brown points: delMSP. Brown curve: delMSP point data smoothed with LOESS
(span = 0.5). Blue crosses: delSPC1. Blue dashed curve: delSPC1 data smoothed with LOESS (span = 0.5).
The two LOESS smoothed curves are scaled to have the same maximum, for ease of comparison.

Dynamic Regression Analysis
We first focus on the possible causal factors explaining the evolution of MSP. Model selection by Akaike
Information Criterion (AIC, see Supplementary Results for all models with delAIC < 2) indicates that the
best model (with lowest AIC) is as shown in Table 2.
Apart from autocorrelation terms, the strongest effect on MSP is by Cavalry and Agri (compare
standardized regression coefficients in the column “Estimate”), followed by MilTech. The bootstrapped
approximated confidence intervals for Agri.sq, EnvPC1, and EnvPC2 overlap 0, suggesting lower
statistical support for these terms. Sociopolitical complexity (SPC1) is not selected for the best-fitting
model, but shows up in some worse-fitting models. However, its coefficient is not statistically significant
and negative to boot (see Supplementary Results for details).

Confidence interval Bootstrap
Estimate
SE
t
2.5%
97.5% Probability
(Intercept)
0.000
0.011
0.000
-0.024
0.027
0.501
MSP
0.613
0.057
10.835
0.451
0.740
0.000
MSP.sq
-0.200
0.048
-4.212
-0.308
-0.091
0.000
MilTech
0.052
0.022
2.366
0.007
0.111
0.016
Cavalry
0.095
0.020
4.814
0.037
0.156
0.000
Agri
0.095
0.034
2.804
0.005
0.198
0.019
Agri.sq
-0.061
0.029
-2.115
-0.136
0.016
0.044
Pastor
0.031
0.013
2.318
0.005
0.069
0.008
EnvPC1
0.030
0.014
2.196
-0.005
0.077
0.052
EnvPC2
0.037
0.014
2.582
-0.002
0.086
0.033
Table 2. Regression results: MSP as the response variable. Estimate: standardized regression estimate;
SE: standard error of the estimate; t: the t-statistic associated with the estimate; Confidence interval: a
measure of the uncertainty of the estimate that excludes the smallest 2.5% and largest 97.5%
bootstrapped values; Bootstrap probability: the proportion of bootstrap values greater than 0 (lesser
than zero for negative terms MSP.sq and Agri.sq).
The coefficient of determination for all these models is nearly the same and is very high (R2 =
0.923). However, one reason for such high R2 is because of temporal autocorrelation terms (that is, the
previous value of MSP, one century before, has a very strong effect on the current value of MSP; this
effect is nonlinear as suggested by a strong MSP.sq term). If we rerun the regression model while
omitting autoregressive terms, we obtain the following results (Table 3).

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion
Estimate
0.000
0.344
0.278
0.509
-0.309
0.209
0.064
0.232

SE
0.020
0.037
0.031
0.058
0.051
0.023
0.024
0.024

P a g e | 15

t
0.000
9.319
8.902
8.818
-6.094
9.188
2.629
9.704

(Intercept)
MilTech
Cavalry
Agri
Agri.sq
Pastor
EnvPC1
EnvPC2
R2 = 0.747
Table 3. Regression results excluding autoregressive terms.
This table omits P-values, because their estimates are highly biased when autoregressive terms are
omitted. The high R2 = 0.75 indicates that the predictor variables explain three-quarters of variance in
moralizing religion, suggesting that MSP is strongly conditioned on these predictor variables.
Next, we examine the evidence for reverse causation, from MSP to SPC1. Full analysis of the
factors affecting the evolution of sociopolitical complexity is reported elsewhere (Turchin et al. in prep,
see also Supplementary Results); here we summarize it. Our analysis shows that the primary influence
on the evolution of socio-political complexity is warfare (or, more precisely, intense military competition
between polities). Two variables, in particular, have a strong effect: development of military
technologies (MilTech) and the spread of cavalry. A secondary factor promoting high social complexity is
agricultural productivity. When we add MSP to the model, we obtain the following results (Table 4).
Estimate
SE
t
Pr(>|t|)
(Intercept)
-0.006
0.013
-0.467
0.640565
SPC1
1.080
0.106
10.146
0.000000
SPC1.sq
-0.396
0.101
-3.916
0.000101
Lag2
0.173
0.039
4.428
0.000011
MilTech
0.065
0.026
2.503
0.012573
Cavalry
0.073
0.021
3.509
0.000484
Agri
0.049
0.015
3.240
0.001262
MSP
-0.038
0.021
-1.847
0.065187
Table 4. Regression results: SPC1 as the response variable. Estimate: standardized regression estimate;
SE: standard error of the estimate; t: the t-statistic associated with the estimate; Pr(>|t|): statistical
significance level.
This result is strong evidence against the causal effect of MSP on SPC1, because the MSP term is
associated with a negative) t-statistic that is not statistically significant at P < 0.05 level.
We now test whether a different measure of MSP, Minimal MSP (defined as the first appearance
of any MSP elements, see Methods), has an effect on this result. The average difference between the
first appearances of minMSP and MSP as primary is c.1000 years (the median is 450 years). When we
use minMSP as a possible predictor (instead of MSP), however, we still do not detect any significant
effect on SPC1 (see the SOM for details).
Thus, the best model (by AIC) suggests that the main factors driving the evolution of social
complexity are the proxies for warfare intensity (MilTech and Cavalry) and agricultural productivity

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

P a g e | 16

(Agri). At the same time we find no effect of MSP, whether we use as predictor the full quantitative
measure or Minimal MSP (as well as MSP is Primary, see Whitehouse et al. 2021).
Overall, dynamic regression analysis reveals the following structure of causal arrows connecting
warfare, socio-political complexity, and moralizing religion. There are no causal arrows going from either
MSP to SPC1, or from SPC1 to MSP. Instead, SPC1 is affected by other evolutionary forces (intensity of
military competition and productivity of agriculture). The main factors affecting MSP are very similar:
the warfare proxies (Cavalry and MilTech) and intensity of agriculture. However, the effect of Agri on
MSP is nonlinear, requiring a quadratic term to fully capture. Additionally, we detect a moderate effect
of Pastoralism (the estimated standardized coefficient is much lower than for other strongly supported
terms, but the bootstrap-estimated 95% confidence interval does not overlap zero). Finally, we found
weaker evidence that environmental variables (EnvPC1 and EnvPC2) have an effect on MSP. EnvPC2, in
particular, is consistent with the hypothesis that environmental risk may play some role, although it is
not a major driver of MSP (and statistical support for it is not high, as the bootstrap-estimated 95%
confidence interval overlaps 0). The result of these causal influences is a positive correlation between all
variables (see correlation graph in SOM). But the dynamic regression analysis indicates that the strong
correlation between MSP and SPC1 is not causal and, thus, in a sense, spurious (Rohrer 2018), arising
because both processes are driven by a similar set of causal factors.
We have extensively tested how this overall result is affected by (1) various ways in which
moralizing religion is quantified, (2) by utilizing distinct methods for handling the effect of uncertainty in
moralizing religion, and (3) by using alternative measures of MSP focusing solely on AfterLife, ThisLife, or
Agency as response variables (see the Methods and Supplementary Results). These analyses suggest that
the overall result is robust. The strongest effects that we have detected, namely the effect of warfare
intensity and agriculture on both socio-political complexity and moralizing religion, and the absence of
direct causation between moralizing religion and complexity, are supported in all scenarios and model
specifications.

Discussion
The analysis presented here provides strong support for the view that military competition between
societies is one of the main factors driving the evolution of MSP and moralizing religions. A number of
military innovations helped to shift the balance between offensive and defensive warfare in favor of
offense, intensifying military competition between societies and increasing the probability that defeated
groups were eliminated as cultural entities (Turchin 2003, 2009, 2016). The resulting process of cultural
multilevel selection favors the spread of cultural traits that (1) sustain large-scale societies (because
having more soldiers and taxpayers increases the probability of survival in between-society competition)
and (2) promote “ultrasocial” institutions, including religious ones, that increase internal cohesion and
cooperation in large-scale societies (because, all else being equal, societies that solve collective action
problems most effectively are more likely to survive such competition).
One of the most important military innovations in history to have shifted the balance of
offense/defense in favor of the former, was mounted warfare or cavalry (Turchin 2009). The potential of
horse-riding in combat was successfully harnessed by Pontic-Caspian nomads around 1000 BCE (Drews
2004). Together with a powerful but short compound bow (which could be used on horseback) and new
iron-smelting technologies (making arrows deadlier), mounted warfare, and the nearly simultaneous
spread of iron metallurgy triggered a military revolution in agrarian societies located along the Steppe
belt (Drews 1993). New forms of warfare spread rapidly through Afro-Eurasia, triggering additional
military innovations in areas such as armor to better protect against projectiles (Drews 1993). Agrarian
societies that were unable to secure an ample supply of horses for their cavalries were forced to
dramatically scale up the size of their infantry armies to survive in the face of the new existential threat

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

P a g e | 17

(Turchin 2016). Previous work (Turchin et al. 2013) modeled these processes in theoretical terms,
strongly suggesting that the pressures from cavalry warfare played a significant causal role in the rise
and spread of ‘Macrostates’ (defined specifically as polities controlling at least 100,000 km 2 of territory)
across Afro-Eurasia (see also Bennett 2020).
Although cavalry warfare provides us with one of the most important evolutionary drivers for
large-scale societies, ultrasocial institutions, and moralizing religions, it is only one instance of a military
innovation that had large consequences in history. Other such innovations include the chariot, which
earlier revolutionized warfare in the Bronze Age Eurasia. Furthermore, although the horse stands out as
by far the most effective animal in warfare, domestication of other transport animals, such as donkeys,
camels, and llamas (often also linked to the expansion of trade rather than military goals) is also
statistically associated with the subsequent rise of large-scale societies (Turchin 2009). Finally, after
1500 CE, important military innovations included the spread of gunpowder weapons and ocean-sailing
ships (Roberts 1956; Cipolla 1965; Chase 2003).
Cavalry warfare thus appears in at least some regions of the world to have been an important
evolutionary driver not only of social complexity, but also for the rise and spread of moralizing religions.
Nevertheless, it is possible that the real evolutionary driver was not warfare, but some other process
with which our warfare intensity proxies are strongly correlated. Future investigations of this issue
should consider additional explanatory factors, based on empirically discernible proxies for the
postulated processes, and adding these variables to the analysis.
Whatever the ultimate drivers of interpolity competition intensity turn out to be, our results
here clearly support the finding of our earlier papers (Whitehouse, François, Savage, et al. 2019;
Whitehouse et al. 2021), that the appearance of moralizing religion follows rather than precedes the rise
of large-scale complex societies. Our analysis shows that the sharpest rises in social complexity precede
moralizing religions, on average by three centuries, a finding that has been the subject of much recent
debate (Beheim et al. 2019). More significantly, the strong correlation between socio-political
complexity and moralizing religion is a result of shared evolutionary drivers, including intense military
competition aided by increasing agricultural productivity. In addition, moralizing religion, but not sociopolitical complexity (see SOM: Evolutionary Drivers of Sociopolitical Complexity), is also affected by
pastoralism. These causal arrows are summarized in Figure 3.

Figure 3. A summary of causal influences affecting the rise of MSP, suggested by the dynamic regression
analysis in this article (“Military Competition” aggregates Seshat variables MilTech and Cavalry). Line
thickness distinguishes stronger from weaker influences. We omit the possible effects of environmental
variables because these factors were not strongly supported by the analysis (see Discussion).

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

P a g e | 18

We do not include possible effects of environmental variables in Figure 3, because the evidence
for them is statistically weak (estimated confidence regions overlap 0). In this our results differ from an
analysis of data in the Ethnographic Atlas by Botero et al. (2014), who found that belief in moralizing
high gods is more prevalent in societies that inhabit poorer environments that are prone to ecological
distress. In contrast, our results suggest that the first principal component, positively correlated with
means and predictabilities of temperature and precipitation and negatively with variance in
temperature (see the PCA results and Figure S1 in Supplementary Online Materials), has a positive effect
on MSP (with a caveat that statistical support for it is weak). On the other hand, the positive effect of
the second principal component, proxying for hot and dry environments, is more in line with the
conclusion of Botero et al. These researchers additionally documented a positive correlation between
moralizing high gods and their measure of political complexity (number of jurisdictional hierarchy
levels). Our study also found this correlation, but we conclude that it was not causal, since this effect
disappeared once the military competition proxies were included in the model. The third factor,
detected by the analysis of Botero et al., was the positive effect of animal husbandry. In this our results
agree, as we also found a statistically significant effect of pastoralism on MSP, although its magnitude
was not high. More generally, there is a nearly universal agreement among the analyses based on the
Standard Cross-Cultural Sample, the Ethnographic Atlas, and now Seshat Databank, that animal
husbandry/pastoralism is a significant positive influence on moralizing religion (see also Brown and Eff
2010; Peoples and Marlowe 2012).
Such a mixture of agreement and disagreement between our results and analyses of the
ethnographic databases is to be expected. It is due, in part, to Seshat’s dynamic approach that allows us
to trace how variables change with time, thus giving us a better ability to capture cause-effect
relationships. Additionally, the Seshat Databank places a much greater emphasis on large-scale complex
societies, which are undersampled in the ethnographic databases. Furthermore, analyses based on
existing ethnographic databases utilize a simple binary measure of moralizing religion. While this
approach works quite well for establishing broad-brush patterns, our analysis demonstrates the benefits
of capturing additional nuance in the dynamics of MSP.
The relationship between MSP and “affluence,” or economic development, is similarly
complicated, as suggested by a comparison of our results to those from the previous analysis of
Baumard et al. (2015), who proxied affluence with an index of energy capture, derived from Morris
(2013). We do not yet have a Seshat variable for a direct comparison, but coding efforts for such a
measure are underway). Nevertheless, a key input in their measure is agricultural productivity, for which
we can use Seshat, from which our analysis of agricultural productivity (Agri) should capture some of the
same traits they use. Our results provide support for the view that this aspect of development is a factor
in the rise and spread of MSP: when Agri is added to the regression model it helps to account for
substantial additional variation in the MSP measure. However, this effect is nonlinear, and the strongest
positive effect of Agri is achieved at intermediate levels of this variable.
The life-history theory proposed by Baumard and colleagues (Baumard and Boyer 2013;
Baumard and Chevalier 2015; cf. Purzycki et al. 2018) utilized measures of MSP extracted from a
standard list of Axial Religions and Movements (Greek philosophy and Second Temple Judaism in
Eastern Mediterranean, North Indian movements such as Buddhism and Jainism, and Taoism and
Confucianism in North China). These measures do not fully capture the diversity and nuance of the
historical data, especially the nature and extent of moralizing monitoring and enforcement and
institutionalized measures to promote prosociality. It also excludes from consideration other faiths that
were at least as moralizing (or Axial) as those included (Mullins et al. 2018; Hoyer and Reddish 2019).
For example, Baumard et al. count Egypt as part of their non-Axial regions. Yet the Seshat data,
buttressed by an extensive analytic narrative devoted to Egypt, indicates that Egypt was one of the

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

P a g e | 19

earliest regions in the world to develop a religion in which concern for interpersonal morality could be
described as primary, preceding the Axial Age, as usually defined, by more than a millennium (see Figure
1).
The life-history approach also brings to the fore various theoretical concerns. Baumard et al.
focus on how individuals respond to affluence, while sociologists of religion emphasize that the process
of adopting theistic beliefs is essentially social (Stark and Bainbridge 1996; Stark 1996). As pre-industrial
societies grew more affluent, most individuals living in them did not enjoy greater affluence. Part of the
explanation for this lies in changes, which can be analyzed in Malthusian and Marxian terms, that meant
that population growth up to the carrying capacity of cultivable land negated advances in productive
technology and resulted in elites appropriating surpluses. Untangling these issues requires considering
both individual-level and society-level processes, but the interplay between them is controversial. This
can be seen in the divergent views of evolutionary psychologists, human behavioral ecologists, and
cultural evolutionists on the role of cultural group selection in explaining developments in human
cooperation (Richerson et al. 2016).

Conclusions
This article focuses on a sample of regions where a multifaceted coding of MSP could be developed and
analyzed alongside documented increases in socio-political complexity. This coding breaks relevant
evidence down into constituent elements focused on the type, range, and focus of moralizing
supernatural powers. Combining these elements into a single quantitative measure makes it possible to
trace the evolution of this significant cultural innovation in considerable detail. We find some evidence
that beliefs in moralizing supernatural powers have ancient roots in some parts of the world, but the
idea that such powers can monitor and enforce moral norms tends to increase after rather than before
the sharpest rises in social complexity (Singh, Kaptchuk, and Henrich 2021; Whitehouse et al. 2021). Not
only do these moralizing powers’ abilities increase in scope, but we find that they become more strongly
focused on moral behavior, punishment for violations becomes more targeted and certain, and the
provenance of punishment is extended to more groups in a society. In short, we find that as societies
grow in complexity (notably driven by increasingly intense inter-state warfare), they tend to produce
religions concerned with policing morality in human affairs in increasingly systematic ways. This policing
function may have facilitated cooperation as societies grew more internally differentiated and, at the
same time, fostered effective collective action against rival polities.
In our sample, we find that both MSP and socio-political complexity were strongly influenced by
the evolutionary demands of intense inter-state competition, particularly cavalry warfare. Our analysis
also supports the hypothesis that the productivity of agriculture and pastoralism have a positive effect
on the evolution of MSP. Utilizing the large dynamic dataset gathered by Seshat: Global History
Databank, we were able to trace how all of these factors relate to each other in our global sample and
make inferences about temporal causality. We structured the Seshat Sample deliberately to include
regions where large-scale societies organized as states formed early, as well as regions with smallerscale ones (and everything in between).
Our dynamic data show that moralizing religions tend to persist even after the states first
adopting them have disappeared. A possible explanation for this is that, once established, moralizing
religions confer such a significant advantage to the populations of a given area that they are preserved,
even following societal collapse, invasion, or reductions in sociopolitical complexity. Moreover, as
doctrinal systems (Whitehouse 2004) moralizing religions tend to spread very quickly and efficiently to
neighbouring societies or are readily adopted by new powers occupying territory encompassing
populations that adhere to such belief systems.

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

P a g e | 20

As well as clarifying some long-standing debates among scholars in a variety of fields, our
findings raise several significant questions that can be approached in new ways: Do all seven MSP
characteristics we identify here carry the same evolutionary benefits? Are some characteristics—for
example affecting the domain or intensity of moralizing enforcement— more effective than others at
strengthening cooperation? Do some MSP characteristics help to suppress structural inequalities or
tensions, contributing to stability at high levels of complexity? Do MSP characteristics foster trust across
ethnic divisions, as these grow more complex and fractious as a result of invasion, incorporation,
migration, and the expansion of trading networks? How do beliefs in the afterlife or impersonal forces
like karma fit into the picture? How do these MSP elements overlap, or interact, with those traits
identified as universal Moral Foundations found in all human societies (Haidt and Joseph 2007; McKay
and Whitehouse 2014; Curry, Mullins, and Whitehouse 2019)? Do these religions confer societal
benefits beyond success in intense intergroup competition, such as increased longevity and other
measures of well-being for different segments of the population? How did the specialization, volume,
and scope of trading networks contribute to the development and spread of MSP? How did MSP interact
with secular institutions designed to solve collective-action problems, such as imperial bureaucracies
and policing organizations that monitored people’s contributions to public goods (and could impose
punishments when individuals fell short)? These questions require further exploration. Utilizing large,
dynamic (time-resolved) databases like Seshat is, we argue, a useful approach to address these big
questions about human evolution.
Developing a more refined set of measures of MSP led us to identity a number of key areas in
which additional work is needed to develop a truly global explanation of the relationship between sociopolitical complexity and the rise and spread of moralizing religions. While this study analyzes moralizing
punishments and rewards using several new variables, it does not yet address all degrees and aspects of
MSP. For example, it considers whether rulers are subject to systems of reward and punishment, but not
how such rules might or might not apply to other social categories (e.g. low-status groups, women,
children). It focuses on moral transgressions most likely to affect interpersonal cooperation (such as
assault or lying) but does not address whether moral offences against the gods, such as failure to carry
out ritual obligations, are cultural proxies for good behavior in other domains. This paper demonstrates
the utility of a more fine-grained approach to the historical development of MSP, encouraging further
refinements like these.
Our study also draws attention to the need to broaden the scope of analysis in order to be more
globally representative. Having focused on regions that figure prominently in explanations for the rise of
MSP during the Axial Age, we recognize the importance of considering regions where sociopolitical,
economic, and religious trajectories were quite different (Mullins et al. 2018). These include centers of
domestication and state formation like Mesoamerica and the central Andes, as well as parts of subSaharan Africa, Polynesia, and North America that had complex societies at the time of contact, where
local traditions represented a diverse range of supernatural powers. Building a broader set of case
studies will present opportunities—and challenges—for refining and testing military, economic, and
other factors that are common across a global sample. Because of the lack of detailed pre-colonial
religious texts in these regions, archaeological data constitute a key source of evidence, raising
important practical questions about how to develop analytical narratives that draw on both the written
and material records (Mullins et al. 2018; Whitehouse, François, Cioni, et al. 2019).
Synthesizing the evidence from archaeology and history on the evolution of moralizing religions
represents an exceedingly challenging aspiration, but a necessary one for robust conclusions to be
reached. The findings reported here may not accord well with those assembled by scholars working with
datasets based on late 19th and early and mid 20th century ethnographies of indigenous societies, many
of which experienced generations of colonial rule and missionary efforts before the arrival of

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

P a g e | 21

anthropologists. Furthermore, using the ethnographic present as a proxy for inferring processes of
religious evolution in the past blurs the distinction between the prehistoric origins of complex societies,
detectable only in their archaeology, and more recent increases in social complexity, as recounted in the
writings of explorers, missionaries, ethnographers, and other literate observers prior to and during early
phases of colonization. There is good reason to suspect that these are problematic records to use as
proxies for Pleistocene foragers, early Holocene farmers, or the cities and states that developed long
before the first narrative histories (Singh and Glowacki 2021).
Seshat results highlight some of the limitations of continuing with indirect studies of human
socio-cultural evolution but they also offer an important way forward toward a more comprehensive
explanation of the human past. We hope that by providing access to our data, analyses, and conclusions
in parallel with the process of peer review, we will encourage critical engagement from a broad range of
scholars, allowing us not only to demonstrate the usefulness of a quantitative approach to the analysis
of world history in tackling longstanding puzzles in the study of cultural evolution but at the same time
increasing the scope and quality of the data and methods available to researchers.

Data Availability
The Seshat team makes our data and analysis scripts publicly available in several ways. First, we
periodically publish “snapshots” of the Seshat Databank for well-curated variables and polities. The
current such data release is Equinox-2020, which presents data in both browsable format and through a
spreadsheet. Whereas the spreadsheet contains data in computer-readable form suitable for statistical
analyses, Seshat Data Browser also includes narrative paragraphs, explaining the codes, as well as
references. Second, we deposit in open access all data on which analyses are based at the time of
publication of the article that reports these analyses. These “replication datasets” are published as
downloadable spreadsheets (see Seshat Datasets). Third, the Supplementary Online Material and
Supplementary Results, including the analysis code for analyses in this article, are available at the OSF
project associated with the SocArxiv preprint. Lastly, we have made available analytic narratives
describing moralizing supernatural punishment and reward in the polities for each region, which have
guided our coding decisions. A separate coding table summarizes the codes (linked in the browsable
page for each polity).

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a John Templeton Foundation grant to the Evolution Institute, entitled
"Axial-Age Religions and the Z-Curve of Human Egalitarianism," a Tricoastal Foundation grant to the
Evolution Institute, entitled "The Deep Roots of the Modern World: The Cultural Evolution of Economic
Growth and Political Stability," an ESRC Large Grant to the University of Oxford, entitled "Ritual,
Community, and Conflict" (REF RES-060-25-0085), a grant from the European Union Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme (grant agreement No 644055 [ALIGNED, www.aligned-project.eu]),
a Templeton World Charity Foundation grant, entitled ‘Cognitive and Cultural Foundations of Religion
and Morality’ (Grant ID# TWCF0164), an Advanced Grant (‘Ritual Modes: Divergent modes of ritual,
social cohesion, prosociality, and conflict’, grant agreement no. 694986) from the European Research
Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme, a grant
from the Institute of Economics and Peace to develop a “Historical Peace Index”, and the program
“Complexity Science,” which is supported by the Austrian Research Promotion Agency FFG under grant
#873927. We gratefully acknowledge the contributions of our team of research assistants, post-doctoral
researchers, consultants, and experts. Additionally, we have received invaluable assistance from our
collaborators. Please see the Seshat website (www.seshatdatabank.info) for a comprehensive list of

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

P a g e | 22

private donors, partners, experts, and consultants and their respective areas of expertise. We also thank
Carlos Botero for sharing his data and methods for calculating environmental variables.
Author contributions: P.T., H.W., and P.F. designed the study; E.A., M.A., J.B., P.B., D.M.C., G.F., P.F., D.H.,
A.K., N.K., J.L., S.E.N., A.S., V.W., and H.W. provided expert advice on data input and review; J.R., E.C., J.D.L.,
E.B., H.W., P.F., J.L., D.H., and P.T. coded the MSP data; P.T. analysed the data; P.T. and H.W. drafted the
manuscript with input from A.C., P.F., J.L, D.H., P.E.S, and E.B.
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Correspondence should be addressed to J.L. (jlarson@kent.edu).

References

Annis, Lawrence V. 1976. "Emergency Helping and Religious Behavior." Psychological Reports 39 (1):
151-158. https://doi.org/10.2466/pr0.1976.39.1.151.
https://doi.org/10.2466/pr0.1976.39.1.151.
Anthony, David W., and Don Ringe. 2015. "The Indo-European Homeland from Linguistic and
Archaeological Perspectives." Annu. Rev. Linguist. 1: 199-219.
Bates, Robert H., Avner Greif, Margaret Levi, Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, and Barry R. Weingast. 2000. "The
Analytic Narrative Project." American Political Science Review 94 (3): 696-702.
Bates, Robert H., Avner Greif, Barry R. Weingast, and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal. 1998. Analytic Narratives.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Baumard, Nicolas, and Pascal Boyer. 2013. "Explaining moral religions." Trends in Cognitive Sciences 17:
272-280. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.04.003.
Baumard, Nicolas, and C Chevalier. 2015. "The nature and dynamics of world religions: A life-history
approach." Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 1818: 20151593.
Baumard, Nicolas, Alexandre Hyafil, Ian Morris, and Pascal Boyer. 2015. "Increased Affluence Explains
the Emergence of Ascetic Wisdoms and Moralizing Religions." Current Biology 25: 1-6.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2014.10.063. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2014.10.063.
Beheim, Bret, Quentin Atkinson, Joseph Bulbulia, Will M. Gervais, Russell Gray, Joseph Henrich, Martin
Lang, M. Willis Monroe, Michael Muthukrishna, Ara Norenzayan, Benjamin Grant Purzycki, Azim
Shariff, Edward Slingerland, Rachel Spicer, and Aiyana K. Willard. 2019. "Corrected Analyses
Show That Moralizing Gods Precede Complex Societies but Serious Data Concerns Remain."
PsyArXiv. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/jwa2n.
Bellah, Robert N. 2011. Religion in Human Evolution: From the Paleolithic to the Axial Age. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Bennett, James S. . 2020. "Retrodicting the Rise, Spread, and Fall of Large-scale States in the Old World."
SocArXiv Preprint. https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/ksgpz.
Bering, Jesse M. 2006. "The folk psychology of souls." Behavioral and Brain Sciences 29 (5): 453-462.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X06009101.
Botero, Carlos A., Beth Gardner, Kathryn R. Kirby, Joseph Bulbulia, Michael C. Gavin, and Russell D. Gray.
2014. "The ecology of religious beliefs." PNAS.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1408701111.
Bouckaert, Remco, Philippe Lemey, Michael Dunn, Simon J. Greenhill, Alexander V. Alekseyenko, Alexei
J. Drummond, Russell D. Gray, Marc A. Suchard, and Quentin D. Atkinson. 2012. "Mapping the
Origins and Expansion of the Indo-European Language Family." Science 337 (6097): 957.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1219669.
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/337/6097/957.abstract.
Boyer, Pascal. 2001. Religion Explained: The Evolutionary Origins of Religious Thought. NY: Basic Books.

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

P a g e | 23

Brooks, A. C. . 2006. Who really cares: The surprising truth about compassionate conservatism—
America’s charity divide—who gives, who doesn’t, and why it matters. New York, NY: Basic
Books.
Brown, Christian, and E. Anthon Eff. 2010. "The State and the Supernatural: Support for Prosocial
Behavior." Structure and Dynamics 4 (1): Article 3.
file:///C:/Documents%20and%20Settings/Peter%20Turchin/My%20Documents/4.DBase/Texts/
Brown_2010.pdf.
Chang, Will, Chundra Cathcart, David Hall, and Andrew Garrett. 2015. "Ancestry-constrained
phylogenetic analysis supports the Indo-European steppe hypothesis." Language 91 (1): 194244.
Chase, Kenneth. 2003. Firearms: A Global History to 1700. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cipolla, Carlo M. . 1965. Guns, Sails, and Empires: Technological Innovation and the Early Phases of
European Expansion, 1400-1700. New York: Pantheon Books.
Currie, Thomas E. 2014. "Developing Scales of Development." Cliodynamics 5: 65-74.
https://doi.org/10.21237/C7clio5125315.
Currie, Thomas E., and Ruth Mace. 2012. "The Evolution of Ethnolinguistic Diversity." Advance in
Complex Systems 15: 1-20.
file:///C:/Documents%20and%20Settings/Peter%20Turchin/My%20Documents/4.DBase/Texts/
Currie_Mace_2012_EthnolinguisticDiversity_ACS.pdf.
Curry, Oliver S, Daniel A. Mullins, and Harvey Whitehouse. 2019. "Is it good to cooperate?" Current
Anthropology 60: 47-69.
Darley, John M., and C. Daniel Batson. 1973. ""From Jerusalem to Jericho": A study of situational and
dispositional variables in helping behavior." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 27 (1):
100-108. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0034449.
Darwin, Charles. 1871. The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex. London: John Murray.
Drews, Robert. 1993. The End of the Bronze Age: Changes in Warfare and the Catastrophe ca. 1200 BC.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
---. 2004. Early Riders: The Beginnings of Mounted Warfare in Asia and Europe. New York: Routledge.
Efron, B, and R J Tibshirani. 1993. An introduction to the bootstrap. New York: Chapman and Hall.
Feinman, Gary M. 2016. "Variation and Change in Archaic States: Ritual as Mechanism of Sociopolitical
Integration." In Ritual and Archaic States, edited by Joanne M. A. Murphy, 1-22. Gainesville:
University Press of Florida.
François, Pieter, J. G. Manning, Harvey Whitehouse, Rob Brennan, Thomas Currie, Kevin Feeney, and
Peter Turchin. 2016. "A Macroscope for Global History: Seshat Global History Databank, a
methodological overview." Digital Humanities Quarterly 10 (4).
http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/10/4/000272/000272.html.
Ge, Erhao, Yuan Chen, Jiajia Wu, and Ruth Mace. 2019. "Large-scale cooperation driven by reputation,
not fear of divine punishment." Royal Society Open Science 6 (8): 190991.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.190991. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.190991.
Geertz, Armin W. 2014. "Do Big Gods cause anything?" Religion 44 (4): 609-613.
https://doi.org/10.1080/0048721X.2014.937052.
https://doi.org/10.1080/0048721X.2014.937052.
Gelfand, Michele J., Jana L. Raver, Lisa Nishii, Lisa M. Leslie, Janetta Lun, Beng Chong Lim, Lili Duan, Assaf
Almaliach, Soon Ang, Jakobina Arnadottir, Zeynep Aycan, Klaus Boehnke, Pawel Boski, Rosa
Cabecinhas, Darius Chan, Jagdeep Chhokar, Alessia D’Amato, Montse Ferrer, Iris C. Fischlmayr,
Ronald Fischer, Marta Fülöp, James Georgas, Emiko S. Kashima, Yoshishima Kashima, Kibum
Kim, Alain Lempereur, Patricia Marquez, Rozhan Othman, Bert Overlaet, Penny
Panagiotopoulou, Karl Peltzer, Lorena R. Perez-Florizno, Larisa Ponomarenko, Anu Realo, Vidar

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

P a g e | 24

Schei, Manfred Schmitt, Peter B. Smith, Nazar Soomro, Erna Szabo, Nalinee Taveesin, Midori
Toyama, Evert Van de Vliert, Naharika Vohra, Colleen Ward, and Susumu Yamaguchi. 2011.
"Differences Between Tight and Loose Cultures: A 33-Nation Study." Science 332 (6033): 1100.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1197754.
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/332/6033/1100.abstract.
Grossman, Philip J., and Matthew B. Parrett. 2011. "Religion and prosocial behaviour: a field test."
Applied Economics Letters 18 (6): 523-526. https://doi.org/10.1080/13504851003761798.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13504851003761798.
Haidt, Jonathan, and Craig Joseph. 2007. "The moral mind: How five sets of innate intuitions guide the
development of many culture-specific virtues, and perhaps even modules." In The Innate Mind
(vol. 3), edited by P. Carruthers, S. Laurence and S. Stich.
Henrich, Joseph, Jean Ensminger, Richard McElreath, Abigail Barr, Clark Barrett, Alexander Bolyanatz,
Juan Camilo Cardenas, Michael Gurven, Edwin Gwako, Natalie Henrich, Carolyn Lesorogol, Frank
Marlowe, David Tracer, and John Ziker. 2010. "Markets, Religion, Community Size, and the
Evolution of Fairness and Punishment." Science 327: 1480-1484.
file:///C:/Documents%20and%20Settings/Peter%20Turchin/My%20Documents/4.DBase/Texts/
Henrich_2010.pdf.
Hofmann, Wilhelm, Daniel C. Wisneski, Mark J. Brandt, and Linda J. Skitka. 2014. "Morality in everyday
life." Science 345 (6202): 1340-1343. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1251560.
https://science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/345/6202/1340.full.pdf.
Hood, Ralph W., Peter C. Hill, and Bernard Spilka. 2009. The Psychology of Religion: An Empirical
Approach. Fourth ed.: The Guilford Press.
Hoyer, Daniel, and J. Reddish, eds. 2019. The Seshat History of Axial Age.
Jaspers, Karl. 1953. The Origin and Goal of History. New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Johnson, Dominic D. P. 2005. "God’s punishment and public goods." Human Nature 16 (4): 410-446.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12110-005-1017-0. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12110-005-1017-0.
Johnson, Megan K., Wade C. Rowatt, and Jordan P. LaBouff. 2012. "Religiosity and prejudice revisited:
In-group favoritism, out-group derogation, or both?" Psychology of Religion and Spirituality 4
(2): 154-168.
Kavanagh, Christopher, Jonathan Jong, and Harvey Whitehouse. 2020. "Ritual and Religion as Social
Technologies of Cooperation." In Culture, Mind, and Brain: Emerging Concepts, Methods,
Applications, edited by Constance A. Cummings, Laurence J. Kirmayer, Shinobu Kitayama, Robert
Lemelson and Carol M. Worthman. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kelemen, Deborah. 2004. "Are Children “Intuitive Theists”?: Reasoning About Purpose and Design in
Nature." Psychological Science 15 (5): 295-301. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.09567976.2004.00672.x. https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.0956-7976.2004.00672.x.
Lang, Martin, G. Purzycki Benjamin, L. Apicella Coren, D. Atkinson Quentin, Alexander Bolyanatz, Emma
Cohen, Carla Handley, Eva Kundtová Klocová, Carolyn Lesorogol, Sarah Mathew, A. McNamara
Rita, Cristina Moya, D. Placek Caitlyn, Montserrat Soler, Thomas Vardy, L. Weigel Jonathan, K.
Willard Aiyana, Dimitris Xygalatas, Ara Norenzayan, and Joseph Henrich. 2019. "Moralizing gods,
impartiality and religious parochialism across 15 societies." Proceedings of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences 286 (1898): 20190202. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2019.0202.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2019.0202.
Mace, Ruth, and Claire J. Holden. 2005. "A phylogenetic approach to cultural evolution." Trends in
Ecology and Evolution 20: 116-121.
Manning, Patrick, Pieter Francois, Daniel Hoyer, and Vladimir Zadorozhny. 2017. "Collaborative
Historical Information Analysis." In Comprehensive Geographic Information Systems, edited by
Bo Huang. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

P a g e | 25

Martin, Luther H. 2014. "Great expectations for Ara Norenzayan's Big Gods." Religion 44 (4): 628-637.
https://doi.org/10.1080/0048721X.2014.937062.
https://doi.org/10.1080/0048721X.2014.937062.
McKay, Ryan, and Harvey Whitehouse. 2014. "Religion and Morality." Psychological Bulletin 141 (2):
447-473. https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0038455.
Morris, Ian. 2013. The Measure of Civilization: How Social Developments Decides the Fate of Nations.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Mullins, Daniel A., Daniel Hoyer, Christina Collins, Thomas Currie, Kevin Feeney, Pieter François, Patrick
E. Savage, Harvey Whitehouse, and Peter Turchin. 2018. "A systematic assessment of 'Axial Age'
proposals using global comparative historical evidence." American Sociology Review 83 (3): 596–
626. https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122418772567.
Murdock, George P. 1967. Ethnographic Atlas. Pittsburgh University of Pittsburgh Press.
Norenzayan, Ara. 2013. Big Gods: How Religion Transformed Cooperation and Conflict. Princeton
University Press.
Norenzayan, Ara, and Azim F. Shariff. 2008. "The origin and evolution of religious prosociality." Science
322: 58-62.
file:///C:/Documents%20and%20Settings/Peter%20Turchin/My%20Documents/4.DBase/Texts/
Norenzayan_2008.pdf.
Norenzayan, Ara, Azim F. Shariff, Aiyana K. Willard, Edward Slingerland, Will M. Gervais, Rita A.
Mcnamara, and Joseph Henrich. 2016. "The cultural evolution of prosocial religions." Behavioral
& Brain Sciences 39: 1-65. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X14001356.
Peoples, Hervey C., and Frank W. Marlowe. 2012. "Subsistence and the Evolution of Religion." Human
Nature 23 (3): 253-269. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12110-012-9148-6.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12110-012-9148-6.
Peregrine, Peter. 1996. "The Birth of the Gods Revisited: A Partial Replication of Guy Swanson's (1960)
Cross-Cultural Study of Religion." Cross-Cultural Research 30 (1): 84-112.
https://doi.org/10.1177/106939719603000104. https://doi.org/10.1177/106939719603000104.
Pereltsvaig, Asya, and Martin W. Lewis. 2015. The Indo-European Controversy: Facts and Fallacies in
Historical Linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Purzycki, Benjamin Grant, Coren Apicella, Quentin D. Atkinson, Emma Cohen, Rita Anne McNamara,
Aiyana K. Willard, Dimitris Xygalatas, Ara Norenzayan, and Joseph Henrich. 2016. "Moralistic
gods, supernatural punishment and the expansion of human sociality." Nature 530: 327.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature16980. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature16980.
Purzycki, Benjamin Grant, Cody T. Ross, Coren Apicella, Quentin D. Atkinson, Emma Cohen, Rita Anne
McNamara, Aiyana K. Willard, Dimitris Xygalatas, Ara Norenzayan, and Joseph Henrich. 2018.
"Material security, life history, and moralistic religions: A cross-cultural examination." PLOS ONE
13 (3): e0193856. https://doi.org/doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0193856.
Raffield, Ben, Neil Price, and Mark Collard. 2019. "Religious belief and cooperation: a view from VikingAge Scandinavia." Religion, Brain & Behavior 9 (1): 2-22.
https://doi.org/10.1080/2153599X.2017.1395764.
https://doi.org/10.1080/2153599X.2017.1395764.
Richerson, Peter, Ryan Baldini, Adrian V. Bell, Kathryn Demps, Karl Frost, Vicken Hillis, Sarah Mathew,
Emily K. Newton, Nicole Naar, Lesley Newson, Cody Ross, Paul E. Smaldino, Timothy M. Waring,
and Matthew Zefferman. 2016. "Cultural group selection plays an essential role in explaining
human cooperation: A sketch of the evidence." Behavioral and Brain Sciences 39 (e30).
https://doi.org/doi:10.1017/S0140525X1400106X.
Roberts, Michael. 1956. The Military Revolution, 1560–1660. Belfast.

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

P a g e | 26

Roes, Frans L., and Michel Raymond. 2003. "Belief in moralizing gods." Evolution and Human Behavior
24: 126-135.
file:///C:/Documents%20and%20Settings/Peter%20Turchin/My%20Documents/4.DBase/Texts/
Roes_2003.pdf.
Rohrer, Julia M. 2018. "Thinking Clearly About Correlations and Causation: Graphical Causal Models for
Observational Data." Advances in Methods and Practices in Psychological Science 1 (1): 27-42.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2515245917745629.
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/2515245917745629.
Scheepers, Peer, Mèrove Gijsberts, and Evelyn Hello. 2002. "Religiosity and Prejudice against Ethnic
Minorities in Europe: Cross-National Tests on a Controversial Relationship." Review of Religious
Research 43 (3): 242-265. https://doi.org/10.2307/3512331.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3512331.
Siegman, Aron Wolfe. 1962. "Personality and Socio-cultural Variables Associated with Religious
Behavior." Archiv für Religionspsychologie / Archive for the Psychology of Religion 7 (1): 96-104.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/23919300.
Singh, Manvir, and Luke Glowacki. 2021. "Human Social Organization During the Late Pleistocene:
Beyond the Nomadic-egalitarian Model." EcoEvoRxiv. https://doi.org/doi:10.32942/osf.io/vusye.
Singh, Manvir, Ted J. Kaptchuk, and Joseph Henrich. 2021. "Small gods, rituals, and cooperation: The
Mentawai water spirit Sikameinan." Evolution and Human Behavior 42 (1): 61-72.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2020.07.008.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1090513820300878.
Smith, Ronald E., Gregory Wheeler, and Edward Diener. 1975. "Faith Without Works: Jesus People,
Resistance to Temptation, and Altruism." Journal of Applied Social Psychology 5 (4): 320-330.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1559-1816.1975.tb00684.x. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.15591816.1975.tb00684.x.
Stark, R. 1996. The Rise of Christianity: A Sociologist Reconsiders History. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Stark, R, and W S Bainbridge. 1996. A Theory of Religion. 1st pbk. ed. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University Press.
Strathern, Alan. 2019. Unearthly Powers: Religious and Political Change in World History. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Swanson, Guy E. 1960. The Birth of the Gods: The Origin of Primitive Beliefs. Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Press.
Townsend, Cathryn, Athena Aktipis, Daniel Balliet, and Lee Cronk. 2020. "Generosity among the Ik of
Uganda." Evolutionary Human Sciences 2: 1-13.
Turchin, Peter. 2003. Historical dynamics: why states rise and fall. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
---. 2006. War and Peace and War: The Life Cycles of Imperial Nations. NY: Pi Press.
---. 2009. "A Theory for Formation of Large Empires." Journal of Global History 4: 191-207.
---. 2016. Ultrasociety: How 10,000 Years of War Made Humans the Greatest Cooperators on Earth.
Chaplin, CT: Beresta Books.
---. 2018. "Fitting Dynamic Regression Models to Seshat Data." Cliodynamics 9: 25-58.
Turchin, Peter, Rob Brennan, Thomas Currie, Kevin Feeney, Pieter Francois, Daniel Hoyer, Joseph
Manning, Arkadiusz Marciniak, Daniel Mullins, Alessio Palmisano, Peter Peregrine, Edward A.L.
Turner, and Harvey Whitehouse. 2015. "Seshat: The Global History Databank." Cliodynamics 6:
77-107.
Turchin, Peter, Thomas E Currie, Harvey Whitehouse, Pieter Francois, Kevin Feeney, Daniel Mullins,
Daniel Hoyer, Christina Collins, Stephanie Grohmann, Patrick Savage, Gavin Mendel-Gleason,

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

P a g e | 27

Edward Turner, Agathe Dupeyron, Enrico Cioni, Jenny Reddish, Jill Levine, Greine Jordan, Eva
Brandl, Alice Williams, Rudolf Cesaretti, Marta Krueger, Alessandro Ceccarelli, Joe FigliuloRosswurm, Po-Ju Tuan, Peter Peregrine, Arkadiusz Marciniak, Johannes Preiser-Kapeller, Nikolay
Kradin, Andrey Korotayev, Alessio Palmisano, David Baker, Julye Bidmead, Peter Bol, David
Christian, Connie Cook, Alan Covey, Gary Feinman, Arni Daniel Juliusson, Axel Kristinsson, John
Miksic, Ruth Mostern, Cameron Petrie, Peter Rudiak-Gould, Barend Ter Haar, Vesna Wallace,
Victor Mair, Liye Xie, John Baines, Elizabeth Bridges, Joseph Manning, Bruce Lockhart, Amy
Bogaard, and Charles Spencer. 2018. "Quantitative historical analysis uncovers a single
dimension of complexity that structures global variation in human social organization." Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 115 (2): e144-e151. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1708800115.
http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2017/12/20/1708800115.
Turchin, Peter, Thomas E. Currie, Christina Collins, Jill Levine, Oluwole Oyebamiji, Neil R. Edwards, Philip
B. Holden, Daniel Hoyer, Kevin Feeney, Pieter Francois, and Harvey Whitehouse. 2021. "An
integrative approach to estimating productivity in past societies using Seshat: Global History
Databank." Holocene. https://doi.org/10.1177/0959683621994644.
Turchin, Peter, Thomas E. Currie, and Edward A. L. Turner. 2016. "Mapping the Spread of Mounted
Warfare." Cliodynamics 7: 217-227. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.21237/C7clio7233509.
Turchin, Peter, Thomas E. Currie, Edward A.L. Turner, and Sergey Gavrilets. 2013. "War, Space, and the
Evolution of Old World Complex Societies." PNAS 110: 16384–16389.
Turchin, Peter, Daniel Hoyer, James Bennett, Kiran Basava, Enrico Cioni, Pieter Francois, Samantha
Holder, Jill Levine, Selin Nugent, Jenny Reddish, Chelsea Thorpe, Sal Wiltshire, and Harvey
Whitehouse. 2020. "The Equinox2020 Seshat Data Release." Cliodynamics 11 (1): 41-50.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.21237/C7clio11148620.
Turchin, Peter, Andrey Korotayev, Nikolay Kradin, Sergey Nefedov, Gary Feinman, James S. Bennett,
Daniel Hoyer, Pieter Francois, and Harvey Whitehouse. 2020. "Rise of the War Machines:
Charting the Evolution of Military Technologies from the Neolithic to the Industrial Revolution."
SocArXiv Preprint.
Turchin, Peter, Harvey Whitehouse, Pieter François, Daniel Hoyer, Abel Alves, John Baines, David Baker,
Marta Bartkowiak, Jennifer Bates, James Bennett, Julye Bidmead, Peter Bol, Alessandro
Ceccarelli, Kostis Christakis, David Christian, Alan Covey, Franco De Angelis, Timothy K. Earle,
Neil R. Edwards, Gary Feinman, Stephanie Grohmann, Philip B. Holden, Árni Júlíusson, Andrey
Korotayev, Axel Kristinsson, Jennifer Larson, Oren Litwin, Victor Mair, Joseph G. Manning,
Patrick Manning, Arkadiusz Marciniak, Gregory McMahon, John Miksic, Juan Carlos Moreno
Garcia, Ian Morris, Ruth Mostern, Daniel Mullins, Oluwole Oyebamiji, Peter Peregrine, Cameron
Petrie, Johannes Prieser-Kapeller, Peter Rudiak-Gould, Paula Sabloff, Patrick Savage, Charles
Spencer, Miriam Stark, Barend ter Haar, Stefan Thurner, Vesna Wallace, Nina Witoszek, and Liye
Xie. 2020. "An Introduction to Seshat: Global History Databank." Journal of Cognitive
Historiography 5 (1-2): 115-123. https://doi.org/10.1558/jch.39395.
https://journal.equinoxpub.com/JCH/article/view/18508.
Turchin, Peter, Harvey Whitehouse, Andrey Korotayev, Pieter Francois, Daniel Hoyer, Peter Peregrine,
Gary Feinman, Charles Spencer, Nikolay Kradin, and Thomas E. Currie. 2019. Evolutionary
Pathways to Statehood: Old Theories and New Data. SocArXiv Preprint.
https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/h7tr6.
Watts, Joseph, Simon J. Greenhill, Quentin D. Atkinson, Thomas E. Currie, Joseph Bulbulia, and Russell D.
Gray. 2015. "Broad supernatural punishment but not moralizing high gods precede the evolution
of political complexity in Austronesia." Proceedings of the Royal Society B 282: 20142556.
https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2014.2556.

Seshat Project: Evolution of Moralizing Religion

P a g e | 28

White, Douglas R. 2008. "Standard Cross-Cultural Sample." In International Encyclopedia of the Social
Sciences, 2nd ed. Vol. 8, edited by W. A. Darity, 88-93. New York: Macmillan.
Whitehouse, Harvey. 2004. Modes of religiosity: a cognitive theory of religious transmission. Walnut
Creek: AltaMira Press.
Whitehouse, Harvey, Pieter François, Enrico Cioni, Jill Levine, Daniel Hoyer, Jenny Reddish, and Peter
Turchin. 2019. " Was There Ever an Axial Age?" In Seshat History of the Axial Age, edited by
Daniel Hoyer and Jenny Reddish. Chaplin, CT: Beresta Books.
Whitehouse, Harvey, Pieter François, Patrick E. Savage, Thomas E. Currie, Kevin C. Feeney, Enrico Cioni,
Rosalind Purcell, Robert M. Ross, Jennifer Larson, John Baines, Barend ter Haar, Alan Covey, and
Peter Turchin. 2020. "A New Era in the Study of Global History is Born but it Needs to be
Nurtured (now Journal of Cognitive History, in press)." Journal of Cognitive Historiography 5.
https://doi.org/10.1558/jch.39422.
Whitehouse, Harvey, Pieter François, Patrick E. Savage, Thomas E. Currie, Kevin C. Feeney, Enrico Cioni,
Rosalind Purcell, Robert M. Ross, Jennifer Larson, John Baines, Barend ter Haar, Alan Covey, and
Peter Turchin. 2019. "Complex societies precede moralizing gods throughout world history."
Nature. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1043-4. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-0191043-4.
Whitehouse, Harvey, Pieter François, Patrick E. Savage, Daniel Hoyer, Kevin C. Feeney, Enrico Cioni,
Rosalind Purcell, Robert M. Ross, Jennifer Larson, John Baines, Barend ter Haar, Alan Covey, and
Peter Turchin. 2021. "Big Gods did not drive the rise of big societies throughout world history."
SocArXiv Preprint. https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/mbnvg.
Whitehouse, Harvey, Jonathan Jong, Michael D. Buhrmester, Ángel Gómez, Brock Bastian, Christopher
M. Kavanagh, Martha Newson, Miriam Matthews, Jonathan A. Lanman, Ryan McKay, and Sergey
Gavrilets. 2017. "The evolution of extreme cooperation via shared dysphoric experiences."
Scientific Reports 7: 44292. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep44292.
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep44292.
Whitley, Rob. 2011. "“Thank you God”: Religion and recovery from dual diagnosis among low-income
African Americans." Transcultural Psychiatry 49 (1): 87-104.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1363461511425099. https://doi.org/10.1177/1363461511425099.
Willard, Aiyana K., Adam Baimel, Hugh Turpin, Jonathan Jong, and Harvey Whitehouse. 2020.
"Rewarding the good and punishing the bad: The role of karma and afterlife beliefs in shaping
moral norms." Evolution and Human Behavior 41 (5): 385-396.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2020.07.001.
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1090513820300805.
Wilson, David Sloan. 2002. Darwin's Cathedral: Evolution, Religion, and The Nature of Society. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

