A Computational Approach to Assessing
Rhetorical Effectiveness: Agentic Framing of
Climate Change in the Congressional Record,
1994–2016
Zoltan P. Majdik, Ph.D.
North Dakota State University
Department of Communication

Abstract
The goal of this paper is to consider rhetorical effects as the propagation of
rhetorical expressions across large sets of texts, measured by the extent to which
rhetorical expressions, structures, or practices become replicated in texts and
sites of rhetorical in(ter)vention. The paper draws on lines of scholarship in the
digital humanities and computational rhetoric—primarily, sequential structuring
of semantic contexts, semantic parsing of unstructured text, and diachronic
tracking of textual expressions—to extend their conceptual and methodological
insights into a computational framework for assessing rhetorical effectiveness.
It offers a test case for this concept through an analysis of how Congress has
framed human agency toward addressing climate change.

Keywords
Climate change; Digital humanities; Computational rhetoric; Rhetorical effects

1

Publication Info
Pre-print disclaimer. This PDF is a pre-print of a manuscript that has been
accepted for publication. It looks different from the Version of Record. To access
the most updated version, and to cite from this document, refer to:
Majdik, Zoltan P. A Computational Approach to Assessing Rhetorical Effectiveness: Agentic Framing of Climate Change in the Congressional Record,
1994–2016. Technical Communication Quarterly XX, no. X (2019): p–pp.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10572252.2019.1601774.

2

Introduction
The goal of this paper is to conceptualize a framework for assessing the success
of rhetorical practices and expressions within a large discursive space. The paper
argues that computationally tracking how distinct rhetorical expressions increase
or decrease in prevalence over time provides a framework for engaging questions
about rhetorical effectiveness; it allows for mapping the "life," or circulation, of
rhetorical expressions as textual imprints that become replicated across general
or specialized discourses relative to and against other rhetorical expressions. The
paper so takes as its starting point theories of rhetoric that understand rhetoric
from cultural (Farrell, 1993) and communication from systemic (Luhmann, 1992)
instead of primarily psychological perspectives. As a test case for this concept,
the paper shows how two distinct agency frames in Congressional deliberations
on climate change shift in prevalence over time, arguing that climate change
frames foregrounding combative action have become more effective as Democratic
control of Congress ended and transitioned into split- and Republican-controlled
Congresses over the last few years.
Technical communication scholars have long been interested in climate change,
often drawing from and contributing to multiple disciplines in their work (for an
overview, see Cagle & Tillery, 2015). Whether implicit or explicit, much of this
work hinges on questions of effect: the effectiveness of public communication
on policy deliberation, for example (Spoel et al, 2008), or of visuals on public
deliberation (Walsh, 2015). Such questions of effect hinge on the need to make
communicative practices useable in technical spaces: on the effective ability of
rhetoric of science, for example, to actually act (Herndl & Cutlip, 2013), or
on the ability to effectively communicate risk against barriers like diachronic
distance of a hazard, complexity of the problem, and uncertainty of solutions
(see, e.g., Slovic, 1986; or Schäfer & Schlichting, 2014, for an overview).
This paper argues that for these reasons, technical communication scholarship
can benefit from considering the question of “effect” not only causally (what types
of communication can effectively do something) but, as described above, also
systemically (what types of communication are effectively doing something). The
latter paradigm represents communication as “an emergent reality” (Luhmann,
1992)1 , as the (dynamically changing) state of norms in a rhetorical system. In
so doing, it offers two possibilities. One is resources for technical communicators.
With reference to Herndl & Cutlip (2013), it offers both a curiosity-orientation
and a mission-orientation; its representation of the (emergent) state of rhetorical
norms also constitutes the resources for communicative practice, for intervening
into that space. Mapping and visualizing which communicative approaches gain
and lose acceptance over time in a technical, discursive system can help in doing
the work of communication.2 In this sense, assessing rhetorical effectiveness
1 For similar systems perspectives on scientific rhetorical practices, see Derkatch, 2018;
Keränen, 2010.
2 This systems-view of communication is why I take prevalence rather than salience as

3

across an entire discursive system treats rhetoric as techne, as a productive craft
(Miller, 1989).
But as Miller suggests, technical communication can, and should, consider
rhetoric differently as well: not just as a tool toward the production of communicative “goods,” but also as praxis, a kind of conduct, in which it provides a
”locus for questioning, for criticism, for distinguishing good practice from bad”
(p. 69). Mapping the work of rhetoric—its effects—maps a rhetorical culture. It
makes intelligible motives and audiences and norms of reciprocity (Farrell, 1993);
it makes visible presuppositions for acceptance and rejection of utterances, and
hence of communicative risk (Luhmann, 1992; see also footnote 1), which serve
as bases for questioning and criticism of actual communicative practices.
The paper offers a test case for this argument that draws methodologically on
scholarship in computational rhetoric and digital humanities, and scales it to
assess rhetorical effects as the propagation of rhetorical expressions across large
textual corpora, through identification of central semantic features, semantic
parsing of unstructured text, and diachronic tracking of textual expressions. The
test case focuses on how climate change is rhetorically positioned in Congressional
deliberations over the last 22 years, by identifying the predominant agentic frames
through which Congressional discourse has framed human capability relative to
climate change: a passive-agentic frame (focused on continued study of climate
change) and an active-agentic one (focused on more immediate intervention
in climate change. The analysis of these rhetorical frames centers on their
effectiveness: which rhetorical frames are most frequently represented across a
textual corpus (and so statically represent the rhetorical norms of the discursive
system), and which frames gain and wane in prevalence over time (and so reveal
the emergent norms of a discursive, rhetorical system).
a measure of rhetorical effectiveness, and measures of rhetorical effectiveness as a resource
for communicative practice. To follow Luhmann, prevalence of rhetorical expressions creates
“redundancy,” a “memory that can be called on my many persons.” These redundancies calcify
into (communicative) institutions that can “guarantee acceptability” (i.e., reduce the risk of
rejection) of utterances made by individual communicators; they identify positions “of connection for the next communication that can now either build on an already attained consensus
or seek dissent.” Hence, although a novel or inventive or particular act of communication can,
of course, be effective in intervening in a life-world if its content and structure is particularly
salient to the moment, from a broader use-perspective, those acts of communication ca not be
abstracted into a resource for others to use in other moments, nor can they be leveraged as
points of critique for general practices of communication.

4

Background: Tracking Rhetorical Frames and
Conceptualizing their Effectiveness in Large
Corpora
Toward rhetorical effects
The paper’s argument on what constitutes rhetorical effectiveness requires perspectives on rhetoric that locate effectiveness in textual more than behavioral
registers. Aristotle may be seen as a precursor: his claim that "[rhetoric’s]
function is not so much to persuade, as to find out in each case the existing
means of persuasion" reflects a systems-view of rhetoric’s effects. If the goal
of rhetoric is judgment in conditions of uncertainty, then what matters for an
effective rhetorical practice is the critical awareness of the means and norms of
persuasion that impinge on a deliberative situation, not to map specific rhetorical
expressions to specific audience reactions. Hence, when Wichelns (1925) stated
that rhetorical analysis is "not concerned with permanence, nor yet with beauty.
It is concerned with effect. It regards a speech as a communication to a specific
audience” [my emphasis], many were quick to (re-)locate that effect in textuality
rather than psychology. As Wayland Parrish (1954) argued, the quality of
rhetoric should not be measured against a specific audience: "We admire Burke’s
great addresses, not because they were well adapted to the boozy country squires
who sometimes sat in Parliament, but because they were designed for a better
audience.”
Others, too, sought to locate effectiveness more distinctly in the textual reach of
rhetorical expressions and practices. Wrage (1947) suggests an "idea centered"
model of rhetoric that emphasizes a "vast quantity of documentary sources" in
which ideas modified by rhetoric exist, and the importance of thinking about
linkages between ideas and between many speeches as measures for observing "the
reflections of prevailing social ideas and attitudes" (pp. 454, 456). Black (1970),
whose Rhetorical Methods already had sought to break with Wichelns’ focus on
immediate effects, argues that although evidence for (in his case, ideological)
effects of a discourse is most evident in the discourse’s substantive claims, the
“more likely evidence available will be the form of stylistic tokens” (p. 112).
Rand (2008), similarly, argues that "By ‘effectivity’ I mean to convey the ways
in which any rhetorical action is taken up [. . . it] refers not to the degree to
which the effects of a polemic match the polemicist’s intentions, but to the ways
in which it is put to use or taken up by others in a variety of different and
unforeseen fashions" (p. 309). Browne (2001), too, notes that effectiveness should
be measured through "units of discourse" (p. 333), while Heidt (2012) argues
that making "claims relating to audience and rhetorical effect" requires tracing
"the atomization, distribution, and recirculation of the elements of presidential
address" (p. 629), and for Greene (1998), effect comes from “linking a fragment
to a structure of signification (p. 35).

5

Importantly, none of these theories of rhetorical effect locate effect in a behavioral
idea, in which rhetorical structures would be argued to act as stimuli that affect
behavioral changes in audiences. Rather, effect is the textual "imprint" (see
also: Campbell & Jamieson, 1978) of a rhetorical practice or expression or
form, the extent to which it becomes replicated in other texts and other sites
of rhetorical in(ter)vention, aligned both in idea and in its value as resource
for communicative practice with the kind of communicative systems paradigm
discussed by Luhmann. The concept of rhetorical effectiveness proposed in this
paper proceeds from this understanding of effect.3 But doing so raises questions
of scope. If technical communication is invested in not only techne but also
praxis (Miller, 1989), then for analysis of rhetorical effects to serve as a resource
for technical communicators requires those effects to be understood in and across
the totality of their discursive system (see footnote 1; Luhmann, 1992). The
paper, then, concerns itself with how rhetorical effects, as discursive “tokens,”
“imprints,” or units with “use-value,” propagate4 across large numbers of texts,
and grow or wane in impact, not so much on actual audiences, but in how
readily they make available distinct communicative ways of associating with or
departing from the norms of an extant discursive system. This approach poses a
methodological challenge that will be addressed in the next section.

Tracking rhetorical effects
The paper’s test case for conceptualizing rhetorical effectiveness is interested
in agency frames (one of the five traits of frames suggested by Entman, 1991)
in Congressional discourse, and follows Nerlich & Koteyko’s (2009) concept of
“lexical framing” in treating words and word compounds as meaningful framing
devices.5 Framing of scientific issues in policy discourses can have a number of
impactful downstream effects on how science gets produced and used (see, e.g.,
Vink, Boezeman, Dewulf, & Termeer, 2013; Park, Liu, & Vedlitz, 2014). Yet,
extended discussion of climate change in Congress began comparably recently.
The Congressional Record—the daily publication of the proceedings of both
houses of Congress—shows that discussion of climate change spiked in 2007,
3 For a more complete discussion of effects in rhetoric, see Kiewe and Houck’s (2015)
introduction to The effects of rhetoric and the rhetoric of effects.
4 See also Campbell & Jamieson (1978) on the “recurrence” of rhetorical forms, as an index of
“human action,” the “influence of conventions on the responses of rhetors,” of “rhetorical options
or commonplaces,” as “insight into the human condition,” and as making accessible (rhetorical)
“affinities and traditions across time (pp 26, 27); or Greene (1998) in a critical/materialist
turn, in which “rhetoric distributes different elements on a terrain of a governing apparatus,”
yielding “a form of cartography” (pp. 38, 39).
5 The relative linguistic/syntactic simplicity of lexical framing serves to more clearly illustrate
the computational dimension of the test case, because such frames have limited semantic and
little syntactic variation (see subsequent section for how such variation is methodologically
captured). My hope is that subsequent research can build on it to encode more complex
rhetorical structures for tracking/mapping, whether they be frames with more complex structure
(like thematic frames, or Burkean acceptance/rejection frames), tropes, figures, narrative
structures, genres, etc.

6

when mentions of "climate change" or "global warming" rose from the mid-100s
and low 1000s in previous years to over 4000 (see Table 1, below, for a more
detailed description of the corpus).
Given the scope of Congressional deliberative texts, any analysis of its rhetorical
features that limits itself to a small sampling of deliberative exchanges will
offer at best a snapshot into how U.S. policy discourse has framed agentic
possibilities about climate change. Between 1994 and 2016, the Congressional
Record includes 5679 documents that include discussion of climate change,
and over 30,000 mentions of the term ’climate change’ or ’global warming’6
within those exchanges. Hence, to offer more than a snapshot of how effective
specific frames for climate change are compared to others requires a quantitative
component, one that should accomplish three objectives. It should include
affordances for exploratory, inductive "reading" across a large textual corpus to
help identify salient rhetorical expressions and semantic contexts. It should be
able to identify and tag these expressions at the scope of a phrase, sentence,
or paragraph, as rhetorical practices tend to operate within and across these
syntactic units. And it needs to show changes over time; because a rhetorical
culture is dynamic (frames and other rhetorical devices react to external drivers
and internal rhetorical forces), questions about effects ask how rhetorical framing
changes over time more than what the rhetorical frames are.
The computational parsing and tagging of semantic elements of language represents a challenge addressed in computational linguistics and rhetoric (for an
overview of work in the latter, see Ridolfo & Hart-Davidson, 2015). Some
approaches in computational linguistics start with syntactic considerations (see,
e.g., Mann & Thompson, 1988); others access semantic contexts by weighting
words based (inversely) on prevalence in a corpus, and deriving meaning through
vector representations (see, e.g., Gabrilovich & Markovitch, 2007).
Of interest to this paper’s goal are computational tools designed to parse and tag
distinctly rhetorical expressions. Many are focused on identifying tropes, most
commonly metaphors (David, Lakoff, & Stickles, 2016; Dodge, 2016; Jisup Hong,
2016; Weber Russell, 2008). Others have made advances in computationally
identifying figures (Gawryjolek, Dimarco, & Harris, 2009; Kelly, Abbott, Harris,
DiMarco, & Cheriton, 2010). Graham, Kim, DeVasto, & Keith (2015) use a
method they call "statistical genre analysis" to parse genre differences across
large textual corpora (see also Kaufer & Hariman, 2008). And Hart (2001)’s
DICTION project is designed to identify the tone of messages computationally
based on a number of features and sub-features. Hoffman & Waisanen (2015)
have generated a summary of these tools for computational rhetoric.
One challenge for rhetorical scholarship using computer-assisted semantic tagging and analysis in larger textual corpora is that such corpora frequently are
comprised of documents from a wide range of domain-specific discourses, not
6 The term “global warming” is included to capture documents, particularly those in the
early years of the dataset, that still used this term over “climate change.”

7

all of which are relevant to a research question. Tagging semantic features
indiscriminately across a corpus, without narrowing which of its salient rhetorical
features through initial, discovery-oriented reading of the corpus, can in large
corpora yield results of questionable validity and usefulness. Nerlich, Forsyth,
& Clarke (2012)’s analysis of climate media discourse demonstrates one option
for expression-level inductive discovery of salient semantic contexts across large
textual corpora. The researchers develop a generic n-gram based model of
inter-term intervals to identify (and contrast) semantically interesting units in a
large corpus. As discussed later, this paper uses a version of n-gram collocates—
bigrams—for an initial inductive discovery of salient semantic features in its
textual corpus.
Another challenge for assessing the effectiveness of rhetorical practices is the
ability to diachronically track and compare the prevalence of rhetorical expressions relative to each other across textual corpora that span time frames of
multiple years.7 One approach is to track how meaning changes over time, as for
example in Motta & Baden (2013), who analyze how "semantic structures" like
frames change over time, or Koteyko (2007)’s diachronic approach to meaning in
English/Russian loanwords. More generally, these types of studies are interested
in tracking changes in language-use, often within a framework called Modern
Diachronic Corpus-Assisted Discourse Studies (MD-CADS) (Partington, 2010).
Koteyko, Thelwall, & Nerlich (2010)’s study of "carbon compounds” provides a
general framework for diachronic mapping (see also Koteyko, 2010, 2015).
This paper draws together conceptual and methodological characteristics from
these lines of scholarship to help conceptualize a framework for assessing rhetorical
effectiveness. It contends that the ability to computationally identify semantically
differentiated rhetorical expressions, coupled with means of tracking how they
replicate across large textual corpora and measuring changes in their prevalence,
can be understood as a measure of rhetorical effect.

Methodology for the Test Case
For testing the effectiveness of rhetorical language specifically, discursive sites like
Congressional deliberations can offer textual corpora that are explicitly rhetorical
(i.e., structured to be deliberatively persuasive; offering claims and evidence;
attuned to audience; created with the purpose of agonistic engagement), instead
of generically representative of common language patterns, public opinion, or
structural features of a ’text’ more broadly defined (as, e.g., in Park et al., 2014).
The daily proceedings of Congress are transcribed in the Congressional Record,
which records all announcements and debates of both houses of Congress. Averaging around 272 pages a day, it is, according to the Library of Congress, a
7 See also Kessler & Graham (2018) for why diachronic approaches to analyzing rhetorical
practices are necessary.

8

"substantially verbatim account of the proceedings of Congress." To retrieve the
daily issue of the Congressional Record and build a textual corpus for analysis,
a custom script was written8 to access the GPO’s publications repository and
extract the relevant files into a database indexed by date. Each date in the index
can contain multiple documents; a document represents a statement or set of
related statements made on the floor of House or Senate, as demarcated by the
editors of the Congressional Record.
The resultant corpus of Congressional deliberations used for this paper includes
Congressional proceedings from 1994 through 2016, encompassing 572,901 documents. To accommodate limitations in available processing power for the
analysis, the database was reduced to documents that included mentions of
"climate change" or "global warming." The reduced corpus encompassed 5679
documents with a total of 275,208,081 words (excluding punctuation; word count
was determined through Python’s regular expression engine), and 31678 mentions
of "climate change" or "global warming." Table 1 shows the number of documents
containing the terms "climate change" or "global warming," number of words
in those documents, and total mentions of the key terms, by year, along with
descriptive statistics both from the keyword-reduced corpus and the total corpus,
including the percentage of documents containing mentions of “climate change”
and “global warming” relative to the total number of documents for each year.
Rhetorical analyses generally begin by reading texts with an eye toward semantic
uniqueness and differentiation—lexical, syntactic, or semantic structures and
expressions that function purposefully, toward a judgment of the specific context
in which they occur, in ways they might not in other semantic contexts. To scale
this approach---to identify these salient semantic features across the large textual
corpus---the text was first segmented into a list of bigrams: a sequence of all
two-word units that make up a discourse, such as [“to identify,” “identify salient,”
“salient semantic,” . . . ] in this sentence.9 Sorting bigrams that included the
term "climate" or “warming” by frequency made it possible to notice interesting
patterns; specifically that, among a number of noun-based bigrams that are
expected and thus of little interest in any text about climate change (like
“global climate” and “climate science”) were bigrams that included two verbs:
"address(ing)" and "combat(ing)." Indeed, when the words in each bigram across
the Congressional Record corpus were tagged by their function as parts-of-speech,
the resultant list of bigrams showed that verbs like "addressing" or "observe"
appeared over 300 times, while more active verbs like "combating" or "fighting"
appeared around 100 times.
8 Links

to all code written for this study are listed in Appendix 1
for sequential over bag-of-words-based approaches to inductively discover
semantically interesting features in large textual corpora include Koteyko et al.: “the lexical
environment of a search term [. . . helps provide] a ‘feel’ of the corpus and a ‘map’ of key
junctions” (2013, p. 77); Nerlich et al.: “[. . . ] the simple and obvious fact that human
language is an inescapably sequential phenomenon” (2012, p. 48). See also Grundmann &
Krishnamurthy (2010)’s argument on "the phraseological tendencies of all languages, whereby
the choice of one word tends to favor the co-selection of other words, its collocates, within
close proximity in a text.”
9 Rationales

9

Table 1: Congressional Record Corpus

10

Bigrams that paired "climate" to terms like "addressing", "studying", and "modeling" matched statements like this, by Sen. Feinstein in 2003: "I agree that we
should continue to study climate change," or, in 2007, by Sen. Domenici: "One of
the most interesting uses of this enormous computer power is modeling climate
change." In both examples, members of Congress consider agentic responsibilities
to rest in continued examination of climate change phenomena. Bigrams pairing
"climate" with combat-related metaphors matched statements like the following,
from the Hon. Earl Blumenauer of Oregon: "[...] taxpayer dollars could be better
spent renewing and rebuilding our nation’s infrastructure and investing in emerging clean resources like wind and solar that will help us combat climate change
[...]." Or similarly, over a decade earlier, by Sen. Feinstein: "[...] giving gasoline
imports a competitive advantage over cleaner fuel that simply should not exist
at a time we are trying to combat climate change." Here, agentic responsibilities
are defined instrumentally, not epistemically: the purpose of engaging with
climate change is not to learn more about it, but to fight it, to invest immediate
resources; these statements foreground a more active, resource-forward role for
fighting change.
The prevalence of these lexical framing terms, and analysis of how they were used
in actual statements, suggested that "climate change" is frequently referenced
in conjunction with what can be called active-agentic or passive-agentic frames.
Both are frames that are driven by the possibility of agency, and an ability to
act.10 They differ on explicit material support: where the active-agentic “combat”
frame seeks immediate intervention that demands corresponding material investment, the passive-agentic “address/observe” frame suggests a more measured
orientation in which needs for solutions are raised but material support for
those solutions is not (yet) made explicit. Active-agentic frames motivate direct
action; passive-agentic frames motivate eventual action. In the bigram-based
reading of the full corpus, the relative frequency difference hence suggested
that Congressional deliberations more frequently frame our agentic capabilities
toward climate change in terms of continued evaluation with the goal of eventual
action instead of resource-forward intervention.
The bigram-based segmentation of a text corpus provides a high-level overview
of the "semantic fields" predominant in a large corpus (Koteyko et al., 2013, p.
77). Once general semantic contexts are inductively identified across a corpus,
bigrams (or similar sequence-based approaches, like keyword/frequency lists,
collocation, or concordance) offer comparably little for engaging in directed,
deductively-driven semantic analysis, however. The following statement from a
recent Congressional Record illustrates this difference:
Mr. WHITEHOUSE. Mr. President, I rise today for the 110th time
to ask my colleagues to wake up to climate change. Long after today’s
debate has died down, it will still be looming and threatening. We
stand now at the precipice of an environmental catastrophe. The
10 See also Figure 2 and its description for the difference between a fully passive frame and
the passive-agentic frame.

11

burning of fossil fuels has unleashed a flood of carbon pollution
that is pushing the climate system planetwide into conditions that
are unprecedented in human history. It has already permanently
altered the world that we will leave to future generations. If we keep
sleepwalking through this and allow the carbon flood to continue, we
will leave even bigger changes and risk absolute catastrophe.
Of rhetorical interest here is how the statement frames the agentic affordances of
human actors. For a rhetorical critic, this dynamic is straightforward to identify,
because the semantic content of words like "wake up," "looming", "unleash", and
"sleepwalking" as a bookend to "wake up", all are functionally similar within the
context and purpose for which they are used. But on a computational level,
sequential analysis of words is not designed to tag and track distinctly rhetorical
features like these, that differ lexically but resemble functionally and in practice.
Hence, while bigrams are useful for exploratory analysis in this paper, they are
limited and imprecise tools for analyzing more semantically complex rhetorical
expressions. For one, the fact that semantic meaning carries across syntactically
different synonyms—i.e., the fact that phrases like "battle climate change" or
"struggle against climate change" would have the same rhetorical function in
framing climate change as the "combat" and "fight" frames—cannot readily
be captured and quantified by bigrams. And secondly, identifying how these
semantically related structures shift dynamically over time requires the ability
to identify semantically similar but syntactically different rhetorical expressions
in a way that can be indexed on a time axis to allow for diachronic mapping.
A second step of the analysis was built on designing regular expression query
syntaxes based on the general insights of the bigram-frequency analysis. Regular
expressions offer a query syntax that can capture more complex rhetorical
structures by accommodating semantic similarities between words, and a wider
syntactic range that can precisely specify the syntactic scope of the rhetorical
’unit’ (e.g., sentence, phrase, paragraph, distance between keywords, etc.) of
interest. Because the bigram-based semantic overview suggested that the verbs
"combat" and "address" were frequently paired with climate change, regular
expressions were designed to identify instances within each document where
"climate change" was referenced within an average paragraph’s range to verbs
like "combat" or "assess." The initial list of synonyms for the terms that most
frequently appeared along "climate" in the bigram list (e.g., to match "measure"
or "evaluate" along with "assess" in the assessment category) were drawn from the
Wordnet corpus in Python’s NLTK module. Additional synonyms were generated
from samples from the Congressional Record corpus that were matched by regular
expressions with the initial synonym list. The resultant regular expression
syntaxes used in the analysis are listed in Appendix 1. They matched rhetorical
expressions like the following, by former Senator Daniel Akaka (D–Hawaii),
who in 2001 sought to both create urgency and challenge to zero-sum logic of
positioning climate change mitigation opposite economic growth:

12

We cannot wait for further scientific proof to materialize [. . . ] An
effective program to fight climate change need not involve huge
increases in energy prices or draconian rules that choke industries
and damage our economic well-being. We need to employ creative
approaches and let American ingenuity loose.
Or, as an example of the passive-agentic frame, Chris Coons (D–Delaware) in
2015 advocates action, but framed less urgently:
My thinking is that the entire Federal Government should make
responsible, timely, and thoughtful plans to assess and to prepare for
prudent mitigation of the future impacts of climate change in our
infrastructure. So I am hopeful that this will be among the many
amendments that will be taken up, debated, discussed, and passed
in the coming hours and days.
The following section shows and discusses the results of tracking the prevalence,
development, and relative success, or effectiveness, of these competing agentic
frames about climate change across large time spans and large sets of text.

Mapping Effective Agentic Frames in Congressional Deliberations on Climate Change
Running queries with the regular expressions discussed in the preceding section
(see Appendix 1) across the Congressional Record corpus identifies 4009 activeagentic frames, and 5322 passive-agentic frames. The relative difference between
these numbers is expected, as it matches the relative difference between "combat"based and "address/observe"-based bigrams in the high-level overview of semantic
contexts in the corpus. Given the large time frame the corpus spans, these
aggregate numbers are of limited interest to rhetorical inquiry, however, as they
fail to reflect the dynamic norms (Luhmann’s “emergent reality”) relevant to the
analysis of rhetorical effects. Mapping the emergence of frames over time, on
the other hand, demonstrates that in terms of relative frequency, active-agentic
frames have made gains on and overtaken passive-agentic frames.
Figure 1, below, shows how over the first few years of the corpus, Congressional
deliberators used passive-agentic frames more frequently than active-agentic
frames. From 2007 through 2009, the use of both frames spikes; this is to
be expected based on the descriptive corpus statistics in Table 1. Of interest,
however, is that after the spike, the relative frequency of the passive-agentic frame
compared to the active-agentic frame (the active:passive ratio across the corpus
is 0.749) not only decreases consistently, but that in some years active-agentic
frames eclipse passive-agentic ones even in absolute frequency. The prevalence
of passive-agentic frames had occasionally decreased earlier, for example in 2006,
when the ratio of active-agentic to passive-agentic surpassed the corpus-wide

13

frame ratio of 0.749. But only starting in 2010, when aggregate Congressional
attention to climate change (as measured by # of documents in the corpus)
began waning, did the active-agentic framing begin to consistently increase in
prevalence relative to passive-agentic frames. In the final year on record, 2016,
active-agentic frames were almost twice (at a 1.722 ratio) as prevalent as passiveagentic frames. This change in relative frequency, as a measure of emergent
rhetorical effectiveness (i.e., of the changing prevalence of a rhetorical expression
relative to another), is shown on the bar plot as the ratio of active-agentic to
passive-agentic frames above each active-agentic bar.

Figure 1: This figure shows the ratios between active-agentic and passive-agentic
frames in Congressional discourse, from 1994-2016, along with descriptors like
party control of Congress and major climate-related events.
Of potential interest is how such analyses of rhetorical effect have the flexibility
to expand to related rhetorical structures, like Burkean frames or pentadic
ratios in this instance. Burke argued that situations where "scenic" elements
are symbolically foregrounded tend to shift perceptions of agency toward the
passive; situations where the acts of agents are foregrounded shift attitudes
toward agentic possibility. These moves can be epideictic: the latter carries
connotations of not only agency but, with it, praiseworthiness or culpability; the
former shifts culpability or praiseworthiness away from the (human) agent (see,
e.g., Ling, 1970).
In climate change deliberation, these differences often appear as emphases
on change being natural (slow, cyclical, expected) and climate change being
anthropogenic (or human-made/caused). Figure 2 shows the results of parsing
the text corpus with regular expressions that collocate "climate change" with

14

terms like "anthropogenic," "human-caused," or "man-made," and "natural,"
"cyclical," or "slow," respectively. The temporal changes in pentadic ratios are
visibly similar to the temporal shift in frames in figure 1, with agent-centric
frames rising consistently in relative frequency in the late 2000s. The only
difference—the more frequent prevalence of agentic over scenic ratios in the early
years of the corpus—makes sense considering that Figure 1 includes only agentic
frames, while the Burkean scenic ratio is more traditionally passive.

Figure 2: This figure shows the ratios between Burkean agentic and scenic ratios
in Congressional discourse, from 1994-2016
The results of the corpus analysis demonstrate that while passive-agentic frames
remain most common across the corpus, active-agentic frames have become more
prevalent over the last few years. If rhetorical effects are theorized as the changing
prevalence of textual imprints over time across an extended body of texts, the
results show that it is important to understand rhetorical effectiveness not only as
monolithic frequency. The test case demonstrates how the replication of rhetorical
expressions manifests in a textual corpus in both absolute frequency and relative
frequency across time, and it demonstrates that when the corpus spans a large
time frame, relative frequency between multiple rhetorical expressions better
conveys an image of rhetorical effectiveness. It is not the passive-agentic frame
that should be seen as more effective in this discourse, despite its advantage
in absolute frequency across over two decades. Instead, it is the rise of the
active-agentic frame relative to the passive-agentic one, over time, that is most
compelling for assessing the rhetorical characteristics and their usefulness for
communicative practice in this subset of Congressional deliberations. Hence,
rhetorical effectiveness can be conceptualized as systemic: within the scope
of a rhetorical problem or question (here, how policy discourse orients views
about agency and acting toward climate change), effective rhetorical practices
15

increase the prevalence of new ’nodes’—or, conversely, maintain the prevalence
of existing ones—that make available and accessible (path)ways or resources for
communicating. The shifting balance between these frames points to a shift in
how the symbolic frames in Congressional deliberations condition attitudes and
perspectives on our agency toward climate change, and speak to the rhetorical
effectiveness of active-agentic frames relative to passive-agentic ones.
The results of indexing rhetorical effectiveness to changes in prevalence over time
carry several implications for the discursive system. First, they demonstrate a
pattern of attention to climate change that runs contrary to what one may believe
about how party control of Congress correlates with variances in the quantity of
deliberations about climate change. Park et al. (2014), for example, argue (on
the basis of an older corpus) that party control does not affect the number of
hearings on climate change (p. 246); the results of this test case suggest that in
recent years, when looking at the effectiveness of rhetorical features in actual
language (instead of structural features, such as number of hearings, or broad
content codes), party control correlates with attention to climate change. The
results show that from 2007–2009, the number of documents relating to climate
change increased significantly (see Table 1), encompassing the two years that
both chambers of Congress were under Democratic control for the first time
since 1995. Through 2014, control of the chambers was split, and attention
to climate change dropped by half or more compared to the 2007–2009 levels,
despite increased global attention to climate change.
Interestingly, Park et al. (2014) also suggest a qualitative difference: that
Democrat-controlled Congresses may help "facilitate proactive legislative efforts
on climate-related issues" (p. 253). Because Democrats are seen to be more
invested in combating climate change, this is likely a common belief. Yet, the
results of this study show that proactive, active-agentic frames in fact increase
in effectiveness (as measured by prevalence) in Congresses with split control
and hit a distinct tipping point in Republican-controlled Congresses (starting
2015), compared to when Democrats hold both chambers. In fact, while not
included in the results because of submission timelines, running the regular
expression queries on a version of the Congressional Record corpus database
that is up-to-date through 12/31/2017 (and hence both a White House and
Congressional majority that are opposed to aggressive environmental regulation)
shows a ratio of active-agentic to passive-agentic frames of 2.000. This ratio is
by far the highest of any year in the corpus, with active-agentic frames being
more effective than in any previous year.
For technical communication, these results have two implications. One is that
for practitioners who want to intervene in climate change deliberations, using
active-agentic framing of their message will have a high chance of acceptance
or intelligibility within this particular discursive system. Active-agentic frames
confer, to follow Luhmann, guarantees of acceptability, “of connection for the
next communication that can now either build on an already attained consensus
or seek dissent.” Studying rhetorical effects within this paradigm can, so, provide

16

resources for rhetorical action. But two, following Miller, the results also suggest
points of questioning, of discussing how to distinguish good from bad practice.
What do they tell us about commonly help presuppositions about the state
and process of Congressional deliberations on climate science, and how do such
presuppositions affect our orientations toward others as we engage in climate
advocacy? Why do internal Congressional deliberations about climate change
differ, in their agentic framing, from how many members of Congress frame
this debate for their constituents? These are questions about good and bad
communicative practice, about motivations, about expectations of reciprocity
and more, that raise the stakes of analyzing rhetorical effects for TC scholars
from, to again quote Miller, techne to praxis.
It is evident, then, that rhetorical effectiveness ought to be understood as
distinct from other means of assessing the success of a semantic feature in
a discursive corpus. While structural measures such as number of hearings
devoted to a topic, or corresponding syntactical measures like frequency counts
of key terms applied to a topic, may drop in frequency, rhetorical engagement
oriented toward that topic may in turn increase in effectiveness, possibly because
decreased opportunities for frame use create exigencies for renewed agonistic
counter-efforts. The formulation of rhetorical effectiveness offered here, whereby
effect is understood in a systems-paradigm, indexed to increases or decreases of
prevalence of rhetorical expressions over time, and measured in relative frequency
against other rhetorical moves, supports these observations: it suggests that
rhetorical success lies not in a solitary or monolithic advantage a frame or other
rhetorical expression holds in terms of its absolute frequency in a discourse, but
that it lies in increasing the prevalence of new communicative resources relative
to existing ones. This may be one way of understanding rhetoric within the
classical paradigm as phronesis, as a praxis oriented toward and responsive to
the needs and good of the community (Miller, 1989).
This view of effect also offers insight into the development of rhetorical norms
through stases. Looking at dynamic change over time, the results show that the
relationship between passive-agentic and active-agentic frames is relatively stable
through 2008 (i.e., remains close to or below the corpus-wide ratio of 0.749; with
an exception in 1997-1998, around the time the Kyoto protocol was finalized and
adopted, which saw active-agentic frames come close to or surpassing the average
ratio; and 2006, the year in which the House held hearings on climate change
and introduced the Safe Climate Act of 2006 (H.R. 5642)11 ). Following a period
of high discursive activity (2007–2009) at the previous static, corpus-wide ratios
between the frames came a few years of contraction, where the ratio between
the two types of frames came closer to even (hence, active-agentic frames gained
in relative prevalence), representing a true point of "frame stasis" over the role
of human agency. This was followed by reversal, where active-agentic frames
11 In a writeup of House hearings, Peter Folger (2006), then-Director of Research at the
American Geophysical Union, noted that while Republicans saw the hearings as being about
education and deepening understanding, Democrats on the committee "expressed their desire
to move beyond the science and take action to address climate change."

17

surpassed passive-agentic ones, accompanied by increased overall frequency of
climate change deliberations (see Table 1; Figure 1), and eventually reaching a
clear tipping point in 2015. Hence, the results evidence a dynamic pattern of
stasis development within a systems-paradigm: external drivers (party control of
Congress, high-profile hearings, international agreements, etc.) amplify the use
of static norms that have settled over time, calling their propriety or legitimacy
or usefulness into question, which leads to clash and eventual resolution (either
return to old norms, or as here, reversal to new norms).

Summary and Implications
The insights and arguments of this study should, at this point, be considered a
test case for the usefulness of mapping rhetorical effects, rather than a complete
representation of effective rhetorical practices on climate change in Congressional
discourse. Whether the pattern of rhetorical stasis is unique to this corpus or an
example of a more general model of rhetorical stasis in large discursive systems
needs to be shown through further research, for example (but see Graham &
Herndl, 2011, for a theoretical exposition on dynamic stasis development in
networks). Similarly, whether the interpretation of the correlations between
political processes like party control, opportunities for frame use, and resultant
rhetorical manifestations translates to other contexts cannot be addressed by
this test case alone. The study’s contention, however, is that a conceptualization
of rhetorical effect across large textual systems as demonstrated in this case
opens possibilities for broader theoretical inquiry into rhetorical discourses, into
traditional rhetorical constructions like stasis, and (beyond rhetorical scholarship)
into communicative praxis in technical contexts, in ways that are not otherwise
available.
To move beyond a test case and develop such possibilities, this paper modeled an
approach for assessing rhetorical effects built on extant work on inductive semantic differentiation of a textual corpus’ semantic contexts, parsing of unstructured
text to identify rhetorical expressions, and diachronic mapping of these rhetorical
features. Necessary for pursuing questions about rhetorical effect in and for
TC is to consider the size of the discursive space: to argue that something is
rhetorically effective on the grounds of changing prevalence over time requires
demonstrating such change over large textual corpora. Hence, a methodological
challenge for this paper, and for subsequent scholarship on rhetorical effect, is to
scale the lines of research on computational linguistics and rhetoric referenced
above to datasets of unstructured text exceeding a few hundred documents and
a few million words or phrases.
One aspect of this challenge—how to engage in initial, inductive, exploratory
reading of a large textual corpus to identify interesting rhetorical features—was,
following Nerlich et al. (2012) and Koteyko et al. (2013), addressed by sequencing
the corpus into bigrams and sorting them by keyword, part-of-speech, and

18

frequency. Despite the availability of semantic parsing tools (see, e.g., Hart, 2001,
for an example), scaling the parsing of complex semantic, linguistic structures
to a large corpus could best be accomplished by using regular expressions. The
structure of rhetorical elements of language tends to be phrase- or sentence-length
units of discourse, which raises semantic complexity and commands a syntax that
can both accommodate semantic flexibility (through a range of Boolean operators)
and control the syntactic relationship of words and other sentence-units relative
to each other within and across sentences and paragraphs. The query syntax used
in this paper shows the difficulty of scaling these requirements to large corpora:
each frame must, by definition, be able to relate the rhetorical features of the
frame (the thing to be framed—climate change—and the vehicle through which it
is framed) within the scope of an average paragraph’s length, and each frame can
consist of many functionally/semantically similar but otherwise different words
or expressions. The binary nature of any computational framework imposes
constraints that make checking for matches with a scope this wide and across a
range of semantically related symbols computing-intensive.
Despite the computational overhead of this test case, inherent in its conceptual
and methodological practices to assess effects are theoretical questions and
assumptions that have long guided rhetorical scholarship, both on the micro-level
(rhetorical components of language are semantically complex in a way that
syntactic parts-of-speech and similar sentence-level classifications cannot account
for) and on the macro-level (concepts like Farrell’s rhetorical culture and its
relationship between general norms and specific practices). This suggests two
considerations. One is that the design and interpretation of computationallyderived rhetoric practices is, at its core, an inventive process that requires both
the critical skill of humanistic criticism (viz., the identification of textual elements
that are rhetorically salient to the text12 ), and the analytical skill of abstracting
semantic textual elements into a computer-readable syntax. The other is that
if the goal of computational approaches to rhetorical effect is to preserve the
semantic and structural complexity of rhetorical practice, then the more sensitive
the computational approach can be to the constant re-configuration of norms,
practices, and semantic contexts of a discursive space, the more fitting this kind
of model of rhetorical effectiveness becomes for directing scholarly inquiry toward
questions of rhetorical effects.
This last point suggests one of three implications of the study, aimed to improve
the methodological sensitivity, theoretical strength, and disciplinary value of
assessing rhetorical effects as demonstrated here.
The first is that for a computational approach to a theory of rhetorical effect
to be useful requires sensitivity to the nuances of rhetorical practices, both
semantically (identifying fitting synonyms for central expressions; accounting for
negation; etc.) and syntactically (capturing rhetorical moves that extend past
12 See also Hart’s (2001) contention that he has found his approach to computerized content
analysis—a different method to the one exemplified in this study, but related conceptually—to
be "creative" rather than mechanical, and requiring "subtlety" (p. 43).

19

sentence-levels). Although increase in scope (from single-text to large corpus)
will always come at a cost to precision, methodological choices can increase
the reliability of computationally parsing rhetorical expressions. For example,
bigram-based assessment of a corpus’ semantic contexts could be expanded
to topic modeling to add reach, topic models may allow for tracking of more
complex frames (thematic frames, Burkean frames, etc.), concordance-based
views into the corpus to add deeper context, and n-grams larger than two to add
wider semantic context to key terms.
The second is that this paper’s arguments about rhetorical effects should be
considered in the context of existing frameworks for assessing the effectiveness
of rhetorical practices. Ceccarelli’s On the Frontier of Science (2013), for
example, looks to the institutional practices of the NSF and to actual audience
responses to demonstrate the effectiveness or lack thereof, respectively, of a
particular metaphor. Leff’s re-visiting of Lincoln at Cooper Union puts the
text in conversation with its social and political context (2001). Foust and
O’Shannon Murphy analyze frame success in newspapers (2009). DeVasto’s
(2016) new materialist framework looks to material practices as evidence of
rhetorical work. Harris (2005) argues for reception studies in the rhetoric of
science (and, presumably, rhetoric more generally; see also Kelly, Abbott, Harris,
et al., 2010). This is not the space for a more exhaustive list; the contention is
that a range of distinct perspectives on rhetorical effectiveness exists, and the
framework exemplified in this paper could be a complement—another tool—to
existing concepts of rhetorical effectiveness.
The third is use-value for communicative practice in technical contexts. This
paper argued that the characterization of rhetorical effect and the methodological for mapping effectiveness across large discursive spaces can offer resources
to technical communicators by mapping the communicative practices that are
“settled” and “can be called on” in a discursive system with reduced risk of
rejection, identifying nodes or positions “of connection for the next communication that can now either build on an already attained consensus or seek
dissent (Luhmann, 1992). It so doing, this approach shows the development of
institutions-as-communicative norms, and offers, to follow Miller (1989), points
for distinguishing and questioning what are and what ought to be good practices
of communication within our discursive institutions.

20

Appendix 1
Below are the regular expressions used in the analysis. All are designed to match
frame synonyms within a set max. distance both before and after mentions of
“climate change”:
Figure 1: Active-agentic frame:

\b(climate\schange|global\swarming)\W+(?:\w+\W+){0,150}?(fight(ing)?|(battle|battling)|must
act|combat(ing)?|(struggle|struggling)|(oppose|opposing)|fight(ing)?\sback|defend(ing?)|press(ing)?|push(ing)?|ca
act|combat(ing)?|(struggle|struggling)|(oppose|opposing)|fight(ing)?\sback|defend(ing?)|press(ing)?|push(ing)?|ca
Figure 1: Passive-agentic frame:

\b(climate\schange|global\swarming)\W+(?:\w+\W+){0,150}?((examine|examining)|study(ing)?|assess(ing)?|m
Figure 2: Agentic ratio foregrounded:
\b(climate\schange|global\swarming)\W+(?:\w+\W+){0,150}?(manmade|anthropogenic|human-caused|cause(d|s)?)|(man-made|anthropogenic|humancaused|cause(d)?)\W+(?:\w+\W+){0,150}?(climate\schange|global\swarming)\b
Figure 2: Scenic ratio foregrounded:

\(climate\schange|global\swarming)\W+(?:\w+\W+){0,150}?(nature|natural|cycle|cyclical|slow)|(nature|natura
Below is the link to the code base used for the analysis, with the following
information contained in each file:
[http://<persistent URL from author>]
’crec_scraper.py’ contains the script used to access the GPO’s Congressional Record and insert new documents into an SQLite database
("crec.db"). The script can be run manually, or more efficiently
through a scheduled, daily cron-job from a virtual server.
’crec_analysis.py’ contains the main code for the analysis in this
study. It has in-line comments to help navigate its contents; four
global variables QUERY1 through QUERY4 contain the regular
expressions used for the analysis.
These files can be opened by any text editor to review contents, or downloaded
to run. The source code can run on any system with the requisite dependencies
installed.

21

References
Black, E. (1970). The second persona. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 56 (2),
109–119.
Boykoff, M. T. (2007). Flogging a dead norm? Newspaper coverage of anthropogenic climate change in the United States and United Kingdom from 2003 to
2006. Area, 39 (4), 470–481.
Browne, S. H. (2001). Response: Context in critical theory and practice. Western
Journal of Communication, 65 (3), 330–335.
Cagle, L. E., & Tillery, D. (2015). Climate change research across disciplines: The
value and uses of multidisciplinary research reviews for Technical Communication.
Technical Communication Quarterly, 24 (2), 147–163. https://doi.org/10.1080/
10572252.2015.1001296
Campbell, K. K., & Jamieson, K. H. (1978). Form and genre in rhetorical
criticism: An introduction. In K. K. Campbell & K. H. Jamieson, (Eds.), Form
and genre: Shaping rhetorical action (pp. 9-32). Falls Church, VA: Speech
Communication Association.
Ceccarelli, L. (2013). On the frontier of science: An American rhetoric of
exploration and exploitation. East Lansing: Michigan State University Press.
David, O., Lakoff, G., & Stickles, E. (2016). Cascades in metaphor and grammar.
Constructions & Frames, 8 (2), 214–255. https://doi.org/10.1075/cf.8.2.04dav
Derkatch, C. (2018).
The self-generating language of wellness and
natural health.
Rhetoric of Health & Medicine, 1 (1–2), 132–160.
https://doi.org/10.5744/rhm.2018.1009
Dodge, E. K. (2016). A deep semantic corpus-based approach to metaphor
analysis. Constructions & Frames, 8 (2), 256–294. https://doi.org/10.1075/cf.8.
2.05dod
Entman, R. M. (1991). Framing U.S. coverage of international news: Contrasts
in narratives of the KAL and Iran Air incidents. Journal of Communication,
41 (4), 6–27. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-2466.1991.tb02328.x
Farrell, T. B. (1993). Norms of rhetorical culture. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Folger, P. (2006). AGU scientists testify at climate change hearings. Eos, 87 (36),
367.
Foust, C. R., & Murphy, W. O. (2009). Revealing and reframing apocalyptic
tragedy in global warming discourse. Environmental Communication, 3 (2),
151–167. https://doi.org/10.1080/17524030902916624
Gabrilovich, E., & Markovitch, S. (2007). Computing semantic relatedness using
wikipedia-based explicit semantic analysis. In IJcAI (Vol. 7, pp. 1606–1611).
22

Gawryjolek, J., Dimarco, C., & Harris, R. (2009). An annotation tool for
automatically detecting rhetorical figures—system demonstration. In Proc.
of the IJCAI-09 Workshop on Computational Models of Natural Argument,
http://www.cmna. info/CMNA9/Proceedings/CMNA9-Gawryjolek% 20et% 20al.
pdf
Good, J. (2008). The framing of climate change in Canadian, American, and
international newspapers: A media propaganda model analysis. Canadian
Journal of Communication, 33 (2), 233–255.
Graham, S. S., & Herndl, C. G. (2011). Talking off-label: The role of stasis in
transforming the discursive formation of pain science. Rhetoric Society Quarterly,
41 (2), 145–167. https://doi.org/10.1080/02773945.2011.553764
Graham, S. S., Kim, S.-Y., DeVasto, D., & Keith, W. (2015). Statistical genre
analysis: Toward big data methodologies in technical communication. Technical
Communication Quarterly, 24 (1), 70–104. https://doi.org/10.1080/10572252.
2015.975955
Greene, R. W. (1998). Another materialist rhetoric. Critical Studies in Mass
Communication, 15 (1), 21–40. https://doi.org/10.1080/15295039809367031
Grundmann, R., & Krishnamurthy, R. (2010). The discourse of climate change:
A corpus-based approach. Critical Approaches to Discourse Analysis Across
Disciplines, 4 (2), 125–146.
Harris, R. A. (2005). Reception studies in the rhetoric of science. Technical Communication Quarterly, 14 (3), 249–255. https://doi.org/10.1207/
s15427625tcq1403_2
Hart, R. P. (1984). Systematic analysis of political discourse: The development
of diction. Political Communication Yearbook, 1, 97–134.
Hart, R. P. (2001). Redeveloping Diction: Theoretical considerations. In M.
D. West (Ed.), Theory, method, and practice in computer content analysis (pp.
43–60). Greenwood Publishing Group.
Hart, R. P., & Jarvis, S. E. (1997). Political debate forms, styles, and media.
American Behavioral Scientist, 40 (8), 1095–1122.
Heidt, S. (2012). The presidency as pastiche: Atomization, circulation, and
rhetorical instability. Rhetoric & Public Affairs, 15 (4), 623–633.
Herndl, C. G., & Cutlip, L. L. (2013). “How can we act?” A praxiographical
program for the rhetoric of technology, science, and medicine. Poroi, 9 (1).
https://doi.org/10.13008/2151-2957.1163
Hoffman, D., & Waisanen, D. (2015). At the digital frontier of Rhetoric Studies:
An overview of tools and methods for computer-aided textual analysis. In J.
Ridolfo & W. Hart-Davidson (Eds.), Rhetoric and the digital humanities (pp.
169–183). University of Chicago Press.

23

Jisup Hong. (2016). Automatic metaphor detection using constructions and
frames. Constructions & Frames, 8 (2), 295–322. https://doi.org/10.1075/cf.8.2.
06hon
Kaufer, D., & Hariman, R. (2008). Discriminating political styles as genres:
A corpus study exploring Hariman’s theory of political style. Text & Talk-An
Interdisciplinary Journal of Language, Discourse Communication Studies, 28 (4),
475–500.
Kelly, A. R., Abbott, N. A., Harris, R. A., DiMarco, C., & Cheriton, D. R.
(2010). Toward an ontology of rhetorical figures. In Proceedings of the 28th
ACM International Conference on Design of Communication (pp. 123–130).
New York, NY: ACM. https://doi.org/10.1145/1878450.1878471
Kessler, M. M., & Graham, S. S. (2018). Terminal node problems: ANT 2.0 and
prescription drug labels. Technical Communication Quarterly. Advance online
publication. https://doi.org/10.1080/10572252.2018.1425482
Keränen, L. (2010). How does a pathogen become a terrorist? The collective
transformation of risk into bio(in)security. In J. Leach & D. Dysart-Gale (Eds.),
Rhetorical questions of health and medicine (pp. 77-96). Lanham, MD: Lexington
Books.
Kiewe, A., & Houck, D. W. (Eds.). (2015). The effects of rhetoric and the rhetoric
of effects: Past, present, future. Columbia, South Carolina: The University of
South Carolina Press.
Koteyko, N. (2007). A diachronic approach to meaning: English loanwords in
Russian opposition discourse. Corpora, 2 (1), 65–95.
Koteyko, N. (2010). Mining the internet for linguistic and social data: An
analysis of “carbon compounds” in Web feeds. Discourse & Society, 21 (6),
655–674. https://doi.org/10.1177/0957926510381220
Koteyko, N. (2015). Corpus-Assisted analysis of internet-based discourses: From
patterns to rhetoric. In J. Ridolfo & W. Hart-Davidson (Eds.), Rhetoric and the
digital humanities (pp. 184–198). University of Chicago Press.
Koteyko, N., Jaspal, R., & Nerlich, B. (2013). Climate change and “climategate”
in online reader comments: A mixed methods study. The Geographical Journal,
179 (1), 74–86. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-4959.2012.00479.x
Koteyko, N., Thelwall, M., & Nerlich, B. (2010). From carbon markets to
carbon morality: Creative compounds as framing devices in online discourses
on climate change mitigation. Science Communication, 32 (1), 25–54. https:
//doi.org/10.1177/1075547009340421
Leff, M. (2001). Lincoln at Cooper Union: Neo-classical criticism revisited.
Western Journal of Communication, 65 (3), 232–248.
Ling, D. A. (1970). A pentadic analysis of Senator Edward Kennedy’s address
to the people of Massachusetts, July 25, 1969. Central States Speech Journal,
24

21, 81–86.
Luhmann, N. (1992). What is communication? Communication Theory, 2 (3),
251–259. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2885.1992.tb00042.x
Mann, W. C., & Thompson, S. A. (1988). Rhetorical structure theory: Toward
a functional theory of text organization. Text-Interdisciplinary Journal for the
Study of Discourse, 8 (3), 243–281.
Miller, C. R. (1989). What’s practical about technical writing. Technical Writing:
Theory and Practice, 14–24.
Motta, G., & Baden, C. (2013). Evolutionary factor analysis of the dynamics
of frames: Introducing a method for analyzing high-dimensional semantic data
with time-changing structure. Communication Methods & Measures, 7 (1), 48–82.
https://doi.org/10.1080/19312458.2012.760730
Nerlich, B., Forsyth, R., & Clarke, D. (2012). Climate in the news: How
differences in mMedia discourse between the US and UK reflect national priorities.
Environmental Communication, 6 (1), 44–63. https://doi.org/10.1080/17524032.
2011.644633
Nerlich, B., & Koteyko, N. (2009). Carbon reduction activism in the UK: Lexical
creativity and lexical framing in the context of climate change. Environmental
Communication, 3 (2), 206–223.
Park, H. S., Liu, X., & Vedlitz, A. (2014). Analyzing climate change debates
in the U.S. Congress: Party control and mobilizing networks. Risk, Hazards &
Crisis in Public Policy, 5 (3), 239–258. https://doi.org/10.1002/rhc3.12062
Parrish, W. M. (1954). The study of speeches. In W. M. Parrish & M. Hochmuth
Nichols (Eds.), American Speeches. NY: Longmans, Green & Co.
Partington, A. (2010). Modern diachronic corpus-assisted discourse studies
(MD-CADS) on UK newspapers: An overview of the project. Corpora, 5 (2),
83–108. https://doi.org/10.3366/cor.2010.0101
Rand, E. J. (2008). An inflammatory fag and a queer form: Larry Kramer,
polemics, and rhetorical agency. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 94 (3), 297–319.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00335630802210377
Ridolfo, J., & Hart-Davidson, W. (2015). Rhetoric and the digital humanities.
University of Chicago Press.
Schäfer, M. S., & Schlichting, I. (2014). Media representations of climate change:
A meta-analysis of the research field. Environmental Communication, 8 (2),
142–160. https://doi.org/10.1080/17524032.2014.914050
Slovic, P. (1986). Informing and educating the public about risk. Risk Analysis,
6 (4), 403–415. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1539-6924.1986.tb00953.x
Spoel, P., Goforth, D., Cheu, H., & Pearson, D. (2008). Public communication of climate change science: Engaging citizens through apocalyptic
25

narrative explanation. Technical Communication Quarterly, 18 (1), 49–81.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10572250802437382
Vink, M. J., Boezeman, D., Dewulf, A., & Termeer, C. J. A. M. (2013). Changing
climate, changing frames: Dutch water policy frame developments in the context
of a rise and fall of attention to climate change. Environmental Science & Policy,
30, 90–101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2012.10.010
Walsh, L. (2015). The visual rhetoric of climate change. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Climate Change, 6 (4), 361–368. https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.342
Weber Russell, S. (2008). Abstraction as a basis for the computational interpretation of creative cross-modal metaphor. International Journal of Speech
Technology, 11 (3/4), 125–134. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10772-009-9042-8
Wichelns, H. A. (1925). The literary criticism of oratory. In A. M. Drummond
(Ed.), Studies in Rhetoric and Public Speaking in Honor of James Albert Winans.
NY: The Century Co.
Wrage, E. J. (1947). Public address: A study in social and intellectual history. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 33 (4), 451–457. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00335634709381332

26

