"x"
"1" "Reducing Inequality through Technology Diffusion: The  C ase of 3D printing in Public Libraries"
"2" "Thomas Woodson"
"3" "Thomas.woodson@stonybrook.edu"
"4" "Stony Brook  University"
"5" "Technology and Society"
"6" "1412 Computer Science"
"7" "Stony Brook, NY 11794"
"8" "Nataliia   Telendii"
"9" "nataliia.telendii@stonybrook.edu"
"10" "Stony Brook  University"
"11" "1412 Computer Science"
"12" "Stony Brook, NY 11794"
"13" "Robert Tolliver"
"14" "robert.tolliver@ndsu.edu"
"15" "North Dakota State University"
"16" "1201 Albrecht Boulevard"
"17" "Fargo, ND 58108-6050"
"18" "Abstract :  3D printers  are  hailed as the next revolutionary technology , yet  few scholars have studied   whether  3D printing will decrease  poverty and i n e quality.  T his paper  determine s   the  availability and  accessibility of  3D printing technology  in  low-income communities thro ugh public librar ies  and gives insights on how libraries use 3D printers .   By examining the  2013 Digital Inclusion Survey  and conducting interviews ,  we found that   libraries are  quickly acquiring 3D printers;  however,  the technology is not being fully adopted by the patrons due to the lack of training, software and practical applications of the technology .   Also ,  we found out that the cost  to use a  3D print er  in public libraries is relatively  low, and  do es  not prevent patrons from  accessing  the technology.  Overall ,  we believe that libraries will onl y play a small role in providing  availability and  access ibility  to 3D printing technology for  marginalized communities."
"19" "Key words: 3D printing, inclusive innovation, public libraries, digital divide"
"20" "Introduction"
"21" "Public libraries  are unique institutions in a country’s  innovation system.  From early in their inception, public libraries were designed  to give broad access to information and knowledge, build community,  and  expose people to culture and ideas   (Wiegand, 2015) .   Public libraries provide basic training courses, access to books and journals, meeting spaces, and activities for children and seniors   (Baker and Evans, 2011) . Studies show that libraries provide a variety of benefits to the community. They can contribute to the economic well-being of the neighborhood by helping residents find jobs and start businesses. They provide children and the elderly enrichment activities during the day   (McClure and Bertot, 1998) . Libraries enhance the quality of life of the neighborhood; contribute to the success of local writers, homeschoolers and business professionals; build social capital in the community; and create links between people that create social trust  (Ishengoma and Mtaho, 2014) ."
"22" "As technology and the means to access information change,  l ibraries  are  shifting from being  book  repositories to proactive service providers   (Shrestha and Krolak, 2015) .  They   are  often   the early adopters of emerging technologies,  and many people go  to  libraries to learn about and use new technology   (Flaherty and Miller, 2016; Walter, 2010)   .   Recently , libraries added 3D printers  to  their collections. 3D printing  is  an additive manufacturing technique where 3D objects are built from a combination of multiple slices . The technology has  been  available  for a few decades , but  it  was very expensive and only used by businesses or extremely dedicated hobbyists   (Scalfani and Sahib, 2013) .  However,   o ver the last  few  years,  innovators have developed  low-cost 3D printers  which   mak e  the technology accessible to individual consumers   (de Jong and Bruijn, 2013) . The shift to  affordable 3D printers opened new opportunities for research and  educatio n ,  and  resulted in a  significant  movement for libraries to acquire and sup port  the technology .  As explained by Moorefield-Lange,  M akerspaces and 3D printing can be an inexpensive way for libraries to provide their patrons with ways to explore, create and innovate   (Moorefield-Lang, 2014) ."
"23" "Problem Statement"
"24" "Although  public libraries are rapidly adopting  3D  p rint er s, there are few studies on  how this technology will impact inequality. This project examine s   the  role that public libraries play in diffusing 3D printer technology to marginalized and underserved communities.  Our main research question is : Are 3D printers accessible to low - income communities through public libraries in the USA?"
"25" "This question can be subdivided into  two  separate issues ,  availability and accessibility . First ,   are 3D printers available to patrons  in low - income  communities ?   Second, is  the technology accessible to pa t rons in low income communities?  Is t here training to use 3D printers and are the printers cheap enough to  be  use d by patrons ?"
"26" "Our  first hypothesis  is that ,   despite the increased adoption of 3D printers in public libraries, l ibraries in  wealthy  communities are more likely to have 3D printers than libraries in poor communities  and ,  as a result, the technology is increasing inequality.  There is little  availability of the technology to marginalized communities."
"27" "Our  second hypothesis  is that e ven if a library has a 3D printer, the technology will n ot be accessible to most of the  patrons due to the  cost of printing and the lack of training to use the printer.  To answer these questions, we analyzed  survey  data  and  interviewed librarians to  map the distribution of 3D printers,  understand why the y did (or did not)  instal l  3D printing , how the technology was being used, and what was the goal for the technology ."
"28" "3.0  Literature  Review"
"29" "Inequality and the  Digital  D ivide"
"30" "Technological i nequality has always existed, and in  some  fields, like the military, inequality  is  encouraged   (James, 2007; Woodhouse and Sarewitz, 2007) .  One  type of  technology that has received attention for causing inequality is information communication technologies (ICTs).   The d igital divide , or inequality in ICTs,  began taking shape in the 1990s  when  computers  and  the  I nternet  became  mainstream   (Kinney, 2010) .  Public and private institutions  were quickly adopting the technology to become more competitive and efficient.  W ith the rise o f ICTs , it be c a me clear that wealthy parts of society had more access to the technology while less affluent  areas  of the world were left behind   (James, 2007) . The “digital divide” natural ly  gr ew ."
"31" "As ICTs become mainstream,  public  libraries  became an  entry point to the techno l ogy. Libraries adopted  technology such as  tablet computers, e-readers, MP3 players,   digital editing software, and recently ,  3D printers.  Given all the investment in technology, are libraries decreasing the digital divide?  In one study scholars used geographic information system (GIS) mapping techniques to show that there are fewer public libraries in extremely poor  areas, partially in response of decreased population density   (Jue et al., 1999) . Another study finds that there is a significant ine quality in library funding, staff, and library programming and that libraries in high-income areas receive more funding than libraries in low-income areas  (Sin, 2011) ."
"32" "3D Printing  in Public Libraries"
"33" "3D printers have been hailed as the next  revolutionary  technology  for  manufacturing,  consumption ,  de sign and daily life   (Beyer, 2014; Huang et al., 2012) . 3D printers  all o w  individuals  to design, customize and print complex shapes without having to build a new manufacturing facility.   With traditional manufacturing, it is very expensive  to   produce  a custom product.  In comparison, it is much easier to create custom  3D print s  because the  designers  simply   change   a part of  the 3 D mode l and the n  reprint the figure   (Beyer, 2014; Huang et al., 2012) .   3 D printing also use s  less material than other manufacturing techniques based on  substantive  creation processes.   Since there is less material used and less material wasted, 3D printing can be more environmentally friendly than traditional manufacturing   (Kreiger and Pearce, 2013) ."
"34" "3D printing  was invented in  the 1980s, but recently the technology has  received  renewed interest  due to a variety of  changes and improvements in the field   (Huang et al., 2012) . First, many of the 3D  p rint ing  patents  that   launch ed  the technology are expir e d in the last five years . This led to an explosion of new and cheaper 3D printers   (Schoffer, 2016) . Second, the printers have gotten faster and use better materials. An item that took hours to print and  clean in  post-production  might  now  take thirty minutes and be ready to use right out of the machine. Third ,  there has been  a  rapid expansion in open source forums that allow people to build their own 3D printers   (Weber et al., 2013) . This  fact  drive s  down the market  price of printers  and  pressures  companies to produce cheaper consumer 3D printers.   These changes  increased the  diffusion   of 3D printers and moved  the technology  from being a niche  device   for  large companies  and  enthusiasts to a technology that ma instream consumers operate.  Once   3D printing  technology  became more  popular ,  li braries  add ed  them to their inventory.  In fact, libraries  have  been adding  many  new design and manufacturing tools , like computer numerical control (CNC) machines,  to set up Maker spaces and  hackerspaces  to   fulfill  their mission in the 21st century   (Slatter and Howard, 2013) ."
"35" "The re are only a  few studies about 3D printers in  public  libraries  and most of them   give advice to practitioners o n starting 3D printing programs .  In one study, the author provides  six  case studies of how the technology was implemented in libraries across the country. The study discusses some of the  insights,  logistical challenges  and successes  the programs   (Moorefield-Lang, 2014) .  Another study  analyses makerspaces and 3D printing in Australian libraries  (Slatter and Howard, 2013) .  T hese are important studies,  but  they  do not delve into  the impact the technology  has  on inequality."
"36" "Methods"
"37" "O ur study consists of  a quantitative analysis of libraries and 3D  printing  patents and a  qualitative  analysis consisting of semi - structured interviews  with  librarians. For the quantitative analysis, we  used  two  main  datasets  and several administrative datasets . F irst, we  examined  data from 2013 Digital Inclusion Survey conducted by the Information Policy & Access Center  at the University of Maryland and  the   American Library Association (ALA)   (Bertot et al., 2016) .  The  survey was  sent to public libraries in the USA  from  September-November 2013, and  it  asked questions about the library’s infrastructure ,  technology services  and  resources, technology training, and other   programs and initiatives.   In particular,  the  survey asks  whether the  library  has a 3D printer.  We used the answers for this  question   a s one of the main variables in  our  study.  In total ,  the survey contains information on 4 , 602  libraries   across  803 variables ."
"38" "The second  major  data source we used was  the Castle Island Rapid Prototyping Patent database   (Grenda, 2015) . This data contains a list of all  the  3D printing related patents  (about 10,000)  in the US Patent Office  up to 2015 .   Each patent entry  includes  a title, list of inventors, correspondence address ,  and patent class.  This proprietary dataset is one of the most comprehensive 3D printing patent databases and it has been used by other scholars studying 3D printing   (Weber et al., 2013) ."
"39" "One of the smaller  d ata sets we used lists US   S tate  R&D  expenditures . The data were  taken from  the  2013 Survey of State Government R&D, sponsored by the National Science Foundation (NSF)   (National Science Foundation, 2013) .  Data on  m edian household income were added from 2009-2013 5-Year American Community Survey ,  U.S. Census Bureau   (US Census Bureau, 2013)   ."
"40" "After  combining and  analyzing the datasets, we mapped  relevant variables  using ArcGIS software ,  and then conducted  a logistic regression of library characteristics and demographic information against whether the library had a 3D printer.   A new variable,  o thertech , was created to represent the number of technologies available at the library excluding the 3D printer.   For a full list of the variables  used in the analysis , see  Table 1."
"41" "Despite our best intentions, a limitation  is  we only have data from a 2013 survey.  3D printing development and adoption is changing so rapidly that  a cross section analysis only gives a narrow purview into the impacts of 3D print us a limited perspective into 3D printing adoption"
"42" "Table 1. List of the Variables used in the data analysis"
"43" "In t he second part of the analysis ,  we i nterview ed  librarians from around the country to understand why libraries installed 3D printers and  how library patrons are  using the  technology.   We  contacted over 100 libraries and  conducted 1 4  interview s with librarians ;  four  of the interviews were   done   in person ,  and ten  -  by Skype  or  phone .  We stratified the sample based on  whether the library had a 3D printer,  location of  the   l ibrary (rural, suburban, cit y , or  town), and median  h ousehold  i ncome of area: Low  (less than $ 40,000) , Medium  ($40,000-$60,000) , High  ( more than $60,000) .  Table 2 shows the breakdown of libraries by stratification.  Of the librarians we interviewed ,  10 of the them had working 3D printers, one of the libraries had a broken 3D printer, one library borrows their 3D printer from the central system, and two  libraries  did not have 3D  printers . It was important to interview a variety of libraries that both have and do not have 3D  printers   so we can  understand the reasons different libraries adopted the technology and  whether the technology is accessible.  Unfortunately ,  we were not able to get  representation  from all  types of the  libraries  because of the low response rate from the librarians .   The low response rate is a limitation of the study and it could bias the results of the qualitative data. However, we could not determine any consistent pattern among the libraries that accepted or rejected our interview requests , and therefore, we  think we can make valid inferences  from the data."
"44" "Table  2.  Descriptive  information  about the libraries in the analysis"
"45" "The i nterview  p rotocol  contains  a variety of questions  about  the  library,  the  community served, technologies available on site, rules ,  and requirements, decision - making process, programs offered ,  etc.  We transcribed and coded the interviews using the  RQDA package for R Studio .   The list of the codes with desc riptions can be found in Table  3  (see Appendix) ."
"46" "Results and Discussion"
"47" "Quantitative Analysis"
"48" "Using the survey and patent data, we mapped public libraries with 3D printers with median household income by county (see  Figure  1 in Attachments) .  The libraries with 3D printers are primarily found on the East  Coast  and in large metropolitan areas like Chicago ,  Minneapolis , and Denver.  I n 2013 ,  there  are  large swaths of the country where public libraries did not have a 3D printer."
"49" "We also mapped public l ibraries with 3D printers and 3D  printing patents registered by zip-code (see  Figure  2 in Attachments). There is no clear pattern of correlation between locations of libraries with 3D printers and registered 3D printing patents .  T here are  big clusters  of libraries with 3D printers and patents  grouped around large metropolitan areas  like Denver, Chicago, Washington DC, and New York ."
"50" "The results of  l ogit analysis ( see   Table  4 ) show that libraries with  a  high number of technologies, located  in  high ly  populated  areas, and in the  suburb s  are more likely to have 3D  printer s on site.  To verify the model was well specified, we ran a Homer- Lemeshow  goodness of it test and found no evidence of a bad fit   (Bartlett, 2014; Yu et al., 2017) ."
"51" "Table 4. Results of the Multivariate Logistic Regression"
"52" "The logits analysis shows the only variables that are statically  significant  are  o thertech ,  c ity , and  pop  (see Table 1 for variables description) ."
"53" "The most important variable in the mod el  i s  o thertech . This variable  show s  that  increasing the number of other technology  types, such as  Kindles, tablet computers, or video editing software ,   by 1  unit ,  increases  the estimated odds of the library having a 3D print er  by  a factor of  1.8 7 , holding the other variables in the model constant.  This  result  is  not surprising .   S ome public libraries are known for being cutting edge and having  numerous  technolog ies . It is very likely that libraries  with a propensity for acquiring new technology  will also have a 3D printer ."
"54" "The model also show s  that city libraries are less likely than  suburban  libraries to have 3D printers.  While i t is not clear why city libraries are less likely  than suburban libraries  to have 3D printers,  one of the reasons might be the necessity for  city libraries  to  spend resources on other services for patrons ,  like care e r support  and  printing official documents ,  while suburban libraries have space and staff to invest in novel technologies."
"55" "Surprisingly, the median household income of the com munity surrounding the library i s not  statistically   significant ,  and it is not high ly  correlated with any of the other variables in the model (see Table  5  in Attachments ).   This result is unexpected because public library budgets usually rely heavily on local property taxes   (Sin, 2011) .  W ealthier  neighborhoods have a  larger  tax base per capita which allows the libraries to buy more technology and host a wider array of  programs.   Our results could be inc onc lusive for two major reasons. First,   the survey was conducted in 2013 and the libraries with 3D print ers were very early  adopters ,  and therefore , their adoption of 3D printers  has little to do with the wealth of the community . R ather ,  the mindset of the individual librarians and  their propensity to adopt  technology  may impact their technology purchases .   Second ,  although studies show that there is a relationship between community income and public library funding, the relationship between community income level and the public libraries spending on technology is less clear  (Sin, 2011) .  A  variety of political and cultural factors could impact technology adoption in libraries."
"56" "The variables representing state  R&D and 3D printing technology surrounding the community  variables  ha d  no impact on whether libraries in   th e  area adopted 3D printers . Again, this   i s an unexpected result. I n  general ,   it is easy to reason that communities with  high levels  of R&D and 3D printing patents  would be technologically sophisticated ,  and therefore ,  the public libraries in those  areas  would also be technologically  advanced .  However ,   we find no evide nce to support this conclusion."
"57" "Qualitative Analysis"
"58" "The second part of the analysis relied on  14  interviews with librarians  from a variety of types of communities that both have and do not have 3D printers (see table 2 for details about the libraries) .  The interviews  give  insight s  in to  the  availability and accessibility of 3D printing by asking about the  purpose, operations ,  and challenges of having a 3D printer in the library .  Below is a summary of the main findings."
"59" "Getting a 3D printer"
"60" "T o understand the  availability  and accessibility  of the printers , an essential interview question  is ,   “ Did your library get a 3D printer, why or why not? ” . Libraries had a variety of reasons for getting 3D printers, but their answers centered on providing new technologies to their patrons. Librarians see their role as extending beyond providing books. As one librarian said, “I think it is a huge part of our library, our mission – educating and providing information. I think in our world, technology is such a part of that now, that exposing people to different things and granting them access to things that they may not have at home is one of our biggest jobs here.” Libraries believe they fill a technology gap."
"61" "However, when we asked  librarians  how they prioritize technology adoption  most of the librari ans   did not have a master strategic plan that shaped their technology acquisitions.  Rather , the interests of the librarians and  community  support networks pushed them to get the printers.  Some libraries received the printers as gifts from community partners, and therefore, they simply  found a use for the gift. Other librarians read about the technology or interacted with 3D printers in other libraries, and they reasoned that adding the printer to their collection would be a nice tool to expand their technology portfolio. Few of the libraries had detailed evaluation criteria to judge whether a technology was meeting the needs of the community. Some librarians had log books that tracked 3D printer use while others only had a rough idea of how often the technology was used."
"62" "For libraries that did not get 3D printers, their primary reason for foregoing the technology is that it is too expensive . This finding holds in both low-income and high-income communities. In one wealthy community, the librarian said  “That is probably why we would not buy it. There are other things we need before we get a 3D printer.” In a low-income area, the library said,  “…. But money is an issue. Not only buying it but keeping it in a working condition and buying supplies.”"
"63" "Another reason why libraries did not get 3D printers is that they lacked some key component to maintain a 3D printer. Some libraries have very little floor space, and the physical constraints of the library make adding a printer very challenging. Other libraries lack the staff to run a 3D printer. We found that libraries with 3D printers dedicated  significant amount  of staff hours to maintaining and operating them. Before a printer can be installed, the staff must be trained to operate it and troubleshoot any problems.  In  general,  libraries require 1-2 staff members to  dedicate a part of their day to  care  for  the machine. Some librarians mentione d  they did not get 3D printers because there was no demand in the community to buy and operate one .   T heir community would rather have access to a new computer or faster Internet. Finally, one interesting comment from a librarian in a wealthy community was that  some  patrons already have access to a 3D printer at school or even at home.  In this case,   t he library bought the 3D printer  as an on-site technology demonstration. Patrons could try the printer before  in order to   make an informed decision about buying it for a personal use."
"64" "Once a library decided to get a 3D printer, they used a variety of avenues to secure the device. Libraries in low-income communities often relied on the largess of donors or the city’s central budget. In one low-income community, the library received a grant to buy the 3D printer, and in another low-income community library, their larger library system provided them a 3D printer. Libraries in richer communities usually bought the 3D printer out of their operating budget, however, in a few cases they also relied on grants or donations from the community."
"65" "5.2.2   Operation of 3D  P rinting"
"66" "The libraries  have a variety of ways to   use  their  3D printers .  While s ome libraries have very centralized and control led  operation ,  other s  are more open with t he manag ement  of  their   devices .  At one  end  of the spectrum ,   some libraries use  3D printers simply  as  a  demonstration project.  At these branches, t he library  will display the technology in the lobby ,  print out  preselected  designs, and  discuss how to use it . How e ver ,  at these libraries ,  patrons cannot  use  the technology.   The second   type of library  lets  patrons submit print jobs ,   and the librarians will print them out .   This  approach  allows  the library to have direct control over the machine to ensure that nothing  breaks  and the 3D printer is not misused.  These  libraries  have rules that limit the  size  of the  object , but in general, patrons  can  submit any  appropriate  design.  On  average,  it takes a day or two for a library to print a design.   In the rare case s ,  one or two weeks  are  required. For example,  one librar ian  mentioned that they had a  two-week  backlog  for  3D print ing   the models .  Finally,  at the other end of the spectrum ,  there are a few libraries that allow patrons to operate the 3D printer  independently . Only one of the libraries we interviewed allowed patrons to print their own designs without direct oversight from library staff. However, before the patron could use the printer without supervision, they had to complete a train ing  program. The train ing   ha s  a series of courses and tests to verify that the patron s   can  safely operate the  3D  printer  without supervision .   However ,  at the time of our interview,  no patron had completed the training program."
"67" "To keep the printer operational,  libraries charge a small sum to use the printer.  Libraries either charge based on how long the print ing  takes (for example, $1 per hour) or based on the amount of material used ( for example,  $0. 25  per gram used).   For  example,  print ing  a  smart  phone case  costs  about $ 4 .   Regardless of  the   pricing structure,  none of the interview  participants mentioned that the price of the printer limited demand .  Also,   on  numerous occasions ,  the librarians said the  reasoning behind  the user fee was not  to make a profit, but simply  a way to cover the cost of operating the printer.  If a patron had financial difficulties, the library might waive the fee."
"68" "5. 2.3   Training and software"
"69" "All  the libraries  in the study  offer introductory classes in downloading  3D print ing  design s from websites , such as   T hingiverse ,  and  brief discussions  about properties of  good 3D print ing  designs.  Librarians  emphasize topics like creating objects with the necessary support structure and building hollow structures.  The  courses  tend to be  geared towards children and  teenagers . In fact, only one library we interviewed has 3D  printing  activities specifically designed for adults."
"70" "The libraries are  eager  to  use free  and  open source software like  TinkerCad   and  Sketchup.  Librarians  believe  th is   software  is   easier  to teach and  to learn  the   b asics of design .   Libraries tend to stay away from more robust  soft ware like  AutoCAD . The librarians mentioned that though  rigorous  software   is  great for 3D  p rinting, it takes too long for patrons to le arn it  and  the libraries  do not have the  st a ff   to train patrons on these tools. In addition, libraries have high  turnover  and dropout rates in the courses ,  so they want to  teach  patrons on quick, easy to use sof tware ."
"71" "5.2.4  Problems"
"72" "Librarians described patrons as having mixed feelings about  3D printers. At first, patrons are very interested in the technology. Librarians shared countless stories of children sitting in front of a 3D printer waiting for their design to be finished. When libraries have courses on 3D printing, they are overrun with requests to attend the classes. But the hype for technology quickly wanes as patrons  run into problems .  One issue is that 3D printing  is still an emerging technology ,  and  a variety of  technical problems  make it difficult to use .  For example, one  widespread  issue   is that   t he  printer  head   gets clogged and  must  be  fixed .  This  issue  shuts down the printer until a  librarian  can  repair  it."
"73" "Another technical problem is the  print  job  may have an error and get messed up in the process.  This forces the library to rerun the job which takes up resources and causes delays for  subsequent 3D print ing s.  One librar ian  mentioned ,  “ For us ,  the greatest challenge was the actual functionality of the machine. We had to replace a couple of  parts, so for us ,  troubleshooting and finding out why it is not working   [was the greatest issues] . ”"
"74" "A  third  problem is there is a perception gap between  the  technology ’s capabilities  and the expectation s  of the public.  P atrons  expect  3D print er s   to be eas y  to operate  and they  do not realize creat ing  a design i s a  challenging  process that requires  knowledge of 3D design principles  and computer aided design ( CAD) .  Creating a customized structure involve s  hours of designing on CAD ,  and then once the printing begins, there is no guarantee that the printed object will turn out right ."
"75" "In addition, p atrons must   design an item that  fits within the constrai nts of the  printer  and has   the proper  structural integrity  to be printed with the given materials .  3D printing advocates regularly tout that  3D printers  can create shapes that were previous impossible manufacture ,  but they cannot defy the laws of physics to print a file.  These challenges are a major hurdle for people to use the printers.   One library commented ,  “ The complexity of using  3D Printing requires some level of skills and knowledge. There might be some problems occurring during the printing process, and people just give up . ”"
"76" "Other patrons overestimated the quality of the printer. They  assume d   the   3D  printer s   will  produce perfectly smooth, production level items.   Cheaper 3D printers, which are the type public libraries tend to own, print  objects using plastics like polylactic acid (PLA) or acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS).   The limitations of the printer make it unreasonable to print something that requires precision or more robust materials. As a result, patrons are not using the 3D printers to create prototypes or finished products. Rather, the printers are used by children to print toys."
"77" "A  sixth  problem with 3D printers is p atrons  often  do not  understand  the  unique design power of  3D  printer s and tend to  use 3D printers  just to  creat e objects  they  current ly  use :  “ A lot of people do not understand what it is, and why you do the 3D Printing.  Also,  people do not know how to do a 3D design . ”   They do not realize the nature of 3D printing allows them to create previously unthinkable shapes. For example ,  a company recently created a key with the teeth in an outside shell. This type of key could only be 3D printed   ( The Economist , 2017) ."
"78" "Below is a list of some other  problems that make 3D printers challenging in libraries :"
"79" "The extruder of the printer can be very hot ,  and  it  is a  safety  hazard  for  children  at the library ."
"80" "The technology is still expensive , and with rapid development ,  it requires constant investments: “It  is  technology, so it is updating quickly. However, because of high price ,   the  library is not able to update the 3D printer as  fast  as  the  technology  is  updating . ”"
"81" "The printers can be loud and distracting in library spaces.  As one of the interviewed librarians mentioned, “The noise associated with  the  printing process bother s  people . ”"
"82" "Navigating  copyright issues with 3D print designs  is complicated .  It is  a  librarian ’ s responsibility to  en sure no illegal or inappropriate designs are printed at the library . It is  challenging to know whether the object is illegal to print."
"83" "It can take hours to print an object.  Librarians   told stories of parents angrily waiting around as the printer had another 30 minutes to go ."
"84" "Inequality"
"85" "Throughout the project, librarians were very keen to say that part of their primary mission was to provide the technology to all their patrons and act as forces to decrease inequality.  All the l ibrarians  interviewed  addressed various types of inequality in their statements. One librarian said: “In our community, there are a lot of people who do not have computers at home, who do not have the Internet, and our role is to bring it to them for free, to put them on the equal standing as people who have it at home. Yes, it is less convenient to come to the library, but it is free. ”   Other  librarians  mentioned that they play a powerful role in mitigating horizontal inequalities like those based on age, gender, race or religious affiliation.  “ The library is open to everyone regardless of race, religion, ethnicity, and economic status. The library is always there to strengthen democracy and to make knowledge available for all citizens. We don’t discriminate against anyone.”"
"86" "Another librarian stated ,  “… we are trying to make sure that everyone in our community is served and has access to these technologies. It might seem like a lot of these are focused more towards males, but we are trying to make sure that females also have an opportunity to realize that working in technology is not something that is just for males even if it looks that way.” This librarian specifically identifies the role  l ibraries play in decreasing gender disparities."
"87" "One aspect of inequality the libraries do not fully address is that libraries themselves are in spatially diverse regions that perpetuate inequality. As stated before, libraries in wealthy communities tend to have more resources than libraries in poor communities  (Sin 2011) . Libraries in this study mitigate the effect by letting all patrons use their resources. From our interviews, only one library restricted the access to 3D printer to its patrons."
"88" "Conclusion  and discussion"
"89" "This study discusses library adoption of 3D printing.  The  central  question of the research project is  if  3 D  printers  are  available and  accessible to low - income communities through  the US  public libraries .   Based on the statistic al analysis of  the  available data,  we  are not able to  confirm   the first  h ypothesis .  We are unable to determine whether   l ibraries in  affluent  communities are more likely to have 3D printers than libraries in poor communities.  However,   f rom the statistical analysis, we can determine that libraries with lots of technolog ies , areas with larger populations, and the suburbs  compared to cities  are more likely to have a  3D  printer."
"90" "The qualit at ive analysis  gives slightly different results than the quantitative analysis and it  support s  the hypothesis that libraries in  wealthy  communities are more likely to have a 3D  printer  than poor communities. Librari ans  mentioned that funding and budget constraints  are  the main factors determin ing  whether  they   purchase a 3D printer. Libraries in wealthy communities  tend to   have larger budgets  than libraries in middle and  low-income  communities,  and therefore , they  can afford  to buy a 3D printer.  As a result, the technology could make the social and educational gap between poor and  wealthy  communities even bigger.   The relationship between  the wealth of the local community and owning a 3D printer is strongly influenced by  the  employees at the library,  and  the library’s local support network."
"91" "The second hypothesis is  that even if a library has a 3D printer, the technology would be inaccessible to  patrons because it i s  too expensive to print an item or patrons are not trained to use the technology . This hypothesis is partially confirmed.   We find libraries  provide very little training on  3D printing.  They tend to  offer introductory courses on  finding and printing objects , but  they provid e few  instruction s  on creating  new  printable  3D object s .   This  circumstance  corroborates  that libraries will not be intermediaries to decrease inequality in 3D printing.  However,  to counter this point,  th ere is evidence public libraries will make the technology accessible. In  general,  the 3D printer is open to any person regardless of their m embership status ,  and it is not very expensive. These factors alon e  will not make the technology accessible, but it does lower the barriers prevent ing  people from using a 3D printer."
"92" "Public l ibraries are  important  spaces that  allow everyone, including people from marginalized groups, to use technology.   In the past ,  p ublic l ibraries  were  key institution s  for re ducing   the  ICT  digi ta l divide ,  but will they  overcome  the digital divide that will arise in 3D printing ?  Given the  cost and training involved to use 3D printers, public libraries will only provide a basic level of access to the technology.  Moreover,  library resources vary tremendously across  regions  and communities  based on income level. Though  income  is not  a  significant  factor in the statistical model  at this point, it is  possible   that as the technology spreads, the median household income of a community  income will become a major factor  in the diffusion of the technology. Public libraries can help decrease technology inequality, but these institutions cannot  solve the 3D printing digital divide."
"93" "Acknowledgements  "
"94" "XXX"
"95" "References"
"96" "Baker D and Evans W (2011) Libraries, Society and Social Responsiblity. In:  Libraries and Society . Oxford: Chandos Publishing."
"97" "Bartlett J (2014) The Hosmer-Lemeshow goodness of fit test for logistic regression. Available at: http://thestatsgeek.com/2014/02/16/the-hosmer-lemeshow-goodness-of-fit-test-for-logistic-regression/ (accessed 20 December 2017)."
"98" "Bertot JC, Real B and Jaeger PT (2016) Public Libraries Building Digital Inclusive Communities: Data and Findings from the 2013 Digital Inclusion Survey.  The Library Quarterly  86(3): 270–289. DOI: 10.1086/686674."
"99" "Beyer C (2014) Strategic Implications of Current Trends in Additive Manufacturing.  Journal of Manufacturing Science and Engineering  136(6): 064701. DOI: 10.1115/1.4028599."
"100" "de Jong JPJ and Bruijn E (2013) Innovation lessons from 3-D printing.  M I T Sloan Management Review: MIT’s journal of management research and ideas  54(2): 43–52."
"101" "Flaherty M and Miller D (2016) Rural Public Libraries as Community Change Agents: Opportunities for Health Promotion.  Journal of Education for Library and Information Science Online  57(2): 143–150. DOI: 10.12783/issn.2328-2967/57/2/6."
"102" "Grenda E (2015) RP Intellectual Propety Data Products. Available at: http://www.additive3d.com/rpml.htm ."
"103" "Huang SH, Liu P, Mokasdar A, et al. (2012) Additive manufacturing and its societal impact: a literature review.  The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology  67(5–8): 1191–1203. DOI: 10.1007/s00170-012-4558-5."
"104" "Ishengoma FR and Mtaho AB (2014) 3D Printing: Developing Countries Perspectives.  International Journal of Computer Applications  104(11): 975–8887. DOI: 10.5120/18249-9329."
"105" "James J (2007) From origins to implications: key aspects in the debate over the digital divide.  Journal of Information Technology  22(3): 284–295. DOI: 10.1057/palgrave.jit.2000097."
"106" "Jue DK, Koontz CM, Magpantay JA, et al. (1999) Using Public Libraries to Provide Technology Access for Individuals in Poverty : A Nationwide Analysis of Library Market Areas Using a Geographic Information System.  Library & Information Science Research  21(3): 299–325. DOI: 10.1016/S0740-8188(99)00015-8."
"107" "Kinney B (2010) The Internet, Public Libraries, and the Digital Divide.  Public Library Quarterly  29(2): 104–161. DOI: 10.1080/01616841003779718."
"108" "Kreiger M and Pearce JM (2013) Environmental life cycle analysis of distributed three-dimensional printing and conventional manufacturing of polymer products.  ACS Sustainable Chemistry and Engineering  1: 1511–1519. DOI: 10.1021/sc400093k."
"109" "McClure CR and Bertot JC (1998)  Public library use in Pennsylvania: Identifying uses, benefits, and impacts. Final report.  Available at: http://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED419548."
"110" "Moorefield-Lang HM (2014) Makers in the library: case studies of 3D printers and maker spaces in library settings.  Library Hi Tech  32(4): 583–593. DOI: 10.1108/LHT-06-2014-0056."
"111" "National Science Foundation (2013) 2013 Survey of State Government R&D. Alexandria, VA. Available at: https://www.nsf.gov/statistics/staterd/."
"112" "Scalfani VF and Sahib J (2013) A Model for Managing 3D Printing Services in  Academic Libraries.  Issues in Science and Technology Librarianship  Spring. DOI: 10.5062/F4XS5SB9."
"113" "Schoffer F (2016) How expiring patents are ushering in the next generatio of 3D printing.  TechCrunch . Available at: https://techcrunch.com/2016/05/15/how-expiring-patents-are-ushering-in-the-next-generation-of-3d-printing/."
"114" "Shrestha S and Krolak L (2015) The potential of community libraries in supporting literate environments and sustaining literacy skills.  International Review of Education  61(3): 399–418. DOI: 10.1007/s11159-014-9462-9."
"115" "Sin SCJ (2011) Neighborhood disparities in access to information resources: Measuring and mapping U.S. public libraries’ funding and service landscapes.  Library and Information Science Research  33(1). Elsevier Inc.: 41–53. DOI: 10.1016/j.lisr.2010.06.002."
"116" "Slatter D and Howard Z (2013) A place to make, hack, and learn: makerspaces in Australian public libraries.  The Australian Library Journal . Taylor & Francis. DOI: 10.1080/00049670.2013.853335."
"117" "The Economist  (2017) A 3D-printed key that can ’t be copied."
"118" "US Census Bureau (2013) American Community Survey 2009-2013. Washington D.C.: US Census Bureau. Available at: https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/."
"119" "Walter VA (2010)  Twenty-First-Century Kids, Twenty-First-Century Librarians . American Library Association."
"120" "Weber CL, Pena V, Micali MK, et al. (2013)  The Role of the National Science Foundation in the Origin and Evolution of Additive Manufacturing in the United States . Alexandria, VA."
"121" "Wiegand WA (2015)  Part of Our Lives: A People’s Hstory of the American Public Library . Oxford: Oxford University Press."
"122" "Woodhouse E and Sarewitz D (2007) Science policies for reducing societal inequities.  Science & Public Policy (SPP)  34(2). Beech Tree Publishing: 139–150. Available at: 10.3152/030234207X 195158data."
"123" "Yu W, Xu W and Zhu L (2017) A modified Hosmer–Lemeshow test for large data sets.  Communications in Statistics - Theory and Methods  46(23). Taylor & Francis: 11813–11825. DOI: 10.1080/03610926.2017.1285922."
