"x"
"1" "Thank You For Your Service :"
"2" "Sacrifice, New Warriors, and  the Second Amendment in the American Rifleman from 1975-201 8"
"3" "Warriors are everywhere in America society today. From Warrior Cats ™ to Wounded Warriors to Warrior Shield condoms, warriors  are ubiquitous today. But today’s warriors have different cultural meaning than warriors of the past.   The defeat in Vietnam marked  a change in the cultural meaning surrounding  these warriors . One significant transition was  the media image of the  New Warrior  – a warrior  who’s sacrifice no longer transformed the nation .  The NRA, emerging from the 1970s with a more hardline stance toward Second Amendment absolutism ,  played an active role in  reshaping the  relationship between  this new  warrior culture , military service,  and the Second Amendment .   Building on   a narrative of government betrayal of the soldiers in Vietnam ,   the NRA  recast the ordinary gun owner  into the New Warrior, an independent  warrior who will go to any lengths to defend the sacred  right to bear arms  against corrupt agents of the government . But the deeper question of how the NRA has accomplished this transformation of cultural meaning remains largely unexplored.  This paper argues that the NRA  used  the  rhetoric of national failure following Vietnam   and  the blood sacrifice  of American soldiers  who died  in the defense of the Constitution   to   transform the cultural meaning   of the Second Amendment  for  ordinary citizens .   T hrough  the  Second Amendment , ordinary men  are transformed into  Second Amendment warriors,  defending   the freedoms the American soldiers died to protect .  As  one of the original real life hero e s of the post-Vietnam New War  -    a retired soldier who  operated outside of the law in order to defend the  Nation– Oliver North’s ascension to the NRA presidency represents the  fulfillment  of the post-Vietnam New War archetype and merges the New War mythology with  the blood sacrifice of  Christian  n ationalism ."
"4" "Keywords: Second Amendment, Nationalism, Warrior Culture, Sacrifice , Christian Nationalism, Gun Culture, NRA"
"5" "Intro duction"
"6" "The rise of warriors in American culture has deep links to America’s past. Today, the use of warriors is tied to everything from charity foundations like the Wounded Warrior Project  (2019)  to Warrior  Coffee ™  and Warrior Cats children’s books to Warrior Shield ™ condoms. But the cultural meaning of warrior in today’s society is fundamentally different  from  the way warriors have been understood in the past. Even still, the cultural meaning links back to  mythic  warriors  of the past but changes in fundamental ways. The shift in cultural meaning finds its origin in the American response to failure in Vietnam."
"7" "The end of the war in Vietnam wasn’t just the end of another conflict in America’s history  but a period of significant cultural change .  The  post-Vietnam  years marked the start of a national reckoning for a nation that had always been victorious in its previous wars  and who’s soldiers sacrifice restored the nation to greatness   (Marvin and Ingle 1996; Peters 2019) .  Since the Civil War, American soldiers blood sacrifice served to purify and reunify the nation  (Marvin and Ingle 1996; Lincoln 1865)  but the Vietnam war defiled this sacrifice  (Gibson 1994) .   Amid this cultural transition, the  NRA  began  its  efforts to  protect the  Second Amendment  from government restriction , walking a fine line between the  post-Vietnam   New Warrior  paramilitary  culture and  the  noblese  oblige  of the Greatest Generation .  To achieve this shift in cultural meaning,  the NRA utilized  post-Vietnam  New War  cultur al  discourse  to transform the  relationship between citizen s, their government,  and the Second Amendment.    In  doing so, the NRA rejected the post-Vietnam transformation of the cultural meaning of citizenship to one of rights and focused instead  on the older  obligation of citizens to do violence on behalf of the state  that grew out of nationalism  (Segal 1989; Knox and Murray 2001) ."
"8" "Following Vietnam, the cultural meaning of  warriors in American culture  underwent a transformation. By that I mean “the typical (frequently recurring and widely shared aspects of the  interpretation…evoked in people as a result o f  their similar life experiences”  (Strauss et al. 1997, 6) .   Prior to Vietnam, soldiers deaths served the civic religious function of  performing a  sacrifice which purified the community  and restored the social order  (Eliade 1987; Gibson 1994; Gorski 2017a) . But following the loss in Vietnam, accompanied by accusations of extreme violence and war crimes, soldiers  actions in war became profaned, wasted in a futile effort overseas (Huebner 2011; Lembcke 2000; Gibson 1994) . This staggering loss  resulted in soldiers occupying “contenti ous  identities ” which required a transformation of cultural meaning to answer  fundamentally collective  questions “Who are you” “Who are we?” and “Who are they?”   (Tilly 2002, 6) .  The combined loss of Vietnam along with the gains by black Americans and women  in the 1960s  sparked a n “emergency of a highly energized culture of war and warrior…New War culture presented the warrior role for  all  men”  (Gibson 1994, 9) .  Guns , paramilitary culture, and  violence went mainstream – in media, movies, and real life -  in the 1970s and 80s in a way that hadn’t been seen previously in American history   (Belew 2018) , providing a perfect opportunity for the NRA to build a cultural narrative about the actions of everyday citizens and their  obligation to defend the Second Amendment."
"9" "This paper demonstrates   how the NRA  linked   America’s  long legacy of the  lone  warrior myth  to the rise of the  post-Vietnam  New Warrior  paramilitary culture  (Gibson 1994) ,  national  reverence for soldiers  (Gorski 2017a; Huebner 2011) , and  the role of blood  sacrifice   (Peters 2019; Marvin and Ingle 1996)   to the defense of the Second Amendment .   This paper contributes to the understanding of how the NRA influenced the  transformation of the  cultural  meaning of the Second Amendment by linking  deep historical   American narratives about  military  sacrifice and service to new warrior culture following Vietnam.  This transformation of  cultural  meaning helped not only to restore the sacrifice of Vietnam veterans to a sacred status but also helped  further  shift   the Second Amendment , beyond the reach of the law (Dawson  2019 ) .  Using the NRA’s most popular  and longest running  magazine the  American Rifleman , I demonstrate how the  transformation of cultural meaning of America’s soldiers underlies the transformation of meaning of the Second Amendment."
"10" "Geertz argues that culture is “an historically transmitted pattern of meanings  embodied  in  symbols , a system of  inherited   conceptions\" (Geertz 1977 quoted in Strauss et al. 1997, 16) .  The NRA, then, uses existing American culture to transform the pattern of meanings of powerful American symbols like citizens, soldier’s sacrifice and the rights they believe are protected only by the Second Amendment.  Stories and narrative provide  an opportunity to “make senses of our occurrences that are essentially wounded and without hope of meaning”   (Tilly 2002, 8)  and  thus, the  American Rifleman   provide s  a window into how cultural meaning  of the conflict in Vietnam gain ed  a sense of meaning  by mapping onto larger New Warrior culture .  By using the NRA’s  American Rifleman , I  offer insights into  social change as  “a continuous process… [of]  quantitative increments within a certain pattern of organization , within a certain institutional structure”   (Tiryakian 1967, 73) .  I turn now to a discussion of  the cultural meaning of  citizens, sacrifice, and their  changing  relationship to the American nation  before  returning to the  NRAs use of this cultural meaning and role in transforming it ."
"11" "Citizen Soldiers"
"12" "The ri s e of the modern nation state transformed subjects into citizens required to do violence on behalf of the state  (Knox and Murray 2001) . The American Revolution, along with the French Revolution “defined participation in armed conflict as part of the normative definition of citizenship”  (Segal 1989, 2) . The American Revolution was “a militia  of mobilized citizens”  (Gibson 1994, 17) .  Military service has long been tied to citizenship but the “relationship between military service and citizenship was most dramatic with regard to the racial integration of the armed forces”  (Segal 1989, 10) .  Following Vietnam and the end of the draft, the extension of citizenship associated with the sacrifice in defense of the American nation began a radical shift in the way that citizenship would come to be culturally understood – less in terms of obligation and sacrifice and more in terms of rights  (Segal 1989) ."
"13" "Through  the 20 th  century, cultural depictions of  the Great War and WWII, American soldiers “talked of home and family, together with their hopes that somehow their sacrifices would lead to a better world”  (Gibson 1994, 45) , emphasizing the focus of their sacrifice in healing the world. This is a not accidental parallel to Jesus sacrifice on the cross for all mankind.  Soldiers   still  “protect[ ed ] the American values of freedom and democracy and to liberate others from tyranny”  (Gibson 1994, 31)  symbolically ensuring that society would be  restored from their sacrifice.  This sacrifice is not merely the sacrifice of the good soldier but linked to the deeper narrative of blood sacrifice  and American religious nationalism   (Marvin and Ingle 1996) .  The  recent resurgence in reverence for American soldiers since 9/11 is part of a  deep tradition of blood sacrifice in American nationalism that extends back to at least the Civil War   (Gorski 2017a) ."
"14" "Since the Civil War, America’s heroes have been the soldiers, whose sacrifice preserved the nation and consecrated the ground with their blood  (Gorski 2017a; Lincoln 1865) . In the Gettysburg address, Abraham Lincoln laid the cornerstone for the sacralization of the American soldier. Speaking of the dead who “gave their lives that that nation might live,” Lincoln invoked the sacrifice of Jesus Christ dying for the sins of humanity.  The land where they died became hallowed and consecrated, made sacred by their blood sacrifice. “The brave men, living and dead, who struggled here, have consecrated it, far above our poor power to add or detract” as a warning to those who might add or remove words from the Holy Bible – that the land must now be regarded as a sacred space that gives birth to a new nation. “[T] hese  honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the last full measure of devotion -- that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain -- that this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom -- and that government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth.” Again, Lincoln invokes the prophetic tradition in American civil religion, tying the American nation to a new covenant under God’s blessing, sealed in a sacrifice of blood  (Lincoln 1865) ."
"15" "A ll of this changed after the failure in Vietnam.  Vietnam created a cultural sense of unease given that the soldiers efforts in Southeast Asia ended with a loss. The loss shattered the mythology surrounding American soldiers and their sacrifice created a “contradiction between a people’s core belief system and their experiences”  (Gibson 1994, 28) . Vietnam was a violation of the sanctification of the  s oldier and in many ways, capitalized on the anti-state vein in American revolutionary narrative  (Horwitz and Anderson 2009) . Vietnam is “often marked as the conflict that smothered romantic views of warfare  in  post-1945 America”  (Huebner 2011, 10) . The “defeat in Vietnam could only be explained by arguing that the full powers of the heroic American warriors of legend had not been unleashed”  (Gibson 1994, 27) ."
"16" "This shift in cultural meaning, however, had deeply implications for an America who  many believed  had been emasculated in Vietnam   (Gibson 2000) .   As soldiers returned home from a pointless war, their sacrifice ignored and profaned, two major trends took hold that would alter the gun rights advocacy landscape in a profound and lasting way. The rise of paramilitarism  (Gibson 1994)  combined with apocalyptic Christianity was the first trend, merging the Christian apocalypse with militarized conspiracy theories  (Belew 2018; Dittmer and Sturm 2016) . The second was the perceived abandonment of the American soldiers in Vietnam  (Gibson 1994)  which combined with increased antigovernment paranoia that has been around since the founding of the nation  (Bellah et al. 2007) .  The  NRA capitalized on this discontent partly because the right was more willing to embrace violence due to the  legacy of blood sacrifice and blood covenant in American history  (Marvin and Ingle 1996; Gorski 2017a)  and partly because of the political alignment of the NRA and the New Christian Right that emerged out of the 1970s  (Dawson 2019) ."
"17" "The 1980s solidified the narrative surrounding Vietnam as government failure, the blood sacrifice wasted and defiled. “The discourse…shifted to emphasize the mistreatment of veterans by the government and civil society” because they were “denied the right to win by limiting their use of force against a beastly, subhuman enemy”  (Belew 2018, 23) . This failure to properly honor the sacrifice of American soldiers began to solidify the narrative of government as corrupt. This transformation played out in what James William Gibson calls the New Warrior narrative  (Gibson 1994) . As the government became associated with forced bussing, forced desegregation, lawsuits that broke down the racial and gender barriers “the state was recast as a menace to morality and prosperity”  (Belew 2018, 10) . Soldiers, however, remained the sanctified martyrs to the nation, their sacrifice to be honored above all  b ut because of the betrayal in Vietnam,  new myths were needed  to reconcile the failure in Vietnam .   The subsequent rise of the “paramilitary warrior culture can only be understood when it is placed in relation to the Vietnam War”  (Gibson 1994, 10) ."
"18" "Old Myths and New Warriors"
"19" "Narratives resonate  through cultural objects  when they  “help actors solve  puzzles  they face”  (McDonald, Bail, and Tavory 2017, 2) .   The rise of the New Warrior culture following Vietnam served  to connect the everyday gun owner to the “broader cultural themes and narratives” of citizen soldier s and particularly to their sacrifice  (McDonald, Bail, and Tavory 2017, 3) .  “The  N ew War is fought principally by paramilitary warriors who are most often hostile to official legal and police authorities”  (Gibson 1994, 29) .  Th is emerged as part of the “discourse generated in novels, memoirs, and…journalistic accounts shifted to emphasize the  mistreatment  of veterans by the government…the idea that the n ation had wrongly rejected,  failed  to honor, and impugned veterans…[who] had been honorable men  …denied  permission to win  by limiting their use of force against a beastly, subhuman enemy”  (Belew 2018, 23) . Within the particular organization of the NRA, warriors as a cultural object serve to a link to America’s storied past to today’s contested cultural context."
"20" "Since the mid 1970s, the NRA has linked the American myths of the lone gunman to the image of good citizen  who is  the ideal of individual protector  who will take action in the face of government failure  (Belew 2018) .  This  narrative invoked the historic requirement of citizens to engage in violence  (Segal 1989)   by refusing to relinquish the  right to engage in violence to the state.  as well as the restoration of the reputation of the “American fighting man…[who was] degraded and damaged by [his] experiences in Vietnam”  (Huebner 2011, 256) ."
"21" "This narrative provides justification to support the   Second Amendmen t in order to preserve the right  and the means  to engage  in   violence. It  serves as a link between the soldiers  sacrifice  and the  armed  citizens who protect their communities. Armed militias were frequently used to put down slave rebellions and other revolts that were perceived to be a threat to predominantly white communities  (Obert 2018)  or to protect white settlers from Native Americans  (Gibson 1994; Dunbar-Ortiz 2018) . In the modern era, the Second Amendment enables (mostly) men to protect themselves and their families in an inherently dangerous and increasingly hostile world  (Mencken and Froese 2017) – one where the institutions of American life are no longer viewed as sufficient to protect the American way of life  (Bellah 1992) ."
"22" "Much of the NRA’s rhetoric throughout the 80s and 90s focused on the  individual  right of citizens to own firearms – then NRA president Charlton Heston specifically argued that the Second Amendment was  not for all citizens – it was reserved  only for the law-abiding  (Heston 1999) .  While the NRA certainly does not  represent all gun owners, understanding how it has  built on shared  cultural meaning – as opposed to the historical or legal meaning - of the Second Amendment represents a largely unexplored area of research  (Melzer 2012) .   Understanding how the NRA used  “ shared  cultural identities” for “political advantage”  (Strauss et al. 1997, 24) offers insight into how cultural change occurs  through changing moral meaning  (Tiryakian 1967)  transmitted by stories and narrative  (Tilly 2002) ."
"23" "Data and Methods"
"24" "The data for this research is the corpus of the  American Rifleman  magazine  from 1975-2019 , the official magazine of the National Rifle Association that’s been consistently published in its current form since the early 1920s  (O’Neill 2007) . An examination of the  American Rifleman  presents an opportunity to study the current emergence of religious nationalism in America, primarily because it is targeted toward broad NRA membership, rather than at core Second Amendment supporters like other NRA magazines, such as  America’s First Freedom   (Melzer 2012) . As the longest-running NRA publication, the  American Rifleman  is more representative of how the organization has communicated to the broadest base of its readers and provides an ability to measure change over time. The  American Rifleman  has been in continuous circulation since 1923 under its current name  (O’Neill 2007)  and its circulation represents one of the top 50 magazine distributions in the country  (Waldman 2015) , even in today’s increasingly digital environment. The NRA states that more than 2 million subscribers currently receive the  American Rifleman  every month  (Keefe 2018) ."
"25" "The  American Rifleman  includes transcripts of major speeches given at the annual conventions each year, as well as presidential addresses, which focuses on key issues, each month.  My sample includes every issue from 1975 until December 2018. Digital editions from 2008 until the present were downloaded from a digital archive. Physical editions were accessed through library archives or purchased from collectors through online vendors such as eBay. Physical editions were scanned to create digital editions and then optimized for text analysis using publicly available optical character recognition software . Where optical character recognition was unclear, the actual text was read and selected passages were transcribed. All issues from 1975 until December 2018 were included in the dataset. Total number of issues are  516 . Issues average  between  100 -120  pages in length, with election year issues being about 20% longer."
"26" "I use a mixed-methods approach to analyze the corpus of the  American Rifleman  from  1975  to 2018. First, I  searched through the magazines looking for references to warriors and sacrifice  and manually coded for meaning and context .   I then manually searched for references to sacrifice and the Second Amendment .   I begin with 1975 , the official end to the Vietnam conflict,  to show how rhetoric changed prior to the  1980s when mass culture  – film, literature, and scholarship -  began to  wrestle with the legacy of the Vietnam war  (Huebner 2011; Gibson 1994) ."
"27" "The Soldier’s  Sacrifice"
"28" "The use of sacrifice in the  American Rifleman  builds on the conquest narrative embedded in American religious traditions. In the conquest narrative, the Hebrews were granted access to the land of Canaan through expulsion and war  (Gorski 2017a) . It was only the latter prophets and the end of sacrifice at the Second Temple that rabbinic Judaism moved away from sacrifice language.  “Modern warrior mythology ignores Judaism’s  condemnation of human sacrifice and  Christianity’s  message that Christ’s death on the cross was the last necessary  sacrifice and instead reverts to this more archaic theme: only another sacrifice can redeem the blood already spilled and secure a future for the community”  (Gibson 1994, 45) . The  American Rifleman’s  use of blood sacrifice motif  changed significantly over time   (Dawson 2019) , notably transforming along with American society’s relationship with the military in the aftermath of the Vietnam war"
"29" "In  the  May 1985 issue of the  American   Rifleman , Gen Westmoreland, the former commander of forces in Vietnam, called for “all Americans to pause, remember and pay tribute to their countrymen who throughout our nation's history sacrificed their all for the preservation of freedom around the world” (Westmoreland 1985, 20) . In the pages of the  American Rifleman , he called the nation to task for abandoning and abusing those soldiers who “did what the nation asked” in Vietnam in defense of freedom. Their sacrifice should be remembered and honored, despite the failure in Vietnam, along with the others who sacrificed for the cause of freedom. This is one of the first mentions of the association of the sacrifice for a worthy cause in Vietnam. It’s especially important that it’s a retired commander of forces calling the nation to task."
"30" "The  prophets of the Hebrew Bible frequently called the nation of Israel to task for its failing to uphold their part of the Covenant – only the prophets can call the nation to task for its failings.  In the  Hebrew Bible , the prophet Jeremiah “rebuke[s]…the king of Judah and the House of David: ‘Woe to him who builds his house by unrighteousness, and his upper rooms by injustice, who makes his neighbor serve him for nothing and does not give him his wages’”  (Gorski 2017a, 48) . Similarly, Westmoreland calls the American people to account:"
"31" "“Have you ever paused to consider that during the Vietnam war, there were more Americans here at home cheering on the Communists waving his flag than there? Can you imagine putting your life on the line in the combat zone while the boy who lived next door may have been v1s1bly supporting your armed enemy from some chosen campus sanctuary remote from the field? Can you 1magine living through that ordeal only to come home to silence or even hostility?... Today let us pause to remember, to pay tribute to the Americans who gave their lives in the preservation of freedom throughout our nation’s history. And we add to that honored assemblage the equally deserving Vietnam Veteran”  (Westmoreland 1985, 20–21) ."
"32" "Westmoreland rebukes his fellow citizens as a veteran of WWII, Korea and Vietnam, telling  American Rifleman  readers that their nation failed to be worthy of the blood sacrifice of the Vietnam Veteran .  Sacrifice fundamentally involves “a religious act which , through the consecration of the victim, modifies the condition of the moral person who accomplishes it”  (Hubert and Mauss 1964, 13) . The sacrifier does not “sanctify himself wholly for his own sake; he did so also on behalf of the person or society in whose name he was acting”  (Hubert and Mauss 1964, 24) . The language Hubert and Mauss use to describe sacrifice Vedic and Hebrew  sacrifice  is nearly identical of the language used in the  American Rifleman  to describe soldiers’ sacrifice for freedom.  In this early use of sacrifice  with reference to American soldiers, Westmoreland:"
"33" "“calls on Americans to pause, remember, and pay tribute to their countrymen who, throughout our nation’s history, sacrificed their all for the preservation of freedom around the world”  (Westmoreland 1985, 21) ."
"34" "Westmoreland’s call to remember the sacrifice of Vietnam veterans, however, is missing a critical aspect of soldier’s sacrifice from previous wars  in that it fails to restore the moral order   (Gibson 1994) .  He references the sacrifice of American soldiers throughout America’s history but he argues that Vietnam veterans were not included in this  tribute -but they  should be .  For Vietnam veterans, the “American mythology of war and the warrior was no longer connected to any idea of founding a sacred order” (Gibson 1994, 32) .   The  Gettysburg Address, by contrast, specifically argues  that the nation is born anew from the sacrifice  during the Civil War."
"35" "“ We have come to dedicate a portion of that field, as a final resting place for those who here gave their lives that that nation might live…   for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining before us -- that from these honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the last full measure of devotion -- that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain -- that this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom   (Lincoln 1865)"
"36" "Westmoreland’s calls for the Vietnam veteran’s sacrifice to be  included in the tribute to national sacrifice highlights the fact that there was a need for call in the first place.    Previous generations did not have their sacrifice questions."
"37" "Figure  1 . Uses of Sacrifice Over Time in the American Rifleman from  1975 -2018"
"38" "As seen in Figure 1, the use of soldier’s sacrifice for freedom – blood  sacrifice   - does not appear in the  American Rifleman  prior to Westmoreland’s article.  Prior to that  first use in 1985 , the main use of sacrifice was in reference to increasing performance of weapons and accessories without cheapening quality.  After  Westmoreland’s  early usage, however, the sacrifice tied to freedom narrative  still  doesn’t become the dominant narrative in the 1980s, though it does  begin to  be tied to the defense of freedom  more frequently."
"39" "“ From 23 February to 6 March 1836 men from Tennessee South Carolina and Kentucky held off Santa Anna to allow General Sam Houston time to build an army. They brought time with their very lives in defense of freedom. The following month the sacrifice of the Alamo was redeemed by total victory over Mexico at San Jacinto”  ( American Rifleman  1986a, 7) ."
"40" "The Alamo is important symbolism for the NRA as one of the primary  “examples of citizen soldiers using their personal weapons to defend freedom”  (Gibson 1994, 251) .  A 1992 reference to the sacrifice of the Buffalo Soldiers is missing any link to restoring the moral order.  That their sacrifice as black Americans is not tied to the defense of freedom  but rather to serving with pride stands out for  it’s  symbolic omission.  It also shows the ways in which the integration of black Americans into the military is contested in symbols and meaning."
"41" "“ It [Buffalo Soldier Memorial] honors all the African- Americans who served their country with pride, and it reminds all Americans of the deeds and sacrifices of the original Buffalo Soldiers and those who followed in their boot steps”  (Keefe 1992, 26)"
"42" "Use of sacrifice in the  American Rifleman  related to combat and war began to increase in the mid 1990s, just after the disastrous involvement in Somalia and just prior to the US involvement in Bosnia , linking the sacrifice of servicemembers to the defense of freedom.  The relatively easy victory in Desert Storm seemed to erase the stain of Vietnam from the American psyche and launched the first wave of patriot marketing. Desert Storm soldiers “earned back honor for those who served and fell in Vietnam…there’s no real link of honor between the two wars…yet there is”  (Gibson 1994, 294) ."
"43" "Year by year, sacrifice by sacrifice, link by link-  l ives of men, women and deeds of honor- that precious chain binds us to the founders of this great country, whose vision gave us the Second Amendment to the Constitution of the United States and all of the freedoms it stands for   (LaPierre 1995, 7)"
"44" "Language of “ultimate sacrifice” serves as a metaphor for the soldiers to willingly sacrifice themselves for the cause  (Gorski 2017b) .  The first use of ultimate sacrifice appears in 1998 in reference to Vietnam veterans  in a fundraising ad  for a commemorative knife ."
"45" "To all those Americans who made the ultimate sacrifice in Vietnam, and to those who returned home without the heroes' welcome they so justly deserved, a stirring tribute -the first-ever collector knife issued by the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund  ( American Rifleman  1998)"
"46" "Ultimate  sacrifice  appears in early 2000 related to  soldiers of previous wars – including Vietnam -  sacrificing to defend citizens’ rights  but also global principles ."
"47" "“W hen duty called, Americans from all walks of life responded by serving in the trenches during WWI and in Europe and the Pacific during WWH. Others saw action in Korea, Vietnam and the Persian Gulf, and continue to defend our proud nation in wide-ranging conflicts. Many paid the ultimate sacrifice for the principles that America stands for - freedom, liberty, and justice for all the citizens of the world ”  ( American Rifleman  2000) ."
"48" "The references to sacrifice in the 80s and 90s represent the NRA building on American traditions of blood sacrifice but importantly – the post - Vietnam sacrifice is in defense of freedom –  represents a changing of moral meaning   (Tiryakian 1967) .  These references to sacrifice embody “the warriors  [depicted in]  in World War II  movies…who fought to protect the American values of Freedom and democracy and to liberate others from tyranny”  (Gibson 1994, 31) .  The Vietnam veterans sacrifice was honored but it did not serve its sacrificial purpose of restoring the community  (Tiryakian 1967) .  The broader American culture was wrestling with the  post-Vietnam   years by redefining soldiers who  came home from war to their families and loved ones to warriors who remained forever set apart from their society."
"49" "Only Two Have Volunteered to Die   For You"
"50" "The post 9/11 new sacralization of the American Soldier was merged fully with a more militant and masculine Jesus that built on the apocalyptic narratives in the Old and New Testament. Just as Heston embodied a new Moses (Dawson,  2019 ), the American Soldier became associated with Jesus’ sacrifice, especially in the years following the 9/11 attacks. For Christians, Jesus’ sacrifice was the final blood sacrifice, cleansing the world of its sins  (Gibson 1994) . For those who believed that 9/11 was brought down upon America as punishment for its sins (such as homosexuality)  (“Falwell: Blame Abortionists, Feminists and Gays” 2001) , the sacrifice of blood during the war in Iraq served as a means of cleansing the nation of its collective guilt."
"51" "Several popular memes arose during this timeframe. While these memes are external to the  American Rifleman , they demonstrate the broader culture that the rhetoric of sacrifice was embedded within in the early 2000s. Though the source of the original quote is allegedly liked to a speech by Tony Blair  (“Tony Blair Quote” 2006) , the source of the meme that links Jesus’ sacrifice to American soldiers in figure 2 is unknown. That soldiers are always armed for self-defense when Jesus went willingly to his crucifixion goes unnoticed. During the annual Army Navy football game, another meme surfaces that again links the Christ’s sacrifice to soldiers “The only game where every player on the field has volunteered to die for everyone watching it” – source unknown. Both memes either directly or indirectly emphasize the religious aspect of American servicemembers voluntary sacrifice on behalf of the American people and in defense of the Constitution."
"52" "Figure 3 . Meme linking Soldiers sacrifice to Christ's death on the cross. Source unknown"
"53" "After, 9/11, songs like Toby Keith’s American Soldier replaced Lee Greenwood’s God Bless the USA as the theme song for American wars  (Meizel 2006) . Keith’s lyrics reflected a merging of Christ’s sacrifice with a soldier’s duty to lay down their lives for the nation."
"54" "And I will always do my duty"
"55" "No matter what the price"
"56" "I've counted up the cost"
"57" "I know the sacrifice"
"58" "Oh, and I don't want to die for you"
"59" "But if  dyin's  asked of me"
"60" "I'll bear that cross with honor"
"61" "'Cause  freedom don't come free  (Keith and Cannon 2003)"
"62" "Warrior Culture"
"63" "Historically, the   warrior ethos “describes the spiritual realm of warrior moral concerns”   (Smith 2018) .  Prior to Vietnam, the “heroic American warrior…always won his battles and simply could not be defeated ”  (Gibson 1994, 27) . The myth of American victory was so deeply entrenched in American culture that the defeat in Vietnam was a shock to the national psyche and  “could only be explained by arguing that the full powers of the heroic American warriors of legend had not been unleashed”  (Gibson 1994, 27) .  The  post Vietnam  years were characterized by “feelings of defeat, emasculation, and betrayal after the Vietnam war and by social and economic change that seemed to threaten and victimize white men”  (Belew 2018, 10) .  The deep myth of being disarmed was an example of deep story, something that feels true even if it’s not literally true  (Hochschild 2016) , and it’s a myth that the NRA built on in the years following Vietnam. They were not  the originators of this myth but they were able frame the defense of the Second Amendment through the lens of the warrior’s efforts  in exceptionally effective ways."
"64" "Gibson’s  Warrior Dreams  (1994)   charts the rise of the paramilitary culture following  Vietnam .  He   argues  that the media played a pivotal role in creating new myths to help Americans  symbolically understand  the trauma of the loss in Vietnam.  These New Warriors “either with or without official approval…could do what was necessary to win victory and thus affirm fundamental truths of America’s virtue and military prowess”  (Gibson 1994, 27) .  Vietnam veterans stories were the stories “of soldiers’ betrayal by military and political leaders and of the trivialization of their sacrifice”  (Belew 2018, 3) .  New warriors were no longer bound to uphold law and order – the system betrayed them."
"65" "Figure  2 . Uses of Warrior in the American Rifleman from 1975-2018"
"66" "Figure  2  shows  the various uses of warrior in  the  American Rifleman , the warrior is someone who is fetishized, worshipped, and above all, almost always remains outside of mainstream society.  However, this is a new conception of warriors conceived in the post-Vietnam years to reconcile the deep spiritual wound left by that war on the nation and its citizens. The  pre - Vietnam  American warrior myth is one bound to protect society. W arriors  “believed in civic values, even if, as a warrior, he could only live on the margins of society”  (Gibson 1994, 31) .  An early use of warrior in the  American Rifleman  depicts this older meaning of warrior as being part of, rather than outside of ,  society."
"67" "“ The land owning citizen warrior…wearing a ceremonial sword at his local government assembly illustrates the perfect vision of our own founding fathers held for America.” (McClaughry 1986, 71)"
"68" "The use of warrior is first used to describe American soldiers and their weapons in a n article titled “American Warriors and their Arms” about a  museum dedicated to  weapons  used and captured during various wars of the 20 th  century   (Roberts 1987) . This is a rare use of warrior tied to all soldiers, however.  The first use linking Marines to warrior is later in the same article referencing a photo  essay.  “ The foundations most recent effort is  Warriors -  a photo essay on Marine recruit training-boot camp-photographed and written by Pulitzer prize nominee Richard Stack”  (Roberts 1987, 76) ."
"69" "The military of the Greatest Generation was part and parcel of the broader American society – in the pages of the  American Rifleman , the WWII generation is only  rarely  referred to as warriors.  “ The American Historical Foundation is helping to keep alive the bold warrior spirit of this American through the issuance of the George S. Patton commemorative revolver ”  ( American Rifleman  1986b) . Patton’s reputation as a fierce  – potentially abusive -   leader who refused to accept failure  (Aubrey 2012)  fits with later uses of warrior, especially post-Vietnam New Warriors who refuse to be constrained by the rules, laws, or government in pursuit of victory  (Gibson 1994) ."
"70" "Another  example  referencing Greatest Generation soldiers as warriors  in an article by Marcus Luttrell discussing whether Audie Murphy was the greatest American warrior or whether the special operations soldiers in  Afghanistan  deserve that title  (Luttrell and Robinson 2008) .  This reference, however, delineates between the service of the WWII generation and the current generation of soldiers."
"71" "“ In describing how Matthew “Axe” Axelson fought seemingly past the limits of his own death, Luttrell wrote “I used to think Audie Murphy was the ultimate American warrior. I’m not so sure about that. Not now. Not anymore.”  (Luttrell and Robinson 2008, 18)"
"72" "Native American Warriors"
"73" "The most consistent use of warrior throughout the entire forty year span covered by this study of the  American Rifleman  is in reference to Native Americans such as Geronimo from the Apache tribe in the Southwest or referencing Plains tribes Native Americans.  The usage in the  American Rifleman  stands in stark contrast to the “mythology of the American west, [where] evil Indians relish the chaos of their wilderness and violently resist efforts of Anglo pioneers to push civilization westward”  (Gibson 1994, 18) .  The earliest uses of warriors as savages was more in   line with broader cultural depictions “ Soldiers had found that revolver bullets would not always stop a charging  savage  warrior, and there was a certain understandable reluctance to tackle vastly more powerful enemies with such an arm”  (Myatt 1975, 31) . Throughout the 1980s, warriors were mostly depicted as foreign, primitive fighters."
"74" "However, in the early 1990s ,  the  American Rifleman  begins the establishment of the Native American warrior to a place of honor.  Usually depicted in advertisements for commemorative rifles or plates, the Native American warrior is  no t  represented as a  savage but instead  revered and honored."
"75" "“ The Sioux warrior, in perfect harmony the forces of nature, summons the Great Spirit to look with favor on the people - to provide for and protect them ”  ( American Rifleman  1992) ."
"76" "By restoring the image of the Native American warrior, the NRA  symbolically restores the image of the Vietnam veteran, who had been linked to savagery and extreme violence through American films  of the 1970s and 80s   (Huebner 2011) . From the 1990s forward, the Native American warrior is portrayed as a protector, but also free from the constraints of  modern  society in an idealized past."
"77" "“ a long lost era when proud warriors on horseback were masters of the endless plains and the landscape rumbled with thundering herds of buffalo. Reserve this magnificent Henry rifle today and own a tribute to the American Indian...and a piece of Western history”  ( American Rifleman  2018) ."
"78" "That this usage  exhalating Native Americans  exploded when the war in Iraq was turning into an echo of Vietnam is rather striking , giving the negative associations of Vietnam and the wars in the American West  and the frequent parallels drawn between the savagery of American soldiers  and the brutality of the Indian Wars  (Huebner 2011, 251) . The elevation of Native Americans from savages to warriors  symbolically restores  the Vietnam veteran’s heroic status   (Huebner 2011) ."
"79" "This focus on Native Americans as respected warriors nonetheless emphasizes their outsider status – separated by time through history but also through space in modern day reservations. Critically, one aspect of Native American warriors depiction is the unstated fight they were engaged in: battling others for control of their ancestral territory from white settlers   (Gibson 1994) . Other warriors in the pages of the  American Rifleman  are Samurai  warriors and African tribesmen, almost all in the context of some historical battle,  all depicted as having fought  with honor and nobility.  This is in stark contrast to films from the Vietnam era that depicted the savagery of Native Americans as a way of commenting on the brutality of Americans during Vietnam  (Huebner 2011) .  Another way to look at the elevation of Native Americans and other tribal warriors , however, is to  highlight  a commentary on the fundamental savagery of all mankind  – and the only defense against this kind of savagery is to be armed  in kind ."
"80" "In Hollywood, movie producers “chose to comment on the Vietnam War through stories of cowboys, Indians, and Indian hunting federal troops”  (Huebner 2011, 250) . Vietnam was frequently referred to as “Indian country” by Vietnam vets along with the creation of the Air Cavalry in Vietnam echoed the language of the Indian Wars  (D. Trask 2015) . The use of the Indian Wars to critique Vietnam, however, was not the dominant paradigm inside the pages of the  American Rifleman .  Instead, restoring the Native Americans reputations as heroic fighters symbolically restores the Vietnam veteran."
"81" "Warrior Weapons"
"82" "The  Special Operations Association  Tribute  pistol is one of the  clearest  linkages of warriors to Vietnam veterans.  This not only links the service in Vietnam to the previous generations service in more traditional wars, but it clearly marks their service  as having been “in support of freedom”  ( American Rifleman  1999, 4) ."
"83" "“From 1964-1973, nearly nine million Americans served in Southeast Asia. Like their father and grandfathers before them. the young American warrior left behind the comforts of home for an uncertain late on a far-off treacherous battlefield, putting their live on the line in support of freedom and liberty, and serving with valor and distinction”  ( American Rifleman  1999, 4) ."
"84" "The most frequent use of warrior, however, has been in the name of specific guns such as Weather Warrior by manufacturer Kimbra or in the titles of books such as  Rogue Warrior.  Despite the attacks on 9/11 that hit the homeland, the vast majority of Americans never encountered anyone who served in the military or served themselves  and yet, the films that dominated the  post-Vietnam  years were exceptionally violent  (Gibson 1994; Huebner 2011) .  In his book  Violence , Randall Collins argues that it those most separated from violence who are most supportive of it  (Collins 2009) .  It is telling that the use of warrior skyrocket ed  in advertisements aimed at civilians on the  home front  just as the men and women who  grew up  in the media  milieu of the New Warrior  (Gibson 1994)   were being inducted into  actual  combat in Iraq and Afghanistan ."
"85" "The rise of the all-volunteer force following Vietnam has set the American servicemember even further apart from the society that they come from  (Mosko, Williams, and Segal 2000) .  During the height of the Surge in Iraq  (2006-2009) , the use of warrior  in the  American Rifleman   is are almost always in advertisements for weapons, clothing, or books about covert operations , echoing the narrative of the New War begun in American culture in the years following the defeat in Vietnam  (Gibson 1994) . As the Surge became the new strategy in Iraq in late 2005, the use of warrior in the pages of the  American Rifleman  exploded as seen in Figure  3 . Despite being arguably the most lethal military force in the world, the US Army leadership failed to prepare its military to fight a guerilla conflict  (Ricks 2006) , leaving most commanders to figure it out on their own  (Filkins 2005) . This caused something of an identity crisis, not only for the military but also for the citizens back home, especially for Americans who lived during the Vietnam conflict  (Schuman 2006) . Bogged down in an insurgency reminiscent of Vietnam, military commanders began using counterinsurgency operations to try to clear, hold and build in place of  more traditional combat  tactics  (Shultz 2012) ."
"86" "During the Iraq war years  (2003-2011) ,  the term warrior  is  infrequently   applied to American servicemembers  in articles. Rather, warrior is used most frequently in advertisements  for weapons, holsters, and ammunition magazines . “ The new Warrior  ™  and Desert Warrior'- pistols are no-compromise versions of the Kimber .45 issued to the elite Marine Detachment assigned to U.S. Special Operations Command”  ( American Rifleman  2005, 148) .  W hen  warrior is tied to  Iraq and Afghanistan  servicemembers , it’s in  often  reference to them being wounded or transitioning back into  civilian life after  the military service."
"87" "Wounded Warriors"
"88" "The term wounded warrior symbolically serves as a way to reintegrate servicemembers back into society.  Beginning in the Vietnam era, t he predominant narrative surrounding returning soldiers has been of PTSD, homelessness and substance abuse  (Huebner 2011) or, in the case of female soldiers, as victims of sexual assault  (Turchik and Wilson 2010) . For a warrior to be turned into a homeless beggar is “ warrior as a beggar conveys the most impossible condition that can be imagine”  (Smith 2018, 34) . The low status of the warrior turned “disgraced vagabond” is a reminder of the loss of power and prestige faced by the warrior deprived of their tools of war  (Smith 2018) . In this way, the narrative of returning veterans as homeless victims of the violence they suffered strips them of their power to engage in violence while preserving the memory of their former  venerated  status   (Huebner 2011) .  The post-Vietnam New Warrior, however, is never reintegrated into society , even if he remains committed to protecting it  (Gibson 1994) . The portrayal of Vietnam veterans as broken and destroyed in media further created  exacerbated the discrepancy between warriors who are never welcomed home and the soldiers returning from yet another war with questionable motives  (Kleykamp and Hipes 2015) ."
"89" "In the pages of the  American Rifleman , the discussion of warriors in terms of actual Iraq and Afghanistan veterans is almost entirely focused on their status as wounded warriors or in events meant to aid their transition home such as “warrior weekends.”  Just as weapons are the tools of soldiers at war, the Second Amendment provides a means to help soldiers to transfer back to civilian life."
"90" "“ A rifle business is different than just any job when it comes to smoothing the path from warrior to civilian: ‘You lose a piece of yourself when you turn that weapon in. To be around guns again really helps the transition process’”  (Wood 2015, 96) ."
"91" "Many returning veterans seek continued involvement in service to their communities, either through charities that emphasis shared community around weapons or in charities that emphasis shared bonds of service like Team Red White and Blue. But in the pages of the  American Rifleman , these returning veterans seek to retain their warrior status through continued involvement with weapons  – which reaffirms their full rights as citizens   (Segal 1989)  and also cements their meaning as New Warriors, whose identi ti es and abilities are symbolically tied to weapons (Gibson 1994) . As a result, they continue to remain outside of and set apart from American society writ large. Some  warriors , however, have transitioned to  a new battleground  – linking  the sacrifice of their  military service to the  necessary defense of  the Constitution and the Second Amendment from all enemies."
"92" "Oliver North: A New   Christian  Warrior"
"93" "Despite his relatively short term as president of the NRA  (Hakim 2019) , Oliver North occupies a unique place in the soldiers role within the  New Warrior  narrative.  Since the return of Vietnam veterans and the emerging rhetoric that the government abandoned the soldiers  and thus prevented victory , the distrust of American government has continued  to grow , especially on the American Right  (Crothers 2003; Blee and Creasap 2010; Bonikowski 2016) ."
"94" "The  military ,  having recovered  its  reputation  from the boondoggle in Vietnam , remained one of America’s most trusted institutions,  even as its leaders remained unquestioned and unchallenged due to their inability to decisively win the war in Iraq and Afghanistan   (Fallows and Atlantic 2015) . As the culture wars continued to escalate after the contested election of Donald Trump, the NRA sought to capitalize on the status of  military  veterans by electing a new  NRA  president – one who had been consecrated on the field of battle.  Oliver North gained infamy during the Iran Contra scandal in the 1980s when he testified that he had a key role in Iran Contra, which had been done to save the lives of covert operators .  North embodied the New Warrior ethos of the post-Vietnam era, doing whatever it took to accomplish the mission  (Gibson 1994) .  That North viewed his role in the Iran-Contra scandal  as a “personal blood sacrifice”  (Gibson 1994, 283)   made him an ideal president for the NRA a generation later   because Iran Contra represented ac t taken outside of government rule . “In New War terms, North was a man of action whose only crime was that he ignored the ‘self-imposed restraints’ created by politicians and government bureaucrats”  (Gibson 1994, 284) ."
"95" "That he was viewed favorably by a large portion of Americans after the testimony justifies how his actions were viewed as selfless rather than selfish  (Rosenberg 2018)  and  further  built on the deep story of government betrayal of the troops following Vietnam .  North’s appointment as the president of the NRA, a largely ceremonial position,  allow ed  the NRA to capitalize on his venerated status as a hero  who managed to do the right thing  despite the government restrictions a s well as a decorated combat veteran."
"96" "LTC (retired)  Oliver North’s message to the  magazine’s readers  demonstrates the merging of religious  nationalism in the pages of the  American Rifleman :"
"97" "“In 1961, I raised my right hand to become a U.S. Marine and took an oath to “support and defend the Constitution of the United States against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same.” That pledge ends with the solemn words, “So help me God.” When NRA’s leadership asked me to serve, I turned to the words of the prophet Isaiah:  “Then I heard the voice of the Lord say, ‘Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?’ Then said I, ‘Here am I; send me.’”  (North 201808 , italics in original )"
"98" "North’s  message of being chosen by God resonates with the deeply American religious traditions  of being a chosen nation   (Gorski 2017b, 2017a; Bellah 1967) , blending not only the implication of yet another sacrifice in service to the nation but also in the  idea that his service remains in defense of the United States Constitution   (Dawson 2019)   . In electing North, Wayne LaPierre  compared the Marine to the former NRA prophet Charlton Heston.  “Someone asked  me  if  I  thought  I  was Charlton Heston.  I replied no, he was Moses. I’m just a Marine.”  (North 2018a) . Again the linking of the NRA to the covenant tradition in American history but also selecting a  “battle hardened Marine” to lead the association when it’s “being attacked like no other time in history” is representative of the deep myth  of government persecution  the NRA continues to build upon."
"99" "Over time, the NRA’s language has become more overtly  tied to religious nationalism , with direct quotes and more linkages explicitly to God’s hand in guiding their  actions to defend the Second Amendment   (Dawson 2019) .  Oliver Nort h explicitly  links  the sacrifices of American soldiers  to protecting the God-given rights in the Constitution ."
"100" "“In December 1961, I raised my right hand oldest civil rights organization in America. and made a solemn oath “to support and against all enemies, foreign and domestic.” That vow, made before a U.S. Marine recruiter, is a promise I still keep as President of our NRA. But, I need your help to carry out that mission. Here’s why:  “ Our constitutionally protected rights and freedoms are being threatened like never before by three tyrannical billionaires: George Soros, Michael Bloomberg and Tom Steyer. They claim to be “Gun Control Advocates.” They’re not. They are the secret financiers and puppeteers behind the  Disarm America Movement …"
"101" "We see their dark money funding an all-out assault on the sacred pillars of our heritage and way of life: our flag , our National Anthem, and  our  Second Amendment … We need every American citizen who defend the Constitution of the United States wants to preserve our God-given liberty to serve on the front lines of freedom—by joining the NRA … Defeat the “Disarm America Movement” before they strip away freedoms bought with the blood of American patriots …"
"102" "The  Disarm America Movement  is the best-funded, most sophisticated assault on our God-given liberties in American history. In bloody battles as a U.S. Marine, I learned the only way to rout a determined enemy is   to stand and fight. And the only organization with the strength and resolve to defeat the Disarm America Movement is the NRA …"
"103" "We the People  are supposed to govern our nation— not wealthy oligarchs who despise us as “deplorables” and denigrate us as people “who cling to our Bibles and guns.”… Preserving the Second Amendment of our Constitution is crucial to retaining the other nine Individual Freedoms in our Bill of Rights;"
"104" "Individual Rights come with personal responsibilities;"
"105" "NRA members are Proud of our Country & unafraid to show it;"
"106" "We believe the U.S. Constitution is the Law of the Land ;"
"107" "We’re Committed to Civic Duty & Willing to Protect our Freedoms;"
"108" "We stand with hands over hearts for our Flag & National Anthem. ”   (North 2018 ,  16,  emphasis in original )"
"109" "In this  column , the former Marine   lieutenant colonel  uses his military service to  explicitly link the Constitution to God  and to  the  freedom held in the Second Amendment which  has been sanctified by the blood of soldiers who died  in its defense .  He invok es  blood sacrifice  twice : first through his own combat service record and then in the sacrifice of  soldiers.  Blood is mentioned a third time when he talks about how these shadowy elites celebrate when a “police officer is gunned down in cold blood” ( North 2018, 16).  This  profanes  the police officer ’ s noble sacrifice in the line of duty into a scapegoat  (Girard 1989) .  North also explicitly states that NRA members  must be   soldiers  committed to  their  civic duty  to defend the Second Amendment and the Constitution ."
"110" "Despite his relatively short term as president of the NRA, Oliver North occupies a unique role in the  warrior  narrative  in American religious nationalism .  In some ways, the elevation of a combat tested Marine  who was convicted of breaking rules to accomplish his mission outside of legal oversight  to the  symbolic  head of the NRA stands  committed to the American Constitution  in a uniquely post-Vietnam way.  In doing so, the  NRA  signals  that they remain committed to their defense of their god-given Constitutional rights  – no matter what restriction the government may attempt .  The election of Donald Trump stands in stark contrast to the veneration of soldiers and their sacrifice in the pages of the American Rifleman. However, when viewed through the lens of the New Warrior, Trump acts as the embodiement of the New War culture rather than an aberition."
"111" "Trump as the Fulfillment of New Warrior Myth"
"112" "The antigovernment rhetoric of broader society and the New Right that elected Ronald Reagan found its way into the pages of the  American Rifleman . But this, too, builds on much older trends in American tradition, tracing it’s lineage back to the Founding Fathers  (Gorski 2017a) . The deliberate construction of a divided central government grew out of the fears the Founders had of a strong central government. The militia movement of the 1990s reflected this fear and in some ways, created self-fulfilling prophecies of tyrannical government expanding beyond its provenance  (Belew 2018; Horwitz and Anderson 2009) . The election of Bill Clinton, a man who was proudly anti-war during the Vietnam conflict, did nothing to assuage the grown distrust of the government on the American political right  (Crothers 2003) . In many ways, it was Clinton’s presidency that removed military service, and indeed service in Vietnam, from the list of qualifications to be president  (Reyes, n.d.) . Even the election of President Bush did not assuage the fears of growing strong central government due to passages of bills like the Patriot Act which greatly expanded government surveillance capabilities."
"113" "Trump’s election was unusual in several respects, not the least of which were the ways in which he was able to attack decorated combat veterans without damaging his approval ratings among his core supporters  (Haberman and Oppel, Jr. 2016) .  Donald Trump violated the norms of the American presidency by attacking not only venerated heroes like Senator John McCain, a prisoner of war in Vietnam but also in his attacks on Gold Star families. Trump’s ability to not only to attack certain veterans and to face no substantive consequences suggests something unique, not about the  role of  servicemembers  in society  but about Trump himself."
"114" "However, when viewed through the lens of  post-Vietnam  new war culture, Trump’s support seems more like the  embodiment of a culture  rather than a n outlier.  It’s Trump who occupies a  unique  status  -  as a sovereign able to declare exceptions from the sacred   (Gorski and Türkmen-Dervişoğlu 2013) . Charismatic leaders are those who  are “obeyed by virtue of personal trust in his revelation”  (Weber 1946, 216) . Trump himself claimed he could shoot someone and not lose any supporters, an  acknowledgement  of his unique status among the presidential candidates  (Vitali 2016) . His ability to violate strong norms suggest deeper problems with American democracy and institutions  (Sorokin 1967; Girard 1989, 1979)  as well as a possible  decoupling  of nationalism from any ethical guidance Christianity may provide  (Gorski 2017b) ."
"115" "Trump ’ s nationalism,  overcomes any perceived short comings , even as it releases American nationalism from any linkages to the Constitution or rule of law  (Gorski 2017b) .  Trump, as a lone vigilante, represents the “epitome of masculine power and self-development”  (Gibson 1994, 32.)  Trump embodies the post-Vietnam man of action who ’s focus on protecting the national and cultural boundaries is a deep seated myth built up in the years following Vietnam  (Gibson 1994, 285) .  Trump’s rhetoric  is defined through vocal support for violence  (Vitali 2016)  cloaked in religious rhetoric  (Bonikowski and DiMaggio 2016)  and appears dedicated to controlling boundaries to protect Americans from evil  (Gibson 1994, 285) .  In the pages of the  American  R ifleman , Trump is portrayed as  a hero who will fight to restore freedom  by any means necessary ."
"116" "“Trump’s promise to “Make America Great Again” is not just a slogan. It is a solemn pledge. It is a call to political battle for all Americans who have  watched our rights—and the freedom they secure—slip away under eight years of President Barack Obama’s arrogant abuse of executive power. Trump and the appointees he will bring into the government to replace Obama’s radicals can restore and rebuild American exceptionalism—the very notion that our liberty is not just the key for a strong and prosperous nation, but is a beacon to the world showing the power of free individual citizens.”  (Cors 2016, 13)"
"117" "In this new war America headed by President Trump, citizenship , then, is linked to  violence and the Second Amendment protects that right .  Armed citizens   – not soldiers -  are now on the front lines of protecting freedom   (Carlson 2015; Stroud 2016) .  “You don’t have to be in the military to be a warrior and protect your family”  (Brune 2017, 58)"
"118" "Discussion"
"119" "After 9/11, the religion and war became more explicitly linked in the broader culture as soldiers sacrifices were more explicitly tied to religious sacrifice necessary to defend American’s freedoms   (Dawson 2019) . For the NRA, this freedom existed because of the Second Amendment.  “Our freedoms may be a gift from God but the only reason we enjoy them today is because of the service, sacrifice, and eternal vigilance of generations of Americans who have risked and given all so that we might live free”  (Heston 2002) . Freedom is a “blessing” that must be fought for and protected at all costs."
"120" "Sacrifice rhetoric in the American Rifleman sharply increases after the attacks on 9/11, emphasizing the ultimate sacrifice of the soldiers “in defense of freedom”. One of the few references to ultimate sacrifice that was not tied to soldiers, however was in an advertisement for the Liberty Rifle :  “we must not forget those who, a year ago, made the ultimate sacrifice”  ( American Rifleman  2002, 9) . This sacrifice stands as something to be commemorated but once more,  the shift in moral meaning remains clear: the sacrifice is to be commemorated but does not serve a higher purpose – it  does not purify the nation. Indeed, the 9/11 attacks in some ways, mirror the inciting incident for the New Warriors portrayed in Gibson’s Warrior Dreams: their families are killed, frequently betrayed by the government, thus unleashing the New Warrior to exact vengeance by whatever means necessary  (Gibson 1994) . Importantly, this new warrior is not bound by the rule of law – something that became a frequent debate as the surveillance state expanded after 9/11 in the name of defending freedom"
"121" "For the NRA, however, the sacrifice of American soldiers is explicitly tied to defense of the Second Amendment, which allows freedom to be secured through violence rather than consent."
"122" "“Our freedoms may be a gift from God but the only reason we enjoy them today is because of the service, sacrifice, and eternal vigilance of generations of Americans who have risked and given all so that we might live free”  (LaPierre 2002, 9) ."
"123" "Here the reference to sacrifice is not explicitly linked to soldiers but to all Americans who sacrificed everything in defended freedom. Freedom, then, is not something enjoyed by rights bearing people but by those who are willing to fight for it. In the same column, LaPierre quotes Thomas Paine “ another of those radical Founding Fathers, said \"Those who expect to reap_ the blessings of freedom must undergo go the fatigues of supporting it\"   (LaPierre 2002, 9) . By linking freedom to sacrifice,  freedom  becomes something earned rather than obtained by rights. Rights, in this sense, only exist where they are granted by God  and   earned  through human action. Unwillingness to act in defense of those rights, in this view, means losing them. Prior to Vietnam, these rights were defended by American  soldiers but after Vietnam, these rights were protected by warriors – by any means necessary  (Gibson 1994) ."
"124" "“In Florida and Pennsylvania— throughout Ohio, Wisconsin and Michigan—in small towns and communities all across America—you were the  special forces  that swung this election and sent Donald Trump and Mike Pence to the White House. You did this! Don’t let anyone tell you otherwise….And it is time, once and for all, to end the absolute fallacy of gun-free zones.  Not one more American serviceman or woman should be murdered on a military base  because the government denied their right to defend themselves with a firearm. We revere the men and women in uniform who defend our freedom, and their rights must be restored immediately.”  (LaPierre 2017, 5 emphasis added) ."
"125" "The invocation of soldiers being shot at home on a military base in a widely known insider terrorist attack invokes government’s inability to protect its own soldiers as it failed to do in Vietnam without desecrating the soldiers’ inherent prestige."
"126" "Conclusion"
"127" "This paper traces the process of cultural change through narratives and stories deployed by the NRA. This narrative makes Second Amendment warriors out of everyday citizens  much like the rise of paramilitary culture following Vietnam made New Warriors out of everyday men  (Gibson 1994; Belew 2018) .  Just as cultural change arises from “existing conceptual systems”  (Strauss et al. 1997, 4) , so too does a changing sacred arise from existing culture."
"128" "“ In the deep subconscious of the American citizen soldier, gun ownership is linked to private property ownership…[which is linked] to economic independence, democratic governments, and the preservation of the country’s independence and the liberty of its people."
"129" "And so we have come full circle serious. The land owning citizen warrior…wearing a ceremonial sword at his local government assembly illustrates the perfect vision of our own founding fathers held for America. It is a vision that however subconsciously motivates the free American today. Every time the right to bear arms is encroached that vision begins to fade. And every time that right is re-affirmed, an ingredient in the spirit of America is strengthened ”   (McClaughry 1986, 71)"
"130" "By calling on average citizens to become  armed citizens , the NRA    these armed citizens  to the  Founding Fathers - the  revolutionary generation who created one of the few historical examples where armed revolution resulted in democratic governance  (Janowitz 1983) .  The violation of the soldier’s sacrifice in Vietnam required new myths to reconcile the violations of founding traditions of blood sacrifice and blood covenant  (Gorski and Türkmen-Dervişoğlu 2013) .  Since rise of paramilitary New Warrior culture in the late 1970s, the  NRA continually linked citizens actions  defending the Second Amendment  to the sacrifice of soldiers  who defended freedom. For this narrative to work, th e restoration of the Vietnam veteran’s  experience in Vietnam had to be reconciled with defeat in that war . The myths that emerged as part of the post-Vietnam era changed the fundamental meaning of warriors in American culture. No longer were they dedicated to civic values  as   part of the society they protected. In the  post-Vietnam  years, they were set apart, me n of action willing to do whatever it took to win. Their sacrifice was never  resanctified  – it was honored but it did not restore the nation   (Gibson 1994) ."
"131" "The 2018 elevation of LTC (retired) Oliver North as the NRA’s president – however short his term - embodies the New  Christian  Warrior. Rather than discrediting him,  North’s role in Iran-Contra demonstrated his willingness to “to question and reject the corrupt institutions that constrain[ ed ] him”  (Gibson 1994, 34) . This served to elevate his status, especially among those who viewed the loss in Vietnam as a result of bureaucrats in Washington  (Belew 2018; Gibson 1994) ."
"132" "Demerath draws a connection between religion and culture, arguing that both share a sacred core and that culture cannot be considered without considering “the cultural system of symbols, beliefs and values as a sacred system in that its components must be accorded a reverential status that allows for the leap of faith required in converting what are often relative and arbitrary judgments into absolute normative standards”  (Demerath 2003, 218) . While defining culture remains a challenging task in the clearest of situations, this paper seeks to engage with the culture surrounding the Second Amendment without resorting to making a claim that everyone who believes in the importance of the Second Amendment believes certain things without question  (Strauss et al. 1997, 3) . It would be a gross oversimplification of the belief system surrounding by the Second Amendment culture to do so."
"133" "The NRA has used the narrative of sacrifice to frame the Second Amendment as something consecrated through the blood of those willing to defend it.  For everyday citizens not associated with the military, the   defense of the Second Amendment links their actions to the sacrifice of soldiers who died to protect   that the rest of the freedoms contained in the Bill of Rights .  In the pages of the  American Rifleman ,  the cultural meaning of warriors shifts from those who sacrifice to protect and restore the nation to those who sacrifice to preserve the right to engage in violence. These new  warriors are revered but rarely are they part of the society they defend .   For readers of the  American Rifleman ,  warriors   remain set apart, sanctified, and revered  – signaling the devotion to those who shed their lives in support of  freedom  but who’s sacrifice is ultimately hollow ."
"134" "The NRA’s use of deep story narrative  communicates  their central values and what they hold to be true and right in the world  (Hochschild 2016) .  The NRA’s ability to use deep story that links everyday citizen’s actions back to the founding of the nation is potent and linked to  traditions embedded in American society  (Gorski 2017a) . The trend toward religious nationalism stands, whether non gun owning Americans admit it or not, on the American civil religious tradition   (Bellah 1967) .  Understanding the NRA’s narrative means understanding a deeply American part of society   and helps illuminate how this transformation  of cultural meaning  has occurred over time ."
"135" "Works Cited"
"136" "American Rifleman . 1986a. “Never Surrender or Retreat,” March 1986."
"137" "American Rifleman . ———. 1986b. “General George S. Patton Commemorative Revolver,” October 1986."
"138" "American Rifleman . ———. 1992. “Prayer to the Great Spirit,” August 1992."
"139" "American Rifleman . ———. 1998. “The Official Vietnam Veterans Collector Knife,” November 1998."
"140" "American Rifleman . ———. 1999. “Special Operations Association Tribute .45 Pistol,” February 1999."
"141" "American Rifleman . ———. 2000. “A 20th Century Salute to the Military: The VFW 100th Anniversary Tribute,” August 2000."
"142" "American Rifleman . ———. 2002. “The Liberty Rifle,” September 2002."
"143" "American Rifleman . ———. 2005. “Kimber Desert Warrior,” November 2005."
"144" "American Rifleman . ———. 2018. “The American Indian Tribute Rifle,” November 2018."
"145" "Aubrey, Darrell W. 2012. “The Effect of Toxic Leadership:” Fort Belvoir, VA: Defense Technical Information Center. https://doi.org/10.21236/ADA560645."
"146" "Belew, Kathleen. 2018.  Bring the War Home: The White Power Movement and Paramilitary America . Cambridge, Mass: Harvard Univeristy Press. http://www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog.php?isbn=9780674286078."
"147" "Bellah, Robert N. 1967. “Civil Religion in America.”  Daedalus  96 (1): 1–21."
"148" "Bellah, Robert N. 1992.  The Broken Covenant: American Civil Religion in Time of Trial . 1 edition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press."
"149" "Bellah, Robert N., Richard Madsen, William M. Sullivan, Ann Swidler, and Steven M. Tipton. 2007.  Habits of the Heart: Individualism and Commitment in American Life . First Edition, With a New Preface edition. University of California Press."
"150" "Blee, Kathleen M., and Kimberly A. Creasap. 2010. “Conservative and Right-Wing Movements.”  Annual Review of Sociology  36 (1): 269–86. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.012809.102602."
"151" "Bonikowski, Bart. 2016. “Nationalism in Settled Times.”  Annual Review of Sociology  42 (1): 427–49. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-soc-081715-074412."
"152" "Bonikowski, Bart, and Paul DiMaggio. 2016. “Varieties of American Popular Nationalism.”  American Sociological Review , 0003122416663683."
"153" "Brune, Evan. 2017. “Guard Training: Level Achieved.”  American Rifleman , November 2017."
"154" "Carlson, Jennifer. 2015.  Citizen-Protectors: The Everyday Politics of Guns in an Age of Decline . 1 edition. Oxford ; New York: Oxford University Press."
"155" "Collins, Randall. 2009.  Violence: A Micro-Sociological Theory . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press."
"156" "Cors, Alan. 2016. “President’s Column.”  American Rifleman , November 2016."
"157" "Crothers, Lane. 2003.  Rage on the Right: The American Militia Movement from Ruby Ridge to Homeland Security . 0224th edition. Lanham, Md: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers."
"158" "Dawson, Jessica. 2019. “Shall Not Be Infringed: How the NRA Used Religious Language to Transform the Meaning of the Second Amendment.”  Palgrave Communications  5 (1): 58. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-019-0276-z."
"159" "Demerath, N.J. 2003. “Secularization Extended: From Religious ‘Myth’ to Cultural Commonplace.” In  The Blackwell Companion to Sociology of Religion , edited by Richard K. Fenn, 211–28. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers."
"160" "Dittmer, Jason, and Tristan Sturm. 2016.  Mapping the End Times: American Evangelical Geopolitics and Apocalyptic Visions . Routledge."
"161" "Dunbar-Ortiz, Roxanne. 2018.  Loaded: A Disarming History of the Second Amendment . San Francisco: City Lights Publishers."
"162" "Eliade, Mircea. 1987.  The Sacred and The Profane: The Nature of Religion . Translated by Willard R. Trask. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich."
"163" "Fallows, James, and The Atlantic. 2015. “The Tragedy of the American Military,” 21."
"164" "“Falwell: Blame Abortionists, Feminists and Gays.” 2001. 2001. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/sep/19/september11.usa9."
"165" "Filkins, Dexter. 2005. “The Fall of the Warrior King.”  New York Times Magazine  23."
"166" "Geertz, Clifford. 1977.  The Interpretation Of Cultures . New York: Basic Books."
"167" "Gibson, James William. 1994.  Warrior Dreams: Violence and Manhood in Post-Vietnam America . Reprint edition. New York: Hill & Wang Pub."
"168" "———. 2000.  The Perfect War: Technowar in Vietnam . Atlantic Monthly Press."
"169" "Girard, René. 1979.  Violence and the Sacred . Translated by Patrick Gregory. Baltimore: W.W.Norton & Company."
"170" "———. 1989.  The Scapegoat . Translated by Yvonne Freccero. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press."
"171" "Gorski, Philip S. 2017a.  American Covenant: A History of Civil Religion from the Puritans to the Present . Princeton: Princeton University Press."
"172" "———. 2017b. “Why Evangelicals Voted for Trump: A Critical Cultural Sociology.”  American Journal of Cultural Sociology , July. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41290-017-0043-9."
"173" "Gorski, Philip S., and Gülay Türkmen-Dervişoğlu. 2013. “Religion, Nationalism, and Violence: An Integrated Approach.”  Annual Review of Sociology  39 (1): 193–210. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-soc-071312-145641."
"174" "Haberman, Maggie, and Richard A Oppel, Jr. 2016. “Donald Trump Criticizes Muslim Family of Slain U.S. Soldier, Drawing Ire.”  New York Times , June 30, 2016."
"175" "Hakim, Danny. 2019. “N.R.A. President to Step Down as New York Attorney General Investigates - The New York Times.”  New York Times , April 27, 2019. https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/27/us/oliver-north-nra.html."
"176" "Heston, Charlton. 1999. “The President’s Column.”  American Rifleman , 1999."
"177" "———. 2002. “President’s Column.”  American Rifleman , November 2002."
"178" "Hochschild, Arlie Russell. 2016.  Strangers in Their Own Land: Anger and Mourning on the American Right . New York: The New Press."
"179" "Horwitz, Joshua, and Casey Anderson. 2009.  Guns, Democracy, and the Insurrectionist Idea . Ann Arbor, Michigan: University of Michigan Press."
"180" "Hubert, Henri, and Marcel Mauss. 1964.  Sacrifice: Its Nature and Functions . Translated by W. D. Halls. Revised ed. edition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press."
"181" "Huebner, Andrew J. 2011.  The Warrior Image: Soldiers in American Culture from the Second World War to the Vietnam Era . Univ of North Carolina Press."
"182" "Janowitz, Morris. 1983.  The Reconstruction of Patriotism: Education for Civic Consciousness . University of Chicago Press."
"183" "Keefe, Mark. 1992. “The Buffalo Soldier Rides Forever.”  American Rifleman , October 1992."
"184" "———. 2018. “The Keefe Report.”  American Rifleman , June 2018."
"185" "Keith, Toby, and Chuck Cannon. 2003. “American Soldier.” Tokeco Tunes, Roba Music. https://www.google.com/search?client=safari&rls=en&q=American+Soldier+lyrics&ie=UTF-8&oe=UTF-8."
"186" "Kleykamp, Meredith, and Crosby Hipes. 2015. “Coverage of Veterans of the Wars in Iraq and Afghanistan in the U.S. Media.”  Sociological Forum  30 (2): 348–68. https://doi.org/10.1111/socf.12166."
"187" "Knox, MacGregor, and Williamson Murray, eds. 2001.  The Dynamics of Military Revolution, 1300-2050 . 1st edition. Cambridge, UK ; New York: Cambridge University Press."
"188" "LaPierre, Wayne. 1995. “Standing Guard.”  American Rifleman , October 1995."
"189" "———. 2002. “Standing Guard.”  American Rifleman , November 2002."
"190" "———. 2017. “Standing Guard.”  American Rifleman , January 2017."
"191" "Lembcke, Jerry. 2000.  The Spitting Image: Myth, Memory, and the Legacy of Vietnam . New York, NY: NYU Press."
"192" "Lincoln, Abraham. 1865. “The Gettysburg Address.” Gettysburg. http://www.abrahamlincolnonline.org/lincoln/speeches/gettysburg.htm."
"193" "Luttrell, Marcus, and Patrick Robinson. 2008. “Lone Survivor.”  American Rifleman , November 2008."
"194" "Marvin, C., and D. W. Ingle. 1996. “Blood Sacrifice and the Nation: Revisiting Civil Religion.”  Journal of the American Academy of Religion  LXIV (4): 767–80. https://doi.org/10.1093/jaarel/LXIV.4.767."
"195" "McClaughry, John. 1986. “Spirit of Liberty.”  American Rifleman , June 1986."
"196" "McDonald, Terrence, Christopher Bail, and Iddo Tavory. 2017. “A Theory of Resonance.”  Sociological Theory  35 (1): 1–14."
"197" "Meizel, Katherine. 2006. “A Singing Citizenry: Popular Music and Civil Religion in America.”  Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion  45 (4): 497–503. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-5906.2006.00324.x."
"198" "Melzer, Scott. 2012.  Gun Crusaders: The NRA’s Culture War . New York, N.Y: NYU Press."
"199" "Mencken, F Carson, and Paul Froese. 2017. “Gun Culture in Action.”  Social Problems , November. https://doi.org/10.1093/socpro/spx040."
"200" "Mosko, Charles, John Allan Williams, and David R. Segal. 2000. “Armed Forces after the Cold War.” In  The Post Modern Military . New York, N.Y: Oxford University Press."
"201" "Myatt, Frederick. 1975. “From England with Four Barrels.”  American Rifleman , May 1975."
"202" "North, Oliver. 2018a. “Bring It On: Defeating the Repeal of the Second Amendment.”  American Rifleman , August 2018."
"203" "———. 2018b. “Giving the Gift of Freedom.”  American Rifleman , August 2018."
"204" "Obert, Jonathan. 2018.  The Six-Shooter State: Public and Private Violence in American Politics . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press."
"205" "O’Neill, Kevin Lewis. 2007. “Armed Citizens and the Stories They Tell: The National Rifle Association’s Achievement of Terror and Masculinity.”  Men and Masculinities  9 (4): 457–75. https://doi.org/10.1177/1097184X05281390."
"206" "Peters, Ted. 2019. “Covenant, Blood, and Violence: America at War with Itself and Others: PETERS.”  Dialog  58 (1): 39–53. https://doi.org/10.1111/dial.12452."
"207" "Reyes, G Mitchell. n.d. “THE SWIFT BOAT VETERANS FOR TRUTH, THE POLITICS OF REALISM, AND THE MANIPULATION OF VIETNAM REMEMBRANCE IN THE 2004 PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION.”  PUBLIC AFFAIRS , 31."
"208" "Ricks, Thomas E. 2006.  Fiasco: The American Military Adventure in Iraq . New York: Penguin Press HC, The."
"209" "Roberts, J.B. 1987. “American Warriors And Their Arms.”  American Rifleman , April 1987."
"210" "Rosenberg, Eli. 2018. “‘Olliemania’: The Stage-Worthy Scandal That Starred Oliver North as a Congressional Witness.”  Washington Post , May 8, 2018. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/retropolis/wp/2018/05/08/the-nras-new-president-oliver-north-is-notorious-for-his-role-in-an-illicit-arms-deal/."
"211" "Schuman, H. 2006. “Comparing Iraq to Vietnam: Recognition, Recall, and the Nature of Cohort Effects.”  Public Opinion Quarterly  70 (1): 78–87. https://doi.org/10.1093/poq/nfj010."
"212" "Segal, David R. 1989.  Recruiting for Uncle Sam: Citizenship and Military Manpower Policy . University Press of Kansas."
"213" "Shultz, Richard. 2012. “Organizational Learning and the Marine Corps: The Counterinsurgency Campaign in Iraq.”  Newport, RI. Retrieved from Http://Www. Usnwc. Edu/Getattachment/Edb03256-23ed-4156-9d59-0a8912a8b276/Shultz-Final-for-Website. Pdf . http://www.usnwc.edu/getattachment/Departments---Colleges/Center-on-Irregular-Warfare---Armed-Groups/Publications/Shultz---Organizational-Learning-and-the-Marine-Corps.pdf.aspx."
"214" "Smith, MC. 2018. “Warrior Ethos in the Bhagavadgītā.”  Religious Traditions: A New Journal For the Study of Religion . https://openjournals.library.sydney.edu.au/index.php/RT/article/viewFile/13127/11814."
"215" "Sorokin, Pitirim Aleksandrovich. 1967.  The Sociology of Revolution . Howard Fertig."
"216" "Strauss, Claudia, Naomi Quinn, American Anthropological Association, and Meeting, eds. 1997.  A Cognitive Theory of Cultural Meaning . Cambridge, UK; New York: Cambridge University Press."
"217" "Stroud, Angela. 2016.  Good Guys with Guns: The Appeal and Consequences of Concealed Carry . Reprint edition. Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press."
"218" "Tilly, Charles. 2002.  Stories, Identities, and Political Change . Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers."
"219" "Tiryakian, Edward A. 1967. “A Model of Social Change and Its Lead Indicators.” In  The Study of Total Societies , edited by Samuel Klausner, First. Garden City, New York: Anchor Books."
"220" "“Tony Blair Quote.” 2006. Snopes.Com. 2006. https://www.snopes.com/fact-check/measure-for-measure-2/."
"221" "Trask, David. 2015. “Indian Wars and the Vietnam War.” In  United States and Asia at War: A Cultural Approach: A Cultural Approach , edited by Philip West, Steven I. Levine, and Jackie Hiltz. Routledge."
"222" "Turchik, Jessica A., and Susan M. Wilson. 2010. “Sexual Assault in the U.S. Military: A Review of the Literature and Recommendations for the Future.”  Aggression and Violent Behavior  15 (4): 267–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.avb.2010.01.005."
"223" "Vitali, Ali. 2016. “Trump Says He Could ‘Shoot Somebody’ and Not Lose Voters.” NBC News. January 23, 2016. https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/trump-says-he-could-shoot-somebody-still-maintain-support-n502911."
"224" "Waldman, Michael. 2015.  The Second Amendment: A Biography . Reprint edition. New York: Simon & Schuster."
"225" "Weber, Max. 1946. “The Types of Authority and Imperative Co-Ordination.” In  The Theory of Social and Economic Organization , translated by Talcott Parsons and A.M. Henderson, 102. New York: Free Press."
"226" "Westmoreland, William. 1985. “Vietnam Tribute.”  American Rifleman , May 1985."
"227" "Wood, Keith. 2015. “A Second Chance for America’s Heroes.”  American Rifleman , April 2015."
"228" "“Wounded Warrior Project.” 2019. 2019. https://www.woundedwarriorproject.org/mission?gclsrc=aw.ds&&gclid=EAIaIQobChMIy9HL3YS84wIVjZ-fCh2vFASzEAAYASADEgJ8XPD_BwE&gclsrc=aw.ds."
