A strategic defeat of Populism in Greece.

Mavrozacharakis , Emmannouil
Phd. Candidate, Faculty of Political Science University of Crete,
Researcher of Centre of Human Rights in the Faculty of Political
Science University of Crete

Abstract
The recent elections in Greece reflects an enormous change in the political
behavior of the electorate. The citizens have not chosen a simple switch on the power,
but contributed with their votes to a strategic defeat of populism and in same time
they paved the way for the search of a new type of leadership, which is close to
realism in handling with social problems that can't be implemented with calculated
financial costs. The vote of 7 th Juli is a vote against the over-promising and underdelivery experienced under Syriza’s rule. The voting for conservative ND is not an
ideological choice. It's a choice that runs counter to the logic of falsely or hypocritical
negotiating austerity measures opposed to Greece buy his Lenders (memorandum)
and the consequent tax-tornado as a result of negotiating failure with the partners in
the EEC and the IMF. The positive vote for ND also reflects the contradiction with
the misguided manipulations of public opinion regarding the Skopje-Question and
finally the strategy of micro concessions and micro- allowances as a means of
concluding a “political-social alliance” with an undefined hostile establishment.

[1]

It is clear that strategic electoral defeats do not refer to percentages, but to
structural transformations and shifts in the electorate and to voting against political
logics. In these sense the recent elections in Greece reflects an enormous change in
the political behavior of the electorate. The citizens have not chosen a simple switch
on the power, but contributed with their votes to a strategic defeat of populism and in
same time they paved the way for the search of a new type of leadership, which is
close to realism in handling with social problems that can't be implemented with
calculated financial costs. The vote of 7 th Juli is a vote against the over-promising
and under-delivery experienced under Syriza’s rule. In this terms “Greece already has
first-hand experience of economic populism and is now rejecting it, making a turn
towards pragmatism”, as Pagoulatos states( Lana-Guggenheim:2019) .“The vote in
2015 was one of hope, of desperation. Then the idealism collapsed. Now people are
focusing on who they believe can deliver (Lana-Guggenheim:2019).
According to Kazamias (2019) the main reason of the defeat of Syriza is
weather his stance according the Name of Skopje (Prespa Agreement) nor the
rejection of Syrizas populism. For Kazamias (2019) « The painful truth about Syriza
is that it has ruled Greece for four years as a party suffering from identity loss and
diminishing credibility. Its record in government has been so full of compromises and
retreats that it now hovers across the political spectrum like an amorphous haze – a
phantom of its old self, without much shape or substance. Tsipras’s cabinet includes
ministers who have defected from almost every other party in parliament, even
several hard-right populists from the Independent Greeks».
This view is not without truth, but it does not take into account that the
populism of the Greek Syriza, in material, political, and symbolic way, are typically
participatory and inclusive by attempting to promote political programs that improve
in some way the quality of life of some weak and poor social groups and migrants
(Font/ Graziano/ Tsakatika: 2019). In a sense, the left-wing populism of Syriza
follows the Latin American model of populism that deals with societies that do not
have

the

level

of

equalization

and

prosperity

of

Western

Europe

(Mavrozacharakis:2018,30).
This does not mean that there are no acute socio-economic differences in
Western Europe as well. However, the weakest social groups still rely on more or less
extensive social services and aids and enjoy full political right. Like the populists in
Latin America, who are struggling for better living conditions of the population
[2]

(Mudde & Kaltwasser:2013, 159), left-wing populism of Syriza also behaves more
explicitly about

the

excluded,

the

marginalized and

the

underprivileged

(Mavrozacharakis:2018,30). However, the political and economic reality that
surrounds Greece left no room for the realization of populism as it was anticipated by
the ruling left in Greece.
The voting for conservative ND is not an ideological choice. It's a choice that
runs counter to the logic of falsely or hypocritical negotiating austerity measures
opposed to Greece buy his Lenders (memorandum) and the consequent tax-tornado as
a result of negotiating failure with the partners in the EEC and the IMF. Unable to
beat the creditors of Greece, the Syriza-Government joined them, «implementing all
the cuts, privatizations, and VAT increases it had been elected to oppose».
(Younge:2019). Alexis Tsipras agreed with the Eurozone partners and lenders to
implement one of the harshest austerity programs. At the same time though, and with
a strong populist manner, Tsipras government attempts to distance itself from the
verbal

content

of

the

austerity measures

it

has

negotiated

and

voted

(Mavrozacharakis/Kotroyannos/ Tzagkarakis:2017,41).
The SYRIZA government relieve communicatively that it has the ability to
move flexibly within a tight framework. In reality though, SYRIZA not only failed to
fulfil its campaign promises but also to implement even a part of its core ideological
principles (Mavrozacharakis/Kotroyannos/Tzagkarakis:2017,41).
Moreover, the left unwittingly turned to realism as its anti-memorandum
negotiating strategies were totally failed. However, electorally, the leading group of
SYRIZA is still able to extract the majority of social acceptance despite the
implementation of the new memorandum. This fact just proves the effectiveness of
populism that Tsipras government uses. The road that led to the final compromise of
SYRIZA government with lenders was marked by the symbolic production of politics
in the sense that a continuous hard negotiation scenario with the partners was raised,
as a “race-till-you-drop” to avoid the memorandum. Similarly, the left government
after signing the Memorandum, tried to cultivate the impression that it will do
everything to normalize its social effects. The radical fury with which SYRIZA
demonized the memorandum and everyone who was involved in its managements in
Greece and abroad, while the party was in opposition(Petras: 2015), was followed
during its first governmental period by a managerial modesty of subordination to the
partners. It is to note, that since 2016 the income taxes are especially harsh on people
[3]

earning more than 35,000 euros per year, as they pay an average of 40 percent more
than they did before. If we add the rise in higher social security dues, the increase
comes to 70 percent. This is likely to lead to even more people being unable to pay
taxes and social security contributions. In addition to the income tax, the amount that
people will have to pay for the ENFIA property ownership tax is about 3.4 billion
euros yearly. However, many people are unable to pay. It is therefore understandable
the anger of the citizens against a government that before the elections promised
social redemption.
As a result of all this in the meantime, the evaluation of the causes of the crisis
has shifted in the voters' opinion. People no longer believe in the hostile image of
Europe as the left projected it before the 2015 elections. Brussels - and Berlin - are no
longer so much blamed for the crisis, but the fight for the best economic model for
Greece in the coming years has come more into focus (Löhe:2019). And here Syriza
and the reawakened Nea Dimokratia are clearly distinguishable. Some want higher
pensions and higher social spending, others lower taxes and lower free market limits.
These are quite domestic reasons, and they have led to Tsipras' defeat. Nevertheless,
the election victory of the Conservatives gives a hint for the whole of Europe. The
large-scale narrative of the populists that they are the traditional parties that had
destroyed the respective country no longer works. With the example of Greece,
arrogance becomes clear: In negotiations with the EU, not everything can be achieved
- except a compromise (Löhe:2019).
The positive vote for ND also reflects the contradiction with the misguided
manipulations of public opinion regarding the Skopje-Question and finally the
strategy of micro concessions and micro- allowances as a means of concluding a
“political-social alliance” with an undefined hostile establishment. The overall
strategy chosen by SYRIZA for the governance of the country was therefore defeated.
At the same time, however, it is inappropriate to attempt to interpret the results of the
national elections in Greece on the basis of the results of the European elections. In
the European elections there was a factor of loose voting, reduced polarization and
disorientation due to parallel municipal-regional elections. The vote of the European
elections was more punitive in the sense of a sanctioning choice because of the
FΥROM-Question and the austerity politics (memorandum), and it acted as a warning
and an outlet or emotional release for peoples political anger, underlining in a sense
the demand for a shift towards more social policies and less taxation (Stevis[4]

Gridneff:2019). Under the polarizing conditions of national elections the terms were
completely different and many is forgiven because of the self-criticism
(Kadrizke:2019) and above all the expression of “repentance” shown by the rulers. A
great role once again played the persuasiveness in the Mea Culpa !.
Moreover should be taken into account, that the provision of Greek citizenship
to thousands of immigrants and the introduction of voting right in the 17, favors the
SYRIZA Party. For this reason, there is no justification for the sizzling leadership of
Syriza, which believes it has not suffered a strategic defeat in the national elections,
holding more than 30% (see for example: Tzanakopoulos :2019). However, in the
political map of Greece, there have been strategic changes and, indeed, seismic. First
of all, the citizens did not give a vote of confidence to the Syriza government and the
“financial relief measures” it received (Karitsis:2016).
These measures constituted a strategic choice of SYRIZA that was defeated.
In particular was misplaced, the political extortion of the economically weaker voters,
arguing by Left proponents, that in the event of ND victory the crumbs preemptively
distributed by Syriza would be in jeopardy. Also, the mobilization of the anti-rightwing syndrome of the left and centrist voters, slamming the “bogey” of the “evil”
right, failed. Above all, however, there has been neutralized the catch-all ability of
Syriza to penetrate into all social strata numerous civil society organizations and
above all, the middle strata, which have now been convinced by the narrative about
ND's tax exemption (Adler:2019). The strategic political tool with a few words of
populism based on enemy-friend shapes (Mavrozacharakis/Tzagkarakis/ Kamekis:
2015,2) was canceled and his position got a more realistic depiction of the reality
expressed by the right of Kyriacos Mitsotakis.
For that reason, CNN, commenting on the election results in Greece, pointed
out that the election of ND to power was the end of left-wing populism in the sense
that it was a vote of protest against a government that promised too much while it did
very little (Labropoulou 2019). Despite the fact that CNN points out that the new
government of ND appears to have plans for reforms, Mitsotakis comes from the
same political establishment that plunged Greece into the crisis and which the voters
rejected in 2015. The positive vote for the market-friendly old guard is a vote of
protest against a government that has given many promises, which it has failed to
observe, a message to the populists worldwide that things can change and then change
again. At the same time, the BBC considers voters turning their back on SYRIZA
[5]

after adopting tough fiscal measures (BBC:2019). While in 2015 Alexis Tsipras was
the personification of change, the BBC points out, he has given many promises, and
under the pressure of the EU he was forced to make a turning of 180 degrees.
The German newspaper Stuttgarter Nachrichten (2019) estimates Alexis
Tsipras tried to entice the voters with clumsy last-minute pre-election prizes, pays
bonuses and promised increases in pensions. But even in Greece, the seasons that
resulted in such tribulations have come to pass. The outcome of the elections in
Greece is above all a clear rejection of populism. This is their essential importance not
only for Greece but also for the whole of Europe. Why is the Tsipras now punished?
Questions the German Sueddeutche Zeitung and points out that the fact that New
Democracy has made such a clear victory shows that many people would like to leave
behind the years of the crisis and that they want again something like
regularity(Schlötzer:2019). According to the newspaper, the fact that Alexis Tsipras is
punished has a lot to do with the dissatisfaction gathered during the long years of
austerity, which turned the everyday life of many Greeks into a lasting struggle for
survival. In conclusion, all SYRIZA's strategic political choices have been defeated,
which is overshadowed by many election polls that deliberately cultivated the
impression that the difference between SW and SYRIZA will exceed 12%. This gave
the SYRIZA leadership the opportunity to mitigate the big defeat it suffered after just
4 years of government. With an autonomous Nea Dimokratia of 40% and an 8%
distance from SYRIZA, the quantitative defeat is as much as the strategic Defeat.
Surely, based on the low expectation logic that remains embedded in the DNA of the
left, 32% is impressive. However, since all the state power and its corresponding
resources have been used to achieve this percentage, its future preservation is not
relevant. In this sense, this logic is beyond the limits of power, and this is indeed a
strategic defeat.

References
Adler, D (2019): The three mistakes behind Syriza’s demise in Greece
Available at: https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2019/jul/08/syrizademise-greece-alexis-tsipras (Accessed: 16/07/2019)

[6]

BBC (2019) : Greek elections: Mitsotakis promises change after New Democracy
win. Available at: https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-48905406 (Accessed:
10/07/2019)
Font, N., Graziano, P. and Tsakatika, M. (2019) Varieties of inclusionary
populism? SYRIZA, Podemos and the Five Star Movement. Government and
Opposition,(doi:10.1017/gov.2019.17)

Available

at:

http://eprints.gla.ac.uk/184538/7/184538.pdf (Accessed: 16/07/2019)
Karitzis, A(2016): The ‘SYRIZA Experience’: Lessons and Adaptations
Available at: https://socialistproject.ca/2016/03/b1236/ (Accessed: 10 /07/2019)
Kadrizke, N (2019): Neuer Wein in alten Schläuchen?
Available

at:

https://monde-diplomatique.de/shop_content.php?coID=100143

(Accessed: 12/07/2019)
Kazamias, A (2019): Syriza betrayed its principles – and the Greek people. Its
days

are

numbered.

Available

at:

https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2019/jul/05/syriza-greek-alexistsipras-eu-imposed-austerity-polls (Accessed: 16/07/2019)
Labropoulou, E (2019) : Greek elections: Victory for New Democracy party
signals end of left-wing populism
Available

at:

https://edition.cnn.com/2019/07/07/europe/greece-elections-new-

democracy-intl/index.html (Accessed: 19/7/2019)
Lana-Guggenheim, B (2019): Marking the End of an Era, Syriza Loses to New
Democracy

in

a

Landslide.

Available

at:

https://www.southeusummit.com/europe/greece/marking-the-end-of-an-erasyriza-loses-to-new-democracy-in-a-landslide/ (Accesed:17/07/2019)
Löhe, F (2019): Tsipras’ Niederlage als WendepunktDer Populismus in Europa
könnte

seinen

Zenit

überschritten

haben.

Available

at:

https://www.tagesspiegel.de/politik/tsipras-niederlage-als-wendepunkt-derpopulismus-in-europa-koennte-seinen-zenit-ueberschritten-haben/24535808.html
(Accessed:15/07/2019

)
[7]

Mavrozacharakis, E/ Tzagarakis, S/ Kamekis, A (2015) . "Modern Populism in
Greece," MPRA

Paper

62656,

University

Library

of

Munich,

Germany.Handle: RePEc:pra:mprapa:62656
Mavrozacharakis, E., Kotroyannos, D., & Tzagkarakis, S. I. (2017).
Mediterranean Left-Wing Populism: The Case of SYRIZA. European Quarterly
of Political Attitudes and Mentalities, 6(2), 40-54. https://nbn-resolving.org/
urn:nbn:de:0168-ssoar-51522-9
Mavrozacharakis, E. (2018). Populism and Democracy: An Ambiguous
Relationship. European Quarterly of Political Attitudes and Mentalities, 7(4), 1935. https://nbn-resolving.org/urn:nbn:de:0168-ssoar-59935-4
Mudde, C/ Kaltwasser, C. R. (2013): Exclusionary vs. inclusionary populism:
comparing contemporary Europe and Latin America, Government and
Opposition, 48, 2: S. 147 – 174.

Petras, J. (2015), Lies and Deceptions on the Left: The Politics of Self
Destruction

Greece,

France,

Brazil,

Available

online

at:

http://www.globalresearch.ca/lies-and-deceptions-on-the-left-the-politics-of-selfdestruction/5438105 (Accessed: 02/12/2015)
Schlötzer, C (2019): Warum Tsipras jetzt abgestraft wurde
Available

at;

https://www.sueddeutsche.de/politik/griechenland-wahl-athen-

mitsotakis-1.4514665 (Accessed: 10/07/2019)
Stevis-Gridneff, M (2019) : Long Economic Crisis Ushers In New Leadership in
Greece
Available

at:

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/07/world/europe/greek-

elections.html (Accessed: 17/07/2019)

[8]

Stuttgarter Nachrichten (2019) : Alexis Tsipras muss gehenGriechenland wählt
Konservative an die Macht
Available

at:

https://www.stuttgarter-nachrichten.de/inhalt.alexis-tsipras-muss-

gehen-griechenland-waehlt-konservative-an-die-macht.23af6714-f113-4b2e-869d936ffabbc9b5.html (Accessed:10/07/2019)

Tzanakopoulos, D (2019) : Election result ‘not a strategic defeat’ for SYRIZA
Available

at:

https://www.tovima.gr/2019/05/26/international/tzanakopoulos-

election-result-not-a-strategic-defeat-for-syriza/
(Accessed: 16/07/2019)
Younge, G (2019): Syriza’s defeat shows the left needs a plan to hold on to
power,

not

just

win

it.

Available

:https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2019/jul/12/syriza-left-election
(Accessed: 15/07/2019)

[9]

at

