A terminological study about university-society relations: third mission, socioeconomic
surroundings and the evolution of the role of academia
Ana Maria Nunes Gimenez
Postdoctoral research fellow in the Department of Science and Technology Policy at the University of
Campinas (DPCT/IG/UNICAMP), with grant from the National Postdoctoral Program (CAPES/BRAZIL)
by the National Institute of Science and Technology in Public Policy, Strategies and Development INCT/PPED. E-mail: anamarianunesgimenez@gmail.com

Maria Beatriz Machado Bonacelli
Associate professor at the Graduate Program in Science and Technology Policy at the University of
Campinas (DPCT/IG/UNICAMP). E-mail: biabona@unicamp.br

Abstract: The relationships and interactions between universities and society that go beyond the teaching and research missions have
been termed differently by various groups of scholars and in different countries and are more commonly known by the term “university
extension”. The different views and interpretations of university missions relate to the development of the understanding of the role of this
institution in society. In respect to this, the purpose of the article was to present, based on extensive literature review, the conceptualization
of the main terms commonly used to express the university-society relations: third mission, outreach, extension, vinculación, engagementcommunity and civic. The research results allow us to conclude that the terms studied arise from very similar situations and purposes,
namely: teaching and research missions and responsibilities of the university vis-à-vis new visions of the social pact or contract between
academia, science and society.
Keywords: university and community; third mission; knowledge transfer; extension; science, technology and society

1. Introduction
The university of the twenty-first century has been pressed to reconsider its ways of acting with a view to the
development of more intense and lasting interactions with the various sectors of society, in a process of opening to and
immersion in its surroundings, abandoning what some scholars have termed “ivory tower” status. This term has been
used since the 19th century to designate not only a posture but also an institutional environment in which teaching and
research activities are disconnected from the needs and concerns of society (European Indicators and Ranking
Methodology for University Third Mission - E3M, 2012a).
From the twentieth century on, there have been profound changes in the modus operandi of universities, not only due to
the takeover of the research mission and the steady increase in scientific activities, but also due to the volume of
resources destined to their funding, increasingly creating the need of support from their donors, i.e., society. Thus, the
public support of university research has increasingly depended on the relevance of the social “pact” or “contract” signed
between academic science and society. This relevance is related both to a cultural enrichment and a better understanding
of the world, namely, the extension and sharing of knowledge to society, but, also, to a conduct of research that meets the

1

needs and demands of society and even to contributions to economic competitiveness (Hessels, Van Lente, and Smits,
2009), especially as a result of public funding. “A ‘pact’ is a fairly long-term cultural commitment to and from the
University, as an institution with its own foundational rules of appropriate practices, causal and normative beliefs, and
resources, yet validated by the political and social system in which the University is embedded.” (Gornitzka et al, 2007,
p. 7).
In face of these contextual changes and new understandings about the role of scientific institutions in society, the
importance of the involvement of higher education institutions (HEIs), especially research-intensive universities, in their
surroundings and in society in general has grown, with such institutions contributing more actively to social and
economic development, becoming protagonists and key actors of the National Innovation Systems. Moving beyond, the
development of more intense and lasting relations between the University and society, in addition to the teaching and
research missions, has been the focus of discussions of several actors, among them scholars, policy makers,
governments, institutions leaders, members of the academic community, and others around the world. It is in this context
of discussions that the concept of third mission has gained prominence, understood as an external commitment to
socialize and share experiences, expertise, and other capabilities that universities have, in a process of immersion,
engagement and attention to their surroundings and to the most pressing needs and demands of the societies that sponsor
them.
It can be argued that these views on the different and multiple forms of university-society relations are linked to the term
“multiversity” - used by Clark Kerr in 1963 - as a counterpoint to the term university, since the institution has taken on
increasingly diverse roles and has been linked to different publics, distancing itself considerably from the original
community of masters and pupils of the Middle Ages. The “multiversity" no longer has a single purpose, or it shouldn't
have; it requires dealing with a multitude of conflicts and redefining its limits; it cannot be static in a dynamic world and
it cannot be intolerant in a world that lacks understanding. It is a complex and multifunctional institution, consisting of
several communities (of humanists, social scientists, hard sciences, technological areas and other areas, the administrative
staff, the administrators) and with imprecise borders or boundaries, because it reaches or interacts with, in greater or
lesser degree, several external groups (alumni, policymakers, legislators, government agencies, entrepreneurs from
various sectors, farmers, among other groups) (Kerr, 2005).
However, Venditti, Reale and Leydesdorff (2013) warn that the vast majority of research and studies concerning the third
mission has focused on examples of “good practices” of American institutions, such as the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT) and Stanford University, as well as some European universities, all in the field of technology transfer,
but this attitude only serves to strengthen the understanding of the real contribution of the third mission to society. Thus,
the idea of a third mission, as Görason, Maharajh and Schmoch (2009) see it, expresses an understanding for a more

2

active and visible role of the university in society and should serve to stimulate and guide the use of knowledge for the
promotion of social, economic and cultural development.
It can be seen, therefore, that the involvement in third mission activities goes beyond the contribution to the capacity to
innovate, assuming a much more comprehensive character. One must, then, have in mind that the discussion on the
scope and coverage of the third mission varies considerably between countries and in different contexts. It is our
understanding that a lack of comprehension, along with narrow mindsets, can hamper the formulation, implementation,
and management of policies, programs and practices related to the third mission, as well as limit the design of the
university as a socially active agent, hence the relevance of this research.
As a result of these findings, this article seeks to investigate concepts and practices related to the multi-faceted universitysociety interface, with focus on the concept and scope of the third mission. Based on a large bibliographical and
documentary study, we have identified recurrent terms that have integrated the nomenclature commonly used in different
countries to name the relations and interactions that result from the accomplishment of teaching and research missions
and that are destined to extend the knowledge produced internally to society. We elected a conceptual framework of the
main discussions that have been developed on the topic of “university-society relations.” To this end, we favored a broad
and inclusive approach, i.e., one which is not exclusively focused on university-industry relations, but which starts from a
broader perspective in order to consider the various possibilities of interaction between universities and the rest of
society, interactions that go beyond technology transfer activities, without, however, disregarding them. The terms in
question are: third mission; extensão (in the Portuguese language), outreach (term in English); extensión and vinculación
(in Spanish); we also noted that the use of the term engagement has grown. The main goal of this study, therefore, is to
explore this terminological variety so as to determine the evolution of understandings about university-society relations,
through the emergence of new social demands and missions, as well as to identify the differences, similarities, points of
contacts or conceptual convergence between terms.
This work is exploratory and descriptive in its purpose and the approach adopted was qualitative, stemming from a
literature review based on bibliographical material of interdisciplinary nature. The university-society relationship is called
here third mission (considering teaching the first mission and research the second). It is important to mention that the
literature commonly refers to teaching and research as being the initial missions, taking into consideration the origins and
development of universities over time. While teaching represented its primeval purpose, research was only instituted as a
university mission in the nineteenth century, with the creation of the University of Berlin (1809/1810). According to
Allen (1988), mission means the basic purpose of a university, its raison d’être.
Therefore, this work presents the results of the exploratory and qualitative research through which we sought to
understand the various ways of naming the relations of higher education, more specifically, universities, with society.

3

countries and continents we found that there are different ways to name and understand the relationship between
university and society in addition to teaching and research activities, which motivated us to explore this conceptual
variety. Based on extensive literature review, the following conceptualization terms were identified and selected: (i)
engagement – community engagement, public engagement, social engagement and civic engagement; (ii) third mission;
(iii) outreach; (v) extension (extensión); (v) vinculación.
The aforementioned are terms that, much beyond naming postures, strategies and specific policies – namely, the various
actions and practices that act as a bridge between education, research, dissemination and sharing of knowledge and
experience beyond the walls of the university – also express different views about the relevance and legitimacy of some
of these actions.
Concepts are meaningful expressions or terms that exhibit a complex history, full of social action. They help delimit and
locate the subject they aim to understand. One can infer, then, that the process of conceptualization must consider the
surrounding reality, as well as the contextual changes through which the object of analysis has been, so as not to be a
mere lexical activity (Minayo, 2009). Thus, the study of concepts helps in apprehending the evolution of understanding
on our research subject: university-society relations. It is worth noting, however, that although it is important to
understand, contextualize and discuss the actions and role of educational institutions in society, taxonomies should not be
dictated or imposed, but they should represent and describe the ways through which universities relate to the world, from
a non-reductionist view on their possibilities of action (Clough, 2009; E3M, 2012b).
It is also important to clarify that, in this work, we use the term "community" to represent groups or specific social actors,
such as corporations, governments, civil society organizations and other associations, among others. According to
Jongbloed, Enders and Salerno (2008), communities can belong to different levels: closer – local and regional – or more
distant – national, international. Each higher education institution (HEI) will define the communities with which they
intend to have an interface with and this will depend on their physical capacities and knowledge, their size, the volume of
resources available for such purposes, as well as the specific demands and needs of each locality.
The term “surrounding” refers to the relationships that universities and other HEIs keep, or could keep, within their
closest vicinity: their neighborhoods, their cities, their regions. Finally, the term “society” is used to represent the set of all
the previously mentioned social ecosystems (E3M, 2012b). Therefore, university-society relations, in addition to the
teaching and research missions, involve any links with the outside world, be it with companies or with non-profit
organizations, neighborhood associations, policy makers, and several other social actors.
In addition to this introduction, this work is comprised of three more sections: the second one presents a panorama, not
exhaustive, of the development of the third mission, starting from the first experiences with university extension up to
involvement with entrepreneurship, innovation, technology transfer and engagement with local/regional demands; the

4

third section features an analysis of the evolution of different ways of naming and understanding university-society
relations, by means of a terminological and conceptual study; finally, in the fourth section, the results of the research are
briefly discussed and the final conclusions are drawn. The results allow us to conclude that the different ways of naming
and understanding university-society relations represent the evolution of the understanding on how the infrastructural and
knowledge capacities of universities can reach audiences that are external to the academic community.

2. Third Mission: a Brief History from Selected Milestones
Several scholars claim that the idea of a third mission arose in the nineteenth century at the University of Oxford, from
1840/1850, and at the University of Cambridge, circa 1873, when they established the foundations for what today is called
university extension with extramural activities. Mackinder and Sadler (1891) affirm that the term ‘extension’ began to be
used circa 1845, at the University of Oxford, becoming of general use in subsequent years. The movement for extension
originated with the displacement of some faculty members of these two universities to the heartland of England, to minister
lectures in places where there was no access to university knowledge.
At the University of Cambridge, for example, in the second half of the nineteenth century (between 1867 and 1873),
proposals were approved for the organization of courses and lectures to be taken to institutes of mechanics, cooperatives,
schools and other associations, especially in the north of England, laying the foundations for future schools or university
extension and adult education departments, not only in Britain but throughout the world (Welch, 1973). It is estimated that,
in 1891, England already had more than 80,000 extension students (American Society for the Extension of University
Teaching, 1891). According to Maunder (1972), the first transfers of public funds for extension activities were directed to
lectures on agriculture. In 1903, the Workers’ Educational Association (WEA) was created to provide part-time educational
opportunities to workers from England and Scotland, as well as to implement programs of involvement with communities.
This initiative was one of the major changes the British extension movement has undergone.
The Industrial revolution triggered different types of needs within the English industrial towns; scientific knowledge would
assist in the search for solutions to the growing problems of industrial production on a large scale in the nineteenth century.
This new reality led to the creation of another type of university, the ‘civic universities’. Such institutions should promote the
integration between teaching, research and local socioeconomic development by connecting to their communities,
presenting themselves as an alternative to the Oxbridge model (the junction of Oxford and Cambridge), which was elitist
and closed (Barnes, 1996).
The connections of these universities with their socioeconomic surroundings were numerous, including the following:
training of skilled labor for the industries, support to industries through scientific advice etc. (Goddard, Kempton, &
Vallance, 2013). However, Fallis (2004) explains that Scottish universities, unlike Oxford and Cambridge, have always

5

been more open and connected with their surroundings, especially after the Scottish Reformation (from the sixteenth
century), maintaining ties with governments and local councils, enhancing social mobility and the idea of serving society.
In the United States, extension was developed mainly under inspiration of the English experience, although it has differed
and developed by adopting characteristics of its own. In 1890, the American Society for the Extension of University
Teaching, in Philadelphia, was created, with the purposes of producing knowledge about extension, designing extension
activities and cooperating with educational institutions and other organizations in this field. The University of Chicago was
the first to create an extension division, in 1892, comprised of six departments, each with its own assignment (lectures,
weekend courses, evening courses, study classes, off-campus courses similar to those offered regularly by the university,
etc.) (University of Chicago Library, 2006). University extension, in its service-provision modality, came up with the land
grant movement in the United States, and the Land-Grant Colleges were the precursors. The donation of 30,000 acres of
federal lands for the purpose of financing public universities in the American states – although private universities were also
financed – was authorized by two federal laws, the Morrill Acts of 1862 and 1890, especially for the promotion of
agricultural and industrial development (Library of Congress, 2016; United States of America, 1862). Kerr (2005) highlights
the importance of the land grant movement for the access of students from less privileged classes to higher education,
democratizing access to tertiary education, in addition to it having been an important milestone for the creation of agencies
for the provision of services and experimental agricultural stations. It is worth noting that the American extension model, in
its rural extension modality, exerted great influence over Latin American countries, including Brazil, where the higher
schools of Lavras (1921) and of Viçosa (1929), in the state of Minas Gerais, were created to provide technical assistance to
farmers (Rocha, 2001).
In Latin America, discussions favoring a more inclusive and open university emerged in Argentina in 1918, with a reform
movement based on the aspirations of students at the University of Cordoba, in reaction to a university they perceived as an
oligarchic ‘ivory tower’, alien to society (Bernasconi, 2008). However, even with the expansion of reformist ideals in Latin
America, the concept of extension that prevailed over several decades was that of delivery, of cultural dissemination, which
sees the community only as a recipient, in a unidirectional and uncritical movement. In addition, there were no structured
programs with well-defined objectives; extension practically remained in the margin of the other university missions, with
almost none, or no relation whatsoever, with teaching and research; lecturers showed no interest in its development, and
there was little projection in the communities. This paternalistic, patronizing perspective would only be questioned in the
1970s, with the second Latin American Extension Conference, held in Mexico, organized by the Union of Latin American
Universities (UDUAL), in 1972 (Bernheim, 1978).
The involvement of universities with entrepreneurial activities, in turn, began in the United States, in the mid-twentieth
century, when academic lecturers and professors began to engage with entrepreneurship, innovation and technology transfer
activities, technology parks, among others, with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and Stanford University

6

serving as paradigm. From then on, gradually, the university started to be considered a relevant actor for economic and
social progress and an important actor of the National Innovation Systems.
Burton R. Clark was one of the first authors to use the term ‘entrepreneurial university’, in the 1998 book ‘Creating
entrepreneurial universities: organisational pathways of transformation’, in which he presented the results of research carried
out in five universities: Warwick, in England, Twente, in the Netherlands, Strathclyde, in Scotland, Chalmers, in Sweden,
and Joensuu, in Finland. According to Clark (1998), entrepreneurial university is the one that performs modifications in its
structure and organizational culture to become more proactive, flexible and dynamic in the management of its relations to
the economy and society. Another approach, the Triple Helix, emphasizes the university-industry-government interaction,
considering the university as a centerpiece of the knowledge-based society and one which can strengthen, increasingly, its
role in the process of innovation, capitalizing knowledge and contributing to economic and social development (Etzkowitz
& Leydesdorff, 1997).
In Latin America, universities have traditionally focused more on the education mission, while the development of scientific
and technological skills and processes of knowledge transfer to the productive sector were relegated to the background.
Facing this reality, in general terms, the ties between academia and industry are still weak, as are the possibilities for an
effective contribution to economic development (Scoponi, Dias, Pesce, Schmidt & Gzain, 2016). Notwithstanding, some
authors deem it important to consider that the delimitation of the field of action and of the activities that should be included
in the definition of the third mission vary considerably between countries and in different contexts. Göransson, Maharajh
and Schmoch (2009, p. 158) observe that
the international debate on third mission is largely dominated by the paradigm of the United States, where
spin-off enterprises from universities in biotechnology and information technology implied a real
economic boom. (...) Many countries introduced similar legislation to support university patents. The
question may be asked whether these models can be transferred to other countries, or indeed if they are
relevant at all, in particular to developing and transition economies.
Moreover, in the twenty-first century, knowledge centers are expected to play a more active role in their regions through the
development of a regional mission. By regional mission we mean the opening of universities to the regions where they are
located and their involvement with specific demands and needs, which can result in a wide range of implications and
interactions, of cultural, social and economic nature (Arbo & Benneworth, 2007). The regional mission has gradually
become understood as a strategic opportunity to support the adoption of an identity and an institutional profile, dissociating
itself from the idea of a mere moral obligation to allocate scarce resources (Pinheiro, 2011).
Grau (2014) proposes that universities should worry about their surroundings as much as about their internationalization,
through the development of a ‘Glocal’ University, which is one that promotes interaction between a global vision and local

7

impacts of its activities. It is important to consider that even in the network society era, whose main feature is its global
nature, ‘most of human experience is local, both in cultural and territorial terms’ (Castells, 2009, p. 25). Thus, the
development of the third mission represents an attempt to change the way universities are embedded in their communities
and regions (Venditti et al., 2013).

3. Conceptualizing and Understanding University-Society Relations
3.1 Engagement: the engaged university
The Kellogg Commission on the Future of State and Land-Grant Universities, in the report entitled ‘Returning to our roots:
the engaged institution’, states that the ‘by engagement, we refer to institutions that have redesigned their teaching, research,
and extension and service functions to become even more sympathetically and productively involved with their
communities’ (Kellogg Commission on the Future of State and Land-Grant Universities, 1999, p. 9). According to BHERT (2006, pp. 3-4):
communities engagement’ has a broad vista that extends beyond business and economic aspects. […]
Engagement is a characteristic of a university’s policy and practice and is reflected in the responsibilities
given to senior staff, rewards and incentive mechanisms, career structure and promotion criteria, the
learning experience of students and the number, nature and sustainability of relationships with
organisations external to it. Engagement should also have a two-way orientation, with institutions outside
higher education committed to interactions with universities in a similar way.
The report ‘Characterising modes of university engagement with wider society: a literature review and survey of best
practice’, prepared by Conway, Humphrey, Benneworth, Charles and Younger (2009) for Newcastle University, stated that
they ‘use a very wide definition of the term ‘engagement’ in this report, to refer to all the relationships and connections
which universities have with the wider society, including businesses, government, the voluntary and community sector and
other societal actors’ (p. 2). Thus, engagement occurs not only through an overflow of fundamental university activities,
such as teaching and research, but it has increasingly become an institutional mission in and of itself.
In a project on the third mission (sponsored by the European Commission), ‘European Indicators and Ranking
Methodology for University Third Mission’, the term engagement was used to give the idea of a social purpose for
universities and the ability to transform the process of driving the third mission into a synergic path comprised of discussion,
co-creation and mutual learning (E3M, 2012b). ‘Social engagement is usually related to ties of mutual benefit at a local
level, between university members and communities within its home city and region’ (E3M, 2012b, p. 6).

8

In 2006, the Carnegie Foundation created an elective classification, called ‘Community Engagement Classification’, which
assesses the level of engagement of HEIs with their communities. Thus, according Carnegie Foundation for the
Advancement of Teaching (2013, p. 2), the term community engagement:
Describes activities that are undertaken with community members. In reciprocal partnerships, there are collaborative
community-campus definitions of problems, solutions, and measures of success. Community engagement requires
processes in which academics recognize, respect, and value the knowledge, perspectives, and resources of community
partners and that are designed to serve a public purpose, building the capacity of individuals, groups, and organizations
involved to understand and collaboratively address issues of public concern.
Bringle, Hatcher and Holland (2007, p. 15) explain that civic engagement is an ‘active collaboration that builds on the
resources, skills, expertise and knowledge of the campus and community to improve the quality of life in communities’, in
terms of education, research and services. Nowadays, the idea of public service aimed at the common good has forced
higher education institutions to take on a new type of commitment, having to rethink their epistemologies, structures and
pedagogies, to integrate teaching, research and services missions in this commitment (Fitzgerald, Bruns, Sonka, Furco, &
Swanson, 2012).
3.2 Outreach
Bringle et al. (2007, p. 15) understand that the concept of outreach is the following:
The application of knowledge and provision of services to the community. Activities that extend
knowledge in the academy to the public through a variety of mechanisms which may be active (e.g.,
continuing education, extension services, public information programs, radio/television broadcasts) or
passive (e.g., athletic programs, cultural events, library services, publications).
In the context of the UNESCO Chair in Community-based Research and Social Responsibility in Higher Education, the
‘Manual on Institutionalizing Community University Research Partnerships: a user's manual’ was created. It stated that it
was during the 1990s that many universities began to use the term outreach to represent activities developed with outside
public, but the term has been revised because it conveys the idea of simple communication and delivery of services and
knowledge, not necessarily sharing and reciprocity. The manual also differentiated the outreach/extension of community
engagement as follows: (i) outreach/extension brings the idea of passive citizens; it does not involve alliances, partnerships
or significant co-production of knowledge; (ii) community engagement encourages proactive and empowering citizens; it
assumes doubly beneficial involvement through partnerships, alliances, sharing and co-production of knowledge (PRIA and
University of Victoria, 2015).

9

3.3 Third mission
Roper and Hirth (2005) explain that, in the US, the third mission evolved from the traditional conception of services through
a vision of the university as capitalizing knowledge (especially driven by the Bayh-Dole Act, from 1980) and contributing to
economic development, to a new view on the role of the university in the twenty-first century, the university engaged with
its communities. Conway et al. (2009) explain that the debate around a third mission of higher education institutions was
intensified in the 1980s, when there was a heightened understanding that this mission would cover both interactions with
companies and the valuation of intellectual property, but also a greater engagement in interactions with small and mediumsized enterprises, marginalized communities, non-governmental organizations, among other actors.
Teixeira (2015) mentions that there many universities around the world show a growing interest in more openness and
integration to their surroundings, explaining that this is due to the knowledge economy and the identification of social
demands. Thus, University Extension has gained an ever-growing importance, both in Latin America (where its main focus
is direct social actions and interventions that promote citizenship and leadership) and in developed countries (focused on
services and technology transfer). According to the author, “third mission” is the most widely used correlate term to
extension in Continental Europe.
In the literature, the entrepreneurial university emerged as a way of achieving the third mission, which set the university as
the driving force of the economy (Trencher, Yarime, McCormick, Doll & Kraines, 2014). In the present day, however, it is
understood that third mission and entrepreneurial university are not synonymous expressions; on the contrary, as the first is
much broader and involves social and economic dimensions, while the second one expresses only an economic dimension –
although much of the literature usually focuses on the latter (Inzelt et al., 2006). Thus, the idea of the entrepreneurial
university, from the point of view of an organizational approach (Burton Clark) or the Triple Helix model (Henry Etzkowitz
& Loet Leydesdorff), represents a specific dimension of engagement, generally more strongly linked to the economic
development strand.
In the context of the ‘European Indicators and Ranking Methodology for University Third Mission” (E3M), for example,
the third mission was composed of three dimensions, by convention: (i) continuing education; (ii) technology transfer and
innovation; and (iii) social commitment.
Molas-Gallart and Castro-Martínez (2007) state the following in the paper titled ‘Ambiguity and conflict in the development
of ‘Third Mission’ indicators’: ‘We use the term ‘Third Mission’ to refer to all activities concerned with the generation, use,
application and exploitation of knowledge and other university capabilities outside academic environments’ (p. 321),
following the understanding of Molas-Gallart, Salter, Patel, Scott and Duran (2002). However, Molas-Gallart and CastroMartínez (2007) also mention that there are still many differences over the possible interpretations and the scope of the third
mission. For some, the third mission is an additional source of income, for others it is the commercial exploitation of the

10

results of academic research, and there are yet those who understand it to be the social impact of universities. In the latter
case, the authors cite the example of Latin American universities, which have their offices or extension schools, by means of
which they connect to society.
In a project called VINCULAENTORNO, co-financed by the European Commission and which also featured the
participation of Latin American universities, it was stated that the development of the third mission is advantageous because
it contributed to a greater involvement of higher education with society, strengthening and enriching the traditional missions
(teaching and research), urging academics to pay attention to social needs, generate new ideas, create business opportunities
and jobs, among other contributions (Mora & Vieira, 2014).
A report1 commissioned by the Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE), stated the following: “terms such
as ‘knowledge transfer/exchange’, ‘enterprise’, ‘outreach’ or ‘engagement’ are more commonly used in the higher
education (HE) sector and in Government” (PACEC & CBR, 2009, p. 1). In addition, for the HEFCE:
the term ‘third stream’ refers to interactions between HEIs and external organisations in the private, public and
voluntary sectors, and wider society. It assumes that some knowledge or expertise flows between HEIs and users
through these interactions (PACEC & CBR, 2009, p. 1).
Conway et al. (2009) comment that the first third stream experiences were directed to financing of knowledge transfer
activities and technologies for businesses. However, successive policies in this field have led to several additions of third
stream activities, including broader relationships with the community at large, according to analyses carried out by the
Centre for Business Research, University of Cambridge (CBR) and the Public and Corporate Economic Consultants
(PACEC), commissioned by HEFCE, widening the range of activities. Currently, hence, third stream involves relationships
with companies, business organizations and the community, maintaining close relationship with the expertise of HEIs in the
field of teaching and research, and consistent with the infrastructure of each institution.
Therefore, taking into consideration the authors that have been mentioned here, it is possible to understand that the two
expressions, third mission and third stream, have been currently used to represent interactions, exchanges, involvements of
the university with actors outside the academy, converging to the same purposes, namely: connecting knowledge and
expertise of universities to society, which is increasingly seen as a mission of the university. The emphasis on relations,
either with the industry or with communities, to revenue-raising or not, will depend on the choices that an institution makes.
However, it is worth noting that the term third stream has been used in some studies with an economic connotation, i.e., as a
way of obtaining resources.

Report title: “Evaluation of the effectiveness and role of HEFCE/OSI third stream funding. Issues Paper 2009/15 for
HEFCE”.
1

11

3.4 Extension and vinculación
Fernández-Larrea and González (2013) believe that university extension is the most objective and complete term to name
university-society relations, claiming that it involves, among others, cultural diffusion, social action, projection and social
interaction. The authors also believe that extension is the most appropriate term because of its historical character, since it
was the first manifestation of social action by the university, and also because it identifies more deeply with transformative
actions. According to them, Latin American universities have adopted their private third mission for many decades, an
extension plan that is different, in many respects, to the ones seen in developed countries.
For Serna Alcántara (2007), the social mission of the university, that is, its responsibility to promote and coordinate actions
of culture and knowledge sharing with the poorest and least educated members of society and then promote social justice,
was attributed to university extension. Thus, university extension is considered the forerunner of the involvement of
universities with the environment that is around it, i.e., its surroundings, communities, or, in broader terms, with society.
In the “Documento de base para un ‘Manual de Indicadores de Vinculación de la universidad con el entorno
socioeconómico’ - Manual de Valencia”, D'este, Castro-Martinez and Molas-Gallart (2014) mention that the term third
mission was employed with the same meaning of vinculación (here translated as linkage), because, according to the authors,
the first is much broader and involves all the activities and relationships of the university with its surroundings. However, the
authors recognize that there is no consensus regarding its use.
In the Manual de Valencia (2017), prepared by the Ibero-American Observatory of Science, Technology and Society
(OCTS-OEI) and the Ibero-American network of Science and technology indicators (RICYT), it was assumed that
vinculación activities are the following:
a) knowledge generation and the development of collaborative capabilities with non-academic agents
and drafting of legal and cultural landmarks that guide the opening of universities to their
surroundings; b) the use, application and exploitation of knowledge and other existing capacities of
the university outside the academic environment, as well as training, services supply, advising and
consultancy, conducted by universities in their surroundings (OCTS-OEI & RICYT, 2017, p. 11).
In Latin America, there is preference for the use of the term university extension (in the first place), while vinculación
(linkage) to the environment or to society is usually the second most used term. Third mission, on the other hand, tends to
be rarely used. However, it is understood that the three terms – third mission, extension and vinculación (linkage) – have
common aspects, namely, putting the knowledge that is generated in the universities at the service of society, as well as
collaborating with surrounding agents, which constitute a specific mission of Latin American universities (Grao, Iriarte,
Ochoa, & Vieira, 2014).

12

According to Grao et al. (2014), in Latin America, the extension has a different connotation in relation to the third mission
approaches of developed countries, since preferences for cultural dissemination activities and social services directed to
disadvantaged groups are predominant. They affirm that the traditional concept of extension has been diluted due to specific
demands of a present knowledge society, which include the incorporation of innovation, social inclusion and
internationalization. Also, although some academic sectors are reluctant to accept the involvement of Latin American
universities with the productive sector, the authors mention that the concept of extension is connected, nowadays, to the third
mission, with the aim to guide the transfer of knowledge to society, which would lead to the problems and demands of both
universities and society being handled and solved jointly, by means of an entrepreneurial, innovation-focused stance.
4. Discussions and Conclusions
The results allow us to conclude that, although university-society relations are understood and named in different ways, it is
possible to affirm that the terminology studied expresses a set of very similar purposes for the avant-garde universities, i.e.,
those that are ahead of their time, varying only with regard to emphasis and range of purposes. Thus, among the goals or
purposes identified in the different terms that were studied, there are the following: reaching audiences that are external to
the academic environment; sharing/disseminating university knowledge to society; providing services; obtaining financial
resources; offering artistic and cultural activities and recreation; promoting socio-economic development; among others. In
this sense, the meanings are similar, which makes it possible to affirm that we are much closer to a synonymy than
antonymy between these different terms.
Relationships with society have been diverse, representing an advancement of the understanding of the role of universities in
society. There have been attempts to overcome paternalistic attitudes and one-way transmissions of knowledge and delivery
of services, moving towards more complex interactions, through sharing and co-production of knowledge, skills and
experience. It should be noted that these challenges are a global phenomenon and solutions cannot be universal; rather, each
country, each region, each university must find the models that best fit its reality and its purposes. These purposes may vary
in scope and this is intrinsically linked to the characteristics of each university (for instance, whether the emphasis is on
teaching rather than research, or both); to human and financial resources; and to the infrastructure that each institution has
(laboratories, museums, libraries, among others).
In Latin America, there is a well-established tradition of developing university extension, which is deemed the strongest link
between Latin American universities and society. Due to the specific characteristics of the region, activities aimed at the
disadvantaged, along with cultural diffusion, have historically occupied a prominent place in the developmental preferences
of extension. Vinculación is the term that has been used in some Spanish-speaking countries instead of university extension,
on the idea that it depicts more intense and collaborative commitments. In Brazil, for example, certain types of relationships
are not well-seen by some sectors within the universities, who see them as stemming from utilitarian attitudes that interfere
with the purity of principles and ideals that they view as absolute and inviolable – autonomy and freedom to define research

13

agendas. From this perspective, the involvement with external demands, especially of the productive sector, has the power
to subvert academic values and autonomy.
We emphasize the need a holistic view which can bring together all possible forms of connections between universities and
society. The third mission is carried out through the transfer of technology, but not only; it also involves university extension
activities, in all its manifestations and all the possible links that can be thought of and made effective in the future, because it
is a concept under construction. Is the third mission an additional source of income? Is it the commercial exploitation of
results from academic research? Is it the social outreach of universities? We believe that all these purposes are (and can be)
present, because it is a term capable of carrying the most diverse directions and purposes, be they economic, social, cultural,
scientific, technological, among others. The activities and scope of commitments, under the title of third mission, will be
established and negotiated on a case-by-case basis.
There are several elements or factors that condition the development of the third mission, contributing to its sustainability, as
shown in Figure 1.

Leadership
Institutionalization and
Strategic
Planning

Indicators

Third Mission
Academic
Community
Engagement

Financial and
Human
Resources

Institutional
Culture

Communication

Figure 1. Third Mission Virtuous Cycle
Source: prepared by the authors.

14

Universities achieves the third mission when they place their physical and knowledge capacities at the service of society.
However, for this to occur and to last, policies stemming from higher management are needed, with the intent of
institutionalizing,

integrating

into

strategic

planning,

providing

financial

and

human

resources;

communicating/disseminating widely; and fostering a favorable institutional culture, rewarding and encouraging the
engagement of the academic community. We reaffirm that engagement presupposes interaction, exchange, sharing,
reciprocity, and not only the delivery of knowledge, services or technology. In addition, the creation of indicators for
monitoring the third mission may allow policies, strategies and actions to be improved.
The connections between universities and society stem from the social pact between them, and in the twenty-first century it
is increasingly expected that the benefits of higher education will reach a larger number of people. It also involves the use
and guiding of the capabilities and expertise of universities so that they can act more actively in society, getting involved in
and interacting with its surroundings.

References
Allen, Michael. 1988. The goals of universities. Milton Keynes, UK: SRHE & Open University Press.
American Society for the Extension of University Teaching. (1891). University extension: its definition, history, system of
teaching and organization. Philadelphia. Retrieved from https://archive.org/details/universityextens00ame
Arbo, P., & Benneworth, P. (2007). Understanding the regional contribution of higher education institutions. OECD
Education Working Papers, n. 9, 1-76. Doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/161208155312
Barnes, S. V. (1996). England's civic universities and the triumph of the Oxbridge ideal. History of education quarterly,
36(3), 271-305. Doi: https://doi.org/10.2307/369389
Bernheim, C. T. (1978). El nuevo concepto de extensión universitaria y difusión cultural y su relación con las políticas de
desarrollo cultural en América Latina. Anuario de Estudios Centroamericanos, 4, 93-126. Retrieved from
https://revistas.ucr.ac.cr/index.php/anuario/article/view/3305
Bernasconi, A. (2008). Is There a Latin American Model of the University? Comparative Education Review, 52, 27-52.
Doi: https://doi.org/10.1086/524305
Bringle, R. G., Hatcher, J. A., & Holland, B. (2007). Conceptualizing civic engagement: Orchestrating change at a
metropolitan
university.
Metropolitan
Universities,
18(3),
57-74.
Retrieved
from
https://scholarworks.iupui.edu/handle/1805/9613
Business/Higher Education Round Table (B-HERT). (June 2006). Universities’ third mission: communities engagement. BHERT Position Paper no. 11. Retrieved from https://www.bhert.com/publications/position-papers/BHERTPositionPaper11.pdf
Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. (2013). Carnegie Community Engagement Classification 2015.
Retrieved from http://www.fiuc.org/bdf/pdf/carnegie_classification-community_engag_2015.pdf
Castells, M. (2009). Communication Power. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Clark, B. R. (1998). Creating entrepreneurial universities: organizational pathways of transformation. Oxford: PergamonElsevier.
Clough, S. (2009). A Study of UK Education Policy in the Adoption and Implementation of Third Stream Activities by
Higher Education Institutions. PhD dissertation, Durham University. Retrieved from http://etheses.dur.ac.uk/135/
Conway, C., Humphrey, L., Benneworth, P., Charles, D., & Younger, P. (2009). Characterising modes of university
engagement with wider society: A literature review and survey of best practice. Newcastle upon Tyne: Newcastle
University. Retrieved from https://strathprints.strath.ac.uk/48210/

15

D’este, P. C., Castro Martínez, E., & Molas-Gallart, J. (2014). Documento de base para un Manual de indicadores de
vinculación de la universidad con el entorno socioeconómico. (Manual de Valencia). Espanhã: INGENIO (CSICUPV). Retrieved from http://digital.csic.es/handle/10261/132865
Etzkowitz, H., & Leydesdorff, L. (1997). Introduction: Universities in the Global Knowledge Economy. In Etzkowitz, H. &
Leydesdorff (Orgs). Universities in the Global Knowledge Economy: A Triple Helix of University-IndustryGovernment Relations (pp. 1-8). London: Pinter.
European Indicators and Ranking Methodology for University Third Mission (E3M). (2012a). Needs and constraints
analysis of the three dimensions of third mission activities. Retrieved from http://e3mproject.eu/Three-dim-thirdmission-act.pdf
European Indicators and Ranking Methodology for University Third Mission (E3M). (2012b). Green paper: fostering and
measuring ‘third mission in higher education institutions. Retrieved from http://e3mproject.eu/results.html
Fallis, G. (2005). The Mission of the University. Canadian Society for the Study of Higher Education, 26, 1-24. Retrieved
from https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED535141
Fernández-Larrea, M., & González, G. R. (2013). ¿Extensión universitaria, proyección social o tercera misión? Una
reflexión necessária. Revista Congreso Universidad, 2(2), 1-11. Retrieved from
http://www.congresouniversidad.cu/revista/index.php/rcu/article/view/482.pdf
Fitzgerald, H. E., Bruns, K., Sonka, S. T., Furco, A., & Swanson, L. (2012). The Centrality of Engagement in Higher
Education. Journal of Higher Education Outreach and Engagement, 16(3), 7-27. Retrieved from
http://openjournals.libs.uga.edu/index.php/jheoe/article/view/861
Goddard, J. B.; Kempton, L.; & P. Vallance. (2013). The civic university: connecting the global and the local. In Capello,
R.; Olechnicka, A.; Gorzelak, G. (Eds). Universities, cities and regions: loci for knowledge and innovation
creation, (pp. 43-63). Routledge, London/New York.
Gornitzka Åse, and Maassen Peter, Olsen, Johan P., and Stensaker Bjørn. 2007. “Europe of Knowledge:” Search for a New
Pact. In Maassen, P., & Olsen, J. P. (Eds.). University Dynamics and European Integration, (pp. 181-214). Higher
Education Dynamics, 19. Springer, Dordrecht. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-5971-1_9
Göransson, Bo, Maharajh, Rasigan, and Schmoch, Ulrich. 2009. New activities of universities in transfer and extension:
multiple requirements and manifold solutions, Science and Public Policy, 36(2), 157-164. Doi:
https://doi.org/10.3152/030234209X406863
Grao, J., Iriarte, M., Ochoa, C., & Vieira, M. J. (2014). La Tercera Misión (3M) de las universidades: buenas práticas em la
América Latina. México [S.l.]: Imaginarial Editores.
Grau, F. X. (2014). The “Glocal” University. Retrieved from http://www.guninetwork.org/files/glocaluniversity_fx_grau_2014.pdf
Herrera Albrieu, M. L. (2012). Una mirada sobre la extensión universitaria en Argentina. In Cátedra Manuel Ancizar 2012I - Educación Superior y debates para el desafío. Universidad Nacional de Colombia. Retrieved from
http://bdigital.unal.edu.co/7472/
Hessels, L. K., Van Lente, H. & Smits, R. (2009). In search of relevance: the changing contract between science and society.
Science and Public Policy, 36(5): 387-401. Doi: https://doi.org/10.3152/030234209X442034
Inzelt, A., Laredo, P., Sanchez, P., Marian, M., Vigano, F., & Carayol, N. (2006). Third Mission. In Strategic Management
of University Research Activities, Methodological Guide, edited by Schoen Antoine (Ed.), (pp. 7-19). Lugano:
PRIME Project ‘Observatory of the European University. Retrieved from http://www.enideurope.org/PRIME/documents/OEU_guide.pdf
Jongbloed, B., Enders, J., & Salerno, C. (2008). Higher education and its communities: Interconnections, interdependencies
and a research agenda. Higher Education, 56(3), 303-324. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10734-008-9128-2
Kellogg Commission on the Future of State and Land-Grant Universities. (1999). Returning to our Roots: the engaged
institution. Washington, DC: APLU. Retrieved from http://www.aplu.org/library/returning-to-our-roots-theengaged-institution/file
Kerr, Clark. (2005). Os usos da Universidade. 15th ed. Brasília: UNB.
Mackinder, H. J., & Sadler, M. (1891). University extension, past, present, and future. London: Cassell. Retrieved from
https://archive.org/details/extensionunivers00mackrich

16

Maunder, A. H. (1972). Agricultural Extension: a reference manual. FAO: Rome. Retrieved from
http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED075628.pdf
Minayo, M. C. S. (2009). O desafio da pesquisa social. In Minayo, M. C. S., Deslandes, S. F., & Gomes, R. Pesquisa social:
teoria, método e criatividade, (pp. 9-29). Petrópolis: Vozes.
Molas-Gallart, J. & Castro-Martínez, E. (2007). Ambiguity and conflict in the development of ‘Third Mission’ indicators.
Research Evaluation, 16(4): 321-330. Doi: https://doi.org/10.3152/095820207X263592
Molas-Gallart, J., Salter, A., Patel, P., Scott A. & Duran, X. (2002). Measuring third stream activities: Final report to the
Russell
Group
of
Universities.
SPRU,
University
of
Sussex.
Retrieved
from
https://www.academia.edu/532097/Measuring_third_stream_activities
Mora, J. G. & Vieira, M. J. (Coord.). (2014). Documento de recomendaciones. El fomento de la “Tercera Misión” en las
Instituciones de Educación Superior en América Latina. Conclusiones y recomendaciones para los distintos
actores. Retrieved from https://recla.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/Documento-de-RecomendacionesVinculaentorno.oct-2014.pdf
Observatorio Iberoamericano de la Ciencia, la Tecnología y la Sociedad (OCTS-OEI) and Red Iberoamericana de
Indicadores de Ciencia y Tecnología (RICYT). (2017). Manual Iberoamericano de Indicadores de Vinculación de
la Universidad con el Entorno Socioeconómico. Manual de Valencia. Retrieved from
http://www.ricyt.org/files/manual_vinculacion.pdf
Pinheiro, R. (2011). In the Region, for the Region? A comparative study of the institutionalisation of the regional mission of
universities. Doctoral dissertation, University of Oslo, Faculty of Educational Sciences. Retrieved from
https://www.academia.edu/5494496/In_the_Region_for_the_Region_A_comparative_study_of_the_institutionalisation_of
_the_regional_mission_of_universities_PhD_dissertation_University_of_Oslo_
Participatory Research in Asia (PRIA), & University of Victoria. (2015). Institutionalizing community university research
partnerships: a user’s manual. UNESCO Chair in Community Based Research and Social Responsibility in
Higher Education. Retrieved from http://unescochair-cbrsr.org/unesco/pdf/CURP_Guidelines.pdf
Public & Corporate Economic Consultants, & Centre for Business Research – University of Cambridge. (2009). Evaluation
of the effectiveness and role of HEFCE/OSI third stream funding. Issues Paper 2009/15 for HEFCE. Retrieved
from https://www.cbr.cam.ac.uk/publications/special-reports/
Rocha, R. M. G. (2001). A Construção do Conceito de Extensão Universitária na América Latina. In Faria, D. S.
Construção Conceitual da Extensão Universitária na América Latina, (p. 13-29). Brasília: UNB.
Roper, C. D., & Hirth, M. A. (2005). A history of change in the third mission of higher education: The evolution of one-way
service to interactive engagement. Journal of Higher Education Outreach and Engagement, 10(3): 3-21. Retrieved
from http://openjournals.libs.uga.edu/index.php/jheoe/article/view/380
Scoponi, L., Dias, F. P. M., Pesce, G., Schmidt, M. A., & Gzain, M. (2016). Cooperación Académica en Latinoamérica para
la Innovación en los Agronegocios. Journal of technology management & innovation, 11(2), 111-120. Doi:
https://doi.org/10.4067/S0718-27242016000200011
Serna Alcántara, G. A. (2007). Misión social y modelos de extensión universitaria: del entusiasmo al desdén. Revista
Iberoamericana De Educación, 43(3): 1-7. Retrieved from https://rieoei.org/RIE/article/view/2324
Trencher, G., Yarime, M., McCormick, K. B., Doll, C. H. N. & Kraines, S. B. (2014). Beyond the third mission: Exploring
the emerging university function of co-creation for sustainability. Science and Public Policy, 41(2): 151-179. Doi:
https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/sct044
United States of America. Morrill Act, 1862. (1862). Retrieved from http://memory.loc.gov/cgibin/ampage?collId=llsl&fileName=012/llsl012.db&recNum=534
University of Chicago Library. (2006). Guide to the University of Chicago University Extension Records 1892-1979.
Retrieved from https://www.lib.uchicago.edu/ead/rlg/ICU.SPCL.UEXTENSION.pdf
Venditti, M., Reale, E., & Leydesdorff, Loet. (2013). Disclosure of university research to third parties: a nonmarket
perspective on an Italian university. Science and Public Policy, 40(6), 792-800. Doi:
https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/sct027
Welch, E. (1973). The Peripatetic University: Cambridge Local Lectures 1873-1973. London: Cambridge University Press.

17

