PRE-PUB VERSION: 7/18/18

Black Holes and Purple Squirrels: A Tale of Two Online Labor Markets*
Steve McDonald, North Carolina State University
Amanda K. Damarin, Georgia State University - Perimeter College
Jenelle Lawhorne, North Carolina State University
Annika Wilcox, North Carolina State University
ABSTRACT
The Internet and social media have fundamentally transformed the ways in which individuals
find jobs. Relatively little is known about how demand-side market actors use online information
and the implications for social stratification and mobility. This study provides an in-depth
exploration of the online recruitment strategies pursued by human resource (HR) professionals.
Qualitative interviews with 61 HR recruiters in two southern US metro areas reveal two distinct
patterns in how they use Internet resources to fill jobs. For low and general skill work, they post
advertisements to online job boards (e.g., Monster, CareerBuilder) with massive audiences of job
seekers. By contrast, for high-skill or supervisory positions, they use LinkedIn to target passive
candidates – employed individuals who are not looking for work but might be willing to change
jobs. Although there are some intermediate practices, the overall picture is one of an increasingly
bifurcated “winner-take-all” labor market in which recruiters focus their efforts on poaching
specialized superstar talent (“purple squirrels”) from the ranks of the currently employed, while
active job seekers are relegated to the hyper-competitive and impersonal “black hole” of the
online job boards.
Keywords: hiring, recruitment, job search, labor markets, Internet, stratification
* Data collection was supported by a grant from the College of Humanities and Social Sciences
at North Carolina State University and from the American Sociological Society’s Fund for the
Advancement of the Discipline. We thank Steve Vallas and Ofer Sharone for their detailed
commentary and advice on earlier drafts of this paper. We also thank our many interviewees who
made this research possible by sharing their thoughts and experiences with us.

1

INTRODUCTION
The advent of job search and recruiting websites such as Monster, CareerBuilder, and Indeed, as
well as professional social media websites like LinkedIn, has fundamentally transformed the
matching of workers and employers in the US. Four out of every five job seekers use the Internet
to search for jobs (Green, Li, Owen, & de Hoyos, 2012; Smith, 2015). Roughly the same
percentage (84) of employers use the Internet to advertise and recruit for job openings (SHRM,
2016). These changes have profound implications for social stratification and mobility that
researchers are only beginning to understand. Optimistic projections about the capacity for the
Internet to empower the workforce through expanded access to opportunities (Feldman & Klaas,
2002; Freeman, 2002) have given way to concerns about the uneven benefits associated with
digital connectivity (Autor, 2001). Online job finding seems likely to accelerate the formation of
“winner-take-all” markets (Frank & Cook, 1996) that primarily benefit elite workers and
generate greater competition for jobs among most other workers (Autor, 2001; Sharone, 2017).
Our research is an attempt to clarify how digital technologies have transformed labor
market institutions. Whereas recent research has examined how job seekers understand and
experience the online labor market (Gershon, 2017; Sharone, 2017), we focus on the demand
side of the market. How do organizational actors understand and use online technologies for
filling job openings? What digital practices do they engage in when attempting to identify,
recruit, and evaluate potential job candidates? How do these meanings and practices vary
depending on the different types of positions they are attempting to fill?
We address these questions by analyzing the experiences and practices of human resource
(HR) professionals involved in recruiting. Despite their importance to the hiring process,
relatively little is known about how these recruiters use web-based data and applications to fill

2

job openings (Klotz, da Motta Veiga, Buckley, & Gavin, 2013). Evidence from interviews with
61 HR professionals in two Southern US metropolitan areas reveals how Internet job matching
technologies have led recruiters to follow two primary strategies for filling jobs. The first
involves posting ads and sorting massive pools of applications for general and low skill
positions. The second involves targeted recruitment of passive (“non-searching”) talent to fill
high-demand, high-skill, and supervisory positions. Despite some hybrid practices, these two
general patterns reveal a unique form of labor market dualism. Organizational actors use distinct
online tools and practices to evaluate and allocate different segments of the workforce. These
practices point to heightened employment competition for much of the workforce and significant
employment advantages for those workers who display ideal digital signifiers.
INTERNET SEARCH AND RECRUITMENT
The everyday functioning of job markets has undergone a major transformation since the
inception of the World Wide Web and popularization of the Internet. Starting around 1995, these
technologies gave rise to a whole range of new market intermediaries, or entities that “facilitate,
inform, or regulate how workers are matched to firms” (Autor, 2001, p. 1). Previously, common
intermediaries included newspaper help-wanted advertising, interpersonal networks, union hiring
halls, and recruiting firms. Today, these are joined by online job and résumé posting boards (e.g.,
CareerBuilder.com, Monster.com), specialty job boards sponsored by educational, professional,
and industrial institutions (e.g., the ASA job board), social networking websites (e.g., LinkedIn,
Facebook), and search engines (e.g., Google). Use of these online tools has become normative.
Internet access among US adults has increased from about 50 percent in 2000 to nearly 90
percent in 2016 (Pew Research Center, 2017). The vast majority of job seekers use the Internet to
search for employment opportunities (SHRM, 2016). About one out of every five external job

3

matches in the United States occurs through online job posting boards (Bonet, Cappelli, &
Hamori, 2013) and over 80 percent of employers engaged in active recruiting use social media
sites to do so (SHRM, 2016).
Previous research has examined Internet job finding mostly from the supply side of the
workforce, noting the impact of the digital divide on economic inequality (DiMaggio, Hargittai,
Neuman, & Robinson, 2001; Hargittai, 2011). Internet-based job searchers tend to be younger,
more urban, more advantaged (in terms of education and skills), and more likely to be currently
employed than offline searchers (Fountain, 2005; Green et al., 2012; Kuhn & Skuterud, 2004;
Nakamura, Shaw, Freeman, Nakamura, & Pyman, 2009). Relative to offline job searches,
Internet-based job search often leads to increased odds of finding a position, reduced
unemployment durations, and/or higher quality jobs (Burke & Kraut, 2013; DiMaggio &
Bonikowski, 2008; Suvankulov, Chi Keung Lau, & Ho Chi Chau, 2012), though other findings
suggest that the benefits of Internet job finding are more modest (see Fountain, 2005; Kuhn &
Skuterud, 2004; Van Hoye, van Hooft, & Lievens, 2009). Several early studies of Internet
searching found that employers use the Internet to recruit for high skilled positions, but turn to
other methods to recruit for low-skilled jobs (Cappelli, 2001; S. McDonald & Crew, 2006; Niles
& Hanson, 2003).
Much of the existing literature has emphasized the empowering potential of online labor
market tools (Sharone, 2017). Certainly, the Internet has expanded the availability of information
about job openings and job candidates. Websites such as Monster and CareerBuilder serve as
storehouses for information about thousands of jobs and job seekers globally. Aggregators like
Indeed.com search out and re-post job advertisements found on company job boards across the
Internet. LinkedIn, the professional social media website, allows workers to post their work

4

profiles for others to view and interact with. Employer organizations also post information about
job openings, and often about their own employees, on company websites. These knowledgeenriching resources may help remedy problems of information-boundedness found in traditional
job markets and potentially improve job matches (Autor, 2001). Furthermore, increased access to
online information about worker qualifications could allow employers to avoid traditional
reliance on “old boy networks” and focus more on job skills when making hiring decisions
(Freeman, 2002). Likewise, Internet job matching could render invisible the ascriptive and status
characteristics of job seekers (Viswanath, Kosicki, Fredin, & Park, 2000; Walther, 1996),
allowing for a more diverse workforce and a more meritocratic job market (Feldman & Klaas,
2002; Freeman, 2002).
Recently, Sharone (2017) has argued that the spread of the Internet operates as a “doubleedged sword” for labor market participants. It offers benefits in the form of increased exposure
for potential job candidates, but also makes it easier for employers to use digital signals to
stratify segments of the workforce. Advancements in computing power, speed, memory, and
algorithmic sophistication have led to exponential increases in the capacity of organizations to
process data retrieved from the Internet. This has led to what Fourcade and Healy (2017) refer to
as the “institutional data imperative” that encourages organizations to collect large quantities of
digital information to classify and rank workers, customers, and potential employees. For
example, organizational actors perceive social media posts as valid indicators of mental ability,
personality, and worker productivity (Berger & Zickar, 2016; Stoughton, Thompson, & Meade,
2013). Organizations are seeking algorithmic tools that would effectively translate digital
footprints into personality scores (Faliagka, Tsakalidis, & Tzimas, 2012; O’Neil, 2016).

5

Internet technologies have thereby accelerated the creation of “winner-take-all” labor
markets (Frank & Cook, 1996) in which payoffs are determined by rankings, top participants
earn the bulk of the rewards, and small differences in characteristics tend to be associated with
large differences in outcomes (Frank & Cook, 2013). Increased access to digital signals and
means to evaluate those signals has created opportunities for systematic ranking of the workforce
based on perceptions of “ideal performativity” reflective of optimal employment competency
and organizational fit (Carr, 2016; P. McDonald & Thompson, 2016). Workers with atypical or
deviant digital signals suffer by comparison (Ruggs, Walker, Blanchard, & Gur, 2016), which
forces them to be more proactive and often settle for significantly reduced labor market returns.
Superstar workers benefit from the exposure brought on by Internet connectivity by becoming
passive beneficiaries of targeted recruitment (cf., S. McDonald, 2015). Although screening
stigmatized job applicants and recruiting privileged ones are not new practices, advances in
algorithmic tools have expanded their scope and efficiency and amplified their consequences for
marginalized segments of the workforce (O’Neil, 2016; Eubanks, 2017). Headhunting and talent
poaching are also not new (Finlay & Coverdill, 2002), but growth in online worker databases and
application tools have enabled a broader range of organizations and recruiters to identify ideal
performers (Coverdill & Finlay, 2017).
The “double-edged” character of online job finding has therefore led to a form of labor
market polarization which is distinct from that suggested by existing theories. Earlier scholarship
on labor market segmentation distinguished between primary and secondary sectors based on
whether workers could access stable employment queues and upward mobility in large
hierarchically-organized firms (Doeringer & Piore, 1971; Hudson, 2007). This theory’s utility
has declined alongside the replacement of intra-organizational job ladders with “boundaryless”

6

careers and network-mediated organizations (Powell, 1990; Arthur & Rousseau, 1996).
Economic theory of skill-biased technological change (SBTC) also addresses labor market
polarization, suggesting that income inequality has expanded due to rising wage premiums
associated with high tech computer skills (Bound & Johnson, 1992; Autor, Katz, & Kearney,
2008). However, SBTC is unable to account for how demand for skill is socially-constructed by
organizational actors (Hanley, 2014; Rivera, 2016). Moreover, the theory focuses on skill and
productivity, leaving the job matching process opaque. We argue that much of today’s
polarization is predicated on distinct sets of rules (logics, tools, and practices) for securing
employment through online job market intermediaries.
Our account of labor market polarization builds on recent research which reveals: 1) how
unemployed workers deal with stigma as part of the online job finding (Gershon, 2017; Sharone,
2017), 2) how résumé signals and interpersonal interviews are used to assess candidate fit in elite
labor markets based on cultural similarity (Rivera, 2016; Coverdill and Finlay, 2017), and 3)
how digital tools and cultural assumptions are used to categorize market actors (Kiviat, 2017;
O’Neil, 2016). Collectively, these studies point to the bifurcated character of job matching in the
new economy. However, much remains unknown about how demand-side agents interpret and
construct distinct online labor markets through strategies for candidate searching and screening
(Klotz et al., 2013).
DATA AND METHODOLOGY
The data presented here come from 61 qualitative interviews with human resource professionals,
an important group to study because of their critical role as labor market intermediaries. Our
interviews were conducted from 2014 through 2016 in Atlanta, GA and the Research Triangle
area (Raleigh-Durham-Chapel Hill) of North Carolina. These southern metropolitan areas are

7

excellent places to study hiring practices because they are fast growing in terms of population,
employment, and diversity. They also contain high proportions of professional and technology
jobs. Respondents were recruited mainly through attendance at HR professional events; a few
come from respondent-suggested referrals. Individuals were eligible to participate if their jobs
involved recruitment and screening. Interviews were semi-structured and centered on hiring
practices (job posting, sourcing applicants for openings, and targeted recruitment) as well as
screening (sorting, interviewing, and assessing candidate quality), though the focus for this paper
is on the former. Interviews lasted more than one hour on average and were audio recorded (in
all but one instance). In the Appendix (see Table A1), we include details on the personal and
employment characteristics of each interviewee.
We followed a grounded theory approach to the collection and analysis of these data
(Hess-Biber & Leavy, 2011). Data collection and analysis proceeded reflexively, as initial
interviews led to a more focused set of inquiries. The lead author used open coding procedures to
assign the various elements of the text data to categories. Then a focused coding stage examined
the various connections among the codes. We developed analytic memos that highlighted the
emergent themes; these themes were studied in greater detail through additional data collection.
Data collection ceased when codes reached saturation and when relevant themes were fully
explored.
Our methodological approach emphasizes the subjective experiences of the interviewees
and makes no claims to generalizability of those experiences. However, theoretical sampling
strategies were employed to generate a broad pool of respondents. For example, given concerns
about missing the experiences of underemployed HR professionals, researchers attended and
recruited respondents from “transition” support groups of HR professionals to supplement the

8

sample. The final sample includes HR professionals in a variety of settings including non-profit
organizations, private companies of all sizes, staffing agencies, and colleges/universities. The
sample also represents a broad range of industry settings, including (but not limited to) real
estate, law, finance, health care, energy, engineering, manufacturing, and private services. These
HR professionals recruit talent for part time and full time jobs; temporary, permanent, and
“temp-to-perm” jobs; low, middle, and high wage jobs. Our analysis centers on several
prominent themes that emerged throughout the interviews.
THE “BLACK HOLE” OF MASS POSTING SITES
Mass job and résumé posting websites are the best-known and longest-standing feature of online
labor markets. Among them, the most prominent are Monster.com, which as of this writing
boasts over five million jobs on file and 29 résumés uploaded every minute, and CareerBuilder,
with three million jobs posted monthly and 150 million candidate profiles 1. The professional
networking application LinkedIn, the job aggregator Indeed.com, and a wide array of other
posting sites (e.g., government-sponsored) have similar functions. By compiling voluminous
information about available jobs and job seekers into searchable databases—with added features
like targeted social media distribution, email alerts, and auto-filled applications—these sites have
made it much easier for employers to publicize openings and for workers to learn about and
respond to them. Sharon, a non-profit sector recruiter, explained the implications of this
transition.
Everything is electronic. So, for people who are applying online, it’s maybe a 3-4 minute
process. It’s not like what it used to be where you’d send in your résumé in the mail, fill
in an application, send it in. It’s a couple of clicks. You fill out your name, your address,
your email address. You attach your résumé, this is what I’m applying for and it sends it
to us. It’s a much easier process. It could be done day, night, whenever it’s convenient for
job seekers, so more are applying.

1

See http://promotions.monster.com/keywordjobsearch and https://hiring.careerbuilder.com/.

9

Sharon links the relative ease of applying for jobs online to the tremendous increase in the
number of applications for any given job opening. Many of our other respondents also described
receiving a high volume of applicants from the mass posting boards.

Going with the Flow
This increased volume of applications is a mixed blessing for recruiters. Jonathan, an
experienced recruiter in a university setting, explained how these sources are extremely useful
for generating “flow” or high numbers of job candidates for a posted opening.
The thing with Career Builder and Monster and those generic type [of websites] … those
are great sites if you want to generate a ton of flow. Because they do that. They clearly do
that.
A high flow of applicants is particularly useful when recruiters are hiring quickly, continuously,
or for numerous openings. However, the large number of applications can be overwhelming.
Linda, a recruiter for an engineering company, explained, “If I go out and look for an accountant
tomorrow … [using] Career Builder, I’ll get 1000 résumés within a couple of weeks.” The
increased volume also results in numerous applications that do not fit the job descriptions. Many
interviewees were confounded by candidates who chose to apply for jobs for which they were
clearly not qualified. IT recruiter Jessica stated that when she used CareerBuilder, “I would post
for a data warehouse engineer, and I would get warehouse workers applying for these jobs.”
Many complained that people “don’t read the job description,” but some suggested that
applicants are so desperate for work that they will jump at even the slimmest chance. Others
suggested that applying for unattainable jobs might be a strategy of avoiding work while
completing the work search activities required for receipt of government unemployment benefits.

10

Those respondents who relied on mass posting sites described sorting through scores of
unqualified candidates as a “frustrating” effort at “weeding out a lot of junk.” According to
Margaret, a staffing agency recruiter…
It bogs everything down so much that it’s hard for us to even figure out who the good
candidates are…internal recruiters will tell me, “Oh yeah, we got 5000 responses to that
posting.” There’s no way. How do you sift through all that information?
The problem of information overload elicited varied responses. Some recruiters tried to avoid the
mass posting sites entirely, but this was not always possible or prudent. In certain circumstances,
they needed an immediate flow of candidates to make multiple or rapid hires. In addition,
posting on some mass posting sites (US.jobs, state websites, and CraigsList.org) is very
inexpensive or free, and use of government sites may be mandated by employer policy. Further,
some respondents felt that they had little control over where their job postings went. Betterresourced employers typically have an applicant tracking system (ATS), an elaborate software
program that manages job requisitions, postings, applications, and related tasks; many recruiters
reported that their ATS systems automatically fed their job advertisements to the mass posting
boards. In addition, their posts on their own websites would be “scraped” and redistributed by
aggregators like Indeed that “spider out” to collect job listings from across the web.
Rather than reducing application volume, many of our participants use software
applications to work around the problems it creates. ATS systems can be set up to receive
applications and feed them into a database where they can be keyword-searched, which speeds
the sorting process. ATS and some mass posting sites can be configured so that applicants are
required to answer job-specific screening questions that help rank their eligibility. Barbara, an
HR generalist at a small utility company, said she used CareerBuilder to receive applications…
because we use the screening questions … to help kind of weed people out … I have all
the questions ranked, so it gives me a percentage. This person scored 100, this person
11

scored 50%. And, you can set up Career Builder to only give you people who get 80% or
better … so you don’t even see the résumés [for the rest].
This and other reports show that just as digital technology spawns information overload by
easing the job application process, it also alleviates it to some extent by reducing the effort
required to screen resulting applicants. It is not clear whether the problem of labor market
information-boundedness is actually resolved or simply shifted from a human condition to a
technological one.
Low Skill and High Competition
Mass posting sites were also favored for advertising certain types of jobs. First, they remain the
central online recruitment tool for work with low or generic skill requirements. This includes
entry level and often low-paying positions in manufacturing and the professional services. Mass
posting sites are useful for such jobs because they facilitate speedy hiring in high turnover
situations and because recruiters and hiring managers tend to view workers as non-essential and
easy to replace. Specific skills are often less important, as is evidenced in agency recruiter
Caitlin’s rationale for mass posting an immediate-need temporary receptionist position:
That [job] was something we could post an ad for. There’s usually a large number of
candidates, because it was pretty generic. Just somebody who felt comfortable at the front
desk. For that type of position, it’s really more about the volume. You might have to …
bring lots of different people in in order to find that person who is a good fit for the
company … [For more specialized roles] I really could tell by the LinkedIn profile or by
the resume if they’re going to be a good fit based on their background. For this one it was
more [necessary to be] meeting them in person and knowing that personality or culture
fit.
In addition to this relatively generic labor, mass posting sites are used as starting points in
searches for high demand talent. Recruiters indicated that Monster or CareerBuilder might
uncover a uniquely qualified worker, especially one new to the area. However, more often than
not these tools were supplemented with more active and nuanced recruitment practices.

12

The prominence of mass posting sites impacts job seekers in important ways. Most HR
professionals agreed that the increased volume of applicants for any given position has resulted
in heightened competition for employment opportunities. Jonathan explained how the increasing
ease of applying online has affected competition for jobs.
Now, the downside to the technology and all the online stuff is that it could be
overwhelming. Say somebody applies to a job and that company or that organization gets
hundreds and hundreds of résumés, which it’s pretty easy to do when everything is
online. It’s really fairly easy to apply like that. You can inadvertently get buried in the
pile.
Despite the increase in unqualified candidates, recruiters have nonetheless seen an increase in the
absolute numbers of qualified applicants for jobs. As Jonathan’s comment suggests, the stack of
applicants has gotten taller, ultimately reducing the odds that any one job candidate will rise to
the top.
Répondez S'il Vous Plaît
Recruiters tend to hold a dim view of the employment prospects of job seekers who rely
primarily on mass posting sites. “A lot of the online postings are black holes. There’s a lot of
people looking and everybody has a computer and everybody is just blasting out their résumé,”
explained Nancy, a recruiter from a private staffing agency. Samantha, another agency recruiter,
echoed this by noting that sometimes applicants “may feel that they're just putting their résumé
into an empty abyss of résumés, and sometimes that's the truth.” This “black hole”
characterization partly speaks to concerns about increased competitiveness. As individuals are
competing with more people for each mass posted job opening, these sources may be of little
help in actually securing employment. Sarah, in her 40s, had been attempting to break into the
HR profession mid-career and expressed her own frustration with searching for employment via
online applications:

13

I have to do all these electronic applications but I have no faith that I will get a job
because I’ve applied for something electronically…I’ve applied for 50 or 60 jobs and
I’ve heard from none of them…Well, I could spend between 20 and 40 minutes on an
online application to find out nothing. To hear nothing at all.
Sarah’s comment illustrates the problems of heightened competition and limited
opportunity on the online job boards, but her criticism extends to another important aspect of the
“black hole” simile. Specifically, recruiters and job seekers alike loathe the de-personalized
nature of online job applications. Not only are workers unlikely to hear a positive response, they
are unlikely to hear any response at all. Recruiters explained that they are often unable to
respond to also-ran candidates because of the sheer volume of applicants in each candidate pool.
Moreover, they often sympathize with job seekers mired in the online marketplace. Dan, a midcareer recruiter from a private employment agency, reflected:
People will post jobs and there will be hundreds of applicants and no one will hear back,
so it’s that feeling of inadequacy. People are feeling, “nobody wants me, nobody wants
me.” I feel like I’m very marketable…why don’t people want to talk with me? I’m like,
“well, the pool of candidates you’re competing against has ten times the number of what
it used to be.” People can’t get back to you quick enough. It depersonalizes it a lot.
Dan’s statement implies that the increased competition for jobs on mass posting websites,
coupled with a lack of personalized response from employers, negatively impacts mental health
by generating feelings of inadequacy and isolation among job seekers.
A MARKET FOR PASSIVE CANDIDATES
For many HR professionals, the work of filling job openings extends well beyond posting ads
and receiving applications through mass posting boards. Interviewees also described their efforts
to identify “passive” candidates to supplement applicant pools. Charles defined passive
candidates as follows:
A passive candidate is somebody who is sitting there doing their job, and doing a good
job. And is not actively - not unemployed… But they are a passive candidate in the sense

14

that if somebody that they trust said, “I thought about you when I heard about this [job],”
they might listen and they might respond.
Other recruiters indicated that passive candidates are employed workers who dissatisfied
with their jobs. Mary, an HR manager at a small private firm, expressed this sentiment most
succinctly:
A lot of times people sit in a job that they feel mediocre about for a long, long time
before something happens and they decide that they’re going to look for a new job. And,
if you can catch them in that period of time when they don’t really like what they’re
doing, but they haven’t crossed the bridge yet over to, “I’m going to leave and look for
something else,” you can get them when they’re really ripe.
Mary’s reference to mediocrity implies that workers can become bored with their work or
frustrated with a lack of opportunities for personal or professional growth. Still, the decision to
move is an important one and can take a long time. Mary’s comments suggest that this critical
shift in outlook, which she likens to crossing a bridge and the ripening of fruit, is a cumulative
process rather than one that is triggered by a single event. And yet, passive candidates must be
plucked when they are willing to make a move, but before they are snatched up by competitors.
Passive candidates are highly valued commodities in the recruiting world. According to
Lisa, an HR supervisor for a large private firm, “usually the best candidates, you’re going to be
kind of stealing them from another company.” Many recruiters had difficulty explaining exactly
why passive candidates are so desirable. Some viewed passive candidates as “tried and true”
with “good job longevity,” someone who is “not going to job hop” or “just go to the next dollar.”
Others reasoned that because passive candidates are currently employed, it is safe to assume that
“whatever they’re doing, they’re doing well” and they are “contributing some kind of value.”
These comments imply that passive candidates maintain superior qualities of performance,
experience, and dedication.

15

For other recruiters, it was a lack of availability that made passive candidates attractive.
“It’s kind of like dating,” explained Brian, a recruiting coordinator for a private staffing agency.
“You want the girl that’s not available. There’s a reason she’s not available. We found that those
top folks, they’re just very, very good at what they do.” Brian’s comments reveal that
unavailability serves as a signal that these workers are “top” quality and leaders in their
respective fields. Joe, a recruiting supervisor at a large public university, similarly compared
passive candidates to industry leaders: “When you think about the best professionals you may
know or the best researchers you may know, many of them probably aren’t looking on job
boards. They’re not looking for work.” Passive candidates fit Joe’s mental image of how the
“best” workers operate. The standard strategy of posting openings on job boards is therefore
unlikely to yield a pool of high quality candidates.
The Stigma of Active Search
Many interviewees described the superiority of passive candidates by describing the suboptimal
qualities of active job seekers. For example, “If they’re looking, why are they looking? They’re
either miserable, they don’t like their job, they’re unemployed, they got fired,” explained Rick, a
recruiter at a private hospital. These negative signals suggest that the individual is a poor-quality
worker or has a bad disposition. Alicia, a talent director for an accounting firm, claimed that
active search could indicate that candidates:
weren't a good fit [with their previous or existing employers] … for a variety of reasons.
They couldn't hang with the pace and the demands … If there were some performance
issues like that; if they didn't play nicely in the sand box and they were causing—they
were one of these negative employees, the disengaged employees that's causing more
drama and upheaval than is helpful. Sometimes those are the people that end up in the
active bucket, and those are the ones we're trying to avoid.

16

Edward, a recruiting supervisor at a private firm in the health services industry, asserted that
actively looking for work could be an indication of “running from something.” When asked what
that meant, he explained that individuals often prefer to leave bad working environments – e.g.,
ones in which they had to work long hours and where managers were unresponsive to feedback –
rather than trying to fix those environments. He felt that “maxing out” on advancement potential
would be a more legitimate reason to seek a new job. In short, active search is clearly
stigmatized among recruiters and results in a wide range of inferences about worker quality and
personality.
Recruiters often assume that passive candidates are employed. In fact, the individuals we
talked to sometimes conflated the unemployed with workers who are employed but looking for
work. This was illustrated above by Charles’ description of passive candidates as, “not actively –
not unemployed.” Equating active search with unemployment is significant because
unemployment carries a stigma among recruiters. “When you’re unemployed, it raises those
questions. Why aren’t they working? What happened at their last job? You’d much rather go
with what you think is a sure thing and that’s someone that’s currently working,” offered Betty, a
young recruiter fresh out of college. Heather, an HR generalist in fast food, wanted her
management-track hires…
to be employed in some way, shape, or form, when I bring them onboard … because that
is demonstrative of your work ethic … I get the idea of making your job search your fulltime job … But I would prefer you do something … Are you volunteering, are you giving
back to the community in some way, how are you filling your time? Are you watching
Days of Our Lives all day, or General Hospital?
Betty sees the unemployed as risky hires, while Heather suspects that they are lacking in work
ethic. Other interviewees claimed that unemployment is not as serious a concern for workers
who have been laid off from their jobs, as even the best workers can experience layoffs. Still,

17

more than one mentioned that layoffs are not random and could reflect worker quality if
companies use them strategically to eliminate their substandard workforce. Some noted that
many unemployed candidates tried to avoid stigma by reporting that they had been laid off when
in fact they had been fired: “everybody says they got laid off these days, it’s just what they say.”
This perceived deception no doubt makes it easier to dismiss unemployed candidates of all
stripes. Thus, whether it signifies a specific trait like laziness or simply the risk of yet-unknown
problems, unemployment is often enough for recruiters to remove individuals from applicant
pools.
Kevin’s experience illustrates how powerful the stigma of unemployment can be. He is
an HR director in a medium sized technology firm:
When I was out looking for a job, I got contacted by a recruiter from a very large
recruiting firm that was looking to fill a lead HR role for a company in this area. … The
phone call went very well and then somewhere along the line in the conversation, it came
up that I was no longer at my last employer and she [the recruiter] was taken aback. She
goes, “Oh, you’re no longer working.” I said, “No, I’m not. I’ve been gone there for X
amount of months.” She said, “Well they’re only looking for—they’re only going to
consider people that are currently working for this position.” … I think that’s not unusual.
Based on his credentials and the phone screen, Kevin appeared to be qualified for the job. It was
only his status as unemployed that got him removed from the applicant pool. Regardless of its
precise causes or meanings, unemployment functions as a strong negative signal of worker
quality. As active search is often equated with unemployment, passive non-searchers are viewed
as the surest source of talent.
Variation in Targeted Recruitment
Recruitment of passive talent requires extra effort and therefore tends to be reserved for specific
types of job openings, particularly for high-demand occupations. As specialty recruiter Ryan put
it, the decision to source passive candidates is partly determined by “what the market is like … if

18

the market is more favorable to the employee or the job searcher, you’re going to tend to talk to
more passive folks. If the market is tighter and employers are being a lot more particular, it’s
harder for the employee to find work, then you’re going to have more active candidates in the
market.” Our respondents identified information technology, various engineering specialties, and
registered nursing as fields that require targeted recruiting since virtually all qualified talent is
employed.
The decision to recruit passive talent is also determined by the availability of candidate
information. Susan, a law firm recruiter, explained:
I definitely do it for paralegal ones. … Most of the paralegals, you can find them on
LinkedIn. … It’s kind of hit or miss with the administrative individuals. … I don’t think
they’re always looking on LinkedIn to find a job.
Susan can recruit passive candidates for paralegal positions in part because she is connected to
many legal professionals on LinkedIn, which makes it easy to search and identify individuals
who might be ready to change jobs. This is not the case with administrative assistants, whom she
perceives as having a weaker LinkedIn presence.
Passive candidates are also recruited to fill high-level executive and managerial positions.
Mark, an experienced recruiter for a large private corporation, explained that executives “aren’t
people that you generally can post a position and they’re going to apply. It’s almost all going out
and sourcing.” Joe explained that he engages in targeted recruitment of high-level university
personnel because he views these positions as particularly important to the organization.
Which positions are considered those key, primary positions? Stands to reason you
wouldn’t likely do the same effort of recruitment for a position that’s relatively easy to
fill that has little impact on the university, but one that’s very difficult or one that’s a key
strategic position at the university is certainly one that we would want to spend more time
on. … [The] focus is [on] those key strategy positions here at the university, going all out
for those searches.

19

In addition to being deemed more “strategic,” executive positions are also usually staffed
continuously. If incumbents perform poorly, the search for their replacements occurs while they
are employed and without their awareness. This makes confidentiality vital. As IT recruiter
Jessica explained in reference to a current opening:
… we don't want to really advertise … and throw it out there. One of the reasons being an
existing internal employee … I printed out a bunch of job descriptions and took them
with me to [a professional group meeting] because I don't want it on the job boards, I
don't want it on LinkedIn. I don’t want this individual to see us actively [sourcing]. There
are some of those positions that come up that are kind of hush hush.
The idea of executives actively searching for jobs may also be viewed as inappropriate, even
comical: Dorothy, a young recruiter for a private company, noted: “you really don’t see directors
out on Career Builder saying, ‘Hey I need a job.’ [laughs].”
Highly paid workers therefore appear to exist in a truly distinctive job market, where
changing jobs typically involves passive recruitment. To assess variable recruitment strategies
across salary levels, the Atlanta interviewees were asked to think about several recent job
openings and how they were filled (see Figure 1). HR tends to post job advertisements for jobs
almost irrespective of their income level. Employee referrals are a common means of recruiting
workers for low wage jobs. Sourcing of passive candidates is especially common for high wage
positions, with nearly 70 percent of jobs openings above $75,000 recruited in this way. This
pattern is consistent with previous research showing substantial amounts of referral hiring into
low wage jobs versus recruitment of passive candidates into high wage jobs (see S. McDonald,
2015).
[Insert Figure 1 about here]
Organizational variation in 1) preferences for passive talent and 2) targeted recruitment of
passive talent is also striking. Passive candidates were preferred by 75 percent of the respondents

20

from third-party staffing/recruiting agencies, compared to only 18 percent of respondents from
non-profit and government organizations. Preferences for passive candidates among for-profit
companies fell in the middle (50 percent for respondents from small and medium-sized firms; 36
percent for respondents from large firms). Figure 2 shows that the preferences of these
organizations matched their strategies. Over 80 percent of third-party staffing/recruiting agencies
actively targeted passive talent as part of their recruitment efforts. Only 11 percent of non-profit
and government organizations did the same. These results show that attitudes and engagement
strategies vary substantially across employment sectors.
[Insert Figure 2 about here]
Fishing for Passive Talent
Beyond applicant quality and occupation type, there are some practical reasons for sourcing
passive candidates. For instance, some interviewees described the practice as a way of closing
market information gaps. According to finance recruiter Lisa, “you have to proactively source
people because otherwise everyone could just post and then everyone would apply, but we
obviously know that's not the case. Every single person in the world does not apply to your job.
So you have to proactively go out and look for these individuals.” Similarly, recruiter Monica
stated that she had to source passive candidates because her company’s lack of name recognition
made it hard to attract active job seekers.
Further, the Internet (generally) and social media (specifically) have made the
identification of passive candidates much easier. Experienced HR professionals explained that
prior to the world wide web, recruitment of passive talent was largely facilitated by personal
networks: recruiters maintained files and Rolodexes filled with potential candidates they had
previously met, and phoned them as the need arose. The Internet transformed this work by

21

providing more extensive information about and greater access to the working population.
LinkedIn especially has served as a game changer. Nancy explained:
As a recruiter, I’m very dependent upon LinkedIn. That’s pretty much the white pages
[laughs] for professionals. I’m able to—just by simply searching a company—find people
that have worked within different industries, with target companies, with competitors and
it’s a way for me to be able to have easy access to a lot of people. Because something that
is very important in my line of work is knowing [the passive candidates]. A lot of times
the active job seekers that are applying to postings. They may not be the people you want
to meet with.
Nancy and others use LinkedIn to identify passive candidates because it provides a huge
database for the workforce, especially the professional class. LinkedIn allows recruiters to scan
their own network connections to find prospective job candidates. For a fee, LinkedIn can also
be used to identify individuals who have specific skill sets, participate in professional working
groups, or work for specific industries and companies, all of which can be critical information
when attempting to poach talent from competitors. Brian offers more detail on the use of
LinkedIn to identify passive candidates at his staffing agency.
LinkedIn is our biggest tool. We’ll go out and pull people from companies. Whoever
we’re doing the search for, whatever company, we’ll ask them, “Where do you see most
of the talent from in your area? Where are they coming from? What companies?” Then
we’ll target those companies … [and their] current employees and then keyword search
for the title. Then start calling these folks.
Brian and others obtain initial lists of candidates by searching the employees of their clients’ top
competitors. Some recruiters felt that this approach was effectively prohibited by company
policies or industry norms, and hence used industry-based rather than company-specific
searches. A few interviewees mentioned that they had taken short courses and received
certificates for conducting advanced talent searches on LinkedIn and other social media.

22

HR professionals pride themselves on being able to identify passive candidates who are
in the ready-to-transition stage. Kenneth provided an example of how he found his job in a
private recruiting/consulting firm:
I was passive—I was on LinkedIn just to network with peers in the industry. I wasn’t
looking until—until I was really looking. I remember that Wednesday night and
Thursday morning, I changed a few things on my profile to make it look active, added
some more detail so that it would show up in more searches. … At that point I was
working as a specialist in learning and development, so I added a little bit more of that in
my profile. My résumé itself didn’t change, but my profile changed. I added some of the
keywords that I knew that people would search for.
On Friday morning, Kenneth was contacted by a recruiter that led to his current job. His story
suggests that signals of the readiness to move can be quite subtle, such as adding skills,
professional group affiliations, or updating other information (e.g., job titles, work experience)
on LinkedIn profiles. Simply changing one’s profile can move individuals closer to the top of
recruiter’s search results and convey openness to new opportunities. Kenneth’s description also
reveals how the distinction between active and passive searching is no mere dichotomy.
Individuals may consider themselves not to be on the market but nonetheless engage in subtle
market behaviors, perhaps as a way of avoiding the stigma of actively looking for work.
Wooing Passive Candidates
One key challenge for recruiters of passive talent is “selling” candidates on the idea of making a
job change. Dan offered his insight on how recruiters tend to approach these individuals.
They’ll send you a little cursory note that says, “I found your information” or “Someone
gave me your name and I have this opportunity…” It’s usually very non-invasive. It’s
like, “If you know of anybody that might be interested…” They’re fishing to see if you
are [interested]. … Often times, [if you respond] it’s like, “Well, I’m glad that you’re
interested because I was really hoping you would be.” Then if you’re not, hopefully [the
recruiter will] get a referral out of it.

23

Dan’s comment suggests that initial communications are subtle and indirect. The recruiter is
hoping that the person they have contacted will be interested in the job, but asks if that person
might know someone (implicitly, someone else) who might be interested in the job. Kimberly, an
unemployed HR professional, offered a theory as to why this indirect strategy is preferred:
It’s a little distasteful to call somebody up out of the blue and [ask], “Do you want this
job?” Even though you have expressed no indication. It’s like being a telemarketer but
for jobs. “Did you know that you really want this garden hose? Did you know that you
really want this job over here that you had expressed no desire for?”
She views the direct and unsolicited selling of job opportunities to passive candidates as
distasteful or insulting because it implies that the candidate needs something unnecessary or that
their current job is suboptimal.
It is also necessary to gain the trust of the target worker to get them to join an applicant
pool. Introductory inquiries typically mention a mutual network connection in order to build that
trust. The messages tend to be brief and offer the opportunity for low-stakes follow-up
conversations. Rather than laying out all of the information at once, recruiters draw out the pitch
across multiple interactions to pique a target’s curiosity and give them time to warm up to the
idea of changing jobs. Finally, recruiters tend to personalize their message and develop the
relationship. As noted above, agency recruiter Brian chose to call targets rather than email them
in order to have a more personalized conversation. Having multiple conversations over time also
helps to develop rapport between the recruiter and the recruited.
Despite these efforts, attempts to woo passive candidates are prone to failure. In the
words of agency recruiter Caitlin:
Sometimes you’ll find what we call ‘tire kickers’ … You’ll reach out to … a
passive candidate and they’ll say, “Maybe I’d be interested. Let me hear more
about it.” You tell them more about it and they’ll [say]: “Yeah, sure, I’ll do an
interview.” They’ll go through the whole process and at the end of the day you
realize they were never going to want to change jobs. They either got a kick out of
24

[the idea that] “somebody was interested in me, that was fun” or “let me see
what’s out there but I really don’t want to change where I am.” Or maybe they
were just wanting to get a counter offer from their current employer to up their
salary.
Caitlin highlights the fact that identifying and wooing passive candidates is a “whole process,”
not a simple task, and that it can easily backfire. Candidates can string recruiters along by
showing interest and then backing out at the last minute. This leads to a certain amount of
frustration and ambivalence among even the most enthusiastic recruiters of passive candidates.
Hunting for Purple Squirrels
Another source of frustration among the most active recruiters is the fact that they are frequently
held responsible for sourcing and attracting “purple squirrels.” Kimberly offered her definition of
purple squirrels:
If you’re looking for something really specific like you need someone with X, Y and Z
skillset that’s been in the industry for 10 years. … You’ve got to dig for that needle in the
haystack.
Purple squirrels are potential job candidates who have a set of characteristics that is so extensive
and rare that they are nearly impossible to identify. Although Kimberly defines purple squirrels
as having a very unique set of skills and industry-specific experience, other characteristics may
also be involved. Margaret mentioned how the status of educational institutions can be a sticking
point for hiring managers: “They have to have gone to a good school or a big school or a top 100
business school or something like that.” Employers also frequently rely on abstract notions of the
ideal person to fill a position, often based on characteristics of the prior incumbent. Sandra, a
recruiter from a large energy company, offered an example:
If someone has been with the company for 20 years and then they retire, over that 20
years they may have worked in four different departments, had a totally different
background, and learned so many things along the way. The hiring manager may be
trying to replace that person with someone else just like them not understanding that that
person is a creation that we have developed over 20 years. You can’t go out in the street
25

and find another person like that because they had a wealth of knowledge accumulated
over time.
Here the characteristics of individuals employed within a given job have merged, over time, with
the requirements for that job. Sandra’s example emphasizes accumulated firm-specific
knowledge and experience, but it is not difficult to imagine that other incumbent qualities might
affect notions of the ideal replacement. For instance, Betty noted that sometimes, “the client calls
you and they want this ideal person. Somebody wants a soul mate.” Personality as well as
social/cultural background of previous incumbents may therefore influence the expectations of
new hires.
Purple squirrels represent a mounting difficulty for individuals in the recruiting field, as
the lists of job requirements that recruiters receive from hiring managers have become longer and
more specific over time. Patricia commented on reasons for this change.
The increased use of online tools has grown the pool of candidates to the point where
managers definitely feel like they can find the perfect fit. “Well, there’s got to be
somebody out there that has five years’ experience in programming, has done cloud
computing, has server administration”…They have a laundry list, grocery list of things
that they want. I think that having these online resources [makes people think], “Oh,
maybe you can find it.” … The purple squirrel has definitely become more something
managers think they can have because they see this huge database and they think,
“There’s got to be somebody in there. It’s magic, if I just push a button, they’ll pop out.”
Patricia’s reference to a “grocery list” depicts the Internet as a supermarket where employers can
engage in detailed scans for their ideal workforce. She suggests that the increased availability of
online information about workers has allowed hiring managers to shift from seeking an adequate
fit for a job opening to expecting an ideal match. In other words, high candidate volume gives
managers the opportunity to be choosy. Sandra explained: “The hiring managers, they don’t have
to settle because they’re given more options and so they’re able to select the best fit as opposed
to the person [who] is available.” Ruth, a part time recruiter nearing retirement age, offered a

26

similar explanation: “Companies…think that, ‘Oh, there are so many good people out there we
can find the perfect fit.’ Perfect.”
Rising expectations may also serve as a tool for managing the rising applicant tide. For
example, Patricia explained, “Now you’ve got all these online sources and you could send them
2,500 candidates that have microbiology in their résumé and that’s not solving anything.” She is
suggesting that when application volume grows, employers need more precise job requirements
to whittle candidate pools down to manageable numbers. While this pragmatic approach seems
to be a plausible response to the increased applicant flow, it does not explain why hiring
managers are loathe to loosen job requirements when applicant pools are relatively dry. Margaret
also claimed that the increasing volume of information online has contributed to a broader
aversion to risk and a pattern of inflexibility with regard to job requirements that extends across
the job market.
Many of the interviewees expressed concerns about the movement toward increased
specialization and the significant challenges that it creates for the workforce. Susan’s comment
provides a representative example of this sentiment. “People are going to need to get more and
more focused and specialized and, ‘What are you the expert in?’ Eventually, we’ll all be
freelancers. That’s a little scary, but lots of candidates think that way.” For Susan, the most
disturbing aspect was the increased job insecurity that this shift brought about. Several other
interviewees also thought that most jobs would be contract-only within the next few decades.
Susan argued that operating as a contract worker required a specific mindset or personality that
facilitated entrepreneurial self-promotion. As only a portion of the workforce possesses such
traits, she felt that many individuals (especially introverts) would fare poorly in future job
markets.

27

MIDDLE-GROUND PRACTICES
The mass posting and targeted recruitment activities described thus far represent two frequently
practiced polarities in market strategy. Our interviews also revealed evidence of middle-ground
practices that combine features of both strategies. One middle-ground practice can be described
as “niche” rather than “mass” posting. Recruiters advertise openings to audiences of active job
seekers, but rather than Monster or Indeed they use specialized “niche” job boards run by
professional, occupational, and/or identity-based affinity groups, industry associations, industry
and professional media companies, or post-secondary schools. Savita, a university staff
recruiting manager, described several websites she used in posting for information technology
(e.g., Dice.com) and executive-level jobs (e.g., Ladders.com). Recruiters value this strategy of
niche-posting because it attracts a more specialized and suitable candidate pool, and posting on
some niche sites is free of charge.
A second middle-ground practice entails recruiting passive candidates in groups rather
than individually. This batch-sourcing involves some online communication, but the most
important contact is often face-to-face. Randall, a hospital HR manager, described hosting events
to attract nurses:
We had an event [at a high-end local hotel], and it was an educational event, but it
was also a recruitment event. We had nice food, had childcare available … They
got educational credits for the classes that were offered, which were general
topics, and then while they were there had opportunity to meet with managers,
interact. Very successful—out of that particular event [and another in a different
location] … I think we got 125 nurses.
Few occupations merited the elaborate events hosted for nurses, but many specialized recruiters
sourced passive talent through active participation in outside groups. For example, IT recruiting
manager Jessica volunteered at monthly meetings of a group for Women in Technology, which
proved to be a useful recruiting opportunity, despite the esoteric content: “my eyes glaze over,
28

but I get to meet people and I'll bring job descriptions with me.” These batch-sourcing strategies
are useful for accessing large pools of qualified candidates, but due to the significant costs and
effort, these strategies are generally employed only in high-demand fields and where recruiters
have numerous or ongoing openings.
A final middle ground strategy involves sourcing active job seekers rather than passive
candidates. Lisa, a recruiting manager at a large financial services firm, described how she finds
candidates with résumés listed on a mass posting website:
I may search for a candidate on Indeed and say ‘Hey, I have a good opportunity, here is
the link to apply’ … Even though they're applying directly to the [applicant tracking
system], it's still someone I direct-sourced, and I'm most likely to reach out to them and
schedule some time to talk to them and screen them.
This strategy seems to be used by recruiters whose mass posting strategies failed. They abandon
posting job ads to the sites, but use them to identify and recruit active job seekers. The recruiters
that we talked to found this practice to be superior to the mass posting approach for finding
specialized talent. However, it requires significant time and effort. Vera, an HR generalist at an
IT firm, noted that this practice involves sifting through out of date résumés and lack of interest
among targets. Ultimately, she concluded that it was not useful for her: “you would call twenty
people to get one person to call you back, and then at end the day it was just too time consuming
and no results.”
Niche-posting, batch-sourcing, and sourcing active job seekers are three examples of
middle-ground strategies. 2 Though middle-range practices are diverse, they can be characterized
overall as requiring more upfront search effort than mass posting, but also a higher applicant
volume and hence more screening and sorting than in the individual passive talent market.

2

This is not an exhaustive list of middle ground practices. Others may include soliciting employee referrals,
contacting former employees or previous job applicants, and actively cultivating social networks and “talent
pipelines.”

29

Though all involve digital communication in some capacity, many seem to rely less exclusively
on Internet-based search tools and more on in-person communication than is the case with mass
posting and sourcing passive talent. There also appears to be a greater emphasis on participating
in and even creating groups of various sorts (occupational, alumni, identity-based, etc.), which
may require industrial or occupational expertise.
IMPLICATIONS
The ascendency of Internet search tools appears to have generated two distinct markets—one in
which job seekers pitch application after application into the black hole of online job boards and
the other where passive candidates are actively searched and sought. Although a muddled
patchwork of practices lies in between, overall these processes represent novel form of labor
market polarization. A number of conditions have contributed to this situation. First, the
availability of online information has reduced labor market information asymmetries. Workers
have greater knowledge about potential job openings and employers have greater knowledge of
potential job applicants. Second, web applications and algorithmic tools have made it easier to
advertise for jobs, apply for jobs, screen job applications, and recruit potential job candidates.
These conditions have transformed not only the processes by which workers are matched to jobs,
but also expectations for skill and fit. Access to more extensive knowledge about and
connectivity to the labor force has allowed employers to ratchet up their skill expectations,
helping to create a market for “purple squirrels” with highly specialized (and improbable) skill
sets. But perceived worthiness extends beyond mere task performance. Employers interpret
digital signals to determine the extent to which workers match subjective notions of “ideal
performativity” (P. McDonald & Thompson, 2016). Workers who meet consensus standards for
ideal skills and performativity are extensively recruited for new employment opportunities.

30

Those workers who lack ideal features face increased competition in the mass job posting
market.
These features resemble those associated with “winner-take-all” markets (Frank & Cook,
1996). Digital signifiers provide the basis for ranking the workforce and subtle differences in
those perceived rankings can result in disparate employment outcomes. Recently, Fourcade and
Healy (2017) argued that digital signals afford individuals with a form of capital (“ubercapital”)
that can be translated into economic rewards. 3 These economic rewards are likely to accumulate
for individuals with favored digital signals (see Merton, 1973; DiPrete & Eirich, 2006). While
the results presented here are consistent with these accounts, much remains unknown about the
broader implications of online labor market segmentation. For example, the extent to which these
changes have altered the overall supply of high quality employment remains uncertain. Does
increased talent poaching enhance employment opportunities for one group at the expense of
others or does it simply lead to an unending round of musical chairs – with much standing up,
moving, and sitting down, but no chairs being removed? We think that there is sufficient reason
for concern. In aggregate, the US has experienced declining labor force participation and job
growth rates, leading economists to suggest that we have entered a new era of “jobless”
recoveries (Burger & Schwartz, 2018) and “secular stagnation” (Summers, 2015). While
employers and policy makers have argued that sluggish hiring has much to do with a shortage of
workers with necessary skills, empirical research offers little evidence of a skills gap (Cappelli,
2015). Rather, overqualification for work has increased substantially over time (Vaisey, 2006).
Moreover, recent evidence suggests that employer preference for passive talent was unaffected
by the Great Recession in 2007; avoidance of unemployed workers went on unabated despite

3

In line with Weeden & Grusky (2014), one might also argue that ubercapital represents a new employment rent for
elite workers in contemporary labor markets.

31

increased labor supply (Coverdill & Finlay, 2017). All of this suggests that rising skill
expectations and preferences for passive talent could put downward pressure on aggregate hiring
patterns.
These concerns are further exacerbated by the potential expansion of the passive talent
market. While changing jobs without engaging in a job search has long been reported
(Granovetter, 1974), formalized “headhunting” was typically reserved for executive search prior
to the Internet (Finlay & Coverdill, 2002). The ease of access to LinkedIn and online search tools
appears to have expanded recruitment of passive candidates to a wider range of occupational
fields, although they continue to be hired more for high wage positions. Importantly, we found a
crucial difference in the ways that passive talent is perceived and recruited across employment
sectors. Third party staffing and recruiting agencies view passive candidates very favorably and
actively seek to recruit these individuals. These types of organizations frame passive talent as
potential candidates as a key selling point for their services – they market themselves based on
their ability to tap into hidden talent pools (Coverdill & Finlay, 2017). By contrast, non-profit
and government organizations mostly avoid the passive market. Consistent with prior research
on hiring based on interpersonal networks, these types of organizations are driven less by profit
motivations than by the need to generate external legitimacy regarding equity, universalism, and
transparency (Marsden, 2001; DiMaggio & Powell, 1991). Pursuing passive talent contradicts
those ideals because it benefits workers who are not in need of employment and involves
poaching talent from other organizations, which may violate personal ethics and industrial norms
(e.g., non-poaching agreements between institutions in the same educational system). This
variability highlights the way that institutional context shapes the social construction of job
matching practices.

32

The present study also advances research on signaling and stigmatization. Previous
research on this topic has addressed unemployment stigma (Eriksson & Rooth, 2014; Weisshaar
2018) and the “scarring” consequences of unemployment (Gangl, 2006). The interview data
presented here confirms that unemployment can serve as a powerful indicator of candidate
quality in the eyes of organizational gatekeepers, comparable to how elite candidates’ attendance
at less prestigious educational institutions may be seen as symbols of intellectual or moral
failures (Rivera, 2016). Employers also make inferences about candidates based on the extent to
which they are actively looking for work.4 The most sought after candidates are not merely those
who are employed, but those who are also not actively looking for new employment. Active job
seeking carries a negative stigma that raises questions about their job performance (such as
whether they will be troublemakers or team players). The stigma of active search is borne out by
research on the employment benefits associated with non-searching (McDonald, 2015) and has
the potential to reshape theories of labor market matching and stratification (McDonald, 2010).
Our research also points out that workers engage in activities (such as updating their LinkedIn
status) to signal their willingness to change jobs while also maintaining their passivity. Much
more can be learned about how that process unfolds and how it is perceived by employment
intermediaries.
Recent research has also examined how employers interpret and value signals of cultural
similarity and mastery, especially as part of résumés and in-person interviews in elite labor
market contexts (Rivera, 2016). Cultural signaling is an essential feature of the online market as
well. While scholars have begun to study job seekers’ strategies for developing online personas

The extent to which unemployment may be overcome by candidates’ exhibition of elite characteristics remains
unclear. However, Kevin’s experience suggests that the stigma of unemployment alone may transfer an otherwise
elite candidate into the pool of undesirables.
4

33

or “brands” (Sharone, 2017; Gershon, 2017), relatively little is known about how digital signals
are perceived and used as part of the applicant screening process. HR employs a variety of
technological strategies to review applicant information, including the use of filtering tools
accessed directly through mass posting boards, customized keyword searching through ATS
software systems, or specialized algorithmic hiring recommendations from third party vendors
(Horton, 2016). HR also frequently engages in “cybervetting,” which involves reviewing online
information from personal social media sources, Google searches, and credit reports to inform
hiring and recruitment decisions (Kiviat, Forthcoming; Berger & Zickar, 2016). Preliminary
research on this topic implies that these types of digital evaluation processes, which are
commonly sold as being bias-free, impose major hardships for marginalized groups in society
(O’Neil, 2016; Eubanks, 2017). Our research similarly suggests that the sourcing of purple
squirrels raises the bar for online job candidates so that only the most privileged can transcend it.
Future research is needed to better understand how this work is done, what signals are
rewarded/penalized, and what the broader consequences are for labor market stratification.
Future research should also consider the role that interpersonal and online networks play
in these two distinctive markets. Gershon (2017) recently argued that the Internet has
transformed the value of interpersonal networks in the labor market. Previously, weak ties gained
their strength from their non-redundancy, which afforded greater access to unique information
about employment opportunities (Granovetter, 1973). Enhanced exposure to employment
information brought on by mass posting websites reduced the premium associated with accessing
job leads. The problem shifted from finding a good job to being hired into one. In the black hole
market, insider contacts may be more useful than weak ties, especially to the extent that they can
help workers to bypass ATS screening technology. In the market for passive talent, access to

34

other types of network contacts may be especially beneficial (such as connections that span
structural holes: Burt, 1991). In short, different network logics are likely to pervade the different
online labor markets described here. Future research should examine those logics as well as the
labor market conditions under which different types of contacts and network resources are
particularly efficacious. The present study provides a useful starting point for these and other
future investigations.

35

REFERENCES
Arthur, M. B., & Rousseau, D. M. (1996). The boundaryless career: A new employment
principle for a new organizational era. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Autor, D. H. (2001). Wiring the Labor Market. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15(1), 25–40.
Autor, D. H., Katz, L. F., & Kearney, M. S. (2008). Trends in US Wage Inequality: Revising the
Revisionists. Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(2), 300–323.
Berger, J. L., & Zickar, M. J. (2016). Theoretical Propositions About Cybervetting: A Common
Antecedents Model. In R. N. Landers & G. B. Schmidt (Eds.), Social Media in Employee
Selection and Recruitment: Theory, Practice, and Current Challenges (pp. 43–58).
Switzerland: Springer.
Bonet, R., Cappelli, P., & Hamori, M. (2013). Labor Market Intermediaries and the New
Paradigm for Human Resources. Academy of Management Annals, 7(1), 341–392.
Bound, J., & Johnson, G. (1992). Changes in the Structure of Wages in the 1980s: An Evaluation
of Alternative Explanations. American Economic Review, 82(3), 371–392.
Burger, J. D., & Schwartz, J. S. (2018). Jobless Recoveries: Stagnation or Structural Change?
Economic Inquiry, 56(2), 709–723.
Burke, M., & Kraut, R. (2013). Using Facebook after losing a job: Differential benefits of strong
and weak ties. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer supported
cooperative work (pp. 1419–1430). ACM. Retrieved from
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2441936
Burt, R. S. (1992). Structural holes: the social structure of competition. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

36

Cappelli, P. (2001). Making the most of on-line recruiting. Harvard Business Review, 79(3),
139–+.
Cappelli, P. H. (2015). Skill Gaps, Skill Shortages, and Skill Mismatches Evidence and
Arguments for the United States. ILR Review, 68(2), 251-290.
Carr, C. T. (2016). An Uncertainty Reduction Approach to Applicant Information-Seeking in
Social Media: Effects on Attributions and Hiring. In R. N. Landers & G. B. Schmidt
(Eds.), Social Media in Employee Selection and Recruitment: Theory, Practice, and
Current Challenges (pp. 59–78). Switzerland: Springer.
Coverdill, J. E. & Finlay, W. (2017). High Tech and High Touch: Headhunting, Technology, and
Economic Transformation. Ithaca, NY: Cornell/ILR Press.
DiMaggio, P., & Bonikowski, B. (2008). Make Money Surfing the Web? The Impact of Internet
Use on the Earnings of U.S. Workers. American Sociological Review, 73(2), 227–250.
DiMaggio, P., Hargittai, E., Neuman, W. R., & Robinson, J. P. (2001). Social Implications of the
Internet. Annual Review of Sociology, 27(1), 307–336.
DiMaggio, P., & Powell, W. (1991). The iron cage revisited: Institutional isomorphism and
collective rationality in organizational fields. In W. Powell & P. DiMaggio (Eds.), The
New Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis (pp. 63-82). Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
DiPrete, T. A., & Eirich, G. M. (2006). Cumulative Advantage as a Mechanism for Inequality: A
Review of Theoretical and Empirical Developments. Annual Review of Sociology, 32(1),
271–297.
Doeringer, P. B., & Piore, M. J. (1971). Internal Labor Markets and Manpower Analysis.
Armonk: M.E. Sharpe, Inc.

37

Eriksson, S., & Rooth, D. (2014). Do Employers Use Unemployment as a Sorting Criterion
When Hiring? Evidence from a Field Experiment. American Economic Review, 104(3),
1014–1039.
Eubanks, V. (2017). Automating Inequality: How High-Tech Tools Profile, Police, and Punish
the Poor. NY: St. Martin’s Press.
Faliagka, E., Tsakalidis, A., & Tzimas, G. (2012). An integrated e-recruitment system for
automated personality mining and applicant ranking. Internet Research, 22(5), 551–568.
Feldman, D. C., & Klaas, B. S. (2002). Internet job hunting: A field study of applicant
experiences with on-line recruiting. Human Resource Management, 41(2), 175–192.
Finlay, W. & Coverdill, J. E. (2002). Headhunters: Matchmaking in the Labor Market. Ithaca:
Cornell University Press.
Fountain, C. M. (2005). Finding a Job in the Internet Age. Social Forces, 83(3), 1235–1262.
Fourcade, M., & Healy, K. (2017). Seeing like a market. Socio-Economic Review, 15(1), 9–29.
Frank, R. H., & Cook, P. J. (1996). The Winner-Take-All Society: Why the Few at the Top Get So
Much More Than the Rest of Us. New York: Penguin Books.
Frank, R. H., & Cook, P. J. (2013). Winner-Take-All Markets. Studies in Microeconomics, 1(2),
131–154.
Freeman, R. B. (2002). The labour market in the new information economy. Oxford Review of
Economic Policy, 18(3), 288–305.
Gangl, M. (2006). Scar effects of unemployment: An assessment of institutional
complementarities. American Sociological Review, 71(6), 986–1013.
Gershon, I. (2017). Down and out in the new economy: How people find (or don’t find) work
today. University of Chicago Press.

38

Granovetter, M. S. (1973). The Strength of Weak Ties. American Journal of Sociology, 78(6),
1360–1380.
Granovetter, M. S. (1974). Getting a job. A study of contacts and careers. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Green, A. E., Li, Y., Owen, D., & de Hoyos, M. (2012). Inequalities in use of the Internet for job
search: similarities and contrasts by economic status in Great Britain. Environment and
Planning A, 44(10), 2344–2358.
Hanley, C. (2014). Putting the Bias in Skill-Biased Technological Change? A Relational
Perspective on White-Collar Automation at General Electric. American Behavioral
Scientist, 58(3), 400–415.
Hargittai, E. (2011). The digital reproduction of inequality. In D. B. Grusky & S. Szelenyi (Eds.),
Social stratification (pp. 660–670). Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Hess-Biber, S. N., & Leavy, P. (2011). The Practice of Qualitative Research (2nd edition). Los
Angeles: Sage.
Horton, J. J. (2016). The Effects of Algorithmic Labor Market Recommendations: Evidence
from a Field Experiment. Journal of Labor Economics, 35(2), 354-385.
Hudson, K. (2007). The new labor market segmentation: Labor market dualism in the new
economy. Social Science Research, 36(1), 286–312.
Kiviat, B. (Forthcoming). The art of deciding with data: evidence from how employers translate
credit reports into hiring decisions. Socio-Economic Review.
https://doi.org/10.1093/ser/mwx030

39

Klotz, A. C., da Motta Veiga, S. P., Buckley, M. R., & Gavin, M. B. (2013). The role of
trustworthiness in recruitment and selection: A review and guide for future research.
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 34(S1), S104–S119.
Kuhn, P., & Skuterud, M. (2004). Internet Job Search and Unemployment Durations. American
Economic Review, 94(1), 218–232.
Marsden, P. (2001). Interpersonal ties, social capital, and employer staffing practices. In N. Lin,
K. Cook, & R.S. Burt (Eds.), Social Capital: Theory and Research (pp. 105-125). New
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
McDonald, P., & Thompson, P. (2016). Social Media(tion) and the Reshaping of Public/Private
Boundaries in Employment Relations. International Journal of Management Reviews,
18(1), 69–84.
McDonald, S. (2010). Right place, right time: serendipity and informal job matching. SocioEconomic Review, 8(2), 307–331.
McDonald, S. (2015). Network effects across the earnings distribution: Payoffs to visible and
invisible job finding assistance. Social Science Research, 49, 299–313.
McDonald, S., & Crew, R. E., Jr. (2006). Welfare to web to work: Internet job searching among
former welfare clients in Florida. J. Soc. & Soc. Welfare, 33, 239.
Merton R. K. (1973). The Matthew effect in science. In N. W. Storer (Ed.), The Sociology of
Science (pp. 439–59). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Powell, W. W. (1990). Neither Market nor Hierarchy: Network Forms of Organization. In B. M.
Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research on Organizational Behavior (Vol. 12, pp. 295–
336). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.

40

Nakamura, A. O., Shaw, K. L., Freeman, R. B., Nakamura, E., & Pyman, A. (2009). Jobs online.
In D. H. Autor (Ed.), Studies of labor market intermediation (pp. 27–65). Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Niles, S., & Hanson, S. (2003). The geographies of online job search: preliminary findings from
Worcester, MA. Environment and Planning A, 35(7), 1223 – 1243.
O’Neil, C. (2016). Weapons of math destruction: How big data increases inequality and
threatens democracy. New York: Crown Books.
Pew Research Center. (2017). Internet/Broadband Fact Sheet. Retrieved from
http://www.pewinternet.org/fact-sheet/internet-broadband/
Powell, W. W. (1990). Neither Market nor Hierarchy: Network Forms of Organization. In B. M.
Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research on Organizational Behavior (Vol. 12, pp. 295–
336). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Rivera, L. A. (2016). Pedigree: How Elite Students Get Elite Jobs. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Ruggs, E. N., Walker, S. S., Blanchard, A., & Gur, S. (2016). Online Exclusion: Biases That
May Arise When Using Social Media in Talent Acquisition. In R. N. Landers & G. B.
Schmidt (Eds.), Social Media in Employee Selection and Recruitment: Theory, Practice,
and Current Challenges (pp. 289–306). Switzerland: Springer.
Sharone, O. (2017). LinkedIn or LinkedOut? How Social Networking Sites are Reshaping the
Labor Market. Research in the Sociology of Work, 30, 1–31.
SHRM. (2016). Survey Findings: Using Social Media for Talent Acquisition: Recruitment and
Screening. Retrieved from https://www.shrm.org/ResourcesAndTools/hr-topics/talentacquisition/Pages/Using-Social-Media-Find-Passive-Candidates.aspx

41

Smith, A. (2015). Searching for work in the digital era. Pew Research Center. Retrieved from
www.pewinternet.org/2015/11/19/searching-for-work-in-the-digital-era/
Stoughton, J. W., Thompson, L. F., & Meade, A. W. (2013). Big Five Personality Traits
Reflected in Job Applicants’ Social Media Postings. Cyberpsychology Behavior and
Social Networking, 16(11), 800–805.
Summers, L. H. (2015). Demand Side Secular Stagnation. American Economic Review, 105(5),
60–65.
Suvankulov, F., Chi Keung Lau, M., & Ho Chi Chau, F. (2012). Job search on the internet and
its outcome. Internet Research, 22(3), 298–317.
Vaisey, S. (2006). Education and its discontents: Overqualification in America, 1972-2002.
Social Forces 85: 835–864.
Van Hoye, G., van Hooft, E. A. J., & Lievens, F. (2009). Networking as a job search behaviour:
A social network perspective. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology,
82(3), 661–682.
Viswanath, K., Kosicki, G. M., Fredin, E. S., & Park, E. (2000). Local Community Ties,
Community-Boundedness, and Local Public Affairs Knowledge Gaps. Communication
Research, 27(1), 27–50.
Walther, J. B. (1996). Computer-Mediated Communication: Impersonal, Interpersonal, and
Hyperpersonal Interaction. Communication Research, 23(1), 3–43.
Weeden, K. A., & Grusky, D. B. (2014). Inequality and Market Failure. American Behavioral
Scientist, 58(3), 473–491.
Weisshaar, K. (2018). From Opt Out to Blocked Out: The Challenges for Labor Market Re-entry
after Family-Related Employment Lapses. American Sociological Review, 83(1), 34–60.

42

43

Percent of positions recruited using selected method

Recruiting Methods by Position Salary/Wages
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%

40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
< $30K

$30-49.9K

$50-74.9K

Position salary wage level
Posting ads

Referrals

Sourcing passive candidates

Figure 1. Recruitment methods by salary/wages
Note: Atlanta data only. 46 positions from 26 interviews

44

$75K +

Did Organization Source Passive Candidates?
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%

0%
Nonprofit and
Government
No, or not deliberately

For Profit, Smallmedium size

For Profit, Large

Yes, actively for some jobs

Figure 2. Sourcing Passive Candidates by Organization Type

45

3rd Party Recruiting/
Staffing

Yes, actively for many jobs

Appendix
Table 1. Interviewee Characteristics
Pseudonym
Alicia
Amy
Angela
Barbara
Betty
Brandy
Brian
Caitlin
Carol
Celine
Charles
Dan
Danielle
Dawn
Deborah
Donna
Dorothy
Edward
Emily
Heather
Helen
Jeanette
Jessica
Joe
John
Jonathan
Kenneth
Kevin
Kimberly
Larry
Lauren
Linda
Lisa
Lyn
Margaret
Mark
Mary
Mitchell

City
Atlanta
Atlanta
Atlanta
Raleigh
Raleigh
Atlanta
Raleigh
Atlanta
Raleigh
Atlanta
Raleigh
Raleigh
Atlanta
Atlanta
Atlanta
Raleigh
Raleigh
Raleigh
Raleigh
Atlanta
Raleigh
Atlanta
Atlanta
Raleigh
Atlanta
Raleigh
Raleigh
Raleigh
Raleigh
Atlanta
Atlanta
Raleigh
Raleigh
Atlanta
Raleigh
Raleigh
Raleigh
Atlanta

Gender
F
F
F
F
F
F
M
F
F
F
M
M
F
F
F
F
F
M
F
F
F
F
F
M
M
M
M
M
F
M
F
F
F
F
F
M
F
M

Race
White
White
Black
Black
White
White
White
White
White
Black
White
White
Black
White
White
White
Black
Other
White
White
White
Black
White
White
White
Black
Black
White
White
White
White
White
White
Black
White
White
White
Black

Age
40s
30s
30s
40s
20s
20s
30s
30s
30s
30s
60s
40s
20s
50s
60s
40s
20s
30s
50s
30s
40s
40s
40s
30s
40s
50s
40s
50s
30s
40s
30s
40s
30s
30s
50s
40s
50s
60s

HR Role
Recruiting
Generalist
Generalist
Generalist
Generalist
Recruiting
Recruiting
Recruiting
Recruiting
Recruiting
Generalist
Recruiting
Generalist
Recruiting
Generalist
Consulting
Recruiting
Recruiting
Recruiting
Recruiting
Generalist
Generalist
Generalist
Recruiting
Recruiting
Generalist
Consulting
Generalist
Generalist
Generalist
Generalist
Generalist
Generalist
Generalist
Recruiting
Recruiting
Generalist
Generalist

46

Primary Organization
Type
Size*
Professional svcs. firm Medium
Utility nonprofit
Medium
Health services firm
Large
College/univ., private
Very large
Recruiting firm
Small
College/univ., private
Large
Recruiting firm
Small
Recruiting firm
Small
Health svcs nonprofit
Medium
Professional svcs. firm Large
Education nonprofit
Small
Recruiting firm
Very large
IT firm
Medium
Recruiting firm
Small
Engineering firm
Medium
Recruiting firm
Small
Manufacturing firm
Very large
Health services firm
Medium
Engineering firm
Medium
Restaurant chain
Very large
Telecomm. firm
Large
Church
Medium
IT firm
Small
College/univ., public
Very large
Utility company
Very large
College/univ., private
Very large
Recruiting firm
Very large
Utility company
Medium
IT firm
Small
Retail firm
Very large
Utility nonprofit
Medium
Profl svcs. nonprofit
Small
Manufacturing firm
Very large
State agency
Medium
Professional svcs. firm Small
Professional svcs. firm Very large
Real estate firm
Small
State agency
Large

Monica
Atlanta
F
Other 40s Recruiting
Professional svcs. firm Small
Nancy
Raleigh F
White 20s Recruiting
Recruiting firm
Large
Patricia
Raleigh F
White 40s Recruiting
Health services firm
Very large
Randall
Atlanta
M
White 60s Generalist
Health services firm
Very large
Rick
Raleigh M
White 40s Recruiting
College/univ., private
Very large
Robert
Raleigh M
White 50s Recruiting
College/univ., public
Very large
Ruby
Atlanta
F
Black 40s Generalist
Publishing firm
Medium
Ruth
Raleigh F
White 50s Generalist
Professional svcs. firm Small
Ryan
Atlanta
M
White 30s Recruiting
Recruiting firm
Small
Samantha
Atlanta
F
White 20s Recruiting
Recruiting firm
Very large
Sandra
Raleigh F
Black 30s Recruiting
Manufacturing firm
Very large
Sarah
Raleigh F
White 40s Recruiting
College/univ., private
Large
Savita
Atlanta
F
Other 30s Generalist
College/univ., public
Very large
Sharon
Raleigh F
White 30s Generalist
Profl svcs. nonprofit
Medium
Sonny
Raleigh M
White 40s Recruiting
Recruiting firm
Large
Sophia
Raleigh F
Other 40s Generalist
Health services firm
Medium
Stephanie
Atlanta
F
White 20s Generalist
Manufacturing firm
Medium
Susan
Raleigh F
White 50s Generalist
Professional svcs. firm Medium
Tanya
Atlanta
F
Other 30s Generalist
Engineering firm
Medium
Theresa
Atlanta
F
Black 40s Recruiting
Business svcs. firm
Very large
Tisha
Atlanta
F
Black 30s Generalist
Environ. svcs. nonprft. Small
Tracie
Atlanta
F
Black 30s Generalist
Retail firm
Very large
Vera
Atlanta
F
White 30s Generalist
IT firm
Small
*Organization size: Small = 1-50 employees, Medium = 51-200, Large = 201-1000, Very large = 1001+

47

