An Introduction to Seshat: Global History Databank
Please note: This is a preprint of a manuscript that has been accepted for publication in the Journal of
Cognitive Historiography. The final published version may contain small differences such as
formatting and copy editing. Please direct correspondence to peter.turchin@uconn.edu.
Recommended citation: Turchin, P., Whitehouse, H., François, P., Hoyer, D., Alves, A., Baines, J., … Xie,
L. (In press). An introduction to Seshat: Global History Databank. Journal of Cognitive Historiography.
doi: 10.1558/jch.39395
Turchin, Peter. University of Connecticut. peter.turchin@uconn.edu
Whitehouse, Harvey. University of Oxford. harvey.whitehouse@anthro.ox.ac.uk
François, Pieter. University of Oxford. pieter.francois@stb.ox.ac.uk
Hoyer, Daniel. Evolution Institute. dhoyer@evolution-institute.org
Alves, Abel. Ball State University. aalves@bsu.edu
Baines, John. University of Oxford. john.baines@orinst.ox.ac.uk
Baker, David. Macquarie University. david.baker@mq.edu.au
Bartkowiak, Marta. Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznań. martabartkowiak86@wp.pl
Bates, Jennifer. Brown University . jennifer_bates@brown.edu
Bennett, James. University of Washington. jsb11@uw.edu
Bidmead, Julye. Chapman University. bidmead@chapman.edu
Bol, Peter. Harvard University. pkbol@fas.harvard.edu
Ceccarelli, Alessandro. University of Cambridge. ac2045@cam.ac.uk
Christakis, Kostis. British School at Athens. knossoscurator@bsa.ac.uk
Christian, David. Macquarie University. director.bighistory@mq.edu.au
Covey, Alan. University of Texas. r.alan.covey@austin.utexas.edu
De Angelis, Franco. University of British Columbia. franco.de_angelis@ubc.ca
Earle, Timothy K. Northwestern University. tke299@northwestern.edu
Edwards, Neil R. Open University. neil.edwards@open.ac.uk
Feinman, Gary. Field Museum. gfeinman@fieldmuseum.org
Grohmann, Stephanie. University of Edinborough. steph.grohmann@ed.ac.uk
Holden, Philip B. Open University. philip.holden@open.ac.uk
Júlíusson, Árni. University of Iceland. arnidan@akademia.is
Korotayev, Andrey. National Research University Higher School of Economics. akorotayev@gmail.com
Kradin, Nicolay. Russian Academy of Sciences. kradin@mail.ru
Kristinsson, Axel. Independent Scholar. axel@akademia.is
Larson, Jennifer. Kent State University. jlarson@kent.edu
Litwin, Oren. George Mason University. olitwin@masonlive.gmu.edu
Mair, Victor. University of Pennsylvania. vmair@sas.upenn.edu
Manning, Joseph G. Yale University. joseph.manning@yale.edu
Manning, Patrick. University of Pittsburgh. pmanning@pitt.edu
Marciniak, Arkadiusz. Adam Mickiewcz University in Poznan. arekmar@amu.edu.pl
McMahon, Gregory. University of New Hampshire. Gregory.McMahon@unh.edu
Miksic, John. National University of Singapore. seajnm@nus.edu.sg
Moreno Garcia, Juan Carlos. French National Centre for Scientific Research. jcmorenogarcia@hotmail.com
Morris, Ian. Stanford University. imorris@stanford.edu
Mostern, Ruth. University of Pittsburgh. rmostern@pitt.edu
Mullins, Daniel. University College London. d.mullins@bbk.ac.uk

Oyebamiji, Oluwole. Lancaster University. o.oyebamiji@lancaster.ac.uk
Peregrine, Peter. Lawrence University. peter.n.peregrine@lawrence.edu
Petrie, Cameron. University of Cambridge. cap59@cam.ac.uk
Prieser-Kapeller, Johannes. Austrian Academy of Sciences. Johannes.Preiser-Kapeller@oeaw.ac.at
Rudiak-Gould, Peter. Independent Scholar. PeterRG@gmail.com
Sabloff, Paula. Santa Fe Institute. psabloff@santafe.edu
Savage, Patrick. Keio University. psavage@sfc.keio.ac.jp
Spencer, Charles. American Museum of Natural History. cspencer@amnh.org
Stark, Miriam. University of Hawaii at Manoa. miriams@hawaii.edu
ter Haar, Barend. University of Hamburg. barend.ter.haar@uni-hamburg.de
Thurner, Stefan. Complexity Science Hub Vienna. thurner@csh.ac.at
Wallace, Vesna. University of California, Santa Barbara. vwallace@religion.ucsb.edu
Witoszek, Nina. University of Oslo. nina.witoszek@sum.uio.no
Xie, Liye. University of Toronto. liye.xie@utoronto.ca

Seshat: Global History Databank, established in 2011, was initiated by an ever-growing team of social
scientists and humanities scholars to test theories about the evolution of complex societies (Francois et
al. 2016; Turchin et al. 2015). Seshat reflects both what is known about global history (within certain
practical constraints, discussed below) and also what is unknown, or poorly known. Seshat is a
continuously growing dataset incorporating evolving interpretations, highlighting persisting
controversies, and contextualizing enduring ambiguities. The quantitative data, suitable for statistical
analysis, is buttressed by qualitative nuance embedded in descriptive paragraphs along with references
to pertinent scholarship.
A key innovation of the Seshat project is that it not only enables researchers to identify static
patterns in the diversity and commonalities observed among past societies, but also to investigate
dynamic processes that may generate cultural change. Thus, Seshat aims to construct temporal
sequences recording how societies evolve and to explore the cross-cultural commonalities in how these
process have unfolded—surveying political, economic, religious, and other cultural characteristics along
with relationships to biophysical systems (Currie et al. 2015; Turchin 2018; Turchin et al. 2019). It is part
of a broader trend to use comparative historical data to address rigorously questions in the social
sciences (Smith et al. 2012).
The first article to utilize fully the Seshat data was published in 2018 (Turchin et al. 2018). The
most recent paper (Whitehouse et al. 2019) found that moralizing gods are not a prerequisite for the
evolution of social complexity. Instead, beliefs in both powerful moralizing “Big Gods” and supernatural
moralistic punishment more generally tend to appear after, rather than before, large increases in social
complexity (contra the “Big Gods” hypothesis; cf. Norenzayan 2013; Norenzayan et al. 2016). Timeresolved data in Seshat, thus, were key in testing this hypothesis.
The possibility to adjudicate between different theories holds the promise of reshaping both
social science and humanities research. Seshat Databank can also contribute to consilience between the
two. Seshat provides a web of complex records connected along temporal, spatial, and thematic
dimensions. Scholars have already started using this resource to compare characteristics among the
societies they study and to trace the development of various attributes over time (Shin et al. 2019).
Seshat can also be used to test theories about the co-evolution (or not) of social scale and complexity,
agriculture, warfare, religion, and any number of such Big Questions. Seshat is rapidly becoming a
massive resource for innovative cross-cultural and cross-disciplinary research.

Temporal and Geographic Scope

Currently, Seshat focuses on the period between the Neolithic and Industrial Revolutions. Our unit of
analysis is a polity, which we define pragmatically as an independent political unit ranging in scale from

villages (independent local communities) through simple and complex chiefdoms to states and empires.
For each polity we code variables on social complexity, warfare, religion and rituals, agriculture,
institutions, well-being, the production of public goods, and various technologies. The current codebook
includes over 1500 variables, of which c.500 are the focus of active coding. As of May 2019, the
Databank contains nearly 300,000 records linked to over 400 polities.
To address potential problems of selection bias and non-independence of data points, we use a
sampling scheme based on 30 “Natural Geographic Areas” (or NGAs) across the globe. NGAs are simply
spatial units that enable us to sample the diversity of past societies. First, ten major world macroregions were identified (Figure 1a). To maximize potential variation, for each world region we selected
one NGA in which social complexity—as defined in (Turchin et al. 2018)—emerged early, another where
it emerged late, and a third in between. In different world regions, the time points at which social
complexity emerged may be very different. For example, complex societies in Susiana, the early
complexity NGA in Southwest Asia, go much further back in time than in Hawaii, the early complexity
NGA for Oceania-Australia. NGAs are not the units for which we collect data, rather they help us select
polities that become part of the Seshat sample. This approach yields a stratified sample of polities driven
by geography and antiquity of social complexity, allowing analysts to construct spatially anchored timeseries, while recognizing that the spatial extent of sampled societies fluctuates with time (as polities rise,
expand, go into decline, and disappear).

Figure 1. (a) Locations of NGAs sampling global variation in cultural evolution. (b) Frequency distribution
of the starting dates for data sequences in Seshat Databank. Adapted from (Turchin 2018).

Data Collection

To populate the Databank, we consult current scholarship on each region along with expert
collaborators to develop a list of all polities that sequentially occupied each NGA. In cases where NGAs
encompass numerous coexisting small-scale societies, we treat these as quasi-polities, which roughly
correspond to ethnological “cultures” (Murdock 1967; Murdock and White 1969) or archaeological subtraditions (Peregrine 2003). We gather information on each variable in our codebook for each polity or
quasi-polity, offering as much specificity as the evidence allows; often, a variable value is associated
with the entire temporal extent of the polity, but if more granular information is known, we capture
changes within the polity’s duration as well.
Prior to inputting data on a topic, we develop a conceptual scheme through Seshat workshops.
The goal is to create a quantitative variable (e.g., polity population) or multiple proxy variables capturing
various aspects of a more complex characteristic (e.g. well-being). Seshat research assistants (RAs) then
code several test cases in consultation with experts, continually refining the variables. RAs are trained
and supervised by teams of advanced (postdoctoral or professorial) social scientists and historians.

Supervisors facilitate communication between RAs and our expert collaborators, oversee coding
decisions, and ensure consistent application of our coding schemes. We focus on hiring RAs with
advanced qualifications and aim to retain productive researchers for lengthy periods, often several
years.
Once a coding scheme is operationalized to test theories, data collection begins. First, RAs
search the most up-to-date and relevant scholarship (with expert guidance and direct supervision by
Seshat’s more senior researchers), sourcing both primary and secondary material, and enter preliminary
data. Second, RAs compile lists of questions on values that cannot be coded unambiguously, or on which
information in the published sources is lacking, and seek help from the experts on the polity. Finally, we
ask experts to review the data to check coding decisions made by RAs and help us fill gaps. The coding
process is never “complete,” as Seshat data are constantly checked by various stakeholders, and new
relevant data may appear, or novel insights may alter the understanding of known documents and
material.
When experts disagree or ongoing debate continues in the literature, multiple alternatives are
coded. Likewise, when quantities are ambiguous, coders record the likely ranges [min, max] found in
specialist literature. Where evidence is lacking entirely, RAs record the value as “suspected unknown”,
which becomes a question to bring to our collaborators; only domain experts can verify a value as
“unknown”, referencing their unique understanding of the limits of empirical evidence for a given area
or topic.
We refer to a coded value of a variable for a particular polity as a “Seshat record” with a
complex internal structure. Seshat records also include a narrative description explaining the
background to the code and contextualizing levels of uncertainty and disagreement, along with citation
to reference sources. The description may specify a quantity or range, or indicate whether a feature is
present, absent, inferred present, inferred absent, suspected unknown, or unknown. “Inferred”
presence or absence indicates some degree of uncertainty. For example, if iron smelting has been
attested both for the period preceding the one that is coded and for the subsequent period, this could
suggest a code of “inferred present” although there is no direct evidence for it (assuming general sociotechnological persistence during this period and that there is no indication that this technology was lost
and then regained). Variables can also have temporal uncertainty. For example, if we know that iron
smelting appeared in a particular polity at some point between 300 and 600 CE, we code the period
between 300 and 600 CE as effectively “either absent or present” (which is different from “unknown”).

The Evolution of Seshat

Seshat’s methods have evolved since its inception in 2011. Initially, all data were collected by expert
collaborators, but we soon realized that asking busy colleagues to fill in hundreds of boxes was misuse
of their expertise. Having established an effective coding scheme, we discovered that much information
can be accurately entered by well-trained and supervised RAs from published scholarship, allowing us to
deploy expertise more strategically to resolve difficult coding issues, locate elusive information and
point out relevant literature, and confirm genuine gaps in the record.
Seshat is a massive, complex project, which evolves constantly. In a project as vast and multifaceted as Seshat, there will inevitably be some practical constraints on obtaining accurate or
representative values or codes for specific variables because, for example, a particular bit of information
has been published in an obscure source, or information of which we are not yet aware changes the
coded value. We cannot wait until this “cleaning” process is over—because it never is. Our approach,
thus, is to address such problems as we discover them, gradually improving the Databank, while
understanding that some disagreement will always exist and that lag between our recorded data and
available evidence will endure. We aim to bring as many voices as possible to bear on the information

we collect in order to utilize the most relevant scholarship in our published work. Once an article using
Seshat Data is published, we present that material on our website as open-source data to be reused by
other researchers. Knowing that the process of improving our data is never ending, we encourage users
to offer feedback, pointing out alternate readings of evidence or directing us to previously unknown
information.
The suggestions and critiques of scholars are essential in this regard. We all benefit by bringing
out these issues into the open; the systematic nature of Seshat helps concentrate these discussions and
identify where there are gaps in knowledge, uncertainties, and disagreements. Seshat is designed to be
iterative—evolutionary—in nature. We are constantly rechecking coded data to make sure that the
information we have is the most up-to-date and that it reflects relevant ambiguities and nuance. We are
continually expanding both the geographic scope of data and adding new variables to cover different
aspects of past societies. This is entirely a collaborative process, as Seshat functions only with the open,
constructive engagement of researchers from a host of disciplines.
References
Currie, T. E., Amy Bogaard, Rudolf Cesaretti, Neil R. Edwards, Pieter Francois, Philip Holden, Daniel
Hoyer, Andrey Korotayev, J. G. Manning, Juan Carlos Moreno Garcia, Oluwole K. Oyebamiji, Cameron
Petrie, Peter Turchin, Harvey Whitehouse, and Alice Williams. 2015. “Agricultural Productivity in Past
Societies: Toward an Empirically Informed Model for Testing Cultural Evolutionary Hypotheses.”
Cliodynamics: The Journal of Quantitative History and Cultural Evolution 6(1):24–56. doi:
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4h29270b
Francois, Pieter, J. G. Manning, Harvey Whitehouse, Rob Brennan, T. E. Currie, Kevin Feeney, and Peter
Turchin. 2016. “A Macroscope for Global History. Seshat Global History Databank: A Methodological
Overview.” Digital Humanities Quarterly 10(4). doi:
http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/10/4/000272/000272.html
Murdock, George P. 1967. “Ethnographic Atlas: A Summary.” Ethnology 6(2):109–236.
Murdock, George P. and Douglas R. White. 1969. “Standard Cross-Cultural Sample.” Ethnology 8(4):329–
69.
Norenzayan, Ara. 2013. Big Gods: How Religion Transformed Cooperation and Conflict. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Norenzayan, Ara, Azim F. Shariff, Will M. Gervais, Aiyana K. Willard, Rita A. McNamara, Edward
Slingerland, and Joseph Henrich. 2016. “The Cultural Evolution of Prosocial Religions.” Behavioral and
Brain Sciences 39. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X14001356
Peregrine, Peter. 2003. “Atlas of Cultural Evolution.” World Cultures 14(1).
Shin, Jaeweon, Michael Holton Price, David Wolpert, Hajime Shimao, Brendan Tracey, and Timothy A.
Kohler. 2019. "Human Societies First Grow, Then Improve Their Information Processing, Then Grow
Some More." Preprint: SocArXiv. https://osf.io/ejfbm
Smith, Michael E., Gary M. Feinman, Robert D. Drennan, Timothy Earle, and Ian Morris. 2012.
“Archaeology as a Social Science.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109(20):7617–
21. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1201714109
Turchin, Peter. 2018. “Fitting Dynamic Regression Models to Seshat Data.” Cliodynamics 9(1):25–58. doi:
10.21237/C7clio9137696
Turchin, Peter, Rob Brennan, T. E. Currie, Kevin Feeney, Pieter Francois, Daniel Hoyer, Joseph Manning,
Arkadiusz Marciniak, Daniel Mullins, Alessio Palmisano, Peter Peregrine, Edward A. L. Turner, and
Harvey Whitehouse. 2015. “Seshat: The Global History Databank.” Cliodynamics: The Journal of
Quantitative History and Cultural Evolution 6(1):77-107. doi: https://doi.org/10.21237/C7clio6127917

Turchin, Peter, Thomas E. Currie, Christina Collins, Jill Levine, Oluwole Oyebamiji, Neil R. Edwards, Philip.
B. Holden, Daniel Hoyer, Kevin Feeney, Pieter Francois, and Harvey Whitehouse. 2019. "Crop
Productivity Estimates for Past Societies in the World Sample-30 of Seshat: Global History Databank."
Preprint: SocArXiv. https://osf.io/jerza
Turchin, Peter, Thomas E. Currie, Harvey Whitehouse, Pieter François, Kevin Feeney, Daniel Mullins,
Daniel Hoyer, Christina Collins, Stephanie Grohmann, Patrick Savage, Gavin Mendel-Gleason, Edward
Turner, Agathe Dupeyron, Enrico Cioni, Jenny Reddish, Jill Levine, Greine Jordan, Eva Brandl, Alice
Williams, Rudolf Cesaretti, Marta Krueger, Alessandro Ceccarelli, Joe Figliulo-Rosswurm, Po-Ju Tuan,
Peter Peregrine, Arkadiusz Marciniak, Johannes Preiser-Kapeller, Nikolay Kradin, Andrey Korotayev,
Alessio Palmisano, David Baker, Julye Bidmead, Peter Bol, David Christian, Connie Cook, Alan Covey,
Gary Feinman, Árni Daníel Júlíusson, Axel Kristinsson, John Miksic, Ruth Mostern, Cameron Petrie,
Peter Rudiak-Gould, Barend ter Haar, Vesna Wallace, Victor Mair, Liye Xie, John Baines, Elizabeth
Bridges, Joseph Manning, Bruce Lockhart, Amy Bogaard, and Charles Spencer. 2018. “Quantitative
Historical Analysis Uncovers a Single Dimension of Complexity That Structures Global Variation in
Human Social Organization.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115(2):E144–51. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1708800115
Whitehouse, Harvey, Pieter François, Patrick E. Savage, Thomas E. Currie, Kevin C. Feeney, Enrico Cioni,
Rosalind Purcell, Robert M. Ross, Jennifer Larson, John Baines, Barend ter Haar, Alan Covey, and
Peter Turchin. 2019. “Complex Societies Precede Moralizing Gods throughout World History.” Nature
568(7751):226-229. doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1043-4

