IPL Working Paper Series

The Role of Institutions in the
Labor Market Impact of Immigration
Mette Foged, Linea Hasager, and Vasil Yasenov

Working Paper No. 19-07
June 2019

IPL working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been formally peer reviewed.
© 2019 by Mette Foged, Linea Hasager, and Vasil Yasenov. All rights reserved.

The Role of Institutions in the Labor Market Impact of
Immigration⇤

Mette Foged, Linea Hasager and Vasil I. Yasenov†
June 5, 2019

Abstract
We study the role of labor market institutions and policies in affecting the wage impact of immigration using a cross-country meta-analysis approach. We gather information on 1,548 previously
reported semi-elasticities from 66 academic studies covering 20 developed countries. We supplement this dataset with country-level institutional structure and coverage data from the OECD. These
include employment and wage rigidities, labor mobility, active labor market programs spending, and
product market regulation. We relate estimated wage effects and institutional coverage while controlling for local economic conditions, immigrant skill composition, time and region fixed effects
and study characteristics. Higher labor market rigidity, as brought about by more widespread institutions, regulations and policies, mitigates the effects on relative wages of high- versus low-skilled
natives but exacerbates the impacts on average earnings. Overall, our results suggest that labor market institutions and policies may be effective tools in the economic absorption of foreign workers.
JEL Classification: D02, J08, J15, J31, J61
Keywords: immigration, wages, labor market institutions, meta-analysis

⇤
We thank Frida Dyred and Emma Hedvig Pind Hansen for excellent research assistance. Bernt Bratsberg, Oddbjorn
Raaum, Jens Hainmueller, David Laitin, Adam Sheridan, Jan Stuhler, Birthe Larsen, participants at the Third Dondena Workshop on Public Policy and seminar participants at Kraks Fond, Institute for Urban Economic Research and the Immigration
Policy Lab at Stanford University provided helpful comments and discussions. The Danish Ministry of Employment provided
generous financial support (grant number: 6149-00024B). All errors are our own.
†
Mette Foged (corresponding author): Mette.Foged@econ.ku.dk, University of Copenhagen, and IZA. Address: Øster
Farimagsgade 5 Building 26, 1353 Copenhagen K, Denmark; Linea Hasager: tlh@econ.ku.dk, University of Copenhagen;
Vasil I. Yasenov: yasenov@stanford.edu, Immigration Policy Lab, Stanford University, and IZA.

1

1

Introduction

Institutional structures and policies such as collective bargaining, unemployment insurance and active
labor market policies play a key role in most interactions in the labor market (Nickell and Layard, 1999;
Boeri and Van Ours, 2013). As such, their origins and consequences have been intense objects of analysis
by economists for more than a century (e.g., Moore, 1911). More recently, labor economists have
focused on studying the interplay between these structures and other economic phenomena. Examples
include the interaction of institutions and policies with the effect of minimum wage (Neumark and
Wascher, 2004), the returns to education (Webber, 2014), income inequality (Farber et al., 2018) and
wage determination (Nunziata, 2005) where researchers have documented significant synergies.
A specific aspect of the labor market where institutions may be particularly crucial, and yet are understudied, is the competition between native and foreign workers. Institutions are often meant to protect incumbent native born from workplace competition with foreign labor. Specifically, policy-induced
labor market imperfections and rigidities may serve as a preventive factor for wage and employment
adjustments. In fact, demand for such protection policies may endogenously arise from public pressure towards politicians due to increased migration levels (Rodrik, 1997). Following a supply shock,
well-designed policies would provide a smooth transition back into market equilibrium, mitigating any
potentially negative impacts caused by foreign workers.
While a large body of literature analyzes the wage and employment consequences of immigration,
we know little about their interaction with labor market policies and institutions. The classic theoretical
underpinnings of the literature rest on assuming perfectly competitive markets, entirely ignoring any
such synergies (e.g., Borjas, 2013). This interplay is of particular relevance because policies and institutions may aid in absorbing foreign workers whilst minimally disrupting the labor market. The substantial
returns to improved policies are highlighted by few recent polls suggesting immigration is the top issue
among election voters in Europe and the U.S. (European Commission, 2018; Reuters, 2018).
Two major challenges stand in the way of measuring the role of institutions on the wage impact of
foreign-born workers. First, institutions are generally set on a national level and do not vary within countries, so a thorough analysis requires a cross-country perspective. Labor markets across the developed
world vary greatly in terms of mobility, rigidity, and institutional scope and intensity providing a useful
laboratory to study how labor market institutions and policies affect the consequences and absorption of
immigrants. Second, gathering comparable micro data across a wide set of countries and time periods
is a virtually unattainable task. We circumvent both issues by directly relating estimated cross-country

2

immigration wage effects and institution scope, enabling us to carefully isolate their relationship. Along
the way we show economic theory is compatible with a wide range of scenarios, motivating the empirical
assessment of these interactions.
We study how labor market institutions and policies affect the impact of immigration on natives’
wages utilizing a cross-country meta-analytic approach. To accomplish this, we gather a novel database
covering 1,548 estimates on the wage impacts of foreign workers from 66 published academic articles
spanning 20 countries in the developed world and several decades. We supplement this database with
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) data on country-specific labor market institutions including employment and wage rigidities, active labor market policies, labor immobility
and market entry regulations. We distinguish between average and relative wage effects because (i) they
have distinct implications for the wage structure, inequality and workers’ welfare more broadly (see
Dustmann, Schönberg, and Stuhler, 2016) and (ii) there is a substantial difference in the two distributions of reported effects as we show in this paper. We then use a linear regression framework to relate the
estimated wage effects and institutional coverage while controlling for an array of related characteristics. This type of meta-analysis is a research synthesis that attempts to extract useful conclusions from a
body of diverse academic literature (see e.g., Card and Krueger, 1995; Longhi, Nijkamp, and Poot, 2005;
Card, Kluve, and Weber, 2018). Importantly, we include region and decade fixed effects accounting for
time-invariant differences across areas and aggregate shocks, country-specific economic conditions (as
proxied by GDP growth and unemployment rate) and relative immigrant skill composition. Lastly, to
eliminate potential concerns about our selection of estimates and studies we control for study characteristics and use various weighting schemes as robustness checks. Additionally, we can rule out that
country-specific time-varying factors such as endogenous responses of institutions to immigration flows
are driving our results.
Our main finding is that higher labor market rigidity, as brought about by more widespread institution
coverage, has a positive impact on the relative wage effects of immigration on low- versus high-skilled1
domestic workers and a weaker negative effect on the consequences on average earnings. Labor market
policies are effective in dampening the extent to which foreign workers distort earnings differentials
between high- and low-skilled natives while exacerbating any effect on average earnings. Intuitively,
any policy meant to protect incumbent workers will also diminish potential benefits induced by the
1

We use the terms ”low-” and ”high-skilled workers” broadly. These could refer to employed individuals across various
education/experience groups, occupations or even industries and the exact definitions vary across studies. For instance, the
traditional skill-cell approach utilizes a constant elasticity of substitution heterogeneous labor framework and nests experience
types within education groups (e.g., Borjas, 2003). The relative wage effect in this model identify earnings distortions across
experience groups within education types. See Dustmann, Schönberg, and Stuhler (2016) for more details.

3

newcomers. These may include complementarities in the production process (Ottaviano and Peri, 2012),
productivity spillovers (Hunt, 2017) and skill or occupational upgrading (Foged and Peri, 2015), etc.
The findings suggest that the significant variation in institutional coverage across countries may, at least
partially, drive the substantial diversity of reported elasticities in the literature.
We advance the literature on the labor market effects of immigration by building on existing studies
and providing novel insights on the role of institutions in mediating the competition between native
and foreign workers. In doing so, this paper presents the first comprehensive analysis of the synergies
between a wide range of labor market policies and the wage consequences of immigrants, filling in
an important gap in an otherwise large and mature body of literature. Consistent with the previous
evidence, we find that labor market rigidity exacerbates the effect of immigrants on the average wage
earner. Extending this analysis, we are the first to show that institutions and policies are helpful in
mitigating immigration-induced wage distortions among various native skill types. Although several
important recent studies have strayed away from the classic perfect competition framework and begun
analyzing the role of individual institutions, a thorough analysis has so far been elusive. Because the
influence of institutions on relative wage effects are more relevant empirically and because institutions
have a stronger effect on relative wages, our novel finding suggests that labor market institutions may be
an effective tool in smoothing the economic absorption of foreign workers.
Crucial for our analysis is the reliance on previous studies in the literature. In a series of influential
meta-analyses on the labor market effects of immigration, Longhi, Nijkamp, and Poot (2010a; 2008b;
2008a; 2005) show that the estimated elasticities in the U.S. tend to be smaller in absolute value than
in Europe. The authors speculate this disparity may stem from differences in labor mobility and/or labor market institutions but do not analyze this hypothesis in detail. Perhaps most similar to our study
is the paper by Angrist and Kugler (2003) who use the Bosnian wars as quasi-experiments to analyze
the interaction of institutions and employment losses induced by labor supply shocks. Reduced market
flexibility (as measured by higher firing costs, replacement rates and barriers to entry) is associated with
increased employment losses brought by foreign workers while wage consequences are not analyzed.
Next, Brücker et al. (2014) use a highly structural wage-setting approach to study the immigration earnings effects in three European countries - Denmark, Germany and the U.K. They find a significant role
for wage flexibility in determining its magnitude, but do not identify the effect of particular institutions
or policies. Lastly, Edo and Rapoport (2017) document an interesting interaction whereby a lower minimum wage exacerbates the immigration-induced earnings and employment consequences in the U.S.
A common theme among these studies is the significant role of institutional structure in altering the
4

competition forces between incumbent workers and newcomers. Our paper builds on and extends this
body of work, distinguishing between average and relative wage effects of immigration, analyzing a wide
variety of labor market institution types simultaneously and employing a strictly data-driven approach.
Consistent with these earlier studies, we show that reduced labor market flexibility is associated with
higher average wage losses due to immigration. In addition and novel to the literature, we go one step
further to document that labor market rigidities mitigate relative wage distortions between low- and
high-skilled natives. For recent reviews of the broader literature of the labor market consequences of
immigration on domestic economies see NAS (2017), Dustmann, Schönberg, and Stuhler (2016), and
Lewis and Peri (2015).
We continue in Section 2 where we describe and summarize the data we use. Next, in Section 3 we
briefly discuss how the institutional variables we analyze fit in the theoretical framework in the literature
on the labor market effects of immigration. Section 4 lays out our empirical strategy and the equation
we estimate. Lastly, we present our results in Section 5 and conclude in Section 6.

2

Data

We combine two data sources – a database on the impacts of foreign workers and information on institutional coverage from the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). We now
describe and summarize each one in turn.

2.1
2.1.1

Wage Impacts of Immigration
Data Sources and Sample

Building a database on the labor market effects of immigration requires selecting study inclusion criteria
based on a few key priorities. With the goal of studying institutions, we focused on sampling studies
analyzing a wide variety of labor market settings across the developed world. This included both geographic and temporal variation. Moreover, to ensure study (and therefore data) quality, we relied on
high quality peer-reviewed publications. Lastly, we concentrated exclusively on estimates of the wage
effects of immigration as this has been the main focus in the literature.2 Appendix Section A.1 describes
2
Analyzing employment effects estimates is more problematic for a few reasons. First, there is large discrepancy in the
outcome variable across studies - some use employment and some unemployment; some use (un)employment to population
ratios and some do (un)employment rates. A comprehensive analysis will therefore require an implicit assumption on the effect
of immigration on labor force participation, which we are not comfortable making. Second, there are far fewer migrationinduced employment impact estimates in the literature, introducing severe statistical power difficulties. To this end we point
interested readers to Angrist and Kugler (2003) who analyze the interplay between labor market institutions and migrationinduced employment losses in the European Economic Area but did not study wage effects.

5

in greater detail the paper sampling process along with the inclusion criteria and Table A.1 lists the
included studies.
Our database consists of 1,548 estimated wage effects of immigration from 66 studies published
between 1982 and 2018 spanning 15 European countries, the United States, Canada, Turkey, Israel and
Australia. Additionally, when available, we recorded data on the corresponding standard error and tstatistic associated with the null hypothesis of the true effect equals zero, regression specification, sample
(e.g., gender, education level), empirical approach (area, skill cell or mixture)3 , publication outlet and
estimation method (OLS, IV or simulation). To gauge study quality, we included journal impact factors
measured by IDEAS/RePEc (2018), a widely used index.
An important feature of our subsequent analysis is the distinction between effects on the relative
versus average wages. We make this choice due to (i) the considerable difference between the two and
(ii) the significant disparity in reported semi-elasticities along this dimension (more on this below; see
Table 1 and Figure A.1). The latter presents immigration-induced total changes in the average labor
market wage. The former one instead identifies relative wage effects, typically across experience or
education groups while controlling for the overall impact. Hence, they capture a partial effect on wage
differentials and are generally linked to changes in the earnings structure and wage inequality. These
relative effects do not necessarily result in changes in total average earnings as a negative wage effect
on one group may be offset by a positive one for other groups.
We follow Dustmann, Schönberg, and Stuhler (2016) in classifying effect sizes into estimating average (the spatial approach) or relative wage changes (the national skill-cell and the mixture approaches).
Our broad definition of the skill-cell approach includes studies utilizing variation in immigration exposure across occupations (e.g, Friedberg, 2001), industries (e.g, Bratsberg and Raaum, 2012), or the
classical education-experience cells (e.g, Borjas, 2003).4 We categorize combinations of those with geographic areas as the mixture approach (e.g, Card, 2001). Lastly, studies using only geographic variation
in immigration intensity are flagged as estimating effects on average wages (Altonji and Card, 1991).
See Dustmann, Schönberg, and Stuhler (2016) for more details on each empirical approach and the
parameters they identify.
Differences in regression specifications across studies require a few adjustments to ensure the re-

3

This is a common studies categorization in the literature. See Dustmann, Schönberg, and Stuhler (2016) or any review
paper for a detailed description of each one.
4
Our broad definition of skill cells doubles the number of relative effect sizes available (from 589 to 1,092) compared to
a narrow skill cell definition excluding industry variation (as well as two papers using firm level variation Malchow-Møller,
Munch, and Skaksen, 2012; Malchow-Møller et al., 2013). Qualitatively, our results survive in the smaller sample; the coefficients have the same sign and are roughly of the same magnitude but some lose significance.

6

ported estimates are measured in comparable units. First, some researchers publish elasticities while
others estimate semi-elasticities. The distinction is subtle but important. The former measure the percentage change in natives’ wages induced by a percent increase in immigration while the latter do the
same for a percentage point increase in foreign-born workers. Following Longhi, Nijkamp, and Poot
(2005), we convert all elasticities to semi-elasticities since this is the more commonly used metric in the
literature. Second, the wage effects are sometimes reported for the actual growth in immigration. This is
often done in structural models where the simulation is carried out for the actual change in the immigrant
share in the analysis period. In that case, we simply rescale the parameter to reflect a one percentage
point increase in the proportion of foreign-born. Hence, our estimates are interpreted as the percentage
change in wages for one percentage point increase in immigrants as a share of the labor force. The
Online Data Appendix contains a complete description of the operations and technical details involved
in creating comparable estimates across studies.
While we attempt to do our best effort in assuring comparability across studies, an inherent limitation
of the meta-analysis approach is the inevitable differences across samples and regression specifications
for which we cannot account. For instance, included control variables or fixed effects across studies
are rarely exactly identical. The sample definitions vary as well – e.g., 16-65 versus 21-54 years old,
working age population versus labor force, etc. We have no reason to believe these remaining differences
may systematically bias our results in a certain direction. Furthermore, it is reassuring that our results
are robust to using various weighting schemes, subsamples and control variables. Hence, they seem to
reflect fundamental patterns in the data rather than being an artifact of a few study characteristics or
estimates.
A key concern for every meta-analysis study is the extent to which the sample of estimates is representative of the entire population. It is well-known that, all else equal, studies with statistically significant estimates are more likely to be published in academic outlets. Unfortunately, this fact introduces
an inherent bias towards more significant estimates even in a random sample of published studies. However, under the assumption that authors choose the significant results as their preferred specification,
all other reported semi-elasticities in their papers should be less prone to publication bias. We mitigate
publication bias concerns to some degree by including all reported elasticities.
To directly test whether such bias may be present in our sample, we follow the standard practice in
the literature (e.g., Card and Krueger, 1995; Longhi, Nijkamp, and Poot, 2005; Stanley and Doucouliagos, 2014) and run a regression of effect sizes on the standard error and other characteristics. If
publication bias is not an issue, the coefficient on the standard error variable should be statistically in7

distinguishable from zero. The results are presented in Appendix Table A.2, using a different weighting
scheme in each column. The weights are chosen to mirror our specifications in the main analysis and are
described in Section 4.2. In Panel A (B) we present the regression results on our subsample of relative
(average) wage effects. We find no conclusive evidence on publication bias in the sample of average effect sizes (Panel B). Some specifications show a positive and some show a negative association between
estimated standard errors and effect sizes but this seem to driven by a few studies with many noisy estimates. The association disappears if we either weight studies equally, or assign higher weight to more
precise estimates, better published studies or a combination (our preferred specification). We find some
evidence that very noisy relative effects are more likely to be published if the estimate is negative (Panel
A). However, this potential issue disappears once we weight by precision, accounting for noise in the
study.
Overall, we find no evidence of publication bias in our preferred specification while the results for
other specifications are mixed. Large outliers can skew the regression coefficients but our weighting
scheme accounting for noise mitigates their influence. Further indication that such bias is not large in
our sample comes from the apparent symmetry around zero of the histograms in Figures A.1 described
below. Lastly, note that for the purpose of this study, publication bias, even if present, is only problematic
if it correlates with the institutional variables we describe below. We have no particular reason to believe
this is the case. We now move on to summarizing our sample of effect sizes.
2.1.2

Summary Statistics

Table 1 presents some summary statistics, splitting the sample into relative (Panel A) and average (Panel
B) wage impact estimates. Each column shows a different statistic denoted in the header. The first row
shows information on our entire sample of 1,548 estimates, divided into 1,092 estimated relative wage
impacts and 456 estimated average wage impacts.
The estimated impacts on average wages are small but positive and the effects on relative wages are
slightly larger in magnitude and always negative. This pattern holds for both the mean and the median
and across alternative weighting schemes (see Appendix Table A.3). A one percentage point increase in
the share of foreign workers, on average, lowers the wage of unskilled workers by 0.28 percent relative
to the wage of skilled workers, ceteris paribus (Panel A). The same influx is associated with a 0.15 percent increase in the average labor market wages (Panel B). In other words, foreign workers assert much
stronger pressure on the relative earnings between skill groups than on the average native. This is an
interesting finding which has not been thoroughly documented in previous summaries of the literature.
8

It is indeed the prediction of the canonical heterogeneous labor model in which immigration-induced
distortions in relative skill supplies change the relative earnings differential while the overall effect is
close to null. This result further motivates our distinct treatment of the two types of semi-elasticities in
the regression analysis. The pooled mean (median) in our sample (not shown here) of previously estimated semi-elasticities is

0.15 ( 0.03) which is very close to the

0.12 ( 0.04) reported in Longhi,

Nijkamp, and Poot (2005) based on a smaller sample of 345 effect sizes from 18 papers. In Appendix
Figure A.1 we present densities for relative (black dashed border line) and average (light gray solid fill)
wage elasticities, respectively. The entire distribution of relative effects is shifted to the left compared
to the distribution of average effects.
We continue by discussing the distribution of effect sizes across study characteristics after which we
move on to comment on the magnitude. The next four rows break down the sample by region. More
than half of our estimates (921 from 38 distinct papers) are from European countries and a third are from
North America (559 from 23 articles). In the following rows we split the semi-elasticities by estimation
method. 766 of them are estimated via ordinary least squares (OLS) and 408 via an instrumental variable
(IV) strategy. The latter are designed to correct for the inherent endogeneity stemming from the nonrandom location choices of foreign-born workers. 382 semi-elasticities are derived from simulating
structural labor demand models.5 Next, we summarize the effects on natives by skill group. We have 885
estimated semi-elasticities for the entire population and 315 (356) for high-(low-)skilled native workers
only.6 In the next two rows we divide our sample into estimates of short- versus long-run immigration
effects as proxied by the frequency of the underlying data (annual or more frequent versus less frequent,
such as decennial). Lastly, we show the distribution of estimates by publication status – Top 50 outlets
as measured by RePEc’s database versus the rest of the sample. 639 of our estimates come from these
elite peer-reviewed journals and 917 are from other high-quality outlets.
We find several robust patterns worth noting. Relative wage effects follow similar patterns to the
estimates reported in Longhi, Nijkamp, and Poot (2010a, 2005) while average wage effects seem to
move in the opposite direction in a number of dimensions. First, Longhi, Nijkamp, and Poot find that
the estimated semi-elasticities are smaller in the U.S. than in Europe. We find the same for relative wage
effects but the opposite pattern for average wage effects such that the largest effect on wage levels is
found in North America. Given the disparities in labor market institutions between the two regions, this

5
Even though some underlying parameters, such as the elasticity of substitution between skill types, are still estimated via
OLS or IV we prefer to keep these as a separate category.
6
The definitions of these skill groups may certainly differ across studies. Moreover, if reported, we categorize any estimates
on the impact on medium-skilled natives as effects on high-skilled.

9

is a first direct hint that labor market policies and features may play a role in affecting these estimates.
Second, IV estimates of relative wage impacts (-0.80) are more negative than OLS ones (-0.15),
possibly reflecting corrected endogeneity stemming from immigrants’ location choices in the direction
we expect. Namely, that they locate in booming labor markets with higher wages. Third, consistent with
Longhi, Nijkamp, and Poot (2005) we find that impacts on low-skilled natives (-0.61) are more adverse
than on their high skilled counterparts (0.50). A possible explanation is stronger competition for jobs in
the bottom of the wage distribution and spillover effects induced by innovation and patents, relevant for
high skill natives. However, average wages increase more for the low skilled.
In addition to Longhi and coauthors’ findings we document three new patterns in the full sample
of wage effect sizes. The average wage effect is larger in the long run (0.30) than in the short run
(0.08) and the distributional effects are slightly smaller in magnitude in the long run (-0.27) than in the
short run (-0.28) as measured by yearly or more frequent data. This pattern is expected as adjustment
mechanisms such as capital accumulation and technology adoption will not be present in the short run
but will likely play a role in longer time frames. Next, the median relative wage impact estimates are
generally smaller in magnitude than the means, indicating the presence of negative outliers skewing the
overall distribution. Lastly, estimates in top publications are generally larger in magnitude than those
published in journals outside top 50.

2.2
2.2.1

Labor Market Institutions Coverage
Data Source

We collected country-level information on institutional structure and strength from OECD (2018). This
data covers all members of the OECD which are a destination to the vast majority of economic immigrants across the globe (Peri, 2016). We selected several variables with extensive coverage reflecting a
wide range of institutions related to the labor market. We then merged these data to our sample of estimates by the first year of study sample. If the institution variable was missing for this year, we allowed
a gap of up to five years.7 With this procedure we merged 91 percent of our semi-elasticity estimates to
at least one of the five institutional variables shown in Table 2 leaving us with a sample of between 628
and 1,323 effect sizes depending on the OECD variable considered. More details and information on
the OECD variables, the merge rate with our sample of estimates, and the entire database are available
7
For instance, if a paper used data from the 1980 and 1990 U.S. Censuses we assigned the U.S. institution variable value
as measured in 1980. However, if it was missing we assigned the respective values from 1975-1985. If no data was available in
this time period then the final entry was coded as missing. A few research articles provide estimates for different sub-periods
within their sample in which case we used the first year in each of the subsamples.

10

in the Online Data Appendix.
2.2.2

Variable Description and Summary Statistics

We include data on five distinct institutional variables which we list and describe in detail below. Table
2 presents the coverage and summary statistics for each one. Each row denotes a separate country and
each Panel designates a distinct institutional variable. Note that the sample size here refers to the number
of merged country-year observations, not semi-elasticities. The latter is larger since each country-year
observation can be matched to more than one semi-elasticity.
Employment Rigidity (StrictEmpInd): We use a strictness of employment protection legislation index which evaluates the procedures and costs involved in dismissing individual workers on regular contracts. Higher values correspond to a larger degree of strictness and therefore higher employment security/rigidity among incumbent workers. Panel A of Table 2 shows summary statistics on this variable.
The data covers most of the countries in our sample with rich variation across and little to no variation within each one (as denoted in the S.d. column). Unsurprisingly, the U.S. and the U.K. have the
most flexibility (0.26, and 1.16 respectively), while employees are most protected in Portugal (5.00),
the Netherlands (2.84), Sweden and Greece (2.80). We are able to link 47 unique country-year level
observations to our database of wage impacts.8
Wage Rigidity (CollBarg): We measure wage rigidity by the collective bargaining coverage rate the ratio of the number of employees covered by collective agreements, divided by all wage earners
with right to bargaining. As such, it is a direct measure of wage rigidity in the labor market commonly
used in the literature (e.g., Avouyi-Dovi, Fougère, and Gautier, 2013). Panel B presents some summary
statistics on this variable. European countries are covered at much higher rates (e.g., 98% in Austria
and 91% in Sweden) than the U.S. and Canada (24% and 34% respectively) and the average is 62%.
We acknowledge the heterogeneity of collective bargaining agreements across countries or even within
countries across industries which, to some degree, may be a limitation of our analysis. Nevertheless,
we believe our results will speak about an overall effect of wage ridigities which is still informative
and relevant and better captured by this variable. The match rate is slightly improved relative to the
previous Panel as we link wage impact data to 53 unique country-year observations of the wage rigidity
indicator.9
8

Alternative measures of employment protection are available in the OECD data. In a robustness checks we use a variable measuring employment protection for individual workers on temporary contracts (StrictEmpTemp). Two other variables
measuring individual and collective dismissals are not used due to much lower coverage and weaker similarity with our main
measure of employment ridigity.
9
An alternative and related measure of wage rigidity is trade union density. We prefer collective bargaining coverage be-

11

Labor Immobility (AverageTenure): Our worker (im)mobility measure is the average job tenure as
indicated by the number of years workers have been in their current or main job or with their current
employer.10 Hence higher values correspond to lower labor mobility. Panel C shows the coverage rate,
mean and standard deviation. The average workplace tenure is slightly above 9 years. European labor
markets are more rigid and with the longest average stay in Southern European countries (Greece 12.68
years, Italy 11.85 years) while in the U.S. it is only 7.42 years. Lastly, we have information on labor
immobility for 30 distinct country-year pairs that we combined with our database on wage effects of
immigration.
Active Labor Market Policies (ALMPExp): This measure is defined as the public expenditure on
ALMPs as percent of GDP. These may include public employment services (e.g., job finding assistance),
training programs (e.g., courses and apprenticeships), short-term employment subsidies, etc. Panel D
shows that, on average, countries spend 0.77% of GDP on ALMPs. This number varies widely across
countries – it is as low as 0.20% in the U.S. and Portugal and as high as 1.51% in Scandinavian countries
such as Denmark and Sweden. We link 43 unique country-year observations of this variable to wage
effect estimates. Once again, we observe little variation of ALMPs expenditure within countries.
Business Regulation (StateControl): This index measures the degree to which business enterprises
are covered by formal regulations that inhibit or promote competition in the product market. It differs
from the aforementioned institutions and ridigities measures as it affects the labor market indirectly
through the regulations in the product market. Table 2 shows the index takes on lowest value in the U.K.
(1.42) and highest in Greece (4.24) displaying wide disparities across states. This is our institutional
variable with poorest coverage – we merge only 13 unique country-year observations to our database.11
Overall, Table 2 asserts the notion that policies and institutions are generally determined at the national level which motivated our cross-country perspective. Unsurprisingly, we see that labor markets in
North America and the U.K. are characterized by lower rigidities and weaker incumbent protection as
compared to European countries. In addition, we also use information on country-level GDP growth, unemployment rates and the relative skill distribution of immigrants and natives from the OECD and study
characteristics such as estimation method and data frequency which we include as control variables.

cause it better captures the actual share of the labor force covered by collective agreements. Trade union density (membership)
is misleadingly low for some countries with high wage rigidity - e.g., 98 percent of workers in France are covered by collective
agreements but less than 10 percent are members of a union.
10
The data source for the U.S. is the Job Tenure Supplement of the Current Population Survey (CPS) and the sample used
to calculate it is all people age 16-64 in the labor force.
11
The alternative measures at our disposal have the exact same coverage and measure different barriers to entrepreneurship
(BTE) and barriers to trade and investment (BTTI). We include them in our robustness checks.

12

3

Theoretical Considerations

Before proceeding to the empirical section, it is useful to briefly discuss the ways these labor market
institutions play out in the canonical model of labor supply and labor demand used to study the impacts of
immigration on native workers. The main theoretical apparatus in the literature is a neoclassical model,
featuring a perfectly competitive economy with no institutional frictions or remedies. On the demand
side, capital and heterogeneous labor, aggregated in a constant elasticity of substitution framework, are
combined to produce a single good with constant returns to scale. In equilibrium all markets clear.
The model mechanically predicts relative wage changes mirroring relative supply distortions induced by
foreign workers. For instance, an influx of low-skilled immigrants makes low-skilled labor relatively
more abundant, decreasing its productivity and therefore price relative to high-skilled natives.
Average wages depend only on the elasticity of capital supply.12 Fixed capital drives down labor’s
total productivity as immigrants come in and average wages decline while they remain unchanged if
capital is fully flexible. Elastic capital supply is probably the most accurate assumption even for very
short time horizons because immigration is generally a slow process where firms have time to adjust in
response. This argument is especially relevant in open economies where investments can come in from
abroad whenever there is an excess return to be earned. Table 1 shows that average wage effects are
slightly positive even in the short run (annual or more frequent data) and higher in the long run (less
frequent data). Positive total effects could reflect a more efficient allocation of workers to tasks, skill
upgrading, productivity spillovers and demand-side effects.13
Contrary to the neoclassical model, real world labor markets do not always clear. On the one hand,
this could be due to distortionary institutions such as minimum wages and employment protection.14 On
the other hand, well-designed policies could reduce market imperfections such as search frictions and
imperfect information. For instance, ALMPs such as job centers and training programs for unemployed
are indeed meant to improve matching between workers and firms and help unemployed workers upgrade
their skills and redirect their career towards firms and industries with better employment prospects.
Our institutional variables (Employment Rigidity, Wage Rigidity, Labor Immobility, ALMP spending,
and Business Regulation) are defined such that higher values indicate stronger institutions and lower
12

Capital is assumed to be skill neutral and therefore does not affect relative wages. See Lewis (2013) for a discussion of
models with capital-skill complementarity.
13
These adjustments are beyond the canonical model where each worker type is preassigned to one task, has a predetermined
skill level, has no effect on the productivity of other workers beyond simple complementarities and where immigrants are
workers (not consumers).
14
Angrist and Kugler (2003) set up a model in which firing costs protect incumbent workers in the short run but decrease
equilibrium employment.

13

occupational mobility likely deteriorating the total effect of immigration on native wages through the
distortionary effects of rigidities and public spending. This is especially the case if immigrants are
not covered by the institutional protections, making them more attractive to firms relative to incumbent
workers.15
Several problems arise in attempting to generalize the impact of labor market institutions on the
relative wage effects of foreign workers. First, especially because institutional coverage and strength
likely vary across skill groups, we need a model where workers respond differently to wage changes.
Heterogeneous labor supply elasticities imply that relative wage and relative employment effects can be
of opposite signs. Moreover, the relative wage of low-skilled natives could even increase in response
to low-skilled immigration if the former is sufficiently elastic, a phenomenon termed “perverse effects”
by Dustmann, Schönberg, and Stuhler (2016). Hence, the mere effect of institutions on (heterogeneous)
workers’ labor supply makes it impossible to sign the interplay between institutions and relative wages
in the economy. Second, institutions likely influence the elasticity of labor demand in heterogeneous
ways across workers also due to varying coverage and strength. Third, many policies and regulations
have different implications for the short and the long run (as in Angrist and Kugler, 2003). Institutions in
the form of various rigidities and high costs of job mobility likely prolong transitions and convergence to
new equilibrium levels.16 Empirically it is usually not possible to separate short and long run outcomes
because immigration is generally a slow and gradual process.
To sum up, the main workhorse model used by most researchers assumes perfectly competitive
markets and ignores the role of labor market institutions. They, however, could affect labor supply, labor
demand as well as the size of the distortion in heterogeneous ways across skill groups and time horizons,
making it virtually impossible to sign the effect on relative wages. Nevertheless, to the extend that
stronger institutions are associated with larger frictions we expect that they worsen the effect on average
wages. We thus conclude that an empirical approach is required to fully understand the interactions
between labor market policies and the wage consequences of foreign-born workers.

4

Empirical Strategy

4.1

Regression Equation

We estimate the following equation:
15

See e.g. Angrist and Kugler (2003) where costs of firing (Employment Protection) is born solely by incumbent workers
thereby harming their long run outcomes.
16
Note, no adjustment costs prevent the economy from jumping from one equilibrium to the other in the neoclassical model.

14

yict = ↵ +

· institutionct + Xct + Zi +

t

+

r

+ "ict .

The subscripts i, c and t refer to effect size, country and time period, respectively. The outcome
variable yict is the estimated immigration wage effect, and institutionct is an institutional variable
of interest17 Xct includes GDP growth and unemployment to control for local economic conditions
affecting labor market tightness and institutional structure. These variables account, for instance, for
situations in which economic booms absorb foreign workers more smoothly and spur lower institutional
coverage such as ALMP spending. Finally, the vector Xct also contains a variable measuring the relative
skill distribution of immigrants and natives defined as low skilled share of all immigrants over low skilled
share of all natives. It controls for the possibility that countries with, say, higher labor market rigidity
may have more restrictive immigration policies. This may, in turn, lead to relatively fewer low-skilled
workers and hence smaller wage impacts when natives are relatively skilled.
The vector Zi contains study/semi-elasticity characteristics such as data frequency, estimation method,
and the skills of natives. The term
time periods and

r

t

is decade fixed effects accounting for worldwide differences across

is a vector of region dummies for Nordic countries, the rest of Europe and the rest

of the world, excluding North America which is the reference group. Lastly, "ict is an idiosyncratic
mean-zero error term.
The coefficient of interest is . We estimate this equation with weighted OLS (see the next Subsection) separately for average and relative wage effects. The standard errors are clustered by country
but do not account for the fact that our outcome variable is already estimated (as in Card, Kluve, and
Weber, 2018).In an ideal scenario, we would like to estimate the interaction between the wage returns to
immigration and institutional coverage within countries. Nevertheless, given that institutions are set at
the country level, this relationship will mainly be identified from cross-country variation within regions
(while controlling for local economic conditions, Xct ). This is perhaps a limitation but we believe it is
the closest we can get to causality without wiping out the useful part of the variation in the data.

4.2

Weighting Schemes

The sheer differences across studies raise the question of how much importance to place on each effect
size. For instance, should the semi-elasticities from a paper reporting only five estimates receive equal
weights to ones derived from a paper with 30? Similarly, should articles published in the top academic
17

Including all institution variables simultaneously results in much reduced sample size (see Section 2.2) but the results are
broadly in line with this specification.

15

journals, which have undergone more rigorous review process and are supposedly of higher quality,
be weighted similarly to ones from lower ranked outlets? Lastly, one can argue that more precisely
estimated semi-elasticities should also be given higher importance as they contain less statistical noise.
To verify the robustness of our results and to account for discrepancies across studies we introduce
several different weighting schemes. First, we assign each wage effect size an equal weight and we refer
to this as unweighted results. Second, instead, we give equal weights to each article. This procedure
uses the number of reported semi-elasticities per article as an inverse probability weight and, intuitively,
it downweighs effect sizes coming from studies reporting many such semi-elasticities (see Appendix
Table A.1). Appendix Figure A.1a and Appendix Figure A.1b show that the distributions of effect sizes
are very similar under both weighting schemes.
Third, we account for study quality by using journals’ impact factors data from RePEc and utilizing
the inverse of the score as a weight. We refer to this as estimates weighted by impact. The procedure assigns higher importance to estimates published in higher ranked journals. Fourth, we adjust for
the precision of the included estimates by using the inverse of the standard error as weighting factor.
Weighting by impact factor (proxy for journal quality) leads to small modifications of the distributions
while taking the statistical uncertainty into account leads to a large reduction of the mass in the tails and
higher concentration of effect sizes around zero (see Appendix Figure A.1c and A.1d). 92 percent of
relative and 90 percent of average wage effects are now concentrated in the interval ( 0.5, 0.5). Hence,
weighting estimates by the inverse standard error penalizes noisily-measured entries and rewards more
precise ones, minimizing the influence of effect sizes that are too large in magnitude to be informative
on the plausible wage effect of immigration.
Finally, we construct a combined weight in which we multiply the three weighting factors. This
measure gives higher importance to effect sizes (i) published in higher ranked outlets, (ii) which are
more precisely estimated and (iii) come from papers with fewer published semi-elasticities. As such, it
combines the virtues of all specifications and it is our preferred specification. We separately incorporate
all these weighting schemes in estimating the regression equation.

5

Results

Table 3 displays our main results. Panel A shows the effects on relative wages and Panel B presents the
results for average wages. Each entry is an estimated coefficient ˆ of an institution variable denoted in
the left column. Standard errors are shown in parenthesis and are clustered by country. Each column

16

corresponds to a different weighting scheme denoted in the column header. The rows below each regression coefficient denote the sample size (N ) and the included controls. All regressions control for
study characteristics, decade and region fixed effects, local economic conditions and the relative skill
composition of immigrants.
Nearly all coefficients in Panel A are positive and many of them are statistically significant at the
one percent level. Institution- and policy-induced market rigidities are effective in mitigating the relative
wage changes induced by foreign workers. The first set of results shows the regression coefficient of
our Employment Rigidity variable. A one unit increase in this index - a change equivalent to more than
half the difference between the U.S. and Europe - is associated with a roughly one percentage point
increase in the relative wage effects of immigration. All estimates are statistically significant. Next,
the second row presents the results for wage rigidity as measured by collective bargaining coverage. A
one percentage point increase in collective bargaining coverage leads to a weak increase in the relative
wage effects of immigration by 0.01-0.02 percentage points. Note that such a change in coverage is
minor since the sample mean of collective bargaining coverage is 62 percent and even within Europe we
see differences of about 50 percentage points. Most of the coefficients are not statistically significant
while all signs are positive and lead to the same conclusion. The third row displays the effects of labor
immobility as measured by average job tenure in years. An increase in average tenure by one year –
around a tenth of the sample mean – is associated with 0.22-0.36 percentage points higher relative wage
effects of foreign-born workers and all coefficients are statistically significant. The second to last row
shows the same results for ALMP expenditure as share of GDP. This is the only variable that does not
show a clear pattern. Finally, the last row presents the coefficients from a regression of immigration
earnings effects on product market regulation. A one unit increase in this index equivalent to roughly 40
percent of the sample mean is associated with approximately 0.68-0.94 percentage points higher relative
wage impacts, and our preferred estimate that combines all weights implies a statistically significant
relationship.
Panel B tells the opposite story – our preferred estimates (last column) point towards lower average
wage effects in more rigid labor markets, but institutions are more weakly related to the immigrationinduced impacts on average earnings. The negative relationship is consistent with Angrist and Kugler
(2003) who find that stronger institutions worsen the employment effects of immigration using the area
approach. The first row in Panel B shows a unit increase in employment rigidity variable is associated
with 0.02 - 0.78 percentage points lower wage effects of foreign workers. Regardless of the weighting
factor, all signs in this row are negative, pointing to the same conclusion. Similarly, the third shows less
17

labor mobility leads to worse average wage consequences of immigration. An increase in the average
tenure by one year is associated with a lowered semi-elasticity of about 0.09-0.51. More prevalent active
labor market policies seem to also be negatively associated with estimated wage impacts of immigration but the coefficients are not statistically significant. Lastly, we find mixed evidence that business
regulation effects the wage consequences of foreign-born workers.18
Overall, Table 3 shows that labor market rigidities exacerbate the average wage impacts of immigration while shielding from redistribution consequences caused by wage distortion between high- and
low-skilled natives. This pattern holds across various different weighting factors. Furthermore, in Panel
A of Appendix Table A.4 we show the interaction between relative wage impacts and institutions is also
robust to excluding outliers (Column 2), excluding OLS estimates from studies that provide IV estimates
(Column 3), focusing only on the “preferred” estimate (Column 4) and excluding study characteristics
(Column 5). Hence, the relationship we describe is not correlated with study characteristics and persist
across different subsamples of estimates. Panel B shows similar robustness checks for average effects.
As in the main analysis, we find some evidence of a negative relationship between average wage impacts
and institutional coverage but average wage impacts are less strongly related to institutions.
We also checked the sensitivity of our results to utilizing only the cross-sectional dimension for
identifying the interaction between institutions and wage impacts of immigration (Column 6). These
results eliminate important threats to identification such as the concern that immigrants could simultaneously affect institutions and macroeconomic conditions. Second and more importantly, institutions may
respond directly to a surge in immigration introducing a reverse causality problem. To eliminate these
concerns, we simply use the average value of each institutional variable in the country and show that our
results survive this reduction in identifying variation. This is unsurprising since, as we show in Table
2, the variation in institutional scope is driven by cross-country and not within-country differences. The
Online Appendix describes and presents a series of further robustness checks not discussed here. All
these robustness tests are certainly reassuring as they inform us that no particular subset of studies or
estimates drive our results.

6

Discussion

We measure a wide spectrum of labor market rigidities as brought about by more pervasive institutions,
regulations and policies and investigate their role in intermediating the competition forces between na18

This is also the institutional variable with poorest coverage.

18

tive and foreign workers. We consistently find that labor market institutions are effective in mitigating
relative wage distortions caused by immigrants but mildly exacerbate effects on average wages. In other
words, these policies are effective in shielding domestic economies from redistributional consequences
and have modest adverse impacts for the average worker. Hence, we document an important role of
institutions in explaining differences in labor market impacts of immigration across countries.
A discussion on the magnitude of the estimated coefficients is in order. Our preferred specification
shows that a one standard deviation increase in labor market rigidity is associated with a 0.16-0.88 decrease in the estimated impact of immigrants on natives’ relative wages. That is, such an intensification
in labor market policies can dampen distortions among unskilled and skilled natives’ wages due to immigration flows by 0.16 to 0.88 percentage points. The wide intervals mask significant heterogeneity
among the different labor market institutions - ALMP and wage ridigity have the smallest impact (0.16
and 0.35) and they are not significant while the other three coefficients lie between 0.50 and 0.88. Next,
a similar calculation shows a single standard deviation increase in the scope of labor market institutions
leads to a decreased average wage effect of immigration by 0.04-0.71 percentage points. Labor immobility results in the largest change (0.71 percentage points) while the other four variables lie between
0.04 and 0.28. Given the sample statistics of reported estimates, these are certainly large effect sizes.
Our main result entails three main implications. Institutions and policies can be adequate and useful
tools in successfully absorbing foreign worker flows into the labor market. This implication is especially
relevant to policymakers concerned with wage differentials between the low- and high-skilled native
workforce in the age of globalization. Second, a thorough understanding of the interaction between
institutions and wage effects is fundamental in generalizing the labor market impact of immigration
from one country to another. Lastly, differences in labor market rigidities across states are important
drivers of the large heterogeneity of estimates in the literature.

19

7

Tables
Table 1: Summary Statistics of Previously Estimated Immigration Wage Effects
Panel A:
Relative Wages

Panel B:
Average Wages

Mean

Median

N

Studies

Mean

Median

N

Studies

Total

-0.28

-0.10

1,092

42

0.15

0.11

456

26

Nordic Countries
North America
Rest of Europe
Rest of World

-0.34
-0.24
-0.32
-0.06

-0.14
-0.15
-0.04
-0.01

143
411
474
64

By Region
6
0.06
12
0.30
23
0.09
3 -0.03

0.34
0.08
0.10
-0.00

74
148
222
12

3
12
10
2

-0.49
-0.12
0.01

By Estimation Method
245
19
0.22
0.24
501
29
0.14
0.07
346
14 -0.13
-0.06

163
257
36

14
20
4

-0.18
-0.01
-0.01

By Native Education Group
630
36
0.12
0.21
249
27
0.15
0.05
213
33
0.22
0.06

247
107
102

19
10
13

0.12
0.11

145
311

11
15

0.08
0.23

329
127

16
10

IV
OLS
Simulation

All
High Skill
Low Skill

-0.80
-0.15
-0.09

-0.47
0.50
-0.61

Long Run
Short Run

-0.27
-0.28

-0.12
-0.09

By Data Frequency
381
13
0.30
711
30
0.08

Outside Top 50
Top 50

-0.15
-0.42

-0.03
-0.21

580
512

By Journal Rank
23
0.11
19
0.24

Notes: Panels A and B show statistics for relative and average wages respectively. N denotes the number of estimates,
and Studies is the number of studies. The total number of studies by subgroups exceeds the total number of studies in our
database (66) since some studies report estimates for multiple subgroups and methods.

20

Table 2: Summary Statistics of Institution Variables by Country

Panel A:
Employment Rigidity
Country
Total

Denmark
Finland
Norway
Sweden

21

Austria
France
Germany
Greece
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
Portugal
Spain
Switzerland
United Kingdom

Canada
United States

Australia
Turkey

Panel B:
Wage Rigidity

Panel C:
Labor Immobility

Panel D:
ALMP

Panel E:
Business Regulation

Mean

S.d.

N

Mean

S.d.

N

Mean

S.d.

N

Mean

S.d.

N

Mean

S.d.

N

2.02

0.94

47

0.62

0.26

53

9.29

1.39

30

0.77

0.48

43

2.66

0.83

13

4
1
3
1

Nordic Countries
8.66 0.23
4
10.73
1
9.20 0.02
2
10.56
1

1.51
0.83
0.91
1.51

0.31
0.18
-

4
1
4
1

2.32
2.81
-

-

1
1
-

1
4
8
1
1
1
1
3
2
1
6

Rest of Europe
10.54
10.71 0.34
10.04 0.06
12.68
9.19
11.85
9.63 0.30
9.24 0.08
9.03
8.00 0.11

1
2
3
1
1
1
2
2
1
4

0.31
0.96
1.06
0.28
0.97
1.34
0.20
0.71
0.21
0.37

0.07
0.35
0.32
0.13
0.01
0.10

2
2
8
1
1
2
1
2
1
4

3.41
2.57
4.24
3.00
2.97
2.49
1.42

0.37

1
1
1
1
1
1
2

1
10

North America
7.42 1.20
4

0.20

0.04

5

1.96

-

1

3
1

Rest of the World
-

0.47
-

0.24
-

4
-

2.28
3.66

-

1
1

2.16
2.79
2.33
2.80

2.75
2.34
2.62
2.80
1.44
2.76
2.84
5.00
2.36
1.60
1.16

0.26

1.17
2.31

0.03
0.00
-

0.00
0.00
0.05
0.00
0.00
0.09

0.00

0.00
-

5
1
4
1

2
2
8
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
5

5

4
1

0.83
0.85
0.71
0.91

0.98
0.82
0.80
0.82
0.44
0.80
0.80
0.69
0.80
0.46
0.49

0.34
0.24

0.74
0.07

0.01
0.01
-

0.14
0.06
0.01
0.02
0.19

0.07

0.13
-

Notes: The mean, standard deviation and number of observations are calculated based on the OECD panel restricted to the years we merge to our sample of estimates. N denotes the number
of country-year observations we merge to our database of effect sizes.

Table 3: Institutions and the Wage Effect of Immigrants on Natives
Panel A: Relative Wages
Unweighted
Employment Rigidity
N
Wage Rigidity
N
Labor Immobility
N
22

ALMP
N
Business Regulation
N
Region FE
Decade FE
Country-Level Controls
Study Characteristics

Studies

Impact

Panel B: Average Wages

Precision Combined Unweighted

Studies

Impact

Precision Combined

0.935⇤⇤⇤
(0.226)
780

1.088⇤⇤⇤ 0.783⇤⇤⇤
(0.271) (0.224)
780
780

0.638⇤⇤
(0.263)
539

0.935⇤⇤⇤
(0.293)
539

-0.278
(0.207)
422

-0.778⇤⇤⇤
(0.146)
422

-0.053
(0.142)
422

-0.015
(0.078)
402

-0.204
(0.152)
402

0.533
(1.136)
868

2.101⇤
(1.103)
868

0.691
(0.971)
868

0.188
(0.857)
627

1.337
(0.791)
627

-0.373
(0.892)
455

1.233
(2.944)
455

0.776
(0.685)
455

0.284
(0.177)
434

1.094
(1.098)
434

0.255⇤⇤
(0.093)
668

0.266⇤⇤⇤ 0.217⇤⇤⇤
(0.056) (0.069)
668
668

0.250⇤⇤⇤
(0.073)
461

0.360⇤⇤⇤
(0.097)
461

-0.085
(0.323)
351

-0.234
(0.817)
351

-0.409⇤⇤
(0.172)
351

-0.279
(0.204)
334

-0.507⇤⇤
(0.170)
334

-0.339
(0.537)
749

0.048
(0.447)
749

-0.069
(0.326)
749

0.306
(0.367)
508

0.341
(0.337)
508

-0.404
(0.371)
410

-2.105
(1.211)
410

-0.039
(0.193)
410

0.010
(0.117)
390

-0.301
(0.392)
390

0.805⇤⇤⇤
(0.152)
395

0.923⇤⇤
(0.327)
395

0.822⇤⇤⇤
(0.163)
395

0.682
(0.382)
292

0.944⇤⇤⇤
(0.260)
292

1.175⇤⇤
(0.376)
233

0.963
(0.914)
233

0.003
(0.191)
233

0.067
(0.045)
222

-0.054
(0.142)
222

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

Notes: ⇤ p < .10, ⇤⇤ p < .05, ⇤⇤⇤ p < .01. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by countries. Models are linear regressions with the effect size as the dependent variable. Effect
sizes are relative wage effects in panel A and average wage effects in panel B. All institutional variables are described in section 2.2.2. The first column is an unweighted regression while the
next four columns in each panel are weighted regressions: by the inverse number of estimates extracted from the study (Studies), by the inverse journal score (Impact), by the inverse of the
standard error of the estimates (Precision), and finally combining all three weights (Combined). Country-level controls are GDP growth, unemployment rate, and the ratio of the share of low
skilled immigrants to low skilled natives. Study characteristics are dummies for high- and low-skilled natives (estimates based on the entire workforce is the reference), dummies for IV and
simulation (OLS is the reference), and a dummy for annual or more frequent data (less frequent is the reference).

References
Altonji, Joseph G. and David Card. 1991. “The Effects of Immigration on the Labor Market Outcomes
of Less-skilled Natives. Chapter 7 in M. J. Abowd and R. B. Freeman (Eds.).” Immigration, Trade
and the Labor Market (Chicago: University of Chicago Press):201–234.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Adriana D. Kugler. 2003. “Protective or Counter-Productive? Labour Market
Institutions and the Effect of Immigration on EU Natives.” The Economic Journal 113 (488):302–331.
Avouyi-Dovi, Sanvi, Denis Fougère, and Erwan Gautier. 2013. “Wage rigidity, collective bargaining,
and the minimum wage: evidence from French agreement data.” Review of Economics and Statistics
95 (4):1337–1351.
Boeri, Tito and Jan Van Ours. 2013. The Economics of Imperfect Labor Markets. Princeton University
Press.
Borjas, George J. 2003. “The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact of
Immigration on the Labor Market.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4):1359–1374.
Borjas, George J. 2013. “The Analytics of the Wage Effect of Immigration.” IZA Journal of Migration
2 (1):22.
Bratsberg, Bernt and Oddbjørn Raaum. 2012. “Immigration and Wages: Evidence from Construction.”
The Economic Journal 122 (565):1177–1205.
Brücker, Herbert, Andreas Hauptmann, Elke J Jahn, and Richard Upward. 2014. “Migration and imperfect labor markets: Theory and cross-country evidence from Denmark, Germany and the UK.”
European Economic Review 66:205–225.
Card, David. 2001. “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows and the Local Labor Market Impacts of Higher
Immigration.” Journal of Labor Economics 19 (1):22–64.
Card, David, Jochen Kluve, and Andrea Weber. 2018. “What Works? A Meta Analysis of Recent Active
Labor Market Program Evaluations.” Journal of the European Economic Association 16 (3):894–931.
Card, David and Alan B Krueger. 1995. “Time-Series Minimum-Wage Studies: A Meta-analysis.” The
American Economic Review 85 (2):238–243.
Carrington, William J and Pedro JF De Lima. 1996. “The impact of 1970s repatriates from Africa on
the Portuguese labor market.” ILR Review 49 (2):330–347.
Dustmann, Christian, Uta Schönberg, and Jan Stuhler. 2016. “The Impact of Immigration: Why Do
Studies Reach Such Different Results?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (4):31–56.
Edo, Anthony and Hillel Rapoport. 2017. “Minimum Wages and the Labor Market Effects of Immigration.” CESifo Working Paper .
European Commission. 2018. “Eurobarometer.” http://ec.europa.eu/commfrontoffice/
publicopinion/index.cfm/Survey/getSurveyDetail/instruments/
STANDARD/surveyKy/2180.
Farber, Henry S, Daniel Herbst, Ilyana Kuziemko, and Suresh Naidu. 2018. “Unions and Inequality Over
the Twentieth Century: New Evidence from Survey Data.” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Foged, Mette and Giovanni Peri. 2015. “Immigrants’ Effect on Native Workers: New Analysis on
Longitudinal Data.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 8 (2):1–34.
23

Friedberg, Rachel M. 2001. “The Impact of Mass Migration on the Israeli Labor Market.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 116 (4):1373–1408.
Hunt, Jennifer. 2017. “The Impact of Immigration on the Educational Attainment of Natives.” Journal
of Human Resources 52 (4):1060–1118.
IDEAS/RePEc. 2018. “Aggregate Rankings for Journals.” URL https://ideas.repec.org/
top/top.journals.all.html.
LaLonde, Robert J and Robert H Topel. 1991. “Labor Market Adjustments to Increased Immigration.”
In Immigration, trade, and the labor market. University of Chicago Press, 167–199.
Lewis, Ethan. 2013. “Immigration and Production Technology.” Annual Review of Economics 5 (1):165–
191.
Lewis, Ethan and Giovanni Peri. 2015. “Immigration and the Economy of Cities and Regions.” Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics 5A.
Longhi, Simonetta, Peter Nijkamp, and Jacques Poot. 2005. “A Meta-Analytic Assessment of the Effect
of Immigration on Wages.” Journal of Economic Surveys, Wiley Blackwell 19 (3):451–477.
———. 2008a. “The Impact of Immigration on the Employment of Natives in Regional Labour Markets:
A Meta-analysis.” In Migration and Human Capital. Edward Elgar, 173–193.
———. 2008b. “Meta-Analysis of Empirical Evidence on the Labour Market Impact of Immigration.”
Région et Développement .
———. 2010a. “Joint Impacts of Immigration on Wages and Employment: Review and Meta-Analysis.”
Journal of Geographical Systems 12 (4):355–387.
———. 2010b. “Meta-Analyses of Labour-Market Impacts of Immigration: Key Conclusions and Policy Implications.” Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy 28 (5):819–833.
Malchow-Møller, Nikolaj, Jakob Roland Munch, Claus Aastrup Seidelin, and Jan Rose Skaksen. 2013.
“Immigrant Workers and Farm Performance: Evidence from Matched Employer-Employee Data.”
American Journal of Agricultural Economics 95 (4):819–841.
Malchow-Møller, Nikolaj, Jakob Roland Munch, and Jan Rose Skaksen. 2012. “Do Immigrants Affect
Firm-Specific Wages?” The Scandinavian Journal of Economics 114 (4):1267–1295.
Moore, Henry Ludwell. 1911. Laws of Wages: An Essay in Statistical Economics. Macmillan.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, Medicine, and others (NAS). 2017. The Economic and
Fiscal Consequences of Immigration. National Academies Press.
Neumark, David and William Wascher. 2004. “Minimum Wages, Labor Market Institutions, and Youth
Employment: A Cross-National Analysis.” ILR Review 57 (2):223–248.
Nickell, Stephen and Richard Layard. 1999. “Labor market institutions and economic performance.”
Handbook of labor economics 3:3029–3084.
Nunziata, Luca. 2005. “Institutions and wage determination: A multi-country approach.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 67 (4):435–466.
OECD. 2018. “OECD.Stat Labor Market Policies and Institutions Database.” URL https://stats.
oecd.org/.
Ottaviano, Gianmarco I. P. and Giovanni Peri. 2012. “Rethinking the Effect of Immigration on Wages.”
Journal of the European Economic Association 10 (1):152–197.
24

Peri, Giovanni. 2016. “Immigrants, productivity, and labor markets.” Journal of Economic Perspectives
30 (4):3–30.
Reuters. 2018. “Immigration top issue for U.S. voters, economy a close second: Reuters/Ipsos
poll.”
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-election-immigration/
immigration-top-issue-for-us-voters-economy-a-close-secondreuters-ipsos-poll-idUSKBN1JV31K.
Rodrik, Dani. 1997. Has Globalization Gone Too Far? Peterson Institute for International Economics.
Stanley, Tom D and Hristos Doucouliagos. 2014. “Meta-Regression Approximations to Reduce Publication Selection Bias.” Research Synthesis Methods 5 (1):60–78.
Webber, Douglas. 2014. “Is the Return to Education the Same for Everybody?” IZA World of Labor .

25

A

Appendix

A.1

Sampling, Inclusion Criteria and Final List of Effect Studies

We collected studies for the database in two steps. First, through extensive searches on Google Scholar
using the phrases “labor market impact immigration” and “wage impact immigration”. Second, by
reviewing citations in earlier meta-analyses, literature reviews and all the empirical studies we found in
the search process. The pool of studies that we identified was then restricted according to the following
inclusion criteria:
1. The study estimates the impact of immigration on natives’ wages or earnings.19
2. Immigration is measured as a share of the total population or relative to the native population.
This implies that we do not include studies where immigration is defined in terms of diversity.
3. The study is published in a peer-reviewed journal or as a book chapter.20
4. All studies based on immigration to European countries are included while older North-American
studies are undersampled. There is a large and mature literature on U.S. data. We wanted to
sample a wide range of countries from the developed world. The resulting database includes more
European and more recent research than any previous review and meta-analysis.
The third criteria could potentially introduce publication bias in our analysis if studies that fail to
document a significant effect do not get published. However, since there is a general consensus in
the literature that the impacts of immigration are small, we do not believe this to be a problem for
our analysis. Indeed, our results confirm that the effect sizes are centered around zero and many are
not significantly different from zero at conventional significance levels. More importantly, Longhi and
coauthors investigated the issue of publication bias in a series of meta-analyses (Longhi, Nijkamp, and
Poot, 2008b,a, 2005) and concluded that it is not an issue (Longhi, Nijkamp, and Poot, 2010a,b).
Table A.1 lists all the studies used in our analysis.21

19

The database contains 672 estimated employment and unemployment effects not used in this article.
Altonji and Card (1991) and LaLonde and Topel (1991) are book chapters.
21
See the Online Data Appendix for a complete list of studies in our database, including articles that only consider employment or unemployment outcomes.
20

26

Table A.1: List of Studies Included in Our Meta-Analysis

27

Authors

Year

Journal

Countries

Data Period

N

Addison and Worswick
Altonji and Card
Aydemir and Borjas
Barrett et al.
Barrett et al.
Bauer et al.
Borjas
Borjas
Borjas et al.
Borjas et al.
Bratsberg and Raaum
Bratsberg et al.
Brücker and Jahn
Brücker et al.
Card
Card
Carrasco et al.
Carrington and De Lima
Cattaneo et al.
Ceritoglu et al.
Chassamboulli and Palivos
Chassamboulli and Palivos
Clark and Drinkwater
Cohen-Goldner and Paserman
D’Amuri et al.
De New and Zimmermann
Docquier et al.
Dustmann and Glitz
Dustmann et al.
Dustmann et al.
Dustmann et al.
Edo
Edo and Toubal
Enchautegui

2002
1991
2011
2006
2011
2013
1987
2003
1996
1997
2012
2014
2011
2014
1990
2001
2008
1996
2015
2017
2014
2013
2009
2011
2010
1994
2013
2015
2005
2013
2017
2015
2015
1995

The Economic Record
Immigration, trade, and the labor market
Journal of Labor Economics
The Economic and Social Review
The Economic and Social Review
Review of International Economics
Industrial and Labor Relations Review
The Quarterly Journal of Economics
American Economic Review
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
Economic Journal
Scandinavian Journal of Economics
Scandinavian Journal of Economics
European Economic Review
Industrial and Labor Relations Review
Journal of Labor Economics
Journal of Population Economics
Industrial and Labor Relations Review
Journal of Human Resources
IZA Journal of Labor Policy
International Economic Review
Journal of Macroeconomics
Nordic Journal of Political Economy
European Economic Review
European Economic Review
Journal of Population Economics
Economic Journal
Journal of Labor Economics
Economic Journal
Review of Economic Studies
The Quarterly Journal of Economics
The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy
Review of International Economics
Contemporary Economic Policy

Australia
U.S.
Canada, U.S.
Ireland
Ireland
Germany
U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
Norway
Norway
Germany
Denmark, Germany, U.K.
U.S.
U.S.
Spain
Portugal
Western Europe
Turkey
U.S.
Greece
U.K.
Israel
Germany
Germany
Sweden, Finland, Germany, Denmark
Germany
U.K.
U.K.
Germany
France
France
U.S.

1982-1996
1970-1980
1960-2001
1966-2002
1999-2007
2000-2005
1980
1960-2000
1980-1990
1960-1990
1998-2005
1993-2006
1980-2004
1993-2009
1982-1979
1990
1991-2001
1962-1981
1994-2001
2010-2013
2000-2009
2000-2007
2000-2007
1989-1999
1992-2001
1984-1989
1990-2000
1985-1995
1983-2000
1997-2005
1990-1993
1990-2002
1990-2010
1980-1990

27
20
28
18
30
19
32
33
20
34
32
31
25
36
3
14
12
16
14
11
24
57
6
20
8
8
36
13
5
66
24
56
48
12

28

Foged and Peri
Friedberg
Gavosto et al.
Gerfin and Kaiser
Glitz
González and Ortega
Greenwood et al.
Grossman
Hofer and Huber
Hothckiss et al.
Hunt
LaLonde and Topel
Lemos and Portes
Llull
Llull
Malchow-Møller et al.
Malchow-Møller et al.
Manacorda
Mitaritonna et al.
Olney
Orrenius and Zavodny
Ortega and Verdugo
Ottaviano and Peri
Pedace
Pedace
Peri and Sparber
Peri and Yasenov
Schmidt and Jensen
Steinhardt
Tumen
Winter-Ebmer and Zweimüller
Zorlu and Hartog

2016
2001
1999
2010
2012
2011
1997
1982
2003
2015
1992
1991
2014
2017
2017
2012
2013
2012
2017
2012
2007
2014
2012
2006
1998
2009
2018
2013
2011
2016
1996
2005

American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
The Quarterly Journal of Economics
LABOUR
Swiss Journal of Economics and Statistics (SJES)
Journal of Labor Economics
Labour Economics
Labour Economics
The Review of Economics and Statistics
Empirica
Southern Economic Journal
Industrial and Labor Relations Review
Immigration, trade, and the labor market
The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy
Journal of Human Resources
Review of Economic Studies
Scandinavian Journal of Economics
American Journal of Agricultural Economics
Journal of the European Economic Association
European Economic Review
Canadian Journal of Economics
Labour Economics
Labour Economics
Journal of the European Economic Association
American Journal of Economics and Sociology
Eastern Economic Journal
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics
Journal of Human Resources
The Annals of Regional Science
The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy
American Economic Review
Oxford Economic Papers
Journal of Population Economics

Denmark
Israel
Italy
Switzerland
Germany
Spain
U.S.
U.S.
Austria
U.S.
France
U.S.
U.K.
Canada, U.S.
U.S.
Denmark
Denmark
U.K.
France
U.S.
U.S.
France
U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
Denmark
Germany
Turkey
Austria
Netherlands, Norway, U.K.

1995-2008
1989-1994
1990-1995
1991-2008
1996-2001
2001-2006
1980
1970
1991-1994
1995-2005
1962-1962
1980
2004-2006
1960-2000
1967-2007
1993-2004
1980-2008
1975-2005
1996-2005
2000-2006
1994-2000
1968-1999
1990-2006
1980-1990
1980-1990
1990-2000
1973-1991
1997-2006
1975-2001
2010-2013
1988-1991
1989-1998

12
17
15
16
16
12
16
3
8
10
5
16
8
104
20
25
16
2
6
20
63
14
45
24
12
1
5
6
49
1
19
132

Notes: N denotes the number of wage effect sizes in each study. Year refers to the year of publication. The Online Data Appendix contains a full list of studies in our database.
Eight estimates extracted from Carrington and De Lima (1996) cannot be classified into relative or average effects since they only exploit variation across time.

A.2

Test for Publication Bias
Table A.2: Publication Bias Test
Panel A: Relative Wages
Unweighted
Standard Error
N
Region FE
Decade FE
Country-Level Controls
Study Characteristics

-0.065⇤⇤⇤
(0.002)
680
X
X
X
X

Studies

Impact

-0.062⇤⇤⇤ -0.062⇤⇤⇤
(0.003)
(0.006)
680
680
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

Panel B: Average Wages

Precision Combined Unweighted Studies Impact Precision Combined
-0.042
(0.057)
664

0.040
(0.150)
664

-0.741⇤⇤
(0.295)
438

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

-0.728 -0.306
(0.433) (0.350)
438
438
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

0.073
(0.433)
434

0.525
(0.515)
434

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

29

Notes: ⇤ p < .10, ⇤⇤ p < .05, ⇤⇤⇤ p < .01. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by studies. Models are linear regressions with the effect size as the dependent variable. Effect sizes are
relative wage effects in panel A and average wage effects in panel B. The first column is an unweighted regression while the next four columns in each panel are weighted regressions: by the
inverse number of estimates extracted from the study (Studies), by the inverse journal score (Impact), by the inverse of the standard error of the estimates (Precision), and finally combining
all three weights (Combined). Country-level controls are GDP growth, unemployment rate and the ratio of the share of low skilled immigrants to low skilled natives. Study characteristics are
dummies for high- and low-skilled natives (estimates based on the entire workforce is the reference), dummies for IV and simulation (OLS is the reference), and a dummy for annual or more
frequent data (less frequent is the reference).

A.3

Distribution of Wage Effect Sizes
Table A.3: Main Statistics of Our Sample of Wage Estimates
Unweighted
Mean
Median
S.d.
N
Mean
Median
S.d.
N

Studies

Impact

Panel A: Relative Wages
-0.28
-0.28
-0.25
-0.10
-0.06
-0.17
2.69
2.03
1.75
1,092
1,092
1,092
Panel B: Average Wages
0.15
0.12
0.04
0.11
0.07
-0.07
1.30
1.58
0.53
456
456
456

Precision

Combined

-0.05
-0.00
0.43
831

-0.01
-0.00
0.14
831

0.07
0.01
0.47
435

0.03
0.00
0.26
435

Notes: Panel A and B contain summary statistics for relative and average wage effect sizes respectively. First column
is based on the unweighted effect sizes. In the next four columns show summary statistics under different weighting
schemes: by the inverse number of effect sizes extracted from each study (Studies), by the inverse journal score (Impact),
by the inverse standard error (Precision) and lastly combining the three weights (Combined).

Figure A.1: Distribution of Wage Effect Sizes

Notes: The graphs show the distributions of relative and average wage effect sizes respectively. Estimates are top and bottom
coded at +/ 2. The effect sizes are unweighted in panel a), while panels b)-d) show the distribution under different weighting
schemes: by the inverse number of effect sizes extracted from each study, by the inverse journal score or by the inverse standard
error.

30

A.4

Robustness Checks
Table A.4: Institutions and the Wage Effect of Immigrants on Natives, Robustness Checks
Panel A: Relative Wages
Main
(1)

Panel B: Average Wages

Excl. SE > 1 No OLS Preferred Estimate No Study Characteristics Avg. Institution
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)

Main
(1)

Excl. SE > 1
(2)

No OLS
(3)

Preferred Estimate No Study Characteristics Avg. Institution
(4)
(5)
(6)

31

Employment Rigidity

0.935⇤⇤⇤
(0.293)

0.914⇤⇤⇤
(0.278)

1.320⇤⇤⇤
(0.265)

1.360⇤
(0.660)

0.877⇤⇤⇤
(0.188)

0.011
(0.343)

-0.204
(0.152)

-0.170
(0.116)

-0.196
(0.141)

0.009
(1.204)

-0.172
(0.167)

-0.231
(0.160)

Employment Rigidity (Temporary)

-0.086
(0.113)

-0.045
(0.110)

-0.001
(0.129)

0.250
(0.183)

-0.063
(0.113)

-0.012
(0.186)

-0.396
(0.299)

-0.366
(0.280)

-0.488⇤
(0.257)

-0.302
(0.234)

-0.382
(0.298)

-0.473
(0.363)

Wage Rigidity

1.337
(0.791)

1.668⇤⇤
(0.581)

1.029
(0.719)

1.192
(2.279)

1.110
(0.868)

2.160⇤⇤⇤
(0.546)

1.094
(1.098)

1.144
(1.131)

2.029
(1.428)

-3.167
(3.403)

1.244
(1.124)

1.512
(1.955)

Labor Immobility

0.360⇤⇤⇤
(0.097)

0.398⇤⇤
(0.127)

0.387⇤⇤⇤
(0.069)

0.597⇤⇤⇤
(0.123)

0.092
(0.103)

0.082
(0.204)

-0.507⇤⇤
(0.170)

-0.502⇤⇤
(0.165)

-0.575⇤⇤⇤
(0.096)

-0.199
(0.316)

-0.567⇤⇤
(0.172)

-0.293
(0.170)

ALMP

0.341
(0.337)

0.281
(0.393)

0.553
(0.367)

0.601
(0.399)

0.360
(0.323)

0.297
(0.303)

-0.301
(0.392)

-0.286
(0.386)

-0.181
(0.454)

-0.411
(0.531)

-0.230
(0.384)

-0.627
(0.736)

Barriers Entrepreneurship

1.800⇤⇤⇤
(0.420)

2.406⇤⇤⇤
(0.558)

2.754⇤⇤⇤
(0.738)

2.937
(6.249)

1.926⇤⇤
(0.582)

-0.538
(0.604)

-2.115
(1.274)

-1.036⇤⇤
(0.356)

-6.377
(4.516)

-6.693⇤⇤⇤
(0.000)

-2.170
(1.409)

-3.129
(2.291)

Barriers Trade and Investment

-0.802
(0.713)

-1.893
(1.430)

1.028
(1.576)

0.684
(8.412)

-0.413
(1.127)

-0.642
(0.501)

-1.736
(1.077)

-0.811⇤⇤
(0.248)

-5.418
(3.778)

-20.366⇤⇤⇤
(0.000)

-1.775
(1.176)

-0.242
(1.284)

Business Regulation

0.944⇤⇤⇤
(0.260)

1.210⇤⇤
(0.385)

2.408⇤⇤⇤
(0.288)

3.352
(2.767)

0.934⇤⇤⇤
(0.180)

0.700⇤⇤
(0.307)

-0.054
(0.142)

-0.167⇤⇤
(0.048)

-0.187
(0.334)

-3.635⇤⇤⇤
(0.000)

-0.075
(0.101)

-0.359
(0.348)

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
No

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
X
No

X
X
X
X

Region FE
Decade FE
Country-Level Controls
Study Characteristics

Notes: ⇤ p < .10, ⇤⇤ p < .05, ⇤⇤⇤ p < .01. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered by countries. Models are weighted linear regressions with the effect size as the dependent variable.
Weights correspond to the combined weights used in Table 3. The first column in each panel replicates results from Table 3. Column 2 excludes effect sizes with standard errors greater than
1. Column 3 uses one preferred estimate from each study. Column 4 excludes OLS estimates if IV estimates are reported within studies. Columns 5 show estimates without macroeconomic
controls. Column 6 displays estimates where the institutional variable is replaced by its mean value within countries. Country-level controls and study characteristics are described in Table 3.
See the Online Data Appendix for a complete description of all the variables.

