AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies, Volume3, Number3. August 2019
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no3.9

Pp.123-129

The Awakening of Female Consciousness in Kate Chopin’s The Story of an Hour (1894)
and Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s The Yellow Wallpaper (1892)
Lama Abdullah Alajlan
English Language Department, College of Languages and Translation
University of Jeddah, Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Faiza Aljohani
English Language Department, College of Languages and Translation
University of Jeddah, Jeddah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

Abstract:
This paper aims to analyze the two short stories The Story of an Hour (1894) by Kate Chopin and
The Yellow Wallpaper (1892) by Charlotte Perkins Gilman in an attempt to unfold the journey
that leads the female characters to awaken their consciousness and to stand against the dominating
male figures in their lives. In both short stories, the central characters Louise Mallard and Jane,
undergo an essential journey of self-realization, which leads them to finally freeing themselves
from patriarchal authority and oppression. Moreover, the paper stresses the impact of the authors
as females on their characters’ development throughout that journey. Following the analytical
approach within the feminist theory, the article is influenced by two major feminist critiques;
Virginia Woolf and Simone De Beauvoir, who believed that women should incorporate their
voices into their writings to depict more realistic female characters. Finally, both characters
rejected being subordinate and oppressed and formed a reaction against it. Moreover, both authors
succeeded in portraying the true characteristics of a female character; they were able to voice their
own opinions and represent their true feelings.
Keywords: Charlotte Perkins Gilman, female consciousness, feminism, feminist literature, Kate
Chopin, short story
Cites as: Alajlan, L. A., & Aljohani, F. (2019). The Awakening of Female Consciousness in
Kate Chopin’s The Story of an Hour (1894) and Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s The Yellow
Wallpaper (1892). Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies, 3 (3) 123-139.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no3.9

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 |www.awej-tls.org

123

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
The Awakening of Female Consciousness in Kate Chopin’s

Alajlan & Aljohani

Introduction

In the feminist essay written by Woolf, (1929) a hypothetical female writer stands against
male criticism and pursue writing as a profession, and states this powerful statement “Lock up
your libraries if you like; but there is no gate, no lock, no bolt that you can set upon the freedom
of my mind” (p.76). Despite all the physical and psychological oppression and dominance imposed
on women, their minds are their own and are eventually liberated. The free thoughts of this
hypothetical character resemble what both female characters in the short stories The Story of an
Hour (1981) by Kate Chopin, and The Yellow Wallpaper (1892) by Charlotte Perkins Gilman
finally end with; A free soul.
In both short stories, the central characters Louise Mallard and Jane, undergo an essential
journey of self-realization, which leads them to finally freeing themselves from patriarchal
authority and oppression. Thus, this paper aims to analyze the two short stories in an attempt to
show the journey that the female characters go through in order to free themselves from the
haunting male figures in their lives and to shed light on the impact of the authors as females on
their characters' development throughout that journey.
Literature Review
The patriarchal ideology controlled the literary canon until the late 18th century. Male
writers exploited women both in life and in literature. They were depicted as inferior, and their
characters were marginalized and silenced. Gubar (1981) addresses this unjust depiction of female
characters in her essay “The Blank Page” and the Issues of Female Creativity. She discusses the
re-creation of the female character in the male’s image as objects; “But if the creator is a man, the
creation itself is the female, who, like Pygmalion's ivory girl, has no name or identity or voice of
her own” (p. 244). Gubar believes that the position of female characters within a culture is not only
as an object but as an art object, she compares her to an engraving made of ivory, a replica made
of mud, an icon or doll, she could be anything but the sculptor itself (p. 244).
A few male writers might deviate from the stereotypical depiction of the female character.
Claridge and Langland, (1990) believe that their intentions are not necessarily sympathetic towards
it, on the contrary, they primarily employ feminism as a means to serve their ideology, agenda,
and to further assert their masculinity. They state:
Although many male writers are interested in a space or possibility for expression
coded as “feminine,” they are not necessarily interested in particular women and
their plights or even the general plight of the generic “woman.” A male writer may
simply need the space of what he or his culture terms the feminine in which to
express himself more fully because he experiences the patriarchal construction
of his masculinity as a constriction. He may, that is, appropriate the feminine to
enlarge himself, a process not incompatible with contempt for actual women. (p. 3-4)
Consequently, female writers sought against the patriarchal literary canon that, as indicated above,
portrayed a wrongful image of the female character and thus failed to deliver its actual
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

124

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
The Awakening of Female Consciousness in Kate Chopin’s

Alajlan & Aljohani

characteristics. Feminist theorists Gilbert and Gubar, (2004) encouraged and called upon women
writers to contribute to the literary canon to negate the stereotypical image of the female character.
They add:
A life of feminine submission, of ‘contemplative purity,' is a life of silence, a life that has
no pen and no story, while a life of female rebellion, of ‘significant action,' is a life that
must be silenced, a life whose monstrous pen tells a terrible story (p. 36).
Similarly, Woolf (1929) encourages writing as a profession for women, and discusses the issue of
men who wrote about women to sustain their superiority, and promote their false ideology:
Have you any notion of how many books are written about women in the course of one
year? Have you any notion how many are written by men? Are you aware that you are,
perhaps, the most discussed animal in the universe? (p. 23).
Additionally, male writers fail to capture the complexity of female nature. Gardner (1981) believes
the reason behind it is that women’s experiences are different from those of men (p. 348). Berkove
(2000) may serve as a prime example of a male writer's point of view that fails to understand the
depth behind an oppressed female character. He believes that there is no evidence that Mrs.
Mallard underwent any suppression (p. 153). He also adds that the role Mrs. Mallard portrays is
unreliable; therefore, her statements are misleading and contradicted (p. 153).
Opposed to that, female writers prove successful in capturing the essence of the female
character. Gardner, (1981) adds: “The other main explanation of female difference posits a "female
consciousness" that produces styles and structures innately different from those of the "masculine
mind" (p. 348). She further adds that the heroines are an extension of the author's identity and a
representation of her ideals (p. 357).
Moreover, Ghandeharion and Mazari (2016) take on the idea of Feminine writing “Écriture
féminine," a term coined by the French theorist Hélène Cixousto, in an attempt to emphasize the
importance of writing for women to escape the patriarchal mindset.
Seeing that this paper is within the Feminist theory, literature on this matter has been
reviewed. However, to my knowledge, none of them address the awakening of the female
consciousness in both stories. Nor do they address the impact of women authors on their female
characters. Therefore, this paper intends to address this gap by bringing these two works in
comparison.
Methodology
Considering that both writers were the forerunners in American feminist literature, this
paper follows the analytical approach within the feminist framework. Influenced by feminist
theorists Virginia Woolf and Simone de Beauvoir.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

125

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
The Awakening of Female Consciousness in Kate Chopin’s

Alajlan & Aljohani

Reimer (1996) defines female consciousness as “women’s recognition and acceptance of
the culturally defined gender role they are expected to fulfill” (p. 79). It differs from the Feminist
consciousness in the sense that the latter refers to “the motive force behind the social and political
liberation movement women have formed in reaction against … a status of subordination and an
experience of oppression" (p. 79). Then it can be established that the Female consciousness was a
trigger for both characters to start their journey of realization toward the awakening of their
Feminist consciousness.
Additionally, Woolf (1929) discusses the status of female writers within the malecontrolled society. She situates the profession of writing atop the ladder of jobs that help women
to gain the upper hand in their relations.
Similarly, de Beauvoir (1953) believes that societies are patriarchal, and men treat women
as subordinates in those societies. She declares that:
"one is not born, but rather becomes a woman. No biological, psychological, or economic
fate determines the figure that the human female presents in society; it is civilization as a
whole that produces this creature, intermediate between male and eunuch, which is
described as feminine" (p. 267).
De Beauvoir equally believes that working is essential for women if they are to break free from
the norms imposed on them by the patriarchal society. She adds that “It is through work that
woman has been able, to a large extent, to close the gap separating her from the male; work alone
can guarantee her concrete freedom” (p. 813).
Analysis
It is important to note that the personal incidents that occurred to the authors influence both
stories; hence, it is valid to consider both as semi-autobiographical stories. It is also crucial to
understand the effect of a female author on characterizing her female character, similarly to what
Gardner (1981) believes, those characters are an extension of the authors’ identity (p. 357), making
them reliable and trustworthy.
In the case of Chopin (1894), her story resembles that of her mother’s, Eliza Faris. A young
French woman who marries Thomas O’Flaherty, a man the age of her father, to secure her family
financially. As Toth, (1999) states "The Story of an Hour" can be read as the story of Eliza
O'Flaherty's marriage, the submission of a young woman to someone else's will" (p. 48). Thomas
dies in a train crash, resembling the train crash that kills Mr. Mallard, and leaves her a widow at
the age of twenty-seven. Toth adds that the death of Chopin's father helped Kate from growing up
in a typical patriarchal household in the nineteenth century "in which a powerful husband ruled
the roost" (p. 50).
In Chopin’s story, Mrs. Mallard’s journey towards the awakening of her consciousness
starts from the moment she learns about her husband’s death. Chopin characterizes Mrs. Mallard
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

126

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
The Awakening of Female Consciousness in Kate Chopin’s

Alajlan & Aljohani

as a woman who isn’t physically oppressed, but psychologically. Despite Mrs. Mallard's young
age, she has heart troubles; besides that, Chopin describes her facial features as having a fair, calm
face with lines that speak of strength and will (p.2). All these physical and psychological
manifestations serve as proof of oppression, which negates the above-stated argument by Berkove
(2000) that there is no clear evidence of Mrs. Mallard's abuse (p.153). Mrs. Mallard receives the
news in a way anyone would expect a typical woman would, “She wept at once, with sudden, wild
abandonment, in her sister’s arms” (Chopin, 1894, p.1). However, Mrs. Mallard goes through a
moment of realization and asks to be alone in her room, as if she is rejecting the society’s
stereotype of grieving widows. Woolf (1929) stresses the importance of personal space for women,
a place only for them to liberate from societies constraints, Woolf adds “for it is a fact, that there
is no arm to cling to, but that we go alone and that our relation is to the world of reality and not
only to the world of men and women” (p. 95). When she is alone in her room, Mrs. Mallard looks
out the window and notices the small things outside; the smell of rain, tops of the trees, the
twittering of birds. Amid her rumination, Mrs. Mallard starts to feel her exhaustion being washed
away, and she physically feels her freedom being handed to her from the sky “But she felt it,
creeping out of the sky, reaching toward her through the sounds, the scents, the color that filled
the air” (Chopin, 1894, p.2). Mrs. Mallard then realizes her current state as a liberated woman. At
first, the feeling is strange and frightening for a woman whose life was overpowered by her
husband. However, she is finally relieved that she is never to be dominated by her husband and
declares that she is "free! Body and soul free!" (p.3). Her freedom is to be able to live for and by
herself, thus not existing as a silenced, marginalized wife.
To the family of Mrs. Mallard, her illness is a weakness to her. When she dies from the
shock that her husband, her oppressor, is alive, the only assumption that comes to the male doctor's
mind is that she died from an immense joy her heart could not endure. Sadly, this ending is what
Chopin had to write to publish her story because, in a society conquered by unjust patriarchal
ordeals, it is unacceptable for a woman to be in the joy of her husband's death. Toth (1999) adds:
“Kate Chopin had to disguise reality. She had to have her heroine die. A story in which an
unhappy wife is suddenly widowed, becomes rich, and lives happily ever after. Eliza
O'Flaherty's story would have been much too radical, far too threatening, in the 1890s” (p.
50).
Similarly to Chopin, Gilman’s story is considered to be a reflection of her own experience. Gilman
(2011) discusses the case of a male physician who protests her story, even though it is based on
Gilman's personal experience with depression. The "rest cure" prescribed by the doctor, besides
restricting work time to two hours to be well, proved its failure as an effective cure, as Gilman
states that she followed the directions for three months and she was on the verge of madness (p.
265). She then disregards the physician’s advice and starts working and gains her health again.
In her story The Yellow Wallpaper, Gilman tells a tale of a depressed woman who slowly
descends to her destructive fate. Jane, who is controlled by her husband, John, who happens to be
her physician. John believes his wife is ill and in need of a rest cure, depriving her of her profession
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

127

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
The Awakening of Female Consciousness in Kate Chopin’s

Alajlan & Aljohani

as a writer and disregarding what she thinks she has: a postpartum depression. John fluctuates
between the husband/doctor characters, even if neither is supportive of his wife's choices. In
addition to being depressed, Jane is neglected, deprived of working and in constant fear of writing
openly. Even as an ill woman, Jane defies her husband's rules and writes when she is unobserved.
Nonetheless, she becomes unable to keep herself sane, and it starts to exhaust her, she says "I did
write for a while in spite of them; but it does exhaust me a good deal ‫ ــ‬having to be sly about it"
(2009, p. 5).
Jane starts her journey of self-realization by walking into the room that she was intended
to rest in for several months. She notices the wallpaper and describes it as the worst paper she saw
in her life (p. 8). This wallpaper is what triggers her unconsciousness, and as time goes by, Jane
finally sees her reflection through the mysterious figure inside the paper. At first, the paper’s smell,
appearance, and color repel her. However, she starts seeing patterns across the wallpaper, that is
when she becomes determined to follow the pattern to a conclusion. Jane's determination
resembles her journey; at first, she is not aware that John is imprisoning her, and as time passes
she becomes more determined about her fate, Jane writes about the wallpaper saying: "There are
things in that paper that nobody knows but me, or ever will. Behind that outside pattern the dim
shapes get clearer every day" (p. 21). This figure that Jane starts to recognize turns out to be a
trapped woman: “I didn’t realize that for a long time what the thing was that showed behind, that
dim sub-pattern, but now I am quite sure it is a woman” (p. 26). With time, she realizes that the
woman trapped behind the paper is the real Jane. This woman only appears when no one is around,
and precisely appears when John is either asleep or when he is out of the house, this is an indication
that Jane is not able to act freely around her dominating husband, she is trapped and imprisoned.
It was time for Jane to start liberating the woman behind the paper, she is determined, and she
changes her mind about leaving the house, she has a purpose now and writes about it saying "Life
is very much more exciting now than it used to be" (p. 27). Finally, she frees the woman by ripping
off the paper: “I’ve got out at last, in spite of you and Jane, And I’ve pulled most of the paper, so
you can’t put me back!" (p. 39). According to her husband, Jane is taken over by madness, but to
her, she is finally liberated from under his oppression.
Conclusion
It can be said that both authors portrayed a realistic journey for their characters, both Mrs.
Mallard and Jane had their moment of liberation, but these moments either ended by death or by
madness. These characters’ lives were deeply affected by the dominance and oppression of their
husbands, and their entrapment and suffering are strictly connected to them. Both characters
rejected being subordinate and oppressed and formed a reaction against it. Moreover, both authors
used their profession to write about women's suffering within the patriarchal society and
successfully negated the patriarchal norms.
Additionally, they succeeded in portraying the authentic characteristics of a female
character; they were able to voice their own opinions and represent their true feelings. In contrast
to male authors who as Gubar (1981) stated, treated female characters as Pygmalion, a status with
that “has no name or identity or voice of her own” (p. 244). Gilman declares that the reason behind
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

128

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
The Awakening of Female Consciousness in Kate Chopin’s

Alajlan & Aljohani

writing the story was not to drive people mad, as to what the physicians claimed she did, but to
save people from going insane, which she eventually achieved. Gilman (2011) states that her
article had an immense impact on a family who assisted their daughter back to recovery and normal
activity (p. 265).

About the author:
Lama Abdullah Alajlan is currently pursuing a Master’s degree in English Literature from the
University of Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. Her research interests focus mainly on Feminist and
Postcolonial studies. ORCID ID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1631-283X
Dr. Faiza Aljohani is an associate professor at the University of Jeddah. She is a staff member in
the Department of English, the Faculty of Languages and Translation. Currently, she is working
as the assistant of the Vise president of the female campus. Her research interest are in African
American, and Caribbean Literature and Culture, Colonial and Post-Colonial Literature and
Culture, Twentieth and Twenty-First Century American Literature and Race Theory.

References
Berkove, L. I. (2000). Fatal Self-Assertion in Kate Chopin's" The Story of an Hour." American
Literary Realism, 32(2), 152-158.
Chopin, K. (2018). The story of an hour. Joe Books Ltd.
Claridge, L. P., & Langland, E. (Eds.). (1990). Out of bounds: male writers and gender (ed)
criticism. Univ of Massachusetts Press.
De Beauvoir, S., & Parshley, H. M. (1953). The second sex (p. 105). New York: Vintage Books.
Gardner, J. K. (1981). On female identity and writing by women. Critical Inquiry, 8(2), 347-361.
Ghandeharion, A., & Mazari, M. (2016). Women Entrapment and Flight in Gilman’s “The Yellow
Wallpaper”. Revista Alicantina De Estudios Ingleses, (29), 113-129.
Gilbert, S., & Gubar, S. (2004). The madwoman in the attic. Na.
Gilman, C. P. (2009). The yellow wallpaper. Auckland, N.Z.: Floating Press.
Gilman, C. P. (2011). Why I wrote The Yellow Wallpaper?. Advances in psychiatric
treatment, 17(4), 265-265.
Gubar, S. (1981). "The Blank Page" and the Issues of Female Creativity. Critical Inquiry, 8(2),
243-263.
Reimer, G. D. (1996). Female consciousness: An interpretation of interviews with Inuit
women. Études/Inuit/Studies, 77-100.
Toth, E. (1999). Unveiling Kate Chopin. Univ. Press of Mississippi.
Virginia, W. (1929). A Room of One’s Own. New York, 47.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

129

