Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number 4. December 2018
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.20

Pp.270-280

Engaging Saudi EFL Students in Online Peer Review in a Saudi University Context

Talal Waleed Daweli
Department of Languages and Translation
Taibah University, Madinah, Saudi Arabia

Abstract:
This study focuses on a Saudi English as a foreign language (EFL) context. It employs Google Docs as an
educational tool to engage Saudi EFL students in online peer review to address some challenges faced
instructors when they implement peer review in class. The main goals of the study are examining what
kinds of corrective feedback that Saudi EFL students provide when they edit their peers’ texts in Google
Docs, how they can improve their texts based on the collaborative online peer review, and what their
attitudes are toward using Google Docs as an online peer review tool. The study utilizes Google Docs, an
online questionnaire, and an interview as research tools; after thematic analysis, the results show that Saudi
EFL students focus on local and global writing issues and provide different types of corrective feedback
that aid them to improve their writing. They have positive attitudes toward using Google Docs in peer
review. This tool allows them to engage in an online social environment outside the classroom, feel as
critical editors, adjust their writing, and avoid embarrassment. The results also suggest that hierarchical
power in the classroom and students’ prior beliefs and experiences can impact their responses to the given
feedback from teachers and peers. This study recommends instructors to integrate online peer review as a
genre and move beyond low-stakes genre in EFL writing courses at the university level.
Key Words: corrective feedback, EFL writing, Google Docs, online peer review, Saudi EFL students

Cite as: Daweli, T. W. (2018). Engaging Saudi EFL Students in Online Peer Review in a Saudi
University Context. Arab World English Journal, 9 (4), 270-280.

DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.20

270

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Engaging Saudi EFL Students in Online Peer Review

Daweli

Introduction
Peer review has received attention from writing researchers and instructors recently (Chang, 2015; Yu,
2016; Hu, 2005). In the EFL Arab contexts, several studies have revealed some challenges faced by
instructors when integrating peer review in the classroom. Ezza (2010) states the teacher’s central role as
the main source of corrective feedback on students’ writing influences the effectiveness of classroom peer
review on writing. Likewise, Al-Hazmi and Schofield (2007) highlight another challenge to the
effectiveness that is learners’ focuses on surface-level errors in their feedback. Time restrictions in writing
courses also influence peer review in the EFL writing classroom (Razak & Saeed, 2014). Additionally, the
author’s teaching experiences at the Saudi university context suggest that Saudi EFL students’ belief and
other cultural norms impact the practice of peer review in writing classes.
Establishing a social environment by using technological applications, such as Google Docs and
Facebook, might overcome some of the limitations and challenges in face-to-face peer review. These
applications enable EFL instructors to create an interactive online learning environment in which students
can promote their critical thinking while they provide comments on their peers’ texts either inside or outside
the classroom. In EFL contexts, particularly in the Saudi context, there have been a few face-to-face peer
review studies (for example, Alnasser & Alyousef, 2015; Al-Hazmi & Scholfield, 2007). These studies use
peer review in EFL writing classes and focus on Saudi’s attitudes toward peer review in the classroom and
which kinds of error corrections the students provide to their peers. However, none of the above-mentioned
studies have implemented Google Docs as an online peer review tool and targeted Saudi EFL students who
study at a Saudi university. In this context, the author’s teaching experiences suggest that some EFL
students are reluctant to provide corrective feedback on their peers’ texts when they interact orally in class.
Rollinson (2005) describes the reason behind this reluctance and articulates that some EFL student writers
“from certain cultures may feel uncomfortable with . . . the social interaction demanded by peer review”
(p. 26). For example, in certain cultures, second language (L2) students may feel intimidated by
participating in class peer review, concerned that they might threaten their peers’ faces or their comments
might bother their peers (Ferris, 2003). Hence, the emergence of technology can alleviate the abovementioned issues by using online peer review, especially in the Saudi EFL contexts where the majority of
students are not accustomed to using technology in a writing course. Therefore, this study focuses on the
Saudi EFL context and employs Google Docs as an educational tool to engage Saudi EFL students in online
peer review. It aims to answer two questions. First, what kinds of corrective feedback do Saudi EFL students
provide when they edit their peers’ texts in Google Docs? And, how do they develop their texts based on
the collaborative peer review? Second, what are Saudi EFL students’ attitudes toward using Google Docs
as an online peer review tool?
Literature review
Corrective feedback and its types
Corrective feedback in writing usually refers to local issues, such as errors on form, or/and global
issues related to content, such as rhetorical aspects of writing. Van Beuningen (2010) mentions that
corrective feedback fosters language learning and develops accuracy because it offers opportunities for
English students to identify their own writing issues related to linguistic and interlanguage. Nevertheless,
another study raises concerns about the use of corrective feedback and suggests this kind of feedback may
not be helpful for students' writing development (Truscott & Hsu, 2008). Ferris (2004, 2010) indicates that
the usefulness of written corrective feedback is a topic of considerable debate. As a result, there has been
considerable controversy among researchers about the usefulness of corrective feedback in learning and
teaching the language (Guénette, 2007). To clarify, the debate is between researchers who argue that
students should receive corrective feedback to improve their accuracy in writing and others who do not
believe in the effectiveness of corrective feedback.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

271

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Engaging Saudi EFL Students in Online Peer Review

Daweli

Regarding the effects of corrective feedback on students' writing, Lyster and Ranta (1997) identify
different types of corrective feedback that would improve students' writing. Some of these types are
clarification requests, repetitions, recasts, explicit error correction, and metalinguistic feedback. Ellis
(2004) and DeKeyser (1998) refer to different kinds of corrective feedback: explicit and implicit. Van
Beuningen (2010) illustrates another classification of corrective feedback which is direct or indirect
feedback. Direct corrective feedback clarifies the written error and its correction, whereas indirect
corrective feedback signifies just an error written in text. However, the corrective feedback types used in
this study are those identified by Lyster and Ranta (1997).
Peer Review
Peer review, whether face-to-face or online, is known by distinctive terms; these include “peer
feedback,” “peer response/revision”, or “peer editing” (Liu & Hansen, 2002). These terms are used
interchangeably to refer to peer review in this study. Nelson (1997) describes that the term peer review
“refers to students’ reading and responding to each other’s written work to provide their peers with
comments on how they can improve the draft versions of their papers” (p. 77). This reflects how the
teacher’s comments are no longer considered as the primary source of written corrective feedback on
student writing. In fact, it is a learner-centered approach where learners can interact with each other to
negotiate their writing errors, enhance a sense of audience, and clarify the purpose of their writing (Liu &
Sadler, 2003). This work of peer review is considered as collaborative and cooperative (Oskoz & Elola,
2011). It is also supported by the notion of Vygotsky's Zone of Proximal Development which assumes that
learners can perform at a higher level when they receive support from others (Ortega, 2009). Similarly, in
peer review activities, learners move from correcting their written content individually to collaboratively
working with each other to share opinions and suggestions that improve their written texts. Thus, each
learner can receive support from his peer. This collaborative peer review is different from feedback
provided by a teacher because it aids students to be more critical readers and revisers of their own and
peer’s writing (Rollinson, 2005).
In the contexts of EFL, classroom peer review has received attention from English researchers and
instructors in recent years. Grami (2010) states, “If students are properly trained to use peer feedback, the
benefits could be very significant, and therefore it recommends that education policy-makers and ESL
writing teachers in Saudi Arabia should do more effort to introduce peer session to all ESL writing classes”
(p.1). So, the lack of training is an issue that EFL students encounter when they provide feedback on their
peers’ text. Moreover, other researchers have investigated various issues of face-to-face peer review,
including more focus on addressing local issues, such as grammar and vocabulary, and less attention to
global issues in writing, such as content and organization (Al-Hazmi & Scholfield, 2007). Nevertheless,
Alnasser and Alyousef (2015) find that EFL students have a preference for giving and receiving peer
feedback on both levels local and global on their writing. Likewise, other studies have shown that EFL
students can provide useful peer feedback that addresses global dimensions of writing, such as content,
organization, and rhetoric (Min, 2005; Ruegg, 2015; Hu, 2005; Xu & Liu, 2010).
There are other positive effects of peer review. Students can have active roles in their writing,
improve their critical skills needed to analyze and revise peers’ writing, receive feedback from multiple
sources, and build confidence when they provide and receive written peer feedback (Ferris, 2003). Lastly,
peer feedback internalizes a sense of audience in EFL student writers’ minds because it provides them with
a realistic and tangible audience than writing only for their teacher (Lundstorm & Baker, 2009).
Based on the above-mentioned studies, there are researchers who agree that several issues constrain
the effectiveness of face-to-face peer review while others believe that peer review represents an interactive
environment which allows EFL students to respond to macro or/and micro writing issues immediately or

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

272

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Engaging Saudi EFL Students in Online Peer Review

Daweli

spontaneously (Chang, 2012; Liang, 2010). On the other hand, other researchers argue that online tools are
superior to face-to-face peer review because they enable EFL students to comment on their peers’ texts and
facilitate their interaction as well as feedback exchanges (Liu & Sadler, 2003).
The results of previous studies (for example, Bradley, 2014; Chang, 2012) support the role of online
peer review as it boosts EFL students’ engagement in writing revision outside the classroom. As new
technology emerges in education, there are several studies which have employed technological tools, such
as Wiki and Facebook, to engage students in electronic feedback. Tuzi (2004) moves from face-to-face peer
review to electronic responses. This researcher finds that although L2 student writers prefer oral feedback,
the electronic feedback has a greater impact on revision than oral feedback and it helps L2 writers focus on
larger writing blocks. Similarly, Ghazali, Sahuri, and Abdulrab (2018) find that EFL students perceive the
Facebook group as an interactive learning environment which facilitates their peer feedback on writing
beyond the university context.
There are other EFL studies that have emphasized the values of online peer review. Min (2008)
finds that online peer feedback can result in better writing because it promotes revision. Figl, Bauer, and
Mangler (2006) also suggest the digital peer review can help teams to enrich their discussions. In terms of
promoting critical thinking skill, Guiller, Durndell, and Ross (2008) compare the transcripts of online and
face-to-face discussion and indicate that the online mode facilitates the development of critical thinking.
Likewise, Crank’s (2002) study of asynchronous peer response and face-to-face peer response in a college
classroom reveals that the use of e-mail improves the quality of peer review, helps students to express their
thoughts, and allows them time to think about their reactions.
Google Docs for peer review
Many writing instructors request L2 writers to share their writing in Google Docs with peers for
providing feedback. This digital tool can support both synchronous and asynchronous editing and comment
by multiple users on different computers. The main author can permit collaborators to view, edit, and
comment on any document at any time. Snyder, a presenter in TESOL International Association 2018,
suggests that Google Docs facilitates high-quality peer review because it gives more time to students to
read their peers’ papers than what it is available in class. Multiple peer reviewers can edit the written texts
in Google Docs, making it a desirable online application for a collaborative learning. In terms of checking
peer comments, teachers can reply to peer review comments if students are giving misleading feedback.
This application makes auto-save every second so that students cannot lose their papers and creates a history
of revision of any document that allows teachers and students to track the progress made in a particular
essay.
Methodology
Context and participants
The author is an English lecturer at a Saudi university where he taught Saudi male EFL students
several writing courses in two semesters, Fall 2016 and Spring 2017. At that time, students did not practice
peer review in any writing classes. So, he trained them in two class periods about 90 minutes for each to
practice peer review in class and show them how they could read their peers’ texts and provide different
kinds of corrective feedback that focus on form and content. This training was helpful and enhanced the
students’ knowledge about peer review. However, several factors constrained students from giving effective
feedback to their peers, such as students’ cultural norms and time constraint. For example, they were
worried about the loss of face and embracement when engaging in classroom peer review. After a year, the
author piloted online peer review as a tool to address some of the cultural concerns Similarly, Yu and Hu
(2017) reveal, “Five major factors emerging from the multiple sources appeared to have played an important
role in influencing the students’ peer feedback practices. They are: (a) student beliefs and values…” (p.30).

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

273

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Engaging Saudi EFL Students in Online Peer Review

Daweli

Thus, using online peer review may be an effective tool that is effective beyond the classroom context.
The author requested permission from the Department of Languages and Translation, where he
taught, to recruit Saudi EFL students who were interested in online peer review through Google Docs
outside the classroom context. Only five Saudi male EFL students (Ahamed, Ibrahim, Mahmoud, Rayan,
and Sami) confirmed via e-mail that they were willing to participate in this study. These five names are
pseudonyms. All five students are seniors and their major is English. Arabic is their first language. They
have studied English since grade 6 and their English proficiency level is intermediate. The author taught
them writing courses about a year ago. In this study, all five participants engaged in an online peer review
via Google Docs outside the writing courses to examine what kinds of corrective feedback they give to their
peers, how the provided feedback in Google Doc can develop their writing, and what their attitudes are
toward using this digital peer review.
Instruments and procedures
This study employs three main instruments: Google Docs, online questionnaire administrated via
Qualtrics, and oral interview via phone. The author created a Google Docs document and shared it with the
participants when the study took place. This document encompasses instructions written in English and
Arabic that the participants read and applied outside the classroom. The first instruction was that watch a
short video on YouTube that explains how to use Google Docs. Secondly, respond to a writing prompt
“write a short essay to your friend who is unfamiliar with Ramadan, the ninth month of the Islamic calendar
when Muslims fast during the day, and provide him with basic information about this month and possible
religious and cultural activities that you practice” This topic is relevant to the participants’ religion and
Saudi culture. A reason for selecting an essay genre is that the participants are more familiar with the fiveparagraph genre and they are not taught to write in different advanced genres, such as reports, formal letters
or memos. They responded to the prompt under their assigned names in a shared Google Docs that allows
asynchronous editing and commenting by multiple users on different computers simultaneously. Therefore,
after each participant finished responding to the prompt, the author divided them into pairs so that each one
could make the necessary corrections and changes in his peer’s text.
The third instruction was an access to a link that enabled the participants to fill out an online
questionnaire via Qualtrics. It contains five questions written in English that elicit information about which
writing errors, global or local, and which corrective feedback types that the participants focused on when
they provided comments on their peers’ writing in Google Docs. They had been given the right to choose
either Arabic or English when they responded to the questionnaire.
The last instruction was an oral interview. The author contacted the participants via phone and
asked them eight questions without recording based on their request. They preferred to make the interview
in English. The interview took from six to eight minutes outside the classroom setting. Each participant
responded to eight questions in English that reflect his prior experience and attitude toward online peer
review. During the interview, the author wrote down the participants’ responses to the questions.
Data analysis
This study employs thematic analysis that is a common form of analysis in qualitative research that
focuses on identifying and analyzing themes within the collected data. This approach also concentrates on
people’s experiences and their feeling and attitudes toward doing an activity. To demonstrate, the author
looked closely at the participants’ provided feedback in Google Docs and their answers to the questionnaire
and interview questions. In order words, he read and re-read the participants’ collected data from the three
instruments in order to figure out what the data involved and to pay attention to the frequent themes that
occurred. Then, he documented their occurrences where they occurred and turned them into labels in order

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

274

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Engaging Saudi EFL Students in Online Peer Review

Daweli

to create categories for analysis. The last process was analyzing the data by describing the frequent themes
and making references to them.
Findings and discussion
Google Docs
In a Google Docs document, all participants wrote an introduction, two body paragraphs, and a
conclusion then they edited their peers’ writing. The two figures below show different kinds of corrective
feedback and writing errors that each participant focused on while editing his peer’s text.

Provided Corrective Feedback Types Per
participant
6
4
2
0
Explicit correction
Rayan

Clarification
requests
Mahmoud

Metalinguistic
feedback
Sami

Ahamed

Ibrahim

Figure 1: Corrective Feedback Types practiced in Google Docs

Types of Error Correction Per participant
6
4
2
0
Global errors
Rayan

Local errors
Mahmoud

Sami

Ahamd

Ibrahim

Figure 2: Types of Error Correction practiced in Google Docs
Regarding the provided corrective feedback in Google Docs, all participants practiced three types
of corrective feedback: clarification request, explicit correction, and metalinguistic feedback. Among these
kinds, clarification request was the most preferred feedback among four participants (see Figure 1).

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

275

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Engaging Saudi EFL Students in Online Peer Review

Daweli

Figure 3: Examples of clarification request
In Figure 3, Rayan made two clarification requests when he reviewed his peer’s text. For example,
he raised two questions: “What do you mean by Quran?” and “What do you mean by Fifa?” Rayan aimed
these questions could help his peer Sami to consider his audience who might not familiar with the two terms
“Quran” and “Fifa”. The biggest concern for Rayan when he edited his peer’s text was the
comprehensibility of the content for readers who might not know what is Quran, the Holy book, and Fifa
that stands for The Fédération Internationale de Football Association. In order words, Rayan’s provided
feedback did not value local writing issues. This theme, focus on audience, is also relevant to the findings
of other studies, such as (Lundstorm and Baker, 2009; Min, 2005).

Figure 4: Clarification request and metalinguistic feedback examples.
In Figure 4, the data shows that the peer reviewer, Ahamed, provided his peer with an explicit
correction that is “The first letter should be capital” in “activities” written in the title. This corrective
feedback indicates that the writer should have edited his grammatical mistake based on the given explicit
comment. In this feedback, Ahamed identified a local error. Moreover, metalinguistic feedback was the
second given corrective feedback that contains a question raised by Ahamed “Can you tell where is the
mistake?” So, he did not make an explicit correction; in fact, his comment required this peer to consider the
cues included in the question. Thus, Ahamed’s peer needed to figure out the error and its correction based
on his grammatical competence. This kind of feedback is to “encourage the learners to function at his or
her potential level of ability” (Ortega, 2009, p. 226). In order words, metalinguistic feedback begins with
implicit prompt, such as Ahamed’s question “Can you tell where is the mistake?” to encourage the writer’s
self- regulation instead of increasing reliance on explicit corrections. This is known as the Zone of Proximal
Development tuned assistance where the corrective feedback is graduated, implicit prompts, contingent,
and relying on the self (Ortega, 2009).

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

276

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Engaging Saudi EFL Students in Online Peer Review

Daweli

Overall, in Google Docs, the participants’ comments included three corrective feedback types,
clarification request, explicit correction, and metalinguistic feedback, and they commented on global and
local errors. Nevertheless, the participants focused more on form when providing comments on the texts of
their peers. Unsurprisingly, this focus reflects how some EFL instructors emphasize form over content on
students’ writing in the Saudi context. It appears that participants mirror their writing instructors in how
they provide corrective feedback; they utilized this feedback on their peers’ texts in Google Docs.
Questionnaire
All participants answered five questions via accessing a shared link in Qualtrics. After analyzing
the participants’ answers to the first question, they followed a common approach when they corrected their
peers’ texts. The approach was close reading then providing corrective feedback that would improve their
peer’s texts. In addition, their answers to the other three questions show that they preferred to provide as
well as receive comments on local and global issues and give three different kinds of corrective feedback
as shown in Figures 1 and 2. In short, their answers in the questionnaire align with the findings of the
feedback analysis of Google Docs.
The last question in the questionnaire reveals that the participants preferred receiving comments
from peers via Google Docs. Mahmoud’s response to the last question was “Your best friend’s comments
because he is closer to you than the teacher.” Receiving comments on writing from peers was preferable by
three participants who could negotiate their writing errors due to a friendship that is not affected by
hierarchical power in the classroom. Nonetheless, other participants chose to obtain writing comments from
both teacher and peer. For instance, Ahamed stated, “I prefer feedback from both but from teacher more
because he helps me to improve my writing more than my peer review”. So, Ahamed’s prior experiences
with peer review might not be positive as he received comments from his peer that were less constructive
compared to the feedback he obtained from his teacher. Trust is another factor that makes Ahamed
prioritized his teacher corrective feedback over his peers. Believing teacher is the only qualified and
authoritative source to comment on students’ writing plays a vital role in how students view their peers’
provided feedback. Therefore, students’ prior beliefs and experiences of teachers and peers’ feedback can
influence their writing development when responding to the feedback.
To summarize this section, all five participants implemented a common approach when they
commented on their peers’ texts. They focused on local and global issues and provided different types of
corrective feedback. Similarly, these results are consistent with Alnasser and Alyuosefs (2015) in that
participants concentrated on both error kinds. The classroom hierarchical structure and students’ prior
beliefs and experiences can impact their responses to the received feedback from teachers and peers.
Similarly, this factor of students’ beliefs is also found in the study of Yu and Hu (2017). Thus, writing
instructors should not be the only source of feedback on students’ writing; in fact, they need to integrate
peer review into course design and use it consistently so that students can value their peers’ comments
(Hedgcock & Ferris, 2013).
Interview
The five participants chose to speak English when the author interviewed them orally via phone.
The interviewees’ answers to the first two questions reveal that they have not engaged in peer review
practices in the secondary school and university except in the writing courses that the author taught them
at the university. Their previous peer review training in class helped them to succeed in peer review via
Google Docs. Generally, the participants have positive attitudes toward giving and receiving feedback in
Google Docs as they were able to benefit from their peers’ feedback in Google Docs. Mahmoud and Ibrahim
built their own confidence when editing their peers’ texts. They said, “I feel I am a writer who has editing
skills” and “it is a positive feeling because I felt I am a critical editor.” Likewise, Ahamed mentioned, “I

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

277

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Engaging Saudi EFL Students in Online Peer Review

Daweli

really like how it saves my time instead of meeting in class and work wherever I want.” Working outside
the classroom was a factor that contributes to the positive feeling that all participants have toward online
peer review. Similarly, consistent with Saeed, Ghazali, Sahuri, and Abdulrab’ study (2018), online peer
feedback appears to facilitate EFL students’ writing beyond the university context.
Regarding changing the texts due to the comments received from peers in Google Docs, four
participants adjusted their writing based on the received comments from their peers. For example, after
Ibrahim received comment from his peer, he tackled his punctuation error as he stated, “yes, I changed
comma errors.” However, the author was not able to access to long-term impact of using online peer review
via Google Docs on participants’ writing development because they responded to the comments only at the
time of the study.
Conclusion and limitations
This study focuses on the EFL post-secondary context and employs Google Docs as an educational
tool to examine which kinds of corrective feedback Saudi EFL students provide when they edit their peers’
texts, how the collaborative peer review helps them to change their texts, and their attitudes toward using
Google Docs as an online peer review tool. The findings reveal that all five participants are able to improve
and adjust their writing when they receive online comments from their peers that include local and global
writing issues and different corrective feedback types, clarification request, explicit correction, and
metalinguistic feedback. Additionally, they find that using Google Docs in peer review can aid them to
work in a social environment beyond the classroom and avoid embarrassment. Overall, they have positive
attitudes toward Google Docs in peer review. However, there are factors that can influence EFL students’
responses to teachers and peers’ feedback, such as hierarchical power and students’ beliefs and experiences
of teachers and peers’ feedback. Considering limitations, the study cannot measure how the participants
can improve their writing for long-term when receiving comments from their peers. Lastly, the results of
the study cannot be generalized to other Saudi EFL university contexts due to the limited number of
participants.
Recommendations and future research
The participants have not practiced peer review at the secondary and university levels and have not
engaged in writing advanced genres. Thus, the author recommends EFL instructors to integrate online peer
review in the university writing courses and implement it as a tool for revision that values both form and
content. Another recommendation, EFL instructors should move students from the five-essay genre to
advanced genres, such as research paper, to enhance EFL students’ rhetorical knowledge. For future
research, it is beneficial to improve this study and recruit a larger number of participants to address its
limitations.

About the author:
Talal Waleed Daweli is a lecturer of TESOL at the Department of Languages and Translation at
Taibah University, Madinah, Saudi Arabia. He earned his Master degree in TESOL from
Arkansas Tech University and now, he is a Ph.D. student in TESOL at Illinois State University.
His research interests are second language writing, language policy, and linguistic and cultural
imperialism. https://orcid.org0000-0001-5765-0248

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

278

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Engaging Saudi EFL Students in Online Peer Review

Daweli

References
Alnasser, S.M. & Alyuosef, H.S. (2015). Investigating Saudi learns preferences for giving and receiving
macro and/ micro level peer feedback on their writing. Canadian Center of Science and Education.
8, (6), 57-68.
Bradley, L. (2014). Peer-reviewing in an intercultural wiki environment – Student interaction and
reflections. Computers and Composition, 34, 80-95.
Chang, C. F. (2012). Peer feedback via three modes in an EFL writing course. Computers and Composition,
29, (1,) 63– 78.
Chang, C. Y. H. (2015). Teacher modeling on EFL reviewers’ audience-aware feedback and affectivity in
L2 peer review. Assessing Writing, 25, 2–21.
DeKeyser, R. (1998). Beyond focus on form: Cognitive perspectives on learning and practicing second
language grammar. In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second
language acquisition (pp. 42–63). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Ezza, E. S. (2010). Arab EFL learners’ writing dilemma at tertiary level. English Language Teaching, 3(4),
33-39.
Ellis, R. (2004). The definition and measurement of L2 explicit knowledge. Language Learning 54(2), 227–
275.
Ferris, D. (2003). Response to student writing: Implications for second language students. Mahwah:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Ferris, D. (2004). The "grammar correction" debate in L2 writing: Where are we, and where do we go from
here? (and what do we do in the meantime?). Journal of Second Language Writing 13(1), 49–62.
Ferris, D. (2010). Second language writing research and written corrective feedback in SLA. Studies in
Second Language Acquisition, 32(2), 181–201.
Figl, K., Bauer, C., & Mangler, J. (2006). Online versus face-to-face peer team reviews. Proceedings of the
36th ASEE/IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference, USA, 7-12.
Crank, V. (2002). Asynchronous electronic peer response in a hybrid basic writing classroom. Teaching
English in the Two Year College, 30(2), 146-155. creating complex interventions in classroom
settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 2(2), 141-178.
Guénette, D. (2007). Is feedback pedagogically correct?: Research design issues in studies of feedback on
writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 16(1), 40–53.
Guiller, J., Durndell, A., & Ross, A. (2008). Peer interaction and critical thinking: Face-to-face or online
discussion? Learning and Instruction, 18(2), 187-200.
Hu, G. (2005). Using peer review with Chinese ESL student writers. Language Teaching Research, 9 (3),
321–342.
Hedgcock, J., & Ferris, D. R. (2013). Teaching ESL composition: Purpose, process, and practice.
Routledge.
Lyster, R., & Ranta, L. (1997). Corrective feedback and learner uptake: Negotiation of form in
communicative classrooms. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19 (1), 37–66.
Liu, J. & Hansen, J.G. (2002). Peer response in second language writing classrooms. Ann Arbor, MI:
University of Michigan Press.
Liu, J., & Sadler, R.W. (2003). The effect and affect of peer review in electronic versus traditional modes
on L writing. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 2(3), 193–277.
Liang, M. (2010). Using synchronous online peer response groups in EFL writing: Revision-related
discourse. Language Learning & Technology, 14(1), 45–64.
Lundstorm, K. & Baker, W. (2009) To give is better than to receive: The benefits of peer review to the
reviewer’s own writing, Journal of Second Language Writing, 18 (1), 30 – 43.
Nelson, G. L. (1997). How cultural differences affect written and oral communication: The case of peer
response groups. New Directions for Teaching & Learning, 70, 77-78.
Min, H. T. (2005). Training students to become successful peer reviewers. ERIC, 33 (2), 293–308.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

279

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Engaging Saudi EFL Students in Online Peer Review

Daweli

Min, H.-T. (2008). Reviewer stances and writer perceptions in EFL peer review training. English for
Specific Purposes, 27(3), 285-305.
Oskoz, A., & Elola, I. (2011). Meeting at the wiki: The new arena for collaborative writing in foreign
language Courses. In M. J. W. Lee & C. Mcloughlin (Eds.), Web 2.0-based E-learning: Applying
social informatics for tertiary teaching (pp. 209–227). Hershey, PA: IGI Global
Ortega, L (2009). Understanding Second Language Acquisition. New York, NY: Routledge.
Razak, N. A., & Saeed, M. A. (2014). Collaborative writing revision process among learners of English as
a foreign language (EFL) in an online community of practice (COP). Australasian Journal of
Educational Technology, 30 (5), 580-599.
Rollinson, P. (2005). Using peer feedback in the ESL writing class. ELT Journal, 59(1), 23-30.
Ruegg, R. (2015). The relative effects of peer and teacher feedback on improvement in EFL students’
writing ability. Linguistics and Education, 29, 73–82.
Saeed, M. A, Ghazali, K, Sahuri, S, S. & Abdulrab, M. (2018). Engaging EFL learners in online peer
feedback on writing: What does it tell us? Journal of Information Technology Education: Research.
17, 40-60.
TESOL International Association (2018, Apr 27). Multilingual Writers& Techonlogy:4 Ideas from the
second
language
writing
standing
group
at
CCCC.
Retrieved
from
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8yF8DBEXdD0&feature=youtu.be
Tuzi, F. (2004). The impact of e-feedback on the revisions of L2 writers in an academic writing course.
Computers and Composition: An International Journal for Teachers of Writing, 21(2), 217-235.
Truscott, J., & Hsu, A.Y.-P. (2008). Error correction, revision, and learning. Journal of Second Language
Writing, 17 (4), 292–305.
Van Beuningen, C. (2010). Corrective feedback in L2 writing: Theoretical perspectives, empirical insights,
and future directions. International Journal of English Studies, 10(2), 1–27.
Xu, Y., & Liu, J. (2010). An investigation into anonymous peer feedback. Foreign Language Teaching and
Practice, 3, 44-49.
Yu, S. (2016). An exploratory study on the role of L1 use in peer written feedback of L2 writing. Porta
Linguarum, 25, 135–146.
Yu, S. and Hu, G. (2017). Understanding university students’ peer feedback practices in EFL writing:
Insights from a case study. Assessing writing, 33, 25-35.

Appendix
Interview Form
1. Did you do peer review activities in an English course in a secondary school? if so, explain how you
did peer review.
2. Did you practice face-to-face or online peer review (Google Docs) in any writing course at a university
level? if so, explain how you did peer review.
3. Did online peer review (Google Docs) help you to improve your English writing skills, especially
editing and revision? In what ways?
4. What was your attitude toward giving writing comments to peer writers on Google Docs?
5. What was your attitude toward receiving writing comments from peer writers on Google Docs?
6. Did you change your texts due to comments and opinions received from peers on Google Docs? If so,
how?
7. In your opinion, what are some pros and cons of the use of digital tools such as google doc with your
peers?
8. Would you like to do a similar activity (peer review by using Google docs) with your teacher?

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

280

