ORIGINAL ARTICLE
GIS & Quantitative Geography

The Dynamics of Urban Neighborhoods: A Survey
of Approaches for Modeling Socio-Spatial
Structure
Elijah Knaap1
Kang1

|

|

Levi John Wolf2

|

Sergio Rey1

|

Wei

Su Yeon Han1

1 Center

for Geospatial Sciences, University
of California, Riverside

For close to a century, researchers from across the disci-

2 School

of Geographical Sciences,
University of Bristol

plines of Urban Studies have developed empirical models

Correspondence
Elijah Knaap PhD, Center for Geospatial
Sciences, University of California Riverside,
Riverside, California, 92521, USA
Email: knaap@ucr.edu

tion of urban neighborhoods–and how these dimensions

Funding information
National Science Foundation Award
1733705

cies. In this paper, we traverse the literatures of social sci-

for understanding the spatial extent and social composichange over time. Unfortunately, however, these techniques
have often been developed within disciplinary silos and without broad exposure to other potentially interested constituenence, computer science, and statistics to examine a variety
of modeling techniques for understanding neighborhood
dynamics. We begin our review by examining early concepts of spatial structure ﬁrst outlined in the Chicago School
and discuss how the notions of social ecology and quantitative neighborhood analysis permeated the urban studies
for several decades to come. Our survey continues by reviewing contemporary statistical approaches for identifying
urban neighborhoods, culminating with the state of the art
in subﬁelds known as ‘geodemographics’ and ‘regionalization’. Following this review, we oﬀer insight into the ﬁeld’s
persistent conceptual issues, identify areas ripe for additional research, and highlight newly-developed computational methods that can inform more just and socially equitable public policy, community development, and account-

1

2

Elijah Knaap et al.

able governance.
KEYWORDS

Neighborhoods, Geodemographics, Regionalization, Factorial
Ecology, Social Area Analysis, Ecometrics

1

|

INTRODUCTION

The analysis of neighborhoods - including their demographic makeup, physical morphology, environmental conditions,
and the evolution of these features over time - is a central focus of research in both the social and physical sciences.
Indeed, for nearly a century, neighborhoods have been among the most prominent primitive units of analysis in the
social sciences, owing largely to important and durable contributions to urban theory made by the early Chicago
School (Park et al., 1925; Merriman, 2015). Park, Burgess, and McKenzie understood the centrality of space in social
outcomes and set out to develop theories and models to explain the social fragmentation they observed in Chicago.
Ever since, social scientists have championed their cause tirelessly, attempting to disentangle the reciprocal nexus
linking cities, people, and neighborhoods. Yet despite their ubiquity in the scholarly literature, neighborhoods remain
enigmatic. There is no precise deﬁnition of “neighborhood” in either spatial extent or social composition, and the continued use of the term belies its fundamental complexity, both in concept and empirical operationalization. Put simply,
neighborhood research is diﬃcult for many reasons but necessary for many more. Neighborhoods are fundamental
elements of social life, and their spatial conﬁgurations have deep implications for the human experience.
In the contemporary era, there is a vast and renewed interest in empirical neighborhood analysis. Substantively,
this push is driven by two social trends. The ﬁrst is a growing recognition of the importance and pervasiveness of
“neighborhood eﬀects” in shaping social inequality and helping to produce a wide variety of stratiﬁed outcomes in
areas like health (Diez Roux, 2001; Diez Roux and Mair, 2010), educational attainment (Garner and Raudenbush,
1991; Burdick-Will et al., 2010), cognitive development (Sampson et al., 2008; Sharkey and Elwert, 2011), employment
(Mendenhall et al., 2006; Galster, 2017), and economic mobility (Chetty et al., 2014, 2015), among a wide variety of
others (Sampson et al., 2002; Sampson, 2012a; Galster, 2012; Sharkey and Faber, 2014; Knaap, 2017; Galster and
Sharkey, 2017). The second is the rise of “data science,” and computational research methods, particularly the growing
subﬁeld of geographic or spatial data science, and the increasing adoption of advanced quantitative techniques for
studying urban areas. Indeed, Wolf (2018) has even gone so far as to say that the identiﬁcation of neighborhood
clusters is the “quintessential geographic data science problem.”
In the following review, we discuss the convergent developments across distinct strands of literature. Among
these bodies of scholarship, two run parallel to one another: the ﬁrst is concerned with developing typologies of
places in which the residents who inhabit those places are internally similar according to their various attributes (a
practice known as geodemographics). Because they are derived from many underlying variables, the neighborhood
typologies are conceived as a type of latent characteristic that captures socio-spatial context. These classiﬁcations
are then taken as true measures of this socio-spatial context and used as data in secondary models of phenomena of
interest.
The other neighborhood analysis literature leverages similar statistical techniques, albeit with a diﬀerent intent.
Whereas the ﬁrst literature is inspired by the Chicago school’s understanding of urban spatial demarcations through
sociodemographic segregation, the second literature is inspired by geographic data mining and computer science. Instead of estimating and mapping these purely-social distinctions, urban regional science detects socio-spatial “regions,”
the spatially-coherent places latent within sociodemographic data. Thus, urban regional science sees geography as

Elijah Knaap et al.

3

the embodiment of sociodemographic segregation, and thus is an object of study itself, rather than a medium of how
sociodemographic segregation could be visualized or expressed. This embodied-expressed distinction is fundamental
to the diﬀerence between the two approaches.
To facilitate a better understanding of these two perspectives in the vast literature on neighborhood identiﬁcation,
classiﬁcation, and transition, we review the last 100 years of research focused on measuring and modeling urban
socio-spatial structure. In so doing, we discuss the empirical foundations and theoretical underpinnings underlying
each approach; we highlight the prototypical examples as well as the innovations and pitfalls of each method, and
ﬁnally, we posit new avenues for conceptual and computational advances.

2

|

EXPRESSION & EMBODIMENT: TWO PERSPECTIVES ON URBAN SPACE

First, we discuss the Chicago School and its durable contribution to the understanding of urban space. The Chicago
School is an important anchor not because its scholars were the ﬁrst to study spatial structure, nor because their
theories were infallible, but because the School’s founding marks the symbolic start of the spatial turn in the social
sciences; scholars even today credit the Chicago School as the inspiration for neighborhood analysis writ large. After
setting forth this perspective, we examine the development of urban regional science.

2.1

| The Chicago School: Expressing Sociodemographic Space

The Chicago School generally traces its genesis to “The City,” the seminal volume compiled by Park et al. (1925) that
laid out the central tenets of a new brand of urban sociology. This new scholarship was a response to the changing
human condition evidenced shortly after the turn of the 20th century, and the waves of immigration, urbanization,
and increasing heterogeneity beginning to characterize the United States and other developed countries in the West
(Wirth, 1938). Led by Park, Burgess and McKenzie, the early Chicago School was characterized by “a focus on the
city, concern for the eﬀects of urbanization in producing social disorganization, an interest in the breakdown of the
extended family and the neighborhood as a social unit, a consideration of the conﬂict between transplanted old world
cultures and the emergent culture of new American cities, and a commitment to empirical methods” (Bell and Greer,
1962). This shift in focus toward the urban social experience was a noteworthy turn in sociology, not only because
“it is one of the most well-known turning points in. . . social science research,” but also because it signaled the growing
appreciation for the eﬀects of spatial structure, and “brought neighborhood-centered research to the fore of the
discipline during the early twentieth century” (Sampson, 2012a).
Indeed, the focus on spatial structure was so signiﬁcant that the “Chicago [school] felt that no social fact makes
any sense abstracted from its context in social (and often geographic) space and social time. Social facts are located”
(emphasis original) (Abbott, 1997, p.1152).
To make sense of this relationship between people and places, the Chicago school scholars drew upon natural
ecology, borrowing the concepts of invasion and succession to explain patterns of residential mobility among diﬀerent
demographic and socioeconomic groups. Examining Chicago’s segregated landscape, Park and his colleagues set out
to describe the geographic pattern they observed in the city, arguing that its residents were in a constant state of
competition for space. As residents climbed the social ladder, they would trade economic capital for spatial capital,
and reap the positive beneﬁts of new pro-social communities (McKenzie, 1924; Park et al., 1925; Wirth, 1938; Fischer, 1972). The process is summarized elegantly by Logan (1978, p. 407): “Residential segregation creates a status
hierarchy of neighborhoods deﬁned simply by the characteristics of their residents, at the same time as common class

4

Elijah Knaap et al.

or status becomes a symbol through which people identify their physical area as a community. The status hierarchy
of places is reinforced by people’s individual decisions to translate upward social mobility into change of place of residence”. In the parlance of Chicago School adherents, urban dwellers engage in processes of spatial assimilation, and
the social structure of the city leads to a predictable spatial pattern organized in concentric rings extending from the
center of the city (Burgess, 2008). Park and Burgess based their model on the early economic work of Von Thunen’s
“Isolated State”, which argued that transportation costs were the central organizing factor in urban economics, and
that willingness to pay for access to the city center would lead to a predictable partitioning among agricultural, residential, commercial, and industrial land uses - eventually leading to the classical “bid-rent” model of urban economics
(Alonso, 1964; Mills, 1967; Sinclair, 1967; Muth, 1969).
The Chicago School is thus an important frame for understanding contemporary approaches for modeling spatial structure, not only because its main conceptual contribution, the Burgess Concentric Zones (BCZ) model, is the
standard-bearer, but because the same kinds of demographic shifts are now taking place that once caused urban scholars to engage deeply with spatial structure: globalization is shaking up both migration and urban economic structure.
Attention to growing socioeconomic inequality has once again brought neighborhood eﬀects to the fore of urban
studies, and gentriﬁcation together with the “back to the city” movement are reshaping geographies of segregation
and inclusion. Thus, the time is ripe to re-examine a series of questions guided by the Chicago School tradition.
The ﬁrst question surrounds the axes of neighborhood diﬀerentiation: what are the relevant dimensions that
distinguish one neighborhood from another? Are they physical (e.g. walls, train tracks, highways)? Are they social
(e.g. defacto segregation)? How are these boundaries maintained through social and political processes? How are
the boundaries changing? How does the maintenance of social and spatial boundaries lead to the development of
“community” and the socialization of certain types of behaviors?
Second, how can (and should) neighborhoods be operationalized and urban spatial structure analyzed: What are
the commonly used techniques for modeling spatial structure? Are the methods inductive or deductive? What are
the challenges and pitfalls associated with modeling spatial structure? How can models of spatial structure be used
to develop better, more equitable urban policies?

2.2

| Modelling Social Structure

Following the introduction of BCZ, empirical models of spatial structure went largely undeveloped for a signiﬁcant
period. In the 1950s, however, social shifts yet again brought emphasis on the signiﬁcance of place. During the postwar period of suburbanization, white ﬂight, and social unrest, there was a signiﬁcant push to understand the nature
of “community;” the Chicago School focused strongly on how urban spatial segmentation leads to social behaviors
like territorialism and consciously created “ideological communities” (Hawley, 1950; Suttles, 1972; Hunter, 1975). To
understand how these communities were created, scholars turned to newly developed statistical methods to identify
the essential elements of “urbanism” that structure modern life and the ﬁeld of social area analysis was born. This
turn is often viewed as the beginning of an age of urban empiricism, but it is important to emphasize that a critical
component of Chicago School analysis is empirical work that is grounded ﬁrmly in social theory (Sampson et al., 2002).
As researchers adopted new statistical techniques, therefore, they attempted to operationalize “the complicated phenomena of urbanism,” described by Wirth (1938, p. 19) as “a system of social organization involving a characteristic
social structure, a series of social institutions, and a typical pattern of social relations”.
Seeking to formalize and operationalize the ideas of human ecology, neighborhoods, and social areas, researchers
set out to deﬁne neighborhoods as a set of spatially structured social interactions. A neighborhood or “natural area”
could then be identiﬁed as meeting the following criteria:

Elijah Knaap et al.

5

(a) a geographic area physically distinguishable from other adjacent areas;
(b) a population with unique social, demographic, or ethnic composition;
(c) a social system with rules, norms, and regularly recurring patterns of social interaction that function as
mechanisms of social control; and
(d) aggregate emergent behaviors or ways of life that distinguish the area from others around it" (Schwirian,
1983, p. 84)
These ideas set the stage for an entire generation of researchers focused on discovering the latent spatial structure
in social relations. What is particularly important about the framework Schwirian articulates is encapsulated in the
last two bullets. The Chicago School and its devotees maintained a focus on human behavior, cultural norms, and
assimilation, which they viewed as having a reﬂexive relationship with residential arrangements. Early approaches
were therefore driven by a focus on identifying, isolating, and quantifying the social processes that led to territorialism,
“defended communities”, and segregation, among other emergent behaviors (Suttles, 1972).
One of the earliest innovations in neighborhood empirical work was the notion that social processes, which are
diﬃcult to observe, could be treated as latent variables and modeled using easily obtained Census data, similar to
the ways that psychologists were beginning to model unobservable personality traits in individuals. The ﬁrst studies
deploying this technique were known as Social Area Analyses (SAA), and were developed to help understand the
shifting patterns of segregation and urbanization that began in the 1950s. Although social area analysis has been long
studied and its lineage is well-known, it is important to remember that its early emphasis on natural science and social
psychology generated a empirical search for the fundamental axes of community diﬀerentiation–the laws of social
physics that described how segregation and city living restructured the life course.

2.2.1

| Social Area Analysis

Social area analysis was ﬁrst devised by Shevky and Williams (1949) and uses factor analysis to isolate and measure
what the authors conceived as three essential dimensions of urban spatial structure:
1.

urbanization - measured by manifest variables fertility, women in the labor force, and single-family dwelling units

2.

social rank - measured by manifest variables occupation, educational attainment, and rent

3.

segregation - measured by an “index of isolation for selected ethnic and foreign-born groups” (Bell, 1953)
Together, Shevky and Bell postulated, these three constructs accounted for the majority of the diﬀerences be-

tween population groups living in the city. The Shevky-Bell hypothesis, as it is now known, holds that urbanization,
segregation, and social rank are the deﬁning forces that structure urban life and inﬂuence a variety of behaviors like
household formation and participation in formal organizations (Bell, 1953; Spielman and Thill, 2008). Implicit in SAA
is that these factors have theoretical connections to behavior. Urbanization, for example may lead to declining birth
rates as women stop bearing children and join the workforce, and segregation may lead to predictable residential patterns as immigrants and ethnic minorities form enclaves for mutual beneﬁt1 . Following their identiﬁcation, the latent
factors are used as input to cluster analysis, used to group neighborhoods into similar types. Describing Shevky’s
original conceptual framework for SAA, Herbert (1967, p. 42) articulates a case that modern urban industrialism is
1 Later, SAA and human ecology more broadly would be criticized for misunderstanding the causal nexus of these patterns (e.g. that segregation is not entirely

due to choice), but here the important point is that variable selection in SAA was driven by attention to social processes, rather than by simply interesting or
available variables

6

Elijah Knaap et al.

characterized by unavoidable “changes in the distribution of skills, changes in the organisation of productive activity,
and changes in the composition of population. Associated with these three main trends are the expressions of social
diﬀerentiation which become more marked over time. Thus, Shevky & Williams’s SAA speciﬁes three goals: ﬁrst, SAA
speciﬁes a quantitative framework for capturing these three essential dimensions of social transformation; second,
SAA ﬁnds groups of spatial units (neighborhoods, in theory) that are similar along each of the three dimensions. By
grouping the neighborhoods into categories, Shevky hoped to capture nonlinear dynamics that might result from the
interaction of the three components. Third, SAA uses the resulting "social area" categories as lenses and explanatory
variables for other urban inquiries (Brindley and Raine, 1979).
Shevky and Williams’s initial work focused on Los Angeles, and soon after it was published, Bell (1953) reimplemented SAA in San Francisco, using his results ﬁrst to examine the generalizability of the original L.A. study, (Bell,
1955) and later to study spatially stratiﬁed participation in organizations, and informal social relations in diﬀerent
neighborhood types (Bell and Force, 1956; Bell and Boat, 1957). A number of replications were also performed to
test the stability of the Shevky-Bell hypothesis, and whether the same general structure appeared in other American
cities, which it often did (Schmid, 1950; Greer, 1956; Schmid et al., 1958; Arsdol et al., 1958b,a).
Despites some converging results from diﬀerent cities, the replication studies often were contentious. Some
objected to the use of SAA, arguing that it lacked foundations in social theory and, apart from interesting patterns,
provided little insight into the causes and consequences of urban ills (Hawley and Duncan, 1957; Van Arsdol, et al.,
1961; Van Arsdol et al., 1962). In a particularly poignant critique, Hawley and Duncan (1957) question whether urbanization, segregation, and social rank are the deﬁning characteristics of cities, and whether the social areas analysis
of these variables provides valuable insight into urban life. Put bluntly, they argue that the ‘social area’ lacks scientiﬁc rigor because it “has provided no theory that explains why areas tend to be homogeneous or otherwise, or that
predicts the degree of homogeneity to be observed” [ p.339].
Apart from methodological issues, some replications called into question whether the three factor structure was
a suﬃciently robust model to describe American cities. While there was general support for the SAA model, some
results were mixed, particularly with respect to the strength and orthogonality of the three factors, leading Anderson
and Bean (1961)
to question whether the same factor solution would emerge using alternative variables and whether the factors
would remain static in number and interpretation. Anderson and Egeland (1961) probe the question in more depth,
ﬁnding support for Burgess’s concentric zones theory in terms of urbanization but not with respect to social rank,
and Udry (1964) argues that the factor solution is sensitive to the size of the spatial units. In the ongoing debate,
even Bell and Greer (1962) conceded that while “there is clearly emergent and presumptive evidence of veriﬁed
theoretical structure in the Shevky schema of urban analysis, additional speciﬁcations, elaboration, and formulation
are necessary,” and as more human ecologists heeded his call, exploratory investigations of the factor structure of
urban areas blossomed into their own subﬁeld called “factorial ecology.”

2.2.2

| Factorial Ecology

Through the 1970s a staggering number of Factorial Ecology (FE) studies appeared in the literature. Unlike its predecessor SAA, which tried to derive three theoretically meaningful constructs using factor analysis, then performed
a cluster analysis on those axes to understand urban segmentation, FE is typically more open-ended. Instead, FE is
an inductive approach that leverages exploratory factor analysis and eschews clustering. Similar to Anderson and
Bean (1961), factorial ecology researchers are interested in how the urban social structure might be modeled if a
more diverse set of variables were factored. Following, in FE many social variables are provided to a factor model

Elijah Knaap et al.

7

and components emerge from the data. By examining which variables load strongly on which factors, researchers can
intuit the conceptual interpretation of each component. Conceptually, factorial ecology borrows from psychological
personality research and psychometrics, modifying “factors of the mind” into factors of the neighborhood (Palm and
Caruso, 1972). Berry (1971) and Rees (1971) develop “factor
models” that borrow from psychological personality research and factor labeling in factorial ecology. Factor models are sensitive to the choice of rotation (oblique or orthogonal) and the estimation procedure used (Hunter, 1972).
Accordingly, many of the results that have emerged from studies of factorial ecology should be treated with skepticism
until it can be shown that they are robust to the choice of factor model used (Salins, 1971; Taylor and Parkes, 1975;
Newton and Johnston, 1976; Perle, 1979). Others have criticized factorial ecology for lacking theory, arguing that it
amounts to quantitative ﬁshing, since any derived factor structure can be explained ex-post-facto.
Despite these criticisms, FE studies have been undertaken all over the world and its diverse applications were
even featured in a special issue of Economic Geography (Berry, 1971). Scholars have canvassed a wide variety of
continents, cultures, and class-systems, including Ireland (Parker, 1975) Sweden (Janson, 1971), the Middle East (Landay, 1971), India (Rees, 1969; Berry, 1971), Canada (Murdie, 1969; Bourne and Barber, 1971), and Brazil (Morris and
Pyle, 1971), in addition to Los Angeles, Chicago (Hunter, 1971), a wide variety of other American cities (Palm and
Caruso, 1972), and more. Despite this broad applicability–or perhaps because of it–Landay (1971) raises the issue
of generalizability and cultural sensitivity when applying factorial ecology in diﬀerent contexts. Of particular interest
is the method by which variables are chosen. If the focus is on a “contextual mode of inquiry,” how much hyperlocal
context needs to be embedded in the data, and how “standardized” might be the results? Perfect contextual data is
inﬁnitely nuanced by deﬁnition, and any attempt to distill a set of “standardized” results is, therefore, oﬀ the mark.
Thus “if the goal is to make broad descriptive statements, factor analysis may be the appropriate technique, but if the
goal is to make statements concerning relationships among speciﬁc variables of theoretical interest, correlation and
regression methods would appear to be more appropriate” (Berry, 1971, p. 214)

2.2.3

| Ecometrics

Following the initial excitement in factorial ecology during the 1960s and 1970s, the practice quickly fell out of vogue
and lay mostly dormant through the 1980s and 1990s, presumably in part due to its inability to address methodological
critiques. After this lull, however, explorations into the factor structure of communities were revived by Raudenbush
and Sampson (1999) in a seminal article introducing a newly minted sub-ﬁeld they term “Ecometrics.” To overcome
the problems of factorial ecology in the earlier generation, Raudenbush & Sampson propose several improvements to
the methodology. First, they argue that while large scale databases like the US Census contain a variety of useful data,
they typically fail to capture many of the most important ecological properties of neighborhoods. Instead, Raudenbush
& Sampson advocate the use of item-response models tailored speciﬁcally to collect information about community
structures.
In conjunction with the proposed data collection devices, they encourage the use of conﬁrmatory factor analysis
(CFA), as opposed to the exploratory factor analyses (EFA) employed by factor ecologists. Conﬁrmatory factor analysis is a special case of structural equation modeling which, unlike its exploratory cousin, allows social scientists to
test a-priori theories about factor relationships by specifying a measurement model that describes how particular variables should load onto designated theoretical latent constructs; in so doing, CFA provides an inferential framework for
testing whether the social construct under consideration is supported by the data. In this way ecometrics is a marked
departure from factor ecology (and arguably a return to Chicago School ideals); whereas the latter is concerned with
exploratory urban research, using diverse datasets to examine emergent factors and developing post-hoc interpreta-

8

Elijah Knaap et al.

tions of them, the former is concerned with deductive research. A theory about why certain variables are presumed
to load into semantically-meaningful factors is stated formally, arguments justifying this are made, and then statistical
tests of ﬁt are performed to interrogate these claims (Mujahid et al., 2007).
Ecometrics is still a ﬂedgling methodology, but it has already been shown capable of developing valid and reliable
measures of social constructs like collective eﬃcacy, physical disorder, and social disorder, which have important implications for human behavior (Sampson and Raudenbush, 1999; Raudenbush and Sampson, 1999; Sampson, 2002,
2012b). The predominant barrier to adoption in ecometric research has been the costly requirement of systematic
social observation (Sampson and Raudenbush, 1999). Part of the push for ecometrics was that large-scale administrative data (e.g. the Census) often lack information about the most important ecological properties of communities, and
thus novel (and expensive) data collection strategies are necessary. Recently, however, researchers have attempted to
make ecometric research more accessible by incorporating “big data” sources and “virtual audits” (O’Brien et al., 2015;
Bader et al., 2015, 2017; Sampson, 2017). It seems likely that ecometric analysis will continue to grow in popularity,
particularly as additional datasets and new applications materialize. Meanwhile, however, ecometric studies are relatively rare, and the more common practice, by far, is the development of neighborhood classiﬁcations and typologies.
Instead of factor analysis, these studies employ cluster analysis to identify groups of neighborhoods (i.e. census tracts)
whose racial, economic, physical and other attributes are internally homogeneous. This approach is discussed in detail
in the following section.

2.2.4

|

Geodemographics

Whereas the early Chicago scholars were interested in explaining the relationship between social processes and spatial structure, another pervasive interest has been describing the emergence of a particular spatial structure when
considering certain socioeconomic, demographic, or behavioral variables. Indeed, “in geographic knowledge discovery the aim is, more often than not, to explore and let spatial patterns surface rather than develop predictive models”
(Henriques et al., 2012, p. 218).
This approach represents an important conceptual shift from the factor analytic approaches discussed in Section
2.2.2. From a procedural standpoint, both factor analysis and cluster analysis are data reduction techniques sometimes described as “unsupervised machine learning”; whereas factor analysis and geodemographics create composite
indices that maintain the greatest amount of information or variance. Thus, factor analysis and geodemographics require a ‘speculative synthesis’ when determining the meaning of the latent variables. For factor analysis, this requires
determining the meaning of loadings; for geodemographics, this requires identifying a meaningful demographic proﬁle
for each geodemographic classiﬁcation (Spielman and Thill, 2008). As a result, meaning is synthesized from statistical
proﬁles, instead of generated at the outset through a theory or hypothesis about urban social structure.
Thus, some expressive analysis methods are deductive, seeking to develop theory and test hypotheses about
urban ecological processes (e.g. ecometrics). Others focus on inductive analysis, exploring the multitude of ways that
urban segregation manifests without specifying the axes of diﬀerentiation (e.g. geodemographics). As ecometrics
modernizes factorial ecology, so too does geodemographics modernize social area analysis.
In this sense, geodemographics reorient social area analysis away from sociological models of spatial structure to
geographic ones. The sociological line of inquiry is arguably about location choice: why do diﬀerent groups of people
come to inhabit discrete parts of the city? It is also concerned with social process: how do spatial contexts (and the
social systems that develop within them) inﬂuence collective behaviors like altruism or crime? In addressing these
questions, urban sociologists wanted to know if the same factor structure emerged in diﬀerent places and diﬀerent
societies–if so, it would represent anthropological evidence that human social and political behavior is inﬂuenced by

Elijah Knaap et al.

9

some kind of natural laws. By contrast, the geographic line of inquiry is arguably about location intelligence: how
diﬀerent are any two neighborhoods, based on the estimated proﬁles of their residents? What can we learn about
cities by studying how residential areas are split by diﬀerent classiﬁcations? In both cases, geography is an expression
or manifestation of the underlying fundamental process at hand, rather than an object of study itself.
Over the last several decades, geodemographics has become a common avenue of academic study and a lucrative
enterprise for private industry market research. Indeed, “the analysis of people by where they live” (Petersen et al.,
2011, p. 174) has become the dominant approach for characterizing how socio-spatial structure is expressed in urban
areas. Much like BCZ, geodemographic approaches “organize areas into categories sharing similarities across multiple
socioeconomic attributes” (Singleton and Spielman, 2014, p. 558). The distinguishing diﬀerence between SAA and
geodemographics is that the latter does not employ factor analysis prior to clustering. Thus, rather than describing the
essential components of urbanism, geodemographic classiﬁcations are themselves “small area indicators of the social,
economic and demographic conditions prevailing in small areas, or ‘neighbourhoods’.” As statistics themselves, these
classiﬁcations can ﬂexibly incorporate any kind of urban data (Singleton and Longley, 2009b, p. 289). This ﬂexibility
means that geodemographic approaches can be tailored to a wide variety of purposes, but also raises the challenge
in “substantiating that they reﬂect real divisions in society, not chance grouping in the data” (Singleton and Spielman,
2014, p. 563).
Geodemographic segmentation systems have been applied with success to a wide variety of practical settings
including public health (Farr and Evans, 2005; Abbas et al., 2009; Petersen et al., 2011), education (Harris et al., 2007;
Singleton and Longley, 2009a; Singleton et al., 2012), criminal justice (Ashby and Longley, 2005), marketing (Dalton
and Thatcher, 2015), road safety (Brown et al., 1999; Anderson, 2010), urban microsimulation (Birkin and Clarke,
2012), and several others (Singleton and Spielman, 2014). In the realm of public policy, Webber and Burrows (2018)
show how the city of Liverpool has been using geodemographics for decades to develop better urban plans, and
Batey and Brown (2007) develop a geodemographic method for assessing whether government initiatives are serving
adequately their intended spatial targets. In the private sector, meanwhile, geodemographic systems like MOSAIC and
ACORN have ﬂourished over the last several decades, enabling marketing and ﬁnancial service providers to better
target customers using geodemographics to model customer behavior (Farr and Webber, 2001). Towards this end
commercial products have proven enormously powerful and consume voracious amounts of data through partnerships
with aggregators like Experian and other ﬁnancial vendors (Webber and Burrows, 2018).

3

|

URBAN REGIONAL SCIENCE: EMBODYING URBAN CONTEXTS

All expressive methods seek to analyze how urban space expresses social diﬀerence, which is done either by identifying the distinct eﬀect neighborhoods have on their inhabitants or by estimating unique classiﬁcations/demographic
proﬁles that apply to pre-existing demographic areas. In contrast to this, the embodied approaches of urban regional
science take urban space as constitutive of social diﬀerence. Instead of identifying how (pre-existing) neighborhoods
are divided by sociodemographic structures, spatially-coherent neighborhoods are constructed that embody these
divides. Alternatively, instead of estimating the eﬀect of context on its inhabitants, the shape of context itself is distilled from its inhabitants. Thus, whereas expressive methods use geography as a medium to express social structure,
embodied methods identify coherent geographies latent within sociodemographic structure.
What a “coherent” geography means, though, requires the core analytical concept of regional science, the “region.” In urban regional science, a “region” is a spatially-bounded territory that stands in for a conceptually- or
mathematically-relevant target of analysis. Since regions are “spatially-bounded,” they are usually exclusive (mean-

10

Elijah Knaap et al.

ing that observations can only be in one region) and exhaustive (all observations are in at least one region). Thus,
regions completely partition the urban space under study. Their use (and thus, relevance) depends on the context
being studied (Openshaw, 1977). With respect to identifying neighborhoods, regionalization methods operationalize (Galster, 2001), ﬁnding “bundles of spatially based attributes associated with clusters of residences.” But, urban
regional science approaches focus on more than neighborhoods alone, allowing for meaningful “bundles of spatially
based attributes” that pertain to a wide variety of distinct urban locations (residences, but also workplaces, commute paths, leisure spaces, etc.). Focusing exclusively on urban regional science about neighborhoods, then, bounding
these coherent bundles of spatially based attributes identiﬁes how relevant social processes are embodied within urban space. The methods, techniques, & common operational theories used to estimate these boundaries are called
“regionalization.”
Distinct from “clustering,” regionalization requires the partitioning of a map into a ﬁnite number of exclusive
labellings. Map clustering seeks only to identify unusual regions, even those that are geographically irregular (Kolatch, 2001) or do not provide an exhaustive partition.2 Thus, clustering is a fully “unsupervised” analytical technique,
whereas regionalization is often described as semi-supervised. Generally-speaking, the analyst has a notion of how
many regions are desired, geographical conditions the regions should satisfy (such as compactness, convexity, and/or
contiguity), and which implicit geographies the detected regions might echo (Duque et al., 2007). However, in nearly
all cases, the recovery of an existing neighborhood geography is not the end of regionalization, so it is not a strictly
supervised technique.
Beyond the core unifying concept of the embodied “region,” regionalization methods have a much wider and diffuse set of applications & techniques. Because regional delineations are strongly dependent on how the process plays
out in space, regionalization methods themselves usually do not relate to speciﬁc hypotheses about social systems.
Instead, regionalization involves a large set of broadly useful methods for partitioning geographies. This can make
the literature on regionalization appear more diﬀuse than the expressive methods discussed previously. However,
this diﬀusiveness is a necessary companion of maturing geographic perspectives (Johnston et al., in press); there are
few grand “geographic theories” in the same sense as those considered by the Chicago School, only speciﬁc theories
about the geography of each social process. In light of this, we present the regionalization in the following section
by identifying commonality in both methods & applications. For each case study we discuss, we identify common
regionalization strategies, examine shared conceptual entities that regions are used to represent, and describe how
these embodied geographies might relate to other studies’ geographies.

3.1

| Regionalization methods

In their review of regionalization algorithms, Duque et al. (2007) identify ﬁve criteria used for drawing regions. They
describe the various conditions governing how “areas,” the fundamental units of observation being grouped, are usually grouped together into the “regions” deﬁning a regionalization. Below, we name and paraphrase the conditions
suggested Duque et al. (2007) that regionalizations tend to satisfy:
1.

exclusiveness - observations are in at most one region

2.

exhaustiveness - observations are in at least one region

3.

fullness - each region has more than one observation

4.

disjunction - each region has a distinctive geographic location and does not overlap or blend into another

5.

optimality - the regionalization is designed to score well according to a formally-speciﬁed objective

2 For

a recent overview of these cluster detection methods, consult Grubesic et al. (2014).

Elijah Knaap et al.

11

Thus, a regionalization algorithm usually provides a full, exclusive-exhaustive partition of a source graph (designed to
represent the urban geography under analysis) into many distinctive parts. Taken together, these subgraphs satisfy
some target goal or objective; this objective might be explicitly spatial, purely sociodemographic, or may reﬂect a
mixture of any number of component objectives.

3.2

| Fully-Exclusive Regionalizations: bounding the neighbourhood

Work on the fundamental theory of how best to conduct regionalization analyses, in general, is active and ongoing
(Folch and Spielman, 2014; Laura et al., 2015; Kim et al., 2016; She et al., 2017). Although regions are sometimes
required purely for statistical purposes (Openshaw, 1977; Spielman and Folch, 2015), regions are often used to model
urban residential markets (Royuela and Duque, 2013), social communities (Hipp, 2010; Hipp et al., 2012, 2013), political communities (Morrill, 1976; Guo, 2008; Pang et al., 2010; Tam Cho and Liu, 2016; Magleby and Mosesson, 2018),
disease clusters (Assuncao et al., 2006), and transit zones (Guo and Bhat, 2007; Li et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2015). 3
Depending on the social process under study and the frame of analysis, these may be larger or smaller than
other common notions of how “large” a neighborhood is from the perspective of the expressive literature (Spielman
and Singleton, 2015). Often, these analyses compare the identiﬁed data-driven regions to an existing regionalization,
identifying how and where the the solutions agree or examining which observations tend to be ill-ﬁtting. This means
that many analyses consider the number of observed regions as if it reﬂects a “known” or true number of admissible
regions. This is not a necessary constraint (Duque et al., 2012), however, and the number of admissible (or intelligible) regions has itself be used to analyze volatility in neighborhood dynamics (Rey et al., 2011) or to provide more
useful statistical summaries of small-area estimates (Bação et al., 2004; Henriques et al., 2010; Assunçao et al., 2006;
Spielman and Folch, 2015).

3.3

| The Fuzzy Urban Region

In geoscience & nature geography, many regionalizations have allowed for classiﬁcations which are not strictly disjoint (Bourgault et al., 1992; Leyk and Zimmermann, 2007; Long et al., 2010; Yuan et al., 2015). In these cases, it is
reasonable to consider the regions being embodied as only partially-identiﬁable. Ecological or geological zones may
reasonably blend smoothly into one another, creating spaces where samples might plausibly fall into more than one
cluster/region.
Only some of their bounds, edges, or extents are discernible, mainly where the diﬀerence in empirical characteristics between regions is largest.
However, by dint of constraint, classical regionalization methods may force these partially-identiﬁed regions into
being complete exclusive-exhaustive assignments. This is akin to some of the concerns discussed by Spielman and
Singleton (2015); uncertainty both about which region a site ought to fall into and uncertainty about the site itself may
aﬀect classiﬁcations across the board. What Kwan (2012) refers to as the “Uncertain Geographic Context Problem”–
this fundamental epistemological uncertainty about the scale and precise hierarchy at which theorized regions aﬀect
observations–is an intrinsically diﬃcult representational problem. In general, since one cannot know the “true” regions that individuals ﬁnd most relevant or most impactful for a given social process (or combination of processes),
misspeciﬁcation of the relevant regions may result in statistical or empirical artifacts; observations may be assigned
the incorrect contextual eﬀect, multiple contexts may act jointly and their eﬀects are not identiﬁable, observations
3 Beyond

the urban, regionalization is common in the identiﬁcation of ecological zones (Long et al., 2010; Miele et al., 2014; Yuan et al., 2015; Long and

Robertson, 2018)

12

Elijah Knaap et al.

may be mis-assigned and thus bias an existing contextual eﬀect estimate away from its “true” value were the set of
all regions known.
Indeed, this is a fundamental concern: Isard (1956) identiﬁes this problem right from the outset of urban regional
science. He notes, “[regional scientists] shall probably never be in the position to identify a ’true’ set of regions,” so
they are forced to use a new purpose-driven regionalization for each distinct interrogation. Thus, the “true” context,
in Isard’s view, was likely to remain uncertain. However, through repeated study, commonalities in the structure of
relevant regions would emerge, possibly leading to regions which minimized the extent to which they obscured the
social processes they co-constituted. While these are just now coming within reach for advanced statistical studies
(Bradley et al., 2017), the extent to which these regions represent intelligible socially-experienced geographies is
currently unknown. Thus, while some analyses do aim to critically consider uncertainties and measurement (Harris
et al., 2007; Gale and Longley, 2013; Singleton et al., 2016; Knaap, 2017), practical consideration of the uncertain
structure of urban regions in this literature is surprisingly rare given the issue’s longstanding theoretical attention.
Beyond uncertainty in classiﬁcation, the inherent rigidity of assuming regions are disjoint, which means that the
identiﬁed zones may be more separated or distinguished geographically than they may be in theory. As some of
the hierarchical and spectral methods note, classiﬁcations need not be strictly disjoint; indeed, it is often reasonable
to think that regions or neighborhoods may have “fuzzy” boundaries. This uncertainty of boundary is distinct from
uncertainty in classiﬁcation or measurement; if regions are useful insofar as they identify a distinct territory, then
blending or interlacing assignments at the boundary may denote areas where a single region assignment may not be
useful or accurate. There are a few attempts to generalize these concerns in classic regionalization methods, either by
considering membership itself as a fuzzy decision (Ambroise et al., 1997; Ambroise and Govaert, 1998; Cowpertwait,
2011; Hu et al., 2009; Reich and Bondell, 2011) or by allowing a component assumption of disjointedness to be relaxed
(Spielman and Logan, 2013; Yuan et al., 2015; Wolf, 2018). For instance, in Spielman and Logan (2013), street segments
are classiﬁed into ethnic categories using historical census data. However, classiﬁcations are not exhaustive, in that
some streets are not identiﬁed as being of any discernible ethnic category. Further, “neighborhoods” are looselybounded, allowing for the intermingling of classiﬁcations into the same bounded space. However, in these studies,
neighborhoods qua regions still represent a single zone, albeit less crisply-bounded; in the case of social applications,
these zones reﬂect shared contexts that are experienced by many individuals in a shared socio-spatial urban geography.
It is only the assumptions about regional structure—that they must be exclusive, exhaustive, and disjoint—that have
been relaxed.

3.3.1

| Rejecting the Neighborhood-as-Region

There are also outright rejections of exclusiveness, exhaustiveness, or disjunction. In the main, these rejections of
neighborhoods as regions are theoretically motivated. They may suggest that only a subset of boundary/transitional
areas is well-deﬁned. These bounding approaches focus exclusively on identifying zones of rapid change rather than
providing membership into discrete categories (in a processes referred to as “wombling”) (Womble, 1951; BocquetAppel and Bacro, 1994; Lu et al., 2007; Dean et al., 2018). Another rejection of classical region assumptions in urban
regional science involves the rejection of shared context. Here, “egohoods,” or spaces of individual/personal experience (Hipp and Boessen, 2013), are used instead. These spaces of individual experience tend to overlap signiﬁcantly,
are usually unique for each individual (Spielman and Thill, 2008; Spielman and Yoo, 2009; Logan et al., 2011; Spielman
et al., 2013) although the characteristics of these spaces can change dramatically depending on how large they are
(Fowler, 2016). Because the egohood is purely theoretical and obtained usually from straightforward computations
applied to individuals’ locations, “bounding” an egohood (or shared spaces between egohoods) is not conceptually

Elijah Knaap et al.

13

useful in the same manner as for the region. Thus, it is unusual to consider the co-incidence of egohood boundaries,
even though this is a common method of analysis when interviewing individuals about what they perceive their neighborhoods to be (Coulton et al., 2001; Campbell et al., 2009; Coulton et al., 2013; Hwang, 2016). Thus, egohoods
are conceptually and practically distinct from neighborhoods since they (in general) do not pertain to collections of
residences (or transit destinations or sales locations, etc).

3.4

| Dynamics of Urban Spaces

Bounding the neighborhood is, however, only the ﬁrst step in the study of neighborhood dynamics. Dating at least
back to Isard (1956), regional dynamics, the changes in shape and structure of urban regions, have been prised over
“comparative statics.” Isard believed we were “far from developing meaningful dynamical models which would require
a constantly-changing regional pattern” (p.21, ibid); yet, in some ways, we are still far from this goal. As Rey et al. (2011)
note, neighborhoods can change in two ways. Neighborhood composition—the sociodemographic proﬁle that characterizes each neighborhood—can change, and their boundaries—the spatial extent over which each neighborhood
is considered salient—can drift. Most clearly, processes like gentriﬁcation and the “back to the city movement” have
considered dynamics primarily in the ﬁrst case; known & bounded urban places change in their economic or racial characteristics. Further, some attention has been paid to drift & disagreement about boundaries in urban spaces (Hwang,
2016) though this usually focuses on change in subjective perceptions or individual identiﬁcation of urban space.
In general, most work in dynamics has been exploratory, describing and identifying latent patterns in social-spatial
structure, rather than model-based in Isard’s (or even Raudenbush and Sampson (1999)’s ecometric) terminology.
More generally, there are many strategies which aim to characterize the dynamics of neighborhood change in
terms of ﬁxed-boundary changes of composition, the drifting boundaries of urban places, or their covariation. An important review of neighborhood change in expressive analytical frameworks is provided by Schwirian (1983), who outlines several broad patterns of change, including invasion-succession and neighborhood life cycle (which he describes
as classical models). He suggests that demographic/ecological, socio-cultural/organizational, political-economy, and
social movements can change neighborhood characteristics. But, given that these neighborhoods are assumed to
express underlying social structure from the outset, any type of social change could modify how social traits are
expressed at any point in urban space.
Recent work on modeling the urban neighborhood change tends to focus on historical footprints of speciﬁc urban
spaces from a holistic perspective. One vibrant strand of work is found in analyzing the sequences using the optimal
matching algorithm (Abbott, 1995; Gauthier et al., 2010). In these analyses, an initial geodemographic analysis is
adopted to segment underlying urban space into speciﬁc neighborhood classes (Mikelbank, 2011; Delmelle and Thill,
2014; Delmelle, 2015, 2016; Ling and Delmelle, 2016; Delmelle, 2017). Then, the historical experience of an urban
area can be examined by summarizing the sequences of the identiﬁed neighborhood classiﬁcations it experiences. An
interesting trait of the current work is that it tends to focus on similarity of experience and could be asynchronous;
two areas could be considered to have analogous historical demographic trends if they make the same sequence of
transitions at diﬀerent times. It could be very interesting and rewarding in terms of revealing hidden urban dynamics
patterns to fully exploit the optimal matching algorithm and its variants widely used in other ﬁelds of social science
(Studer and Ritschard, 2016). On the other hand, some recent research applied measures of income mobility to provide complementary insights in neighborhood change (Modai-Snir and van Ham, 2018). More speciﬁcally, the total
neighborhood change is decomposed into exchange and structural eﬀects similar to the income mobility tradition (van
Kerm, 2004). Further cross-fertilization between economic and social dynamics could be explored. Other interesting
analyses of neighborhood change are viscerally expressive, examining changes in images of urban streets (Hwang,

14

Elijah Knaap et al.

2015; Naik et al., 2017).
Other perspectives aim at modeling and predicting the dynamics of neighborhoods. As Mikelbank (2011) notes,
many neighborhoods experience deja vu: they may appear to be transformed, acquiring wholly-new characteristics,
but instead quickly change into another common and established type of neighborhood. Thus, work examining
how the urban space transitions between neighborhood classes over time provides an alternative characterization
of neighborhood dynamics (Aaronson, 2001; Rey et al., 2011, 2012; Delmelle, 2015; Arribas-Bel and Tranos, 2018).
These studies model the trajectories of neighborhood classiﬁcations as a Markov Chain based on which a transition
count/probability matrix can be estimated and further analyzed. In this case, trajectories of neighborhood classes are
stepwise examined, rather than being analyzed holistically as a sequence. Some classes might be “stable,” in that they
may tend to retain their classiﬁcation rather than change classiﬁcation frequently. Others may be “volatile,” in that
they may have a high probability of transitioning to other classes. It should be noted that the classic Markov chains
model does not take account of potential spatial eﬀects such as spatial autocorrelation and spatial heterogeneity, as
well as temporal heterogeneity. Strategies for diagnostics and extensions could borrow from the regional income
distribution dynamics literature (Rey, 2001; Rey et al., 2016; Kang and Rey, 2018) and interpretation should proceed
with caution.
In general, developing these kinds of longitudinal analyses of dynamics has historically been frustrated by the
lack of available data. Despite long-running historical projects that focus on speciﬁc urban places (Sampson, 2012a),
long-term high-resolution longitudinal sociodemographic data suitable for spatial analysis are expensive to develop
and maintain. So, it has only recently been made freely- and openly-available (Logan et al., 2014, e.g.). This concern
also applies to urban street-level imagery, and as such, the recent cultivation of these large and extensive datasets
has lifted the prospects for longitudinal analysis of neighborhoods broadly.

4

|

ISSUES AT THE FRONTIER

At present, the analysis of neighborhoods occupies a somewhat enigmatic space in urban studies. Despite the longstanding interest, signiﬁcant work is still necessary to obtain basic theoretical frameworks for some traits of neighborhoods, such as their usual social- or spatial size (Fowler, 2016; Talen, 2018). The application of geodemographic
typologies has proven useful repeatedly in a variety of settings, and their instrumental value is clear. Further, studies
in urban regionalization continue to cast doubt on Isard’s hope of a single true context that appears and reappears
across many regionalizations (Poorthuis, 2018). Regardless, however, the development of regionalization methods
tends to be largely descriptive, cross-sectional, and driven strongly by non-academic interests.
Despite their practical utility, geodemographic studies are explicitly non-causal expressions of social structure.
Thus, in their pursuit of active, responsive visualization of the social tapestry as is, geodemographics has done very
little to advance scientiﬁc understanding of the underlying social and political processes by which spatial segmentation
arises and the mechanisms by which society or individuals enforce & reinforce it over time. Rich historical accounts of
geodemographic work Webber and Burrows (2018) and Singleton and Spielman (2014) detail the success geodemographics have enjoyed in practical settings, but the relative dearth of academic geodemographics is conspicuous.
There are a variety of other critiques which might turn researchers away from geodemographic work (Voas and
Williamson, 2001). But, geodemographics as a discipline is also exceptionally-responsive to academic critique when
it does occur For instance, “ on the ﬂy" visualisation of the outcome of geodemographic classiﬁcations (Singleton and
Longley, 2009b) allows for response and interactive segmentation and exploratory spatial data analysis. Linking “of
conventional social, economic and demographic geographies to patterns of virtual interactions at ﬁne levels of spatial

Elijah Knaap et al.

15

granularity” (Longley, 2012) empowers detailed and sensitive insights to be obtained. For many current and planned
geodemographic output area classiﬁcations, a broad set of stakeholders is consulted directly. Finally, leveraging “the
best spatial analysis methods in a problem centered approach” (Singleton and Longley, 2009b, p.290) has supplanted
one-size-ﬁts-all approaches.
These improvements aside, one of the longstanding criticisms of geodemographics has been that typologies “fail
to advance any real understanding of the social processes which cause neighborhoods to change” (Webber and Burrows, 2018, p. 130). One possible reason is that geodemographic analyses are contingent, precisely-oriented to a
speciﬁc objective on which the demographic segmentation is drawn. This makes them diﬃcult to evaluate objectively.
Indeed, “classiﬁcation can only be deemed ‘good’ or ‘poor’ when it has been evaluated in terms of the speciﬁc purpose
for which it is required” (Singleton and Spielman, 2014).
This also means that critical decisions about parameterization have no true answer; the “best” number of clusters
can be identiﬁed (Rousseeuw, 1987; Frey and Dueck, 2007, e.g.), but this may not provide the clearest or most useful
contrasts for the visualization of these clusters. There is considerable variability for this parameter in the literature:
ﬁve neighborhood types have generally emerged in academic analysis (Mikelbank, 2004; Delmelle, 2015; Foote and
Walter, 2017; Xiang et al., 2018), but commercial systems have evolved over time, with original systems using 10
low-level categories, later systems leveraging over 40 (Webber and Burrows, 2018), and still others with over 100
(Brown and Batey, 1994). Further, hierarchical typologies may nest types-within-types, creating arbitrary numbers
and conﬁgurations of sub-types within types. The rationale for these decisions is often unclear or uncompelling from
a theoretical perspective, but can profoundly aﬀect the resulting structure of identiﬁed neighborhoods.
Despite broad utility and appeal in the geographical sciences, a major limitation of geodemographics remains
that “current geodemographic systems cannot be considered to be explicitly spatial in design, estimation or testing,
and that local context requires systematic consideration in geodemographic proﬁling” (Singleton and Longley, 2009b,
p. 289). Further, “it is increasingly clear that what is missing is explicitly spatial representation of the accumulated
eﬀects of historical and cultural processes” (Longley, 2012). In general, this can foster a good kind of “blindness” in
the geodemographic classiﬁcation. Without extensive consideration of deep history & geography urban demographic
segmentations, the analyses may hope to discover novel or interesting patterns, unconstrained by legacies of space
and time.
Indeed, the lack of explicit geographical constraint is often viewed as enhancing ﬂexibility more than a limitation,
since, as Schwirian points out, “social areas” were originally deﬁned such that “the subareas need not be contiguous.
Their similarity arises from the social similarity, not the physical proximity of their residents” (Schwirian, 1983, p.
86). Geographies that are strongly spatially-similar will generate nearly-contiguous geodemographic classiﬁcations,
and ones that are not, do not. Moving forward, there is a clear opportunity to bridge expressive and embedded
perspectives to include formal models of spatial relationships (Rey and Janikas, 2005; Rey et al., 2011, 2015), but
these (as of yet) are neither common nor simple.
In contrast, explicit models of spatial regionalization tend to still ﬁxate on methodological developments. Typically, these innovations tend to focus on getting regionalizations faster (Laura et al., 2015), with higher quality (Bradley
et al., 2017), or with better guarantees on their properties relative to the rest of an unfathomably-large set of possible
regionalization (Chikina et al., 2017). These methodological innovations reﬂect substantial advances in a known-hard
methodological problem, but the relative lack of theoretical work on the validity of urban regionalization methods remains here, too. Further, concerns from geodemographics, such as those about arbitrary numbers of neighborhoods
or a solution’s contingency on a speciﬁc purpose or context, still apply in regionalization (Duque et al., 2012). Thus,
while regionalization is often presented more strictly as a methodological problem to be solved through methodological means, it is likely that better theory about the social-spatial structure of neighborhoods could beneﬁt both the

16

Elijah Knaap et al.

current cutting-edge embedded and expressive methods of analysis.

4.1

| Toward an Urban and Regional Ecology

Contemporary approaches for modeling socio-spatial structure, the expressive perspective employing cluster analysis and the embodied perspective of employing regionalization, are successors to long lines of urban social science.
While the former is typically practiced by sociologists as a deductive method for understanding the geography of
social processes, the latter is typically practiced by geographers as an inductive method to understand the emergent
patterning of spatial structure. Unfortunately, these quantitative disciplines have seldom crossed in the literature, to
the detriment of urban scholarship writ large. In our view, these approaches are complements, not substitutes: crossfertilization between empirical researchers would provide more robust insights into the human processes under study
in the city. For most cases, this requires better theory-driven development of methods in neighborhood dynamics.
Addressing common concerns about uncertainty in demographic classiﬁcations, future work may aim to integrate
the classiﬁcation and prediction models into the same probabilistic framework. This is currently under active development (e.g. Bradley et al., 2017), and will likely only continue to be more attractive as statistical thinking becomes more
expressive and “harder” models become more feasible. Integrating the classiﬁcation and use model ensures that the
uncertainty and ﬂux in classiﬁcation decisions are formally linked to how they are used.
For instance, many of the geodemographic and regionalization methods are conceptualized as estimating “latent”
categories of observations. Recent work makes it simpler to chain theories together in hierarchical models, which nest
models of multiple processes together in a single consistent probabilistic framework. While hierarchical modeling is
not new, formal analysis and computation methods make them more feasible now than they ever have been before.
Thus, more extensive use of relevant formal statistical theory is required to address concerns about uncertainty in the
analysis of neighborhood dynamics.
Second, it is necessary for more explicit attention to be paid to the human theory underlying neighborhood
dynamics. For instance, in analogue to ethnographic studies that use participants’ notions of neighborhood boundaries
to obtain a consensus about neighborhood structures (Coulton et al., 2001; Campbell et al., 2009; Coulton et al., 2013;
Hwang, 2016), do neighborhoods of wealth comport with neighborhoods of transit or healthcare or race? Regions
or geodemographic partitions can be drawn, but to what extent do the discovered map patterns coincide? Current
geodemographic and regionalization analyses tend to focus on the latent structure of a large amount of social data,
reprising the same data reduction timbre from early Chicago School study. However, since data-driven analyses are
destined to be contingent on middle-range theory, it may be more illuminating to embrace this narrowness, examining
how patterns in regionalizations or geodemographic partitions of diﬀerent social processes coincide.
Third, it is important to reconcile the theoretical distinctions made between expressive and embedded analyses.
Explicitly-spatial strategies to integrate information about conﬁguration and pattern of the input data into geodemographic classiﬁcation must be embraced, improved, and deployed. Further, strict beliefs about neighborhoods or
regions as contiguous zones need to be relaxed in future work in urban regional science. This may involve methods
that explicitly relax constraints (Yuan et al., 2015; Wolf, 2018) or generalize their meaning (Wu and Murray, 2008).
While there are sometimes explicit statistical or mathematical challenges to using spatial data directly within classic
geodemographic methods, simpler strategies exist and can be remarkably eﬀective (Halleck Vega and Elhorst, 2015).
It is important to consider these directions in developments to analyze socio-spatial structure.
Finally, the study of true dynamics is critical for relevance in the future. What a true dynamical model of joint
spatial and social structure might look like is still uncertain, however. Currently, work proceeds by considering the
social structure of tract-years, the “ﬂattened” collection of neighborhoods in space and time. When these are linked

Elijah Knaap et al.

17

together in the analysis of transitions or demographic sequences, there is usually not a generative model (in the sense
of Schwirian (1983)’s descriptive typologies). Regardless of the speciﬁc expressive/embedded approach, this lack of
generative dynamics makes it diﬃcult to address Longley (2012)’s concerns about how the accumulation of historical
experiences can be invisible or obscured in geodemographic analysis. Better models of neighborhoods as dynamic
social-spatial systems may yet prove more sensitive to this legacy of experience.

5

|

CONCLUSION

The history of neighborhood dynamics is storied, and involved with many central strands of social science throughout the mid-20th century. However, diﬃcult conceptual challenges, identiﬁed at the outset of this genre of study,
still plague the domain. This persistent disunity centers on the precise mechanisms and actions by which neighborhoods operate in urban space. Through what social process do neighborhoods (as things in themselves) aﬀect their
inhabitants? Which “neighborhoods” (or generally, urban regions) are germane to which processes, and do all neighborhoods play a part in that process? What are neighborhoods for? Despite the longstanding interests in bounding
their territory, estimating their eﬀects, and describing their dynamics, these questions are still largely approached by
examining as broad of social data as possible, attempting to draw suﬃciently general geodemographic classiﬁcations
using a large amount of census data. While this means the study of neighborhood dynamics often considers the intersection of many diﬀerent social processes, it still remains contingent on “narrow spatial theorizing,” Isard (1956, p.
20) or sometimes no theorizing at all.
Thus, in some ways, the same challenges that have existed continue to exist in nearly the same form, although
data and computation have improved immensely. Indeed, there have been so many important, recognizable advances
in the methodology for understanding the dynamics of neighborhoods, that it is diﬃcult to characterize exactly how
extensive these advances are. New data on new human experiences continue to challenge and change the ways in
which we bound and describe neighborhoods. New algorithms and mathematical advances improve the quality and
precision with which urban structure can be prescriptively divided or descriptive divisions estimated.
However, most of the theory for modeling neighborhoods and their socio-spatial structure derive from the Chicago
School, whose pursuit of human ecology began 100 years ago (Abbott, 1997, p. 1153). Many new methods still reprise
the same theoretical motifs from this earlier work. And while once a towering paradigm in the social sciences, human
ecology has lain dormant for many years. As we have shown, contemporary methods provide two distinct views on
how neighborhoods are meaningful in cities. Unfortunately, the growth, maturation, and adoption of methods belonging to the embedded and expressive perspectives have apparently accompanied the erection of disciplinary silos and
as a result, modern urban ecology is more diﬀuse and it is diﬃcult to trace the exact moment of its genesis.
Moving forward we call for a new generation of scholarship that bridges the perspectives, leveraging the useful
theoretical backing of the Chicago school with the stronger geographies of urban regional science. Today, we argue,
there is an emerging generation of urban ecological scholarship that does precisely this. Though sometimes not actively conscious of this lineage, this new urban ecology traces much of its heritage to the Chicago School. Unlike these
predecessors, however, the new urban ecology strives to blend urban regional science embeddings with new expressive analyses. It is this new urban ecology, then, that stands poised to provide new perspectives on the fundamental
divide in the study of neighborhood dynamics.

18

Elijah Knaap et al.

references
Aaronson, D. (2001) Neighborhood Dynamics. Journal of Urban Economics, 49, 1–31. URL: http://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/S0094119000921818.
Abbas, J., Ojo, A. and Orange, S. (2009) Geodemographics – a tool for health intelligence? Public Health, 123, e35–e39. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.puhe.2008.10.007http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S003335060800276X.
Abbott, A. (1995) Sequence Analysis: New Methods for Old Ideas. Annual Review of Sociology, 21, 93–113. URL: http:
//www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev.so.21.080195.000521.
— (1997) Of Time and Space: The Contemporary Relevance of the Chicago School. Social Forces, 75, 1149. URL: http:
//www.jstor.org/stable/2580667?origin=crossref.
Alonso, W. (1964) Location and Land Use: Toward a General Theory of Land Rent. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ambroise, C., Dang, M. and Govaert, G. (1997) Clustering of Spatial Data by the EM Algorithm. In Geostatistics for Environmental Applications, vol. 9, 493–504. URL: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=?doi=10.1.1.25.3634http:
//link.springer.com/10.1007/978- 94- 017- 1675- 8{_}40.
Ambroise, C. and Govaert, G. (1998) Convergence of an EM-type algorithm for spatial clustering. Pattern Recognition Letters,
19, 919–927. URL: http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0167865598000762.
Anderson, T. K. (2010) Using Geodemographics to Measure and Explain Social and Environment Diﬀerences in Road Traﬃc
Accident Risk. Environment and Planning A, 42, 2186–2200. URL: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1068/a43157.
Anderson, T. R. and Bean, L. L. (1961) The Shevky-Bell Social Areas: Conﬁrmation of Results and a Reinterpretation. Social
Forces, 40, 119–124. URL: https://academic.oup.com/sf/article-lookup/doi/10.2307/2574289.
Anderson, T. R. and Egeland, J. A. (1961) Spatial Aspects of Social Area Analysis. American Sociological Review, 26, 392. URL:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2090666?origin=crossref.
Arribas-Bel, D. and Tranos, E. (2018) Characterizing the spatial structure (s) of cities “on the ﬂy”: The space-time calendar.
Geographical Analysis, 50, 162–181.
Arsdol, M. D., Camilleri, S. F. and Schmid, C. F. (1958a) An Application of the Shevky Social Area Indexes to a Model of Urban
Society. Social Forces, 37, 26–32. URL: https://academic.oup.com/sf/article-lookup/doi/10.2307/2573775.
Arsdol, M. D. V., Camilleri, S. F. and Schmid, C. F. (1958b) The Generality of Urban Social Area Indexes. American Sociological
Review, 23, 277. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2089241?origin=crossref.
Ashby, D. I. and Longley, P. A. (2005) Geocomputation, Geodemographics and Resource Allocation for Local Policing. Transactions in GIS, 9, 53–72. URL: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.1467- 9671.2005.00205.x.
Assuncao, R., Costa, M., Tavares, A. and Ferreira, S. (2006) Fast detection of arbitrarily shaped disease clusters. Statistics in
medicine, 25, 723–742.
Assunçao, R. M., Neves, M. C., Câmara, G. and Da Costa Freitas, C. (2006) Eﬃcient regionalization techniques for socio???economic geographical units using minimum spanning trees. International Journal of Geographical Information Science,
20, 797–811. URL: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/13658810600665111.
Bação, F., Lobo, V. and Painho, M. (2004) Geo-self-organizing map (Geo-SOM) for building and exploring homogeneous regions. International Conference on Geographic Information Science, 22—-37. URL: http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.
1007/978- 3- 540- 30231- 5{_}2.
Bader, M., Mooney, S. J., Bennett, B. and Rundle, A. G. (2017) The Promise, Practicalities, and Perils of Virtually Auditing
Neighborhoods Using Google Street View. The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 669, 18–
40. URL: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0002716216681488.

Elijah Knaap et al.

19

Bader, M., Mooney, S. J., Lee, Y. J., Sheehan, D., Neckerman, K. M., Rundle, A. G. and Teitler, J. O. (2015) Development and
deployment of the Computer Assisted Neighborhood Visual Assessment System (CANVAS) to measure health-related
neighborhood conditions. Health & Place, 31, 163–72. URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1353829214001580http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1353829214001580.
Batey, P. and Brown, P. (2007) The Spatial Targeting of Urban Policy Initiatives: A Geodemographic Assessment Tool. Environment and Planning A, 39, 2774–2793. URL: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1068/a38519.
Bell, W. (1953) The Social Areas of the San Francisco Bay Region. American Sociological Review, 18, 39. URL: http://search.
ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true{&}AuthType=ip,uid{&}db=sih{&}AN=12770865{&}site=ehost-live{&}scope=
sitehttp://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0003- 1224{%}28195302{%}2918{%}3A1{%}3C39{%}3ATSAOTS{%}3E2.0.
CO{%}3B2-O{&}origin=crossref.
— (1955) Economic, Family, and Ethnic Status: An Empirical Test. American Sociological Review, 20, 45. URL: http://www.
jstor.org/stable/2088199?origin=crossref.
Bell, W. and Boat (1957) Urban Neighborhoods and Informal Social Relations. American Journal of Sociology, 62, 391–
398. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2772880{%}0Ahttp://www.jstor.org.proxy.uchicago.edu/stable/pdfplus/
2772880.pdf?acceptTC=true.
Bell, W. and Force, M. T. (1956) Urban Neighborhood Types and Participation in Formal Associations. American Sociological
Review, 21, 25. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2089336?origin=crossref.
Bell, W. and Greer, S. (1962) Social Area Analysis and Its Critics. The Paciﬁc Sociological Review, 5, 3–9. URL: http://www.
jstor.org/stable/info/10.2307/1388270.
Berry, B. J. L. (1971) Introduction: The Logic and Limitations of Comparative Factorial Ecology. Economic Geography, 47, 209.
URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/143204?origin=crossref.
Birkin, M. and Clarke, G. (2012) The enhancement of spatial microsimulation models using geodemographics. Annals of Regional Science, 49, 515–532.
Bocquet-Appel, J. and Bacro, J. (1994) Generalized wombling. Systematic Biology, 43, 442–448.
Bourgault, G., Marcotte, D. and Legendre, P. (1992) The multivariate (co)variogram as a spatial weighting function in classiﬁcation methods. Mathematical Geology, 24, 463–478. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/BF00890530.
Bourne, L. S. and Barber, G. M. (1971) Ecological Patterns of Small Urban Centers in Canada. Economic Geography, 47, 258.
URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/143208?origin=crossref.
Bradley, J. R., Wikle, C. K. and Holan, S. H. (2017) Regionalization of multiscale spatial processes by using a criterion for spatial
aggregation error. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 79, 815–832.
Brindley, T. and Raine, J. (1979) Social Area Analysis and Planning Research. Urban Studies, 16, 273–289. URL: http://
journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1080/713702552.
Brown, P. J. B. and Batey, P. (1994) Design and Construction of a Geodemographic Targeting System: Super Proﬁles 1994.
Tech. Rep. July, The Urban Research and Policy Evaluation Regional Research LaboratoryUniversity of Liverpool, Liverpool.
Brown, P. J. B., Hirschﬁeld, A. F. G., Merrall, S., Bowers, K. J. and Marsden, J. (1999) Targeting Community Safety Projects: The
Use of Geodemographics and GIS in the Identiﬁcation of Priority Areas for Action. In European Regional Science Association
/ Regional Science Association International 39th European Congress - ERSA99, no. September 1999.
Burdick-Will, J. A., Ludwig, J., Raudenbush, S. W., Sampson, R. J., Sanbonmatsu, L. and Sharkey, P. T. (2010) Converging
Evidence for Neighborhood Eﬀects on Children’s Test Scores: An Experimental, Quasi-Experimental, and Observational
Comparison. In Whither opportunity?: Rising inequality, schools, and children’s life chances, 255–276.

20

Elijah Knaap et al.

Burgess, E. W. (2008) The Growth of the City: An Introduction to a Research Project. In Urban Ecology (eds. J. M. Marzluﬀ, E. Shulenberger, W. Endlicher, M. Alberti, G. Bradley, C. Ryan, U. Simon and C. ZumBrunnen), 71–78. Boston, MA:
Springer US. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 0- 387- 73412- 5{_}5http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978- 0- 38773412- 5{_}5.
Campbell, E., Henly, J. R., Elliott, D. S. and Irwin, K. (2009) Subjective constructions of neighborhood boundaries: lessons from
a qualitative study of four neighborhoods. Journal of Urban Aﬀairs, 31, 461–490.
Chen, Y., Xu, J. and Xu, M. (2015) Finding community structure in spatially constrained complex networks. International Journal
of Geographical Information Science, 29, 889–911.
Chetty, R., Hendren, N. and Katz, L. (2015) The Eﬀects of Exposure to Better Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from
the Moving to Opportunity Experiment. Tech. Rep. August, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. URL:
http://www.nber.org/papers/w21156.pdf.
Chetty, R., Hendren, N., Kline, P. and Saez, E. (2014) Where is the land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational
Mobility in the United States *. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 1553–1623. URL: https://academic.oup.com/
qje/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/qje/qju022.
Chikina, M., Frieze, A. and Pegden, W. (2017) Assessing signiﬁcance in a markov chain without mixing. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 114, 2860–2864.
Coulton, C. J., Jennings, M. Z. and Chan, T. (2013) How big is my neighborhood? individual and contextual eﬀects on perceptions of neighborhood scale. American journal of community psychology, 51, 140–150.
Coulton, C. J., Korbin, J., Chan, T. and Su, M. (2001) Mapping residents’ perceptions of neighborhood boundaries: a methodological note. American journal of community psychology, 29, 371–383.
Cowpertwait, P. S. P. (2011) A regionalization method based on a cluster probability model. Water Resources Research, 47.
URL: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1029/2011WR011084.
Dalton, C. M. and Thatcher, J. (2015) Inﬂated granularity: Spatial “Big Data” and geodemographics. Big Data & Society, 2,
205395171560114. URL: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/2053951715601144.
Dean, N., Dong, G., Piekut, A. and Pryce, G. (2018) Frontiers in residential segregation: Understanding neighbourhood boundaries and their impacts. Tijdschrift voor economische en sociale geograﬁe.
Delmelle, E. C. (2015) Five decades of neighborhood classiﬁcations and their transitions: A comparison of four US cities, 1970–
2010. Applied Geography, 57, 1–11. URL: http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0143622814002860http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2014.12.002.
— (2016) Mapping the DNA of urban neighborhoods: Clustering longitudinal sequences of neighborhood socioeconomic
change. Annals of the American Association of Geographers, 106, 36–56.
— (2017) Diﬀerentiating pathways of neighborhood change in 50 U.S. metropolitan areas. Environment and Planning A, 49,
2402–2424. URL: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0308518X17722564.
Delmelle, E. C. and Thill, J. C. (2014) Neighborhood quality-of-life dynamics and the great recession: The case of charlotte,
North Carolina. Environment and Planning A, 46, 867–884.
Diez Roux, A. V. (2001) Investigating Neighborhood and Area Eﬀects on Health. American Journal of Public Health, 91, 1783–
1789. URL: http://ajph.aphapublications.org/doi/10.2105/AJPH.91.11.1783.
Diez Roux, A. V. and Mair, C. (2010) Neighborhoods and health. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1186, 125–
145. URL: http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true{&}db=a9h{&}AN=48116272{&}site=ehost-livehttp:
//doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.1749- 6632.2009.05333.x.

Elijah Knaap et al.

21

Duque, J. C., Anselin, L. and Rey, S. J. (2012) THE MAX-P-REGIONS PROBLEM*. Journal of Regional Science, 52, 397–419.
URL: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/j.1467- 9787.2011.00743.x.
Duque, J. C., Ramos, R. and Suriñach, J. (2007) Supervised Regionalization Methods: A Survey. International Regional Science
Review, 30, 195–220. URL: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0160017607301605.
Farr, M. and Evans, A. (2005) Identifying ‘unknown diabetics’ using geodemographics and social marketing. Journal of Direct,
Data and Digital Marketing Practice, 7, 47–58. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1057/palgrave.dddmp.4340504.
Farr, M. and Webber, R. (2001) MOSAIC: From an area classiﬁcation system to individual classiﬁcation. Journal of Targeting,
Measurement and Analysis for Marketing, 10, 55–65. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1057/palgrave.jt.5740033.
Fischer, C. S. (1972) "Urbanism as a Way of Life". Sociological Methods & Research, 1, 187–242. URL: http://journals.
sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/004912417200100203.
Folch, D. C. and Spielman, S. E. (2014) Identifying regions based on ﬂexible user-deﬁned constraints. Int. J. Geogr. Inf. Sci., 28,
164–184.
Foote, N. and Walter, R. (2017) Neighborhood and socioeconomic change in emerging megapolitan nodes: tracking shifting social geographies in three rapidly growing United States metropolitan areas, 1980–2010. Urban Geography,
38, 1203–1230. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/02723638.2016.1217637https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.
1080/02723638.2016.1217637.
Fowler, C. (2016) Segregation as a multiscalar phenomenon and its implications for neighborhood-scale research: The case
of south Seattle 1990-2010. Urban geography, 37, 1–25.
Frey, B. J. and Dueck, D. (2007) Clustering by Passing Messages Between Data Points. Science, 315, 972–976. URL: http:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17218491http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/doi/10.1126/science.1136800.
Gale, C. G. and Longley, P. A. (2013) Temporal uncertainty in a small area open geodemographic classiﬁcation. Transactions in
GIS, 17, 563–588.
Galster, G. (2001) On the Nature of Neighbourhood. Urban Studies, 38, 2111–2124. URL: http://journals.sagepub.com/
doi/10.1080/00420980120087072.
— (2012) The mechanism (s) of neighbourhood eﬀects: Theory, evidence, and policy implications. In Neighbourhood eﬀects
research: New perspectives (eds. M. van Ham, D. Manley, N. Bailey, L. Simpson and D. Maclennan), 23–56. New York:
Springer.
— (2017) The Geography of Opportunity 20 Years Later. Housing Policy Debate, 27, 941–943. URL: https://www.tandfonline.
com/doi/full/10.1080/10511482.2016.1216745.
Galster, G. C. and Sharkey, P. T. (2017) Spatial Foundations of Inequality: A Conceptual Model and Empirical Overview. RSF: The
Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences, 3, 1. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.7758/rsf.2017.3.2.01.
Garner, C. L. and Raudenbush, S. W. (1991) Neighborhood Eﬀects on Educational Attainment: A Multilevel Analysis. Sociology
of Education, 64, 251. URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/2112706?origin=crossrefhttp://www.jstor.org/stable/
2112706http://www.jstor.org/stable/2112706?origin=crossref.
Gauthier, J., Widmer, E. and Bucher, P. (2010) Multichannel sequence analysis applied to social science data. Sociological,
1–38. URL: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467- 9531.2010.01227.x/full.
Greer, S. (1956) Urbanism Reconsidered: A Comparative Study of Local Areas in a Metropolis. American Sociological Review,
21, 19. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2089335?origin=crossref.

22

Elijah Knaap et al.

Grubesic, T. H., Wei, R. and Murray, A. T. (2014) Spatial Clustering Overview and Comparison: Accuracy, Sensitivity, and Computational Expense. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 104, 1134–1156. URL: http://www.tandfonline.
com/doi/abs/10.1080/00045608.2014.958389.
Guo, D. (2008) Regionalization with dynamically constrained agglomerative clustering and partitioning (REDCAP). International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 22, 801–823. URL: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/
13658810701674970.
Guo, J. Y. and Bhat, C. R. (2007) Operationalizing the concept of neighborhood: Application to residential location choice
analysis. Journal of Transport Geography, 15, 31–45.
Halleck Vega, S. and Elhorst, J. P. (2015) The SLX Model. Journal of Regional Science, 55, 339–363.
Harris, R., Johnston, R. and Burgess, S. (2007) Neighborhoods, Ethnicity and School Choice: Developing a Statistical Framework for Geodemographic Analysis. Population Research and Policy Review, 26, 553–579. URL: http://link.springer.
com/10.1007/s11113- 007- 9042- 9.
Hawley, A. H. (1950) Human Ecology: A Theory of Community Structure. Ronald Press. URL: https://books.google.com/books?
id={_}GvXAQAACAAJ.
Hawley, A. H. and Duncan, O. D. (1957) Social Area Analysis: A Critical Appraisal. Land Economics, 33, 337. URL: http:
//www.jstor.org/stable/3144311?origin=crossref.
Henriques, R., Bacao, F. and Lobo, V. (2010) Spatial Clustering with SOM and GeoSOM: Case Study of Lisbon’s Metropolitan
Area. In 2010 Second International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services, 148–
152. IEEE. URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5437658/.
— (2012) Exploratory geospatial data analysis using the GeoSOM suite. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 36, 218–
232.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2011.11.003http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0198971511001141.
Herbert, D. (1967) Social Area Analysis: a British Study. Urban Studies, 4, 41–60. URL: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/
10.1080/00420986720080031.
Hipp, J. R. (2010) Micro-structure in micro-neighborhoods: A new social distance measure, and its eﬀect on individual and
aggregated perceptions of crime and disorder. Social Networks, 32, 148–159. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.
2009.11.001.
Hipp, J. R. and Boessen, A. (2013) Egohoods as waves washing across the city: A new measure of “neighborhoods”. Criminology,
51, 287–327.
Hipp, J. R., Butts, C. T., Acton, R., Nagle, N. N. and Boessen, A. (2013) Extrapolative simulation of neighborhood networks
based on population spatial distribution: Do they predict crime? Social Networks, 35, 614–625. URL: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.socnet.2013.07.002http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S037887331300066X.
Hipp, J. R., Faris, R. W. and Boessen, A. (2012) Measuring ’neighborhood’: Constructing network neighborhoods. Social
Networks, 34, 128–140. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2011.05.002.
Hu, T., Ouyang, J., Qu, C. and Liu, C. (2009) Initialization of the Neighborhood EM Algorithm for Spatial Clustering. In Lecture
Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics), vol.
5678 LNAI, 487–495. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978- 3- 642- 03348- 3{_}48.
Hunter, A. (1971) The Ecology of Chicago: Persistence and Change, 1930-1960.
American Journal of Sociology, 77, 425–444. URL: http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true{&}AuthType=ip,uid{&}db=sih{&}AN=
15404476{&}site=ehost-live{&}scope=site.

Elijah Knaap et al.

23

— (1975) The Loss of Community: An Empirical Test Through Replication.
American Sociological Review, 40,
537. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2094194{%}0Ahttp://www.jstor.org/stable/2094194?origin=crossrefhttp:
//www.jstor.org/stable/2094194?origin=crossref.
Hunter, A. A. (1972) Factorial Ecology: A Critique and Some Suggestions. Demography, 9, 107. URL: http://link.springer.
com/10.2307/2060548.
Hwang, J. (2015) Gentriﬁcation in changing cities: Immigration, new diversity, and racial inequality in neighborhood renewal.
The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 660, 319–340.
— (2016) The Social Construction of a Gentrifying Neighborhood. Urban Aﬀairs Review, 52, 98–128. URL: http://journals.
sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1078087415570643.
Isard, W. (1956) Regional science, the concept of region, and regional structure. Papers in Regional Science, 2, 13–26.
Janson, C.-g. (1971) A Preliminary Report on Swedish Urban Spatial Structure. Economic Geography, 47, 249. URL: http:
//www.jstor.org/stable/143207?origin=crossref.
Johnston, R., Harris, R., Jones, K., Manley, D., Wang, W. W. and Wolf, L. (in press) Quantitative methods i: The world we have
lost – or where we started from. Progress in Human Geography. URL: https://doi.org/10.1177/0309132518774967.
Kang, W. and Rey, S. J. (2018) Conditional and joint tests for spatial eﬀects in discrete markov chain models of regional income
distribution dynamics. The Annals of Regional Science. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00168- 017- 0859- 9.
van Kerm, P. (2004) What lies behind income mobility? reranking and distributional change in belgium, western germany and
the usa. Economica, 71, 223–239. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3549096.
Kim, K., Dean, D. J., Kim, H. and Chun, Y. (2016) Spatial optimization for regionalization problems with spatial interaction: a
heuristic approach. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 30, 451–473. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1080/13658816.2015.1031671http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/13658816.2015.1031671.
Knaap, E. (2017) The Cartography of Opportunity: Spatial Data Science for Equitable Urban Policy. Housing Policy Debate, 27,
913–940. URL: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/10511482.2017.1331930.
Kolatch, E. (2001) Clustering algorithms for spatial databases: A survey. Tech. rep., University of Maryland, College Park. URL:
http://mrl.cecsresearch.org/Resources/papers/Ericasurvey.pdf.
Kwan, M.-P. (2012) The uncertain geographic context problem. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 102, 958–
968.
Landay, S. (1971) The Ecology of Islamic Cities: The Case for the Ethnocity. Economic Geography, 47, 303. URL: http:
//www.jstor.org/stable/143212?origin=crossref.
Laura, J., Li, W., Rey, S. J. and Anselin, L. (2015) Parallelization of a regionalization heuristic in distributed computing platforms – a case study of parallel- p -compact-regions problem. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 29,
536–555. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2014.987287http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/
13658816.2014.987287.
Leyk, S. and Zimmermann, N. E. (2007) Improving land change detection based on uncertain survey maps using fuzzy sets.
Landscape Ecology, 22, 257–272.
Li, W., Church, R. L. and Goodchild, M. F. (2014) An extendable heuristic framework to solve the p-compact-regions problem
for urban economic modeling. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 43, 1–13. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.compenvurbsys.2013.10.002http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0198971513000872.
Ling, C. and Delmelle, E. C. (2016) Classifying multidimensional trajectories of neighbourhood change: a self-organizing map
and k-means approach. Annals of GIS, 22, 173–186. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/19475683.2016.1191545.

24

Elijah Knaap et al.

Logan, J. R. (1978) Growth, Politics, and the Stratiﬁcation of Places. American Journal of Sociology, 84, 404–416. URL: http:
//www.jstor.org.proxy.lib.ohio-state.edu/stable/2777855.
Logan, J. R., Spielman, S., Xu, H. and Klein, P. N. (2011) Identifying and Bounding Ethnic Neighborhoods. Urban Geography,
32, 334–359. URL: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.2747/0272- 3638.32.3.334.
Logan, J. R., Xu, Z. and Stults, B. J. (2014) Interpolating us decennial census tract data from as early as 1970 to 2010: A
longitudinal tract database. The Professional Geographer, 66, 412–420.
Long, J., Nelson, T. and Wulder, M. (2010) Regionalization of Landscape Pattern Indices Using Multivariate Cluster Analysis.
Environmental Management, 46, 134–142. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s00267- 010- 9510- 6.
Long, J. and Robertson, C. (2018) Comparing spatial patterns. Geography Compass, 12, e12356.
Longley, P. A. (2012) Geodemographics and the practices of geographic information science. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 26, 2227–2237. URL: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/13658816.2012.719623.
Lu, H., Reilly, C. S., Banerjee, S. and Carlin, B. P. (2007) Bayesian areal wombling via adjacency modeling. Environmental and
Ecological Statistics, 14, 433–452.
Magleby, D. B. and Mosesson, D. B. (2018) A new approach for developing neutral redistricting plans. Political Analysis, 26,
147–167.
McKenzie, R. D. (1924) The Ecological Approach to the Study of the Human Community. American Journal of Sociology, 30,
287–301. URL: http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/213698.
Mendenhall, R., DeLuca, S. and Duncan, G. (2006) Neighborhood resources, racial segregation, and economic mobility: Results
from the Gautreaux program. Social Science Research, 35, 892–923. URL: http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S0049089X05000293.
Merriman, B. (2015) Three Conceptions of Spatial Locality in Chicago School Sociology (and Their Signiﬁcance Today). American Sociologist, 46, 269–287.
Miele, V., Picard, F. and Dray, S. (2014) Spatially constrained clustering of ecological networks. Methods in Ecology and Evolution,
5, 771–779.
Mikelbank, B. A. (2004) A typology of U.S. suburban places. Housing Policy Debate, 15, 935–964.
— (2011) Neighborhood Déjà Vu: Classiﬁcation in Metropolitan Cleveland, 1970-2000. Urban Geography, 32, 317–333. URL:
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.2747/0272- 3638.32.3.317.
Mills, E. S. (1967) An Aggregative Model of Resource Allocation in a Metropolitan Area. The American Economic
Review, 57, 197–210. URL: http://pum.princeton.edu/pumconference/papers.htmlhttp://www.jstor.org/stable/
1821621{%}5Cnhttp://www.jstor.org/stable/1821621.
Modai-Snir, T. and van Ham, M. (2018) Structural and exchange components in processes of neighbourhood change: A social
mobility approach. Applied Spatial Analysis and Policy. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12061- 017- 9249-z.
Morrill, R. L. (1976) Redistriciting revisited. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 66, 548–553.
Morris, F. B. and Pyle, G. F. (1971) The Social Environment of Rio de Janeiro in 1960. Economic Geography, 47, 286. URL:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/143210?origin=crossref.
Mujahid, M. S., Diez Roux, A. V., Morenoﬀ, J. D. and Raghunathan, T. (2007) Assessing the Measurement Properties of
Neighborhood Scales: From Psychometrics to Ecometrics. American Journal of Epidemiology, 165, 858–867. URL:
https://academic.oup.com/aje/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/aje/kwm040.

Elijah Knaap et al.

25

Murdie, R. A. (1969) Factorial ecology of metropolitan Toronto, 1951-1961: an essay on the social geography of the city. No. nos.
115-117 in University of Chicago. Department of geography. Research paper. [University of Chicago] Dept. of Geography.
URL: https://books.google.com/books?id=JjwDAAAAMAAJ.
Muth, R. F. (1969) Cities and housing; the spatial pattern of urban residential land use. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 91, 19–41. URL: http://trid.trb.org/view.aspx?id=545388.
Naik, N., Kominers, S. D., Raskar, R., Glaeser, E. L. and Hidalgo, C. A. (2017) Computer vision uncovers predictors of physical
urban change. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114, 7571–7576. URL: http://www.pnas.org/lookup/doi/
10.1073/pnas.1619003114.
Newton, P. W. and Johnston, R. J. (1976) Residential Area Characteristics and Residential Area Homogeneity: Further
Thoughts on Extensions to the Factorial Ecology Method. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space, 8, 543–552.
URL: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1068/a080543.
O’Brien, D. T., Sampson, R. J. and Winship, C. (2015) Ecometrics in the Age of Big Data. Sociological Methodology, 45, 101–147.
URL: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0081175015576601.
Openshaw, S. (1977) A Geographical Solution to Scale and Aggregation Problems in Region-Building, Partitioning and Spatial
Modelling. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 2, 459. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/622300http:
//www.jstor.org/stable/622300?origin=crossref.
Palm, R. and Caruso, D. (1972) Factor Labelling In Factorial Ecology. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 62,
122–133.
Pang, S., He, H., Li, Y., Zhou, T. and Xing, K. (2010) An approach of redistricting based on simple and compactness. In
International Conference in Swarm Intelligence, 415–424. Springer.
Park, R. E., Burgess, E. W. and McKenzie, R. D. (1925) The City. Chicago: Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. URL:
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3004850?origin=crossref.
Parker, J. B. A. (1975) The Factorial Ecology of Dublin: A Preliminary Investigation. Economic and Social Review. URL: http:
//edepositireland.ie/bitstream/handle/2262/69075/v7n11975{_}3.pdf?sequence=1{&}isAllowed=y.
Perle, E. D. (1979) Variable Mix and Factor Stability in Urban Ecology. Geographical Analysis, 11, 410–414. URL: http://doi.
wiley.com/10.1111/j.1538- 4632.1979.tb00708.x.
Petersen, J., Gibin, M., Longley, P., Mateos, P., Atkinson, P. and Ashby, D. (2011) Geodemographics as a tool for targeting
neighbourhoods in public health campaigns. Journal of Geographical Systems, 13, 173–192.
Poorthuis, A. (2018) How to draw a neighborhood? the potential of big data, regionalization, and community detection for
understanding the heterogeneous nature of urban neighborhoods. Geographical Analysis, 50, 182–203.
Raudenbush, S. W. and Sampson, R. J. (1999) Ecometrics: Toward a Science of Assessing Ecological Settings,
with Application to the Systematic Social Observation of Neighborhoods.
Sociological Methodology, 29, 1–
41. URL: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0081- 1750.00059/abstract{%}5Cnhttp://doi.wiley.com/10.
1111/0081- 1750.00059http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1111/0081- 1750.00059.
Rees, P. H. (1969) The Factorial Ecology of Calcutta. American Journal of Sociology, 74, 445–491. URL: http://www.journals.
uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/224681.
— (1971) Factorial Ecology: An Extended Deﬁnition, Survey, and Critique of the Field.
Economic Geography,
47, 220. URL: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.2753/JEI0021- 3624440403http://www.jstor.org/stable/
143205?origin=crossref.
Reich, B. J. and Bondell, H. D. (2011) A Spatial Dirichlet Process Mixture Model for Clustering Population Genetics Data.
Biometrics, 67, 381–390.

26

Elijah Knaap et al.

Rey, S., Anselin, L., Li, X., Pahle, R., Laura, J., Li, W. and Koschinsky, J. (2015) Open Geospatial Analytics with PySAL. ISPRS
International Journal of Geo-Information, 4, 815–836. URL: http://www.mdpi.com/2220- 9964/4/2/815/http://www.mdpi.
com/2220- 9964/4/2/815.
Rey, S. J. (2001) Spatial empirics for economic growth and convergence. Geographical Analysis, 33, 195–214.
Rey, S. J., Anselin, L., Folch, D. C., Arribas-Bel, D., Sastré Gutiérrez, M. L. and Interlante, L. (2011) Measuring Spatial Dynamics
in Metropolitan Areas. Economic Development Quarterly, 25, 54–64. URL: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/
0891242410383414.
Rey, S. J. and Janikas, M. V. (2005) Regional convergence, inequality, and space. Journal of Economic Geography, 5, 155–176.
URL: https://academic.oup.com/joeg/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/jnlecg/lbh044.
Rey, S. J., Kang, W. and Wolf, L. (2016) The properties of tests for spatial eﬀects in discrete markov chain models of regional
income distribution dynamics. Journal of Geographical Systems, 18, 377–398. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10109016- 0234-x.
Rey, S. J., Mack, E. A. and Koschinsky, J. (2012) Exploratory Space–Time Analysis of Burglary Patterns. Journal of Quantitative
Criminology, 28, 509–531. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s10940- 011- 9151- 9.
Rousseeuw, P. J. (1987) Silhouettes: a graphical aid to the interpretation and validation of cluster analysis. Journal of computational and applied mathematics, 20, 53–65.
Royuela, V. and Duque, J. C. (2013) Housi: Heuristic for delimitation of housing submarkets and price homogeneous areas.
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 37, 59–69.
Salins, P. D. (1971) Household Location Patterns in American Metropolitan Areas. Economic Geography, 47, 234. URL: http:
//www.jstor.org/stable/143206?origin=crossref.
Sampson, R. J. (2002) Transcending tradition: New directions in community research, Chicago style. Criminology, 40, 213–
230. URL: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1745- 9125.2002.tb00955.x/abstracthttp://doi.wiley.
com/10.1111/j.1745- 9125.2002.tb00955.x.
— (2012a) Great American City. University of Chicago Press. URL: http://www.press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/
chicago/G/bo5514383.htmlhttp://www.asanet.org/journals/CC/MAR13CCFeature.pdfhttp://www.bibliovault.org/BV.
landing.epl?ISBN=9780226734569.
— (2012b) Great American city: Chicago and the enduring neighborhood eﬀect. University of Chicago Press.
— (2017) Urban sustainability in an age of enduring inequalities: Advancing theory and ecometrics for the 21st-century city.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114, 8957–8962. URL: http://www.pnas.org/lookup/doi/10.1073/pnas.
1614433114.
Sampson, R. J., Morenoﬀ, J. D. and Gannon-Rowley, T. (2002) Assessing “Neighborhood Eﬀects”: Social Processes and New
Directions in Research. Annual Review of Sociology, 28, 443–478. URL: http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/
annurev.soc.28.110601.141114http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev.soc.28.110601.141114.
Sampson, R. J. and Raudenbush, S. W. (1999) Systematic Social Observation of Public Spaces: A New Look at Disorder in
Urban Neighborhoods. American Journal of Sociology, 105, 603–651. URL: http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.
1086/210356.
Sampson, R. J., Sharkey, P. and Raudenbush, S. W. (2008) Durable eﬀects of concentrated disadvantage on verbal ability
among African-American children. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105, 845–852. URL: http://www.pnas.
org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.0710189104.
Schmid, C. F. (1950) GENERALIZATIONS CONCERNING THE ECOLOGY OF THE AMERICAN CITY. American Sociological
Review, 15, 264–281.

Elijah Knaap et al.

27

Schmid, C. F., MacCannell, E. H. and van Arsdol Jr., M. D. (1958) THE ECOLOGY OF THE AMERICAN CITY: FURTHER COMPARISON AND VALIDATION OF GENERALIZATIONS. American Sociological Review, 23, 392–401.
Schwirian, K. P. (1983) Models of Neighborhood Change. Annual Review of Sociology, 9, 83–102. URL: http://www.jstor.
org/stable/2946058http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev.so.09.080183.000503.
Sharkey, P. and Elwert, F. (2011) The Legacy of Disadvantage: Multigenerational Neighborhood Eﬀects on Cognitive Ability.
American Journal of Sociology, 116, 1934–81. URL: http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/660009.
Sharkey, P. and Faber, J. W. (2014) Where, When, Why, and For Whom Do Residential Contexts Matter? Moving Away from the Dichotomous Understanding of Neighborhood Eﬀects. Annual Review of Sociology, 40, 559–
579. URL: http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev-soc- 071913- 043350http://www.annualreviews.
org/doi/10.1146/annurev-soc- 071913- 043350.
She, B., Duque, J. C. and Ye, X. (2017) The Network-Max-P-Regions model. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 31, 962–981. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13658816.2016.1252987https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/
10.1080/13658816.2016.1252987.
Shevky, E. and Williams, M. (1949) The social areas of Los Angeles: analysis and typology. Published for the John Randolph
Haynes and Dora Haynes Foundation by the University of California Press. URL: https://books.google.com/books?id=
nrUPAQAAMAAJ.
Sinclair, R. (1967) Von thünen and urban sprawl. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 57, 72–87. URL: http:
//www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1467- 8306.1967.tb00591.x.
Singleton, A., Pavlis, M. and Longley, P. A. (2016) The stability of geodemographic cluster assignments over an intercensal
period. Journal of Geographical Systems, 18, 97–123.
Singleton, A. D. and Longley, P. A. (2009a) Creating open source geodemographics: Reﬁning a national classiﬁcation of census
output areas for applications in higher education. Papers in Regional Science, 88, 643–666. URL: http://doi.wiley.com/
10.1111/j.1435- 5957.2008.00197.x.
— (2009b) Geodemographics, visualisation, and social networks in applied geography.
Applied Geography, 29,
289–298. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2008.10.006http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0143622808000726.
Singleton, A. D. and Spielman, S. E. (2014) The Past, Present, and Future of Geodemographic Research in the United States
and United Kingdom. The Professional Geographer, 66, 558–567. URL: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/
00330124.2013.848764.
Singleton, A. D., Wilson, A. G. and O’Brien, O. (2012) Geodemographics and spatial interaction: an integrated model for higher
education. Journal of Geographical Systems, 14, 223–241. URL: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s10109- 010- 0141- 5.
Spielman, S. E. and Folch, D. C. (2015) Reducing uncertainty in the American Community Survey through data-driven regionalization. PLoS One, 10, 1–21.
Spielman, S. E. and Logan, J. R. (2013) Using high-resolution population data to identify neighborhoods and establish their
boundaries. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 103, 67–84.
Spielman, S. E. and Singleton, A. (2015) Studying Neighborhoods Using Uncertain Data from the American Community
Survey: A Contextual Approach. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 105, 1003–1025. URL: http:
//www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00045608.2015.1052335.
Spielman, S. E. and Thill, J.-C. (2008) Social area analysis, data mining, and GIS. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems,
32, 110–122. URL: http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0198971507000907.

28

Elijah Knaap et al.

Spielman, S. E. and Yoo, E.-h. (2009) The spatial dimensions of neighborhood eﬀects. Social Science & Medicine, 68, 1098–
1105.
Spielman, S. E., Yoo, E.-H. and Linkletter, C. (2013) Neighborhood Contexts, Health, and Behavior: Understanding the Role of
Scale and Residential Sorting. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 40, 489–506.
Studer, M. and Ritschard, G. (2016) What matters in diﬀerences between life trajectories: a comparative review of sequence
dissimilarity measures. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society), 179, 481–511. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1111/rssa.12125.
Suttles, G. D. (1972) The Social Construction of Communities. Studies of urban society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
URL: https://books.google.com/books?id=IsqcQgAACAAJ.
Talen, E. (2018) In support of the unambiguous neighborhood: a proposed size typology. Journal of Urbanism: International
Research on Placemaking and Urban Sustainability, 1–23.
Tam Cho, W. K. and Liu, Y. Y. (2016) Toward a talismanic redistricting tool: A computational method for identifying extreme
redistricting plans. Election Law Journal, 15, 351–366.
Taylor, P. J. and Parkes, D. N. (1975) A Kantian View of the City: A Factorial-Ecology Experiment in Space and Time. Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space, 7, 671–688. URL: http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1068/a070671.
Udry, J. R. (1964) Increasing Scale and Spatial Diﬀerentiation: New Tests of Two Theories from Shevky and Bell. Social Forces,
42, 403–413. URL: https://academic.oup.com/sf/article-lookup/doi/10.2307/2574983.
Van Arsdol,, M. D., Camilleri, S. F. and Schmid, C. F. (1961) An Investigation of the Utility of Urban Typology. The Paciﬁc Sociological Review, 4, 26–32. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/1388484http://www.jstor.org/stable/info/10.
2307/1388271http://www.jstor.org/stable/info/10.2307/1388484.
Van Arsdol, M. D., Camilleri, S. F. and Schmid, C. F. (1962) Further Comments on the Utility of Urban Typology. The Paciﬁc
Sociological Review, 5, 9–13. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/info/10.2307/1388271.
Voas, D. and Williamson, P. (2001) The diversity of diversity: a critique of geodemographic classiﬁcation. Area, 33, 63–
76. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/20004125{%}5Cnhttp://www.jstor.org/stable/pdfplus/20004125.pdfhttp://
doi.wiley.com/10.1111/1475- 4762.00009.
Webber, R. and Burrows, R. (2018) The Predictive Postcode: The Geodemographic Classiﬁcation of British Society. SAGE.
Wirth, L. (1938) Urbanism as a Way of Life. American Journal of Sociology, 44, 1–24. URL: http://www.journals.uchicago.
edu/doi/10.1086/217913http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/004912417200100203.
Wolf, L. J. (2018) Spatially-Encouraged Spectral Clustering : A Critical Revision of Spatially-Constrained Spectral Clustering.
Womble, W. H. (1951) Diﬀerential systematics. Science, 114, 315–322.
Wu, X. and Murray, A. T. (2008) A new approach to quantifying spatial contiguity using graph theory and spatial interaction.
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 22, 387–407.
Xiang, L., Stillwell, J., Burns, L., Heppenstall, A. and Norman, P. (2018) A geodemographic classiﬁcation of sub-districts to
identify education inequality in Central Beijing. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 70, 59–70. URL: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2018.02.002http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0198971517303198.
Yuan, S., Tan, P.-n., Cheruvelil, K. S., College, L. B., Collins, S. M. and Soranno, P. A. (2015) Constrained Spectral Clustering for
Regionalization: Exploring the Trade-oﬀ between Spatial Contiguity and Landscape Homogeneity. In IEEE International
Conference on Data Science and Advanced Analytics (DSAA), 1–10.

