Towards A Queer Futurity of Data
Andrea Zeffiro
05.17.19
Peer-Reviewed By: Tanya Clement and Amelia Acker
Clusters: Data
Article DOI: 10.22148/16.038
Journal ISSN: 2371-4549
Cite: Andrea Zeffiro, “Towards A Queer Futurity of Data,” Journal of Cultural Analytics. May 17, 2019.

Future Visions
On February 17th, 2017, Mark Zuckerberg published a 5,800-word Facebook
post rescripting the company’s Corporate Social Responsibility strategy and
defining its future directions.1 The manifesto, as some commentators referred
to it, declared Facebook’s future vision for “developing the social infrastructure
for community” and emphasized the company’s focus on fostering a global
community that is supportive, safe, informed, civically-engaged, and inclusive.2
“To our community,” the post begins, “On our journey to connect the world,
we often discuss products we’re building and updates on our business. Today I
want to focus on the most important question of all: are we building the world
we all want?”3 Zuckerberg goes on to propose how Facebook can shape an
equitable future, explaining how, “In times like these, the most important thing
1 Mark Zuckerberg, ”Building Global Community,” Facebook, February 16, 2017, accessed
November 03, 2018.
2 Zuckerberg, “Building Global Community.”
3 Zuckerberg, “Building Global Community.”

1

Andrea Zeffiro

Cultural Analytics

we at Facebook can do is develop the social infrastructure to give people the
power to build a global community that works for all of us.”4 This is a radically
optimistic and persuasive agenda, and if one were to focus solely on the efforts
of community building, then one might not be compelled to consider how,
in fact, Facebook will achieve its future vision. Omitted from this sanguine
future narrative is any mention whatsoever of data as its key asset. The basic
work Facebook does is to collect data and to hold on to it for a long time, if
not forever.5 Thus, the future conjured for us by Facebook necessitates the
production of data by its participants, though not once is data referenced.
My contribution to this special issue of Cultural Analytics hinges on but digresses
from a reflection on Zuckerberg’s manifesto, and I focus instead on that which
is invoked through its conspicuous absence: data. It has been nearly a year since
Cambridge Analytica dominated news reports and collective fascination, and we
now know more, though still not enough, as to how Facebook traffics consumer
data. In this enlightened climate is knowledge truly power? Though we know
more, our capacity to talk back to an entity like Facebook is limited. Short of
any alternatives, some of us will choose to continue to use the platform because
it is where we organize collectively and maintain ties to social groups. Others
may heed to the disclosures and tighten controls over how data is shared within,
across, and outside of the platform. And others yet will pull the proverbial plug
and shutter their accounts. Indeed, these are choices one can make in response to
Facebook’s dubious data practices, but none enter into dialogue with the monolithic entity specifically, or data cultures more generally. What other options do
we have to talk back?
The aim of this commentary is to move beyond critique and put forth an alternate framework to think about data cultures. Thus, this work invites a return to
4 Zuckerberg,

“Building Global Community.”

5 Brian X. Chen, ”I Downloaded the Information That Facebook Has on Me.

Yikes.” The New York
Times, April 11, 2018, accessed November 03, 2018, Keith Collins and Larry Buchanan, ”How Facebook Lets Brands and Politicians Target You,” The New York Times, April 11, 2018, accessed November 03, 2018, Nick Douglas, ”Here’s All the Data Facebook Can Learn From Your Selfies,” Lifehacker,
April 10, 2018, accessed November 03, 2018. Sheera Frenkel, Matthew Rosenberg, and Nicholas Confessore, ”Facebook Data Collected by Quiz App Included Private Messages,” The New York Times,
April 10, 2018, accessed November 03, 2018, Alex Hern, ”Facebook Admits Tracking Users and Nonusers Off-site,” The Guardian, April 17, 2018, accessed November 03, 2018, Madison Malone Kircher,
”Ever Record a Video on Facebook? Facebook Still Has It,” New York Magazine, March 28, 2018, accessed November 03, 2018, John Naughton, ”Data-hungry Facebook Seeks Younger Recruits,” The
Guardian, December 10, 2017, accessed November 03, 2018, Kurt Wagner, ”This Is How Facebook
Collects Data on You Even If You Don’t Have an Account,” Recode, April 20, 2018, accessed November 03, 2018, Chris Walters, ”Facebook’s New Terms Of Service: ‘We Can Do Anything We Want
With Your Content. Forever’,” Consumerist, February 16, 2009, accessed November 03, 2018.

2

Cultural Analytics

Towards A Queer Futurity of Data

theory,6 and not as a means to render ‘big data’ intelligible, but rather to draw out
its limits, inadequacies, and dissonances, and to encourage new ways of thinking
about the future of and with data. What follows charts the contours of ‘reproductive data futurism’ as a conceptual framework that seeks to reframe our thinking
about data in the present in order to imagine solutions to political, social and
economic problems that are otherwise framed as problems data can fix.

Data as Culture as Regime of Truth
‘Big data’ is a floating signifier. It is referenced in relation to our interactions
and habits online, our media use and preferences, and it is named as an agent in
politics, business, education, healthcare, and social services, to name but a few
more prominent areas of application. Big data, then, is at once everywhere and
nowhere; it is everything and nothing. It is precisely its elusiveness, which prevents us from knowing it, and in turn, sustains its authority. Working through
the evasiveness of the term, I frame big data co-productively as a technical assemblage, and an ideological apparatus. Data emerge from a nexus of computational tools, techniques and protocols, and infrastructures and institutions. Data
are shaped by what Alexander Galloway (2004) describes as the ‘protocological
condition’.7 “The founding principle of the Net is control, not freedom,” writes
Galloway. “Control has existed from the beginning.”8 For scholars like Galloway
and Wendy Chun,9 the internet is far from a ‘free for all’ and came into existence
and continues to exist as a controlled network through which protocols, as standards, govern how technological developments are agreed to, adopted, implemented, and ultimately put into practice10 and normalizes specific behaviours,
attitudes, and values that uphold and reinforce a big data paradigm. The technical assemblage and ideological apparatus create new conditions of seeing. Orit
Halpern11 refers to these assumptions about the value of data as effectuating
‘communicative objectivity’, which are new forms of observation and rational6 For instance, see: Chris Anderson, ”The End of Theory: The Data Deluge Makes the Scientific
Method Obsolete,” Wired, January 26, 2008, accessed November 03, 2018.
7 Alexander R. Galloway, Protocol: How Control Exists after Decentralization (Cambridge, MA:
MIT, 2006).
8 Galloway, Protocol, 142.
9 Wendy Hui Kyong Chun, Control and Freedom: Power and Paranoia in the Age of Fiber Optics
(Cambridge: MIT Press, 2006).
10 Chun, Control and Freedom, 7.
11 Orit Halpern, Beautiful Data: A History of Vision and Reason since 1945 (Durham: Duke University Press, 2015).

3

Andrea Zeffiro

Cultural Analytics

ity through which we are trained and train ourselves to observe and analyze the
world.
The forms of observation and rationality and the techniques and procedures that
are valorized for creating new conditions of seeing are indicative of what Foucault referred to as a ‘regime of truth.’12 “Truth,” according to Foucault, “is to
be understood as a system of ordered procedures for the production, regulation,
distribution, circulation and operation of statements.”13 It “is linked in a circular
relation with systems of power which produce and sustain it, and to effects of
power which produce and sustain it, and to effects of power which it induces and
which extend it.”14 The regime of truth legitimized by ‘big data’ is linked in a circular relation to ‘dataism’.15 As an ideology governing a new scientific paradigm,
dataism bolsters big data to the production of truth rooted in a belief in the objective quantification of the tracking of all kinds of personal data from social media,
internet platforms, and other communication technologies, as well as a trust in
the institutional entities that collect, interpret, share and monetize data.16 Ten
years ago, Wired editor Chris Anderson postulated how in the ‘Petabyte Age’, a
new era marked by the influx of huge amounts of data and the statistical tools
to process and analyze this data, correlation supplants causation and scientific
inquiry is able to advance without the hampering of consistent models or integrated theories.17 “Who knows why people do what they do?” asks Anderson.
“The point is they do it, and we can track and measure it with unprecedented
fidelity. With enough data, the numbers speak for themselves.”18 Indeed, Anderson’s thesis is provocative by intent, written at the forefront of the mainstreaming
of the term, ‘big data’, and yet, it persists as a master narrative that reinforces a
prevailing data paradigm. A belief and trust in big data as the ‘holy grail of behavioural knowledge’ or as neutral ‘imprints or symptoms of people’s actual behaviours or moods’19 validates it as a conduit towards an objective and accurate
view of reality.

12 Michel Foucault, Power/knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings 1972-1977 (New York:
Pantheon, 1980).
13 Foucault, Power/knowledge, 133.
14 Foucault, Power/knowledge, 133.
15 Jose van Dijck, “Datafication, Dataism and Dataveillance: Big Data between Scientific Paradigm
and Ideology,” Surveillance & Society 12, no. 2 (2014): 197-208, doi:10.24908/ss.v12i2.4776.
16 van Dijck, “Datafication, Dataism and Dataveillance: Big Data between Scientific Paradigm and
Ideology,” 198.
17 Chris Anderson, ”The End of Theory: The Data Deluge Makes the Scientific Method Obsolete,”
Wired, January 26, 2008, accessed November 03, 2018.
18 Anderson, “The End of Theory,” 2008.
19 van Dijck, “Datafication, Dataism and Dataveillance: Big Data between Scientific Paradigm and
Ideology,” 199.

4

Cultural Analytics

Towards A Queer Futurity of Data

Reproductive Data Futurism
The desire to harness and wield big data is not merely an effort to comprehend
the contemporary present. Predictive analytics, for instance, employ techniques
and tools from data mining, modelling, statistics, machine learning and artificial
intelligence to analyze current data and make predictions about the future. We
are led to believe and trust that more data collected now will enable us to calibrate
a clearer image of the future. ‘The future’ evoked here is a linearity or temporality
that protracts the present (the here and the now) into the future (the there and the
later). Thus, the future, in this sense, merely reproduces what already exists and
persists. Building on the work of Lee Edelman,20 I propose ‘reproductive data
futurism’ as a framework for understanding how projections about the future are
intertwined with data in the present.
In No Future: Queer Theory and the Death Drive, Lee Edelman repudiates futurity and contemporary politics, arguing how both are fettered to a heteronormative logic of ‘reproductive futurism’, which for Edelman, entails surrendering the
present for a future embedded in “the logic of a narrative wherein history unfolds
as the future envisioned for a Child who must never grow up.”21 The figure of the
child, as Edelman describes, “has come to embody for us the telos of the social
order and come to be seen as the one for whom that order is held in perpetual
trust.”22 The future is therefore defined by a present heteronormative social order that must be protected and safeguarded because it is the space the child will
inhabit in order to uphold the reproductive logic of the present. For Edelman,
reproductive futurism is a logic that underpins all aspects of society and is especially ingrained in and reproduced by contemporary politics.
Expanding on and departing from Edelman’s polemic, the future in reproductive
data futurism is outlined by a technosocial order that must be preserved and defended because it is the space in which data will be anchored to reaffirm the logic
of the present. Data, much like the figure of the child evoked by Edelman, is a
political trope through which we are coerced into the promise that more data collected now will lead to a better and brighter future. For Zuckerberg, for instance,
this includes the capacity to “prevent harm” by building “social infrastructure
to help our community identify problems before they happen,” which demands
“building artificial intelligence to understand more quickly and accurately what
is happening across our community.”23 Yet such a vision of the future is what
20 Lee Edelman, No Future: Queer Theory and the Death Drive (Durham: Duke University Press,
2007).
21 Edelman, No Future, 151.
22 Edelman, No Future, 11.
23 Mark Zuckerberg, ”Building Global Community,” Facebook, February 16, 2017, accessed

5

Andrea Zeffiro

Cultural Analytics

Claire Birchall describes as ‘structurally speculative’. “The uses to which collected
data will be put and the meanings it will be given are dependent on future algorithms and political concerns.”24 The examples that follow uphold reproductive
data futurism in their promises of a better future. Better than what? In these
future visions, technology relieves contemporary discords with a more desirable
though still uncertain version of the present. Data is the precondition to fulfilling
this future, and yet these examples carefully unfasten it from their narratives.

Data Futures
In December 2016 when Microsoft acquired LinkedIn for 26 billion dollars, company President and Chief Legal Officer Brad Smith nestled the deal between the
Brexit vote and the American Presidential Election. In a blog post aptly titled,
“Microsoft-LinkedIn deal cleared by regulators, opening new doors for people
around the world,” Smith wrote how,
On both sides of the Atlantic, it has become increasingly apparent
that many people feel left out and unable to participate in the economic growth and opportunities created by the rising digital economy…While technology tools are not a panacea for current economic challenges, we believe they can make an important contribution…Our ambition is to do our part to create more opportunity
for people who haven’t shared in recent economic growth.25
Smith asks us to submit to the acquisition as an altruistic aspiration by Microsoft
to create opportunities for individuals snubbed by the digital economy. Nowhere
in Smith’s post does he mention data from LinkedIn’s 433 million members. In
turn, we are more able to disregard the troves of highly personalized data now
acquired by Microsoft and embrace the structurally speculative endeavour of enabling those disenfranchised to find their way into the digital economy with the
help of Microsoft’s steering of LinkedIn.
In the same way that Microsoft plans to use “better data and analytical capabilities to pursue economic development strategies to help connect people with
November 03, 2018.
24 Clare Birchall, “Shareveillance: Subjectivity between Open and Closed Data,” Big Data & Society
3, no. 2 (2016), 6: doi:10.1177/2053951716663965.
25 Brad Smith, ”Microsoft-LinkedIn Deal Cleared by Regulators, Opening New Doors for People
around the World,” The Official Microsoft Blog, December 06, 2016, accessed November 03, 2018.

6

Cultural Analytics

Towards A Queer Futurity of Data

new opportunities,”26 Sidewalk Labs, an urban technologies company that is part
of Google’s parent company Alphabet, plans to build what it describes as “the
world’s first neighborhood built from the internet up”. When the company announced its plans for a new ‘smart city’ on 800 acres of federally owned waterfront
east of downtown Toronto, Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau assured
Canadians of how as a “world leader in urban innovation, Sidewalk Labs will
create a testbed for new technologies… that will help us build smarter, greener,
more inclusive cities which we hope to see scaled across Toronto’s eastern waterfront and, eventually, in other parts of Canada and across the world.”27 Quayside,
as the project is called, will be equipped with sensors and cameras tracking everyone who lives, works or passes through the area. The trade-off of continuous
data tracking and surveillance, as we are reassured, is that the data gathered will
be used to ‘instruct’ the smart city to be responsive to its residents and environment. Nevertheless, in the smart city of the future, we find ourselves snagged
within what Rob Kitchin has identified as a ‘data paradox’. Data systems implemented to make societies more secure, safe, competitive, productive, efficient,
transparent and accountable, necessarily do so through processes that in effect
monitor, survey, discipline, repress, persuade, coerce and exploit individuals.28
In the examples above, reproductive data futurism is codified in part through an
expectant present wherein history can be straightened out by even more data.
If we invest in Microsoft’s or Sidewalk Labs’ reproductive data futurism, for instance, in regard to data acquisition and predictive analytics that tout to make
society more equitable, then we willingly submit to their deliberately obtuse data
practices. And if we are able to convince ourselves that the future these entities
suggest we want is indeed the future we so desire, then we are more able to push
aside any concerns we may have by virtue of our investment in reproductive data
futurism.
Despite promises by Microsoft and Alphabet to produce a more desirable social
order, their visions of the future, however progressive, are an endless reproduction of the same. Edelman describes politics in similar terms. ”For politics,
however radical the means by which specific constituencies attempt to produce a
more desirable social order, remains, at its core, conservative insofar as it works
to affirm a structure, to authenticate a social order, which it then intends to transmit to the future in the form of its inner Child.”29 Similarly, as I argue below,
26 Smith,

“Microsoft-LinkedIn Deal Cleared by Regulators.”
quoted in, Tyler Irving, ”Google to Build Living Laboratory for Urban Innovation in
Toronto,” University of Toronto News, accessed November 03, 2018.
28 Rob Kitchin, The Data Revolution: Big Data, Open Data, Data Infrastructures & Their Consequences (Los Angeles: Sage, 2017), 165.
29 Edelman, No Future, 3.
27 Trudeau

7

Andrea Zeffiro

Cultural Analytics

Facebook affirms and authenticates what André Brock has identified as the ‘social structure’ of the Western Internet, which privileges and normalizes White,
masculine, bourgeois, heterosexual and Christian culture.30
At face value, Zuckerberg’s manifesto rescripts the company’s Corporate Social
Responsibility strategy in light of the company’s confrontation with waves of criticism and complaints for its role in supporting the proliferation of ‘fake news’, a
mishandling of ‘Trending’ topics, and its complicity in perpetuating informationfilter bubbles. We catch a glimpse of a vulnerable Zuckerberg, who admits how,
“the complexity of the issues” of the last year have “been painful for me because
I often agree with those criticizing us that we’re making mistakes.”31 Lamenting
further, Zuckerberg describes how Facebook is “a work in progress” and how
the company is “dedicated to learning and improving.”32 If one were to concentrate on the conscience-stricken discourse and the laundry list of ways in which
Facebook will foster a future through “a global infrastructure that works for everyone,” then one can easily calibrate reception of the text to its apologetic undertones. Indeed, Zuckerberg’s manifesto is first and foremost a public relations
manoeuvre aimed at steadying what had been a tumultuous period for the company. However, embedded within the post’s opaque transparency is Facebook’s
corporate agenda, which unwittingly leaks to us its colonial plan. Most tellingly,
it does so, as Tamara Shepherd writes, “by positioning itself as an actor with a
‘worldwide vantage point,’ conflating its US-based culturally imperialistic perspective (‘Sitting here in California’) with a global ‘us’.”33 And it does so too by
upholding what already exists, that is, the Internet. Zuckerberg’s post outlines a
crucial rhetorical shift in the platform’s branding. Facebook is uncoupled from
‘social network’, the term it became synonymous with, and in its vacancy, we encounter ‘social infrastructure’. The rhetorical shift from network to infrastructure
aligns neatly with Facebook’s long-term goal. Facebook is no longer invested in
operating as a network, rather it wants to be the network; it wants to be the internet.

30 André Brock, “Beyond the Pale: The Blackbird Web Browser’s Critical Reception,” New Media &
Society 13, no. 7 (2011): 1085-103, doi:10.1177/1461444810397031, 1088.
31 Zuckerberg, ”Building Global Community.”
32 Zuckerberg, “Building Global Community.”
33 Tamara Shepherd, ”Reading the Zuckerberg Manifesto,” Culture Digitally, February 17, 2017,
accessed November 03, 2018.

8

Cultural Analytics

Towards A Queer Futurity of Data

Data Pasts
Prior to the publication of ‘Building Global Community’, Facebook’s colonizing
efforts were evident in Internet.org (rebranded as Free Basics in 2015), the company’s philanthropic project to bring affordable mobile internet to developing
regions. In August 2013, Zuckerberg shared a 10-page white paper on Facebook
titled “Is Connectivity A Human Right”. “For almost ten years,” it begins, “Facebook has been on a mission to make the world more open and connected.”34
Zuckerberg outlines how universal basic internet service is a human right and
how Facebook can facilitate global connectivity. “[M]any people who have never
experienced the internet” do not understand particulars about it, such as “what a
data plan is or why they’d want one.”35 And yet, “most people have heard of services like Facebook and messaging and they want access to them. If we can provide people access to these services, then they’ll discover other content they want
and begin to use and understand the broader internet.”36 However, Internet.org
is not ‘the broader internet’. Rather, it is akin to a walled garden that allows ‘free’
access only to a Facebook-sanctioned set of services. Perhaps this is why Facebook went to such great lengths to frame the project as a humanitarian effort. As
Wired’s Jessi Hempel recently explained, Internet.org was presented as a socially
concerned effort in every respect. “Its name ended in ‘dot-org,’ appropriating
the suffix nonprofits use to signal their do-gooder status on the web. Zuckerberg wrote that he wasn’t expecting Facebook to earn a profit from ‘serv[ing] the
next few billion people,’ suggesting he was motivated by a moral imperative, not
a financial one.”37
Both the 2017 manifesto and 2013 white paper echo the rhetoric of the early internet, when ‘visionaries’ sought to secure the public’s belief and trust in it with
evidence of a better future. One of the most enduring myths of the history of internet is that Al Gore created it. The origins of the tall tale are in a March 9, 1999
interview on CNN’s “Late Edition”. The program’s host, Wolf Blitzer, asked the
sitting Vice President what distinguished him from his challenger for the Democratic presidential nomination, Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey. Gore’s response, in part, reflected on his role in promoting and fostering the economic
and legislative development of the internet. As Gore explained:
During my service in the United States Congress, I took the initia34 Mark Zuckerberg, ”Is Connectivity a Human Right?” August 20, 2013, accessed November 03,
2018.
35 Zuckerberg, “Is Connectivity a Human Right?” 4.
36 Zuckerberg, “Is Connectivity a Human Right?”
37 Jessi Hempel, ”What Happened to Facebook’s Grand Plan to Wire the World?” Wired, May 20,
2018, accessed November 03, 2018.

9

Andrea Zeffiro

Cultural Analytics

tive in creating the Internet. I took the initiative in moving forward
a whole range of initiatives that have proven to be important to our
country’s economic growth and environmental protection, improvements in our educational system.38
Gore’s articulation of the stabilizing effects of technology intimates a future
wherein social, political and economic problems are problems that can be
alleviated by technology. Similarly, the Facebook of the future, as Zuckerberg
promised in 2017, will be “for keeping us safe, for informing us, for civic
engagement, and for inclusion of all.”39
Perhaps one of the enduring myths to protract from contemporary digital culture
is one in which Facebook, and Zuckerberg by proxy, democratize the internet.
We are in the folds of such a narrative. For instance, during Facebook’s Q1 2018
earnings call, Zuckerberg reported on how “our Internet.org efforts have helped
almost 100 million people get access to the internet who may not have had it otherwise.”40 History unfolds as the future prescribed by and contained within the
social infrastructure. Each and every individual ‘helped’ into Facebook’s ecosystem becomes a compulsory data producer. In Althusserian terms,41 individuals
are interpellated into an arrangement that is sustained by an asymmetrical relationship between those who collect, mine, store and analyze data, and those
whom data collection targets. In this equation, the ‘social engineers’ define the
problems and put forth solutions to the ‘engineered’.42

Compulsory Data Production
A reliable mode of indenturing individuals into compulsory data production is
to anchor specific data practices to formative social experiences. In June 2018,
Facebook introduced Messenger Kids - a version of its text and video messaging app for children under the age of 13 - to the Canadian market. The app was
38 Transcript:

Vice President Gore on CNN’s ‘Late Edition’, CNN, March 9, 1999, accessed November
03, 2018.
39 Zuckerberg, ”Building Global Community.”
40 Zuckerberg in, Josh Constine, ”Facebook Beats in Q1 and Boosts Daily User Growth to 1.45B
amidst Backlash,” TechCrunch, April 25, 2018, accessed November 03, 2018.
41 Louis Althusser, “Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses,” trans. Ben Brewster, in Lenin and
Philosophy and Other Essays, 121-76 (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1971).
42 Danah Boyd and Kate Crawford, “Critical Questions For Big Data,” Information, Communication
& Society 15, no. 5 (2012): 662-79, doi:10.1080/1369118x.2012.678878; Anita Gurumurthy and Nandini Chami, ”Data: The New Four-letter Word for Feminism,” GenderIT.org, accessed November 03,
2018.

10

Cultural Analytics

Towards A Queer Futurity of Data

pitched as a tool for parents to allow their children to communicate with family
and close friends in an environment touted as more secure and controlled than
other messaging apps. For instance, Messenger Kids is full of ‘parental controls’;
kids must get an adult’s authorization via the adult’s own Facebook account to
sign up and add each new contact, it contains no ads or in-app purchases, and
it does not require a child to use their real name.43 The aim to train kids to use
lighter versions of social media platforms is an opportunity for them to acquire
digital literacies, and there is obvious merit to such a project. Nevertheless, Messenger Kids is somewhat superfluous given how kids already communicate with
close friends and family by other digital means, such as texting.
Perhaps we might also understand Facebook’s app as a means of conditioning
kids into data subjects. In this example, a child’s early encounter with a social media platform is marked by interactions with individuals they are close to. These
encounters instill a level of intimacy and familiarity in kids, but also in the adults
they connect with. First and foremost, an adult’s account is required to serve as
an intermediary between a child and the app, and the adult is bound perfunctorily to Facebook. Beyond that, a child’s enthusiasm to connect via the app may
incentivize an adult to (re)engage with the social media platform and use it actively in order to communicate with and possibly monitor a child’s use. In this
regard, the indenture of the child to Facebook is also a reach towards the social
control of adults. Indeed, the messenger are kids.
Reproductive data futurism is at play here in the way the figure of the child is fixed
as a prop to secure the reproduction of a particular technosocial order underpinned by compulsory data production. By this I mean there is a natural inclination assumed by big tech that we all want to be a part of the social infrastructure.
When Zuckerberg asks at the outset of his text, “are we building the world we all
want?” he is not so much as asking us what world we want, but rather proposing
one to us. This is a future vision accented by what some might identify as the
pillars of an ideal social order: supportive, safe, informed, civically-engaged, and
inclusive.
The tethering of childhood socialization to a social media platform reinforces a
communicative objectivity about the value of big tech in helping shape the social
practices of children. According to this logic, a child’s social life is more secure
and controllable - even justifying the need for ‘parental control’ - through an app
43 Rachel Metz, ”Facebook’s app for kids should freak parents out.” MIT Technology Review, February 7, 2018, accessed November 3, 2018; Dani. Deahl, ”Facebook’s controversial Messenger Kids is
rolling out to Canada and Peru.” The Verge, June 22, 2018, accessed November 3, 2018; Matthew
Braga, ”Facebook brings its messaging app for kids to Canada despite experts’ concerns.” CBC, June
22, 2018, accessed November 3, 2018.

11

Andrea Zeffiro

Cultural Analytics

like Messenger Kids. And yet, this hopeful prototype of the future replicates the
‘coercive universalization’ Edelman identifies with the image of the Child. That is,
it “serves to regulate political discourse - to prescribe what will count as political
discourse - by compelling such discourse to accede in advance to the reality of a
collective future whose figurative status we are never permitted to acknowledge
or address.”44 The desire to be a part of the social infrastructure is manufactured
by anchoring compulsory data practices to the child; the literal embodiment of
the future.
Some of us may rebuff an app like Messenger Kids as redundant to existing modes
of communication or simply as unnecessary for kids, however, when other forms
of data servitude are legitimized and normalized by disciplinary institutions, like
schools, it is difficult to envision different organizing principles for communal
relations to exist outside of compulsory data production. In numerous school
districts in Canada and the United States, for example, Google’s G Suite for Education is mandated as a teaching and learning platform. G Suite incorporates
Google Classroom with other apps and services like Google Drive, Forms, Calendar, Search, Docs, Sheets, Slides and Gmail, and it boasts one online setting in
which instructors can post resources and evaluation methods, communicate with
students, track their progress, and share information with parents/guardians. By
all measures, it is seamless and easy to use. In 2017, G Suite for Education counted
more than 70 million users worldwide.45 Google’s privacy policy for their education products stipulates that the company does not collect student data for advertising purposes or sell it to third parties, and the apps are also ad-free. But
Google nevertheless collects data on students.46 The policy allows for the collection of information including location and GPS data, mobile network, and phone
number.
The structurally speculative nature of student data is concerning because we simply do not know its life span or the ways in which it could be exploited by future
algorithms and political agendas. But also, when G Suite is adopted there are few,
if any, alternatives offered to students, which means they are compelled into data
production. Thus, of particular concern is how instituting a corporate platform
that collects, stores, and possibly shares student data with other partners, induces
regulated effects of dataism.
An educational platform like G Suite conditions students, and in many instances
44 Edelman,

No Future, 11.
Lardinois, ”Google says its G Suite for Education now has 70M users,” Tech Crunch,
January 1 2017, accessed November 3, 2018.
46 Jeremy Gillula and Sophia Cope, ”Google changes its tune when it comes to tracking students,”
Electronic Frontier Foundation, October 6, 2016, accessed October 6, 2016.
45 Frederic

12

Cultural Analytics

Towards A Queer Futurity of Data

the adults who care for them, into ways of being/becoming in the world that are
engendered, in part, through compulsory data production. It becomes easier to
justify the tracking of student data because of an engrained belief and trust in
educational institutions. And if we are able to accept a corporate platform as
indispensable to education, then we may be less inclined to think our way out of
or outside of compulsory forms of data servitude in other domains as well.

Data Impasse
Facebook, and indeed so many other corporate entities that collect and broker
our data, manufacture for us scenes of fantasy of ‘the good life’47 made more
possible with big data. In his “Building Global Community” statement, Mark
Zuckerberg’s rhetoric frames Facebook as the conduit to the objects of our desire. In the scenes of the future, we are told how data will bring happiness with
close-knit communities, a safer society, economic fairness. And we need these
engineered scenes of the future because, according to Zuckerberg, the problem
we face is a “lack of a sense of hope for the future.” He articulates this crisis in
his manifesto, explaining how,
Since the 1970s, membership in some local groups has declined by as
much as one-quarter, cutting across all segments of the population.
The decline raises deeper questions alongside surveys showing large
percentages of our population lack a sense of hope for the future…
As one pastor told me: ‘People feel unsettled. A lot of what was
settling in the past doesn’t exist anymore.’48
In this example, Zuckerberg plants the roots to our collective hopelessness in
the historical present, as the scene that has severed some kind of ordinary life
that was supposed to continue and to which people felt optimistic and settled.49
And because we cannot go back, and we are acutely aware of this limitation and
hindrance to what was, we occasionally invest in “a cluster of promises we want
someone or something to make to us and make possible for us.”50 We see this
pervasive cultural fantasy carried beyond reproductive data futurism, in those
politicized utterances about making <something> great again. Zuckerberg asks
47 Lauren

Berlant, Cruel Optimism (Durham: Duke University Press, 2011), 14.
”Building Global Community.”
49 Berlant, Cruel Optimism, 11.
50 Berlant, Cruel Optimism, 23.

48 Zuckerberg,

13

Andrea Zeffiro

Cultural Analytics

us to believe that at some point in the future, Facebook will steer us back to where
we were before, but also, somewhere better.
At play is what Lauren Berlant calls ‘cruel optimism’, “the condition of maintaining an attachment to a significantly problematic object.”51 Data, as the object
of cruel optimism, is the thing to which we pass our fantasy of sovereignty for
safe-keeping.52 For Berlant, “optimistic relation[s] are not inherently cruel” but
rather, “[t]hey become cruel only when the object that draws your attachment actively impedes the aim that brought you to it initially.”53 We may recognize something like Messenger Kids as a means through which we can forge new kinds of
social interactions with kids, and we may identify our enthusiasm for a project
like Quayside as tied to our support for sustainable cities. Our optimism toward
these things, however, may not always feel optimistic.54 Any doubts we may have
about the good-life fantasies these data-driven objects promise, such as questioning whether the future we are told we want is indeed the future we desire, registers
an instability in our investment to these things. And yet, because our optimism
for these objects is so intimately tied to what we “look forward to being in the
world,”55 we preserve our “attachment to compromised conditions of possibility.”56 For Berlant, this ‘arc and rhythm’ is a way to preserve optimism for irreparable objects. “The compulsion to repeat a toxic optimism” explains Berlant,
“can suture someone or a world to a cramped and unimaginative space of committed replication, just in case it will be different.”57 Similarly, reproductive data
futurism persists in the way we (un)willingly consent to a future that necessitates
the production of data in the present, but that remains perpetually out of reach.
And because this future can never be fully realized, we reach towards it repeatedly, expecting that this time things will change in the right way.58
In the nearly two years since Zuckerberg released “Building Global Community,”
a lot has changed for Facebook and for its members. The company has weathered
a series of crises, including foreign interference in elections, the Cambridge Analytica scandal, Zuckerberg’s testimony before the U.S. Congress and European
Parliament, the company’s admittance to playing a role in ethnic cleansing in
Myanmar, and the hiring of a PR firm to discredit critics. To put it bluntly, Facebook has failed miserably at building community. In fact, our desire for what
data-driven platforms promise to be and the various ways they pledge to improve
51 Berlant,

Cruel Optimism, 24.
Cruel Optimism, 43.
53 Berlant, Cruel Optimism, 1.
54 Berlant, Cruel Optimism, 10.
55 Berlant, Cruel Optimism, 24.
56 Berlant, Cruel Optimism, 24.
57 Berlant, Cruel Optimism, 259.
58 Berlant, Cruel Optimism, 2.
52 Berlant,

14

Cultural Analytics

Towards A Queer Futurity of Data

our lives are obstacles to our flourishing.59 Maybe Zuckerberg is correct in his
assessment about our “lack of a sense of hope for the future.” It just so happens
Facebook is the object to which we direct our waning optimism. And yet, even
with this awareness and with the fraying of the good-life fantasies, many of us
maintain an attachment to it. It renders us impassive. This is precisely a relation
of cruel optimism,60 but it is also reproductive data futurism at work.
Reproductive data futurism, much like cruel optimism, is a force that compels
us to walk back from moments of unsettling revelations and from the brink of
coming to terms with the reality that these data-driven entities are first and foremost revenue generating corporations. And yet, we depend on the discomfort at
the realization that our optimistic attachments are flawed, for instance, in order
to decipher a company’s benevolent rhetoric as a smokescreen for its egregious
and disorganized data practices. These instances of rupture, though short-lived,
open a space for reflection, induce a creeping sense of incompleteness, and surface fleeting impulses of refusal that clarify the impotence in our hope. In this
respect, we may temporarily betray the mandate of reproductive data futurism,
which is rooted in “the hope of forging some more perfect social order” through
data, and if we “refuse the insistence of hope itself as affirmation,” we might find
pockets of resistance in hope’s dissolution.61
This space of fracture I describe is akin to what Berlant defines as ‘the impasse’,
“a stretch of time in which one moves around with a sense that
the world is at once intensely present and enigmatic, such that the
activity of living demands both a wandering absorptive awareness
and a hypervigilance that collects material that might help to clarify
things.”62
The impasse is a ‘transitional moment’, in which we realize that existing ‘genres’
can no longer make sense of the present. Berlant’s conceptualization of the term
helps us to rethink our impassivity in a conventional sense. We have not become
insensible or immune to ‘big data’, nor have we lost our way. In fact, we are acutely
aware of the ways in which data driven computational tools and techniques have
shaped our lives. In turn, our impassivity is a “style of composure”63 that guides
us through the impasse—that ‘transitional moment’ of adjustment to the loss of
the good-life fantasies.64 The impasse signals our capacity to conceive of alterna59 Berlant,

Cruel Optimism, 1.
Cruel Optimism, 1.
61 Edelman, No Future, 4.
62 Berlant, Cruel Optimism, 18.
63 Berlant, Cruel Optimism, 5.
64 Berlant, Cruel Optimism, 11.
60 Berlant,

15

Andrea Zeffiro

Cultural Analytics

tive genres for navigating future data narratives in the present. In this sense, it
is a space of contained action through which we might unlock different ways in
which the interruption of norms of the reproduction of dataism can be adapted
to, felt out and lived,65 and usher us towards a queer futurity of data.

Queer Futurity
The title of my piece “Towards a Queer Futurity of Data” alludes to a gesture or
movement forward. First and foremost it describes the ideation presented in the
text, which moves towards a reading of data cultures through the lens of reproductive data futurism. The text presents the kernels to an evolving framework
that seeks to expand our perception of data cultures with particular attention to
the limitations and deficiencies of contemporary data paradigms.
At the centre of this ‘working through’ and ‘working towards’ is a queer politic
that begins with a rejection of ‘straight time’, what José Estebon Muñoz describes
as “an autonaturalizing temporality” in which “the only futurity promised is that
of reproductive majoritarian heterosexuality.”66 A hetero-normative logic inscribes contemporary data cultures. Indeed, it is a logic that pervades society
including the technosocial. The desire to colonize global populations through
data services by equating access to an enclosed technical platform as a fundamental human right is indicative of this logic. Subjugation might be packaged as
a mobile internet service in the global south, a social networking site geared towards professionalization, or an educational platform that boasts a suite of tools
customizable to learning needs. These examples indenture individuals into compulsory data production in the hope of realizing a future version of the contemporary present.
When reproductive data futurism entraps us in a heteronormative logic, we are
less able to think through its recursiveness and reproductive power. For instance,
when the figure of the child bears the burden of substantiating data as a political
trope, we become invested in dataism because it is also an investment in the future
child. Thus, we see here the reproduction of the heteronormative fantasy itself—
the perpetual promise of the good life fastened not only to the child but also to
‘the family’ as an extension of an ideal social order it reinforces. The ‘normative’
65 Berlant,

Cruel Optimism, 199.

66 José Esteban Muñoz, Cruising Utopia:

The Then and There of Queer Futurity (New York, NY: New

York University Press, 2009), 22.

16

Cultural Analytics

Towards A Queer Futurity of Data

in this respect, provides an ‘aspirational anchor’67 for those of us whose senses of
security and stability are dwindling. Thus, if constituting a new politics of truth
demands a fundamental change to our “political, economic, institutional regime
of the production of truth” then we need radical models to wrangle ourselves
from a future manufactured by “the fraying ‘good life’ narratives we hold onto.”
68 In this respect, we are better served to receive Zuckerbeg’s question— “are
we building the world we all want?”69 —not simply as a rhetorical strategy on
Facebook’s part, but as a genuine inquiry into the state of our attachments. Who
is building this world? And for whom? We are encumbered with the task of
rescripting engineered fantasies of the future with a figuration that allows people
to think beyond reproductive data futurism.
Finally, the title of the piece signals also an expansion or movement outward.
What I have sketched here is a partial framework for reproductive data futurism.
In other words, it is incomplete. Edelman’s project is an obvious and crucial
starting point, yet it is limited by its intransitive insistence that the “future stops
here.”70 “We do not intend a new politics, a better society, a brighter tomorrow”
writes Edelman, “since all these fantasies reproduce the past, through displacement, in the form of future.”71 I agree with Edelman’s appraisal of how future
fantasies merely reproduce the past in a future tense, but I think it is necessary
to envision and experiment, by beginning to see, the alternate data futures that
already exist or are currently under construction, rather than foreclose the possibility of any future. In turn, I propose we lean towards theories of queer futurity72 to undermine data paradigms so that we can begin to see the multiplicity
of nonormative logics and organizations of data that constitute, supplement, and
abridge reproductive data futurism. If we can better understand the deficiencies
and biases of data paradigms in the present, then we might begin to imagine possible futures and seek out strategies to support these future visions.

Unless otherwise specified, all work in this journal is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
67 Lauren Berlant, ”Lauren Berlant on her book Cruel Optimism,” Rorotoko, June 4, 2012, accessed
November 3, 2018.
68 José Esteban Muñoz, ”Living the Wrong Life Otherwise,” Social Text, January 13, 2013, accessed
November 3, 2018.
69 Muñoz, “Living the Wrong Life Otherwise.”
70 Edelman, No Future, 30-31.
71 Edelman, No Future, 3.
72 Edelman, No Future; Muñoz, “Living the Wrong Life Otherwise”; Judith Halberstam. The Queer
Art of Failure (Durham: Duke University Press, 2011).

17

