Electoral Studies 70 (2021) 102264

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Electoral Studies
journal homepage: http://www.elsevier.com/locate/electstud

Coattails and spillover-effects: Quasi-experimental evidence from
concurrent executive and legislative elections
Lukas Rudolph a, b, *, Arndt Leininger c
a

LMU Munich, Germany
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
c
Freie Universität Berlin, Germany
b

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Concurrency
Turnout
Electoral outcomes
Election timing
Second-order elections
Quasi-experiment

Concurrent elections are widely used to increase turnout. We theorize and show empirically how concurrency
affects electoral outcomes. First, concurrency increases turnout and thereby the participation of peripheral
voters. Second, in combined elections, one electoral arena affects the other. In our case of majoritarian executive
elections concurrent to proportional representation (PR) legislative elections, the centripetal tendency of
majoritarian elections colors off to the concurrent PR race. Third, concurrency also entails spillovers of the in­
cumbency advantage of executive officeholders to the concurrent legislative race. Drawing on quasi-random
variation in local election timing in Germany, we show that concurrency increases turnout as well as council
votes for the incumbent mayor’s party and centrist parties more generally, with slightly more pronounced gains
for the political left. As a consequence, concurrent elections consolidate party systems and political power by
leading to less fragmented municipal councils and more unified local governments.

1. Introduction
Concurrent elections are a widely used tool to make electoral
participation more convenient and efficient for citizens. For instance, in
25 of the 33 OECD member states we can observe concurrency of elec­
tions at the national as well as sub-national level. Concurrency occurs
when two elections of similar or different saliency, which could be
elections for executive, legislative, special elections, or referendums, are
held simultaneously. It is well established that concurrency brings voters
to the polls that otherwise would have abstained. However, do these
additional voters affect electoral outcomes in a systematic way? We
study this question in the context of concurrent second-order elections,
for which the turnout effect is particularly relevant,1 and for combina­
tions of proportional representation (PR) legislative and majoritarian
executive elections.2

The classical view is that electoral participation rates are high among
socio-economically advantaged and low among disadvantaged citizens.
From this, we could expect that a stimulus to turnout relates to relative
increases in participation of the latter (Tingsten 1937; Lijphart 1997;
Kogan et al., 2018). Then, left-of-center parties should also do better.
Drawing on quasi-exogenous variation in institutional settings, this has
been shown empirically in various contexts (for example, Bechtel et al.,
2016; Fowler 2013; Potrafke and Roesel 2020), also specifically for
turnout increases from concurrency (Fowler 2015). However, numerous
studies report findings that diverge from this pattern: turnout increases
can also lead to mildly higher vote shares for minor as opposed to
mainstream parties (Ferwerda 2014), more electoral support for the
extreme ends of the political spectrum (Finseraas and Vernby 2014),
more participation of well-off citizens (Cepaluni and Hidalgo 2016), or
electoral benefits for the left but also centrist parties (Hodler et al.,

* Corresponding author. ETH Zurich, Switzerland.
E-mail addresses: lukas.rudolph@gess.ethz.ch (L. Rudolph), arndt.leininger@fu-berlin.de (A. Leininger).
1
A substantial turnout effect for low-salience elections is evident both when such an election is combined with a political contest of higher salience (see Geys 2006)
and when it is combined with a contest of similarly low salience (Fauvelle-Aymar and François 2015; Garmann 2016; Leininger et al., 2018).
2
Prominent real-world examples of these are the Chilean and Mexican presidential and parliamentary elections, Germany’s and Japan’s mixed electoral systems,
or Poland’s and Spain’s parliamentary elections, where one chamber is elected in majoritarian elections. In contrast, the other is elected using PR. At the subnational
level, France’s regional and departmental elections are one example of concurrency of two different electoral systems; the former use PR while the latter use singlemember constituencies. In addition to Germany, our case of study, the US, UK, and various other countries also frequently see local elections for a directly-elected
mayor and a council, which are held on the same day.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electstud.2020.102264
Received 3 March 2020; Received in revised form 17 November 2020; Accepted 20 November 2020
Available online 13 January 2021
0261-3794/© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

L. Rudolph and A. Leininger

Electoral Studies 70 (2021) 102264

2015). We take from these findings that the consequences of turnout
shocks depend on particular institutional settings. However, a nuanced
and systematic assessment of how concurrent elections should influence
turnout is lacking.
Therefore, the first contribution of our article is a theoretical argu­
ment that systematizes three important features of concurrent elections
and explains what effects they may have. The first feature of concur­
rency is the ensuing turnout shock, which affects the composition of the
electorate and should increase the participation of peripheral voters –
this should improve the electoral fortunes of left-wing parties and po­
sitions in line with Tingsten’s (1937) law (but see Finseraas and Vernby
2014). The second feature of concurrent elections is that they frequently
combine different electoral systems – in our case, we assess a combi­
nation of executive elections with majoritarian voting system and leg­
islative elections under a proportional represtentation system. We
theorize that the two-party tendency of majoritarian elections colors off
to a concurrent non-majoritarian race. Third, drawing on the in­
cumbency advantage (Lopes da Fonseca 2017) and coattail literature
(Campbell 1960), we argue that the incumbency bonus in one race has
electoral spillovers – parties of incumbent mayors profit in the concur­
rent race (cf. Hainmueller and Kern 2008).
Our second contribution lies in providing credible causal evidence
for the effect of simultaneous low-salience elections on electoral out­
comes. Given that election timing is usually politically determined and
has low variation over time, evidence on the electoral effects of
concurrency that can credibly deal with potential endogeneity is scarce.
We are able to draw on a unique case in the German state of Lower
Saxony, where we observe quasi-random variation in the combination of
legislative (local council) and executive (mayoral) elections at the
municipal level in three legislative periods. Idiosyncrasies in the intro­
duction of mayoral elections led to quasi-randomness in whether
mayoral elections are on- or off-cycle with respect to council elections.
Various balance, parallel trends, and placebo tests provide support for
this assumption. In our case, concurrency leads to gains of centrist
parties (around 1.2 percentage points) in general and incumbent parties
in particular (around 1–2.5 percentage points, in tendency higher on the
left side of the political spectrum). We thereby link to a literature that
has extensively documented coattails from high-salience electoral con­
tests to concurrent low-salience races (Magar 2012; Campbell, 1987,
1991; Ferejohn and Calvert 1984; DeNardo 1980). Here, we provide
evidence that coattails are also a relevant feature of simultaneous
low-salience elections, where the turnout shock is more moderate in
size. Our results also demonstrate that coattails can occur in cases of
horizontal concurrency (executive and legislative elections at the same
level). In contrast, the existing literature on coattails has mostly focused
on vertical concurrency (first-order executive and second-order legis­
lative or other elections) (e.g. Rogers 2019; Meredith 2013). Therefore,
our argument and results should apply to a wide range of cases where we
see concurrent executive and legislative elections, or concurrent elec­
tions with different electoral formulas more generally.3
Our third contribution is that we show that these concurrency effects
matter for representation. With centrist parties and incumbent parties
(which mostly are centrist) profiting, we see a lower number of effective
parliamentary parties, a higher likelihood of single-party dominance in
local councils, and a higher likelihood of alignment of local council
majorities and mayoral party affiliation with concurrency. In short,
concurrent elections consolidate party systems and political power by
producing less fragmented municipal councils and more unified local
governments.

2. Theoretical argument
We start with the observation that a combination of elections in­
creases turnout. This effect is well-known and was already formulated in
Boyd’s (1989) ballot attractiveness hypothesis (whereby turnout in­
creases if salient elections are added to a ballot). Since then, a broad
literature has established that turnout increases in low-salience elections
when they are held concurrent to high-salience elections (see Geys 2006
for a review). However, and more relevant for our case, a recent liter­
ature provides evidence that concurrency is also causing an increase in
turnout for the combination of two second-order elections, both simi­
larly low in salience (Fauvelle-Aymar and François 2015; Garmann
2016; Leininger et al., 2018). Theoretically, this literature argues that
with constant voting costs any additional ballot should increase the
benefit of turning out for the electorate on average. However, it is likely
that only part of the electorate, not necessarily the whole electorate,
experiences this turnout stimulus. Hence, the composition of voters
likely differs when an election is held concurrently compared to being
held alone. In the following, we lay out why we would expect these
concurrent elections not to be outcome neutral.
We propose that an effect of concurrent elections on vote shares
through higher turnout could stem from three mechanisms. First, con­
current elections have economies of scale to the individual voter (as at
least some costs of voting are constant irrespective of the number of
ballots). Hence, when concurrent elections reduce voting costs over
benefits as such, this could lead to increased participation of peripheral
voters. Arguably, voting costs matter more for socioeconomically
disadvantaged citizens who (given their economic situation) should
have a preference for left-wing parties. This is what drives the widely
hypothesized relationship between lower turnout and more socioeco­
nomically biased electorates known as Tingsten’s (1937) law.
Conversely, a relative decrease of voting costs should lead to more
balanced participation, and electorally to benefits for the political left
(see Bechtel et al. (2017), Fowler (2013, 2015), but Finseraas and
Vernby (2014), Ferwerda (2014)). In our case, this is the center-left
social-democratic SPD.
In line with this argument, Kogan et al. (2018) show that when
low-salience elections in the US are combined with high salience
nation-wide elections, especially with presidential elections, the elec­
torate becomes more diverse and more liberal on aggregate. However,
the relative increase of participation of peripheral voters with concur­
rency needs to be sufficiently large to make a meaningful difference to
the overall voter composition (Kohler 2011). Hence, Kogan et al. (2018)
also find that, when low-salience elections are combined with other
low-salience elections, compositional effects are less pronounced. We
therefore propose:
Hypothesis 1. Concurrent second-order elections increase the partic­
ipation of peripheral voters and thereby provide electoral benefits to
left-wing parties.
Second, a simultaneous election brings with it a specific coattail ef­
fect that can but does not have to benefit the political left.4 In particular,
each election brings with it mobilization efforts of individual parties and
candidates. We draw upon a model by Cox (2015), who argues that
concurrent elections allow parties that field candidates in separate races
simultaneously to internalize positive externalities from mobilization in
any individual electoral contest. Mobilizational alliances for different

4
By coattail effects we understand that institutional and other features of one
government level affect election outcomes at another government level.
Drawing on Meredith (2013: 742), this is the usage of the term coattail effect in
the comparative politics literature, which is a bit broader than its usage in the
American politics literature, where coattails usually refer to the effect that “the
personal identity of a party’s candidate in one election has on the performance
of the party’s candidates in concurrent elections”.

3
Some evidence in this direction can also be found in the literature on mixed
electoral systems (e.g. Hainmueller and Kern 2008; Ferrara et al., 2005).

2

L. Rudolph and A. Leininger

Electoral Studies 70 (2021) 102264

fragmentation and a greater likelihood of single-party majorities in the
municipal council. Given that most mayoral incumbents come from one
of the two major parties and that incumbents provide coattails to their
party list, we should expect a greater likelihood of alignment of the
incumbent mayors’ party and the party holding the council majority –
we address this in more detail in the discussion. Having established our
expectations for the empirical analysis, we proceed with a short
description of our case before explaining our research design.

political seats under the same party brand increase the mobilization
efforts of these political actors, and even more so with the number and
value of the offices at stake. However, the model stays silent on how this
could affect electoral outcomes on aggregate.
We propose that the aggregate effects of mobilization depend on the
electoral systems that are combined. In our case, we see the combination
of a PR vote for local councils with a majoritarian election for the
mayoral office. Only two parties can field viable candidates (usually the
dominant centrist parties) for the majoritarian election (Cox 1997), will
plausibly invest in mobilization efforts for these candidates, and will be
seen as worthwhile to turn out for by voters. Consequently, the strength
of mobilizational alliance varies over parties, with viable parties in the
majoritarian election enjoying a mobilizational edge for the concurrent
PR contest. Hence, the usual two-party concentration effect of majori­
tarian electoral contests should rub off to the concurrent PR election.
This argument is related to the centripetal pressure towards a two-party
system in the PR tier proposed by Duverger (1986: 72) for
mixed-member systems that combine majoritarian with PR elections.
We therefore propose:

3. Case
Election timing can depend on strategic considerations of policymakers (Anzia 2012a), such as future economic prospects (Smith
2003), or anticipated feelings in the electorate (Lupia and Strom (1995);
see also Hartney and Nickerson (2012); Kayser (2005); Meredith
(2009)). This could well imply that unobserved variables correlate with
our dependent variables (turnout levels and electoral outcomes), and
our independent variable (the occurrence of a concurrent election). We
therefore first describe our case – municipal council and mayoral elec­
tions in the German state of Lower Saxony – and how it provides us with
credibly exogenous variation in the occurrence of concurrent mayoral
elections (CMEs).
We begin by briefly outlining the institutional setting under study.
Municipalities are the lowest tier of government in Germany. However,
they are of substantial political and economic importance, as they ac­
count for about a quarter of all total government spending.5 They are
responsible for culture, sports, elementary schools, local public trans­
port, social welfare, and local infrastructure management, among
others. Municipalities generate revenue through property and business
taxes, which they set and collect themselves. In addition, municipalities
receive a share of wage and income tax as well as VAT revenue. Finally,
they also finance themselves through fees, rents, leases, and sales, as
well as debt. To the extent that their own revenues are not sufficient, the
state provides the necessary funds through an inter-municipality
financial compensation mechanism.
The state of Lower Saxony, with 47.600 km2 and 7.9 million in­
habitants, is Germany’s second-largest and fourth-most populous state.
Lower Saxony comprises 414 municipalities with directly elected
mayors.6 From this set of 414 municipalities, we exclude municipalities
that have seen changes in their borders due to municipality mergers
between 2001 and 2011. This leaves us with 401 municipalities, which
remained unchanged throughout our period of investigation.
Council elections in Lower Saxony are held every five years on the
same date across the federal state. Voters have three votes, which they
allocate freely to party list(s) or individual party candidate(s) in an
open-list system with seat allocation proportional to vote share and no
electoral threshold apart from the natural threshold defined by the seat
allocation mechanism. Lower Saxony’s political spectrum, just as the
national level, is dominated by two parties: the center-left SPD and the
center-right CDU. In the council elections that we study, these two
parties obtained the plurality of votes in 1121 out of 1203 elections.
They also won 66.9% of mayoral elections between 2001 and 2011.
Independents won almost all other elections.

Hypothesis 2. Concurrent second-order elections that combine
majoritarian and PR electoral systems lead to electoral benefits for
centrist parties in the PR race.
Third, we start by observing that incumbents hold electoral advan­
tages over competitors and propose that these extend to concurrent
elections. As Dewan and Shepsle (2011) note, “the advantage of in­
cumbents in electoral contests is perhaps one of the best-documented
empirical regularities in politics.” These electoral advantages may
stem from scare-off effects for potential challengers, experience and
resources attached to the office, or informational shortcuts that voters
apply (see Lopes da Fonseca 2017). Irrespective of why these in­
cumbents enjoy an electoral advantage, we propose that the electoral
benefit of incumbency is not restricted to personal reelection. In line
with Hainmueller and Kern (2008), we argue that incumbents can
attract additional votes for their party in a concurrent election. One
potential mechanism for this runs through informational shortcuts that
voters employ. De Benedictis-Kessner (2018) reports that the in­
cumbency advantage for mayors increases with national elections con­
current to mayoral elections, which he explains by uninformed voters
coming to the poll and supporting an incumbent who’s name they
recognize against a lesser-known challenger (see also Bracco and Revelli
(2018), Rudolph (2017), but Trounstine (2013)). Beyond the personality
of the incumbent mayor, similar effects may accrue to the party of the
sitting mayor itself. For instance, relevant to our case, Freier (2015)
identifies a persistent and strong party incumbency advantage in
German municipal elections.
We turn this argument around and propose that voters who support
the incumbent mayor and are mobilized to vote for her are also more
inclined to vote for her party in the concurrent election. This argument
directly relates to the large literature on the coattails of executive office
holders on concurrent legislative elections – such coattails provide a
plausible pathway for an incumbency advantage to color off to a con­
current race (e.g. Halberstam and Montagnes 2015; Magar 2012), and is
part of the explanation of the “surge” observed in votes for congressional
candidates on a presidential party ticket in Campbell’s 1960 “surge and
decline” argument. As most party incumbents (aside from independent
candidates) are from CDU and SPD, we would again expect to see the
two centrist parties profit on aggregate from these incumbency advan­
tages. We therefore propose:

5
See
http://www.bpb.de/nachschlagen/zahlen-und-fakten/soziale-situat
ion-in-deutschland/61867/oeffentliche-finanzen, retrieved on 16/03/2017.
6
Of these, 126 are so-called Samtgemeinden (collective municipal associa­
tions). A Samtgemeinde is an administrative division particular to Lower Saxony.
It is an association of smaller municipalities that executes most municipal duties
for its member municipalities (see Lower Saxony law on local government,
NKomVG). Around 80% of municipalities in Lower Saxony have united to form
Samtgemeinden. The remaining 288 are so-called Einheitsgemeinden, including
124 cities (As of 01/01/2014, see http://www.mi.niedersachsen.de/themen
/kommunen/kommunen-in-niedersachsen-63108.html, retrieved on 16/03/
2017). While the former tend to be more rural, the latter tend to be more urban.

Hypothesis 3. Concurrent second-order elections that combine exec­
utive and legislative elections lead to electoral benefits for the parties of
executive incumbents in the other race.
Finally, we can derive expectations for the overall party system in
council elections if all these hypotheses bear out. If one or both of the
major parties profit, this will lead to a decrease in party system
3

L. Rudolph and A. Leininger

Electoral Studies 70 (2021) 102264

In 1996, under SPD-party rule and contested by the opposition, the
direct election of these local executives was introduced with five-year
terms. Mayors were until then indirectly elected by the municipal
council for 12-year terms and had a largely ceremonial and represen­
tative role. The municipal administration’s day-to-day business was
overseen by a professional municipal director, who was appointed by
the council. When the direct election of mayors was introduced in 1996,
the position of municipal director ceased to exist. Elected mayors lead
the municipal executive, which is a full-time appointment in Lower
Saxony. They hold considerable sway over a municipality’s public
administration. For instance, departmental heads of the city adminis­
tration are elected by the council on the recommendation by the mayor,
who retains the exclusive right to nominate candidates. In contrast to
mayors, council members retain their regular jobs and receive a modest
allowance for serving on the council.
In mayoral elections, voters have a single vote to give to one
candidate. If no candidate receives an absolute majority of votes, a runoff election between the top two candidates is held a week after the first
round.7 Turnout in municipal elections in Lower Saxony is relatively
high when compared, for instance, to turnout in the US. On average,
50%–60% of eligible citizens vote in local elections, with turnout being
systematically higher when mayoral and council elections are held
concurrently, as we show in this article. Even stand-alone mayoral
elections draw almost half of the electorate to the voting booth. Turnout
in these elections is on par with European elections turnout.8
Next, we explain why the timing of mayoral elections has an exog­
enous component. Mayoral elections were to be held concurrently to
council elections beginning in 1996 (Detjen 2000). However, transi­
tional rules did not force municipal executives to face reelection as long
as their original 12-year term was still running (Armbrust 2007: 60f.).
The reform thereby introduced a desynchronization of the timing of
mayoral elections because some mayors (due to idiosyncratic reasons
such as their age) chose to hold elections before their term ended, while
others served out their full term. Note that in 1996, the term lengths of
mayors was to a certain degree already on different trajectories
depending on when the mayor in office at that time was elected by the
municipal council, which would also influence a mayor’s decision
whether to opt for concurrent mayoral elections in 1996. Additionally,
in a second reform in 2005, under CDU rule and again contested by the
opposition, the term length of mayors was prolonged to eight years
(Armbrust 2007: 60f.). The explicit political aim of the reform was to
desynchronize the electoral cycles of municipal executives and coun­
cils.9 This became effective for all mayoral elections from 2005. This
reform pushed municipalities with concurrent elections out of concur­
rency and some into concurrency. Lastly, exceptional mayoral elections
occur with the death, retirement, or resignation of mayors and lead to
new terms, inducing additional desynchronization of council and
mayoral elections.10
We analyze the council elections of 2001 (9 September), 2006 (10
September), and 2011 (11 September). On these dates, some

municipalities in Lower Saxony concurrently elected their mayors while
others did not do so because of the reasons outlined above.11 Fig. 1 il­
lustrates the variation in the timing of mayoral elections in our sample
between 1997 and 2014. We see four broad patterns of timing that
evolved: A first cluster of municipalities held mayoral elections in 2001,
2006, and 2013 (denoted by symbol ◆ in Fig. 1), i.e., every five years
and concurrently until 2006, and then with the new eight-year term in
2013. A second cluster of municipalities held first direct mayoral elec­
tions before 2001, and then concurrently with local elections in 2006;
they are therefore out of sync in 2001 and 2011 (□). A third cluster of
municipalities held first direct mayoral elections after 2001, and then
concurrently with local elections in 2011; they are therefore out of sync
in 2001 and 2006 (■). A fourth, smaller cluster never held CMEs (○).
Overall, 188 municipalities held CMEs in 2001, 110 did so in 2006, and
249 did in 2011.
Altogether, these patterns of (non-)concurrency that we observe
depend on individual retirement decisions of mayors before 1996 that
led to differences in running terms back then, as well as on reforms
explicitly aimed at desynchronizing electoral cycles affecting different
municipalities at different times. More importantly, because of these
multiple reforms, we observe almost all municipalities both under
treatment and control status for different elections – only 41 munici­
palities never held CMEs during our period of study, and only five al­
ways held CMEs. These circumstances provide plausibly exogenous
variation for analyzing the effect of CMEs on electoral results for council

Fig. 1. The figure presents one marker for each mayoral election since 1997 in
362 (out of 401) municipalities in our sample. Vertical dashed lines indicate
state-wide council elections in 2001, 2006 and 2011. If a marker overlaps the
vertical dashed line, a municipality holds mayoral elections concurrently with
council elections. We align municipalities along the y-axis by groups defined by
patterns of concurrency: 156 municipalities held concurrent mayoral elections
(CMEs) in 2001 and 2006 but not 2011 (◆), 105 held CMEs in 2006 only (□),
60 held CMEs in 2011 only (■), 41 never held mayoral elections concurrent
with council elections (○). 39 municipalities, which exhibit different patterns of
concurrency, are omitted from the plot. See Fig. A.1 in the appendix for a
visualization of concurrency patterns in all 401 municipalities. For an overview
over concurrency patterns see also Table A.1 in the appendix.

7
Electoral reforms by competing state governments led to the abolishment of
run-offs between elections in November 2011 and 2013. However, this reform
does not concern us because we focus on the first round of mayoral elections
only. There are no second-round mayoral elections, which were concurrent
with council elections. In cases where the ends of the council and mayoral terms
coincided, the first-round of the mayoral election was held on the same day as
the council election.
8
See Leininger et al. (2018) who contrast turnout in 2014 European elections
in Lower Saxony and turnout in mayoral run-off elections in the same year.
9
In 2013, again under SPD rule, this prolongation and desynchronization
were reversed by the new government (STK 2013).
10
De-selection of municipal executives is rarely an issue. There are very high
political hurdles; only two cases until 2008 are known where this occurred, see
http://www.bpb.de/apuz/144111/politische-verfasstheit-der-kommunalen-e
bene?p=all (last retrieved on 29 August 2020).

11
Additionally, in some municipalities, county administrators were elected.
Counties (Landkreise) are an administrative layer above municipalities with
very limited competences. For this reason, we do not consider this variation
explicitly in the following analysis.

4

L. Rudolph and A. Leininger

Electoral Studies 70 (2021) 102264

elections. To substantiate this claim, we conduct a series of placebo tests,
which we explain along with the research design described in the
following section.

definition, we cannot observe counterfactual outcomes directly, we
capture through this analysis both minimum and maximum turnout
potential in the municipalities as these elections represent the most
salient as well as the least salient of elections in which German voters
can vote.15 Regressing turnout and vote shares in federal and European
parliament elections on our original treatment variable, concurrency of
mayoral and council elections, we find differences between treatment
and control group which are minuscule and statistically insignificant
(see Appendix Section A.2.3).16
Third, we conduct balance tests for several geographic, de­
mographic, and socio-economic control variables: Comparing means
across all three election years and individually, we see differences be­
tween treated and control municipalities significant at or below the 5%level in only five out of sixty comparisons.17 These results all serve to
confirm that idiosyncratic events in the wake of the initial reform have
set municipalities on a long-term trajectory of electoral timing. Later
reforms affected all municipalities equally and provided no room for
strategic election timing.18 Collectively, these tests imply that our esti­
mates have high internal validity.

4. Research design
We draw on a perfectly balanced panel of 401 municipalities i for
which we obtained data on three municipal council elections at points in
time t = {2001, 2006, 2011}. Our main explanatory variable Cit is a
dummy variable indicating whether a municipality i held concurrent
mayoral elections (CMEs) at time t. We then estimate the effects of CMEs
on three sets of dependent variables Yit . First, we regress turnout (ab­
solute number of voters in the council election relative to the votingeligible population12) on our treatment dummy. Second, we move to
electoral outcomes: we look at the vote share of the party holding the
mayoralty at the time of the council election (‘incumbent party vote’),
the combined vote share of the two large mainstream parties (‘major
party vote’) as well as the vote share of individual parties at council
elections (we consider the most important parties SPD, CDU, FDP and
Greens, all represented in the state assembly, and a residual ‘other’
category). Third, we consider aggregate outcomes at the council level: a
dummy variable indicating one-party majorities in the local council (i.e.,
a party with more than 50% of votes), Laakso and Tagepeera’s (1979)
effective number of legislative parties, and a dummy variable indicating
alignment of mayoralty and the party holding the plurality of council
votes occurred.13
We include time (θt ) and unit (γi ) fixed-effects in our regressions to
control for common election-year shocks and time-constant confounders
at the municipality level, clustering standard errors at the level of
treatment, i.e., municipalities. Our estimation equation therefore is:
Yit = θt + γi + βCit + εit .
The empirical strategy builds on the assumption that had mayoral
elections not occured, the outcome variables in ‘treated’ municipalities
with CME would follow similar trends as in ‘untreated’ municipalities
with stand-alone council elections. Hence, we rely on a difference-indifferences framework (Lechner 2011). The idiosyncrasies in the
timing of mayoral elections described above make it highly likely that
the assumptions of the design are met in our case. We conduct three sets
of tests to justify this assumption: Parallel trends in the pre-treatment
period, placebo tests on unrelated outcomes (federal and European
election results) in the treatment period, and balance tests on potential
confounders all indicate that our empirical strategy provides valid es­
timates of the causal effect of concurrency.
First, we assess parallel trends in council elections in the pretreatment period 1981 to 1991. We do this for the three most sizable
clusters of municipalities based on their pattern of election timing in the
treatment period, i.e. the top three panels of Fig. 1.14 As presented in
Appendix Section A.2.1, these three groups exhibit very similar trends in
turnout, major party vote shares or SPD/CDU vote shares. This indicates
that we do not expect that municipalities selected into (early) concur­
rency based on turnout or vote share trends.
Second, we conduct two types of placebo tests on federal and Euro­
pean elections in the treatment period 1998–2014: On the one hand, as
reported in Appendix Section A.2.2, the three most sizable clusters of
municipalities (see above) show very similar trends in turnout and
electoral outcomes in the treatment period. On the other hand, we
formally test for an effect of CME on turnout and electoral outcomes in
temporally close federal and European parliament elections. While by

5. Results
In the following, we present our results on how concurrent elections
affect aggregate turnout and vote choice. Table 1 shows estimates for the
average effect of CMEs on turnout, SPD, and CDU vote shares in council
elections. Model 1 in Table 1 confirms the assumption, undergirding all
our hypotheses, that concurrency raises turnout. Compared to an
average control group observation, the treated municipalities see an
increase in turnout of about 3 percentage points – an increase of 5.4%
relative to average turnout in the control group municipalities.19 Our
results are in line with what we would expect given earlier findings from
concurrent local elections in France, Germany, and Japan, where effects
range between 2 and 5 percentage points (Fauvelle-Aymar and François
2015; Garmann 2016; Fukumoto and Horiuchi 2016). They confirm
these prior findings that even two concurrent low-salience elections
15
Vetter (2015: 5) using German “Politbarometer” survey data shows that
European elections are even less important to German citizens than local
elections and that federal election trump all other elections in terms of
importance.
16
Interestingl mayoral elections held concurrently with federal or European
elections do increase turnout in these elections. For the latter Leininger et al.
(2018) show that this represents a strong causal effect of concurrent mayoral
elections on turnout in European elections.
17
See Appendix Table A.8. Balance also holds when comparing municipalities
that hold CME for the first time with municipalities that still have not seen any
CME (see Table A.10).
18
Consequently, we observe differences, as expected, in indicators relevant for
treatment assignment (see Appendix Table A.9). Incumbents’ time in office is
higher in the treatment group, as mayors stepping down (mainly due to
retirement age) lead to non-concurrent elections. However, concerning parti­
sanship SPD vs. CDU, mayoral incumbency is balanced in the overall sample.
Note that SPD mayoral incumbents are more prevalent in earlier CME elections
and CDU mayoral incumbents in later CME elections – this is, as the staggered
reform process had incentives for SPD mayors to switch earlier and CDU mayors
to switch later to CMEs. Similarly, although CME municipalities with CDU or
SPD incumbents are broadly comparable, they do cluster somewhat
geographically, and the center-right CDU is more dominant in more affluent
areas (see Table A.11 in the appendix).
19
Table A.14 in the appendix shows that a single election does not drive this
average effect but that a sizable treatment effect occurs consistently for all
instances of concurrency. These estimates remain substantively unchanged
when we include additional control variables, giving further credibility to our
design.

12

Registration is automatic in Germany.
Summary statistics for these variables are provided in Appendix Table A.7.
14
This is municipalities holding CME in 2001 and again in 2006, those only
with CME in 2006, and those only with CME in 2011. We do this, as almost all
municipalities are observed in treated and in control state in the three election
years in the treatment period.
13

5

L. Rudolph and A. Leininger

Electoral Studies 70 (2021) 102264

increase turnout.20
To test our first hypothesis, Table 1 reports estimates for the SPD and
CDU council vote in models 2 and 3. In line with Tingsten’s (1937) law,
the political left (SPD) profits from CMEs. However, the political center
profits more generally as we also see a positive but slightly less sub­
stantial effect for the center-right CDU. In model 2, the SPD’s vote share
increases by about 0.73 percentage points, significant at the 5%-level, if
mayoral elections are held concurrently. Model 3 estimates the corre­
sponding increase of the CDU council vote share to be slightly smaller, at
about 0.47 percentage points, significant at the 10%-level. This increase
in the vote for the two parties goes hand in hand with a corresponding
decline for all other parties.21 The sum of both effects forms the ‘major
party vote’ as reported in Table 2.
Table 2 reports the central tests for our second and third hypotheses.
Model 1 shows that concurrent elections increase combined center-left
(SPD) and center-right (CDU) council election vote share (‘major party
vote’) by about 1.2 percentage points. This provides evidence in support
of our second hypothesis that with majoritarian elections concurrent to
PR elections, centrist parties see electoral gains in the PR contest. Given
that both major parties already win a vast majority of seats, the effect is
relatively low at about 1.5% of an average control municipality.
The dependent variable in model 2 of Table 2 is the vote share of the
incumbent mayor’s party in the respective council race. Note that we
have many independent candidates (about a third of the sample) – per
definition, they have no corresponding political party in the council. We,
therefore, exclude them from the analysis.22 Note also that we code
party incumbency, not personal incumbency. In the case of Lower Sax­
ony that we analyze here, the effects for party and personal incumbency
should be very similar because most mayors chose to run for re-election
(Wollmann 2014). We also believe in erring on the side of caution by
estimating the effect of party incumbency: a mayor rerunning likely has
a slightly stronger effect than a party running a new candidate in cases of
a mayor retiring. Hence, what we provided here is a conservative esti­
mate of the incumbency spillover effect. Still, results are in line with
what we would expect from our third hypothesis: The council vote share
of the incumbent mayor’s party increases with concurrency by about
0.95 percentage points. Given a 46% baseline, this is about a 2%

Table 2
The effect of concurrent mayoral elections on major party vote share and
incumbent mayor’s party vote share.

(2)

(3)

Turnout

SPD vote (%)

CDU vote (%)

Year fixed effects
Municipality fixed effects
N
Municipalities
Within R2

3.03***
(0.19)
✓
✓
1203
401
0.60

0.73**
(0.31)
✓
✓
1203
401
0.081

0.47*
(0.28)
✓
✓
1203
401
0.31

Control group mean
Control group SD

56.3
6.29

34.8
12.8

41.4
16.1

CME

(2)

Major party vote (%)

Incumbent party vote (%)

Year fixed effects
Municipality fixed effects
N
Municipalities
Within R2

1.20***
(0.40)
✓
✓
1203
401
0.34

0.95**
(0.48)
✓
✓
624
291
0.20

Control group mean
Control group SD

76.2
15.7

46.1
14.8

CME

Year and municipality fixed-effects estimation with standard errors clustered by
municipality. Major party vote is the combined vote share of SPD and CDU.
Incumbent party vote is the vote share for the party of the incumbent mayor.
This model is estimated on a reduced sample of municipalities, which excludes
municipalities with independent (non-aligned) mayors and those lacking in­
formation on mayoral incumbency. ** (*,***) indicates p < 0.05 (0.1, 0.01).

increase in control group vote shares.
Table 3 provides detailed evidence on the coattails of mayoral in­
cumbents we propose with hypothesis 3. For this, we split the CME
dummy variable to distinguish between CMEs with SPD and CDU in­
cumbents as well as incumbents from other national parties (FDP and
Greens), and municipalities with independent or no elected in­
cumbents.23 Municipalities with SPD incumbents that hold CMEs see
substantially larger increases in the SPD vote of around 2.2 percentage
points compared to municipalities with non-SPD incumbents (model 1).
While a similar pattern emerges for CDU incumbents, the effect is much
smaller with 0.9 percentage points (model 2). For the SPD, the effect
amounts to 6.4%, and for the CDU to 2.1% vis-à-vis their control group
Table 3
The effect of concurrent mayoral elections on party vote shares and turnout
depending on party affiliation of the incumbent mayor.

Table 1
The effect of concurrent mayoral elections (CMEs) on turnout and the vote
shares of CDU and SPD.
(1)

(1)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

SPD vote
(%)

CDU vote
(%)

Green/FDP
vote (%)

Turnout
(%)

CME (FDP/Green
inc.)
CME (indep./no
elected inc.)
Year fixed effects
Municipality fixed
effects
N
Municipalities
Within R2

2.24***
(0.60)
− 0.20
(0.43)
− 0.81
(0.86)
0.64*
(0.36)
✓
✓

− 0.045
(0.43)
0.90**
(0.44)
− 1.24
(2.88)
0.48
(0.38)
✓
✓

− 0.57
(0.43)
− 0.73**
(0.29)
2.66*
(1.37)
− 0.36
(0.27)
✓
✓

3.32***
(0.32)
3.03***
(0.31)
4.81***
(0.91)
2.87***
(0.24)
✓
✓

1203
401
0.099

1203
401
0.31

1203
401
0.33

1203
401
0.61

Control group mean
Control group SD

34.8
12.8

41.4
16.1

9.90
7.36

56.3
6.29

CME (SPD inc.)
CME (CDU inc.)

Year and municipality fixed-effects estimation with standard errors clustered by
municipality. ** (*,***) indicates p < 0.05 (0.1, 0.01).

Year and municipality fixed-effects estimation with standard errors clustered by
municipality. Dependent variables are municipal council party vote shares or
turnout, as given in model header. Independent variable is a split indicator of
type of CME by party affiliation of the mayoral incumbent. Base category is a
stand-alone, non-concurrent municipal council election. ** (*,***) indicates p <
0.05 (0.1, 0.01).

20
Contrary to the even larger increases in turnout of about 11 percentage
points (20%) observed with concurrent European and mayoral elections in
Lower Saxony (Leininger et al., 2018), we suppose that council and mayoral
elections attract a more similar sub-set of the electorate and therefore provide a
somewhat lower stimulus to political participation.
21
See Table A.15 in the appendix.
22
We were able to obtain data on 907 incumbent mayors in total. Of these,
314 are CDU (35%), 302 SPD (33%), 8 minor party (FDP or Greens) (1%) and
283 independent (31%) mayors.

23
Similar to major party vote, which captures the sum of the effects on SPD
and CDU, Green/FDP vote captures the combined losses of both parties. As can
be seen in Table A.15, both parties suffer equally from concurrency.

6

L. Rudolph and A. Leininger

Electoral Studies 70 (2021) 102264

vote share. Note that we interpret these results as speaking for a genuine
incumbency advantage mechanism because incumbency is only weakly
related to local party strongholds, i.e., a party doing very well in these
municipalities in other elections, too.24 Nevertheless, local party
strongholds potentially constitute a relevant topic for further research
into the effects of concurrency on electoral outcomes. Finally, for mu­
nicipalities with incumbents of the FDP or the Greens (model 3), a
similar association evolves, with large effects of around 2.7 percentage
points, significant at the 10%-level (note that there are very few of these
cases). Incumbents of the other party have in tendency a small negative
effect on a party’s vote share. Finally, model 4 of Table 3 reports
whether mobilization differs by incumbency type. As can be seen,
turnout increases relatively stronger with incumbents from FDP or
Green party (around 4.8 percentage points) and least with independent/
no elected incumbents (around 2.9 percentage points).
Note that the results also indicate that the benefits of concurrency to
the two centrist parties are not driven by incumbency spillover effects
alone. Instead, the political center also profits from CMEs where we
would expect incumbency effects to be irrelevant, i.e., with independent
or no elected incumbents. This finding is in line with the electoralsystems mechanism that we theorized: The turnout stimulus of concur­
rent elections under majority rule seems to induce centrist voters to turn
out, as centrist parties are much more likely to field viable mayoral
candidates in an average municipality. To summarize, both an electoral
system and an incumbency mechanism contribute to gains for centrist
parties when majoritarian executive and PR legislative elections are held
simultaneously.

supporters of the incumbent mayor, the distribution of partisan leaning
among marginal voters, or both.
While we cannot exclude other mechanisms with our research
design, we deem it likely that turnout is an essential part of the electoral
effects observed with CMEs. Taking our mobilization estimate of on
average three percentage points literally, an average control group
municipality with 14,611 eligible citizens would see an increase in the
voting population of 443 voters. If these additional 443 voters were to
vote for the SPD exclusively, the party would see an increase in 3.3
percentage points, which is about 4.5 times higher as our estimated
coefficient (as not only the left profits from CMEs). However, the
maximum increase of the major parties combined would be 1.2 per­
centage points, which is exactly what we find empirically. Finally, if all
additional voters were to vote for the incumbent mayor’s party exclu­
sively, a vote share increase of 2.8 percentage points would follow, again
larger than our estimate of 0.95 in Table 2, but only slightly larger than
the decomposed effects for SPD/FDP/Green incumbents we find in
Table 3. Overall, this makes sense as we would not expect a perfect
relation between turnout increase and additional voters for the centrist
or incumbent parties.
In the following, we discuss the broader implications of our findings,
drawing on additional evidence: Do concurrency-induced shifts in the
electoral balance meaningfully affect local politics? A precondition for
any effect of concurrency on policymaking would be a substantive shift
in observed political competition at the municipality level. Therefore,
we investigate how municipal councils’ composition and the alignment
of legislative and executive majorities change through concurrency.
Since coattails and electoral systems effects benefit the two dominant
parties in our case, we should expect that concurrency reduces frag­
mentation in the council and, given the electoral strength of the parties,
increases the occurrence of single-party majorities in the council.
Coattails should also make it more likely for the mayor’s party to hold a
plurality in the council. Making some additional simplifying assump­
tions that we explain below, we can conduct three empirical tests on
these conjectures, the results of which we report in Table 4.

6. Discussion
Our theoretical framework laid out expectations regarding the con­
sequences of increasing turnout through concurrent elections, which we
saw confirmed through our empirical analysis. First of all, we find a
tendency towards a relatively stronger performance of the center-left
SPD compared to the center-right CDU under concurrency. As both the
SPD and the CDU hold about a third of mayoral seats and both parties
compete at similarly high levels of political support,25 we would not
expect this to be the consequence of a lop-sided distribution of mayoral
incumbency. Rather, as proposed in hypothesis 1, Tingsten’s law seems
to appear through the backdoor: Effects are consistent with either
marginal voters being more on the left side of the political spectrum, or a
larger mobilization potential of left-leaning marginal voters with con­
current elections.
Second, we find evidence that the political center, not just the centerleft, profits from concurrency. Both the SPD and the CDU see increases in
their vote shares under concurrency. Importantly, these two parties also
profit from concurrency in cases where independents or no elected in­
cumbents are in place, i.e., in cases where mayoral incumbency effects
cannot be the driver of the vote share increase for major parties. This
provides support for electoral system effects (as outlined in hypothesis
2): A majoritarian contest concurrent with a PR race will lead to elec­
toral spillovers that impose the former’s two-party logic on the latter
contest.
Third, as proposed in hypothesis 3, we find clear evidence that the
vote share of an incumbent mayor’s party is positively affected by
concurrency – both when we look at incumbency coattail effects in
aggregate, and when we assess party-specific incumbency coattails.
These findings indicate that coattail effects are a general feature of
concurrency. Note, however, that incumbents from the center-left SPD
see stronger coattails compared to the center-right CDU. This implies
that the size of coattails may depend on the relative voting costs of

Table 4
The effect concurrent mayoral elections on the composition of local councils and
the probability of unified government.

CME
Year fixed effects
Municipality
fixed effects
N
Municipalities
Within R2
Control group
mean
Control group
SD

(1)

(2)

(3)

One-party
dominance in
local council

Effective number of
parliamentary parties

ExecutiveLegislative
Alignment

0.043**
(0.021)
✓
✓

− 0.062***
(0.018)
✓
✓

0.068***
(0.026)
✓
✓

1203
401
0.042

1203
401
0.32

1062
394
0.011

0.35

2.79

0.53

0.48

0.69

0.50

Municipality fixed-effects models with standard errors clustered by municipal­
ity. Dependent variables are the probability of one party having an absolute
majority in the municipal council (one-party dominance, model 1), the effective
number of parliamentary parties in the municipal council (model 2), and the
probability of one party commanding both a majority in the council and con­
trolling the mayoralty (executive-legislative alignment, model 3). ** (*,***)
indicates p < 0.05 (0.1, 0.01).

24

See Tables A.12 and A.13 in the appendix.
The SPD receives 36% of the council vote on average, while the CDU re­
ceives 42%.
25

7

L. Rudolph and A. Leininger

Electoral Studies 70 (2021) 102264

Our first dependent variable is a dummy variable indicating whether
a single party list obtained more than 50% of the vote or not, which we
then use as a proxy for single-party majorities in municipal councils.26
As can be seen from model 1, results indicate that, with concurrency,
municipalities are 4.3 percentage points more likely to have a one-party
majority in the municipal council. This is a substantial increase (of
12.3%) compared to the control group mean of 35%.
Our second dependent variable is the effective number of parlia­
mentary parties (ENPP), which provides a measure of the number of
parties weighted by their size (Laakso and Taagepera 1979).27 As ex­
pected, given the increasing vote share of the major parties, ENPP de­
creases. As can be seen from model 2, the decrease of about 0.06 is rather
small compared to the control group mean of 2.8 effective parties.
Nevertheless, findings are still in line with our electoral system hy­
pothesis. Concurrency benefits the two dominant parties and thereby
reduces fragmentation. Our third and last dependent variable is an in­
dicator of partisan alignment between legislature and executive. We
construct a dummy that equals one if the party receiving a plurality of
the votes and the mayoral party coincide after a council election, and
zero otherwise. Concurrent elections raise the probability that this oc­
curs. As can be seen from model 3, concurrency raises the likelihood of
alignment by 6.8 percentage points (or 13% compared to the control
group mean of 53%).
Collectively, these findings provide a clear indication that concurrent
elections likely influence both politics and policy. The combination of
PR and mayoral elections shifts the balance of power in the municipality
legislatures in the direction of the executive leadership, the mayor, as
one would expected based on Campbell’s (1960) “surge and decline”
argument. In the case of multiparty systems, this leads to a consolidation
of the party system in favor of the center-left and also to a lesser extent
the center-right party.

concurrency also leads to a particular increase in the PR votes of the
incumbent mayor’s party. Our findings relate to the broader literature
that shows conflicting electoral effects of turnout, likely due to different
contexts and institutional settings in which variation in turnout is
observed (e.g. Bechtel et al., 2016; Cepaluni and Hidalgo 2016; Fer­
werda 2014; Finseraas and Vernby 2014). Although we cannot ascertain
with certainty the extent to which concurrency affects electoral out­
comes (only) through turnout, the effects we observe are in line with
what we would expect from a turnout-driven effect.
Nevertheless, explicitly disentangling contamination from turnout
effects is the first of four distinct theoretical and empirical challenges,
which future research should address. Campbell’s (1960) “surge and
decline” argument entails two propositions. On the one hand, it has been
argued that mobilization efforts matter for electoral outcomes in con­
current elections (Fukumoto and Horiuchi 2016), which is also the
theoretical argument we focus on in this article. On the other hand, core
voters may change their minds, i.e., we observe contamination by which
the characteristics of candidates for one vote feed into the decision
making calculus of the other vote (Hainmueller and Kern 2008). While
aggregate predictions on the consequences of concurrency do not differ,
future research on the exact mechanisms would inform theories of
voting behavior. For such research on who exactly is mobilized by
concurrency, individual-level survey data of voters and non-voters in
comparable voting districts with and without concurrency would be a
crucial prerequisite.
Second, how do concurrent legislative elections affect competition in
the mayoral race? To the best of our knowledge, there is no research on
whether concurrent elections increase the likelihood that parties field
candidates or whether it increases the competitiveness of mayoral
elections. Note that these effects can, in a causal framework, only be
identified with a case where the researcher observes variation in the
occurrence of concurrent legislative elections while mayoral elections
take place in all municipalities at the same time, i.e., inverting the
characteristics of our set-up.
Third, do concurrent elections affect policy-making? A growing
literature investigates the policy consequences of institutional designs
that affect turnout. All in all, conflicting arguments have been made in
the literature, from the introduction of postal voting, where increasing
turnout brought lower welfare spending (see Hodler et al., 2015), to
compulsory voting, where increasing turnout brought higher welfare
spending (see Fowler 2013). So far, only few articles have looked at the
policy consequences of concurrently elected political representatives,
and with conflicting results (Anzia 2012b; Berry and Gersen 2011).28
Fourth, do we observe heterogeneity in average treatment effects and
the importance of the mechanisms leading to it when the electoral
stimulus provided by concurrent elections increases? Even concurrency
in low salience elections can have vastly differing turnout effects,
depending on the type of elections that are combined (Leininger et al.,
2018). As reported by Kogan et al. (2018), for a given low-salience
election, the change in the composition of the electorate is more sub­
stantial when the concurrent election is of higher salience and most
pronounced with first-order national elections. Hence, we would expect
that the relative importance of the electoral participation of peripheral
voters, spillovers of incumbency, and differential mobilization from the
electoral system also changes with the extent of the turnout stimulus
provided by concurrency. In particular, we would expect that the
equality-enhancing effect of concurrent elections via increased partici­
pation of disadvantaged voters, and a corresponding increase in leftist
party vote shares, least traceable in our case, is more pronounced with a
stronger electoral stimulus (but see Rudolph 2020; Finseraas and Vernby
2014), whereas the incumbency spillover and electoral system effects
are more pronounced when the electoral stimulus is lower, and the
elections combined are of similar salience.

7. Conclusion
Elections are often held concurrently to raise turnout. However, the
electoral consequences of concurrent elections, in particular when it
comes to horizontal concurrency and concurrency of different electoral
systems, are still underexplored. We put forward a theoretical argument
that generalizes and extends the turnout effects of Campbell’s (1960)
“surge and decline” hypothesis to PR systems. We argue that elections
under a majoritarian system held concurrently to elections under a
system of (party-list) proportional representation affect the outcome of
the latter contest. We propose that both electoral system effects and
incumbent coattails lead to electoral gains for centrist parties in general
as well as gains for the party of the incumbent in the legislative race.
This is because these parties are dominant in the majoritarian arena and
the two-party tendency of majoritarian elections spills over to the con­
current PR election. Additionally, incumbents mobilize their latent
supporters to turn out in higher numbers for the concurrent election.
Drawing on a unique case in Germany, where we observe quasirandom variation in the timing of local executive and legislative elec­
tions, we show that combined elections increase turnout, even though
both elections – municipal elections in our case – are at a low level of
salience. This turnout increase affects the composition of the electorate
and, thereby, who wins. While we find that electoral gains are slightly
more pronounced for the center-left, we nevertheless find significant
gains for the center-right as well. In line with our theoretical argument,

26
This is a conservative approach to such majorities, as the natural threshold
imposed by the seat distribution system implies that vote shares of less than
50% regularly suffice for a council majority.
27
For practical reasons, we simplify the approach somewhat. As we do not
have data on seat shares, we use the PR vote shares. Parties other than CDU,
SPD, Greens, FDP, Left, and Independents, which usually see only a fraction of
the vote, are subsumed in an ‘Others’ category.

28

8

See also Kogan et al. (2018) for evidence from concurrent referendums.

Electoral Studies 70 (2021) 102264

L. Rudolph and A. Leininger

Gaining a better understanding of the implications of concurrent
elections is essential: While the turnout increase induced by concurrency
is generally considered desirable (Lijphart, 1997), it is not
outcome-neutral but seems to rest strongly on the nature of concurrency.
Hence, concurrency has potentially significant implications for
accountability, representation, and the structure of the party system. For
instance, the incumbency advantage is widely considered as problematic
for accountability because it reduces turnover (Ansolabehere and Gerber
1997). Concurrency extends the incumbency advantage to another
electoral arena. Even if the incumbency effect would only reflect
candidate quality (Ashworth and Bueno de Mesquita 2008), a spillover
implies an undeserved electoral gain in an unrelated electoral contest
and biases electoral selection in this contest. As shown by de
Benedictis-Kessner (2018), concurrent elections can even cement the
incumbency advantage of mayors, with a potential of reinforcing cycles.
Note, however, that further research is needed to assess whether this is
also detrimental to voter welfare (Prato and Wolton 2018). Neverthe­
less, one may also consider some of the effects of concurrent majori­
tarian and PR elections as positive. For instance, one may approve of the
centripetal electoral system effect because it reduces fragmentation in
the legislature. After all, fragmentation is particularly strong at the local
level and in low-salience elections more generally. Overall, the electoral
consequences we document ultimately bear implications for policy
outcomes as well. For instance, in cases of horizontal concurrency, the
partisan alignment of executive and legislature becomes more likely,
which potentially allows the governing party to govern more effectively,
also enhancing its accountability via voters (due to greater clarity of
responsibility under unified government) (Leyden and Borrelli 1995; Wu
and Huang 2007). Future research along the four lines of inquiry that we
have proposed above should help to better understand the broader im­
plications of the often-used tool of concurrency for democracy.

Ashworth, S., Bueno de Mesquita, E., 2008. Electoral selection, strategic challenger
entry, and the incumbency advantage. J. Polit. 70, 1006–1025. https://doi.org/
10.1017/S0022381608081024.
Bechtel, M.M., Hangartner, D., Schmid, L., 2016. Does compulsory voting increase
support for leftist policy? Am. J. Polit. Sci. 60, 752–767. https://doi.org/10.1111/
ajps.12224.
Bechtel, M.M., Hangartner, D., Schmid, L., 2017. Compulsory voting, habit formation,
and political participation. Rev. Econ. Stat. 100, 467–476. https://doi.org/10.1162/
rest_a_00701.
Berry, C.R., Gersen, J.E., 2011. Election timing and public policy. Q. J. Polit. Sci. 6,
103–135. https://doi.org/10.1561/100.00010070.
Boyd, R.W., 1989. The effects of primaries and statewide races on voter turnout. J. Polit.
51, 730–739. https://doi.org/10.2307/2131504.
Bracco, E., Revelli, F., 2018. Concurrent elections and political accountability: evidence
from Italian local elections. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 148, 135–149. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jebo.2018.02.006.
Campbell, A., 1960. Surge and decline: a study of electoral change. Publ. Opin. Q. 24,
397–418. https://doi.org/10.1086/266960.
Campbell, J.E., 1987. The revised theory of surge and decline. Am. J. Polit. Sci. 31,
965–979. https://doi.org/10.2307/2111231.
Campbell, J.E., 1991. The presidential surge and its midterm decline in congressional
elections, 1868-1988. J. Polit. 53, 477–487. https://doi.org/10.2307/2131768.
Cepaluni, G., Hidalgo, F.D., 2016. Compulsory voting can increase political inequality:
evidence from Brazil. Polit. Anal. 24, 273–280. https://doi.org/10.1093/pan/
mpw004.
Cox, G.W., 1997. Making Votes Count: Strategic Coordination in the World’s Electoral
Systems. Cambridge University Press.
Cox, G.W., 2015. Electoral rules, mobilization, and turnout. Annu. Rev. Polit. Sci. 18,
49–68. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-polisci-060414-035915.
de Benedictis-Kessner, J., 2018. Off-cycle and out of office: election timing and the
incumbency advantage. J. Polit. 80, 119–132. https://doi.org/10.1086/694396.
DeNardo, J., 1980. Turnout and the vote: the joke’s on the Democrats. Am. Polit. Sci.
Rev. 74, 406–420. https://doi.org/10.2307/1960636.
Detjen, J., 2000. Demokratie in der Gemeinde: Bürgerbeteiligung an der
Kommunalpolitik in Niedersachsen. Niedersächsische Landeszentrale für politische
Bildung.
Dewan, T., Shepsle, K.A., 2011. Political economy models of elections. Annu. Rev. Polit.
Sci. 14, 311–330. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.polisci.12.042507.094704.
Duverger, M., 1986. Duverger’s law: forty years later. In: Grofman, B., Lijphart, A. (Eds.),
Electoral Laws and Their Political Consequences. Agathon Press, New York,
pp. 69–84.
Fauvelle-Aymar, C., François, A., 2015. Mobilization, cost of voting and turnout: a
natural randomized experiment with double elections. Publ. Choice 162, 183–199.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11127-014-0212-0.
Ferejohn, J.A., Calvert, R.L., 1984. Presidential coattails in historical perspective. Am. J.
Polit. Sci. 28, 127–146. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004.
Ferrara, F., Herron, E.S., Nishikawa, M., 2005. Mixed Electoral Systems. Contamination
and its Consequences. Palgrave Macmillan, New York.
Ferwerda, J., 2014. Electoral consequences of declining participation: a natural
experiment in Austria. Elect. Stud. 35, 242–252. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
electstud.2014.01.008.
Finseraas, H., Vernby, K., 2014. A mixed blessing for the left? Early voting, turnout and
election outcomes in Norway. Elect. Stud. 33, 278–291. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
electstud.2013.07.003.
Fowler, A., 2013. Electoral and policy consequences of voter turnout: evidence from
compulsory voting in Australia. Quarterly Journal of Political Science 8, 159–182.
https://doi.org/10.1561/100.00012055.
Fowler, A., 2015. Regular voters, marginal voters and the electoral effects of turnout.
Political Science Research and Methods 3, 205–219. https://doi.org/10.1017/
psrm.2014.25.
Freier, R., 2015. The mayor’s advantage: causal evidence on incumbency effects in
German mayoral elections. Eur. J. Polit. Econ. 40, 16–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ejpoleco.2015.07.005.
Fukumoto, K., Horiuchi, Y., 2016. Identifying the effect of mobilization on voter turnout
through a natural experiment. Elect. Stud. 44, 192–202. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
electstud.2016.08.003.
Garmann, S., 2016. Concurrent elections and turnout: causal estimates from a German
quasi-experiment. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 126, 167–178. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jebo.2016.03.013.
Geys, B., 2006. Explaining voter turnout: a review of aggregate-level research. Elect.
Stud. 25, 637–663. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electstud.2005.09.002.
Hainmueller, J., Kern, H.L., 2008. Incumbency as a source of spillover effects in mixed
electoral systems: evidence from a regression-discontinuity design. Elect. Stud. 27,
213–227. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electstud.2007.10.006.
Halberstam, Y., Montagnes, B.P., 2015. Presidential coattails versus the median voter:
senator selection in US elections. J. Publ. Econ. 121, 40–51. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jpubeco.2014.10.002.
Hartney, M., Nickerson, D.W., 2012. Elect Your Own Employer! Endogenous Election
Timing or Interest Group Advantage? University of Notre Dame, Mimeo, pp. 1–32.
Hodler, R., Luechinger, S., Stutzer, A., 2015. The effects of voting costs on the democratic
process and public finances. Am. Econ. J. Econ. Pol. 7, 141–171. https://doi.org/
10.1257/pol.20120383.
Kayser, M.A., 2005. Who surfs, who manipulates? The determinants of opportunistic
election timing and electorally motivated economic intervention. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev.
99, 17–27. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055405051464.

Data availability
Replication materials are available at the Harvard Davaverse at https
://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/XFUJOO.
Acknowledgements
We thank the editors of Electoral Studies and three anonymous re­
viewers, as well as Yusaku Horiuchi, Konstantin Kaeppner, Susumu
Shikano, Peter W. Wielhouwer, Jerome Schäfer, participants at the
MPSA 2017, EPSA 2017 and EPOP 2017 conferences and seminar au­
diences at LMU Munich, ETH Zurich, FU Berlin and University of Bern
for thoughtful comments. The Office of the Elections Administrator, the
Ministry of the Interior, Lower Saxony as well as the Statistical Office of
Lower Saxony provided data and helpful background on election timing
in Lower Saxony. We thank Alexia Sotelo Beyza, Anton Könneke, Elena
Kalter, Fabio Best, Jan Menzner, Jette Bergen, and Robert Welz for
excellent research assistance.
Appendix A. Supplementary material
Supplementary material to this article can be found online at https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.electstud.2020.102264.
References
Ansolabehere, S., Gerber, A., 1997. Incumbency advantage and the persistence of
legislative majorities and the persistence of legislative majorities. Legis. Stud. Q. 22,
161–178. https://doi.org/10.2307/440380.
Anzia, S.F., 2012a. Partisan power play: the origins of local election timing as an
American political institution. Stud. Am. Polit. Dev. 26, 24–49. https://doi.org/
10.1017/S0898588X11000149.
Anzia, S.F., 2012b. The election timing effect: evidence from a policy intervention in
Texas. Q. J. Polit. Sci. 7, 209–248. https://doi.org/10.1561/100.00011056.
Armbrust, P., 2007. Einführung in das niedersächsische Kommunalrecht. LIT Verlag
Münster.

9

L. Rudolph and A. Leininger

Electoral Studies 70 (2021) 102264
Potrafke, N., Roesel, F., 2020. Opening hours of polling stations and voter turnout:
evidence from a natural experiment. Rev. Int. Organ. 15, 133–163. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11558-018-9305-8.
Prato, C., Wolton, S., 2018. Electoral imbalances and their consequences. J. Polit. 80,
1168–1182. https://doi.org/10.1086/698757.
Rogers, S., 2019. Coattails, raincoats, and congressional election outcomes. PS Political
Sci. Polit. 52, 251–255. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1049096518002135.
Rudolph, L., 2017. Die Münchner Ergebnisse Im Bundes- Und Landesvergleich: Ein UdeEffekt In München? In: Klima, A., Küchenhoff, H., Selzer, M., Thurner, P.W. (Eds.),
Exit Polls Und Hybrid-Modelle. SpringerVS, Wiesbaden, pp. 21–35.
Rudolph, L., 2020. Turning out to turn down the EU: the mobilization of occasional
voters and Brexit. J. Eur. Publ. Pol. 27, 1858–1878. https://doi.org/10.1080/
13501763.2019.1706623.
Smith, A., 2003. Election timing in majoritarian parliaments. Br. J. Polit. Sci. 33,
397–418. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0007123403000188.
STK, 2013. Kommunale Vertretungen und Hauptverwaltungsbeamte sollen künftig
synchron gewählt werden – erste „neue“ Wahlen im Herbst 2014. Niedersächsische
Staatskanzlei. http://www.stk.niedersachsen.de/aktuelles/presseinformationen
/kommunale-vertretungen-und-hauptverwaltungsbeamte-sollen-kuenftig-synchrongewaehlt-werden–erste-neue-wahlen-im-herbst-2014-118124.html.
Tingsten, H., 1937. Political Behavior: Studies in Election Statistics. PS King.
Trounstine, J., 2013. Turnout and incumbency in local elections. Urban Aff. Rev. 49,
167–189. https://doi.org/10.1177/1078087412463536.
Vetter, A., 2015. Just a matter of timing? Local electoral turnout in Germany in the
context of national and European parliamentary elections. German Polit. 24 (1),
67–84. https://doi.org/10.1080/09644008.2014.984693.
Wollmann, H., 2014. The directly-elected mayor in the German Länder - introduction,
implementation and impact. Publ. Money Manag. 34, 331–337. https://doi.org/
10.1080/09540962.2014.945798.
Wu, C., Huang, C., 2007. Divided government in Taiwan’s local politics: public
evaluations of city/county government performance. Party Polit. 13, 741–760.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1354068807080085.

Kogan, V., Lavertu, S., Peskowitz, Z., 2018. Election timing, electorate composition, and
policy outcomes: evidence from school districts. Am. J. Polit. Sci. 62, 637–651.
https://doi.org/10.1111/ajps.12359.
Kohler, U., 2011. Estimating the potential impact of nonvoters on outcomes of
parliamentary elections in proportional systems with an application to German
national elections from 1949 to 2009. Elect. Stud. 30, 497–509. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.electstud.2011.01.008.
Laakso, M., Taagepera, R., 1979. “Effective” number of parties. A measure with
application to West Europe. Comp. Polit. Stud. 12, 3–27. https://doi.org/10.1177/
001041407901200101.
Lechner, M., 2011. The estimation of causal effects by difference-in-difference methods.
Found. Trends Econ. 4, 165–224. https://doi.org/10.1561/0800000014.
Leininger, A., Rudolph, L., Zittlau, S., 2018. How to increase turnout in low-salience
elections: quasi-experimental evidence on the effect of concurrent second-order
elections on political participation. PSRM 6, 509–526. https://doi.org/10.1017/
psrm.2016.38.
Leyden, K.M., Borrelli, S.A., 1995. The effect of state economic conditions on
gubernatorial elections: does unified government make a difference? Polit. Res. Q.
48, 275–290. https://doi.org/10.1177/106591299504800203.
Lijphart, A., 1997. Unequal participation: democracy’s unresolved dilemma. Am. Polit.
Sci. Rev. 91, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.2307/2952255.
Lopes da Fonseca, M., 2017. Identifying the source of incumbency advantage through a
constitutional reform. Am. J. Polit. Sci. 61, 657–670. https://doi.org/10.1111/
ajps.12287.
Lupia, A., Strom, K., 1995. Coalition termination and the strategic timing of
parliamentary elections. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 89, 648–665. https://doi.org/10.2307/
2082980.
Magar, E., 2012. Gubernatorial coattails in Mexican congressional elections. J. Polit. 74,
383–399. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022381611001629.
Meredith, M., 2009. The strategic timing of direct democracy. Econ. Polit. 21, 159–177.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0343.2008.00342.x.
Meredith, M., 2013. Exploiting friends-and-neighbors to estimate coattail effects. Am.
Polit. Sci. Rev. 107, 742–765. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000439.

10

Online Appendix for
‘Coattails and Spillover-Effects:
Quasi-Experimental Evidence from Concurrent
Executive and Legislative Elections’
1

2

Lukas Rudolph and Arndt Leininger

Article forthcoming in Electoral Studies, doi:10.1016/j.electstud.2020.102264
3

20/12/2020

A.1

Case description

Council elections in Lower Saxony are held every five years on the same date across the
federal state. In this paper, we analyze the council elections in 2001, 2006, and 2011
and the impact that holding concurrent mayoral elections (CMEs) had on them. We
exploit the fact that the timing of mayoral elections follows a haphazard pattern with
municipalities dropping in and out of treatment status (i.e., holding CME).
The reasons behind this pattern are various electoral reforms enacted by the state
legislature. In 1996, under SPD-party rule and contested by the opposition, the direct
election of these local executives was introduced with five-year terms. Mayors were until
then indirectly elected by the municipal council for 12-year terms and had a largely
ceremonial and representative role. The municipal administration’s day-to-day business
was overseen by a professional municipal director, who was appointed by the council.
When elected mayors were introduced in 1996, the latter position ceased to exist. Mayoral
elections were to be held concurrently to council elections beginning in 1996 (Detjen 2000).
However, transitional rules did not force municipal executives to face reelection in 1996
and 2001 if their original 12-year term was still running (Armbrust 2007: 60f.). This
reform introduced desynchronization of the timing of mayoral elections because some
mayors, due to idiosyncratic reasons such as their age, chose to hold early elections while
others served out their full term. The initial reform put municipalities on very different
trajectories concerning the timing of mayoral elections. Some held their first mayoral
elections concurrently with 1996 council elections, while others did not.
Additionally, in 2005, under CDU rule and again contested by the opposition, the term
length of municipal executives was prolonged to eight years (Armbrust 2007: 60f.). The
explicit political aim of the reform was to desynchronize the electoral cycles of municipal
executives and councils. This became effective for all municipal executive elections from
2005. This reform pushed municipalities with concurrent elections out of concurrency.
However, it did also push some formerly non-concurrent municipalities into concurrency.
1
2
3

LMU Munich and ETH Zurich (lukas.rudolph@gsi.uni-muenchen.de)
FU Berlin (arndt.leininger@fu-berlin.de)
Replication material to reproduce the figures and tables presented in this appendix (and the main
article) is available in the Harvard Dataverse, at doi:10.7910/DVN/XFUJOO.

1

Lastly, exceptional mayoral elections occur with the death, retirement, or resignation
of mayors and lead to new terms, inducing additional desynchronization of council and
mayoral elections.
Figure A.1 and Table A.1 provide an overview over the patterns of concurrency that
we observe. Among 401 municipalities, we can distinguish eight different patterns of
concurrency. Further explanations can be found in the captions of the Figure and Table.
Type of concurrency

2001

2006

2011

N

CMEs in 2001 and 2006 but not 2011
CME in 2006 only
CMEs in 2011 only
Never held CME
CMEs in 2001 and 2011 but not 2006
CMEs in 2006 and 2011 but not 2001
CMEs in 2001 only
CMEs in 2001, 2006 and 2011

1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1

1
1
0
0
0
1
0
1

0
0
1
0
1
1
0
1

156
105
60
41
21
7
6
5

Sum (of municipalities holding CMEs)

188

273

93

401

Symbol (Fig. 1)
◆
□

#
▽
▼
▲

Table A.1: The table presents eight different groups of municipalities as defined by patterns
of concurrency: 156 municipalities held concurrent mayoral elections (CMEs) in 2001 and 2006
but not 2011 (◆), 105 held CMEs in 2006 only (□), 60 held CMEs in 2011 only (), 41 never
held mayoral elections concurrent with council elections (#), 21 held CMEs in 2001 and 2011
but not 2006 (▽), 7 held CMEs in 2006 and 2011 but not 2001 (▼), 6 held CMEs in 2001 only
(▲), and 5 held CMEs in 2001, 2006 and 2011 ( ).

2

Figure A.1: The figure presents one marker for each mayoral election since 1997 in the 401
municipalities in our sample. Vertical dashed lines indicate state-wide council elections. Municipalities are aligned on the y-axis based on the pattern of concurrency in the 2001, 2006 and
2011 council elections: 156 municipalities held concurrent mayoral elections (CMEs) in 2001 and
2006 but not 2011 (◆), 105 held CME in 2006 only (□), 60 held CMEs in 2011 only (), 41
never held mayoral elections concurrent with council elections (#), 21 held CMEs in 2001 and
2011 but not 2006 (▽), 7 held CMEs in 2006 and 2011 but not 2001 (▼), 6 held CMEs in 2001
only (▲), and 5 held CMEs in 2001, 2006 and 2011 ( ).

3

A.2

Checks on the plausibility of identifying assumptions of the
research design

Our empirical strategy builds on the assumption that absent mayoral elections, the
‘treated’ municipalities with concurrent council elections, would follow similar trends as
‘untreated’ municipalities with stand-alone council elections.
To plausibilize this assumption, we conduct several tests: tests for parallel trends
in the pre-treatment period, tests on unrelated outcomes (Federal and European elections in the treatment period), and balance tests that compare municipality and election
characteristics between treated and control municipalities.
A.2.1

Parallel trends in pre-treatment period

This subsection describes parallel trends in the pre-treatment period. As our treatment
period comprises three years, and almost every municipality falls into the treatment group
in one or even two of the election years and falls into the control group in the other
election years, we cannot separate municipalities in a group that is overall “treated” and
a group that is overall “control”. However, as depicted in Figure A.1, we can differentiate
municipalities by types of election time clustering. For the following tests, we take the
three largest clusters of municipalities, i.e., municipalities holding CME in 2001 and again
in 2006, those only with CME in 2006, and those only with CME in 2011 (cf. groups
depicted the top three panels of Figure A.1).
Figure A.2 shows group means for these three groups of municipalities in the pretreatment period 1981 to 1991. As can be seen, these groups follow very similar trends
over time for turnout (top left panel), major party vote share (top right panel), and
SPD and CDU vote shares (bottom panels). If we look at levels, we see that the group
holding CME only in 2011 has slightly different levels and an average municipality in
this group leans more towards the CDU in this group. This indicates that some political
determinants might have played a role for the question of which municipalities selected
into concurrency earlier. However, as trends are still parallel, this is no danger to our
estimation strategy. Table A.2 provides statistical estimates for the similarity of these
trends, which are not statistically different at conventional levels.
The regression models presented in this table test for parallel trends between different
groups of municipalities as defined by concurrency. “CME in ...” are dummy variables,
which indicate whether a given municipality held concurrent mayoral elections in that year
only. A group of municipalities holding CME in both 2001 and 2006 serves as base category
in the regression analysis. Smaller groups of municipalities are omitted from the analyses.
Any year number represents a dummy variable, which is 1 for all observations from that
year and 0 for all others. These variables capture trends in the dependent variables from
one election to the other. We always omit the first year because it represents the base
category (if all year-dummies are zero, we are dealing with an observation from that
year). Finally, we interact the year dummies (indicating trends) with the CME-dummies
(indicating groups of municipalities) to test whether there are significant differences in
time trends between the groups of municipalities. Coefficients on these interaction terms
are substantially close to zero and always statistically insignificant, thus, confirming the
parallel trends assumption under-girding our empirical analyses.
4

Figure A.2: The figure displays average levels and trends for turnout and vote shares (major
party, SPD, CDU) in council elections 1981, 1986, and 1991 for three types of municipalities:
those holding mayoral elections concurrent with council elections (CME) in 2001 and 2006,
holding first and only CME in 2006, and holding first and only CME in 2011.

5

1986
1991
CME in 2006
CME in 2011
1986 x CME in 2006
1986 x CME in 2011
1991 x CME in 2006
1991 x CME in 2011
Intercept
N

(1)
Turnout
∗∗∗
-3.91
(0.50)
∗∗∗
-7.46
(0.50)
-0.82
(0.58)
0.59
(0.64)
-0.24
(0.82)
-0.05
(0.91)
-0.26
(0.82)
0.03
(0.91)
∗∗∗
79.59
(0.35)
1185

(2)
Major Party
-1.47
(0.90)
∗∗∗
-3.00
(0.90)
-0.33
(1.04)
-0.04
(1.16)
0.07
(1.48)
-0.03
(1.65)
-0.42
(1.48)
0.22
(1.65)
∗∗∗
88.68
(0.64)
1179

(3)
SPD
∗∗
3.52
(1.27)
∗∗∗
4.82
(1.27)
1.60
(1.48)
∗∗
-5.42
(1.65)
-0.54
(2.10)
-0.70
(2.34)
-1.23
(2.10)
-0.52
(2.34)
∗∗∗
35.38
(0.90)
1182

(4)
CDU
∗∗∗
-4.97
(1.38)
∗∗∗
-7.81
(1.38)
-1.88
(1.60)
∗∗
5.42
(1.79)
0.59
(2.27)
0.64
(2.53)
0.80
(2.27)
0.72
(2.53)
∗∗∗
53.25
(0.98)
1179

Standard errors in parentheses
∗
∗∗
∗∗∗
p < 0.05,
p < 0.01,
p < 0.001

Table A.2: OLS regression models to test for parallel trends in turnout and vote shares (major
party, SPD, CDU) in council elections 1981–1991.

A.2.2

Parallel trends in unrelated elections

We also investigate whether these three groups of municipalities show parallel trends
in turnout and election results in unrelated elections in the treatment period. These
tests help us to assess whether time-varying confounders might be present that bias our
estimates.
As can be seen (again, descriptively) in Figure A.3, parallel trends hold for the case
of average turnout and vote shares in federal elections (1998-2013), and also the case of
average turnout and vote shares in European elections (see Figure A.4) in the treatment
period (1999-2014). All variables exhibit quite similar levels in all three groups of municipalities and almost perfectly parallel trends – the only exception being the groups of
municipalities holding “CME in 2011” only for the case of turnout in European Elections
in 2004 and 2014. Note that these deviations in average turnout are due to municipalities
of type “CME in 2011” holding mayoral elections concurrently with European elections in
2004 but not in 2014 – see also Figure 1 in the manuscript. The other groups of municipalities hold no mayoral elections concurrent with European elections in 2004 but do so in
2014. Leininger et al. (2018), analyzing European elections in the same state, have shown
that mayoral elections exert a strong positive effect on turnout in European elections.
Again, Tables A.3 and A.4 provide formal tests for these parallel trends. The results
6

in theses tables show that, after controlling for the occurrence of concurrent secondorder elections (CSOE) in 2004 and 2014, trends between groups are perfectly parallel.
Figure A.5 shows this graphically. It plots predicted values generated from the models in
Table A.4.

Figure A.3: The figure displays average levels and trends for turnout and vote shares (major
party, SPD, CDU) in federal elections 1998–2013 for three types of municipalities: those holding
mayoral elections concurrent with council elections (CME) in 2001 and 2006, holding first and
only CME in 2006, and holding first and only CME in 2011.

7

2002
2005
2009
2013
CME in 2006
CME in 2011
2002 x CME in 2006
2002 x CME in 2011
2005 x CME in 2006
2005 x CME in 2011
2009 x CME in 2006
2009 x CME in 2011
2013 x CME in 2006
2013 x CME in 2011
CSOE
CSOE x CME in 2006
CSOE x CME in 2011
Intercept
N

(1)
Turnout
∗∗∗
-2.88
(0.38)
∗∗∗
-4.52
(0.38)
∗∗∗
-10.74
(0.38)
∗∗∗
-10.40
(0.39)
0.13
(0.43)
0.09
(0.51)
0.04
(0.61)
0.33
(0.74)
0.21
(0.61)
0.25
(0.72)
0.48
(0.61)
0.35
(0.72)
0.21
(0.61)
0.62
(0.73)
0.25
(1.00)
-1.80
(1.49)
-1.15
(1.76)
∗∗∗
84.45
(0.27)
1605

(2)
Major Party
∗
-1.01
(0.46)
∗∗∗
-6.81
(0.46)
∗∗∗
-20.53
(0.46)
∗∗∗
-8.72
(0.47)
-0.24
(0.53)
0.46
(0.62)
-0.59
(0.74)
-0.07
(0.90)
-0.30
(0.74)
0.41
(0.88)
-0.47
(0.74)
0.82
(0.88)
-0.40
(0.74)
0.78
(0.88)
0.30
(1.22)
-2.12
(1.81)
1.15
(2.14)
∗∗∗
84.72
(0.33)
1605

(3)
SPD
-1.72
(0.90)
∗∗∗
-6.56
(0.90)
∗∗∗
-19.76
(0.90)
∗∗∗
-16.29
(0.91)
1.69
(1.02)
∗∗
-3.77
(1.20)
-0.53
(1.43)
0.18
(1.74)
-0.47
(1.43)
0.43
(1.70)
-1.03
(1.43)
1.00
(1.70)
-0.77
(1.43)
0.64
(1.71)
1.38
(2.37)
-4.68
(3.51)
-2.74
(4.15)
∗∗∗
48.86
(0.63)
1605

(4)
CDU
0.71
(1.06)
-0.25
(1.06)
-0.78
(1.06)
∗∗∗
7.56
(1.08)
-1.93
(1.20)
∗∗
4.23
(1.42)
-0.06
(1.69)
-0.25
(2.05)
0.17
(1.69)
-0.02
(2.01)
0.56
(1.69)
-0.19
(2.01)
0.37
(1.69)
0.14
(2.02)
-1.09
(2.79)
2.56
(4.14)
3.89
(4.90)
∗∗∗
35.86
(0.75)
1605

Standard errors in parentheses
∗
∗∗
∗∗∗
p < 0.05,
p < 0.01,
p < 0.001

Table A.3: OLS regression models to test for parallel trends in turnout and vote shares (major
party, SPD, CDU) in federal elections 1998–2013.

8

Figure A.4: The figure displays average levels and trends for turnout and vote shares (major
party, SPD, CDU) in European elections 1999–2014 for three types of municipalities: those
holding mayoral elections concurrent with council elections (CME) in 2001 and 2006, holding
first and only CME in 2006, and holding first and only CME in 2011.

9

2004
2009
2014
CME in 2006
CME in 2011
2004 x CME in 2006
2004 x CME in 2011
2009 x CME in 2006
2009 x CME in 2011
2014 x CME in 2006
2014 x CME in 2011
CSOE
CSOE x CME in 2006
CSOE x CME in 2011
Intercept
N

(1)
Turnout
∗∗∗
-4.87
(0.59)
∗∗∗
-4.03
(0.59)
0.41
(0.92)
-1.21
(0.66)
-0.27
(0.80)
0.63
(0.94)
0.63
(1.19)
1.27
(0.94)
1.17
(1.13)
1.31
(1.37)
1.45
(1.33)
∗∗∗
9.84
(0.95)
0.81
(1.41)
∗∗∗
6.52
(1.78)
∗∗∗
44.93
(0.42)
1284

(2)
Major Party
∗∗∗
-12.36
(0.64)
∗∗∗
-19.24
(0.64)
∗∗∗
-14.96
(1.00)
-0.42
(0.72)
0.91
(0.86)
-0.86
(1.02)
0.48
(1.29)
-0.67
(1.02)
0.67
(1.22)
1.04
(1.49)
1.32
(1.44)
∗
2.27
(1.03)
-1.91
(1.53)
2.32
(1.93)
∗∗∗
88.24
(0.46)
1284

(3)
SPD
∗∗∗
-11.58
(0.97)
∗∗∗
-11.98
(0.97)
∗∗∗
-8.15
(1.50)
1.39
(1.09)
∗∗∗
-4.34
(1.30)
-0.44
(1.53)
2.13
(1.94)
-0.57
(1.53)
1.05
(1.84)
1.28
(2.24)
1.62
(2.17)
2.19
(1.56)
-2.76
(2.30)
-5.63
(2.90)
∗∗∗
39.33
(0.69)
1284

(4)
CDU
-0.78
(1.28)
∗∗∗
-7.27
(1.28)
∗∗∗
-6.81
(1.99)
-1.82
(1.44)
∗∗
5.26
(1.72)
-0.42
(2.03)
-1.66
(2.56)
-0.10
(2.03)
-0.38
(2.43)
-0.24
(2.97)
-0.30
(2.87)
0.09
(2.06)
0.85
(3.04)
∗
7.95
(3.83)
∗∗∗
48.92
(0.91)
1284

Standard errors in parentheses
∗
∗∗
∗∗∗
p < 0.05,
p < 0.01,
p < 0.001

Table A.4: OLS regression models to test for parallel trends in turnout and vote shares (major
party, SPD, CDU) in European elections 1999–2014 while controlling for concurrency of EP
election with mayoral elections, i.e., concurrent second-order elections (CSOE).

10

Figure A.5: The figure displays predicted levels and trends for turnout and vote shares (major
party, SPD, CDU) in European elections 1999–2014 for three types of municipalities: those
holding mayoral elections concurrent with council elections (CME) in 2001 and 2006, holding
first and only CME in 2006, and holding first and only CME in 2011. Predictions are based
on the models presented in Table A.4. Before generating the predicted values we have set the
variable CSOE to zero for all municipalities to simulate predicted values if there would have
been no concurrency of European elections with mayoral elections in some municipalities.

A.2.3

Placebo tests on temporally proximate federal and European parliament elections

Next, we provide formal tests, for the full sample, that a CME effect is not present
for neither federal nor European election turnout (Table A.5) and for neither federal nor
European election major party vote shares (Table A.6). We conduct these tests as placebo
tests, i.e., we code a municipality as “placebo treated” in the federal election preceding
(Models 1), in the federal election temporally closest (Models 2) or in the European
election preceding (Models 3) a concurrent mayoral to local council election. Note that
while placebo effects are close to zero and statistically insignificant (first row), whenever
a municipality held genuine concurrent mayoral elections to federal/European elections,
this appears as a significant effect for both turnout and vote shares (second row).

11

Table A.5: Placebo Effect of Mayoral Elections Concurrent to Local Council Elections on
Federal and European Election Turnout

CME with Council Election

Federal Elect.
(1)
(2)
Turnout (%) Turnout (%)
0.067
0.039
(0.076)
(0.061)

CME with European/Federal Election

Election Year == 2002

∗

0.52
(0.29)

∗∗∗

-2.81
(0.066)

0.52
(0.29)
-2.76
(0.071)

∗

∗∗∗

-4.44
(0.20)
∗∗∗

-4.38
(0.086)

∗∗∗

-10.5
(0.11)

∗∗∗

-10.2
(0.12)

Election Year == 2005

-4.37
(0.074)

Election Year == 2009

-10.5
(0.11)

Election Year == 2013

-10.2
(0.13)

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

-3.56
(0.19)

∗∗∗

Election Year == 2014

N
Clusters
2
Within R

∗∗∗

11.4
(0.48)

∗∗∗

Election Year == 2004

Constant

Europ. Elect.
(3)
Turnout (%)
0.19
(0.18)

0.50
(0.36)
∗∗∗

84.4
(0.076)
2005
401
0.94

∗∗∗

84.5
(0.067)
2005
401
0.94

∗∗∗

44.4
(0.15)
1604
401
0.77

Municipality fixed-effects estimation with municipality-clustered standard errors. Column 1:
“Preceeding Placebo SME” variable indicates municipalities that held concurrent mayoral
and local council elections after this federal election (1998 FE and 2001 LCE; 2005 FE and
2006 LCE; 2009 FE and 2011 LCE). Column 2: “Closest Placebo SME” variable indicates
municipalities that held concurrent mayoral and local council elections matched to the temporally closest federal election (2002 FE and 2001 LCE; 2005 FE and 2006 LCE; 2009 FE
and 2011 LCE). Column 3: “Preceeding Placebo SME” variable indicates municipalities that
held concurrent mayoral and local council elections after this european election (1999 EE
and 2001 LCE; 2004 EE and 2006 LCE; 2009 EE and 2011 LCE). CME indicates municipalities that actually held mayoral elections concurrent to a federal/european election in a
given election year.
** (*,***) indicates p < 0.05 (0.1, 0.01)

12

Table A.6: Placebo Effect of Mayoral Elections Concurrent to Local Council Elections on
Federal and European Election Vote Shares

CME with Council Election

CME with European/Federal Election

Election Year == 2002

Federal Elect.
(1)
(2)
SPD and CDU Vote (%) SPD and CDU Vote (%)
0.036
0.14
(0.12)
(0.11)
∗

0.51
(0.27)

∗

∗∗∗

-1.21
(0.087)

0.51
(0.27)

∗∗∗

-12.4
(0.16)

Election Year == 2005

-6.72
(0.087)

∗∗∗

-6.81
(0.11)

Election Year == 2009

-20.5
(0.15)

∗∗∗

-20.5
(0.14)

Election Year == 2013

-8.68
(0.14)

∗∗∗

-8.69
(0.12)

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

-19.3
(0.18)

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

Election Year == 2014

N
Clusters
2
Within R

∗∗∗

1.87
(0.18)

∗∗∗

-1.13
(0.090)

Election Year == 2004

Constant

Europ. Elect.
(3)
SPD and CDU Vote (%)
-0.021
(0.13)

-14.6
(0.18)
∗∗∗

∗∗∗

84.8
(0.092)
2005
401
0.97

84.8
(0.071)
2005
401
0.97

∗∗∗

88.4
(0.13)
1604
401
0.94

Municipality fixed-effects estimation with municipality-clustered standard errors. Column 1: “Preceeding Placebo SME” variable
indicates municipalities that held concurrent mayoral and local council elections after this federal election (1998 FE and 2001
LCE; 2005 FE and 2006 LCE; 2009 FE and 2011 LCE). Column 2: “Closest Placebo SME” variable indicates municipalities that
held concurrent mayoral and local council elections matched to the temporally closest federal election (2002 FE and 2001 LCE;
2005 FE and 2006 LCE; 2009 FE and 2011 LCE). Column 3: “Preceeding Placebo SME” variable indicates municipalities that
held concurrent mayoral and local council elections after this european election (1999 EE and 2001 LCE; 2004 EE and 2006 LCE;
2009 EE and 2011 LCE). CME indicates municipalities that actually held mayoral elections concurrent to a federal/european
election mirror this model toitsan for differences in a given els (in federal and European election) between treatment and control
groupection year.
** (*,***) indicates p < 0.05 (0.1, 0.01)

A.2.4

Descriptive statistics and balance tests

This subsection presents descriptive statistics for all election-year observations on all timevarying variables used in the analyses for the control group (left panel), treatment group
(mid panel), and full sample (right panel) (see Appendix Table A.7).
Subsequently, we present balance tests on population, geographical, fiscal, and economic indicators as well as mayoral-incumbent characteristics of municipalities with and
without concurrent mayoral elections.
Appendix Table A.8 does so for population, geographical, fiscal and economic indicators for each municipal election year (panels 1-3) and pooled for all election-year observations (panel 4). As can be seen, while some differences are discernible (particularly
some municipality income-related variables in the full sample), the overall pattern is one
of marginal differences, and particularly so for the comparisons within election years.
13

Appendix Table A.9 does so for incumbent characteristics – while SPD incumbents
are more prevalent in the 2006 treatment group, CDU incumbents are more present in the
2011 treatment group, and average effects cancel out (see panel 3). Notably, mayors in the
control group are substantially longer in office (row 3). This is a feature of the selection
process, as mayors that step-back early select their municipalities into early elections (and
hence the control group).
Next, Appendix Table A.10 presents a last comparison for a particular group of municipalities (where selection arguably is most likely), those that held their first concurrent
mayoral election in a certain council election year. As can be seen from panels 1-4, the
general picture is one whereby also first-time CME municipalities do not differ starkly
from the respective control group. Note that data on fiscal and economic indicators is
only available from 2001, and data on incumbents only from 2006.
Finally, Appendix Table A.11 presents balance tests within the treatment group (i.e.,
only for CME municipalities) separated by whether the municipality has a CDU or SPD
mayor. These tables show that CME municipalities with CDU or SPD incumbents are
broadly comparable, although they do cluster somewhat geographically, and the centerright CDU is more dominant in more affluent areas (see Table A.11).

14

Table A.7: Summary statistics reported for full sample and by treatment group for the dependent and independent variables used in the
analyses

15

Turnout (%)
Incumbent vote (%)
Major party vote (%)
SPD vote (%)
CDU vote (%)
FDP vote (%)
Green vote (%)
Other parties
One-party dominance in local council
Effective number of parliamentary parties
Executive-Legislative Alignment
Concurrent mayoral election (CME)
CME with SPD mayoral incumbent
CME with CDU mayoral incumbent
CME with Green/FDP mayoral incumbent
CME with indep./other mayoral incumbent

CME == 0
mean
sd min max count
56.3
6.29 38.8 78
649
37.0
21.0
0
100
508
76.2
15.7
0
100
649
34.8
12.8
0
64.7 649
41.4
16.1
0
90.2 649
3.62
4.28
0
26.4 649
6.28
5.90
0
29.3 649
13.9
15.6
0
100
649
0.35
0.48
0
1
649
2.79
0.69
1
4.80 649
0.53
0.50
0
1
508
0
0
0
0
649
0
0
0
0
649
0
0
0
0
649
0
0
0
0
649
0
0
0
0
649

CME == 1
mean
sd
min max
58.7
6.69 39.6 90.5
38.8
21.3
0
100
78.9
14.3
0
100
37.1
13.2
0
68.9
41.8
15.4
0
90
3.90
4.27
0
25
4.98
4.88
0
34.4
12.2
14.5
0
100
0.41
0.49
0
1
2.67
0.59
1
4.54
0.60
0.49
0
1
1
0
1
1
0.24
0.43
0
1
0.26
0.44
0
1
0.0072
0.085
0
1
0.49
0.50
0
1

count
554
399
554
554
554
554
554
554
554
554
554
554
554
554
554
554

Full sample
mean
sd
min
57.4
6.59 38.8
37.8
21.2
0
77.5
15.1
0
35.9
13.0
0
41.6
15.8
0
3.75
4.27
0
5.68
5.49
0
13.1
15.1
0
0.38
0.48
0
2.74
0.64
1
0.57
0.50
0
0.46
0.50
0
0.11
0.32
0
0.12
0.32
0
0.0033
0.058
0
0.23
0.42
0

max
90.5
100
100
68.9
90.2
26.4
34.4
100
1
4.80
1
1
1
1
1
1

count
1203
907
1203
1203
1203
1203
1203
1203
1203
1203
1062
1203
1203
1203
1203
1203

Table A.8: Balance in population, geographical, fiscal and economic indicators of municipalities with and without concurrent mayoral
elections (CME)

Eligible citizens

(1)
2001
C/mean T/mean Diff-In-Means/se
13817.28 16422.95
-2605.67
(2513.51)

NC
213

NT
188

C/mean
12763.39

(2)
2006
T/mean Diff-In-Means/se N C
16639.06
-3875.67
128
(2711.21)

NT
273

C/mean
15927.06

(3)
2011
T/mean Diff-In-Means/se N C
14051.08
1875.98
308
(3032.49)

NT
93

C/mean
14610.67

(4)
Full
T/mean Diff-In-Means/se N C N T
16131.28
-1520.60
649 554
(1465.58)

AGS-Region == 1

0.17

0.21

-0.04
(0.04)

213

188

0.17

0.19

-0.02
(0.04)

128

273

0.20

0.15

0.05
(0.05)

308

93

0.18

0.19

-0.01
(0.02)

649

554

AGS-Region == 2

0.22

0.21

0.01
(0.04)

213

188

0.23

0.21

0.01
(0.04)

128

273

0.22

0.22

0.00
(0.05)

308

93

0.22

0.21

0.01
(0.02)

649

554

AGS-Region == 3

0.25

0.26

-0.01
(0.04)

213

188

0.28

0.24

0.04
(0.05)

128

273

0.26

0.25

0.01
(0.05)

308

93

0.26

0.25

0.01
(0.03)

649

554

AGS-Region == 4

0.36

0.32

0.04
(0.05)

213

188

0.32

0.35

-0.03
(0.05)

128

273

0.33

0.39

-0.06
(0.06)

308

93

0.34

0.35

-0.01
(0.03)

649

554

-5707.00
(4461.73)

194

180

9289.80

14997.19

-5707.39
(4582.63)

112

259

15203.85

9158.85

6045.00
(6164.38)

279

85

12801.32

14765.74

-1964.42
(2681.74)

585

524

585

524

Debt market

Log(Debt Market)

Tax

11373.40 17080.41

8.74

-0.16
(0.13)

194

180

8.46

8.74

-0.28
(0.14)

∗∗

112

259

8.76

8.55

0.20
(0.16)

279

85

8.64

8.71

-0.07
(0.08)

537.84

531.18

6.66
(23.86)

208

182

673.80

643.62

30.18
(31.87)

125

265

775.17

799.52

-24.35
(39.69)

298

92

676.85

632.26

44.59
(17.94)

∗∗

631

539

6.23

6.22

0.01
(0.03)

207

182

6.43

6.40

0.03
(0.04)

125

265

6.59

6.61

-0.02
(0.04)

298

92

6.44

6.37

0.07
(0.02)

∗∗∗

630

539

242.03

235.06

6.97
(16.54)

208

182

367.68

341.88

25.81
(24.17)

125

265

402.43

418.19

-15.76
(30.18)

298

92

342.67

318.84

23.84
(13.29)

∗

631

539

5.37

5.34

0.03
(0.05)

207

182

5.74

5.71

0.03
(0.05)

125

265

5.88

5.90

-0.02
(0.06)

298

92

5.68

5.61

0.07
(0.03)

∗∗

630

539

-1693.36
(2955.43)

205

177

15549.72

18319.09

-2769.37
(3147.27)

124

258

17603.30

14914.89

2688.42
(3430.47)

293

89

16831.75

17699.94

-868.18
(1697.03)

622

524

293

89

182.75

193.80

-11.05
(11.76)

622

524

∗∗∗

16

8.58

Log(Tax)

Tax income real

Lag(Tax income real)

Population size

16504.48 18197.84

∗

Population density

184.04

194.11

-10.07
(20.45)

205

177

163.58

202.49

-38.91
(21.83)

124

258

189.96

168.00

21.96
(23.74)

Unemployment rate

3.82

3.97

-0.15
(0.11)

205

177

4.79

4.99

-0.20
(0.14)

124

258

2.99

2.79

0.20
(0.12)

∗

293

89

3.62

4.27

-0.65
(0.08)

622

524

Working-age population

65.79

65.88

-0.09
(0.22)

205

177

64.30

64.49

-0.19
(0.25)

124

258

64.75

64.89

-0.14
(0.25)

293

89

65.00

65.03

-0.03
(0.13)

622

524

Observations

401

401

401

1203

Comparison of balance of covariates between municipalities without CME (control group C) and with CME (treatment group T). Panels 1 to 3 are, from left to right, comparisons within one election year only (2001, 2006, 2011) and in panel 4 for the pooled
sample. Within each panel, the columns present control group mean, treatment group mean, the difference in means (with standard errors in parentheses) and the number of control and treatment group observations.
For Unemployed and Working age population: 2000 values for 2001 and 2005 values for 2006 due to limited data availability; The AGS-Region variables are indicators to which of the four, in 2005 abolished, administrative regions of Lower Saxony a municipality
belongs.
** (*,***) indicates p < 0.05 (0.1, 0.01)

Table A.9: Balance in incumbent characteristics of municipalities with and without concurrent mayoral elections (CME)

SPD incumbent

CDU incumbent

C/mean T/mean
0.20
0.35

0.46

0.34

961.74

2357.32

Female incumbent

0.19

0.14

Observations

401

Incumbent’s time in office

(1)
2006
Diff-In-Means/se
∗∗∗
-0.15
(0.05)
∗∗

0.12
(0.06)

NC NT
110 256

C/mean
0.37

T/mean
0.23

(2)
2011
Diff-In-Means/se N C
∗∗
0.14
301
(0.06)

T/mean
0.32

301

93

0.35

0.37

∗

301

93

2222.10

2508.21

308

93

0.14

0.11

256

0.30

0.45

-0.15
(0.06)

-1395.58
(72.93)

110

250

2682.69

2913.83

-231.13
(138.77)

0.05
(0.04)

128

273

0.12

0.04

0.08
(0.04)

401

C/mean
0.32

∗∗∗

110

∗∗∗

NT
93

∗∗

(3)
Full
Diff-In-Means/se
0.01
(0.03)

NC
411

NT
349

411

349

-286.11
(81.82)

411

343

0.03
(0.02)

436

366

-0.02
(0.03)
∗∗∗

802

17

Comparison of balance of covariates between municipalities without CME (control group C) and with CME (treatment group T). Panels 1 to 2 are, from left to right, comparisons within one election
year only (2006, 2011) and in panel 3 for the pooled sample. Within each panel, the columns present control group mean, treatment group mean, the difference in means (t-test, with standard errors
in parentheses) and the number of control and treatment group observations.
Comparisons for 2001 are not possible as incumbent characteristics for the non-CME sample are not recorded.
** (*,***) indicates p < 0.05 (0.1, 0.01)

Table A.10: Balance between (first-time) CME and non-CME municipalities in 1996, 2001, 2006 and 2011. For each election we compare
municipalities which hold CME for the first time with municipalities which still have not seen any CME.
(1)
CME 1996
T/mean Diff-In-Means/se
∗
17519.54
-3466.75
(1936.80)

NT
55

Eligible citizens

13067.24

15764.26

-2697.02
(2414.95)

368

57

13036.28

13282.50

-246.22
(1949.19)

191

129

11121.31

15355.82

-4234.51
(2171.11)

90

101

11302.06

11159.32

142.74
(2164.70)

34

56

AGS region == 1

0.18

0.23

-0.05
(0.06)

370

57

0.17

0.20

-0.03
(0.04)

191

129

0.12

0.21

-0.09
(0.05)

90

101

0.12

0.12

-0.01
(0.07)

34

56

AGS region == 2

0.22

0.21

0.01
(0.06)

370

57

0.18

0.18

-0.00
(0.04)

191

129

0.21

0.15

0.06
(0.06)

90

101

0.32

0.14

0.18
(0.09)

∗∗

34

56

AGS region == 3

0.28

0.21

0.07
(0.06)

370

57

0.26

0.29

-0.03
(0.05)

191

129

0.24

0.28

-0.03
(0.06)

90

101

0.24

0.25

-0.01
(0.09)

34

56

AGS region == 4

0.32

0.35

-0.03
(0.07)

370

57

0.39

0.33

0.07
(0.05)

191

129

0.42

0.37

0.06
(0.07)

90

101

0.32

0.48

-0.16
(0.11)

34

56

10499.41

12828.26

-2328.85
(3204.82)

180

123

8105.60

11512.65

-3407.05
(2609.12)

85

94

9246.31

7985.14

1261.17
(2597.49)

32

50

8.48

8.58

-0.09
(0.15)

180

123

8.39

8.58

-0.19
(0.19)

85

94

8.44

8.42

0.02
(0.30)

32

50

534.11

501.36

32.75
(27.06)

186

125

675.49

606.09

69.40
(39.70)

∗

89

97

773.63

793.49

-19.86
(61.71)

34

55

6.22

6.17

0.05
(0.04)

185

125

6.43

6.36

0.07
(0.05)

89

97

6.61

6.61

0.00
(0.07)

34

55

241.26

218.71

22.55
(19.13)

186

125

372.77

311.85

60.92
(30.24)

89

97

412.24

424.59

-12.34
(47.55)

34

55

5.36

5.28

0.08
(0.05)

185

125

5.76

5.64

0.11
(0.07)

89

97

5.92

5.93

-0.01
(0.10)

34

55

SPD incumbent

0.14

0.32

-0.18
(0.06)

∗∗∗

79

87

0.15

0.14

0.00
(0.08)

34

56

CDU incumbent

0.51

0.31

0.20
(0.08)

∗∗∗

79

87

0.32

0.54

-0.21
(0.11)

∗

34

56

786.73

2731.95

-1945.22
(65.18)

79

83

1627.82

2682.30

34

56

0.18

0.19

-0.01
(0.06)

90

101

0.09

0.05

34

56

18
Tax

Log(Tax)

Tax income real

Lag(Tax income real)

Incumbent’s time in office

Female incumbent

Observations

427

320

NT
121

C/mean
14143.87

191

∗

∗∗

∗∗∗

NT
94

C/mean
13754.35

(4)
CME 2011
T/mean Diff-In-Means/se
13742.64
11.72
(2666.08)

NC
34

Log(Debt Market)

C/mean
15369.87

(3)
CME 2006
T/mean Diff-In-Means/se N C
16721.82
-2577.95
89
(2093.11)

Population

Debt market

NC NT
306
50

(2)
CME 2001
T/mean Diff-In-Means/se N C
13431.40
1938.48
183
(1469.26)

C/mean
14052.79

∗∗∗

-1054.48
(126.27)
0.03
(0.05)

90

With each panel (election in year indicated in model header) we compare municipalities which hold CME for the first time with municipalities which still have not seen any CME. Within each panel, the columns present control group (no CME so far) mean,
treatment group (first time CME) mean, the difference in means (t-test, with standard errors in parentheses) and the number of observations in the groups. For empty cells, covariates are not available for comparison in that election year.
** (*,***) indicates p < 0.05 (0.1, 0.01)

Table A.11: Balance in population, geographical, fiscal and economic indicators of municipalities with concurrent mayoral elections (CME)
and CDU or SPD incumbents.
(1)
2001
Diff-In-Means/se
10215.13
(6584.43)

Eligible citizens

SPD/mean
12690.80

N CDU
87

N SPD
89

CDU/mean
13626.98

SPD/mean
20297.10

ags region== 1

0.21

0.36

-0.15
(0.16)

14

25

0.14

0.25

-0.11
(0.06)

∗

87

89

0.10

0.19

ags region== 2

0.07

0.12

-0.05
(0.10)

14

25

0.13

0.28

-0.15
(0.06)

∗∗

87

89

0.14

ags region== 3

0.14

0.24

-0.10
(0.14)

14

25

0.31

0.20

0.11
(0.07)

87

89

ags region== 4

0.57

0.28

0.29
(0.16)

∗

14

25

0.43

0.27

0.16
(0.07)

∗∗

87

18681.15

10751.17

7929.99
(7266.64)

13

24

14293.49

23618.25

-9324.75
(8997.74)

9.14

8.76

0.38
(0.38)

13

24

8.83

8.92

524.01

567.18

-43.17
(69.90)

13

24

665.01

6.21

6.28

-0.07
(0.12)

13

24

226.81

245.20

-18.39
(41.80)

13

5.34

5.38

-0.04
(0.16)

20190.17

16280.00

Population density

200.34

Unemployment rate

Working-age population

Debt market

Log(Debt Market)

Tax

19

Log(Tax)

Tax income real

Lag(Tax income real)

Population size

Observations

N SPD CDU/mean
25
17822.94

N CDU
143

N SPD
135

-0.10
(0.09)

42

21

0.13

0.26

-0.13
(0.05)

∗∗∗

143

135

0.29

-0.14
(0.11)

42

21

0.13

0.25

-0.13
(0.05)

∗∗∗

143

135

0.31

0.19

0.12
(0.12)

42

21

0.29

0.21

0.09
(0.05)

∗

143

135

89

0.45

0.33

0.12
(0.13)

42

21

0.45

0.28

0.17
(0.06)

∗∗∗

143

135

85

81

6270.75

14447.45

-8176.70
(2183.84)

36

20

12563.80

19680.44

-7116.64
(5884.19)

134

125

-0.09
(0.22)

85

81

8.29

9.21

-0.92
(0.36)

36

20

8.72

8.93

-0.22
(0.17)

134

125

670.84

-5.83
(44.14)

86

83

843.46

815.55

27.90
(104.04)

42

21

705.16

675.14

30.02
(38.45)

141

128

6.43

6.43

0.00
(0.06)

86

83

6.66

6.62

0.04
(0.10)

42

21

6.48

6.43

0.05
(0.05)

141

128

24

363.73

350.15

13.58
(33.51)

86

83

461.38

410.50

50.88
(77.04)

42

21

380.19

340.37

39.82
(28.39)

141

128

13

24

5.77

5.71

0.06
(0.08)

86

83

6.00

5.85

0.15
(0.14)

42

21

5.80

5.67

0.13
(0.06)

141

128

3910.17
(4898.53)

12

24

18075.45

24565.24

-6489.79
(6561.72)

83

79

14066.95

20145.37

-6078.42
(2900.04)

∗∗

41

19

17053.60

22247.02

-5193.42
(4223.17)

136

122

234.26

-33.92
(65.27)

12

24

181.61

283.72

-102.11
(40.42)

∗∗

83

79

138.11

255.12

-117.00
(29.02)

∗∗∗

41

19

170.15

269.53

-99.39
(27.54)

∗∗∗

136

122

3.37

4.45

-1.07
(0.37)

∗∗∗

12

24

4.65

5.21

-0.56
(0.20)

∗∗∗

83

79

2.33

3.41

-1.08
(0.25)

∗∗∗

41

19

3.84

4.78

-0.94
(0.18)

∗∗∗

136

122

66.49

65.98

0.51
(1.02)

12

24

64.51

64.59

-0.08
(0.39)

83

79

65.02

64.94

0.07
(0.53)

41

19

64.84

64.92

-0.08
(0.31)

136

122

63

∗∗∗

∗∗

CDU/mean SPD/mean
17088.20
19973.88

(4)
Full
Diff-In-Means/se
-2885.69
(3674.76)

N SPD
21

176

SPD/mean
21943.43

(3)
2011
Diff-In-Means/se
-6670.12
(4190.42)

N CDU
42

39

N CDU
14

(2)
2006
Diff-In-Means/se
-4120.48
(5442.25)

CDU/mean
22905.93

∗∗

278

Comparison of balance of covariates between municipalities with CME and CDU incumbent (‘comparison group 1’ CDU) and municipalities with CME and SPD incumbent (‘comparison group 2‘ SPD). Panels 1 to 3 are, from left to right, comparisons within one election year only (2001, 2006, 2011) and in
panel 4 for the pooled sample. Within each panel, the columns present comparison group 1 mean, comparison group 2 mean, the difference in means (t-test, with standard errors in parentheses) and the number of observations in the groups.
For unemployed and working age population: 2000 values for 2001 and 2005 values for 2006 due to limited data availability; The AGS-region variables are indicators to which of the four, in 2005 abolished, administrative regions of Lower Saxony a municipality belongs.
** (*,***) indicates p < 0.05 (0.1, 0.01)

A.3

Additional robustness tests

This section presents one set of further robustness tests. As one reviewer suggested, the
effect of mayoral party incumbency may be due to other differences across municipalities
(correlated with the incumbent mayor’s party) that potentially moderate the impact of
concurrent elections. To address this point, we identify ‘strongholds’ of the SPD and CDU
based on electoral returns of the 1998, 2005, and 2009 federal elections, instead of using
the party of the incumbent mayor. We focus on the party list vote, the so-called “Zweitstimme,” in federal elections for two reasons: First, turnout in highly salient national
elections indicate the maximum turnout potential in a municipality. Correspondingly,
the result a party achieved in a federal election indicates the maximum number of votes
a party is able to garner. Second, by focusing on the “‘Zweitstimme” on the federal
level, we abstract away from local personalities, such as mayors or local candidates, who
could drive a party’s popularity. Focusing on the federal level makes sure we focus on
how popular a given party label is in a municipality. We code a municipality as either
stronghold of the SPD or CDU if the party has achieved a plurality of votes by garnering
at least 40% of the vote in the federal election preceding the respective municipal elections (in 2001, 2006, or 2011). We then cross-tabulate and correlate the dummy variables
indicating party strongholds with our treatment dummy CME. For the SPD, Table A.12
shows that there is only a weak relationship between party strongholds and incumbency.
For the CDU, Table A.13 shows that there is a relatively stronger but still overall weak
relationship between party strongholds and incumbency.
Table A.12: SPD strongholds and incumbents

SPD stronghold

SPD incumbent
Yes
No

Yes

381
(345.5)
224
(259.5)
605

No
N
Cramer’s V: 0.17

137
(172.5)
165
(129.5)
302

N
518
389
907

Table A.13: CDU strongholds and incumbents

CDU stronghold

CDU incumbent
Yes
No

Yes

536
(483.8)
57
(109.2)
599

No
N
Cramer’s V: 0.31

N

204 740
(256.2)
110 167
(57.8)
314 907

20

A.4

Additional results

In this section, we provide further evidence on the turnout and ensuing vote-share effects
of CMEs. Model 1, Table A.14 is the same model as Model 1 in Table ?? but presents the
estimates for the year fixed effects. Model 2 adds control variables and provides further
evidence that the timing of CMEs follows a random pattern. The coefficient on CME
barely changes after the inclusion of control variables. Readers may refer to the table’s
caption for a list of control variables employed. Models 3 and 4 estimate CMEs’ effect
on turnout separate by year, with and without control variables, showing that the effect
occurs every time that mayoral and council elections are held simultaneously. Table A.15
provides estimates of the effect of CMEs on the electoral fortunes of all major parties and
retainer category ‘Other parties.’
Table A.14: Average turnout effect and year-by-year turnout effect of concurrent mayoral
elections

CME

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Turnout (%) Turnout (%) Turnout (%) Turnout (%)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
3.03
3.08
(0.19)
(0.19)
∗∗∗

2.22
(0.30)

∗∗∗

4.41
(0.34)

∗∗∗

2.59
(0.42)

∗∗∗

-7.64
(0.53)

∗∗∗

CME 2001

2.16
(0.30)

CME 2006

4.51
(0.31)

CME 2011

2.45
(0.43)
∗∗∗

-6.32
(0.49)

-3.83
(0.19)

∗∗∗

No
1203
401
0.60
56.3
6.29

Election year=2006

-5.25
(0.17)

Election year=2011

Controls
N
Clusters
2
Within R
Control group mean
Control group SD

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

-6.66
(0.27)

∗∗∗

-3.60
(0.66)

∗∗∗

-4.11
(0.24)

-4.00
(0.69)

Yes
1145
382
0.65
56.3
6.29

No
1203
401
0.62
56.3
6.29

Yes
1145
382
0.66
56.3
6.29

∗∗∗

Municipality fixed-effects estimation with municipality-clustered standard errors.
Control variables (unemployment rate, employment share, population density, logged
population, log tax rate, log market debt, time trends for three regions of Lower Saxony, time trends for four municipality types) included where indicated. Other party
vote is the combined vote share of all other minor parties.
** (*,***) indicates p < 0.05 (0.1, 0.01)

21

Table A.15: Vote share effect of concurrent mayoral elections

CME

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
SPD vote (%) CDU vote (%) FDP vote (%) Green vote (%)
∗∗
∗
∗
0.73
0.47
-0.26
-0.22
(0.31)
(0.28)
(0.15)
(0.23)
∗∗∗

-0.90
(0.26)

∗∗∗

-4.79
(0.32)
1203
401
0.31
41.4
16.1

Election year=2006

-0.96
(0.25)

Election year=2011

-2.06
(0.33)
1203
401
0.081
34.8
12.8

N
Clusters
2
Within R
Control group mean
Control group SD

∗∗∗

0.52
(0.12)

∗∗∗

0.44
(0.12)

∗∗∗

-1.67
(0.15)
1203
401
0.28
3.62
4.28

∗∗∗

5.33
(0.25)
1203
401
0.56
6.28
5.90

(5)
Other parties
∗
-0.71
(0.38)

∗∗∗

0.90
(0.33)

∗∗∗

∗∗∗

3.19
(0.41)
1203
401
0.11
13.9
15.6

∗∗∗

Municipality fixed-effects estimation with municipality-clustered standard errors. Other parties is the sum of
vote shares for all parties not present in the three state level legislatives in our treatment period (cf. 2003 to
2013).
** (*,***) indicates p < 0.05 (0.1, 0.01)

22

References
Armbrust, P., 2007. Einführung in das niedersächsische Kommunalrecht. LIT Verlag
Münster.
Detjen, J., 2000. Demokratie in der Gemeinde: Bürgerbeteiligung an der Kommunalpolitik in Niedersachsen. Niedersächsische Landeszentrale für politische Bildung.
Leininger, A., Rudolph, L., Zittlau, S., 2018. How to Increase Turnout in Low-Salience
Elections: Quasi-Experimental Evidence on the Effect of Concurrent Second-Order
Elections on Political Participation. Political Science Research and Methods 6, 509–
526. doi:10.1017/psrm.2016.38.

23

