Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 3 September 2019

Pp.178- 191

DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no3.12
Spelling Problems and Causes among Saudi English Language Undergraduates
Dheifallah Altamimi
English Language Department, University College of Haqel
Tabuk University, Tabuk, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

Radzuwan Ab Rashid (Corresponding Author)
English Language Department, Faculty of Languages and Communication
Universiti Sultan Zainal Abidin, Malaysia

Abstract
Arab students who learn English as a foreign language, especially Saudi students, face different
challenges during the process of learning of the four English language skills, especially writing
and its component (spelling). This paper aims to investigate the preceded causes of students’
spelling errors. The main research question sought to be answered is: What are the causes of
spelling errors made by the Saudi university students? The research participants were 15 students
in the English Language Department at Tabuk University and 15 English language lecturers from
the same department. Group structured interviews were designed for the lecturers and students.
The findings reveal that there are different causes of students’ spelling errors such as the education
system and university syllabus, students’ learning attitude, and the interference between English
and Arabic language. This paper concludes that the spelling errors which Saudi university students
commit were caused by the negative impacts of their education system and syllabus, where the
syllabus ignores the importance of spelling rules and techniques, and the interference between
English and Arabic language when the learners refer to their mother tongue while writing in the
English language. It is hoped that the findings revealed in this study will help the policymakers in
taking necessary actions in improving the learning experience of Arab learners of English. This
paper calls for a reform in the English language teaching in Saudi education system so that spelling
is given the required emphasis as it is the foundation of English proficiency.
Keywords: English language teaching, Saudi learner, spelling error, foreign language learner,
vocabulary
Cite as: Altamimi, D., & Rashid, R. A. (2019). Spelling Problems and Causes among Saudi
English Language Undergraduates. Arab World English Journal, 10 (3) 178- 191.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no3.12

178

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Spelling Problems and Causes among Saudi English Language

Altamimi & Rashid

Introduction
Learning a second language is often challenging for learners as their native language has language
rules according to which they pronounce and spell words. A second language has patterns different
from their native language, which creates problems for learners as the patterns of their mother
tongue become part of their linguistic instinct, which they attempt to, apply to the second language
(Nor & Rashid, 2018). In order to learn any other language, the learner’s linguistic instinct has to
undergo various modifications to accommodate the understanding of the second language and thus
developmental stages and encounters with the language many times (Kocatepe, 2017; Zuriyani &
Mohamed Ismail, 2019). During the process of learning, the speaker hears sounds different to those
she/he instinctively knows and has to form hypotheses about their use. Learners of a second
language can have implicit knowledge about the orthographic structure of the target language
insofar as they may be able to pronounce or spell a word in their second language without having
explicit knowledge of the particular rule they are using.
Spelling is considered an essential component of written language. The potential mistakes in
written spellings may change the meaning and understanding of written material and would make
it unclear. Hence, it is essential to use the correct spelling of words in order to convey the exact
intended meaning of the content. In this context, Babayiğit and Stainthorp (2010) state that
grammatical and phonological skills make a significant contribution to spelling performance.
Therefore, it can be asserted that spellings play a pivotal role in being a primary and essential skill
required by students. Accurate spelling enables writers to express their ideas and thoughts within
a standard framework, which is easily understandable by their readers. For effective writing,
spelling must also be effective.
Among various difficulties faced by Arab learners of English, the most common error relates
to the spelling of words in documents (Al-Bereiki & Al-Mekhlafi, 2015; ). Students, due to
ineffective learning, continue to repeat the same spelling errors, even after they have completed
high school or university or have started in their field of work, which can create obstacles to their
progress and development. Consequently, spelling errors can handicap students in various ways.
According to Rosenthal and Ehri (2010), spelling out loud practice increases the pace of learning
the pronunciation of new words. The present study suggests that a good command of spellings
enables an individual to communicate his/her thoughts more clearly and openly in their writing.
Poor spelling not only makes a bad impression; it also inhibits communication as the reader has to
puzzle over the writer’s message.
Literature Review
The concept of spelling has been defined differently by various researchers over the years.
Puspandari (2017) defines spelling as a process of representing the spoken language in a written
form that consists of a sequence of letters composed to form words in their generally accepted
usage. On the other hand, Mpiti (2012) defines spelling as a process that encompasses a number
of skills: phonological, morphological, syntax and semantic knowledge, as well as the ability to
formulate words based on visual memory along with applying the orthographic rules. Moreover,
Perveen and Akram (2014) define spelling as the method for writing words in their correct and
acceptable forms. In other words, it is a process of assembling the letters of a given language in
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

179

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Spelling Problems and Causes among Saudi English Language

Altamimi & Rashid

accordance with their correct sequence according to the official orthographical rules of that
language otherwise; it would be viewed as a spelling error.
In addition, Ahmed (2017) views spelling as a linguistic method that deals with phonemic
orthography. In other words, spelling is the process of word formation by representing the oral
language by using the conventional, accepted individual letters according to the rules of that
particular language. According to Johnson (2008), spelling is the act of recognizing or mimicking
oral or spoken words by the equivalent correct sequence of letters taking into consideration
phonological and alphabetical skills and knowledge.
The Case for Good Spelling
Researchers and educators are concerned with mistakes and errors made by students in the process
of learning a second or a foreign language (Dweikat & Aqel, 2017). One of the requirements for
students, especially at higher levels of academic education, is to be able to communicate, to
represent oneself through writing or speaking. Students should master the correct spelling to avoid
the misunderstandings or miscommunications that can occur as a result of poor spelling. Hence,
the proper spelling is one of the qualities that most students should acquire during the development
stages of their education.
Alhaysony (2012) claims that people can turn their thoughts into clear and unambiguous written
messages with the help of proper spelling. There could be a situation where there was a valid
justification for figuring out how to spell which the traditional instructor never tried to make
explicit. The reality of the situation may prove that there is something to be said for exercises of a
formal sort to cope with different levels of ability. Clearly, if there was no point in spelling
correctly, the subject of spelling would not be given so much consideration, still less an appropriate
topic in language teaching.
Peters (2013) lists some of the reasons for teaching and learning spelling. First, there are reasons
related to communication and concern for others. Poor and careless spelling may hinder
communication. The reader may be constantly held up through having to puzzle out what a word
is meant to be, or else he may be misinformed. Thus, the degree of precision necessary in spelling
relates to the ease and smoothness of communication. Second is the issue related to the question
of courtesy. Failure to speak clearly, to write legibly and to spell correctly are signs of discourtesy.
Thirdly, there is an issue of habit-formation. Right spelling as a skill means being precise; the
habit of being correct is one of the essential virtues to be acquired by educated persons. Precision
is important for communication, especially for the person who is receiving the information, while
it is highly significant for the person who wishes to construct the communication (Banfi et al.,
2017). Spelling precision can be viewed from two different dimensions: accuracy and stability.
Spelling accuracy refers to the correct spelling of a word or the attempts made by a person to spell
a word. They may always spell as word accurately (always right), inaccurately (always wrong),
or inconsistently (sometimes right) (Rossi, Martin-Changa, & Ouellette, 2018). Inconsistent
spelling can sometimes be attributed to a transition period when the learner is in the process of
acquiring the correct spelling, but it is not yet stable.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

180

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Spelling Problems and Causes among Saudi English Language

Altamimi & Rashid

Based on this presumption, the process of learning could include the transfer of training and
that what is transferred is a skill such as spelling. The transfer, however, in this context, is not a
technique but the basis for the construction of a habit of care. There is a causal relationship between
the habits, skills, and ability involved in, handwriting, spelling, punctuation, and sentence
construction and paragraphs formation. All these aspects require careful attention by learners who
want to acquire a good command of a language (Ouellette, Martin-Chang, & Rossi, 2017). On the
other hand, good spellers must also possess some orthographic knowledge which established on a
word-by-word basis (Perfetti, 2007).
Fourthly, an important case for good spelling is that it contributes very effectively to learners’
self-concept development. It allows the learners to communicate precisely and acceptably in
writing and receive high esteem for their spelling accuracy. The fifth reason for learning to spell
is that nearly all spelling systems have been conventionalized years ago by linguists. It is difficult
to change or reform spelling systems because they become internalized effectively by the speakers
of the language. People will resist any attempt to change a spelling system as it is deeply ‘petrified’.
The sixth good reason for learning to spell is the educational importance attached to it, which
is connected to the freedom to write. The freedom to write or creative writing does not mean that
people are free to create new spellings (though they can generate new words) but they must develop
the spelling skills that allow them to write freely, without making orthographical errors. It is only
when people have attained machine-like spelling that is automatic, predictable, and infallible, that
we can say they are free to write with confidence, with no backward glances to see if a word ‘looks
right’.
The Causes of Poor English Spelling
Different causes of English spelling errors have been mentioned and examined in various studies.
In this sub-section, the four most common kinds of spelling mistakes and errors in the written work
of students of English are discussed. Overall, spelling errors can be a result of omission, or
substitution or insertion, or the misplacement of a letter when writing a particular word.
Omission errors are where the student does not complete a word something is left out.
Derivation errors occur when the student does not apply a basic rule or follow the basic instructions
for spelling a particular word; for instance, they write snobish for snobbish. Inflection errors occur
when the student ignores or does not make the necessary changes when adding the inflection. For
instance, students forget to drop or remove “e” when adding “ing” to some words, producing
timeing for timing or reduceing for reducing. Residue error is when students forget to drop letters
in a particular context like bite when the past form bit is required. Phonetic errors are produced
when students spell words as they are spoken, like yot for yacht or wacht for watched.
Omission Errors
Omission is concerned when the inflectional or derivational morpheme in English words is left
out, when the speller did not attempt the morpheme at all, e.g., bill as an error attempt of billed, or
*behin as an error attempt of behind. Omission errors also refer to the omission of one of the
double letters in a word with the same two adjacent letters; for example, *hapy (happy) and
*speling (spelling). In other words, this kind of error occurs when the speller leaves out one or two
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

181

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Spelling Problems and Causes among Saudi English Language

Altamimi & Rashid

letters from the standard spelling of a word. Moreover, this sort of spelling error may be caused
by the inconsistency of the sound and the letter system in the English language (Critten, Connelly,
Dockrell, & Walter, 2014).
Substitution Errors
The second kind of error is a substitution, which occurs when the speller substitutes one of the
letters of the standard spelling of a word with another. The main cause of substitution and omission
errors of English spelling is silent letters (Sénéchal, Gingras, & L’Heureux, 2016). Sénéchal et al.
(2016) further explain that there is some statistical evidence that children used their prior
orthographic context knowledge when making substitution errors. This can also be because some
English letters have inconsistent pronunciation, depending on the context. For instance, the sound
/f/ can be represented by letter f, ff or gh as in life, different and laugh. The letter C can be
pronounced as /k/ in car, microphone and it is pronounce as /s/ in another context in words like
city, nice, and mice. In addition, another sort of substitution error in English spelling occur as result
of the inconsistent pronunciation of English vowels; for example, *hangry (hungry), *thes for
(this), *fascenating (fascinating), and so forth. Al-zuoud and Kabilan (2013) posit that vowels are
another major reason why Arabic students struggle to write error-free English.
Insertion Errors
Another sort of English spelling errors most commonly committed by learners are insertion errors
where the spellers add an additional letter when writing a word. A study conducted by Alhaisoni,
Al-Zuoud, and Gaudel (2015) shows that insertion errors of spelling are very common among
Saudi EFL learners, which may be a result of different sound systems. Examples of insertion errors
may be different from person to person. For example, a speller may wrongly write words like,
*famouse (famous), *prouduce (produce), or by doubling a letter in a word as in: *assisstant
(assistant), and *inclussion (inclusion) (Gail, Hantler, Laker, Lenchner, & Milch, 2016).
Ambiguous Errors
These are mistakes that can be seen as either inter-lingual or developmental, as for the most part,
they mirror the learner’s mother tongue structure while resembling the expressions of very young
mother-tongue learners (Al-Buainain, 2012). Al-Harrasi (2012) refers to a concern in the matter
of categorisation, because these categories do not account for why a student may have more than
one kind of spelling mistake in a single word (e.g.,*discribtion = depiction) or why two students
may make different sorts of blunder spelling the same word, (e.g., *permition, *permision,
*permmission = authorization), so the categorisation of errors may be of limited help in the
understanding of spelling errors. Allaith and Joshi’s (2011) analysis suggested that Arabic students
make mistakes using phonemes that doesn't exist in their own language; for instance, (/p/and/v/)
so they substitute similar ones that do exist in Arabic for example, (/b/→/‫ب‬/and/f/→/‫ف‬/). They
also examined students’ ability to distinguish between/b/and/p/and between/f/and/v/. A few
incorrect spelling events thus occur because of phonological issues.
Methodology
This research paper employs case study approach. Data were gathered through structured group
interviews with the students who are in the final year of their degree in English language at
university college of Haqel and their instructors. 3 group interviews are used in this study for the
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

182

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Spelling Problems and Causes among Saudi English Language

Altamimi & Rashid

students (A, B, C) in each group five students. In addition, three group interviews were also used
in this study for the lecturers, whereas in each group consist of five lecturers. All the interviews
were recorded, analyze, and codes manually. For example, (S1/GA) means student number 1 from
group A and (L2/GB) means lecturer number 2 from group B.
Findings
Students’ Views
Different students from different groups shared different comments toward the causes of their
spelling errors. For example; the education system and university syllabus, students’ learning
attitude and the interference between English and Arabic language.
The participants felt that spelling problems are due to the poor education system in Saudi
Arabia. For example, a participant mentioned that students in Saudi Arabia have been learning
Arabic since childhood and the education system only focuses on Arabic so becoming competent
in English is very difficult (S1/GA). The responses revealed that as English is a foreign language,
they face many challenges and there is lack of focus of the educational system to train students at
beginner level at school so that they can learn to overcome language issues. Sawalmeh’s (2013)
study found that the Saudi government and Ministry of Education focuses only on Arabic and
Arabic communication skills. There are many challenges for EFL students because they fail to
understand even basic English instructions.
A participant from Group A pointed out that
[they] lack proofreading as a strategy or any
reading skills in [their] syllabus or to check [their] writing, which is the real reason for the spelling
mistakes in writing (S2/GA). The student claimed that lack of reading skills and proofreading
strategies taught by lecturers, means most students fail to identify their spelling mistakes.
However, with the help of proofreading, many of their writing issues can be improved. O'Brien’s
(2015) study used qualitative methods and found that proofreading helped students to identify their
spelling mistakes, which is one of the most effective ways of preparing error-free scripts.
In the same vein, a participant from Group A stated that [their] syllabus during [their] studies
in the university lacks the four English language skills and the spelling rules or any kind of writing
techniques (S3/GA). Some spelling problems occur due to lack of knowledge of writing rules,
listening rules, reading rules, and speaking rules. The participant above pointed out they don’t
study any English language skills in their studies at University as these skills are not part of the
students’ syllabus. According to Murphy, Macaro, Alba, and Cipolla’s (2015) qualitative study
based on observation techniques, the findings revealed that understanding writing rules allows
students to identify key ideas, which helps them avoid spelling errors. Alhasiany’s (2014) findings
suggested that those students who learn writing and speaking rules from the beginning of their
studies can avoid many kinds of spelling mistakes.
A participant from Group B mentioned that students face many challenges about how to deal
with language writing issues because there is poor concept building at primary level (S2/GB). This
participant sees language issues are mostly due to the education system failing to develop clear
concepts for students in their early ages of education. This finding is supported by those of Al-Jarf
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

183

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Spelling Problems and Causes among Saudi English Language

Altamimi & Rashid

(2008) that educational institutions need to focus on the concept of educational development at
basic levels.
A participant from Group C commented on the syllabus that is taught to [them] during [their]
academic studies is limited and it does not help [them] to overcome the basic level language
challenges [S1/GC]. Similar findings were obtained by Al-Nofaie (2010) that the education system
and institutions need to plan beyond the structural ways of teaching the English language so that
spelling can also be improved.
A student from Group A stated that:
The English syllabuses do not include spelling rules and patterns which can be applied
to a large number of words, with few exceptions (e. g. the effect of (e) on the vowel in
some words, e. g. rat /ræt/ vs. rate /reIt/; tub vs.| tube|.)
(S3/GC)
The limited rules and guidelines offered in the syllabus fail to fulfill the students’ needs and queries
regarding writing techniques and spelling rules which could allow Saudi students to potentially
produce error-free scripts. Alharbi’s (2015) analysis also proposed that at tertiary level, students
are not provided with basic instruction, which means there is a lack of clarity concerning writing
skills.
Students’ lack of interest in learning Basic English language skills results in their not being able
to improve their spelling. For example, a participant stated that students do not practice or
memorize English on a daily basis, so they often make spelling mistakes (S6/GA). This has
encouraged them to stop writing and memorizing the spelling of difficult words (S7/GA). Chou’s
(2014) observations revealed that learning English requires memorization and similar practices on
a daily basis so that students can quickly correct their mistakes. It is clear that, when the students
found themselves far removed from writing skills and if their university as well their lecturers pay
no any attention to this skill, the students will stop practicing this skill even if they know the
benefits of it.
There is a wide range of studies concealing the reasons for spelling mistakes. Alhasiany (2014)
showed that students make a spelling mistake because of their own careless attitude. Yen, Hou,
and Chang’s (2015) mixed method research found that students do not practice or memorize
English on a daily basis, which inhibits their learning and often creates problems like multiple
spelling mistakes. The findings show that the poor writing practice results in extensive spelling
mistakes and the text books available to the learners are limited and this reduces their opportunities
to learn spelling and limits the texts they write and knowledge of writing methodologies.
A participant from Group B mentioned that students don’t care about the rules and the structure
of English language; the students do not pay any attention to English spelling rules (S8/GB). It
seems that most of the students do not even bother to learn the correct spelling even after noticing
their mistakes. Basoglu and Akdemir (2010) found that it is the students’ attitude that is the
problem, as many students do not have much interest in correcting their common spelling errors.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

184

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Spelling Problems and Causes among Saudi English Language

Altamimi & Rashid

This problematic attitude is associated with the nature of English language which makes students
reluctant to show interest in learning basic forms (S10/GB). It seems that students are not
interested in finding their common mistakes; there is lack of self-evaluation by students, which
reflects their unwillingness to learn English. Figueredo’s (2006) study revealed the same results
that EFL students’ attitude is highly influential for increasing (or reducing) their interest in learning
and writing in the English language.
A student from Group C stated that Saudi students come and sit in the classroom and expect
the lecturers to do all the work. The students just listen to their lecturers and do not contribute in
class (S8/GC). The attitude of students in not participating in class, but expecting their teachers to
do everything, ignore the fact that spelling rules have to be learned and remembered by the students
themselves.
Regarding the interference between English and Arabic, the lecturers from the different Groups
shared different ideas for example; Saudi university students make spelling errors due to interlingual or intra-lingual errors. The inter-lingual errors start when students make spelling errors
due to their native Arabic transfer. On other hand, their intra-lingual errors are because of poor
learning of the second language (S3/GA). The respondent suggests that inter-lingua and intralingual errors cause the students in Tabuk University to misinterpret English words and sentences.
The students believe that because Arabic is their mother language and proficiency in it is most
important, other languages are difficult for them. In this way, another language like English is not
conceived as a means of communication, so the students of Tabuk University do not try to master
any foreign language.
Another comment regarding the interference between English and Arabic language shared by
the lecturers, the nature of English language is also a cause of spelling errors. English is a difficult
language, which is not easy to understand or learn. The main cause of students spelling errors is
due to the number of silent letters or the grouping of letters makes it hard to understand for Saudi
students to spell words when the students compare it with Arabic (S3/GC). The response suggests
that the nature of English language in terms of the silent letters or group of letters makes it hard
for the students to understand how to spell words especially when the students compare it with
Arabic. Silent letters also affect the pronunciation of the preceding vowel (like the difference
between hop/hɒp/ and hope /hoʊp/) although they themselves are not pronounced. Hence,
members of the teaching staff find English is often difficult for Saudi students because the
relationship between the spoken and written form is not straightforward as it is in Arabic; the
function of the silent letter cannot be understood easily because there are none in Arabic and most
of the students refer to their mother language rules while writing in English.
Lecturers’ Views
Different lectures shared different comments or ideas toward the preceded causes of students’
spelling errors. For example; poor syllabus and education system, students lack knowledge of
spelling rules and techniques and administrative constraints.
A participant from group A reported in the Saudi context, English is taught as a foreign
language (EFL). Students are supposed to master the four language skills within English. Teaching
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

185

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Spelling Problems and Causes among Saudi English Language

Altamimi & Rashid

the skill of writing, especially mastering the spelling component, is one of the major areas
challenging language instruction and learning in Saudi EFL (L1/GA). The response points out that
because English is a foreign language in Saudi Arabia, it is difficult for students to gain expertise
in all four skills, including spelling as the main component of the writing skill. The major
challenges that are faced by learners are due to the teaching system, especially teaching the skill
of writing is one of the challenges that face Saudi students and lecturers. Another participant
reported that, in some contexts, Saudi students are not able to master the four English language
skills, especially in Tabuk University, because the students do not study writing as a compulsory
subject, so this may be one of the reasons why Saudi students in Tabuk University face a problem
with spelling (L2/GA). As pointed out by the lecturer, students could make spelling errors because
of their University (Tabuk University) ignores the writing skill in the students’ syllabus.
Another participant from Group B commented that the Saudi government focuses on Islamic
studies rather than on English. This is because Saudi Arabia is an Islamic country and they must
keep the focus on Arabic rather than any other language. Again, this corresponds to one of the
major root causes of spelling issues among Saudi students, as the government makes schools
prioritize Islamic studies and Arabic rather than focusing on English language (L2/GB). The
response of the lecturer suggests that because Saudi Arabia is an Islamic country, where the
government and other agencies focus on their religious values, they believe that Arabic is the only
language which needs to be spoken as a means of communication throughout the country, therefore
learning English has very little value.
The five participants from group C shared the same views regarding this reason. For example,
the major problem is due to the fact that the students do not know the spelling rules. They are
unaware of English sound recognition, and they are not familiar with the correct pronunciation of
words (L5/GC). This participant believes that Saudi students currently enrolled in Tabuk
University are unaware of the interconnectedness of writing, listening, and reading and speaking
and how they affect each other Another participant from Group B shared a similar comment, this
major problem is due to the fact that the students make spelling errors because they have no idea
how the word is spelt or the different spellings of words that are homophones (L8/GB).The
response suggests that neither in Tabuk University nor during their previous school experience
have students been provided with adequate spelling rules for writing in English, consequently, they
seem unaware of them or how they operate.
The participants from Groups A, B and C agreed that administrative constraints contribute to
the reasons for the students’ spelling errors, for example, Saudi students make spelling errors
because of their universities’ administrative constraints the amount of class time, for instance or
when the lecturers are more focused on earning money and doing the minimum, rather than
helping their students to learn or master English language skills. While the universities do not
have certain clear guidelines to follow so that their students have learning goals, improved
learning outcomes are difficult. If all the universities shared formal requirements such as a
common test for all the students in all English departments, this would help general planning to
improve students’ performance (L5/GA). This response suggests that Tabuk University lecturers
need to support themselves and their families financially, and that is their main focus, or they feel
unsupported by the administration in their teaching. Pieretti and Roseberry-McKibbin (2016)
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

186

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Spelling Problems and Causes among Saudi English Language

Altamimi & Rashid

approached 110 teachers of English in Saudi schools. Their findings revealed that these teachers
were mainly novice teachers, more concerned with earning money than effective teaching. Hence,
the findings of their study are similar to the comment above, about teachers being more likely to
be concerned about making money, than helping students learn, especially if the administration
and organization of teaching are not supportive.
A participant from Group B reported about the administrative constraints as a cause of students’
spelling errors, Saudi students make spelling errors because in many Saudi universities, there are
no clear or specific rules for selecting lecturers, which means that sometimes, you can find a
lecturer who has majored in science but is teaching English, especially if he is a native English
speaker lecturer (L7/GB). The response suggests that Saudi learners may be taught by untrained
teachers of English, especially if they are native speakers, and do not think in terms of second or
foreign language learners’ need for explicit teaching, so students misspell words because they are
not provided with the proper rules and guidance because their lecturers are not EFL teachers. The
University prefers lecturers who are native speakers of English to teach English regardless of
where they come from, and their specialization can be Science or Computer background. If their
only advantage is that they are native speakers of English, this may not be enough for them to
teach English if it is outside their own field and they are untrained or are not fluent in another
language beside English. Liu’s (2017) sample of teachers in Nigeria and demonstrated that
teachers’ selection criteria are often neglected when appointing staff who are not qualified to teach
specific courses and so are unable to improve the performance of students.
Discussion
Learning English can be particularly challenging for native Arabic speakers due to pronunciation
and orthographic differences. Previous studies agree that the causes of spelling errors tend to be
related to interference from the native language in areas where it differs from the second or foreign
language (e.g., Ahmed, 2017; Al-Sobhi, Rashid, Abdullah, & Darmi, 2017). This study confirms
the findings of the existing studies and at the same time, puts forth another factor, which is the
nature of classroom instruction and teachers education. As highlighted in the findings part,
students’ lack knowledge of spelling rules and techniques and administrative constraints can be
considered as perceived causes of spelling errors in addition to the nature and influence of the
learners’ mother tongue.
It is often more difficult for someone to learn something entirely new or very different from
what they already know. Since English writing system is very different from Arabic, this could
help explain why English spelling poses such a problem for Arabic speakers. In the interviews, the
participants claimed that the majority of students made spelling errors related to prefixes,
apostrophe usage, reduplication of letters, and omission of letters and addition of letters. The
participants felt that the mistakes are due to influence from their mother tongue, which supports
the finding of Al-Khairy (2013), as well as a result from irregularities in the English spelling
system, which is in agreement with (Babu & Gibreel, 2018). The participants in Al-Khairy’s
(2013) and Babu and Gibreel’s (2018) are different from the participants in this study, yet all of
them agreed that their mother tongue contributes to the spelling errors made. This reflects that
mother-tongue interference has a strong influence in Arab students’ learning of English.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

187

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Spelling Problems and Causes among Saudi English Language

Altamimi & Rashid

Tackling the mother-tongue influence is challenging. It is impossible for Arab learners to
abandon their mother tongue as they grow up with this language. Thus, the challenge facing
policymakers in Saudi Arabia is to find ways to lessen the effects of this mother-tongue
interference. One possible way is perhaps to introduce English as early as possible, which can be
done by including English as a core subject in early childhood education.
The present paper is also in line with Rass (2015) regarding the lack of administrative support
for teachers. The findings show that the EFL lecturers believed they did not receive any training
that could improve their performance in class. This suggests that novice lecturers are provided
with inadequate resources, making it harder for them to develop useful activities for spelling or
listening tasks. As a result, they often just teach directly from the textbooks provided to them, a
finding supported by Witzel (2015). However, these textbooks do not contain writing activities
that teach students about English spelling rules. Consequently, the Saudi EFL classes frequently
ignore this important area. A contributing factor to instructor efficiency is the hiring practices at
Saudi universities. When hiring lecturers from other countries, universities often only care whether
individuals are native speakers of English regardless of their academic background or professional
experience. This practice leads to teachers who do not learn effective methods of delivering
information about language skills, a finding shared by Hervey, Dickins, and Higgins (2016) and
Olson (2017). This practice results in fewer teachers and trainers qualified to teach English spelling
rules. This situation would appear to negatively affect classroom performance because teachers
appeared unable to deal with learner errors.
Perceived causes of Saudi EFL student spelling errors tend to include the major linguistic
differences between English and Arabic, which affect their reading, writing, and listening abilities.
Learning a language is a multi-sensory process that should include visual, auditory, morphemic,
and etymological strategies to reduce spelling errors. Unfortunately, low quality of instruction is
provided in the classroom, as perceived by the students and the teachers interviewed in this study.
The teachers have limited experience, lower-quality training, and inadequate resources hence
hampering them from being an efficient instructor to further develop their learners.
Conclusion
There were many perceived causes of spelling errors either reported by the respondents or observed
in this study, in particular, according to the respondents, the interference between English and
Arabic language, poor syllabus and education system, students lack knowledge of spelling rules
and techniques, administrative constraints and students’ learning attitude can be considered as the
main causes of Saudi university students spelling errors.
About the Authors:
Dheifallah Altamimi is a PhD researcher at Universiti Sultan Zainal Abidin. His research interests
include Applied Linguistics and Qualitative Methodology. He has several years of teaching
experience at university level in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-25149456
Radzuwan Ab Rashid is an Associate Professor of Applied Linguistics and TESL at Universiti
Sultan Zainal Abidin, Malaysia. He is currently the Editor-in-Chief of Journal of Nusantara
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

188

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Spelling Problems and Causes among Saudi English Language

Altamimi & Rashid

Studies (Jonus), a social science journal indexed in Web of Science (ESCI), published by UniSZA
Press. He is the recipient of UniSZA’s Best Researcher Award 2019. https://orcid.org/0000-00021334-6268
References
Ahmed, D. (2017). Investigating English spelling difficulties in basic level pupils: A case study of
some basic level schools in Omdurman locality. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation).
Sudan University of Science and Technology, Khartoum, Sudan.
Al-Bereiki, S. & Al-Mekhlafi, A. (2015). Spelling Errors of Omani EFL Students. Journal of
Educational and Psychological Studies, 9, (4), 660-676.
Al-Buainain, H. (2012). Students’ Writing Errors in ESL: A Case Study. QNRS Repository, 1, (1),
1-37.
Alhaisoni, E.M., Al-Zuoud, K.M, & Gaudel, D.R. (2015). Analysis of Spelling Errors of Beginner
Learners of English in the English Foreign Language Context in Saudi Arabia. English
Language Teaching, 8, (3), 185-192.
Alharbi, H.A. (2015). Improving Students' English Speaking Proficiency in Saudi Public Schools.
International Journal of Instruction, 8, (1), 105-116.
Al-Harrasi, T.S. (2012). Using Stories in English Omani Curriculum. English Language Teaching
Archives, 5, (11), 51-58.
Alhasiany, F. (2014) English Language Learners. International Journal of Business and Social
Science, 5, (8), 38-43.
Alhaysony, M. (2012). An Analysis of Article Errors Among Saudi Female EFL Students: A Case
Study. Asian Social Science, 8, (12), 55-66.
Al-Jarf, R. (2008). The Impact of English as an International Language (EIL) upon Arabic in Saudi
Arabia. Asian EFL Journal, 10, (4), 193-210.
Al-Khairy, M.A. (2013). Saudi English-Major Undergraduates' Academic Writing Problems: A
Taif University Perspective. English Language Teaching, 6, (6), 1-12.
Allaith, Z.A. & Joshi, R.M. (2011). Spelling Performance of English Consonants Among Students
whose First Language is Arabic. Reading and Writing, 24, (9), 1089-1110.
Al-Nofaie, H. (2010). The Attitudes of Teachers and Students Towards Using Arabic in EFL
Classrooms in Saudi Public Schools: A Case Study. Novitas-Royal: Research on Youth
and Language, 4, (1), 64-95.
Al-Sobhi, B.M.S., Rashid, S.M., Abdullah, A.N., & Darmi, R. (2017). Arab ESL Secondary
School Students’ Spelling Errors. International Journal of Education & Literacy Studies,
5, (3), 16-23.
Al-Zuoud, K.M. & Kabilan, M.K. (2013). Investigating Jordanian EFL Students' Spelling Errors
at Tertiary Level. International Journal of Linguistics, 5, (3), 164-176.
Babayiğit, S. & Stainthorp, R. (2010). Component Processes of Early Reading, Spelling, and
Narrative Writing Skills in Turkish: A Longitudinal Study. Reading and Writing, 23, (5),
539-568.
Babu, S. & Gibreel, M.O.M. (2018). An Investigation in Learning English Language by Students
of Sudanese University: A Case study of Tertiary Level Khartoum Locality. Indian
Journal of Public Health Research & Development, 9, (6), 490-500.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

189

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Spelling Problems and Causes among Saudi English Language

Altamimi & Rashid

Banfi, C., Kemény, F., Gangl, M., Schulte-Körne, G., Moll, K., & Landerl, K. (2017). VisuoSpatial Cueing in Children with Differential Reading and Spelling Profiles. PLoS ONE,
12, (7), 1-20.
Basoglu, E.B. & Akdemir, O. (2010). A Comparison of Undergraduate Students' English
Vocabulary Learning: Using Mobile Phones and Flash Cards. Turkish Online Journal of
Educational Technology, 9, (3), 1-7.
Chou, M.H. (2014). Assessing English Vocabulary and Enhancing Young English as a Foreign
Language (EFL) Learners’ Motivation Through Games, Songs, and Stories. Education 313, 42, (3), 284-297.
Critten, S., Connelly, V., Dockrell, J.E., & Walter, K. (2014). Inflectional and Derivational
Morphological Spelling Abilities of Children with Specific Language Impairment.
Frontiers in Psychology, 5, (948), 1-10.
Dweikat, K.A.J. & Aqel, F.M. (2017). A Longitudinal Analysis Study of Writing Errors Made by
EFL Students at Al-Quds Open University (QOU) the Case of Language Use
Course. British Journal of Education, 5, (13), 127-145.
Figueredo, L. (2006). Using the Known to Chart the Unknown: A Review of First-Language
Influence on the Development of English-as-a-Second-Language Spelling Skill. Reading
and Writing, 19, (8), 873-905.
Gail, H.R., Hantler, S.L., Laker, M.M., Lenchner, J., & Milch, D. (2016). U.S. Patent No.
9,465,791. Washington, DC: U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Hervey, S., Dickins, J., & Higgins, I. (2016). Thinking Arabic Translation: A Course in
Translation Method: Arabic to English. London: Routledge.
Johnson, K. (2008). An Introduction to Foreign Language Learning and Teaching. London, UK:
Routledge.
Kocatepe, M. (2017). Female Arab EFL Students Learning Autonomously Beyond the Language
Classroom. English Language Teaching, 10, (5), 104-126.
Liu, W. (2017). The Changing Role of Non‐English Papers in Scholarly Communication: Evidence
from Web of Science's Three Journal Citation Indexes. Learned Publishing, 30, (2), 115123.
Mpiti, T. (2012). The nature of spelling errors of grade three isiXhosa background students in
English first additional language. (Unpublished master thesis). University of Fort Hare,
South Africa.
Murphy, V.A., Macaro, E., Alba, S., & Cipolla, C. (2015). The Influence of Learning a Second
Language in Primary School on Developing First Language Literacy Skills. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 36, (5), 1133-1153.
Nor, N.M & Rashid, R.A. (2018). A Review of Theoretical Perspectives on Language Learning
and Acquisition. Kasetsart Journal of Social Sciences, 39(1), 161-167.
O'Brien, J. (2015). Consciousness-Raising, Error Correction and Proofreading. Journal of the
Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, 15, (3), 85-103.
Olson, E. (2017). Voice Onset Time in Arabic and English Stop Consonants. (Unpublished
bachelor thesis). Faculty of The University of Utah, USA.
Ouellette, G., Martin-Chang, S., & Rossi, M. (2017). Learning from Our Mistakes: Improvements
in Spelling Lead to Gains in Reading Speed. Scientific Studies of Reading, 21, (4), 350357.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

190

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Spelling Problems and Causes among Saudi English Language

Altamimi & Rashid

Perfetti, C. (2007). Reading Ability: Lexical Quality to Comprehension. Scientific Studies of
Reading, 11, (4), 357-383.
Perveen, U. & Akram, F. (2014). A Comparative Study to Know the Causes of Spelling Errors
Committed by Learners of English at Elementary Level in Distract Kasur and Lahore in
Pakistan. European Academic Research, 2, (2), 2601-2622.
Peters, M.L. (2013). Spelling Caught or Taught: A New Look. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul
plc.
Pieretti, R.A. & Roseberry-McKibbin, C. (2016). Assessment and Intervention for English
Language Learners with Primary Language Impairment: Research-Based Best
Practices. Communication Disorders Quarterly, 37, (2), 117-128.
Puspandari, K. (2017). An Analysis on Spelling of Inflectional Nouns Made by the Seventh Grade
Students of SMPN 1 Loa Kulu. Jurnal Intelegensia, 2, (2), 19-31.
Rass, R.A. (2015). Challenges Face Arab Students in Writing Well-Developed Paragraphs in
English. English Language Teaching, 8, (10), 49-59.
Rosenthal, J. & Ehri, L.C. (2010). Pronouncing New Words Aloud during the Silent Reading of
Text Enhances Fifth Graders’ Memory for Vocabulary Words and Their Spellings.
Reading and Writing: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 24, (1), 921-950.
Rossi, M., Martin-Chang, S., & Ouellette, G. (2018). Exploring the Space Between Good and Poor
Spelling: Orthographic Quality and Reading Speed. Scientific Studies of Reading, 23, (2),
192-201.
Sawalmeh, M.H.M. (2013). Error Analysis of Written English Essays: The Case of Students of the
Preparatory Year Program in Saudi Arabia. English for Specific Purposes World, 14, (40),
1-17.
Sénéchal, M., Gingras, M., & L’Heureux, L. (2016). Modeling Spelling Acquisition: The Effect
of Orthographic Regularities on Silent-Letter Representations. Scientific Studies of
Reading, 20, (2), 155-162.
Witzel, C. (2015). Commentary: An Experimental Study of Gender and Cultural Differences in
Hue Preference. Frontiers in psychology, 6, (1840), 1-3.
Yen, Y.C., Hou, H.T., & Chang, K.E. (2015). Applying Role-Playing Strategy to Enhance
Learners’ Writing and Speaking Skills in EFL Courses Using Facebook and Skype as
Learning Tools: A Case Study in Taiwan. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 28, (5),
383-406.
Zuriyani, M. Y. & Mohamed Ismail, A. S. (2019). The Interactive Roles of Lexical Knowledge
and Reading Strategies on Reading Comprehension Performance. Journal of Nusantara
Studies, 4(1), 273-299.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

191

