Tuomas Tammisto
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9767-7832

Making temporal environments: Work,
places and history in the Mengen landscape

Introduction
For the Mengen living in the Wide Bay area of New Britain Island, Papua
New Guinea, landscape is an important materialisation of personal and
group histories. People see in the landscape traces of each other’s productive
activities, namely ‘work’ as the Mengen understand it. Work, as activity
that creates and maintains valued social relations, is at the basis of Mengen
conceptions of relatedness. Conversely, all activity that produces and
maintains valued social relations, is classed as ‘work’ and hence work is
a key source of value for the Mengen. Care and nurture, expressed especially
in acts of giving and feeding, are important, if not the most important, forms
of work (Tammisto 2018: 11, 54; see also Fajans 1997). Food and gardens
are central media through which these relations are acted out, as well as
key expressions of value (e.g. Turner 2008: 47, 53; Stasch 2009: 14, 19–20).
The socially productive activities of people also leave visible traces on the
environment. Thus, in the course of their social life, people make places (see
also M. Scott 2007: 167, 213).
The near environment of the Wide Bay Mengen villages is a patchwork
of gardens, fallows and secondary forest. What to an outsider looks like
undifferentiated forest is, for those living there, an environment made by,
and speaking of, human activities. These places constitute the Mengen
landscape, which is “the world as it is known to those who dwell therein,
who inhabit its places and journey along the paths connecting them”, and
“a pattern of activities ‘collapsed’ into an array of features”, to borrow Tim
Ingold’s definition (2000: 193, 198). Abandoned villages are visible to
the attentive onlooker in the shape of domestic trees planted by former
inhabitants, although the sites had returned to primary forest. Even old and
more distant forests are full of signs of past and present activity: paths, old
burial sites, places where people have gathered house materials and so forth.
These signs of work are ‘memories’ of people, bringing to mind the persons
associated with them. The semiotic aspects of the landscape come together
in the Mengen term for landscape, glanpapa, translated to me as “how things
247

Tuomas Tammisto

draw themselves out clearly when you look at them”.1 Here Philippe Descola’s
definition of landscape as “transfiguration”, the deliberate re-shaping of a site
so that it can also function as a sign (2016: 5), is helpful, because it focuses on
placemaking and the semiotic qualities of the landscape – which the Mengen
themselves emphasise.
All social relations are spatial, they happen in space and co-produce
spaces, as Jason Moore notes (2015: 11). Thus, places which constitute
spaces and landscapes, are also inherently political. Places are, as Margaret
Rodman puts it, “politicized, culturally relative, historically specific, local
and multiple constructions” (1992: 641). This means that different forms
of value production create different kinds of places and different forms of
politics are enacted in different ways in and through the places they create.
In this paper I examine how the Mengen make their landscape, how
time and place intersect in it and how places become one of the concrete
media through which the Mengen relate to each other (see Munn 1992: 17;
Stasch 2009: 19–20). I start by focusing on how the Mengen organise their
horticulture in time by following the cycles of particular trees thus dividing
the year into several seasons during which different gardening tasks are
done. This is a concrete example of the temporality of the Mengen landscape.
It shows how ecological temporalities, such as the growth of certain trees
and food plants, intersect or converge with human temporal trajectories
(see also Stasch 2003: 369, 381). Following that, I show how people not only
coordinate their activities by observing a temporal landscape, but through
their gardening activities they also create it. Places created in the course
of people’s lives are important historical markers and indices of people’s
relations with each other and the land.
As Mengen social relations, histories and values are intimately intertwined
with the gardens, forests and land – in short the lived environment – I ask
how Mengen forms of politics are enacted through and expressed in the
landscape. I examine how engaging with land and placemaking can also be
contested acts, and how places in the landscape become contested sites with
respect to landholding. Furthermore, intensified natural resource extraction
not only connects the Mengen in new ways to a global market economy, it
reshapes questions of landholding, and very concretely speaking, it changes
the political landscape of the Mengen.

The Mengen tree calendar
The tropical climate of Wide Bay is most notably divided into two main
seasons of about equal length, the dry and the rainy. The Mengen call the
dry and rainy seasons kae koureta (‘only sun [kae]’) and windfa respectively.
The seasons are most strongly associated with their extreme periods, namely
November to January for the sunny season and June to August for the rainy
1

The term may very well be a neologism. Nonetheless, it illustrates well the visual
aspects of the Mengen landscape. (Mengen [M]: gel: to see, to look; pa: to draw, to
write.)

248

Making temporal environments

Figure 1. The index tree phase.

season. The intermediary times are characterised by more or less gradual
shifts from one extreme to another. The seasons dominate activities in as
much planting is not possible during the height of the rainy season, and
the rough seas caused by the strong winds of the period make traveling by
boat difficult – and dangerous. However, there is no major shift in activities
of dwelling corresponding with the contrast of seasons (Panoff 1969: 154).
The two seasons provide the most general division of time, but the
Mengen conception of seasons is much more sophisticated. Specific
gardening activities are performed according to the so-called tree or village
calendar (Tok Pisin [TP]: kalender bilong ples), in which the yearly cycle is
represented according to the flowering and leaf phases of five index trees
(see Figure 1). (The notion of “index tree” is Michel Panoff ’s (1969: 156),
who documented this calendar in use in the 1960s among the Mengen of
Jacquinot and Waterfall Bay.) By “index” I refer to a semiotic relation where
the signifier and signified are physically connected or occur at the same time
(Parmentier 1994: 4). In this case, the flowering of a specific tree occurs at
the same time as a specific season and hence the former is an index of the
latter. Similarly, in this paper I use the term ‘icon’ to refer to a sign that has a
formal resemblance with the thing signified (Parmentier 1994: 4, 6).
During my fieldwork, the Wide Bay Mengen coordinated their gardening
work according to this schedule, having systematised their calendar in
the early 2000s so that it could be taught in elementary schools. This was
part of a national education reform initiative in which elementary schools
began teaching in local languages. In this version, the phases of the index
trees were adjusted in terms of Western calendar months, which are more
generally used for reckoning time. However, people follow the index tree
249

Tuomas Tammisto

phases in their day-to-day gardening work and speak about their work
in terms of them – in Wide Bay Mengen this is known as vekmein (vek:
tree, mein: phase, ‘round’). For example, people often explained to me that
a garden being cleared was to be planted with taro of the sap, one of the
index trees, or that during another tree, pri, the yam harvest would begin,
and so on.
• Tlop (Euodia elleryana; also Melicope elleryana): The phases of the tlop
tree index the time roughly between December, when its distinctive red
flowers appear, and February. The height of the dry season, occurring in
January, is sometimes called tlop maengngan (heat of the tlop), while the
end of this period around February is tlop kan, as the seed (kan) of the
tlop is clearly visible. During the flowering of the tlop lesser and greater
yam is planted and then harvested around September–October. Later in
December–January taro is also planted. This constitutes a ‘slow’ season
for the taro, which is ready for harvest around October and lasts until
December. Yearly festivals (M: pnaeis, TP: kastom, also lukara) are held
during the season of tlop as the main food taro is ready for harvest.
• Sap (Alphitonia marcocarpa): Sap is used as an index for the period
lasting from March to April, with sap lvun (the leaf of sap) referring more
specifically to April. The sap phase is still part of the dry season although
characterised by light rains. During sap taro is planted, to be ready for
harvesting around October–November. Taro planted during sap is often
transplanted from yam gardens planted during December–January (tlop).
• Pri (Erythrina indica): the start of the pri phase was identified to me
differently by people, either starting in May or June, but in most accounts
pri is associated with June and July, which could also be referred to as pri
chu chumtan (pri is leafless). The rainy season starts at this time. Both taro
and yam can be planted at the beginning of pri although it is regarded as
a ‘minor’ season for both. The taro-planting season of pri usually merges
with sap. Yam planted during the kreng phase in September starts to
ripen and is ready to harvest. During the height of the rainy season there
is usually no planting.
• Kreng (Pterocarpus indicus): Kreng mukmguang means that the kreng
starts to flower and ‘leads’ other trees, which flower later. This occurs
by the turn of August–September, when rains are easing off. The season
of kreng continues to October when the rainy season is over and the
weather is ‘good’, that is, moving towards the dry season. Kreng is the
main season for planting yam. Yam gardens are readied during August
and September and seed yam is brought from the kreng gardens of the
previous year. Yam planted during kreng ripens around June–July (see
pri). The annual ceremonies are usually held in January when taro is
harvested, but they can also be held in September–October when yam
is harvested and distributed as the gift. Sometimes minor prestations
are made with yam at this time, anticipating the actual ceremonies
held in December–January, during which taro is given. In this case, the
prestations are ‘shadows’ (M: koun, shadow, spirit, image, reflection) of
the ceremonies proper to come.
250

Making temporal environments

• Pokal (Albizzia falcataria): The pokal tree flowers during November
when the dry season is well under way. While identified as one of the
index trees, many people with whom I spoke tended to leave pokal out
of their accounts and merged the season with kreng and tlop. Pokal is
a time for planting yam and taro and clearing gardens for the yam and
taro seasons of tlop.
The division of the year into vekmein constitutes a sophisticated way of
dividing the principal meteorological seasons into distinct phases for the
planting and harvesting of the main food plants. My interlocutors did
not know how the system had evolved, nor were there any accounts of its
emergence, but it is clear that it is based on very careful observation of trees,
their relation to the growth of food plants and the yearly cycle. It is just
one example of the impressive knowledge the rural Mengen have of their
environment. People noted that if the ‘tree calendar’ is observed carefully
– and nothing unusual such as droughts occur – food would be abundant
throughout the year. As soon as a garden is planted, clearing new ones for
the next season or crop should get underway, as the clearing and fencing of
gardens can take considerable time – usually at least a month.
Besides the tree calendar, people use plants more widely to conceptualise
time. When I interviewed a man in his 70s on the history of a village, he used
the growth of coconut palms to recall how, for many years, the villagers hid
in the forest during World War II:
The war started and we fled into the forest. I think we must have been something
like three years in the forest, because when we came back, the coconut palms
were ready to carry fruit.

While trees and plants are a way of counting the flow of time and
conceptualising seasons, they also serve as metaphors for history for the
Mengen (Panoff 1969: 164). Like the growth of a tree, history was seen by
the Jacquinot Bay Mengen as progressive, and events, such as branching, as
irreversible (Panoff 1969: 164). This conception also applies to the histories
of clans which were called vines and vine-branches in the vernacular.
This kind of “botanic metaphor [...] that combine[s] notions of growth
and succession”, as James Fox (1996a: 8) observes, is common among the
Austronesian peoples to which the Mengen also belong. The index cycles of
the index trees, visible to the skilled observer in the landscape, were used by
the Mengen to conceptualise time and organise gardening.

Gardening and place making
Besides this yearly cycle as indexed by trees and connected to the practices
and work of the Mengen, there are other temporal features worth considering
in the Mengen landscape. Gardening and dwelling practices, such the
establishment of settlements and burial sites or the gathering of building
materials and food stuff from the forest, as active engagements with the
251

Tuomas Tammisto

environment, create places that are visible in the Mengen landscape. People
leave their gardens to fallow after one harvest, and the environment near the
Wide Bay Mengen villages is thus a patchwork of differently aged fallowforests. Along with gardens and fallows, there are also abandoned villages,
burial sites and other signs of people’s productive activities that have created
a multi-layered landscape. The Mengen term for landscape glanpapa, which
a Mengen man translated to me as how things draw themselves out as one
looks at them, focuses on the abundance of different signs that constitute
the landscape.
Here it is helpful to draw on Philippe Descola’s proposal (2016: 5, 11–12)
for a stricter definition of landscape, understood as transfiguration, namely
the deliberate changing of the appearance of a site. In order to be a ‘landscape’,
transfiguration should satisfy three conditions: the result of the activity
must be deliberately sought after, the activity should not be exclusively
utilitarian, and at the end of the activity, people should recognise the change
in appearance of the site (Descola 2016: 5). Moreover, a landscape formed
by transfiguration, whether by modification of the site itself or through
its pictorial representation, can function as a sign standing for something
else (Descola 2016: 5). The signs of productive activity that make up the
Mengen landscape, stand for a variety of social relations. This is especially
pronounced in Mengen gardens and in the succession between gardens and
fallows.
There are several temporal trajectories in Mengen gardens. The food
plants require weeding and pruning at different times and stages of growth.
The time-span of a given garden is largely determined by the main food
plant and how it matures for harvesting. After harvest, people leave gardens
to fallow, and by doing so create an ever-changing landscape of gardens and
fallows in different stages of maturation. For example, when a yam garden
matures, the taro planted in it are uprooted and transplanted into newly
cleared gardens. Like the vekmein, which seamlessly merge into each other,
there is no absolute distinction between a mature and an abandoned garden,
instead, letting the garden become fallow is a gradual process. This effect is
made even more pronounced by the way the Mengen never plant a garden
with only one crop, and different foods mature at different times and are
thus harvested at different periods. Final harvesting takes place as fences
start to deteriorate and species associated with bush fallow begin to take
over a garden.
The importance of horticulture is evident in the forest terminology of the
Wide Bay Mengen. The general term for forest, gurlon, covers both primary
and secondary forest of different kinds. Gurlon however, is divided into four
terms referring to forests of distinct types and ages:
1. papli: this encompasses mature gardens, gardens left fallow and
secondary forest that begins to grow in abandoned gardens. Papli is
recognised as a former gardening area. No new gardens can be cleared
at this stage.
2. mlap: secondary forest growing in abandoned gardens. Mlap is
distinguished from papli by the size and type of trees. Certain tree species
252

Making temporal environments

start to grow in size and thus overwhelm species typical to immediate
secondary growth or papli. In contrast to papli, mlap starts to resemble
‘real forest’ and trees grow into substantial specimens. Mlap is still
recognised as former garden where traces of human work, such as tree
stumps and axe marks, are visible. Papli becomes mlap in about seven
to twenty years, depending on various factors that influence the growth
of trees. At this stage new gardens can be cleared. There is no rule about
how many years are needed before mlap can be cleared for gardens, it
depends on the size of the trees, which in turn varies from area to area.
To my knowledge, fallows younger than five years should not be cleared.
3. lom: primary forest. Lom is not regarded as former garden, but some of
my interlocutors noted that if left unused for a “very long time”, mlap will
turn into lom. The lom is distinguished from papli and mlap through the
type and size of the trees: these are of different species and considerably
bigger than in a secondary forest. Traces of work, such as gathered plants,
but also trails (gue), abandoned villages (knau) distinguished by domestic
plants or earth oven stones, and burial sites (o), are visible in the forest.
4. lom son: the definitions for this category are somewhat vague, but it
refers to forest growing on mountain ranges, where vegetation is poorer
due to less fertile land and not much fauna. In some definitions lom son
is distinguished from other types of forest as characterised by a lack of
(visible?) human action. One person noted that if people were to start
using this kind of forest, it would change into lom. Another considered the
main distinction to be the different flora. The distance from the everyday
environment of people is also a factor. Some people noted that lom son
are the “blue ranges” visible far away (as opposed to the more proximate
forest characterized by different shades of green).2 The counterpart of
lom son – in the opposite direction, namely toward the sea – is mail son,
the far away ocean – characterised similarly by another shade of blue.
As is evident in this forest terminology, the Mengen emphasise ‘work’
and its visibility in the environment. The two terms for secondary forest
refer to gardening areas and are directly linked to horticulture, as these
types of environments would not exist without human action. The terms
ngur (garden), papli and mlap are partly overlapping and on a continuum.
A garden where harvesting has started may be called papli, while a secondary
forest ready to be cleared again (mlap) can be also referred to as somebody’s
papli. People thus emphasise that fallows are always somebody’s fallows. In
contrast, secondary forest that had been logged, but not cultivated, is not
papli or mlap, but called tlanglis (M: tlang: to fell, lis: to decompose), forest
cleared for no apparent reason (TP: katim bus nating). While lom is not an
anthropogenic forest type, it incorporates a wide range of visible human
action. However, in terms of horticulture lom is ‘empty’ and whoever clears
a garden in it retained further rights to cultivate the area.
Botanists’ classification and description of the forests near Toimtop
village overlap with Mengen classification. Pius Piskaut and Phille Daur
2

Note that in Mengen ‘green‘ and ‘blue’ are referred to with the same word.

253

Tuomas Tammisto

Figure 2. Schematic representation of Mengen forest terminology.

(2007: 21) distinguish between early secondary forest with tree heights of
up to 10 m, and advanced secondary forest with the canopy layer at 20–25
m and trees occasionally as high as 30 m. In primary forest the canopy layer
is generally at 20–30 m with trees occasionally as high as 40 m (Piskaut and
Daur 2007: 20). Botanists divide the primary forest into three types: upper
and lower lowland hill forests (at elevations of up to 220 m asl) and Dillenia
(230–400 m asl) and Mixed Castanopsis forests (400 m asl and upwards)
that grow on ridge tops with shallow and nutrient-poor brown forest soils
(Piskaut and Daur 2007: 20).
Taking the village as a starting point, the fallow succession and the
different types of forests can be schematically represented in relation to time
and the gradual diminishing of signs of human presence (see Figure 2). The
village and the surrounding gardens are the most evidently human areas.
As the gardens start to become fallow, signs of human activity decrease. In
the primary forest (to which the fallows return if left uncleared), signs of
human presence decrease: the forest itself is not anthropogenic in the same
way as secondary forest, but domestic trees, oven stones from abandoned
village sites and so on provide evidence of past usage. Finally, the far-away
forest, the lom son, is characterized by the absence of human signs. In this
sense the gradient of human presence is also temporal. The papli is young
bush which, over time, grows into more robust secondary forest and finally
254

Making temporal environments

back into lom, primary forest, a temporal gradient that is connected to signs
of human presence and the social relationships they index (Thomas Strong
2008; personal communication).
The villages and gardens index contemporary and present social relations,
whereas older fallows and abandoned villages highlight past relations. These
semiotic aspects of the different types of forest are also iconic, in as much
the diversity in age of forests is iconic of the diversity of social relations
of different ages. Similarly, Mengen gardens are indices of their users and
important food plants are indices of the women who tend them, while the
diversity of plants in a single garden is an icon of the diversity of social
relations through which the women have acquired the different plants (for
more details, see Tammisto 2018: 41–43). Thus the Mengen landscape, and
its elements, can function not only as iconic signs, as Descola (2016: 5) notes,
but also as indices. The signs of people’s socially productive activities, or
work, in the landscape materialise personal histories (also Maschio 1994:
180; Kirsch 2006: 189). These places evoke memories of the people who,
through their activities, created them, and are thus not just about recollecting
past activities; remembering other people often has a strong emotional
component. As a Mengen woman in her 50s told me:
A grandfather of mine, once we were clearing a garden on an abandoned village,
he sat down and cried. It’s bush now! But people still know this area. [...] And
he said he recalled his mothers and uncles from the past, because when I felled
that tree, a rin3, it smelled. [...] He asked me: “Do you smell that? They planted it
in front of the men’s house.” And he said to me, “you go and plant that garden”.
And once I had done it, I [...] gave him a piece of shell money, a pig and a heap
of food. And another one I gave to an old grandmother of mine. I compensated
the two like that. I made the two cry, made them worry and think back, because
in the past they lived there, then the government came and we came down [to
the coast] and now we go back to work our gardens there.

The quote brings up several important issues. First, while the visual aspects
of places are central in the epistemology of the Mengen, other senses are
also important. While Descola’s (2016) definition of landscape focusing on
placemaking and signification is helpful, landscape is not only experienced
through sight. Here the smell of the tree functions as a sign as well. In this
story, the smell of the rin, a domestic plant and an index of people’s activities,
triggers a memory of the abandoned village, the men’s house and the people
who lived there. A young man told me how he had gone to look for an
abandoned village that his grandmother had told him about. Knowing its
approximate location, he finally found the village because of the scent of the
domestic plants. This points to another important way in which the places in
themselves are not the whole story, so to speak; their full social significance
unfolds only when people know the area and its history. This knowledge
is passed on both by visiting the places and through narration – in these
3

The rin (Euodia anisodora) is a fragrant plant often planted in villages, because it
has ritualistic uses and because of its aesthetic and decorative properties. In time
the shrub grows into a tree.

255

Tuomas Tammisto

two cases by the elders telling younger relatives about abandoned hamlets,
where they were located and who lived there. This intertwining of places and
history is common for Austronesian societies (see Fox 1997b): for the Rauto
of New Britain, the recitation of place names and the stories connected to
them are a social history (Maschio 1994: 182), and this is also the case for
the Mengen.
Thomas Maschio (1994: 181) notes that among the Rauto the trees people
plant could be called memorials, as indeed is the case among the Mengen.
Signs of people’s productive activities, such as trees, are called rnagil (M: gil,
to know) and were points of active remembering – to paraphrase Debbora
Battaglia (1990: 10). When I was preparing to leave Wide Bay, a friend of
mine suggested that I plant a fruit tree, people could remember me by it.
In the extract above, the woman says that she “compensated” her elders
for making them cry and “worry”. (The Tok Pisin idiom wari means here
sorrowful, nostalgic longing [see also Maschio 1994]). “Compensation” does
not imply that the woman had done wrong. On the contrary, her grandfather
had approved her family’s clearing the garden on the site of the abandoned
village (which was, moreover, located on land that claimed by their clan).
Rather, it was an acknowledgment of their sorrow and the work of past
people.
Finally, the quote shows how in pursuit of control and “legibility” (J. Scott
1998), the colonial government encouraged and ordered people to leave
their dispersed inland hamlets and move to the coast and main trail routes.
As a Mengen man told me:
The government wanted people only along the roads [main trails]. They didn’t
like to go around the bush looking for people. [...] People had to be along the
roads at the time they were to be given work or checked that they live in an
orderly fashion. [The patrol officer] would only walk along a road. Climbing
mountains and such was too much hard work.

This process took place gradually, and people continued to move between
their inland settlements and coastal villages, coming down to the coast for
church and the government-appointed communal work day on Monday
before returning inland. In some cases, people who had already permanently
settled to the coast, returned to their inland hamlets to perform their
children’s initiations on their own clan land. I was told that the last inland
villages were abandoned in the 1970s. The history of colonialism and state
formation is also inscribed in the landscape as roads established by the
colonial government, abandoned settlements in the forest as well as copra
plantations that the mission and colonial governments established in Wide
Bay and New Britain (Tammisto 2018: 129–134). As Maxine Dennis notes
(1981: 219), plantations in New Guinea were not only economic projects,
but also ways of occupation and pacification that supplemented the work of
the colonial government. Like concentrating people into villages, they were
a spatialised form of governance.
The Wide Bay Mengen were not dispossessed of their lands – they still
communally own them under Papua New Guinea law (Lakau 1997) – nor
256

Making temporal environments

did colonial policies break people’s links with the land and landscape.
People remember past settlements that materialise histories of land use
and relations to the land, discussed more in depth below. Similarly, at the
time of my fieldwork, some people in the southern Wide Bay Mengen
areas had resettled old inland villages as new roads had been established
in the course of logging operations starting in the 1990s (see Tammisto
2018: 84–89). Along with re-establishing links to the land, this resettlement
was most probably also a way of enforcing claims to land in disputes over
ownership that had arisen in consequence of the logging. As these examples
show, people’s relationship with the socially meaningful landscape and its
scattered places of significance, is not static. On the contrary, it is one of
active engagement. In the above example, an abandoned village was cleared
for a garden and the appearance of the place was transformed. Still later, after
the harvest, the garden was left to fallow and turn into forest again. With
the ceremonial gift prestation, those who had cleared the garden publicly
acknowledged relatives’ emotional and historical ties to the place. This also
meant upholding the memory of the site as a past village.
The productive activities of people root them in the land and leave
a testimony of their lives in the landscape. This is an inevitable result of
Mengen social life, but like all social life, it has also its tensions. Rootedness
is not only about emotional and historical connection for the Mengen, it is
also about claims of various kinds. Because of this, people occasionally hope
that others would make their presence visible on the land they themselves
coveted. As Simon Harrison (2004: 147) has noted for the Avatip of the Sepik
area, sometimes the landscape remembers too much. In a society where
knowledge of the past is a value whose circulation should be controlled and
carefully restricted, people do not want the landscape to remember more
than they do (Harrison 2004: 147). Because of this, people sometimes also
deliberately seek to erase the traces of others. In the following section, I turn
more closely to these questions of placed histories and land-holding as well
as their relation to Mengen politics.

Placed histories and relating to the land
Along with the histories of individual persons, inscribed in the Mengen
landscape are important categories such as the autochthonous clan and the
land-using group. Landownership among the Wide Bay Mengen is vested
in exogamic matrilineal clans, which are associated with their places of
origin (also Panoff 1970: 177). This cosmological link between the people
and the land, however, does not translate into a clear-cut local community.
Both members of the land-owning clan and those who actually inhabit the
land become emplaced by the work performed in villages and gardens. Few
people live on their own clan land, and thus land-use is conceptualised as
a reciprocal relation between clans, much like intermarriages or ceremonial
gifts. This is a common dynamic in the Austronesian matrilineal societies
of Melanesia (e.g. Panoff 1970: 177, 194; M. Scott 2007: 223; Eves 2011: 353;
Martin 2013: 31, 37). The autonomy of the landowning clan and socially
257

Tuomas Tammisto

productive relations between clans are also two central values. Pursuing
these produces both a productive contradiction in Mengen society that
accounts for the dynamism of Mengen landowning practices and Mengen
political life generally. The two categories, land-owners and users, have their
spatial equivalents, namely origin-places and abandoned villages.
According to Mengen clan histories, the apical ancestress of each clan
autonomously emerged in a specific area, often from a plant or a topographical
feature. The clan names refer either to the environmental element from
which the ancestress was said to have emerged or the circumstances of her
emergence. The landscape is scattered with such origin places (M: plangpun,
plang: to emerge, pun: root). The clans claim land areas both on the basis of
this mythical precedence and first settlement into a vacant territory, as is
common in Austronesian societies (Fox 1996b: 9; M. Scott 2007: 7). Among
the Arosi of the Solomon Islands, who have very similar notions of lineage
emergence and relations, the pre-social emergence of the ancestress forms
the basis of landownership. Yet, because of clan exogamy, no lineage can
live alone on its land. Therefore, real social existence is only achieved when
lineages intermarry and dwell together on the land (M. Scott 2007: 223; also
Eves 2011: 359). This is also the case in Mengen clan histories: the apical
ancestress meets a man from a different clan (both are often named), they
start having children and start to inhabit the land. So in order for real social
life to be achieved, the clan has to ‘bring’ others to their land (M. Scott 2007:
223). For the Arosi there are two ways of relating to the land, what he terms
utopic and topogonic (M. Scott 2007: 201–202).
The “non-placed” or utopic refers to the separate emergence of the
various lineage ancestress in areas which are devoid of others and “nonplaced”. The topogonic relation is based on place making and dwelling
(M. Scott 2007: 201–202); one Mengen elder referred to uninhabited land
before the emergence of the ancestress as “land nothing” (TP: graun nating).
Through place making activities, both the original lineage and people from
other lineages are rooted in the land (M. Scott 2007: 225). The Mengen have
distinct spatial categories for the two ways of connecting people to the land.
The place of origin only refers to the clan that had emerged from it, whereas
villages, gardens and abandoned settlements create links between the land
and all its long-standing inhabitants and their progeny. As a Mengen man
noted, “[o]nce you have cleared gardens, made kastom and buried your dead,
your blood is in the land”. These two spatial categories are an important part
of Mengen conceptions of history (Panoff 1969: 163).
Each clan has its own history which recounts its emergence, movement
and intermarriages. Those I was told followed a similar pattern: they begin
by describing how the apical ancestress emerges from the plangpun in an
area devoid of other people. She resides alone on the land until she meets
a man from a clan of the opposing moiety who has ventured into the
area while hunting or because he had seen smoke from the woman’s fire
and was inquisitive. The two inquire about each other’s marriage status in
a roundabout way and, realising that both are single, they pair up. After
this, the clan histories list the children of the apical ancestress and whom
they marry, in other words they become genealogies listing the members
258

Making temporal environments

of the matriline. The histories also recount where the apical pair and later
generations moved, the villages they founded, the locations of their gardens
and so on. (See Michael Scott [2007: 74, 190] on very similar lineage histories
of the Arosi of Solomon Islands.) In other words, the clan histories are also
listings of places, or topogenies, which are a common Austronesian “means
for the ordering and transmission of social knowledge” (Fox 1997a: 8).
When attached to specific locations in an inhabited landscape, topogenies
are “a projected externalization of memories that can be lived in as well
as thought about” (Fox 1997a: 8). In the Mengen case, the topogenies are
closely intertwined with genealogies (see also Fox 1997a: 13).
The relationship between the autonomy of the landowning clan and
the socially productive inter-relations between the clans is a ‘productive
contradiction’, because as values they are in constant tension. On the other
hand, they also presuppose each other. In order for the exogamous clan to
reproduce, its members have to marry people from other clans and share its
land with them. So in order to pursue one value, one must pursue the other,
but emphasising one too much can have “negative value” potentials (Munn
1992: 12) in respect to the other. For example, as Michael Scott notes (2007:
245–46) in the case of the Arosi, if the landowning lineage emphasizes too
much its ownership of the land, it risks making other lineage members feel
unwelcome. By ‘productive contradiction’, I do not mean that the relation
is one of conflict, but rather a central dynamic within the Mengen society
that accounts for much of the dynamism in communal life. Like with other
similar value antinomies in Melanesia (for example Robbins 2006: 192–93,
195–96), socially successful action has to strike a balance between the two
opposing and complementary values. Among the Mengen this is especially
pronounced in matters relating to land use.
Questions of land use and ownership rose to the fore with large-scale
logging which began in Wide Bay in the early 1990s like in many other
rural areas of Papua New Guinea (Tammisto 2018: 84–89; also Bell 2015).
Malaysian logging companies saw PNG as a frontier of unused resources,
while both the government of PNG and many rural communities hoped
that logging would bring in income, infrastructure and services (Filer 1998;
Tammisto 2018: 87). As under PNG law local communities own their lands,
they had to be consulted before the logging operations could start (see
for example Lattas 2011 on wrong-doings by loggers). So too among the
Wide Bay Mengen. When logging was first proposed to the Mengen, many
communities started discussing if and how it should be allowed. As noted,
landownership is vested in the matrilineal clans, which owned distinct areas,
but user rights to land are more widely spread and hence actual Mengen
communities are always multi-clan polities, to borrow Scott’s expression
(2007: 33, 247). The logging proposal sometimes created disputes over
who should decide on logging and how benefits should be shared among
landowners and land users for instance.
Likewise, not all of the Mengen supported logging, but some feared
that large-scale logging would hamper swidden horticulture and destroy
important parts of the landscape, while others saw logging and the use
of forests as a means of establishing productive relations with outsiders.
259

Tuomas Tammisto

Likewise, even among those who agreed on allowing logging, the distribution
of compensations and decision-making power created tensions. People
debated whether compensations should be held by the clan on whose land
actual logging took place or whether the money should be distributed
between all community members. This reflects the ‘productive contradiction’
between the values of clan autonomy and inter-clan relations. For example,
some members of the clan on whose land logging took place, decided to
distribute the logging royalties among all the clans involved in the landowner
company, but wanted auxiliary payments from the loggers for clan members
only. The idea was to emphasise their status as landowners.
Meanwhile men who were active in logging, initially sought to present
the operations as community projects involving all clans in the given
communities. Interestingly, the landowner companies that represented the
local population and acted as contractual partners with foreign loggers, were
named after abandoned villages. In doing this, the men sought to emphasise
the communal aspects of logging, as abandoned villages in the landscape are
signs of inter-clan relations and of long-standing histories of shared land-use
by the different clans. In disputes over the ownership of land, clan histories
and particularly topogeny, or recitations of places, is used also as evidence
of landownership. Basing their claims on place of origin and on villages
founded by their ancestors, the disputing clans seek to point out their longstanding relations with the land. Thus the above mentioned re-settlement
of abandoned settlements was a way to reinforce claims to the land. These
are examples of how the Mengen use the semiotic aspects of the landscape
as signs of claims to the land. The forest and the places in it became with
logging a new object of contest over who owns it, who decides its use and
what is done with it, as well as a media through which these contests were
acted out.

Conclusions
Time, history and social relations are thoroughly emplaced in the gardens
and forests of Wide Bay. The places, both mythical and those made through
human action constitute the Wide Bay Mengen landscape, in which human
and ecological temporalities intertwine and converge. To refer back to Jason
Moore (2015: 11), all social relation are spatial inasmuch they develop in
through space and actively co-produce it in the process. Moreover, this
means that ‘humans’ and ‘the environment’ or ‘society’ and ‘nature’, are not
distinct entities, but form what Moore calls a double-internality (2015: 13,
25, 36), a dialectical relation in which human activity unfolds in and through
nature and vice versa. However, different forms of activity and different
forms of value production make different environments (Rodman 1992: 641;
Moore 2015: 44–45).
In the Mengen case, forests and the land are not only, or even foremost,
conceptualised as resources. Rather, the landscape is thoroughly social and
it tells of past and present activity. It is both a product of human activity, as
forests around the villages are anthropogenic fallows regarded as gardens, and
260

Making temporal environments

the mythical origin of Mengen clans. As a testimony of human activity, the
landscape is also thoroughly political: the origin places, abandoned villages
and gardens speak of histories and legitimate land use and ownership in the
present. A garden is not only a trace of important livelihood practices, it tells
the Mengen about relationships between a landowning clan and its affines,
as well as about relations between them. And like all pursuits of value have
their tensions, so it is with the Mengen. What I have argued is that these are
enacted through the landscape. The clearing of gardens or planting of trees
is not only about making a living, in certain contexts, both can be highly
political acts establishing links to land and making claims to it.
Composed of signs of human activity, the Mengen landscape is
semiotically dense. To escape both a narrow definition of landscape as a
pictorial representation, and a broad conception of it as an experienced
environment (e.g. Ingold 2000: 198), Descola defines landscape as the
deliberate change of appearance, or transfiguration, of a site (2016: 4–5). The
proposal for a cross-culturally sensitive, but analytically precise definition
(Descola 2016: 3) is useful here, because it focuses on placemaking and
its possible semiotic functions. The Mengen are particularly sensitive to
placemaking and emphasise the semiotic aspect of the landscape in their
own definition of landscape as how things draw themselves out to the
onlooker. The places that form the Mengen landscape are often results of
transfiguration and typically results of dwelling practices. As I noted above,
while the Mengen emphasise visual aspects, places are experienced more
holistically. Other sensory experiences, such as the smell of a domestic tree,
can and do function as indexical signs of people and social relations. Adding
to Descola’s definition, I note that transfiguration can be experienced with
many senses. This means we should be sensitive to how people experience
their lived environment.
The Mengen landscape is and has been formed through the relations
between the Mengen and various actors, such as colonial governments,
missions and foreign companies. Logging roads, copra and cocoa plantings
and such are signs of these, often highly unequal, relationships (e.g. Bell
2015). Large-scale oil palm projects currently underway over the east coast of
New Britain loom also at the fringes of the Mengen landscape. These projects
promise income, employment and services (Tammisto 2018). However, they
threaten radical changes in the landscape and the livelihood practices that
form it. Despite these, the Wide Bay Mengen have managed to retain control
over their lands and the landscape, to keep them infused with their history
and to ensure Mengen pursuits of value remain meaningful.

Acknowledgement
I wish to thank Eeva Berglund, Timo Kallinen and Anu Lounela as well as
the two anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments. This article
is based on a total of 18 moths of fieldwork I conducted in Wide Bay in
2007, 2011–12 and 2014, funded by a one year grant from the University of
Helsinki and the Academy of Finland (grant 253680). I also want to thank
261

Tuomas Tammisto

Henni Alava, Timo Kaartinen, Jenni Mölkänen, Sonal Makhija, Liina-Maija
Quist and Heikki Wilenius, who have commented on various parts of this
paper. Finally, my research would not have been possible had not the Wide
Bay Mengen allowed me to live with them and opened up their lives for me.
It is thus to them that I owe my deepest gratitude.

References
Battaglia, Debbora 1990. On the Bones of the Serpent: Person, Memory, and Mortality
in Sabarl Island Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bell, Joshua 2015. The Structural Violence of Resource Extraction in the Purari Delta.
In Joshua Bell, Paige West and Colin Filer (eds), Tropical Forests Of Oceania:
Anthropological Perspectives. Canberra: ANU Press.
Dennis, Maxine 1981. Plantations. In Donald Denoon and Catherine Snowden (eds),
A Time to Plant and a Time to Uproot: A History of Agriculture in Papua New
Guinea. [Papua New Guinea]: Institute of Papua New Guinea Studies.
Descola, Philippe 2016. Landscape as Transfiguration: Edward Westermarck Memorial
Lecture, October 2015. Suomen Antropologi: Journal of the Finnish Anthropological
Society 41 (1): 3–14.
Eves, Richard 2011. Puzzling Over Matrilineal Land Tenure and Development in New
Ireland, Papua New Guinea. Pacific Studies 34 (2): 350–373.
Fajans, Jane 1997. They Make Themselves: Work and Play Among the Baining of Papua
New Guinea. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Filer, Colin with Nikhil Sekhran 1998. Loggers, Donors and Resource Owners. London:
IIED.
Foster, Robert 1995. Social Reproduction and History in Melanesia: Mortuary Ritual,
Gift Exchange, and Custom in the Tanga Islands. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Fox, James 1996a. Introduction. In James Fox and Clifford Sather (eds), Origins,
Ancestry and Alliance: Explorations in Austronesian Ethnography. Canberra:
Australian National University.
Fox, James 1996b. The Transformation of Progenitor Lines or Origin: Patterns of
Precedence in Eastern Indonesia. In James Fox and Clifford Sather (eds), Origins,
Ancestry and Alliance: Explorations in Austronesian Ethnography. Canberra:
Australian National University.
Fox, James 1997a. Place and landscape in comparative Austronesian perspective. In
James Fox (ed.), The Poetic Power of Place: Comparative Perspectives on Austronesian
Ideas of Locality. Canberra: Australian National University.
Fox, James (ed.) 1997b. The Poetic Power of Place Comparative Perspectives on
Austronesian Ideas of Locality. Canberra: ANU Press.
Graeber, David 2001. Toward An Anthropological Theory of Value: The False Coin of Our
Own Dreams. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Harrison, Simon 2004. Forgetful and memorious landscapes. Social Anthropology
12 (2): 135–151.
Ingold, Tim 2000. Perception of the Environment: Essays in Livelihood, Dwelling and
Skill. London: Routledge.
Kirsch, Stuart 2006. Reverse Anthropology: Indigenous Analysis of Social and
Environmental Relations in New Guinea. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Laufer, Carl 1955. Aus Geschichte und Religion der Sulka. Anthropos 50 (1–3): 32–64.
Martin, Keir 2013. The Death of the Big Men and the Rise of the Big Shots: Custom and
Conflict in East New Britain. New York: Berghahn Books.

262

Making temporal environments

Maschio, Thomas 1994. To Remember The Faces Of The Dead: The Plentitude Of
Memory In Southwestern New Britain. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Moore, Jason 2015 Capitalism in the Web of Life: Ecology and the Accumulation of
Capital. New York: Verso.
Munn, Nancy 1992. The Fame of Gawa: A Symbolic Study of Value Transformation in
a Massim Society. New edition edition. Durham: Duke University Press Books.
Panoff, Michel 1969. The Notion of Time Among the Maenge People of New Britain.
Ethnology 8 (2): 154–166.
Panoff, Michel 1970. Land Tenure among the Maenge of New Britain. Oceania 40 (3):
177–194.
Parmentier, Richard 1994. Signs in Society: Studies in Semiotic Anthropology.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Piskaut, Pius and Phille Daur 2007. Plants and Ethnobotany. In Andrew Mack, Maureen
Ewai and Janine Watson (eds), A Biological Survery of a Lowland Rainforest Site in
East New Britain Province, Papua New Guinea. Unpublished document.
Rascher, P. Matthäus 1904. Die Sulka: Ein Beitrag zur Ethnographie von NeuPommern.
Archiv für Anthropologie 29: 209–235.
Robbins, Joel 2004. Becoming Sinners: Christianity and Moral Torment in a Papua New
Guinea Society. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Rodman, Margaret 1992. Empowering Place: Multilocality and Multivocality. American
Anthropologist 94 (3): 640–656.
Scott, James 1998. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human
Condition Have Failed. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Scott, Michael 2007. The Severed Snake: Matrilineages, Making Place, and a Melanesian
Christianity in Southeast Solomon Islands. Durham: Carolina Academic Press.
Slotta, James 2014. Revelations of the World: Transnationalism and the Politics of
Perception in Papua New Guinea. American Anthropologist 116 (3): 626–642.
Stasch, Rupert 2003. The semiotics of world-making in Korowai feast longhouses.
Language & Communication 23 (3–4): 359–383.
Stasch, Rupert 2009. Society of Others: Kinship and Mourning in a West Papuan Place.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Tammisto, Tuomas 2018. New Actors, Old Landscapes: The Making of a Frontier Place
in Papua New Guinea. PhD thesis. Helsinki: Unigrafia.
Turner, Terence 2008. Marxian Value Theory: An Anthropological Perspective.
Anthropological Theory 8 (1): 43–56.

263

