Ostro 0

Weber, Durkheim, and the Duality of Structure
in Modern Society

By Jules Ostro
The New School for Social Research
Fall 2018

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 1
“Man’s characteristic privilege is that the bond he accepts is not physical but moral;
that is, social. He is governed not by a material environment brutally imposed on him, but by a
conscience superior to his own, the superiority of which he feels. Because the greater, better
part of his existence transcends the body, he escapes the body’s yoke, but is subject to that of
society.” -- Emile Durkheim1

I. INTRODUCTION
The theoretical projects of Max Weber and Emile Durkheim address the character and
dynamics of the modern social order. The implications of modern society on the nature of being
human in a social world are vast, as demonstrated by the myriad upheavals witnessed since the
‘long’ 19th century2. But what are the implications of modern society on what it means to be a
moral​ being? How do individualism and social solidarity coexist? The following addresses the
complexity of these questions by analyzing Weber and Durkheim’s perspectives on the
transition to modern life and the relationship between modern society and the individual. With
Marx as a theoretical backdrop, this essay examines how Weber and Durkheim conceived of the
problems of modern society by underscoring the dualities that are reflected in autonomy,
authority, rationalization, and other dimensions of structure inherent within social organization
and interdependence. These concomitant dualities evince the necessary doubleness of the
human condition and how it enmeshes society in a “poverty of morality” (Durkheim, ​Suicide,​ p.
387) that is in need of a new moral order and greater social solidarity.

​Emile Durkheim, Suicide, p. 252
Professor Jeff Weintraub, Handout #1, The New School for Social Research (NSSR), ​Classical Sociological
Theory
1
2

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 2
II. MODERN SOCIETY: PROBLEMS AND DUALITIES
The breakdown of feudal ties and advent of industry, the capitalist market, and the social
division of labor helped give rise to modern society. Modern society gave people more freedom
to pursue individual self-interests, but the nature and forces of productive technology and its
impersonal, interdependent relations problematized solidarity and moral life. Marx believed that
capitalism and its recursive system of commodification was the central defining feature and
crisis of modern society. Although Weber found capitalism to be just “one manifestation of the
larger process of rationalization,”3 he also considered it “the most fateful force in our modern
life” (Weber, p. 17). Weber witnessed the transition into a modern state and capitalist order that
promoted the ​spirit of capitalism​ through the industrialist’s “systematic, rational organization of
wage-labor”4. Yet, for Weber, the development of modern society is best measured by the
emergence of bureaucratic administration, the formal rationalization of top-down systems of
domination enacted by administrative staff. This staff, in turn, becomes the impersonal cog-like
appendages to a bureaucratic apparatus whose primacy is rationalized domination and control.
Anthony Giddens’ notion of the “duality of structure”5 is useful in addressing how modern
society has come to need the very structures that constrain it, e.g. how the constraining and, at
times, hostile systems of capitalism and bureaucracy enable structure and order. Therefore, the
duality of modern society lies in how it has come to ​value​ the very systems that constrain it
because it has come to ​need ​what these systems enable: “what confers value [...] is that [which]
meets certain needs” (Durkheim, ​Division of Labor in Society,​ p. 44).

​Weintraub, Weber II Memo Notes, NSSR
​Weintraub, Lecture 1 Nov. 2018, NSSR
5
​Weintraub, Email 1 Dec. 2018, NSSR
3
4

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 3
A patent duality of the structure is how modern individuals fulfill impersonal,
differentiated roles through the division of labor’s structure of functional coordination and
objective interdependence6. The division of labor provides a means of securing one’s livelihood,
which is how one is able to consider “[...] the distribution of these functions just” (Durkheim,
Suicide,​ p. 250) while also concentrating human life on labor that reduces one to a cipher.
Another duality of the division of labor aside from its intrinsic fetter to capitalism is how it
undermines the solidarity of (at times obligatory) collective beliefs and practices, i.e.
“mechanical solidarity” into “organic solidarity,” an emerging type of solidarity developed from
the mutually-interdependent parts that drive the division of labor and hold possibilities for a
new form of social solidarity7. The emergence of “organic solidarity” included a transition in
the role and manifestation of the “common consciousness” or “conscience collective”8 by
stressing the moral (and sacred) importance of individual consciousness, with the division of
labor “increasingly fulfilling the role that once fell to the common consciousness” (Durkheim,
Division of Labor in Society​, pp. 134-135). The duality of this new “moral culture of
modernity,”9 one whose sacred object is the individual, lies in how the individual consciousness
cannot be removed from the collective consciousness10. The collective is evermore immanent
within the individual, for it is the very maker of the consensus to exalt the individual over the
community. One cannot separate the part from the whole, for “[...] it is the whole that produces
the part” (Durkheim, ​Dualism of Human Nature​, p. 249). But how does one coalesce the part
and whole into congruous aims? An individual must have direction to orient their beliefs and

​Weintraub, Lecture 29 Nov. 2018, NSSR
​Weintraub, Durkheim I Memo Notes, NSSR
8
​Weintraub, Lecture 29 Nov. 2018, NSSR
9
​Weintraub, Email 11 Dec. 2018, NSSR
10
​Weintraub, Email 1 Dec. 2018, NSSR
6
7

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 4
actions into a standard of mutually-supported, shared practices that align one’s purpose with
that of the collective. This is the meaning behind Durkheim’s notion of collective
consciousness, a consciousness whose transformation calls to action new, morally-regulated
systems of interdependence that converge parts into a “whole system of rights and duties”
(Durkheim, ​Division of Labor in Society​, p. 316).
The duality of the division of labor is further realized through bureaucracy in general
and bureaucratically administered formal organizations (BAFOs) in particular. Weber likened
bureaucratic administration to a machine that is “[...] mind objectified” and one of the most
effective forms of coordination and domination11. That BAFOs and other forms of bureaucratic
administration organize, integrate, and regulate the individual appear to align with Durkheim’s
belief in integration and ​moral​ regulation as key factors for creating a healthy relationship
between the individual and society12. However, the way needs are met and integration occurs is
often through domination, force, violence, and other hegemonic forms of power that result in
dehumanization13, which is arguably ​immoral​ regulation and highlights the duality of BAFOs.
An important duality in Durkheim’s analysis of modern society is his ​paradox of
autonomy​, with individuals in modern society growing more autonomous, yet seemingly more
reliant on society (Durkheim, ​Division of Labor in Society​, p. 7). One might assume that the
more individuals rely on society, the less autonomous they are, for they would come to
prioritize the solidarity and moral authority of social life over their own self-interests, but one
finds the opposite with Durkheim. If Marx were to be asked how he would consider this
paradox of autonomy, ​he might retort, “What autonomy?” Marx would say that the bourgeois
​Weintraub, Lecture 8 Nov. 2018, NSSR
Weintraub, Durkheim II Memo Notes, NSSR
13
​Weintraub, Lecture 8 Nov. 2018, NSSR
11
12

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 5
individual was the only autonomous entity in modern society, and perhaps not even ​truly
autonomous, since bourgeois entrepreneurs are also under the heteronomous sway of an
unceasing, impersonal market. Weber would agree with Marx, for the role of bureaucratic
functionaries, those in office or power, is to use their ​authority, t​ he legitimation of domination,
to rationalize strategies for enacting formal rules and procedures14. Functionaries use the power
and authority they receive from their appointment to office15, but they too are without ​true
autonomy because they are under the power and authority of the state. This suggests that there
is also a ​paradox of autonomy​ in bureaucratic administration; like the capitalist market, the
efficiency and survival of BAFOs lie in its inherent and convenient ​impersonality​ that makes all
functionaries and administrative staff, and capitalists and their laborers, ​interchangeable16,
which is a euphemism for ​replaceable​ . These dimensions of the ​paradox of autonomy r​ eveal
the intersecting dualities of individualism, impersonality, and power.
In addition, there is the duality of the state as a moral authority. Durkheim recognized
that capitalist society remained unchecked and unregulated because it lacked an authority,
allowing the duality of impersonal interdependence and autonomy to grow. Is it not true that the
role of the state is to govern and legislate in a way that is conducive to a moral order based in
social solidarity? Durkheim asserted that even if the state were to make individuals more aware
of society and their dependence on it, the state would remain a distant entity that can only exert
“[...] discontinuous influence” because the feelings of awareness and dependence of society
have “neither the necessary constancy nor strength” since, for most of one’s life, “nothing [...]
draws them out of themselves and imposes restraint on them” (Durkheim, ​Suicide,​ p. 389). This
​Weintraub, Lecture 8 Nov. 2018, NSSR
​Weintraub, Handout #20, NSSR
16
​Weintraub, Lecture 8 Nov. 2018, NSSR
14
15

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 6
is why Durkheim wrote of the need for a regulative force, a “force [that] can only be moral”
(Durkheim, ​Suicide,​ p. 248), as “men’s actions are stayed only by a moral force they respect”
(Durkheim, ​Division of Labor in Society​, p. 9). If there is no authority administering and
controlling the system and organization of modern society, there will be no collective authority
for social mediation and moral guidance. It could be argued that in some modern, perhaps
majority-secular societies, the authority of religion has been surpassed by the authority of
government which, “[...] instead of regulating economic life, has become its tool and servant”
(Durkheim, ​Suicide,​ p. 255), with government, in turn, surpassed by that of industry, “the
supreme end of individuals and societies alike” (Durkheim, ​Suicide,​ p. 255) and that which “lies
outside the society’s or the state’s authority and sphere of action” (Durkheim, ​Division of Labor
in Society​, p. 11). Modern society needs something to inspire self-regulation and
morally-informed action because as individuals continue to pursue their industrial, economic
self-interests, these interests can become insatiable, “unlimited desires” (Durkheim, ​Suicide,​ p.
247) that cause one to become more ​reliant​ on the transactional system that allows for the
pursuit of those desires, rather than more ​thoughtful​ about the larger collective identity,
authority, and purpose. Durkheim did not believe the state could condition the moral
constitution and solidarity of society and its sacred objects and cultural totems, instead “[...]
society alone can play this moderating role; for it is the only moral power superior to the
individual, the authority of which he accepts” (Durkheim, ​Suicide​, p. 249), which is the reality
of society ​sui generis.​
Along with the duality of the state as an authority is the duality of rationalization as an
authority. Weber argued that the non-rational and highly moralizing Protestant religion,

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 7
specifically, Calvinism, led to the inception of capitalism and, as a consequence, the domination
and authority of rationalized systems of bureaucracy and formal organization17, which makes for
an ironic history. For Weber, the system of rationalization focuses one’s attention on
rationalizing their aims, actions, and the way they think about the world and society through
rational action, the “conscious, continuous, and systematic effort to adjust action to explicit
ends”18. However, there is a duality in Weber’s conception of rationality. Weber conceives of
two types of rationality, that of value-rationality and that of instrumental-rationality, with the
former reliant on arbitrary value-judgments (morality) and the latter, arbitrary concrete results
(efficiency). “The triumph of the modern world is the triumph of instrumental-rationality”19,
which is the triumph of individualism and capitalism. This triumph aligns with Durkheim’s
concepts of ​anomie, t​ he lack of moral regulation, and ​egoism,​ the lack of social integration20, for
the impersonal powerhouses of bureaucracy and capitalism produce differentiated and at times
dysfunctional individuals, institutions, organizations, and states because of their failure to
reconcile value-rationality with instrumental-rationality. The irony of this triumph is that
immoral i​ nstrumental-rationality spawned from a religion that required ​constant morality21, yet
came to exist with an ethos devoid of solidarity and moral regulation. The triumph of society
became the triumph of the individual, who came to exist of and for itself, to espouse a
self-centered agenda that was also realized at the level of institutions, the state, and ​Betrieb​ , the
modern rationalized form of social organization based on rules and opposed to tradition22.

​Weintraub, Lecture 1 Nov. 2018, NSSR
​Weintraub, Lecture 1 Nov. 2018, NSSR
19
​Weintraub, Lecture 1 Nov. 2018, NSSR
20
​Weintraub, Lecture 6 Dec. 2018, NSSR
21
​Weintraub, Lecture 1 Nov. 2018, NSSR
17
18

22

​Weintraub, Lecture 8 Nov. 2018, NSSR
© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 8
Therefore, the duality of rationalization lies in the triumph and authority of
instrumental-rationality, and how it survived because modern society came to value it and need
it.
One final duality of structure is revealed in Durkheim’s analysis of restitutive law as a
framework for understanding how social solidarity takes form. Restitutive or “cooperative” law
regulates unchecked aspects of society that result from the functions (and dysfunctions) of the
division of labor and its necessarily ​complementary​ parts, as Durkheim evidences à la
Heraclitus: “[...] one accommodates only to what one opposes, that the finest harmony is born
from differences, and that discord is the law of all becoming” (Durkheim, ​Division of Labor in
Society​, p. 45). Yet if “cooperative” law enables solidarity, might it only be in a superficial
way? An individual’s motive for abiding by the law is often opportunistic and aimed at
satisfying one’s individual conscience rather than a greater moral order and social solidarity.
Durkheim asserts how this new standard of moral consciousness assumes the form of “ ​Equip
yourself to carry out a specific function properly​ ” (Durkheim, ​Division of Labor in Society,​ p.
36). This reflects the devotion of modern society’s moral consciousness to the self-directed
individual consciousness, yet one that was still begot through the conscience collective, which
actualizes the duality of law and solidarity, as well as the overarching structure of
consciousness. Is individual consciousness a solid enough foundation for social solidarity and a
new moral order? If not, what is?

IV. MODERN SOCIETY: SOLUTIONS

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 9
Marx proposed that a socialist revolution would abolish class inequalities by
reappropriating social and political power in order to reconsolidate and advance the social
organization of modern life toward a more equal world. While Weber and Durkheim understood
what drove Marx to idealize revolution, for “appetites superficially restrained are ready to
revolt” (Durkheim, ​Suicide,​ p. 251), both conceived of solutions other than a socialist revolution
for social and moral transformation. While Durkheim put more explicit weight on the call for a
new social structure that foregrounds moral order in solidarity, Weber would not disagree,
although his solutions would differ. One solution for Weber was to consider the utility and
influence of a charismatic leader in helping enact moral regulation due to their ability to “break
up accepted patterns and routines of social life”23. Weber believed charismatic leaders could
bridge the gap between the individual and society in order to animate the social order with a
renewed moral culture conducive to solidarity and principled action.
However, because charismatic leaders often turn out to be unscrupulous masters of
deceit, a duality of charisma Weber himself admitted to via the “charismatic domination” of
bureaucracy24, Weber offered a solution for how one might withstand “the monster of social
organized control”25 in the meantime. Since bureaucracy is a reality of life, society must find a
way of conciliating with it, and there is no better way of mediating the whole than by mediating
its parts. Weber believed in the power of the individual consciousness, that individuals could
reconcile their lives with formal social organization by committing to a vocation and mode of
life that gives them personal meaning and purpose26.

​Weintraub, Lecture 8 Nov. 2018, NSSR
​Weintraub, Handout #22, NSSR
25
​Weintraub, Lecture 8 Nov. 2018, NSSR
26
​Weintraub, Lecture 8 Nov. 2018, NSSR
23
24

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 10
Durkheim, on the other hand, was convinced of the power of the collective
consciousness. He was not only committed to the notion of a new moral order, but also to the
notion of a new ​moral community,​ one of invigorating totemic images and forms of collective
representation that would help individuals forge positive attachments to social life, for a moral
community could provide a new influence and commitment through the sacred force of ​mana27
that can be found in symbolic representation, belief, practice, and ritual. In addition, Durkheim
also suggested ​occupational decentralization​ as a way of addressing the problem of
individualism (Durkheim, ​Suicide,​ p. 390). This would create a “multiplication of the centers of
communal life” for a stronger “collective personality” (Durkheim, ​Suicide,​ p. 391) and
collective consciousness.
While Marx would have written off Durkheim’s insights on the collective consciousness
as utopian28, he would have agreed that there was a deficit of morality and argued that the
reason for this was social inequality. Durkheim, on the other hand, would have considered
Marx’s ideas of revolution unrealistic, for even if modern society did pursue a socialist
revolution, one would still need to construct a new moral order of “shared beliefs, moral
constraints, and a whole set of sacred symbols”29. Durkheim would have thought that the
consequence of revolution would be a rupture to the social equilibrium and “disturbance [to] the
collective order” (Durkheim, ​Suicide p​ . 246), whereas Marx believed modern society was
already at a breaking point. Weber would agree with Durkheim that Marx’s solution of social
organized control was unrealistic, and perhaps also utopian, for even if a state was to rid itself

​Weintraub, Lecture 13 Dec. 2018, NSSR
​Weintraub, Lecture 13 Dec. 2018, NSSR
29
​Weintraub, Lecture 13 Dec. 2018, NSSR
27
28

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 11
of capitalism, BAFOs would still be there30 and likely with a tenfold degree of rationalization
and domination. Society has an insatiable desire for rationalized power. Marx, on the other
hand, would respond to both Weber and Durkheim by maintaining that if one does revolution
right, BAFOs (as one knows them) would fall along with the bourgeoisie, and that a new moral
order could be established through a ​socialist​ solidarity. Marx would also criticize the primacy
of social equilibrium for Durkheim, who believed it was necessary for individuals to have
constraints on their desires, with a “limit that they recognize as just” (Durkheim, ​Suicide​, p.
249). The issue for Marx was not in how one safeguards against immeasurable desires, but in
how one remedies the acute social disaster of class. Durkheim wasn’t convinced that a classless
society of equal opportunities and resources would be the panacea for social inequality. Instead,
Durkheim believed that social inequality is immanent in the heredity of natural talent, for not
everyone is born with the same dispositions, tastes, and aptitudes, and that a new ​moral
discipline​ would help those who are hapless accept their natural disadvantages (Durkheim,
Suicide,​ p. 251).

V. CONCLUSION
The transition to modern society brought a sea change in how people came to live and be
in the world as social beings. But what about as ​moral​ beings? How does one conciliate

30

​Weintraub, Lecture 8 Nov. 2018, NSSR

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 12
individualism and rationalization with solidarity and morality? This essay examined several
manifestations of duality that address the dialectic of the individual and modern society in order
to underscore the inescapable doubleness of the human condition; “the freedom and
unfreedom.”31 Both Durkheim and Weber recognized what it means to live in an impersonal, yet
interdependent social world, offering to posterity their own theoretical reimagining of modern
society and its dualities of structure. Durkheim also confronted the duality of human nature,
which is a most profound crux and can be addressed if each of us have the courage to ask
ourselves, “How can we belong entirely to ourselves, and entirely to others at one and the same
time?” (Durkheim, ​Dualism of Human Nature​, p. 152).

31

​Weintraub, Lecture 13 Dec. 2018, NSSR
© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 13
WORKS CITED
Durkheim, Emile. ​Suicide.​ New York: The Free Press. 1951.
Durkheim, Emile. ​The Division of Labor in Society. ​New York: Free Press. 2014.
Durkheim, Emile. ​The Dualism of Human Nature. ​Chicago and London: The University of
Chicago Press. 1973.
Weber, Max. ​The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. N
​ ew York: Dover Publications,
Inc. 2003. p. 17.

© 2018 Jules Ostro

