AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies, Volume3, Number2.May 2019

Pp.122-138

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no2.11

Major Translation Methods Used in Legal Documents: Translation of a Marriage Contract
from Arabic into English
Omar EL GHAZI
Department of English Studies, Faculty of Arts and Humanities Ben M’sik
Hassan II University of Casablanca, Morocco
Chakib BNINI
Department of English Studies, Faculty of Arts and Humanities Ben M’sik
Hassan II University of Casablanca, Morocco

Abstract
Throughout history, the use of translation methods has constituted a source of lots of debates; some
scholars advocate literal translation, others advocate free translation. In legal translation which is
a special and specialized area of translational activity (Cao, 2007), and where documents are
characterized by brevity, economy, and neatness to prevent fraud, additions, omissions or
alterations in the text (Crystal & Davy, 1969), mistakes or mistranslations can lead to disastrous
repercussions. The present study deals primarily with the methods that translators of legal texts
follow and adopt when rendering a legal document. A concise account of translation theories that
have been adopted and are still being applied to legal translation is offered to attempt to show the
main views towards the application of such translation theories to legal translation. Major methods
often used in the translation of legal documents are then presented, discussing their validity to
legal translation. This presentation includes literal translation, free translation, the functional
approach to translation, transliteration & transcription, loan translation, adaptation, description by
definitions, lexical expansion, and descriptive substitution. The empirical part of this study is
concerned with the analysis of a marriage contract translated from Arabic into English in an
attempt to shed some light on the major methods adopted by the translator of this document and
the reason behind using such methods.
Key words: Legal system, legal translation, marriage contract, methods of translation, source text,
target text
Cites as: EL GHAZI, O., & BNINI, C. (2019). Major Translation Methods Used in Legal Documents:
Translation of a Marriage Contract from Arabic into English. Arab World English Journal for
Translation & Literary Studies, 3 (2). 122-138 . DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no2.11

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 |www.awej-tls.org

122

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Major Translation Methods Used in Legal Documents
EL GHAZI & BNINI
Introduction
Translation is considered a gateway for understanding and dealing with others and their
civilizations (Al-Aqad, 2014). Its significance and relevance in our daily life is multi-dimensional.
It is through translation that we learn about developments in communication and technology and
follow the latest innovations and novelties in the various fields of knowledge. Since translating is
a communicative process from the source language (SL) into the target language (TL), or a process
of conveying the sense of the text from one language into another language, this process involves
a wide range of methods and techniques ranging from “word-for-word translation” or “literal
translation” to “sense-for-sense translation” or “free translation”.
The significance of the study
The significance of this study lies in the fact that there is a lack of research on the translation
of private legal documents in Morocco, especially the translation of marriage contracts between
Arabic and English. It is hoped that this paper will contribute to raising the awareness of Moroccan
and Arab researchers about the area of marriage contracts. This study recommends the use of
functionalist theories of translation that take into consideration the context and the target user of
the final product.
Corpus and Methodology
The corpus used in this paper comprises the translation of an authentic marriage contract
translated by a sworn translator certified by the Ministry of Justice and Liberties in the Kingdom
of Morocco. The translator was commissioned to translate the document from Arabic into English
the way he is used to dealing with legally-binding official documents without informing him of
the purpose of the translation.
The article starts by offering a succinct account of legal language as a genre and its
characteristics with a special focus on contracts. Important methods of legal translation are
presented, mentioning the different views of scholars with regard to each one. The practical part
is concerned with analyzing an example of a marriage contract translated by a sworn translator
certified by the Ministry of Justice and Liberties in the Kingdom of Morocco.
1. Legal discourse
Mattila (2006) considers legal language as a language for special purposes (LSP) which is
distinguished from ordinary language or any other language for specific purposes. So, there is a
specific legal style which may not be comprehensible to the public. He goes on to discuss legal
language as an instrument for achieving justice, communicating messages of legal significance,
bolstering the authority of the law, and creating a shared identity among lawyers as a professional
category.
According to Bhatia (1982; 1983; 1993) legal discourse is considered notorious for its
complexity, repetitiveness, and tortuous syntax. The intention is always to write clearly, precisely,
unambiguously, and all-inclusively, with detailed specification of the scope of legislative
provisions.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

123

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Major Translation Methods Used in Legal Documents
EL GHAZI & BNINI
Maley (1994) indicates that present day legal discourse retains its identity as a highly
specialized and distinctive discourse type or genre of English. He points out that there is not one
legal discourse but a set of related legal discourses. Each one has its distinct characteristics, but
each differs from the other according to the situation in which it is used. He mentions judicial
discourse (the language of judicial decision, either spoken or written), courtroom discourse (used
by judges, court officials, witnesses, and other participants), the language of legal documents
(contracts, regulations, deeds, wills, Acts of Parliament, or statutes) and the discourse of legal
consultation: between lawyer and lawyer, lawyer and client.

1.1. English legal discourse
Tiersma (1999) shows to what extent ‘legalese’ is a product of its past, when Anglo-Saxon
mercenaries, Latin-speaking missionaries, Scandinavian raiders, and Norman invaders all left their
marks on the language that lawyers use today. On his part, Mellinkoff (1963) conducts a historical
approach to describe how the language of the law developed to its present state. He investigates
the continuous and successive influence of Old English, Latin, various forms of French (especially
Anglo-Norman), Middle English, and Modern English on the words and expressions in law
throughout history. He describes the language of the law as the customary language used by
lawyers in those Common Law jurisdictions where English is the official language. He indicates
that there are nine distinctive characteristics of legal English:
1. Frequent use of common words with uncommon meanings.
2. Frequent use of Old English.
3. Frequent use of Latin words and phrases.
4. Frequent use of old French and Anglo-Norman words.
5. Use of terms of art.
6. Use of argot (the jargon of a particular group or class).
7. Frequent use of formal words.
8. Deliberate use of words and expressions with flexible meanings.
9. Attempting extreme precision of expression.
Crystal and Davy (1969) indicate that “of all the uses of language, it [legal language] is perhaps
the least communicative, in that it is designed not so much to enlighten language-users at large as
to allow one expert to register information for scrutiny by another.” (p. 112) Accordingly, a legal
text exhibits a high degree of linguistic conservation, incorporated in written instruction such as
court judgments, police reports, constitutions, charters, treaties, protocols and regulation. They
describe legal texts as formulaic, predictable and almost mathematic indicating that “a common
linguistic formula in legal texts is ‘if X, then Z shall be Y’ or ‘if X, then Z shall do Y.’ (p. 203).
1.2. Arabic legal discourse
Legal language in Arabic has two principal foundations: Islamic Law and Common Law. Legal
discourse has its own idiosyncratic features and distinctive structures. Emery (1989) states that:

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

124

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Major Translation Methods Used in Legal Documents
EL GHAZI & BNINI
Arabic legal texts exhibit their own features of structure and style. They make more use of
grammatical cohesion (through reference and conjunction) and of finite structures than their
English counterparts, and less use of passives. In addition, they are not characterized by the use
of archaic vocabulary and morphology. The two languages differ in their patterns of
nominalization, creation of binominals and in their use of highlighting and text markers. (p. 10)
Arabic legal language incorporates a wide range of terms and expressions emanating from the
Islamic law the sources of which are the Holy Quran and the Sunna (Prophet Muhammad’s legal
decisions, deeds, and utterances). Together, they form what is called in Arabic “Shari’a”.
According to El-Farahaty (2015, pp.31-51), Arabic legal language is generally characterized
by the following features:
Lexical features
- Religious, culture-specific and system-based terms and expressions; e.g. ( ‫على كتاب هللا وسنة‬
‫رسوله‬: According to the Holy Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His Messenger)
- Formality; e.g. ( ‫حضرة صاحب الجاللة‬: His Majesty)
- Gender-based terms: terms that are marked for masculine (‫المتعاقد‬: the contracted party
،‫الشاهد‬: the witness)
- Archaic terms; e.g. ( ‫المذكور أعاله‬: the above mentioned)
Syntactic features
- Nominalization; eg. ( ‫ورفع مستوى المعيشة‬...‫تحقيق التنمية‬: achieving development….raising the
standards of living)
- Passivisation; eg. (‫يفسخ هذا العقد فورا‬: This contract is revoked immediately)
- Modals; e.g. )‫يجوز‬: may, ‫ يجب‬: must(
- Complex sentence structure: Lack of well-defined sentence boundaries and inconsistent
use of punctuation marks result in long, complex sentences.
- Doublets and triplets; e.g. ‫بدون تنبيه أو إنذار‬: without any prior notice, :‫عيب أو تلف أو خلل‬fault,
harm or damage
- Participles: There are some grammatical features in Arabic legal texts, such as ‫إسم المفعول‬
(the passive participle) and ‫(المطلق المفعول‬the absolute object), or ‘the cognate accusative’;
e.g. ‫عاين الشقة معاينة تامة‬: he has fully inspected the apartment.
Textual features
- Lexical repetition: the occurrence of a word, phrase or structure more than one time in text,
- Reference: using cohesive devices to trace participants and establish cohesive links in a
text,
- Conjunctions and punctuation: Arabic uses conjunctions such as ‫(و‬and), ‫(أو‬or), ‫(ف‬and),
‫(كما‬also / in addition), ‫(هذا‬this). In terms of punctuation, the full stop and the comma are
the most common punctuation marks used.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

125

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Major Translation Methods Used in Legal Documents
EL GHAZI & BNINI
2. The field of contracts
Contracts fall into the category of written legal genres with a great formality in style caused by
the use of some formulaic and fixed expressions. Newmark (1982) suggests that when dealing with
legal documents like contracts that are concurrently valid in the TL, the translator should focus on
a communicative approach. Vermeer (1989), on his part, contends that legal criteria should be
taken into account when opting for a particular translation strategy since the meaning of legal texts
is determined by the legal context: "for instance, in regard to contracts, the decision whether and
to what extent target language formulae should be used is determined primarily by the law
governing the contract. This fact is essential because it determines whether the contract will be
interpreted according to the source or the target legal system." (p.99). In official translations of
contracts, the strategies used must focus on the principle of fidelity to the ST. Sarcevic (1997,)
indicates that:
Legal translators have traditionally been bound by the principle of fidelity. Convinced that
the main goal of legal translation is to reproduce the content of the ST as accurately as
possible, both lawyers and linguists agreed that legal texts had to be translated literally. For
the sake of preserving the letter of the law, the main guideline for legal translation was
fidelity to the ST. Even after legal translators won the right to produce texts in the spirit of
the target language, the general guideline remained fidelity to the ST. (p.16)
Saqf Al-Hait (2010) suggests that contracts have substantial and formal elements that should be
taken into consideration when preparing contracts. These elements are: the title of the contract, the
contract parties, the legal capacity of the contracting parties, the preamble, mutual obligations,
payment and method of payment, duration of contract, general provisions, law and the court of
jurisdiction over contractual disputes, date of signing the contract, number of contract’s articles
and copies, and signature.
3. Translating Legal texts: an overview
El-Farahaty (2016, p. 475) indicates that legal translation from English into Arabic or vice versa
is more difficult because of the wide gap between English and Arabic language systems, on the
one hand, and legal systems, on the other. She further points out that both languages belong to
different language families, Arabic being a Semitic language while English belongs to the IndoEuropean languages. Thus, translators from and into Arabic face difficulties at different linguistic
levels, such as terminological (Shari’a Law vs. Common Law terms), syntactic (modals and
passive structures incongruities) and textual (lexical repetition and punctuation marks).
Accordingly, translating a legal text from Arabic into English requires a painstaking effort on the
part of the translator as he needs not only the target language but also the source and target legal
systems. Sarcevic (1997, p. 13) postulates that the rendering of legal texts from the SL into the TL
is rather ‘a translation from one legal system into another – from the source legal system into the
target legal system’.
As legal documents vary considerably, the legal translator needs to take into consideration the
categorization of each legal text. Cao (2013, p.1) provides a classification of legal translation
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

126

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Major Translation Methods Used in Legal Documents
EL GHAZI & BNINI
according to different criteria. First, legal translation has been categorized according to the subject
matter of the SL texts into the following categories: (a) translating domestic statutes and
international treaties; (b) translating private legal documents; (c) translating legal scholarly works;
and (d) translating case law. Second, legal translation can also be categorized according to the
status of the SL texts: (a) translating enforceable law, e.g., statutes; and (b) translating nonenforceable law, e.g., legal scholarly works. Third, legal translation can be classified according to
the functions of legal texts in the SL: (a) primarily prescriptive, e.g., laws, regulations, codes,
contracts, treaties, and conventions; (b) primarily descriptive and also prescriptive, e.g., judicial
decisions and legal instruments that are used to carry out judicial and administrative proceedings
such as actions, pleadings, briefs, appeals, requests, petitions, etc.; and (c) purely descriptive, e.g.,
academic works written by legal scholars, for example legal opinions, law textbooks, and articles,
the authority of which varies in different legal systems (Sarcevic, 1997, p. 11).
4. Methods of Translation
4.1. Vinay and Darbelnet’s model:
The term used by Vinay and Darbelnet (1958) to describe the methods is “procédés” in their
seminal work “les procédés techniques de la traduction” (pp. 46-55). They identify seven basic
procedures operating on three levels of style: lexis, distribution (morphology and syntax) and
message. The procedures are classified as direct (or literal) and oblique (or free).
Literal translation occurs when there is an exact structural, lexical, even morphological
equivalence between two languages. According to the authors, this is only possible when the two
languages are very close to each other. Oblique translation occurs when word-for-word translation
is impossible. The seven procedures are as follows:
-

Borrowing: it is a word taken directly from another language; for example, the English
word “bulldozer” has been incorporated directly into other languages.

-

Calque: it is a special kind of borrowing whereby a language borrows an expression form
from another but then translates literally each of its elements; e.g., “fin de semaine” from
the English “weekend”.

-

Literal Translation: or word-for-word translation is the direct transfer of a SL text into a
grammatically and idiomatically appropriate TL text in which the translators’ task is
limited to observing the adherence to the linguistic servitudes of the TL; e.g., “the ink is
on the table” and “l’encre est sur la table.”

-

Transposition: it involves replacing one-word class with another without changing the
meaning of the message; e.g., “as soon as he gets up”: “Dès son lever”. The word class of
the English verb “gets up” is replaced by a noun in French “son lever”.

-

Modulation: it is a variation of the form of the message, obtained by a change in the point
of view. This change can be justified when, although a literal, or even transposed,

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

127

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Major Translation Methods Used in Legal Documents
EL GHAZI & BNINI
translation results in a grammatically correct utterance. It is considered unsuitable,
unidiomatic or awkward in the TL; e.g., ‘it is not difficult to show...’: ‘Il est facile de
démontrer...’
-

Equivalence: in this procedure, the same situation can be rendered by two texts using
completely different stylistic and structural methods; e.g., ‘too many cooks spoil the broth’:
‘Deux patrons font chavirer la barque.’

-

Adaptation: it is used in those cases where the type of situation is referred to by the SL
message is unknown in the TL culture. In such cases translators have to create a new
situation that can be considered equivalent; e.g., “cycling” for the French, “cricket” for the
English and "baseball” for the Americans.

4.2. Newmark’s model:
Newmark (1988, pp. 45-53) considers that the central problem of translating has always been
whether to translate literally or freely. He identifies the following translation methods:
-

Word-for-word translation: it is a method in which the SL word-order is preserved and the
words translated singly by their most common meanings, out of context.

-

Literal translation: in literal translation, the SL grammatical constructions are converted
to their nearest TL equivalents but the lexical words are again translated singly.

-

Faithful translation: a faithful translation attempts to reproduce the precise contextual
meaning of the original within the constraints of the TL grammatical structures. It 'transfers'
cultural words and preserves the degree of grammatical and lexical 'abnormality' (deviation
from SL norms) in the translation. It attempts to be completely faithful to the intentions
and the text-realization of the SL writer.

-

Semantic translation: ‘semantic translation’ differs from 'faithful translation' in that the
first is uncompromising and dogmatic, while the second is more flexible. In other words,
the central concern of the translation is to convey the meaning of the phrase and sentence
through paraphrasing, or even literal depending on the purpose of the translator.

-

Adaptation: it is the 'freest' form of translation. It is used mainly for plays (comedies) and
poetry; the themes, characters, plots are usually preserved, the SL culture converted to the
TL culture and the text rewritten.

-

Free translation: using this method, the translator reproduces the matter without the
manner or the content without the form of the original. Usually, it is a paraphrase much
longer than the original; it is also called 'intralingual translation'.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

128

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Major Translation Methods Used in Legal Documents
EL GHAZI & BNINI
-

Idiomatic translation: it reproduces the 'message' of the original but tends to distort
nuances of meaning by preferring colloquialisms and idioms where these do not exist in
the original.

-

Communicative translation: this method attempts to render the exact contextual meaning
of the original in such a way that both content and language are readily acceptable and
comprehensible to the readership.

4.3. Sarcevic’s model:
Sarcevic (1985, p.128) considers that the following translation procedures are used by
translators of laws to fill lexical gaps resulting from SL culture-bound terms: transcription,
transliteration, the functional approach to translation, loan translation, adaptation, lexical
expansion, and descriptive substitution.
-

Transcription: it is an acceptable translation procedure only if the SL term has already
been naturalized into the terminology of the TL or the meaning of the term is evident from
the context.

-

Transliteration: it points to the transcription of the SL term with the use of the TL
alphabets where the SL term appears as a loan word in the TL, and is often placed between
inverted commas or is italicized.

-

Functional Approaches to Translation: they are derived from a general theory of
translation called “Skopos theory”, brought forward by the German scholar Hans J.
Vermeer in the late 1970s and early 1980s. It was soon taken up by several scholars who
were teaching at the schools for translator and interpreter for its application in their
translation classes. The functional approach to translation aims at producing a text which
goes in line with the cultural expectations of the target reader. Unlike traditional translation
approaches, the functional approach to translation claims that the same text can be
translated differently on the basis of the communicative function of the translated text.

-

Loan translation: in loan translation, a compound word or expression is translated literally
into the TL. Word-for-word translation is used whenever the source term is semantically
motivated or transparent.

-

Adaptation: in adaptation, the SL term is adapted to designate something in the social
reality of the TL with a similar function. In other words, a cultural equivalent is used. In
our case, this would mean replacing the recognized loan translation by a cultural equivalent
in the TL.

-

Lexical expansion: the primary procedure of over-translation used by legal translators to
compensate for under-translation is lexical expansion. In lexical expansion, supplementary

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

129

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Major Translation Methods Used in Legal Documents
EL GHAZI & BNINI
information is either inserted into the text itself or provided in marginal help such as
glossaries or marginal notes.
-

Descriptive substitution: it is used as a part of translation couplet, which consists of the
transliterated SL term, followed by descriptive substitution in brackets. It is adopted when
there is no one-to-one correspondence between the SL culture-specific term and the TL
legal terminology which can designate the same legal concept.

5. Discussion and analysis
5.1. Quantitative analysis of the frequency of translation techniques in the TT
Table 1 shows the techniques used in translating the marriage contract:
Table1: Frequency of use of translation techniques in the marriage contract
Translation techniques
No. of occurrences
Proportion of techniques
Word-for-word translation
35
37%
Literal translation
25
26%
Translation by omission
20
21%
Communicative translation
10
11%
Translation by adaptation
5
5%
Total
95
100%
As shown in the above table, ‘word-for-word translation’ comes in the first place with a
percentage of 37 percent. In the second place comes both ‘literal translation’ with a percentage of
26 percent. ‘Translation by omission’ comes in the third place with a frequency of 21 percent,
whereas ‘communicative/ functional translation’ and ‘translation by adaptation’ have registered
only eleven and five percent respectively.

5.2. Qualitative analysis of the frequency of translation techniques in the TT
2.1 Word-for-word/literal translation:
In order to preserve the religious nature of the text, the translator opted for the techniques of
word-for-word translation and literal translation (for the distinction between the two techniques,
see Newmark’s model above) as the following examples show:
ST
‫بناء على اإلذن بتوثيق عقد زواج معتنقي‬
‫اإلسالم واألجانب‬

-

-

‫الحل للزواج الخالية من موانعه‬

-

-

‫يجوز لهما في إطار تدبير األموال التي‬
‫ستكتسب أثناء قيام الزوجية االتفاق على‬
‫استثمارها وتوزيعها في وثيقة مستقلة عن‬
‫عقد الزواج‬

-

-

TT
On the basis of authorization…to
contract marriage for foreigners and
those converting to Islam
fit for marriage and free from
impediments thereto
they could, regarding the investment
and distribution of the property to be
acquired during the matrimonial time,
write a separate document therefore.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

130

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Major Translation Methods Used in Legal Documents
EL GHAZI & BNINI
The layout of the marriage contract in the source text (see Appendix A) follows a standard
skeletal plan; a heading containing a Qur’anic version, the Ministry of Justice and Liberties and
its logo, the court contracting the marriage, a margin specifying the registration number, record
number, marriage record number…etc. The body of the document is a one-paragraph text
characterized by long sentences and lack, if not absence, of punctuation marks. To convey the
meaning to the target reader, the translator changed the layout of the original text (see annex 2) in
such a way that the target reader smoothly understands the target text. This change of layout helped
the translator to escape from excessive literalism that faces the overwhelming majority of legal
translators of marriage contracts between Arabic and English. The table and the chart above show
clearly that word-for-word translation and literal translation are the most frequent techniques used
by the translator; altogether with a percentage of 60%. This percentage is quite normal with regard
to the kind of religious and cultural-specific terms and expressions characterizing Arabic legal
marriage contracts.
2.2 Translation by omission
Arabic official documents such as marriage contracts include Islamic elements referring to
Allah at the beginning of the contract such as the basmala “ ‫("بسم هللا الرحمان الرحيم‬in the name of
Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful) on the top of the contract, followed by a Qur’anic
benediction verse"‫ "ربنا هب لنا من أزواجنا وذرياتنا قرة أعين واجعلنا للمتقين إماما‬, translated into English as
"Our Lord! Grant unto us wives and offspring who will be the comfort of our eyes, and give us
(the grace) to lead the righteous." (Yusuf Ali, 1938). Another expression is used in the ST ‫"صدق‬
"‫(هللا العظيم‬True are the words of Allah the Almighty). The translator has used omission fully or
partly; sometimes he omits part of a phrase, other times, he omits the whole phrase. Below are
some examples of omission used by the translator, the omitted elements are underlined:
2.2.1 Fully omitted phrases/ elements:
‫بسم هللا الرحمان الرحيم‬
‫ربنا هب لنا من أزواجنا وذرياتنا قرة أعين واجعلنا للمتقين إماما‬
‫صدق هللا العظيم‬
‫وهللا سبحانه يؤلف بينهما لما يحبه ويرضاه‬

-

2.2.2 Partly omitted phrases/ elements
ST
‫الحمد هلل تزوج على بركة هللا‬
‫وحسن عونه وتوفيقه‬

-

-

‫عازبة بذكرها‬
‫على صداق مبارك قدره‬
‫قبضت الزوجة من الزوج المذكور جميع‬
‫الصداق قبضا تاما فأبرأته منه فبرئ‬

-

-

TT
Praise be to God…the bonds of
marriage are established between…
single
The dowry was fixed at…
…which the wife received in full

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

131

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Major Translation Methods Used in Legal Documents
EL GHAZI & BNINI
The fully omitted elements, benedictory formulas, are perhaps omitted because the translator
thinks that they are not relevant to the target culture and are not legally-binding. Mayoral Asensio
(2003) comments on this as follows:
Documents under Islamic law traditionally use [a] set [of] formulas of salutation referring to
God. Very often these are fragments, more or less literal, from the Koran. They are inter-textual
references, fully meaningful in the Arabic text, but this inter-textuality is lost in non-Islamic
cultures… These ritual formulas do not have any relevance for the legal validity of the
document; consequently, the possibility of omitting their translation remains open. (p. 21)
Aixela (as cited in El-Farahaty, 2015, p. 80) justifies the omission of culture-specific elements in
cases where they are either unacceptable in the target culture or irrelevant to the target reader or
when the item in question is ambiguous.
2.3 Communicative/ functional translation:
The examples below show that the translator rendered the contextual meaning of the original
text so as to convey the overall meaning to the target reader. In the first example, he translated the
word “‫( ”الترجمة‬translation) as “communication” which is literally translated “‫”تواصل‬. The choice
of the translator is suitable in this context because the intended meaning is facilitating
communication rather than translating or interpreting which is often conducted by a professional
translator or interpreter.
In the second example, the translator translated the phrase “‫ ”وهما متمتعان باألهلية والتمييز واالختيار‬as
“while the persons concerned being sound in mind and memory and legally competent” which is
more comprehensible to the target than the literal translation “while enjoying competency,
distinction and choice”.
In the last example, the translator used the loan words “Qur’an” as an equivalent to “ ‫كتاب هللا‬
‫ ”تعالى‬and “Sunnah” as an equivalent to “‫ ”سنة رسوله الكريم‬both composed of three words.
ST
‫قام بعملية الترجمة من اللغة االنجليزية إلى‬
...‫العربية السيد‬
‫وهما متمتعان باألهلية والتمييز واالختيار‬

-

-

-

-

TT
Communication was facilitated by Mr…
while the persons concerned being
sound in mind and memory and legally
competent
in accordance with the Qur’an and
Sunnah

‫ تزوجها على كتاب هللا تعالى وسنة رسوله‬‫الكريم‬
2.4 Translation by adaptation:
In order to translate the term “sadaq” into English, the translator used the technique of ‘cultural
adaptation’ by providing the nearest equivalent in the English culture “dowry”. Looking up the
word “dowry” in different dictionaries, we find the following definitions:
1- The definition provided by Collins Online Dictionary:
Dowry: the money or property brought by a woman to her husband at marriage
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

132

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Major Translation Methods Used in Legal Documents
EL GHAZI & BNINI
2- The definition provided by Oxford Online Dictionary:
Dowry: An amount of property or money brought by a bride to her husband on their
marriage
3- Definition provided by Black's Law Dictionary Free Online Legal Dictionary:
Dowry: The property which a woman brings to her husband in marriage; now more commonly
called a “portion.”By dowry is meant the effects which the wife brings to the husband to support
the expenses of marriage….This word expresses the proper meaning of the “dos” of the Roman,
the “dot” of the French, and the “dote” of the Spanish law, but is a very different thing from
“dower,” with which it has sometimes been confounded. By dowry, in the Louisiana Civil Code,
is meant the effects which the wife brings to the husband to support the expenses of marriage.
It is given to the husband, to be enjoyed by him so long as the marriage shall last, and the
income of it belongs to him. He alone has the administration of it during marriage, and his wife
cannot deprive him of it. The real estate settled as dowry is inalienable during the marriage,
unless the marriage contract contains a stipulation to the contrary.
The three definitions show that there is a contradiction regarding the beneficiary of the dowry. In
Western culture in general, the amount of money is given by the wife to her husband as opposed
to the Islamic culture. In this case, the translator should have used the technique of descriptive
substitution (see 2.9 above) which consists in the transliterated SL term (sadaq), followed by
descriptive substitution in brackets (dowry). In this context Mayoral Mayoral Asensio (2003)
argues:
The Arabic sadaq is regularly translated as dowry. But the dowry (in fact, shiwar) is
offered to the bride by her father as a custom whereas the sadaq is offered by the
bridegroom as an element necessary for the legal validity of the marriage. This is usually
law-risk information but could become critical. For instance, it could lead to the
annulment of the marriage by a Spanish judge applying Moroccan law. (p. 62)
The translator further opted for the techniques of adaptation and lexical expansion to render the
term “adlayn” (the plural form of “adl”) as “notaries of Islamic Law” using a general word
“notary” plus “Islamic Law” to compensate for under-translation. A notary according to Collins
Online Dictionary is “a person, usually a lawyer, who has legal authority to witness the signing of
documents in order to make them legally valid”. However, other Moroccan legal translators prefer
the word “two aduls” to preserve the cultural connotations for the original word.
The translator translated the expression “‫ ”الحمد هلل وحده‬using its nearest equivalence in English
“Praise be to God”. According to the online dictionary Merriam-Webster “[It is] used to express
happiness or relief that something did or did not happen.” However, “God” is differently conceived
by Muslims and Christians, although the definitions roughly mention no difference between the
two cultures. Oxford Online Dictionary provides the following definition: “(In Christianity and
other monotheistic religions) the creator and ruler of the universe and source of all moral authority;
the Supreme Being.”
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

133

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Major Translation Methods Used in Legal Documents
EL GHAZI & BNINI
Regardless of the definitions provided above, Islam emphasizes that God (Allah) is strictly
singular (Tawhid), while Christians believe that there is one God who is embodied in three gods
(Trinity): God the Father, the Son (Jesus Christ) and the Holy Spirit.
Conclusion
This paper explores a number of techniques followed and adopted in the field of legal
translation, with varying degrees. Among these techniques and strategies are literal translation,
free translation, the functional approach to translation, transliteration/ transcription, loan
translation, adaptation, translation by omission, lexical expansion…etc.
In translating religious and culture-based terms and expressions in marriage contracts, it is
noticed that the translator chiefly used the techniques of literal translation and word-for-word
translation in order to preserve the specificity of these terms. However, in several cases, this
literalism proves meaningless, hence resorting to other techniques such as translation by omission,
communicative translation and translation by adaptation.
It is concluded from the analysis of the translated marriage contract that legal translators need
to familiarize themselves with the legal systems of both the source and target languages before
they start translating, because the difference of the legal systems imposes on the translator a
painstaking effort to decipher the meaning of the source text and convey it to the target language.
To do so, translators need training and coaching that focus on the integration of functional and
pragmatic perspectives to legal translation.
Limitations of the Study
The study is only a preliminary step in investigating major translation methods used in the
translation of private legal documents, especially marriage contracts. The work provides some
translation methods used in legal translation, but it does not cover the methods in an exhaustive
way. This could be explained, on the one hand, by the scarcity of research in this field and, on the
other hand, by the corpus used in this study which is restricted to a single example of marriage
contract which could be oblivious of other methods and techniques of translation.
About the Authors:
Omar EL GHAZI, PhD student at the Department of English Studies, Faculty of Arts and
Humanities of Ben M’sik, Hassan II University of Casablanca. He graduated from King Fahd
School of Translation in Tangiers. His research interests are in legal translation between Arabic,
French & English and the translation of minority languages (Tamazight as a case). He is Head of
the Department of Cooperation and Partnerships at Hassan II University of Casablanca.
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6447-9351
Dr. Chakib BNINI received his Master's degree in Descriptive and Applied Linguistics from
Essex University, UK, in 1985, before obtaining his PhD degree in Translation Studies from
Heriot-Watt University, UK. He is currently a Professor of Translation Studies and Linguistics at
the Faculty of Arts and Humanities of Hassan II University, Morocco, where he is also an active
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

134

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Major Translation Methods Used in Legal Documents
EL GHAZI & BNINI
member within the Centre of Doctoral Studies. His areas of academic interest include translation
studies, cultural studies and linguistics. ID ORCid: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0955-4419
References:
Al Aqad, M. H. (2014). Translation of Legal Texts between Arabic and English: A Case of
Marriage Contracts, Arab World English Journal, 5, (2), 110-121.
Bhatia, V. K. (1982). An Investigation into Formal and Functional Characteristics of
Qualifications in Legislative Writing and its Application to English for Academic Legal
Purposes. Birmingham: University of Aston PhD thesis.
Bhatia, V. K. (1983). An Approach to the Linguistic Study of Legal Documents. Fachsprache, 5,
(3), 98-108.
Bhatia, V. K. (1993). Analyzing Genre: Language Use in Professional Settings. London:
Longman.
Cao, D. (2007). Translating Law. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Cao, D. (2013). Legal Translation. ResearchGate , 1-6. DOI: 10.1002/9781405198431.wbeal0679.
Crystal, D. & Davy, D. (1969). Investigating English Style. London: Longman.
El- Farahaty, H. (2015). Arabic-English-Arabic Legal Translation. London: Routledge.
El-Farahaty, H. (2016). Translating Lexical Legal Terms between English and Arabic,
International Journal for The Semiotics of Law - Revue Internationale de Sémiotique
Juridique, 29 (2), 473-493.
Emery, P. G. (1989). ‘Legal Arabic Texts: Implications for Translation. Babel, 35, 1–11.
Maley, Y. (1994). The Language of the Law. In Gibbons, J. (ed) Language and the Law (pp. 1150). London and New York: Longman.
Mattila, H. (2006). Comparative Legal Linguistics, Translated by Christopher Goddard. UK:
Ashgate.
Mayoral Asensio, R. (2003). Translating Official Documents. Manchester: St. Jerome.
Mellinkoff, D. (1963). The Language of the Law. Boston: Little Brown.
Newark, P. (1982). Approaches to Translation. Oxford: Pergamon.
Newmark, P. (1988). A Textbook of Translation. New York: Prentice.
Saqf Al-Hait, A. (2010). The Reliable Guide to Legal Translation. Amman: Dar Al-Thaqafa for
Publishing and Distribution.
Sarcevic, S. (1985). Translation of Culture-bound Terms in Laws, Multilingua - Journal of CrossCultural and Interlanguage Communication, 4 (3), 127-134.
Sarcevic, S. (1997). New Approach to Legal Translation. The Hague: Kluwer Law International.
Tiersma, P. M. (1999). Legal Language. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Vermeer, H. J. (1989). Skopos and Commission in Translational Action. In Chesterman, A. (ed),
Readings in Translation Theory (pp. 173-187). Helsinki: Oy Finn Lectura Ab.
Vinay, J.P., & Darbelnet J. (1958) : Stylistique Comparée du Français et de l’Anglais. Paris:
Didier.
Yusuf Ali, A. (1938). Translation of Quran by Abdullah Yusuf Ali, available at
http://www.quranonline.net/html/trans/options/yali/25.html
Dowry. (2018). In The Law Dictionary. Retrieved from https://thelawdictionary.org/dowry
Dowry. (2018). In Collins Dictionary. Retrieved from
https://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/dowry
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

135

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Major Translation Methods Used in Legal Documents
EL GHAZI & BNINI
Dowry [Def. 1]. In Oxford Dictionary. Retrieved from
https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/dowry
God. (2018). In Oxford Dictionary. Retrieved from
https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/god
Notary. (2018). In Collins Dictionary. Retrieved from
https://www.collinsdictionary.com/dictionary/english/notary

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

136

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Major Translation Methods Used in Legal Documents
EL GHAZI & BNINI
APPENDIX A. (ST)

APPENDIX B. (TT)
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

137

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Major Translation Methods Used in Legal Documents
EL GHAZI & BNINI
ARABIC-ENGLISH TRANSLATION
Kingdom of Morocco
Ministry of Justice and Liberties
Court of First Instance of Kénitra
Family Justice Division
MARRIAGE CONTRACT
Recorded under xxxx, marriage record xxxx, on October 11th, 2016.
Registered under xxxxxx, marriage register xxxxx, on October 11th, 2016.
Praise be to God. On the basis of authorization xxxxxxxx to contract marriage for foreigner and those converting to Islam, issued
by the Family Judge in charge of marriage, on October 10 th, 2016, file of marriage documents xxxxxxxx, held by the Registry
Office of the Court of First Instance of Kénitra, the undersigned notaries of Islamic law, Mr. xxxxxxx and Mr. xxxxxxxxx,
accredited to receive and issue testimony within the jurisdiction of the said court, received at 03:30 p.m., on October 10 th,
2016, the following testimony filed under xxxxxx, folio xxxxxxx, record book xxxxxxx, held by the first notary:

The bonds of marriage are henceforth established between:
Mr. xxxxxxxxxxxxx, British citizen, born in Rawalpindi, Pakistan, on xxxxxxxx, to his father xxxxx xxxxxxx son of xxxxxxxxxxx and
to his mother xxxxxxxxxxx, Muslim, holder of passport xxxxxxxxxx, issued by the British authorities, on August 16 th, 2016, valid
until August 16th, 2026, Accountant, divorced, residing at xxxxxx Malmesbury Road South Woodford, London xxxxxxxxx,
England, and;
Miss xxxxxxxxxxxx, Moroccan citizen, born in Fes, on xxxxxxxxx, to her father xxxxxx son of xxxxxxxx, and to her mother xxxx
daughter of xxxxxx, holder of National ID Card xxxxxxxxxx, student, single, residing at Lot. Menzeh xxxxxxxx, Bir Rami Est,
Kénitra, fit for marriage and free from impediments thereto.
The dowry was fixed at xxxxxxxxxxx Dirhams (xxxxxxxx MAD), which the wife received in full.
With her full consent, the bride was given for marriage in accordance with the Qur’an and Sunnah, by her father born on
xxxxxxxxxx, Moroccan citizen, holder of National ID Card xxxxxxxx, retired, residing at the same address as his daughter, which
the groom and the bride fully accepted after they were informed that they could, regarding the investment and distribution of
the property to be acquired during matrimonial time, write a separate document therefore. Communication was facilitated by
Mr. xxxxxxxxx, born on xxxxxxxx, to his father xxxxxx son of Said and to his mother xxxx daughter of xxxxx, Moroccan citizen,
student, holder of National ID Card xxxxxxxxx, residing at the above address. The said spouses signed hereunder after the
content herein was explained to them
In witness whereof, this contract was transcribed on the date hereof, while the persons concerned being sound in mind and
memory and legally competent.
Follow the signatures of the groom, bride and Tutor.
Follow the signatures of the aforementioned notaries of Islamic Law, and the authentication by the Notarial Judge Mr.
xxxxxxxxx, his signature and seal on October 11th, 2016.

--------------------------------------------End of translation-------------------------------------------------I, xxxxxxxx, sworn translator, hereby certify that the above is an exact and accurate translation
of the submitted document.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Arab #World
English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
Translation
16-0239
2550-1542
www.awej-tls.org
Kénitra,ISSN:
on October
11th,| 2016.

138

