ORGANON 49:2017

Sébastien Plutniak (École française de Rome – Lisst–Cers (Umr 5193))
THE PROFESSIONALISATION OF SCIENCE – CLAIM AND REFUSAL:
DISCIPLINE BUILDING AND IDEALS OF SCIENTIFIC AUTONOMY
IN THE GROWTH OF PREHISTORIC ARCHAEOLOGY.
THE CASE OF GEORGES LAPLACE’S GROUP OF TYPOLOGIE
ANALYTIQUE, 1950s–1990s
Abstr act. The majority of analyses investigating the
professionalisation of scientific domains tend to
assume the linear and general features of this
transformation. These studies focus on the shift from
a non–professionalised state to a professionalised
state. This dual approach, however, crucially lacks
some other aspects of the process of professionalisation. This issue is discussed within the context of
the growth of prehistoric archaeology in France from
the 1940s, by observing scientific societies, national
research organisations and their social networks.
Looking at the scale of Georges Laplace’s career and
that of his research group, which studied the typologie analytique method, this article demonstrates the
benefits of a ternary model which also encompasses
the modes of refusal of professionalisation.
Keyw ords : prehistoric archaeology, professionalisation, scientific societies, scientific specialties, scientific autonomy, social network analysis, Georges
Laplace.


Address for correspondence: École française de Rome, Piazza Navona, 62, 00186 Roma, Italia. Email:
sebastian.plutniak@ehess.fr.


I acknowledge Georges Couartou, André Crémillieux and Hélène Crémillieux who shared some of the
documents I consulted for this article. Furthermore, I would like to thank the people who welcomed and helped
me in the archive services I visited: Marie–Dominique Dehé (archives of the Musée national de Préhistoire),
Dominique Trousson (CEPAM archives), Anais Rodríguez (Archives of the Sociedad de Ciencias Aranzadi),
and also those who accepted being interviewed: André Crémillieux, Hélène Crémillieux, Christine Cabon,
Dominique Ebrard, Geneviève Marsan, Michel Livache, Christian Normand, Jean–Louis Voruz. Finally, I thank
Arnaud Hurel, Vanessa López Gómez and the two anonymous reviewers for their comments and corrections,
Rebecca Coles and Bradius V. Maurus III for English language copy–editing.

Sébastien Plutniak

106

Introduction
Common accounts of the history of archaeology describe a general shift
from antiquarians and scientific societies to universities and professional scientific organisations (from local to national and from private to public). They
suggest the general replacement of the former bodies by the latter ones. In her
introductory chapter to the book Assembling the Past: Studies in the
professionalisation of Archaeology, Alice Kehoe indicates a transformation
from antiquarians to archaeologists which was also a transformation from
aristocrats to academics which occurred from the eighteenth to the twentieth
century1. Considering the 1940s in France and the development of the Centre
national de recherche scientifique (CNRS) Ève Gran–Aymerich describes a
consequently gradual decrease in archaeological research by amateurs 2. Others
studies do not address the professionalisation of archaeology but its
institutionalisation. Nathalie Richard investigated the case of prehistoric
archaeology, grounded on a definition of an institution which encompasses
both the institutional structures and their scientific personnel3.
Whether considering professionalisation, institutionalisation or even
disciplinarisation, all these concepts share a processual feature. This is
relevant when studying processes: investigating what happens between a
given starting state and a given final state. However, an argument against the
use of these concepts claims that reality is more complex. Professionalisation,
for example, encompasses rather unclear reasons and oversimplifies a
multifaceted phenomenon. The aim of this paper is not to critique this, as I
consider that the relevance of these processional concepts is relative to the
level of analysis adopted, both as to the scale of time, space and social
generality (mass). These concepts are of little interest for an ethnographic
analysis of the interactions and self–designations of actors observed in
practice. On the contrary, at the level of individual trajectories, observing
professionalisation does not raise particular difficulties, as we can always
explicitly define (and discuss) the criteria we use, for example getting a
position, being paid and gaining recognition, etc. Similarly, at the level of
discipline or of science itself, many studies have investigated the general
changes of scientific practice over centuries. Issues are less clear at the
intermediate level of analysis, encompassing the scale of the individual and
research group. Indeed, using these concepts at this level tends to
overemphasise both the ineluctable and irreversible characteristics of the
professionalisation or institutionalisation. This intermediate level of analysis
has, however, another particular interest: it is appropriate to observe the
eventual struggles between various potential forms of organisations in the
science practice, before some of them are integrated into the main historical
accounts of the discipline’s history and others forgotten4. In other words,
1

See A. B. Kehoe, Introduction, p. 1.

2

See È. Gran–Aymerich, Les chercheurs de passé, 1798–1945, p. 460.

3

N. Richard, L’institutionnalisation de la préhistoire, p. 189.

4

Martin Rudwick worked at this intermediate scale in his book on the geological controversy of the Devonian period. See M. J. S. Rudwick, The great Devonian controversy.

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...

107

investigating this level allows the observation of how professionalisation or
institutionalisation occurs or more interestingly, fails to occur.
I aim to illustrate this claim from a case taken during the history of prehistoric archaeology in France, namely the Groupe international de recherches
typologiques led by Georges Laplace (1918–2004). Laplace’s early
archaeological work dates back to the late 1940s, after his engagement in the
war1. Shortly afterwards, he became interested in methodological issues and in
the contemporary debates on lithic typology2. From the late 1950s he
developed his own method, to which he gave the name typologie analytique
(et structurale), that he continuously improved until the late 1990s 3. This
method was dedicated primarily to the study of prehistoric stone tools and
integrates a taxonomy, a set of metric coefficients and their relative graphic
representations, a coded notation for the description of the stones and an
articulated set of statistical procedures (e.g. the chi–squared test, 2Î, factor
analysis). From 1969 to 1989, Laplace organised an annual one–week seminar
in Arudy, a village located in the French Pyrenees. This Séminaire international de typologie gathered people coming mainly from France, Spain and Italy.
Most of them had an interest in archaeology, even if occasionally some
philosophers, linguists, computer scientists, and mathematicians also took part
in these meetings.
The work developed by Laplace and his collaborators present two
interesting particularities. First, considering the contemporary state of the
human sciences in France, their work is one of the few examples of a structuralist approach – and more generally of a theory–founded approach4 – in
French archaeology. Second, regarding the state of the French research in the
general and international history of prehistoric archaeology, their work is
contemporary to the worldwide growth of the New Archaeology trend. In a
similar manner, Laplace and his collaborators also relied on an in–depth use of
computing and mathematical or linguistic formalisations. Hence, the so–called
insularity of French prehistoric archaeology regarding methodological and
theoretical developments5 can be considered as a true statement only if work
such as Laplace’s, developed outside the main powerful centres of archaeological research, are omitted. Besides the question of the relationships between
concurrent forms of organisations 6, my aim here is also to contribute to
explain why there is little mention of this work in discipline historiography.
1
For details on Laplace’s work and life see C. Cabon, Georges Laplace (1918–2004), I. Barandiarán,
2004, Georges Laplace (Pau 1918–Pau 2004), S. Plutniak, L’innovation méthodologique ... , S. Plutniak &
M. Tarantini, An influential outsider.
2
For the archaeological controversies Laplace was involved in see M. Tarantini, Georges Laplace in Italia
tra tipologismo e antropologismo, P. –Y. Demars, François Bordes versus Georges Laplace ... , R. Lippé, Pierres
à convictions ... , A. Vila i Mitjà & J. Estévez Escalera, Georges Laplace.
3

For an in–depth presentation see G. Laplace, La typologie analytique et structurale ... .

4

To get an idea of how the debates on lithic typology could have been philosophically grounded in the
international literature see S. Kantman, Essai sur la formation de concept du «type» ... .
5
6

F. Audouze & A. Leroi–Gourhan, France: A continental insularity.

Sociologists developed various accounts of this concept. In this paper, I rely on a simple and working
definition: an organisation is defined, by G. Ahrne & N. Brunsson, Organization outside organizations ... , p. 84,

Sébastien Plutniak

108

The first section of this article focuses on the relatively well–known
professionalisation process in archaeology during the twentieth century. The
following two sections add to this general picture some specific issues. The
second section emphasises the growth and the contemporary persistence of
non–professional and non–public service organisations, namely scientific
societies and associations. Although the sharp distinction between amateur
organisations and professional organisations is commonly used by the actors,
in practice, these two categories have porous borders and could share similar
purposes and values. The third section introduces a third organisational mode
characterised by a denial of these two categories of organisations: Laplace’s
research group gives a striking example of this position. I show how it relied
on a particular concept of scientific autonomy (a fundamental aspect in
scientific practice), namely the financial organisation of the group and its
underlying ideology – notably its association to a French traditional craftsmanship movement called compagnonnage, which defined its aims against
both those of artistic and scientific practices. This article draws on a documentation I prepared for my PhD research thesis1, including archives2, actors’
publications and interviews.
1. The indisputable professional aim in prehistoric archaeology
1.1. Speleolog y, pr ehis tor y and their or ig inal pr ox imit y
In August 1952, a speleological expedition led by the Belgian Max
Cosyns (1906–1998) aimed to investigate the La Pierre Saint–Martin chasm
(Arette, in the French Pyrenees, close to the Spanish border). It had been
discovered two years earlier by Georges Lépineux when it was subsequently
explored through a shaft 320m deep. At this time, it was the longest descent
ever made and no adapted equipment was available. Cosyns decided to use the
electrical winch for the first time in speleological history. On the 13 th August
1952 the fastening of the wire broke and the speleologist Marcel Loubens
(1923–1952) fell, lying severely wounded several hundred meters deep.
Rescues were organised. Speleologists from Lyon and Mauléon (a nearby
town) travelled to the chasm to provide their help. Laplace was among the
latter group3 which included the speleologists Michel Bouillon and Pierre
as a decided order, including one or more of the elements of membership, hierarchy, rules, monitoring and
sanctions.
1
A thesis in which I analysed the use, in archaeology, of methods borrowed from mathematics, automatic
documentation and formal linguistics during the second half of twentieth century. Laplace and the typologie
analytique was one of the cases investigated. See S. Plutniak, L’opération archéologique.
2

Georges Laplace’s files at the Musée National de Préhistoire, Les Eyzies–de–Tayac (shorten as MNP),
Henri Breuil’s files at the Muséum national d’histoire naturelle in Paris (MNHN), files of the Sociedad de
Ciencias Aranzadi, San Sebastián–Donostia (Aranzadi), Bordes’ files at the Service régional de l’archéologie de
Nouvelle–Aquitaine, Bordeaux (SRA), École française de Rome archives (EFR), files of the CEPAM archaeological centre in Nice (CEPAM), private files of Georges Couartou, Georges Laplace’s nephew, private files of
André Crémillieux and Hélène Crémillieux, private files of Pierre Mourre.
3
The participation of Laplace is mentioned in a letter from (his father) Georges Laplace to François
Bordes and Denise de Sonneville–Bordes, 20 Aug. 1952, MNP. It is also attested in an interview of Boucher. See
P. Boucher & X. Peyran, P. Boucher (1909–1997) ... , p. 18) and in H. Tazieff, Neuf nuits de vingt–quatre heures
au fond du gouffre de la Pierre–Saint–Martin. VIII. «Ici, Marcel Loubens a vécu les derniers jours de sa vie
courageuse» in: Le Figaro, 3 Sep. 1952, p. 5.

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...

109

Boucher (1909–1997). At the time, Boucher was the president of the Mauléon
speleological club. Laplace and Boucher had already collaborated in
speleological explorations and in prehistoric archaeological work1, as in the
1950s these two fields were usually associated. People commonly practised
both of these activities and their membership to the respective organizations
encompassed both disciplines. For instance, in 1952 Laplace was secretary of
the West Pyrenees section of the Société méridionale de spéléologie et de
préhistoire (SMSP)2. Marcel Loubens died on the 14th August, despite the
efforts of what was the first organisation of a medicalised speleological
rescue. Press coverage of this tragic event was wide, reaching a national
audience far beyond the small speleological community, and it raised
numerous commentaries. Robert de Joly (1887–1968), a pioneer speleologist
and founder of the Spéléoclub de France in 1930, severely criticised the
equipment and management of the Cosyns’ expedition. The death of Loubens
offered him an opportunistic case to publish as an indictment against amateur
speleologists that he called spéléistes by distinction. His publication was also
a plea for scientific organisations, such as the Comité national de Spéléologie
newly founded in 1948 in collaboration with the CNRS. According to him,
[o]nly a qualified body can clearly distinguish between a genuine researcher
and a more or less well–meaning amateur 3. De Joly demanded a strict monitoring of the spéléistes by the speleologists:
Let us assume, therefore, as it will become absolutely
necessary, that an organisation is qualified to issue
the “speleologist” title and license. This would not
forbid young people to explore the caves, who, with
good reason, prefer sport, adventure and science to
cinemas and cafés, but they will be instructed to
undertake these visits only with skilled speleologists.
Depending on the difficulty of the exploration, there
should be as many speleologists as “cavers”. Thus,
each exploration will have a sufficient number of
supervisors who will minimise the risks and prevent
degradation.4
1
Their collaborative work led notably to the discovery of the paintings in the Etxeberri cave (Camou–
Cihigue) in May 1950. See G. Laplace–Jauretche, Les grottes ornées des Arbailles, p. 134.
2
See Bulletin de la Société méridionale de spéléologie et de préhistoire. Année 1948–1949 in: Bulletin de
la Société d’histoire naturelle de Toulouse 84, 1949. The SMSP was founded in 1947 in Toulouse by Louis
Méroc (1904–1970), lawyer and prehistoric archaeologist and Albert Vandel (1894–1980), biologist.
3
R. de Joly, Comment s’est tué le spéléologue Loubens?, p. 442: [s]eul un organisme qualifié peut faire
sans conteste la distinction entre le chercheur authentique et le promeneur plus ou moins bien intentionné. All
translations of publications, archive documents and interviews quotations are mine.
4

R. de Joly, Comment s’est tué le spéléologue Loubens?, p. 442:
Admettons donc que, comme cela deviendra forcément nécessaire, un
organisme soit qualifié pour délivrer le titre et la licence de «spéléologue».
On n’interdira pas pour autant l’exploration des grottes aux jeunes gens qui,
avec juste raison, préfèrent le sport, l’aventure et aussi la science aux
cinémas et aux cafés, mais on leur prescrira de n’entreprendre ces visites
qu’en compagnie de spéléologues accomplis. Selon la difficulté de

Sébastien Plutniak

110

What is the relevance of this case–study for the aim of this article? What
can be observed in speleology – the creation of organisations, journals and
licenses, definition of standards, safety rules – and the resulting conflicts of
legitimacy between actors according to their social and organisational
positions, also occurred during the same period in prehistoric archaeology.
Despite their proximity, the respective disciplinary and professional aims in
speleology and prehistoric archaeology also implied distinctive and
antagonistic relationships between these two fields. For instance, speleologist
Jacques Labeyrie (1920–2011, member of the Cosyns’ team at La Pierre
Saint–Martin expedition in August 1952), mentions the contentious
interactions of his team with Laplace in 1950, after they entered into the
Etxeberri caves 1. As the local secretary for the SMSP, Laplace felt morally (if
not legally) responsible for the protection of archaeological sites. He was, as
other young archaeologists, profoundly convinced of the need for the
professional organisation of his research field.
1.2. Lap lace’s pr ofess ional amb ition
In 1947, Laplace was demobilised and started to develop his
archaeological activities. He registered at the University of Toulouse and took
part in the excavations in Montmaurin (near Toulouse), led by an archaeologist who gave lectures at his university, Louis Méroc (1904–1970). In the
western part of the Pyrenees, his home region, Laplace did multiple surveys,
in particular in collaboration with the Basque ethnographer and prehistoric
archaeologist José Miguel de Barandiarán y Ayerbe (1889–1991). In 1949,
Laplace published his first archaeological article about these surveys. Its text
ended with a firm plea for professionalisation in archaeology, emphasising the
virtues of the legislation, of scientific methods, of academic training, and of
collective work against the amateur practice of archaeology in an unsystematic, solitary and self–taught manner:
One cannot declare oneself a field archaeologist, any
more than one would declare oneself a metal turner.
Archaeology is a profession to be learnt patiently,
with tenacity and humility. More than in any other
disciplines, amateurism must be prohibited and the
1941 law which regulates archaeological excavations
has been a blessing. There are excavation schools
and academic titles: a self–taught person – despite
his merit – remains an autodidact, and reading quantities of literature on Prehistory is not enough. [...] It
follows that, alone, the prehistorian can only do bad
work: research in a team is essential. [...] The age of
the infancy is closed. This is too bad for those who do
l’entreprise choisie, tant de spéléologues pour tant de spéléistes. Ainsi,
chaque expédition comptera un nombre suffisant de responsables qui
écarteront les risques et empêcheront les dégradations.
1

See J. Labeyrie, Les découvreurs du gouffre de la Pierre Saint–Martin.

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...

111

not understand. We need researchers seriously
trained in the difficult, but productive disciplines of
true scientific work.1
Laplace defended this view over the next decades (even if in the details
some variations and nuances can be discussed: I will elaborate later on his
reference to craftsmanship). Ten years later, he deplored the destruction of
archaeological sites by unqualified archaeologists: […] more than ever, meticulous excavations are indispensable: too many sites have been destroyed, and
thus, the mixed archaeological materials have become unusable or have
misled interpretations. Prehistory is a science and an art. Nothing worthwhile
can be created without asceticism.2
Laplace’s emphasis on the necessary scientific foundations of prehistoric
archaeology is associated with a positive judgement on professionalism. This
is illustrated in a letter written ten years after the previous quote. The letter is
addressed to Henri Delporte (1920–2002) in response to the critical review
Delporte wrote about the book Laplace extracted from his PhD thesis3: A
long–time solitary researcher, as you know, it is only in the last few years that
I have been assisted by a young team, spontaneously created and composed,
for the most part, by professionals who work with total freedom.4
Despite his early claim in favour of the necessity of team–work, Laplace
did most of his work alone or with few collaborators, namely Alberto Broglio
(1931–), an Italian archaeologist. At the same time, after Laplace published his
thesis, he and Broglio co–signed a call for the constitution of a research group
on typology in the main Italian journal of prehistoric archaeology 5. This was
the root of the group which annually gathered in Arudy from 1969 to 1989 and
that Laplace refers to in his letter to Delporte. In this letter, Laplace
emphasises the fact that members of this group have mostly professional
1

G. Laplace–Jauretche, Prospections et fouilles, p. 466:
On ne s’improvise pas plus fouilleur, qu’on ne s’improviserait tourneur sur
métaux. Il s’agit d’un métier à apprendre patiemment, avec ténacité et
humilité. Plus que partout ailleurs, l’amateurisme doit être proscrit et la loi
de 1941 qui réglemente les fouilles archéologiques a été une bénédiction! Il
existe des écoles de fouilles et des diplômes de faculté: un autodidacte –
malgré son mérite – ne reste qu’un autodidacte et la lecture des gros traités
de préhistoire ne suffit pas. [...] Il s’ensuit donc, que seul, le préhistorien ne
peut faire que du mauvais travail: la recherche en équipe s’avère indispensable. [...] L’âge est clos des balbutiements. Tant pis pour ceux qui ne
comprendraient pas. Il faut des chercheurs sérieux formés aux disciplines
rudes mais fécondes du véritable travail scientifique.

2
G. Laplace–Jauretche, Quelques considérations sur l’origine ... , p. 124: [...] plus que jamais des fouilles
minutieuses deviennent indispensables: trop de gisements furent détruits dont les matériaux mélangés sont
inutilisables ou ont égaré l’interprétation. La préhistoire est une science et un art. Rien de valable ne se crée
sans ascèse.
3
Laplace’s thesis was published as G. Laplace, Recherches sur l’origine ... . Delporte published two
reviews in the main French journals of prehistoric archaeology, the Bulletin de la Société préhistorique française
and L’Anthropologie. See H. Delporte, Georges Laplace ... and H. Delporte, Laplace (G.) ... .
4
Letter from Laplace to Henri Delporte, 15 Nov. 1967, MNP: Chercheur longtemps solitaire, comme vous
le savez, ce n’est que depuis quelques années que je me trouve assisté par une jeune équipe, spontanément créée
et formée pour la plupart de professionnels, qui travaille dans la plus totale liberté.
5

See G. Laplace & A. Broglio, Proposta per la costituzione ... .

Sébastien Plutniak

112

positions1. He also answers Delporte’s commentaries on his typologie analytique method. Not only does Laplace mark a difference between professionals
and amateurs but, furthermore, he provokingly identifies as amateur the
propositions of a well–known professional archaeologist, namely Denise de
Sonneville–Bordes (1919–2008, then maître de recherche at the CNRS since
1952):
The value of a method is judged by the results it
achieves, by the progress of knowledge it grants by
combining flexibility and rigour. [...] you acknowledge to have encountered major difficulties, if not
insurmountable ones, in your attempt to compare the
results obtained by the traditional typology of
Sonneville and by the analytical typology of Laplace.
Could it have been otherwise, given the fundamental
differences between the two systems? One will appear
superior to the other, depending on whether one
considers the viewpoint of the stamp collector or the
viewpoint of a naturalist taxonomer. Far from excluding each other, they are harmoniously complementary
in the historical perspective that goes from
amateurism to scientific research. I am truly in favour
of a peaceful coexistence, leaving time to make the
necessary stratifications, and it is an act of faith!2
Laplace assumes that the growth of scientific knowledge goes from
amateur research to scientific research. For him, the difference between his
typological proposition and that of his rival Sonneville–Bordes, is one
evolution, assuming that his own proposition represents a step in the scientific
progress.
Besides Laplace’s own views on this controversy concerning lithic
typology, it is worthwhile to underline that this debate opposes two
archaeologists working and being paid by a professional organisation, the
CNRS. This very fact is a consequence of the rapid growth of prehistoric

1
In the reports of Poyemau and Gatzarria excavations, Laplace distinguishes the participants between
three categories: fouilleurs professionnels, fouilleurs en stage pré–professionnel, fouilleurs non professionnels.
See G. Laplace, Rapport de fouilles 1968. Grotte du Poeymau. Commune d’Arudy (Basses–Pyrénées), p. 2, SRA.
2

Letter from Laplace to Henri Delporte, 15 Nov. 1967, MNP:
La valeur d’une méthode se juge aux résultats obtenus, aux progrès de la
connaissance qu’elle permet en alliant souplesse et rigueur. [...] vous
reconnaissez avoir rencontré des difficultés majeures, sinon insurmontables,
dans votre tentative de comparer les résultats obtenus par la typologie
traditionnelle de Sonneville et par la typologie analytique de Laplace.
Pouvait–il en être autrement tant la diversité de nature des systèmes est
foncière? L’un apparaîtra supérieur à l’autre selon que l’on se place du point
de vue du collectionneur de timbres ou du point de vue de la taxinomie
naturaliste. Loin de s’exclure, ils se complètent harmonieusement dans la
perspective historique qui va de l’amateurisme à la recherche scientifique. Je
suis réellement partisan de la coexistence pacifique, laissant au temps le soin
d’opérer les stratifications nécessaires, et c’est un acte de foi!

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...

113

archaeology in research and academic organisation during and after World
War II.
1.3. Pr ofess ional org anisations for pr ehis tor ic archaeolog y
The history of the institutionalisation of prehistoric archaeology in France
is relatively well–known. In this section, I draw on the main steps identified in
previous works1 and provide complementary new data. I aim to give a general
picture of the context in which researchers, such as Laplace, developed their
requests for professionalisation and took an opportunity to begin their own
professional careers.
Although the majority of events involved in the institutionalisation and
professionalisation of prehistoric archaeology happened after World War II,
some key events were before this period. Concerning the educational aspect 2,
it is worthwhile to note that a certificat of prehistoric archaeology was created
in Toulouse in 1921, even if it was still associated with the history chair 3.
During the war, the Vichy regime established the first legal regulation for the
practice of archaeology and the protection of archaeological materials with the
Carcopino law published on the 27th September 19414. This law was
completed by a subsequent one on the 21th January 1942, by which an
archaeological section was created in the CNRS (XVe commission). It was
commissioned to authorise excavations. Consequently, in 1943, the CNRS
started the publication of Gallia, a periodical aimed at publishing the raw
results of current excavations. In 1945, the French territory was divided into
archaeological administrative regions, one division for historical research and
the other for prehistorical research (see Figure 15)6.
In 1946, André Leroi–Gourhan (1911–1986) founded the Centre de
recherche et de documentation en préhistoire (CDRP), a research center
attached to the CNRS. Its direction was shared by Leroi–Gourhan, Franck
Bourdier (1910–1985) and Harper Kelley (1896–1962). In 1948, the XVe
commission of the CNRS became the Comité technique de la recherche
archéologique en France and was committed to the coordination of
archaeological research for the period prior to 800 AD and was soon in charge
of the Gallia publication7. The same year, Louis–René Nougier (1912–1995)
defended the first doctorate (thèse d’État) about a prehistoric archaeology
1
For a more detailed synthesis about the institutional development of prehistoric archaeology in France,
see È. Gran–Aymerich, Les chercheurs de passé, 1798–1945, pp. 449–468 & F. Audouze, La préhistoire et le
CNRS.
2
On the development of prehistoric archaeology teaching in France see A. Hurel, L’enseignement de la
préhistoire.
3

See A. Hurel, Un prêtre, un savant dans la marche ... .

4

See È. Gran–Aymerich, Les chercheurs de passé, 1798–1945, p. 456.

5

All figures are at the end of the paper, pp. 148–154.

6

By decision of the 13 th September 1945 decree, followed by a definition of the divisions within the
14th December 1945 decree, which were modified afterwards by the 7 th December 1946 decree. See [Gallia],
Législation archéologique, p. 230.
7

See A. Leroi–Gourhan, France, p. 148.

Sébastien Plutniak

114

matter. One year latter, in 1949, he obtained the first university chair devoted
to this domain, created for him in Toulouse1.
In order to get a wider picture, I draw on the International Directory of
Anthropological Institutions published in 1953 by the Wenner–Gren Foundation2. Leroi–Gourhan authored the chapter about France. He insists on the
historical trend to maintain an equal division in anthropological research
among ethnology, physical anthropology, prehistory, ethnography, sociology
and linguistics3. The French section of the Directory gives information about a
total of 43 institutions, divided into four categories: educational, professional
associations, research institutions and museums, and subsidising agencies 4.
Excluding the institutions in the last category and those not related to prehistoric archaeology, there is a total of 24 institutions, whose spatial distribution
is shown in Figure 2.
Leroi–Gourhan mentioned the names of 99 actors related to the 24 French
institutions concerning prehistoric anthropology. Using graph theory allows us
to study some structural properties of the networks we can define from these
relations between actors and institutions.
A first network is produced in which two institutions are tied by an edge if
an actor belongs to both institutes (see Table 1).
Nodes
Edges
Components
Degree centralisation
Betweenness centralisation

Institutions network
24
61
10
0.61
0.07

Actors network
99
532
10
0.47
0.23

Table 1: Descriptive statistics for the network of actors and for the network of
institutions related to anthropology in France in 1953. A component of a graph
is a subgraph in which any two nodes are connected to each other by paths.
Degree and betweenness centralisations measure the tendency of a graph to be
organised around particularly central nodes (in terms of degree centrality or
betweenness centrality). The resultant values are normalised to a range
between 0 (weakly centralised) and 1 (highly centralised). Data: A. Leroi–
Gourhan, France.
In the resulting network, the edges are weighted by the number of actors
belonging to each pair of institutions. The very low betweenness centralisation
value and the high degree centralisation value indicate that the main part of
1

In 1955, his maîtrise de conférence position was turned into a full professor chair.

2

On the role of the Wenner–Gren Foundation in the development of methodological and theoretical
aspects of archaeology in France and in western Europe. See S. Plutniak, L’innovation méthodologique ... .
3
4

A. Leroi–Gourhan, France, p. 141.

Replication data and programming codes used
http://dx.doi.org/10.7910/DVN/S2ZPXL [retrieved Nov. 19, 2017].

for

this

paper

are

available

at

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...

115

the network of institutions is not structured by different dense subparts but
there are some particular institutions which are related to more actors. So, the
centrality of each institution has been computed and results reported in
Table 21. They confirm an observation made by Leroi–Gourhan on the high
centralisation of anthropological activities in Paris, particularly in the Musée
de l’Homme2.
Institution name
Musée de l’homme
Association française pour l’avancement des sciences
(section 12 ethnologie)
Institut d’ethnologie
Centre de formation aux recherches ethnologiques
Institut de paléontologie humaine
Institut des études préhistoriques des Eyzies
Centre de documentation et de recherches préhistoriques
Société préhistorique française
Société d’anthropologie de Paris
École d’anthropologie
Université de Lyon
Laboratoire d’anthropologie physique (EPHE)
Institut français d’anthropologie
Université de Rennes
Institut d’anthropologie générale
Laboratoire du Peyrat
Faculté des lettres de Paris
Musée des Antiquités Nationales
Comité technique de la recherche archéologique en
France
Université de Toulouse
Université de Poitiers
Institut catholique de Paris
Université de Dijon
Musée des sciences naturelles

Address
Paris
Paris
Paris
Paris
Paris
Les Eyzies–de–
Tayac
Paris
Paris
Paris
Paris
Lyon
Paris
Paris
Rennes
Rennes
Villebois–Lavalette
Paris
Saint–Germain–en–
Laye
Paris
Toulouse
Poitiers
Paris
Paris
Lyon

Degree
15
13
12
12
9
8
7
7
7
7
6
6
4
2
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Table 2: Centrality of the French anthropological institutions in 1953 based on
the co–membership of their participants (vertex weighted degree). Data:
A. Leroi–Gourhan, France.

1
Centrality has been computed in terms of weighted vertex degree, i.e. the sum of the edge weights of the
adjacent edges for each vertex. About the centrality and centralisation concepts see L. C. Freeman, Centrality in
social networks I: conceptual clarification.
2

See A. Leroi–Gourhan, France, p. 141.

Sébastien Plutniak

116

A second network is produced in which two actors are tied if they belong
to the same institution (see Table 1 and Figure 3). Articulation points 1 in the
network and nodes’ centrality have been computed (see Table 3)2. We found
that, according to Leroi–Gourhan’s presentation, himself and Henri–Victor
Vallois (1889–1981) appear as the key–actors in the field: their structural
positions correspond to the articulation points of the graph and they have the
highest centrality scores (respectively 0.19 and 0.17).
Actor name
André Leroi–Gourhan
Henri–Victor Vallois
James–Louis Baudet
Yvette Oddon
Henri Breuil
Raoul Hartweg
Georges Bidet
R. Humbert
Pierre Métais
André Basset

Betweenness centrality
0.19
0.17
0.08
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.01

Table 3: Centrality of actors based on their membership to the main French
anthropological institutions in 1953: normalised betweenness centrality
ranging from 0 (weakly central) to 1 (highly central). Only the ten most
central actors are reported. Data: A. Leroi–Gourhan, France.
In this context, the CNRS took an increasing role in the growth of
prehistoric archaeology in France during the second half of the twentieth
century. As shown in the map of the prehistoric archaeology institutions in
1953 (see Figure 2), only the University of Toulouse and the Institut des
études préhistoriques des Eyzies3 were mentioned in southern France. The
increase in the recruitment of archaeologists, such as Laplace, in the different
French regions was also a consequence of the CNRS’ national development
policy initiated by the director Frédéric Joliot–Curie (1900–1958) in 19444.
The CNRS’ role was also notable in regards to its publications: in 1958, the
periodical Gallia Préhistoire was created as a specialised complement to
Gallia. From 1944 to 1991 prehistoric archaeology began to be associated
with ethnography and physical anthropology (see Table 4).
1

In a graph, articulation points are nodes whose removal increases the number of connected components.

2

Centrality has been computed in terms of betweenness centrality: in graph theory, the betweenness
centrality of a node is the number of shortest paths between all the pairs of nodes of the graph that pass through
this node. All graph–related computations have been made with the igraph package for R. See G. Csárdi &
T. Nepusz, The igraph software package for complex network research.
3
Founded in 1949 and directed by Henri–Victor Vallois, with the assistance of Georges Malvesin–Fabre
(1893–1956).
4
See È. Gran–Aymerich, Les chercheurs de passé, 1798–1945, p. 462. For a general account of prehistoric
archaeology at the CNRS see also F. Audouze, La préhistoire et le CNRS.

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...
Creation
1944
1967
1971
1976
1983
1992

Suppression
1967
1971
1976
1983
1991
–

Section no.
20
23
25
30
33
31

117

Title
Anthropologie, préhistoire et ethnographie
Anthropologie, préhistoire et ethnographie
Anthropologie, préhistoire et ethnographie
Anthropologie, préhistoire et ethnographie
Anthropologie, préhistoire et ethnographie
Hommes et milieux: évolution, interactions

Table 4: Prehistoric archaeology in the CNRS sections since 1944. Various
sources.
This association has not been without the raising of multiple disciplinary
conflicts, generally between, on one side, anthropologists and archaeologists
and, on the other side, ethnologists 1. Professionalisation in prehistoric archaeology was also expressed through a shared conception of an ongoing
modernisation of this field of studies. This enthusiastic belief in the progress
of methods and knowledge in prehistoric archaeology can be read in text
written by Annette Laming–Emperaire (1917–1977)2, Leroi–Gourhan3 and as
well as by Laplace, as previously illustrated. Given that professional purpose
and the opportunities offered by the contemporary scientific policies, it was
possible for Laplace to hope for a career in the professional organisations of
scientific research.
1.4. Lap lace’s trajector y in the pr ofess ional org anis ations of ar chaeolog y
From 1950 to 1983, Laplace made his career in the CNRS. I will now
briefly summarise his trajectory, highlighting the support he received from
central actors of the 1950s who have been identified in the preceding text. The
underlying idea is that a social dimension of professionalisation relies on the
development of relationships with the key actors of the field.
His first professional activity was education: from 1938, Laplace was a
primary teacher in the Esquiule public school (Basses–Pyrénées). Due to the
support of Louis Méroc and Henri Breuil4, Laplace was selected by the
twentieth section of the CNRS in October 1950 and got his first annual
contract as attaché de recherches 5. In 1953, he obtained his reassignment from
the Ministry of National Education to the CNRS: no longer a teacher, this
administrative decision made him a researcher 6. In 1954, two significant
1
In 1969, Léon Pales (1905–1988) summarised the evolution of this CNRS section and claimed that the
division between its three components was ineluctable. See L. Pales, Réflexion sur la section 23 du CNRS,
document dated 10 Mar. 1969 and addressed to Pierre Monbeig, Jacques Ruffié, Denise Ferembach & Denise de
Sonneville–Bordes, BOR 41, SRA.
2

See A. Laming–Emperaire (éd.), La découverte du passé.

3

See A. Leroi–Gourhan, Les fouilles préhistoriques. Technique et méthodes.

4

See Letter from Henri–Victor Vallois to Henri Breuil, 16 Nov. 1950, BR 42, MNHN.

5

See Letter from Louis Méroc to Henri Breuil, 20 Jan. 1951, BR 37, MNHN.

6

Decision dated 13 Jan. 1953. Letter from the Inspecteur of the Basses–Pyrénées academic region to

Sébastien Plutniak

118

events marked his professional recognition. First, he was suggested for the
Girard Prize, a three–year grant from the Association française pour l’avancement des sciences 1, an organisation in which Henri–Victor Vallois was
involved. Second, he was appointed corresponding member of the Commission des Monuments Historiques for the prehistoric sites of the Basses–
Pyrénées département2. The same year, he contributed to the reorganization of
the gallery of prehistory in the natural history museum of Toulouse, under the
supervision of Louis Méroc3. A turning point of his professional career
occurred in 1956, when he was recruited as a member of the École française
de Rome, due to the support of Henri Breuil4. He was the first prehistoric
archaeologist recruited in this prestigious institution and he stayed there for
two years, from 1956 to 1958. However, despite this prestigious position, his
professional progression was too slow for him in the following years. He
wrote to Jean Bayet (1892–1969), director of the École française de Rome,
complaining: I am currently forty–one years old and my scientific future may
be undeniably compromised by the delay of this appointment.5
Finally, in October 1960, he was promoted to chargé de recherche by the
CNRS with a permanent contract6. His progression though the CNRS
hierarchy continued with his promotion in 1968 as maître de recherche7,
notably supported by Henri–Victor Vallois and Lionel Balout (1907–1992)8.
During this period the Université de Pau et des Pays de l’Adour in Pau was
being created, after the discovery of important gas resources in the western
part of the Pyrenees in 1951 9. The university opened in 1971. Laplace was in
charge of a course on the geology and archaeology of the Quaternary Period.
He also participated in the council of the regional studies department of the
Institut universitaire de recherche scientifique (IURS). This organization
aimed to centralise the management of research resources in Pau. Finally, in
1978, Laplace was promoted directeur de recherche, this time supported by
Henri Delporte and by the ethnologist Georges Condominas (1921–2011) who

Laplace, 13 Jan. 1953, Couartou’s files.
1
Decision dated 27 Feb. 1954. See Séance du 23 juin 1955 in: Bulletin de la Société préhistorique de
France 52, 5–6/1955, p. 253.
2
Decree dated 25 Jan. 1954. Letter from the sous–directeur des monuments historiques to Laplace, 12
Mar. 1954, Couartou’s files.
3

See Letter from Laplace to François Bordes, 14 Feb. 1954, BOR33, SRA.

4

On the scientific and institutional motives of the recruitment of Laplace at the École française de Rome
see S. Plutniak & M. Tarantini, An influential outsider, pp. 80–83.
5
Letter from Laplace to Jean Bayet, 3 Oct. 1959, EFR: J’ai actuellement quarante et un ans et mon avenir
scientifique risque d’être indéniablement compromis par ce retard de nomination.
6

See Letter from Laurichesse (on behalf of the CNRS) to Laplace, 18 Nov. 1960, Couartou’s files.

7

See Letter from Louis Plin to Laplace, 7 Feb. 1968, Couartou’s files.

8

Letter from Henri–Victor Vallois to Laplace, 13 Apr. 1968, MNP.

9

Creation of the university by the decree no. 70–1174 dated 17 Feb. 1970.

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...

119

was the director of the thirtieth section of the CNRS1. Laplace retired five
years later, in 1983.
Given this summary, Laplace’s trajectory seems representative of the new
kind of professional career which was possible after WWII. However, a
significant aspect of his scientific activities has not been addressed, namely
the role played by scientific societies.
2. The growth and resilience of archaeological societies
In this section, I show that during the twentieth century, the development
of professional archaeological organisations did not lead to the complete
dismissal of archaeological societies. Laplace’s career is taken as an example
of organizational crossover and of the inter–dependency between societies and
professional organisations.
2.1. General summar y of the develop ment of ar chaeolog ical s o cieties
The development of scientific societies in France was an important trend
during the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth century. Its
acme was noted by some authors as occurring in the 1930s (see Figure 4),
declining after WWII2. During the 1940s, there was general concern about the
future of scientific societies, voiced by actors of these societies and by the
promoters of new research organisations. On one hand, the reform of the
CNRS initiated by Frédéric Joliot–Curie in 1944 was a landmark for the
institutional organisation of science in France, and for prehistoric archaeology
in particular since it marked the start of its rapid growth. The decline of
scientific societies worried the supervisors of the professional organisation, as
illustrated by the report on the funding of these societies signed by Lucien
Febvre (1878–1956), member of the historical commission of the CNRS3. On
the other hand, the fear that the professionalisation of scientific practice
implied the demise of the scientific societies was an ongoing concern4.
Actually, the relationships between scientific societies and the growing
professional research organizations were a complex issue: on one hand, the
new legal regulations and the new professional organisations implied a new
control given to the professional researchers; on the other hand, actors
involved in both types of organisations were not uncommon and continuous

1
See Letter from Henri Delporte to Laplace, 7 Apr. 1977 and letter from Georges Condominas to Laplace,
15 Sep. 1979, Couartou’s files.
2

See J.–P. Chaline, Sociabilité et érudition, pp. 221–225.

3

See Réunion de la XVe Commission du 18 mars 1943, Archives Nationales, CNRS, 800 284, liasse 48,
mentioned by È. Gran–Aymerich, Les chercheurs de passé, 1798–1945, p. 460.
4
In his conclusion, J.–P. Chaline, Sociabilité et érudition, p. 225, asks: Were the science societies only a
temporary palliative to the shortcomings of the universities and to the lack of public support for research ? [Les
sociétés savantes n’auraient–elles été qu’un palliatif temporaire aux insuffisances des universités et à l’absence
de soutiens publics à la recherche?]

Sébastien Plutniak

120

attempts were made to initiate collaborations between professional institutions
and scientific societies 1.
To obtain a general picture of the evolution of archaeological societies, I
rely on the data provided online2 by the Comité des travaux historiques et
scientifiques (CTHS), an organisation created in 1834 that aimed to federate
the multiple scientific societies. I selected all the organisations – 104 societies
in total3 – considered as relevant by the CTHS (either named society or
association) and tagged as related to archaeology (see Table 5).
decade
n

1820
2

1830
5

1840
2

1850
1

1870
2

1880
2

1890
3

1900
2

1910
2

decade
n

1920
4

1930
2

1940
3

1950
8

1960
5

1970
9

1980
8

1990
3

2000
3

Table 5: Number of archaeological societies founded in France by decades between 1824 and 2004. Data: Comité des travaux historiques et scientifiques.
I distinguished between three groups of societies according to their
thematic scopes: multidisciplinary societies which combine for instance
historical, folklore, artistic and archaeological studies; archaeological societies
without specific scopes; and societies specialised in prehistorical archaeology.
A temporal analysis of these data shows, first, that the general trend during the
period 1824–2004 was an increase in the number of organisations; second,
that societies with a specialisation in prehistoric archaeology did not appear
before the early 1900s; and third, that the number of generic archaeological
society increased during the 1960s and 1970s, while the number of prehistoric
archaeological societies suddenly increased in the mid–1970s (see Figure 5).
Mapping these data shows the unequal distribution of these societies in
France (see Figure 6). A notable low density can be observed in the west
Pyrenees region, which remains unchanged throughout the 1824–2004 period.
Indeed, due to their remote and mountainous locations, the Basque
country and Béarn were less closely monitored by the decentralised state
institution for archaeology, the Direction des Antiquités préhistoriques et
historiques, established in Bordeaux4. The state control started to increase
from 1991 with the creation of the Service régional de l’archéologie5.
1

See È. Gran–Aymerich, Les chercheurs de passé, 1798–1945, pp. 460–461.

2

Data extracted in July 2017. Archived page can be seen at https://web.archive.org/web/*/http://cths.fr/an/
and the resulting data set is available at http://dx.doi.org/10.7910/DVN/S2ZPXL [retrieved Nov. 19, 2017].
3

Note that the rate of organisations that disappeared is under–estimated in this dataset.

4

In 1966 the archaeological administrative divisions are redesigned and these regions are no longer under
the control of the 10 th region showed in figure 1: the 10th region is divided between the new 13 th and 14th regions.
See Decree no. 65–49 dated 11 Jan. 1965 «fixant les Circonscriptions archéologiques» in: Journal Officiel,
21 Jan. 1965, p. 547.
5
Interview of Christian Normand, government officer at the Service régional de l’archéologie, 5 Jun.
2017. On the transformation of the Direction des Antiquités préhistoriques et historiques into the Services
régionaux de l’archéologie as parts of the Direction régionales des affaires culturelles see J. Tarrête,

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...

121

2.2. S ituation in the s ou thwest of France
Laplace was born in Pau, and as a man who was firmly attached to his
home region, he lived in various places but always in the Béarn. After his
demobilisation in 1947, he settled in Jurançon and, later, moved to a smaller
village, Coarraze, around 1963. To get an idea of the possible local intellectual
and social resources Laplace had access to, it is worthwhile to look at the
geographical distribution of the scientific organisations. First, we note that
before WWII, the region had relatively few scientific societies. They were
concentrated in the two main regional cities, Toulouse and Bordeaux (see
Figure 4).
Concerning archaeology after the war, we have already note that in 1953
this part of France had no professional organizations (see Figure 2). A similar
observation can be made for the scientific societies dedicated to archaeology. I
then consulted a smaller extraction of the data compiled by the Comité des
travaux historiques et scientifiques. I extracted the societies with an archaeological aim and then selected those which existed in 1953 (see Figure 7).
There was only one society in the western part of the Pyrenees and it was
not specifically dedicated to prehistoric archaeology: the Association régionaliste du Béarn, du Pays basque et des contrées de l’Adour, created in 1917 and
located in Pau. From Laplace’s location, the closest organisation for prehistoric archaeology was the Société préhistorique de l’Ariège, located in Foix
(see Figure 7, eastern Pyrenees). Created in 1945 by Romain Robert (1912–
1991), this society published a journal entitled Bulletin de la Société préhistorique de l’Ariège. Préhistoire, spéléologie ariégeoise. As indicated by the title,
this society encompassed both speleology and prehistoric archaeology.
To summarise, these results give a picture of the situation and of the
resources available to Laplace when he started his archaeological activities. I
turn now to the ways he managed his involvements both in local and non–
local scientific organisations.
2.3. Lap lace’s continued invo lvement in ar chaeolog ical s ocieties
Laplace’s first archaeological membership was in 1948, when he joined
the Société préhistorique française. Admission in this society required
sponsorship by a member: Laplace benefited from the sponsorship of Louis
Méroc and Raoul Cammas (1905–1987), two archaeologists he worked with
from 1947 at the Montmaurin excavations directed by Méroc 1. His membership to the Société préhistorique française, a national–scale society, was a
significant step. At the beginning of the 1950s, the members were predominantly located in the Paris region. An increasing membership from the
southwest of France was noticeable, even if it was not yet locally organised 2.
Due to his location and his interest in the Béarnese and Basque cultures,
Laplace was also involved in societies with regional aims.
L’archéologie, une discipline en partage.
1

See Séance du 22 Avril 1948 in: Bulletin de la Société préhistorique de France 45, 3–4/1948, p. 86.

2

See P. Soulier, Un siècle de Bulletin de la Société préhistorique française (1904–2004) ... , p. 56.

Sébastien Plutniak

122

In 1946, José Miguel de Barandiarán, exiled in France since 1936, created
the Institut basque de recherches Ikuska in the village of Sare (Basses–
Pyrénées). Laplace’s membership in Ikuska is recorded in 1948 and 1949 1. He
contributed actively, being in charge of the speleology section alongside Jesús
Elosegui Irazusta (1907–1979), and published three articles in the first issues
of Ikuska. Documents et questionnaires, the institute journal2. In the same
period, Laplace also joined the Société internationale d’études Basques
«Gernika» (SIEB) created in 1948 in Bayonne3. The same year, the Ikuska
institute and the Gernika society organised the seventh congress of Basque
studies – the first congress in exile – in Biarritz, in which Laplace also participated4. Laplace was also a teacher in the summer courses, conversaciones,
organised by Ikuska at the Musée basque in Bayonne in 1949 and 19505.
From the early 1950s, Laplace relied on his memberships in various
scientific societies to contribute to the local organisation of archaeological
research. Two examples can be given. In 1951, he was a member of the
Société méridionale de spéléologie et de préhistoire (SMSP) and assumed the
function of secretary of the section related to the western Pyrenees region 6.
His involvement is still documented in 1953 and in 1954, but Laplace was no
longer mentioned from 1958 in the publications of the society. Furthermore, in
1953 Laplace created a laboratory of prehistoric archaeology and an exhibition gallery inside the Pau Museum of fine arts 7. The same year, with some
collaborators, he took the initiative to gather the local members of the Société
préhistorique française:
Chaired by the eminent Basque archaeologist, the
Abbot J. N.[M.] de Barandiaran, Director of the
Institute of Basque Research, a meeting was held at
the Prehistoric Archaeology Laboratory of the
Museum of Pau, attended by various members of the
French Prehistoric Society. At the end of this first
meeting, it was decided to periodically group the
members of the French Prehistoric Society of our
region in order to collaborate. The members of the
French Prehistoric Society who were not informed,
1

See J.–C. Larronde, Histoire du VII ème Congrès d’Études Basques. Biarritz, 1948, p. 42.

2

On the paintings of the Etxeberri cave see G. Laplace–Jauretche, Etxeberri’ko–karbia (La Grotte
d’Etcheberry). On his surveys and excavations in the west Pyrenees see G. Laplace–Jauretche, Prospections et
fouilles. On the paintings of Chachiloaga cave see G. Laplace–Jauretche, Nouvelles peintures préhistoriques en
Haute–Soule. Chachiloaga.
3

J.–C. Larronde, Histoire du VIIème Congrès d’Études Basques. Biarritz, 1948, p. 59.

4
The congress was held from the 12 th to the 19th September 1948. See J.–C. Larronde, Histoire du
VIIème Congrès d’Études Basques. Biarritz, 1948.
5
The first course was held from the 29 th August to the 3th September 1949 (see Conversaciones de Ikuska
in: Eusko Jakintza 3, 4–5–6/1949, p. 364) and the second from the 4 th–9th September 1950 (see Conversaciones
de «Ikuska» año 1950 (del 4 al 9 de Septiembre en el Musée Basque in: Eusko Jakintza 5, 4–5–6/1950, p. 385.
6

See SMSP, Bulletin de liaison, no. 5, Nov. 1951, p. 6.

7

See SMPS, Bulletin de liaison, no. 7, Nov. 1953, p. 10.

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...

123

were asked if they wished to be summoned later, to
contact one of the following members: Mr the Abbot
J. N.[M.] de Barandiaran, in Sare, Mr Bouchet[r], 44
rue Victor–Hugo in Mauléon, Mr Laplace–Jauretche,
3 avenue de Gélos, Jurançon.1
The same year, Laplace joined the Société des Arts, Lettres et Sciences de
Pau, and he remained a member for a long period until at least 19712. He
participated in society gatherings, gave two oral communications which were
published afterwards in the society journal: a first one in 1960, entitled Les
grottes d’Oxocelhaya3 and a second one in 1963, entitled Problèmes de
l’origine de l’aurignacien à la lumière des fouilles de la grotte Gatzarria4.
Beyond the national borders, Laplace also joined foreign archaeological
societies. A first example is in Italy. During his stay at the École française de
Rome, he was invited to become a member of the Istituto Italiano di
Paleontologia Umana in 19585, an institution created in 1927 in Florence on
the model of the French Institut de paléontologie humaine6. A second example
concerns the Grupo de ciencias naturales Aranzadi, created in 1947 by Jesús
Elosegui Irazusta in San Sebastián–Donostia. Laplace became a member in
1963, when he aimed to study the lithic collections from the Urtiaga cave
preserved by the Aranzadi society7. Afterwards, Laplace kept close contact
with basque archaeologists for subsequent decades. He published two papers
in Munibe, the society journal8, and remained a member of Aranzadi until
1980. This overview of Laplace’s involvement in various scientific societies
1
The mistakes of the original text are reproduced. This article comes from an unidentified journal, without
author and date but can be cross–dated to 1953, MNP:
À l a S o c i é t é Pr é h i s t o r i q u e Fr a n ç a i s e
Groupe de recherches des Pyrénées Occidentales
Sous la présidence de l’éminent archéologue basque, M. l’abbé J. N.[M.] de
Barandiaran, directeur de l’Institut de Recherches Basque, une réunion s’est
tenue au laboratoire d’archéologie préhistorique du Musée de Pau, à
laquelle assistaient divers membres de la Société Préhistorique Française. À
l’issue de cette première réunion, il a été décidé de grouper périodiquement
les membres de la Société Préhistorique Française de notre région en vue
d’une collaboration. Les adhérents de la Société Préhistorique Française qui
n’ont pu être avisé, sont priés, s’ils désirent être ultérieurement convoqués,
de se mettre en relation avec l’un des membres suivants: M. l’abbé J. N.[M.]
de Barandiaran, à Sare, M. Bouchet[r], 44 rue Victor–Hugo à Mauléon,
M. Laplace–Jauretche, 3 avenue de Gélos, Jurançon.
2

See Bulletin de la Société des sciences, lettres et arts de Pau 7 (4e série), 1972, p. 429.

3
Presentation given the 27 Feb. 1960 and published as G. Laplace–Jauretche, Les grottes d’Oxocelhaya à
Saint–Martin d’Arberoue.
4

Talk presented the 22 Feb. 1963 and published as G. Laplace, Le problème de l’origine de l’Aurignacien
à la lumière des fouilles de la Grotte de Gatzarria.
5

See Letter from Alberto Broglio to Laplace, 27 Mar. 1958, MNP.

6

M. Tarantini, Dal fascismo alla repubblica.

7
His membership dated 14 Nov. 1963. See Aranzadiania 74 (2a serie, n. 8), Enero 1964, p. 92. See also
Acta de la reunión de la Sección de Prehistoria del G. de C. N. Aranzadi, celebrada el 26 de Octubre de 1963,
folder 243–1 Actas sección prehistoria, Aranzadi.
8

See G. Laplace, Solutréen et foyers solutréens & G. Laplace, De l’application des coordonnées ... .

Sébastien Plutniak

124

shows the weight of this type of scientific organisation in his scientific activities. One might conclude that, in his case, the professional organisation and
the scientific societies were of equal importance. However, I must qualify this
assumption by looking at a particular event that occurred at the beginning of
the 1950s.
2.4. Ear ly 1950s cr is is : Lap lace’s denial of the scientific s oci eties
In the early 1950s Laplace and François Bordes were close friends and
collaborated in various fieldworks (Pech de l’Azé, Gatzarria: 1952, 1953,
Montmaurin: 1949, 1951). They had a lively correspondence, sharing aspects
of both their private and professional lives. In 1951, Laplace informed Bordes
about the difficulties he encountered with the SMSP and announced he would
resign from the society and from his secretarial position1. One year later,
Laplace suddenly resigned from many of the societies in which he was
involved2. He wrote to Bordes about his surprise that the societies had no
reactions:
Really, I will remember the beginning to this year
1952! How many things ended! First, the SOCIETIES, large and small, obscure or famous, scientific
or not scientific, to which I had, with the unconsciousness of youth and with the naivety of the little
shepherds, given my support and my heart. And if it
was only a question of support! But no, Sir, I had also
accepted responsibilities, as incongruous as varied.
[...] I THREW THE SOCIETIES OUT OF THE
WINDOW ... I was expecting a terrible row. Nothing.
NOTHING ... but the song of the westerly wind that
was pushing the clouds. So, I took off my beret and I
felt JUGARA in my heart, coiled, swinging its moon
head.3
Laplace’s surprise at the society being nonchalant to his resignations came
with a worry: the control that Louis Méroc had over him, as the director of the
tenth prehistoric archaeological region (see map in Figure 1):
1

Letter from Laplace to François Bordes, 27 Feb. 1951, BOR 33, SRA.

2

On this rupture with the scientific societies see also S. Plutniak, L’innovation méthodologique ... .

3

Letter from Laplace to François Bordes, 26 Jan. 1952, BOR 33, SRA:
Vraiment, je me souviendrai de ce début d’année 1952! Que de choses se sont
liquidées! D’abord les SOCIÉTÉS, grandes et petites, obscures ou célèbres,
savantes ou pas savantes, auxquelles j’avais dans l’inconscience de la
jeunesse et la naïveté des petits bergers, donné mon adhésion et mon cœur. Et
s’il ne s’était agi que d’adhérer! Mais non, Monsieur, avait accepté des
responsabilités, aussi incongrues que variées. [...] J’AI FOUTU LES
SOCIÉTÉS PAR LA FENÊTRE ... Je m’attendais à un terrible vacarme. Rien.
RIEN ... que le chant du vent d’ouest qui poussait les nuages. Alors j’ai
enlevé mon béret et j’ai senti JUGARA dans mon cœur, lové, qui balançait sa
tête de lune.

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...

125

Excavations are reserved for him [Méroc] and for the
people of Toulouse ... and to me, the test pits. I am
certainly not capable of digging a site without Mr
Lacombe, Mr Mothe, Mr Delaplace and Mr Cammas,
for example ... See how the first clandestine excavation of Boucher in Aussurucq concluded. Greetings to
the wise master, who declares that peace does not
reign in the hearts, who calmly judges without
distinction, the idiots who pillage the sites and those
who try to stop the misdeeds of pretentious beasts.
[...] One divides, one arbitrates, and one reigns. I
CANNOT ACCEPT IT ANYMORE. I defend the
witnesses of the past at the same time as my future,
my profession. M[éroc] exceeds his role as director.
He uses it. You know the affection, the gratitude I
have for him, how much I appreciate his methods, the
honesty of his work ... but he does not hold me with a
string ... MADAM, the umbilical cord is broken, the
bird has left the nest, it is the law of the world.1
We saw earlier that Laplace had never ceased to be a member of various
societies. Hence, the announcement of his sudden withdrawal from the
societies in 1952, but in the end he did not do so with respect to all of them.
Given these elements, one might think that later Laplace and his
collaborators would have organised their activities either on the model of
professional organisations or on the model of scientific societies. But they did
not. The 1952 incident gives a key to understanding why. On one hand, it can
be seen as a moment of clear demarcation between professional and amateur
prerogatives. It corresponds to the boundary work coined by Thomas Gieryn 2,
an effort made by the actors to delimit the extent of their scientific legitimacy
and to exclude some practitioners. This typical form of conflict between
categories of actors has been studied in numerous cases, in archaeology by
Philippa Levine3 and in other fields such as zoology by Susan Leigh Star and
1

Letter from Laplace to François Bordes, 26 Jan. 1952, BOR 33, SRA:
À lui [Méroc] et aux toulousains les fouilles ... à moi, les sondages. Sans
doute ne suis je pas foutu de fouiller un gisement sans MM. Lacombe, Mothe,
Delaplace, Cammas, etc. ... Voyez aussi la conclusion donnée à la première
fouille clandestine de Boucher à Aussurucq. Salut au maître sage, qui déclare
que la paix ne règne pas dans les cœurs, qui juge sereinement et sur le même
plan les imbéciles qui saccagent les gisements et ceux qui s’efforcent de
mettre un frein aux méfaits des couillons prétentieux. [...] On divise, on
arbitre, et on règne. MOI, JE NE MARCHE PLUS. Je défends les témoins du
passé en même temps que mon avenir, mon métier. M[éroc] outrepasse son
rôle de Directeur. Il s’en sert. Vous savez l’affection, la reconnaissance que
j’ai pour lui, que je pense du bien de ses techniques, de l’honnêteté de son
travail ... mais qu’il ne compte pas me tenir par une ficelle ... MADAME, le
cordon ombilical est rompu, l’oiseau a quitté le nid, c’est la loi du monde.

2

See T. F. Gieryn, Boundary–work and the demarcation of science from non–science.

3

See P. J. A. Levine, The amateur and the professional.

Sébastien Plutniak

126

James Griesemer1. In these conflicts the actors can rely on various resources
to oppose their rivals. Star and Griesemer analysed the relations between
administrators, and amateur and professional scientists working in a natural
history museum. These authors emphasised the mediation function of some
boundary objects such as typologies, ideal types, and standardised forms. It is
accepted that standardisation is a way to increase control: first of all on the
operations made by scientists and, possibly, also on the scientists themselves.
In this perspective, legal regulation (which is a standardisation of social
norms) also appears as a potential resource for the actors engaged in demarcation conflicts within a scientific field. However, even if Laplace’s typologie
analytique can be characterised as a boundary object, he did not intend to rely
further on standardisation – and even less on legal regulation – to shape a
collective method to practise science. Indeed, the 1952 incident was also, on
the other hand, an expression of the refusal of the new forms of administrative
and institutional control on archaeological activities. In the letter quoted
above, Laplace appears in an uncomfortable intermediate position establishing
distance with the scientific societies but also being limited in his actions by
the new legal and professional archaeological organisations. The position he
claims is defined by two aims: an epistemological purpose (to protect and to
study the traces of the past) and a more personal and ethical purpose: to ensure
his professional activity in acceptable conditions. I now address the ways
Laplace and his collaborators attempted to achieve these two aims.
3. Organisational alternatives for archaeological research
3.1. The Arud y gr oup : collective res ear ch and fu nd ing
In 1968, Laplace was promoted to maître de recherche. Vallois, who had
advised him since the beginning of his career, insisted in a letter on the
autonomy implied by this promotion: being maître de recherche means the
person is entitled to choose his own research topics, can apply for funding and
can assume the direction of a research group 2. Indeed, Laplace set up the
Centre de recherches d’Arudy in the Arudy village (Basses–Pyrénées) in 1968.
The Centre was located in the Hôtel de Poutz, an eighteenth century manor. It
had offices, a library, a laboratory, a conference room3, a dormitory, and a
kitchen. The next year, the first edition of the séminaire de typologie d’Arudy
was held there, from the 11th–16th August4. These initiatives seem to normally
fulfil what was expected of a professional research career. Once again, a detail
would lead to qualify this view: the foundation of the Arudy Center was not
negotiated with the CNRS hierarchy as one might expect, but was done in
collaboration with local institutions: namely, the Arudy municipality5 – whose
1

See S. L. Star & J. R. Griesemer, Institutional ecology, “translations” and boundary objects ... .

2

Letter from Henri–Victor Vallois to Laplace, 13 Apr. 1968, MNP.

3

Letter from Laplace to Henri–Victor Vallois, 18 Jun. 1971, MNP.

4

See the reports of the seminar in: I. Barandiarán, Arudy 1969. Coloquio internacional de tipología &
J. M. Merino, El coloquio internacional de Arudy.
5

Municipal decision of the 25 th September 1967. See G. Laplace, Rapport de fouilles Poeymau 1968, SRA.

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...

127

mayor was Georges Houraa, a friend of Georges Laplace 1 – and with the recently created national park of the Pyrenees, in which Laplace was called to
join the scientific board2.
At the same time, in 1969 3, Laplace was invited by Louis David (1927–
2016) to join the Centre de paléontologie stratigraphique of Lyon, a laboratory he created in 1963 and associated with the CNRS. Students and researchers
in Lyon such as Robert Vilain, Sabine Morelon or Denise Philibert took part in
the excavations directed by Laplace in the Pyrenees as well as in the Arudy
seminars. Nevertheless this partnership ended in 1974, due to a conflict about
the very nature of their collaboration. David wrote to Laplace and complained
about what he perceived as a lack of commitment:
You need to know there are deadlines, rules, forms.
You have done nothing of all this, it is hardly the
behavior of an adult researcher who is conscious of
his responsibilities. I have nevertheless spoken to Mr
Éluard about this small problem which we may be
able to resolve on friendly terms, but I repeat that on
the official level it is an additional demonstration of
your non–integration into a formal research
structure.4
Laplace answered with his own appreciation of the situation but, in any case,
this incident manifested once again the limits of Laplace’s involvement in the
official structures of research. Afterwards, he focused on his own Centre,
renamed the Centre de palethnologie stratigraphique «Eruri» from 1973
(Eruri stands for Arudy in Béarnais language 5). The annual seminars continued until 1989 and the centre published Dialektikê. Cahiers de typologie analytique every year from 1972 to 1987.
In 1981, the Centre de recherches archéologiques, a CNRS laboratory
created in 1970 to organise the archaeological research at the national level,
published a directory about this domain of research in France6. It gathers
information about 75 researchers, 550 museums and 270 research teams,
including the Centre de palethnologie stratigraphique. Its record provides
1

Interviews with Christine Cabon (11 May 2013) and Geneviève Marsan (12 May 2013).

2

Decree of the 10 May 1968 establishing the scientific board of the national park in: Journal Officiel,
31 May 1968, p. 5313.
3

Letter by Laplace to Louis David, 21 Mar. 1974, MNP.

4

Letter from Louis David to Laplace, 15 Mar. 1974, MNP:
Vous devez savoir qu’il existe des délais, des règles, des imprimés, que vous
n’avez rien fait de tout cela, ce n’est guère le comportement d’un chercheur
adulte et conscient de ses responsabilités. J’ai néanmoins parlé à M. Éluard
de ce petit problème que nous pourrons peut–être résoudre sur le plan amical
mais je vous répète que sur le plan officiel il est une démonstration
supplémentaire de votre non intégration dans une structure officielle de
recherche.

5

See P. Raymond, Dictionnaire topographique du département des Basses–Pyrénées ... , p. 14.

6

See M.–B. Chardenoux, B. Lequeux, A. Querrien & S. Roscian, Répertoire de la Recherche Archéologique Française.

Sébastien Plutniak

128

some basic information including the number of researchers (1: Laplace) and
the number of volunteer collaborators (4: Delia Laplace–Brusadin, Françoise
Lavaud, Michel Livache, and Sylvie Prudhomme). The presence of the Arudy
Centre in this directory manifests a form of recognition, but it also records an
unusual particularity: the sources of funding are said to be limited to personal
funding.
Of course, Laplace did not run his excavations or missions using only his
own financial resources. For most of his excavations, he received a grant from
the Conseil supérieur de la recherche archéologique (CSRA, the state institution in charge from 1964 of authorising the funding of excavations in France).
For instance, in 1973, he received 2500 F for his excavations in the Olha cave
and 1000 F for those in the Gatzarria cave1. Concerning his travels and
research missions, he did, for example, fieldwork in Tunisia in November
1955 funded by the Institut des hautes études de Tunis2. In 1970, the CNRS
granted him 2000 F for a study on public and private archaeological collections (probably in Rome, Florence and Ferrara) 3. Laplace had also received
occasional grants from foreign research institutions. In October 1971, he
completed a mission in Prague, Brno and Nitra, immediately followed by a
mission in Florence and Rome in November. He was funded by a collaboration between the CNRS and, respectively, the Czechoslovak Academy of
Science and the Italian Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (National Research
Council). The Spanish Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas
(Spanish National Research Council) also gave him a grant, in October 1974,
to study a lithic collection in Santander4.
However, all these sources of funding were personal grants. Hence, they
are not relevant to our purpose, which only concerns the collective organisation of archaeological research. In this respect, the Centre de palethnologie
stratigraphique relied on personal funding: Laplace’s funding and that of
people attending the annual seminars. Even publishing the journal of the
group, Dialektikê, was due to the volunteer work Laplace’s wife, Delia
Laplace (1924–1997) and to the subscription fees payed by the seminar
participants5. The financial particularity of this research group brings our
attention to other unusual aspects, in particular to Laplace’s own conception of
scientific research work, scientific autonomy and the scientific ethos.
3.2. Lap lace’s emp has is on autonomy
Most of the biographical accounts of Laplace emphasise the unusual particularities of his ethical viewpoints. This is particularly the case in reviewing

1
Conseil supérieur de la recherche archéologie. Section des antiquités préhistoriques, Séance des 26–27
février 1973, box 3, CEPAM.
2

See G. Laplace, Campagne de recherches en Tunisie. Novembre 1955, handwritten report, MNP.

3

See CNRS, Le CNRS dans le domaine de l’archéologie, 1970, box Gardin 3, CEPAM.

4

Examples taken from Laplace’s administrative records, Couartou’s files.

5

See Letter from Delia Laplace to Suzanne Simone, 3 May 1982, MNP.

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...

129

how the Spanish viewed him1. For instance, in Laplace’s obituary, the Basque
archaeologist Ignacio Barandiarán (1937–) wrote: He was not an usual
prehistorian [...] as an ethical model apparently for a few people (so few?)
and always as a critical thinker.2 Another example can be taken from a text
entitled Georges Laplace. La fuerza de la contradicción interna [The strength
of internal contradiction], written by the Catalan archaeologists Assumpció
Vila i Mitjà and Jordi Estévez Escalera:
The most important thing we learn from Laplace was
the possibility to harmonise a firm political position
based on the dialectical conception with the archaeological study of paleolithic materials. It was then
feasible to make coherent a political and philosophical Marxist position with an archaeological scientific
practice.3
In the following sections, drawing on Laplace’s own words and on the
judgements of his collaborators, I illustrate three aspects of Laplace’s scientific views and ethos. As illustrated by the previous quotations, his personal
influence was instrumental in shaping the collective life of the research group
in Arudy. Hence, addressing this individual level of analysis cannot be
omitted.
3.2.1. Sp ontaneity
A first theme concerns the high importance that Laplace gave to the idea
of spontaneity in this theoretical preferences (his sympathy for orthogenesis
and neo–lamarckist perspectives 4) and his conception of the collective practice
of science. This last aspect is illustrated in a letter sent in 1967 to Henri
Delporte. Laplace insists on the fact he never tried to popularise his method: in
his opinion, its users adopted it by themselves:
I have also never made any effort to disseminate my
method. As a result of my own experience, my method
has been developed for the sole joy of my own understanding of phenomena. [...] a group of young French,
Italian and Spanish researchers – now joined by
German, Swiss and even Czech researchers – spontaneously stated that not only had they adopted the
1

See also A. Sáenz de Buruaga, Recorrido y reflexiones en torno ... & F. Gusi i Jener, León y caballo ... .

2

I. Barandiarán, Georges Laplace (Pau 1918–Pau 2004), p. 327: No fue prehistoriador del común [...]
como referente ético aparentemente para unos pocos (¿tan pocos?) y como pensador crítico siempre.
3

A. Vila i Mitjà & J. Estévez Escalera, Georges Laplace, p. 141:
Lo más importante que pudimos aprender de Laplace fue la compatibilización de una postura política firme y la concepción dialéctica con el
estudio arqueológico de los materiales paleolíticos. Era posible hacer
coherente un posicionamiento político–filosófico marxista con una praxis
científica arqueológica.

4
In particular in his 1950s publications, Laplace referred to authors such as the Italian prehistorian Alberto
Carlo Blanc (1906–1960), the Swiss entomologist Paul Bovey (1905–1990) and the Spanish paleontologist
Miguel Crusafont i Pairó (1910–1983).

Sébastien Plutniak

130

analytical typology, but that they had also formed an
international group intended to advance it in its own
way ... there is much to do!1
This position related to the question of research practice organisation is
associated with a declared rejection of hierarchy.
3.2.2. Rejection of hierar chy
To understand the unusual characteristics of the Arudy group, the standard
ways in which research was organised in the main contemporary archaeological centres must be summarised. The events of May 1968 were decisive
for the reorganization of research and higher education in France 2. However,
at least in the case of prehistoric archaeology, the general distribution of
power and authority remained the same: Leroi–Gourhan dominated in Paris,
Pierre–Roland Giot (1919–2002) in Rennes, Henry de Lumley (1934–) in
Marseille and Bordes and Sonneville–Bordes held their position in Bordeaux.
The group gathered around Laplace considered Bordes and Sonneville–Bordes
(and their collaborators) as their principal rivals. For them, François Bordes
embodied the perfect archetype of an excessively authoritarian scholar 3,
contrasting with someone such as Laplace, who represented, to the contrary,
the possibility of free and collective thinking 4. Speaking about the Arudy
group, Ignacio Barandiarán insists on the irrelevance of the school concept:
according to him, there was no such school in Arudy and the main aim of the
group laid in free and critical debates:
[...] it is inappropriate, because oversimplified, to ask
if there was a “Laplace school (= ‘system’)”:
abhorring the word, he was only satisfied by the
attention of those who approached his texts and
listened directly to his opinions to know and discuss
them, contributing to the mutual enrichment of the
analysis.5
1

Letter from Laplace to Henri Delporte, 15 Nov. 1967, MNP:
Aussi n’ai–je jamais fait aucune espèce d’effort pour propager ma méthode.
Fruit de ma seule expérience, ma méthode a été mise au point pour la seule
joie de ma propre compréhension des phénomènes. [...] un ensemble de
jeunes chercheurs français, italiens et espagnols – auxquels se joignent
actuellement des chercheurs allemands, suisses et même tchèques – se sont
prononcés spontanément qui non seulement ont adopté la typologie
analytique mais ont jeté les bases d’un groupe international destiné à la faire
progresser selon ses propres voies et ... il y a fort à faire!

2

See the studies gathered in O. Orain (éd.), Les «années 68» des sciences humaines et sociales.

3

This view was also shared by other professional researchers, as Vallois who considered Bordes as an
autocrate. See Letter from Henri–Victor Vallois to Laplace, 13 Apr. 1968, MNP.
4

Interviews with Dominique Ebrard (8 Jun. 2017) and with Michel Livache (12 Mar. 2014) among others.

5

I. Barandiarán, Georges Laplace (Pau 1918–Pau 2004), p. 326:
[...] no es adecuada, por simple, la pregunta de si existe una «escuela (= “un
sistema”) de Laplace»: término que él aborrecía, sólo compensado por la
atención de cuantos se acercaron a sus textos y a escuchar directamente sus
opiniones para conocerlas y discutirlas contribuyendo al mutuo
enriquecimiento del análisis.

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...

131

When retired, Laplace published a vigorous pamphlet entitled Autorité et
tradition en taxinomie, criticising various social and political aspects of
academic research1. In this text, he opposes these aspects with the principle of
libre examen (free inquiry), referring to the eighteenth century Pyrenean philosopher Pierre Bayle2 (1647–1706). This theme is frequently attested in his
correspondences, for instance in the following letter to Jean–Georges Rozoy
(1922–, French physician and prehistoric archaeologist). Laplace contrasts
institutional research and its authoritative features with the genuine researcher
who stands supposedly far from any envy of power:
Scientific research is carried out in institutions governed by a strong, dominating hierarchy, a reflection
of the social hierarchy, inherited from religious
hierarchies and medieval academic institutions. The
genuine researcher, necessarily freed from the envy of
power, as well as from the taste for submission, enters
inevitably into opposition with a hierarchy which
generally refuses and discourages novelty, unless it
tolerates it in the hope of taking it. Are these the
professionals you are talking about?3
This excerpt also illustrates the distance Laplace finally went with his professional ideal and values and with his career ambitions, distancing himself
from his earlier claims in the 1950s.
3.2.3. Refraining fr om caree r ism
Laplace and Rozoy shared, although contradictory, a lengthy correspondence. Observing the complimentary closes of their exchanges is meaningful
for our aim. In a 1974 letter, Laplace signed off his letter by provokingly
emphasising the value of liberty and the universal equality of men: My
language is that of a free man held at the liberty of another man. A word to the
wise is enough! 4 Rozoy’s reply was: My language is that of a totally free man
to a professional researcher, which is not in itself dishonourable. I warmly
greet you.5 Hence, Rozoy proudly suggested that practising archaeology
within a professional framework provides less freedom than practising it in an
1

A text which has been translated into Spanish: G. Laplace, Autoridad y tradición en taxonomía.

2

See G. Laplace, Un exemple de nouvelle écriture de la grille typologique, p. 33.

3

Letter from Laplace to Jean–Georges Rozoy, 16 Sep. 1982, MNP:
Quant à la recherche, elle s’effectue dans des institutions régies par une
hiérarchie pesante, dominatrice, reflet de la hiérarchie sociale, héritière des
hiérarchies religieuses et des institutions universitaires médiévales. Le
chercheur véritable, nécessairement libre du goût du pouvoir comme du goût
de la soumission, entre fatalement en opposition avec une hiérarchie qui très
généralement refuse et décourage la nouveauté, à moins qu’elle ne la tolère
dans l’attente de la récupérer. Sont–ce là les professionnels dont vous parlez?

4
Letter from Laplace to Jean–Georges Rozoy, 12 Mar. 1974, MNP: Mon langage est celui d’un homme
libre tenu à la liberté d’un autre homme. À bon entendeur, salut!
5
Letter from Jean–Georges Rozoy to Laplace, 13 Apr. 1974, MNP: Mon langage est celui d’un homme
libre totalement à un chercheur professionnel ce qui n’est pas déshonorant. Je vous salue bien.

Sébastien Plutniak

132

unprofessional situation. More generally, this example manifests the subtle
manipulations of the symbolic and relative borders between the professional,
and amateur or non–professional situations.
For the members of the Arudy group, it was clear that the seminars were a
place of great intellectual liberty in contrast with the requirements of a
professional career. For instance, Ignacio Barandiarán stresses the contrasts
with the bureaucratic and management requirements in the contemporary
academic institutions:
Considering that, nowadays, the curricula and professional successes in archaeology are evaluated on the
number of conferences one has attended or organised, on the managing of interdisciplinary and costly
research programs, or on the publications (so often
determined/weighed up by one’s interest in its self–
marketing!) Laplace was an exception among all
[...].1
When Laplace was in trouble with the Centre de Paléontologie
stratigraphiques of Lyon, he replied to the criticism of his director, Louis
David, who declared him to be an asocial researcher:
“Isolated researcher?” No, autonomous researcher,
independent researcher, free researcher like his
research, indifferent to the bosses and their followers,
working calmly with his peers without career
concerns. The Centre of Stratigraphic Palaeontology
honoured him by opening its doors to him, in exactly
the same way as the centre is honoured by the
behaviour of a free man. Long live freedom!2
Laplace insisted on his disregard for any form of professional career
ambition in academic activities. In fact, Michel Livache – one of the most
involved actors of the Arudy group – said that [o]nly people who did not have
the need to live for, or make a career, in archaeology could come to Laplace3.
An ideal of non–professional practice was hence shared – at least – by some of
the group members. Indeed, several conflicts in the group occurred due to the
1

I. Barandiarán, Georges Laplace (Pau 1918–Pau 2004), p. 327:
Cuando se miden hoy en Arqueología los curricula y el éxito profesional por
el número de apariciones y/o protagonismos en congresos, en la gestión de
programas interdisciplinares y costosos o en la aparición/eco (¡tantas veces
determinado/dosificado por cada interesado en su propio marketing!)
Laplace fue la excepción de todos [...].

2

Letter from Laplace to Louis David, 21 Mar. 1974, MNP:
«Chercheur isolé?» Non, chercheur autonome, chercheur indépendant,
chercheur libre comme sa recherche, indifférent aux patrons et à leurs
clientèles, travaillant sereinement avec ses pairs sans souci de carrière. Le
Centre de Paléontologie stratigraphique l’a honoré en lui ouvrant ses portes
exactement dans la mesure où il est honoré par le comportement d’un homme
libre. Gora azkatasuna!

3
Interview with Michel Livache, 3 Dec. 2012: ne pouvaient venir à Laplace que des gens qui n’avait pas
besoin de vivre, de faire carrière en archéologie.

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...

133

incompatibility between this general ethic and the professional ambitions of
some participants.
All these statements inform us of the values shared among the members
of the Arudy group. However, differences with their actual practices and their
life trajectory can be observed. A simple measure of the actors’ involvement in
the Arudy group is obtained by summing their number of active years, i.e.
either by participating in the Arudy seminar or by publishing in the journal
Dialektikê or in Archivio di tipologia analitica (see Table 6). On this basis,
considering the ten most active actors, six had a professional position in
archaeology during their lifetime (Georges Laplace, François Lévêque, Jordi
Estévez Escalera, Fabio Martini, Paolo Gambassini). Four never did: besides
their archaeological activities, they were a primary school teacher (Michel
Livache), a social worker (André Crémillieux), Greek teacher (Hélène Crémillieux), and physician (Pierre–Louis Trotot). If we enlarge the sample to the
first twenty actors, we observe that only six of them did not get a professional
position in archaeology. These observations suggest that some of the Arudy
seminar participants had indeed career ambitions.
Name
Georges Laplace
Michel Livache
André Crémillieux
Hélène Crémillieux
François Lévêque
Pierre–Louis Trotot
Jordi Estévez Escalera
Paolo Gambassini
Jean Lesage
Fabio Martini

Active years
21
19
18
15
15
15
14
12
12
12

Name
Assumpció Vila i Mitjà
José María Merino Sanchez
Jean–Louis Voruz
Gérard Colmont
Annamaria Ronchitelli
Joël Vital
Francesc Gusi i Jener
Agostino Dani
Antonio Fandos
Carmen Olaria Puyoles

Active years
12
11
11
10
10
10
9
8
8
8

Table 6: The twenty most active participants in the typologie analytique group
based on their number of active years (participation in seminars or publications).
One of the main actors, Jean–Louis Voruz (1952–), had a life trajectory of
particular interest. If the historical evolution of archaeology was from
antiquarians to archaeologists1, Voruz’s history would go anticlockwise:
when he was 43 years old, after spending nine years as a maître d’enseignement et de recherche at the University of Geneva, he became a professional
antique and second–hand goods dealer. He did not give up his archaeological
works, as he was in charge of authorised excavations and continued to publish
his research2. This case radically contrasts with a previous case when a
participant of the Arudy group had to stop his involvement with the group due
1

A. B. Kehoe, Introduction, p. 1.

2

Interview with Jean–Louis Voruz, 15 May 2017.

Sébastien Plutniak

134

to a conflict with Laplace. Laplace explained the situation to Rozoy in a letter,
concluding that:
[...] like so many others, she attended our first
seminars without ever having expressed the desire to
‘join the tour’. We keep the best memories of her. If
we have, perhaps, helped her to become aware of
some problems, none of the compagnons were her
master. Her academic future cannot, in any way,
concern us.1
Laplace established a clear line between academic careers and participation in the Arudy group. The vocabulary he used is of interest: the terms tour,
compagnons, maître refer directly to the compagnonnage, a movement and
network of transmission and practice of craftsmanship, widely developed in
France since the eighteenth century. By the end of the 1970s, Laplace and his
collaborators intended to adopt some aspects of the compagnonnage in their
own collective archaeological practice.
3.3. The compag nonnag e as a mod el for the collective p ractice
of s cience
3.3.1. The comp ag nonnage’s reaction again st academicism
The compagnonnage has a long history, involving conflicts between its
different branches and attempts to bring them together. In the middle of the
twentieth century, important transformations occurred. In 1941, the Association ouvrière des Compagnons du Devoir et du Tour de France (AOCDTF)
was created with the support of the Vichy regime. Jean Bernard (1908–1994),
compagnon and stonecutter, played a prominent role. After the war, in 1953,
the Fédération Compagnonnique des Métiers du Bâtiment (FCMB) was
created in reaction against the AOCDTF. Raoul Vergez (1908–1977) appeared
as a key figure of this new component of the compagnonnage. Both Bernard
and Vergez attempted actively to enhance the cultural life and identity of the
movement, notably through a vigorous publishing initiative. Laplace had some
of these recently published books in his library, which shaped his inspiration.
A noteworthy aspect of this invigoration of the compagnonnage culture
concerns its self–definition in relation, on one hand, to the working–class
movement and, on the other hand, to academic knowledge and society.
Regarding this last point, Vergez developed a critical view of the university
that agreed with Laplace’s own views:
The tactile world has deliberately emasculated itself
on the steps of the University, in the blissful,
dogmatic, untouchable, quasi–Buddhist admiration it
carries to the so–called intellectual patriciate, this
1

Letter from Laplace to Jean–Georges Rozoy, 16 Sep. 1982, MNP:
[...] comme tant d’autres, [elle] a fréquenté nos premiers séminaires sans
jamais avoir manifesté le désir d’«entrer dans le tour». Nous gardons d’elle
le meilleur souvenir. Si nous l’avons, peut–être, aidée à prendre conscience
de certains problèmes, aucun des compagnons n’a été son maître. Son avenir
universitaire ne saurait, en aucune manière, nous concerner.

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...

135

caste of graduates who holds it on a lead like the
hunter keeps his pack of dogs, since the end of the
guilds in 1791 with the Isaac Le Chapelier law. Since
then, the prerogatives of the university patriciate have
continued to develop in all fields.1
Vergez, as a compagnon firmly bound to his traditions, did not have a
Marxist conception of society and did not consider dialectical reasoning as
important as Laplace did. However, the archaeologist shared Vergez’s critical
positions against academism, as shown in others excerpts from his letters to
Rozoy: Many young and old people, who abandon sterile and obsolete
academicism, open themselves to dialectical reason. Let us trust them: they do
not embarrass themselves with timely syncretism!2
Ten years later, Laplace describes the adoption of the compagnonnage
culture and methods in the Arudy group, precisely against these supposed
academic vices:
Against the feudal and clienteles systems, against the
arguments of authority and the dogmas, researchers
denying accepted ideas have created a new devoir
compagnonnique whose headquarters is in Arudy.
They publish “Dialektikê. Cahiers de typologie analytique” and organise open meetings, by invitation, to
those they deem likely to respect the rules that have
made the perpetuation of the old devoirs.3
We saw that Laplace’s laboratory, the Centre de palethnologie stratigraphique did not have any official existence in the CNRS structure, and he
received no funding from this body. In the previous quoted letter, Laplace
asserts the creation of a new compagnonnage; one might nevertheless wonder
what kind of existence this collective entity had.
3.3.2. Ar chaeolog y as a métier compagonn ique ?
In 1975, Laplace wrote to the FCMB and AOCDTF. He aimed to integrate
1

R. Vergez, Les enclumes de cristal, p. 427:
Le monde tactile s’est volontairement émasculé sur les marches de
l’Université, dans l’admiration béate, dogmatique, intouchable, quasi
bouddhique qu’il porte au patriciat soi–disant intellectuel, cette caste de
diplômés qui le tient en laisse comme le veneur tient sa meute de chiens,
depuis la fin des corporations survenues en 1791 avec la loi Isaac Le
Chapelier. Depuis lors, les prérogatives du patriciat universitaire n’ont cessé
de se développer en tous domaines.

2
Letter from Laplace to Jean–Georges Rozoy, 12 Mar. 1974, MNP: Nombreux sont les jeunes et les moins
jeunes qui, abandonnant les positions stériles des académismes désuets, s’ouvrent à la raison dialectique.
Faisons–leur confiance: ils ne s’embarrassent pas de syncrétisme opportun!
3

Letter from Laplace to Jean–Georges Rozoy, 16 Sep. 1982, MNP:
Face aux systèmes des féodalités et des clientèles, des chercheurs niant les
idées reçues, l’argument d’autorité et les dogmes ont créé un nouveau devoir
compagnonnique dont le siège est à Arudy. Ils éditent «Dialektikê. Cahiers de
typologie analytique» et organisent des rencontres ouvertes, sur invitation, à
ceux qu’ils jugent susceptibles de respecter les règles qui ont fait la pérennité
des vieux devoirs.

Sébastien Plutniak

136

prehistoric archaeology as a compagnonnage craft1. Generally speaking, the
inclusion or exclusion of specific crafts is a common aspect of compagnonnage history2. Hence, there were no a priori reasons for not considering the
new prehistoric archaeological practice, in which manual work was an
important part, as a compagnonnage craft. In this context, in a newspaper
article about the collaboration between the Centre de palethnologie stratigraphique of Arudy and the Centre de paléontologie stratigraphique of Lyon for
the excavation of the Poyemau cave, Robert Vilain was quoted as saying:
It is pointless to get into research if one does not
know how to use one’s hands. A laboratory apparatus
is first and foremost an instrument invented by a good
workman. It is also fair to say that all who are here
have faith in the value of their work. It is their
passion and that is why we will find it very natural to
participate.3
However, according to the leaders of the compagnonnage organizations,
this manual work was not enough to justify the integration of prehistoric
archaeology. Laplace received an answer from Jean Bernard on behalf of the
council of the AOCDTF:
The trade you would like to include in the
Compagnonnage does not correspond to the required
criteria: the Compagnons are above all manual workers, creators by their guild houses, of work from a
material. But, there is nothing to prevent you from
creating a “Society of Scientific Researchers”, with
clearly defined characters and goals, with its rules,
obligations, and conditions of membership. The
Compagnons cannot help you in this matter, being
absolutely incompetent [...].4

1

Letter from Laplace to the AOCDTF, 28 Jan. 1975 (letter mentioned but not recovered).

2

For a summary of this history see N. Adell, Arts de faire, arts de vivre, pp. 120–121.

3

L. Laborde–Balen, L’université de Lyon a pris en charge le gisement préhistorique du Pouey–Maü, à
Arudy, où d’importants travaux ont commencé in: Sud ouest, publication date not available, cross–dated March
1968:
Il est inutile de se lancer dans la recherche si l’on ne sait pas se servir de ses
mains. Un appareil de laboratoire, c’est d’abord un instrument inventé par
un bon ouvrier. Il est bon de dire aussi que tous ceux qui sont ici ont foi en la
valeur de leur travail. C’est pour eux une passion et c’est pour cela que nous
trouverons tout naturel de mettre la main à la pâte.
4

Letter from Jean Bernard to Laplace, 15 Feb. 1975, Mourre archives:
Le métier que vous souhaiteriez voir réunir au Compagnonnage ne
correspond pas aux critères nécessaires: les Compagnons sont avant tout des
manuels, créateurs par leurs maisons de travaux exécutés dans une matière.
Mais rien ne vous empêche de former une «Compagnie de chercheurs
scientifiques» dont le caractère et les buts seraient définis très nettement,
dotée de ses règles, de ses obligations, de ses conditions d’adhésion. Les
Compagnons ne peuvent vous aider en la matière, étant absolument
incompétents [...].

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...

137

As a matter of fact, even if archaeologists do manual work, draw artefacts,
and have a close relation with the past, they do not undertake creative work by
transforming raw materials. Hence, both compagnonnage organisations
refused their integration. Nevertheless, after this refusal, Laplace and four of
his closest collaborators continued to share cultural references, social roles
and songs related to the compagnonnage1. A particular consideration was
given to a specific form of autonomy also related to the compagnonnage,
namely autodidacticism.
3.3.3. Au tod id acticism
The distinction between professional and amateur condition and practice
is closely related to the way knowledge is transmitted. Laplace refused any
kind of authority founded on a fixed knowledge, and to the contrary, he
emphasised the unlimited nature of the learning process in science, which a
genuine scientist must accept. This is illustrated in a letter to Rozoy in which
Laplace denies the distinction between professional and amateur and
emphasises the necessity of a non–dogmatic and thorough education:
[...] we are all amateurs. Fortunately. The jacks of all
trades are the plague, considering themselves superior to all learning. Worse yet are the obsessed. With
them, there is nothing to do. When the jacks of all
trades or obsessed hold the power of teaching, the
quest for truth is replaced by the duty to retain the
word of the teacher, and scientific teaching becomes a
teaching of submission integrated into a repressive
culture.2
Transmission is a matter of high importance in compagnonnage
organizations. It encompasses both the transmission of knowledge as well as
of practices, ethics and traditions. Laplace’s initial interest in the transmission
of knowledge can be dated back to his 1940s war experiences, when he was
already in touch with some compagnons. It is noteworthy to mention this part
of his life, as his time in the Resistance made him highly regarded by
members of the Arudy group.
In September 1941 the Vichy regime created the École des cadres
d’Uriage, a school dedicated to the training of future French executives. The
school settled in the Uriage castle, in the Vercors region (Alps). A lively
intellectual and cultural dynamism grew there, attracting many people,
1
Interview with Michel Livache, 12 Mar. 2014 & interview with André Crémillieux & Hélène Crémillieux, 17 May 2017. An in–depth analysis of this adoption of the compagnonnage will be given in a coming
article.
2

Letter from Laplace to Jean–Georges Rozoy, 16 Sep. 1982, MNP:
[...] nous sommes tous des amateurs. Heureusement. La plaie, ce sont les
touches–à–tout se jugeant bien au–dessus de toute espèce d’apprentissage.
Pire cependant sont les obsédés. Avec ceux–ci, rien à faire. Lorsque des
touche–à–tout ou des obsédés détiennent le pouvoir de l’enseignement, le
devoir de retenir la parole du maître remplace la recherche de vérité et
l’enseignement de la science devient un enseignement de la soumission
intégré à une culture répressive.

Sébastien Plutniak

138

including Benigno Cacérès (1916–1991), a compagnon carpenter from
Toulouse. The school trained thousands of young people, addressing a wide
range of topics from the future of France to the development of an humanistic
culture. This relative intellectual liberty pushed the Vichy regime to close the
school in December 1942. The people in charge of the school then joined in
the clandestine Resistance and settled in the La Balme castle in Murinais. In
August 1943, teams called équipes volantes (mobile teams) were created.
Their mission was to visit the clandestine Resistance camps in order to give
military training and to enhance their morale with cultural, literary and artistic
materials. Cacérès took part in these teams as well as Laplace 1. They spent
their time between the intellectual work necessary to prepare their
interventions in the Resistance camps, manual work at the castle, and camp
visits; the topics of learning and self–teaching were of central importance to
them, as described by Cacérès in his books2. After the war, Cacérès dedicated
his life to the development of popular education and set up a significant
organisation for this purpose3. He also wrote numerous books, on his life and
on education. In one of them, focusing on autodidacticism, he expresses
positions grounded both in his experience of the labour movement, his
compagnon identity and his participation in the Uriage school:
The self–taught men of the nineteenth century, in an
overwhelming majority, had a real trade. To
manipulate material, to modify it, to reflect at all
times on the free acts of the trade, a structure of
thought, an art of thinking, were created and could be
applied to another art. The worker remained a
proletarian, but his professional and quasi–individual
contact with the material he was working with, led
him much more easily to the creation. Did not the
poor understanding of rationalisation kill these types
of men?4
Hence, his positions were widely similar to Laplace’s own view.

1
18e Bataillon d’Infanterie parachutiste. États des services de M. Laplace, dated 6 Sep. 1952, Laplace
files, EFR. On the Uriage experience in general and for a mention of Laplace see A. Delestre, Uriage, une
communauté et une école dans la tourmente, 1940–1945, p. 212.
2
For a description of the daily life in the Uriage community and in the Murinais castle see B. Cacérès,
L’espoir au cœur.
3
The Peuple et culture movement, alongside with Joffre Dumazedier (1905–2002). Dumazedier also took
part to the équipes volantes during the war and, as Laplace, was recruited by the CNRS afterwards (in 1952, as a
sociologist).
4

B. Cacérès, Les autodidactes, p. 19:
Les autodidactes du XIXe siècle étaient, dans une écrasante majorité,
possesseurs d’un vrai métier. À manier la matière, à la modifier, à réfléchir à
tout instant aux actes libres du métier, une structure de pensée, un art de
penser, se créaient et pouvaient s’appliquer à un autre art. L’ouvrier restait
un prolétaire, mais son contact professionnel et quasi individuel avec la
matière qu’il façonnait le conduisait beaucoup plus facilement à la création.
La rationalisation mal comprise n’a–t–elle pas tué ces types d’hommes?

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...

139

3.3.4. The cons istenc y of the compagnonn a ge reference
Indeed, Laplace showed great concern for specific topics: métier (craft)
versus profession, criticism against some excesses of (industrial) rationalisation, and emphasis on individual development. In an interview published in
1980 in the Sud Ouest newspaper, he summarised the way that the
compagnonnage might be a model for his group of prehistoric archaeologists:
I strongly believe in collegiality in scientific research:
for example, our seminar will be organised on the
Compagnons du Tour de France model, the only
hierarchy being that of knowledge and all the
participants are true equals in the discussions. It is
not for nothing that the bulletin, in which we record
the results of our annual seminars, is called
“Dialektikê” [...].1
We can distinguish two aspects in this use of the compagnonnage model,
one related to the definition of a collective identity and the other concerning
ethical values.
First, the definition of a collective identity and the aims of the
compagnonnage organisations on one hand and those of the Arudy group on
the other hand, share a similar method to dialectically refuse binary oppositions and to settle them through a third position. Indeed, as the compagnons
distinguished themselves and their practice from art and science, the Arudy
archaeologists distinguished themselves from amateurs and professional
organisations and identities. There is, in other words, a similar ternary method
to define a collective identity which relies on the refusal of a well–known
opposition.
Second, concerning values, Laplace and his compagnons mixed, to some
extent, classical scientific ethical values and those values adapted from the
compagnonnage culture. Without mentioning them explicitly, Laplace
expressed an adhesion to the Mertonian norms of science (universalism,
communism, disinterestedness, and organised scepticism)2. It is also noteworthy that he had an interest in the sociology of science and occasionally
cited3 authors such as Jerry Gaston or Robert Merton, using for example the
honest cryptomnesia4 notion coined by the later5. I have already elaborated on
1

A. Bernard, Georges Laplace. Connaître les sociétés préhistoriques in: Sud Ouest, 2 Apr. 1980:
Je crois beaucoup à la collégialité dans la recherche scientifique: tenez, par
exemple, notre séminaire sera organisé sur le modèle des Compagnons du
Tour de France, la seule hiérarchie étant celle du savoir et les participants
vraiment égaux dans le débat. Ce n’est pas pour rien que nous avons appelé
«Dialektikê» le bulletin dans lequel nous consignons les résultats de nos
séminaires annuels [...].

2

See R. K. Merton, Science and technology in a democratic order.

3

For example in G. Laplace, Un exemple de nouvelle écriture de la grille typologique.

4

See R. K. Merton, On the shoulders of giants. A shandean postscript, p. xxiii: Among other ailments endemic among scholars, Merton defined the honest cryptomnesia as “submerged or subliminal memory of events
forgotten by the supraliminal self” as in forgetting the source of an idea one takes to be newly one’s own [...].
5
On the relations in the 1970s between the French radical science movement and the emerging Science
and Technology Studies academic field see R. Debailly, La critique de la science depuis 1968.

Sébastien Plutniak

140

the values of autonomy, liberty or autodidacticism: in Table 7, a larger set of
ethical oppositions concerning knowledge–related practices are presented. For
each aspect, the options either valued or depreciated by the main participants
of the Arudy group are given. This outlines the structure of a particular system
of values which can be considered has underlying the collective organisation
of this group.
Knowledge …
Model of practice
Organization
Social consequence
Validation
Transmission

Depreciated
profession
scientific societies
schools of thinking
narration, inaccuracy
academicism

Valued
craft
self–organization
free–thought
reasoning, methodological rigour
self–learning

Table 7: Valued and depreciated ethical options and aims for the collective
practice of archaeology according to the participants of the Arudy group.
To summarise, Laplace’s view of scientific practice relies on a critique of
scientific institutions on the one hand and, on the other hand, on strongly
supporting epistemic values as rationality or truth. Such a distinction might be
due to his deep interest in Protestantism (complementing his more general
interest in religions and metaphysical issues, including Buddhism and Catholicism). I have already mentioned Laplace’s references to the Pyrenean
Protestant philosopher Pierre Bayle; indeed, during the 1980s Laplace was
also in contact with Protestant Darbyst communities 1, as the Béarn region was
one of the French regions where this form of Protestantism was active 2.
Lastly, let us consider a final aspect of the Arudy annual meeting that was
also related to the compagnonnage culture, namely songs. Songs appear as an
appropriate way to conclude the description of the Arudy group’s
characteristics. Indeed, singing was a practice related to all the relevant
aspects of Laplace’s life: his relation to the Pyrenean culture, his war
experiences 3, and a significant aspect of the shared life during the Arudy
seminars4. The song repertoire was very large, including traditional or work
songs, Italian and Spanish revolutionary songs, bawdy songs, and also, not
surprisingly, songs taken from the compagnonnage repertoire. At the end of a
handwritten variation of the compagnonnique song La conduite, one read the
following verses, which summarise the social and learning ideals shared by
the compagnons of the Arudy seminars:
1

Interview with Michel Livache, 12 Mar. 2014.

2

See C. Maillebouis, Sur l’implantation du «darbysme» en France au XXe siècle, p. 341.

3
Laplace’s war companions emphasised his noteworthy singing skills. See for instance A. Delestre,
Uriage, une communauté et une école dans la tourmente, 1940–1945, p. 212.
4
The songs sung by the participants have attracted the attention of the journalists who reported the
meetings. See Tamburo, Séminaire particulièrement important au Centre de Recherches de la Maison d’Ossau
in: La République des Pyrénées, 29 Aug. 1973, p. 12 & A. Bernard, Érudits à Arudy. L’internationale des
préhistoriens ... in: Sud Ouest, 10 Apr. 1980.

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...

141

Who is the master?
The one who doesn’t know it.
Who is the companion?
The one who does not say it.
Who is the apprentice?
Everybody.1
Conclusion
From the case of prehistoric archaeology, I have examined three modes of
collective organisation in scientific research: scientific societies, professional
research organisations and alternative forms of organisation such as that
inspired by the compagnonnage. The detailed observation of the individual
life trajectory of Georges Laplace and of the research group he led, was a
method to emphasise the nuances and porous borders between these three
modes of organisation. The values and aims of people changed during their
lifetimes, often leading them to hold viewpoints and positions which were
contradictory to those in the past.
Laplace, like other young archaeologists in the 1950s, had a firm
professional ambition. Although he made a symbolic distance from scientific
societies to reach his career aims, in practice these relationships were never
completely broken. New professional archaeologists continued to be engaged
or to collaborate with amateur archaeologists, a term whose meaning had
consequently changed. For many archaeologists, a common individual trajectory was to firstly join a scientific society, then pursue academics studies, and
then hold a professional position2. Furthermore, in some cases, as in the Arudy
group, archaeologists intended to define a collective mode of practice,
different from the scientific societies and academic organisations, by keeping
a distance from professional aims, careers and values.
The general result of this paper is that these three modes were
contemporary, and belong equally to the history of prehistoric archaeology
during the second half of the twentieth century in France. Furthermore, one
might note that these three modes are partially contradictory. How can we
explain these apparent contradictions, when the same actors disregard, value
or ignore one of these modes? A first answer might be to assume a sharp
distinction between the three modes with the idea of an ineluctable historical
order: amateur practice, soon or later, will turn into professional practice. Such
a sharp distinction is made in prehistoric archaeology in France, notably when
1
From the lyrics of the Arudy seminars songs, Crémillieux files. Song performed by Hélène Crémillieux,
17 May 2017: Qui est le maître? / Celui qui ne le sait pas. / Qui est le compagnon? / Celui qui ne le dit pas. /
Qui est l’apprenti? / Tout le monde.
2

A striking example is, in Toulouse, the educative action of the Centre d’anthropologie des sociétés
rurales, a center of anthropology, ethnology and archaeology. This center was created in 1978 and led by
archaeologist Jean Guilaine (1936–) under a twofold affiliation to the CNRS and to the newly founded École des
hautes études en sciences sociales. Hence, Guilaine was entitled to supervise research works submitted to get the
diplôme de l’École des hautes études en sciences sociales, an higher education degree for which not any
prerequisite was necessary. Many archaeologists without former academic training obtained an academic
recognition by this way. See, for instance, the story of Pierre Campmajo in: P. Campmajo, L’archéologie
autochtone génère des archéologues autochtones et autonomes.

Sébastien Plutniak

142

dealing with the Laplace and Arudy group cases. In publications and interviews, archaeologists frequently contrast the alleged anti–scientific autarchical
or sectarian behaviours of the Laplace group with the Bordes laboratory1.
However, as shown in this paper, the symbolic and organisational frontiers
between these modes are relative and can be interpreted and manipulated
differently by the different actors. Such a dual conception misses the potential
diversity of organisational forms that have been developed, and is unable to
account for the possible contradictory statements claimed by the actors, or to
account for possible variations in the conceptions over time by an actor or by a
collective.
Another way to answer the problem relies on the general sociology of
scientific growth. In the 1970s, numerous researchers investigated the
development of scientific specialities, assuming that it is at this particular level
of action that the mechanisms of scientific progress occur and can be observed
and analysed. Grounded on empirical studies, authors proposed various
general models of the cognitive and social dynamics of science. For example,
Michael Mulkay identified four development phases: 1) scattered researchers
identify a new problem and struggle for priority; 2) informal relationships
increase among them, a consensus is made on pioneering works; 3) research
teams are set up, recruitment procedures are defined; and 4) establishment of a
research network while meanwhile pioneer researchers move to another field
of investigation2. To know if Mulkay’s model is relevant in case of the
typologie analytique group requires a close discussion which goes beyond the
historical reconstruction presented in this article. However, my point is that
there is no fundamental difference between these types of social and
intellectual processes and those related to the development of the other
research groups, such as the Bordes group in Bordeaux or Giot’s group in
Rennes, regardless of how their success is considered, or how they are
estimated by the analyst. Ideals and policies, as well as access to social and
financial resources, are important to understand the ways the relationships
between the three modes exist at a particular moment. One mode can be in a
prominent position at a given time, and later this place can be taken by another
model.
Professional research is, as with any other possible forms, historical and
contingent. To focus on the particularities of the Arudy group gave an additional case underlining the historical importance and persistence of amateur or
popular science3. Furthermore, the Arudy experience is just one case among
others: during the 1970s, scientists from various fields intended to change the
conditions of the practice of science in several ways. In archaeology this was
for instance the case in the surveys organised by Pierre Gouletquer 4 (1939–) in
1

See, for instance, P. –Y. Demars, François Bordes versus Georges Laplace ... .

2

See, for instance, M. J. Mulkay, Three models of scientific development. See also N. C. Mullins, The
development of a scientific specialty.
3

On popular science see R. Cooter, The cultural meaning of popular science.

4

Gouletquer took part to the Arudy seminar in 1971.

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...

143

Brittany1. More generally, other attempts were made from various scientific
fields through the numerous journals created in a critical perspective after the
May 1968 period such as Labo–contestation (1970–1973) or Impasciences
(1975–1977)2. Nowadays, the popularization of the internet led to the current
emphasis on participatory science and on autodidacticism, notably illustrated
by the high rate of self–taught programmers on the labour market or by the
garage sciences enthusiasts. In this context, observing the diversity of (not so)
old experiences is still relevant today, insofar as guaranteeing the conditions of
scientific autonomy is an never–ending struggle.
References
Adell N., Arts de faire, arts de vivre. Chefs–d’œuvre inconnus des compagnons du tour de France in: Gradhiva 13, 2013, pp. 118–143.
Ahrne G. & Brunsson N., Organization outside organizations: the significance
of partial organization in: Organization 18, 1/2011, pp. 83–104.
Audouze F., La préhistoire et le CNRS in: La revue pour l’histoire du CNRS 8,
2003, pp. 16–29.
Audouze F. & Leroi–Gourhan A., France: A continental insularity in: World
Archaeology 13, 2/1981, pp. 170–189.
Barandiarán I., Arudy 1969. Coloquio internacional de tipología in: Caesaraugusta 33, 1969, pp. 143–155.
Barandiarán I., Georges Laplace (Pau 1918–Pau 2004) in: Veleia 21, 2004,
pp. 325–327.
Boucher P. & Peyran X., P. Boucher (1909–1997). “Éléments d’une histoire
de vie” in: 50 ans d’archéologie en Soule: Hommage à Pierre Boucher
(1909–1997), (éd.) D. Ebrard, Ikerzaleak, Mauléon–Licharre 2013, pp.
17–23.
Cabon C., Georges Laplace (1918–2004) in: Paleo 16, 2004, pp. 9–20.
Cacérès B., L’espoir au cœur, Éditions du Seuil, Paris 1967.
Cacérès B., Les autodidactes, Éditions du Seuil, Paris 1967.
Campmajo P., L’archéologie autochtone génère des archéologues autochtones
et autonomes. Autobiographie abrégée d’un amateur in: L’archéologue et
l’indigène. Variations sur l’autochtonie, (éd.) S. Sagnes, Éditions du Comité des travaux historiques et scientifiques, Paris 2015, pp. 167–171.
Chaline J.–P., Sociabilité et érudition. Les sociétés savantes en France. XIXe–
XXe siècles, Éditions du Comité des travaux historiques et scientifiques,
Paris 1995.
Chardenoux M.–B., Lequeux B., Querrien A. & Roscian S., Répertoire de la
Recherche Archéologique Française, Association pour la promotion et la
diffusion des connaissances archéologiques, Valbonne 1981.
Cooter R., The cultural meaning of popular science. Phrenology and the
organization of consent in nineteenth–century Britain, Cambridge
University Press, New York 1984.
1

See P. Gouletquer, Préhistoire du futur. Connaître les pays est un repos.

2

On these journals see M. Quet, Mai 68 et la sociologie des sciences.

144

Sébastien Plutniak

Csárdi G. & Nepusz T., The igraph software package for complex network
research in: InterJournal Complex Systems 1695, 5/2006, pp. 1–9.
Debailly R., La critique de la science depuis 1968, Hermann, Paris 2015.
Delestre A., Uriage, une communauté et une école dans la tourmente, 1940–
1945, Presses universitaires de Nancy, Nancy 1989.
Delporte H., Georges Laplace, Recherches sur l’origine et l’évolution des
complexes leptolithiques, Paris, 1966, 586 p. in: Bulletin de la Société
préhistorique française 71, 7/1967, pp. 199–200.
Delporte H., Laplace (G.) «Recherches sur l’origine et l’évolution des complexes leptolithiques. 1. vol. de 586 p. 25 pl. 21 tabl. E. de Boccard, Paris,
1966» in: L’Anthropologie 71, 1967, pp. 291–301.
Demars P.–Y., François Bordes versus Georges Laplace: deux visions de
l’outillage lithique in: François Bordes et la Préhistoire, (éd.) F. Delpech
& J. Jaubert, Éditions du Comité des travaux historiques et scientifiques,
Paris 2011, pp. 125–131.
Freeman L. C., Centrality in social networks I: Conceptual clarification in:
Social Networks 1, 1979, pp. 215–239.
[Gallia], Législation archéologique in: Gallia 5, 1/1947, pp. 228–234.
Gieryn T. F., Boundary–work and the demarcation of science from non–
science. Strains and interests in professional ideologies of scientists in:
American Sociological Review 48, 6/1983, pp. 781–795.
Gouletquer P., Préhistoire du futur. Connaître les pays est un repos, Éditions
Bretagnes, Morlaix 1979.
Gran–Aymerich È., Les chercheurs de passé, 1798–1945. Naissance de l’archéologie moderne. Dictionnaire biographique d’archéologie, CNRS
Éditions, Paris 2007.
Gusi i Jener F., León y caballo: Georges Laplace. El Yin y el Yang de un
prehistoriador inolvidable in: Seis décadas de tipología analítica. Actas
en homenaje a Georges Laplace, (éd.) A. Calvo, A. Sánchez, M. García–
Rojas & M. Alonso–Eguíluz, Facultad de Letras de la UPV/EHU, Vitoria–
Gasteiz 2015, pp. 40–46.
Hurel A., Un prêtre, un savant dans la marche vers l’institutionnalisation de
la préhistoire. L’abbé Henri Breuil (1877–1961) in: La revue pour
l’histoire du CNRS 8, 2003.
Hurel A., L’enseignement de la préhistoire: un siècle en marge de l’Université in: La revue pour l’histoire du CNRS 15, 2006, pp. 16–19.
Joly R. de, Comment s’est tué le spéléologue Loubens? in: Science et vie 423,
1952, pp. 436–442.
Kantman S., Essai sur la formation de concept du «type» dans l’étude du
Paléolithique in: Quartär 69, 1969, pp. 69–77.
Kehoe A. B., Introduction in: Assembling the past: Studies in the professionalisation of archaeology, (éd.) A. B. Kehoe & M. B. Emmerichs,
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque 1999, pp. 1–17.
Labeyrie J., Les découvreurs du gouffre de la Pierre Saint–Martin, Éditions
Cairn, Paris 2005.
Laming–Emperaire A. (éd.), La découverte du passé. Progrès récents et
techniques nouvelles en préhistoire et en archéologie, Picard, Paris 1952.

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...

145

Laplace G., Solutréen et foyers solutréens. Essai de typologie analytique sur le
phénomène de solutréanisation in: Munibe. Revista de la Sociedad de
Ciencias Naturales Aranzadi 14, 3–4/1962, pp. 414–455.
Laplace G., Le problème de l’origine de l’Aurignacien à la lumière des fouilles
de la Grotte de Gatzarria in: Bulletin de la Société des Sciences, Lettres et
Arts de Pau 24, 1964, pp. 24–26.
Laplace G., Recherches sur l’origine et l’évolution des complexes leptolithiques, De Boccard, Paris 1966.
Laplace G., De l’application des coordonnées cartésiennes à la fouille stratigraphique in: Munibe. Revista de la Sociedad de Ciencias Naturales
Aranzadi 23, 2–3/1971, pp. 223–236.
Laplace G., La typologie analytique et structurale: base rationnelle d’étude
des industries lithiques et osseuses in: Les banques de données archéologiques, (éd.) M. Borillo & J.–C. Gardin, Éditions du CNRS, Paris 1974,
pp. 91–143.
Laplace G., Un exemple de nouvelle écriture de la grille typologique in: Dialektikê. Cahiers de typologie analytique 12, 1987, pp. 16–21.
Laplace G., Autoridad y tradición en taxonomía in: Cuadernos de prehistoria
y arqueología castellonenses 13, 1988, pp. 7–16.
Laplace G. & Broglio A., Proposta per la costituzione di un «gruppo di recerca di tipologia analitica» in: Rivista di scienze preistoriche 21, 2/1966,
p. 415.
Laplace–Jauretche G., Prospections et fouilles in: Eusko–Jakintza. Revue
d’Études Basques 3, 1949, pp. 466–470.
Laplace–Jauretche G., Etxeberri’ko–karbia (La Grotte d’Etcheberry). Découverte de peintures préhistoriques in: Ikuska. Documents et questionnaires
3, 2–6/1949, p. 92.
Laplace–Jauretche G., Prospections et fouilles in: Ikuska. Giza–Ikaskuntza 3,
2–6/1949, pp. 66–70.
Laplace–Jauretche G., Nouvelles peintures préhistoriques en Haute–Soule.
Chachiloaga in: Ikuska. Documents et questionnaires 4, 1–3/1950, p. 179.
Laplace–Jauretche G., Les grottes ornées des Arbailles in: Eusko–Jakintza.
Revue d’études basques 6, 1952, pp. 132–153.
Laplace–Jauretche G., Quelques considérations sur l’origine et l’évolution des
complexes à lames et à lamelles in: Bulletin de la Société d’études et de
recherches préhistoriques 8, 1958, pp. 119–124.
Laplace–Jauretche G., Les grottes d’Oxocelhaya à Saint–Martin d’Arberoue
in: Bulletin de la Société des Sciences, Lettres et Arts de Pau 21, 1960,
pp. 119–121.
Larronde J.–C., Histoire du VIIème Congrès d’Études Basques. Biarritz, 1948
in: VIIème Congrès d’Études Basques, (éd.) J.–C. Larronde, Eusko Ikaskuntza, Donostia 2003, pp. 17–61.
Leroi–Gourhan A., Les fouilles préhistoriques. Technique et méthodes, A. &
J. Picard, Paris 1950.
Leroi–Gourhan A., France in: International directory of anthropological institutions, (éd.) W. L. Thomas Jr & A. M. Pikelis, Wenner–Gren Foundation
for Anthropological Research, New York 1953, pp. 141–151.

146

Sébastien Plutniak

Levine P. J. A., The amateur and the professional: Antiquarians, historians
and archaeologists in Victorian England 1838–1886, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1986.
Lippé R., Pierres à convictions: Georges Laplace et la polymorphie des complexes leptolithiques in: Écrire le passé. La fabrique de la préhistoire et
de l’histoire à travers les siècles, (éd.) S. Archambault de Beaune, CNRS
Éditions, Paris 2010, pp. 309–321.
Maillebouis C., Sur l’implantation du «darbysme» en France au XXe siècle in:
Bulletin de la Société de l’histoire du protestantisme français (1903–)
159, 2013, pp. 329–364.
Merino J. M., El coloquio internacional de Arudy in: Munibe. Revista de la
Sociedad de Ciencias Naturales Aranzadi 22, 1–2/1970, pp. 87–98.
Merton R. K., Science and technology in a democratic order in: Journal of
Legal and Political Sociology 1, 1942, pp. 115–126.
Merton R. K., On the shoulders of giants: A shandean postscript, Free Press,
New York 1965.
Mulkay M. J., Three models of scientific development in: Sociological Review
23, 3/1975, pp. 509–526.
Mullins N. C., The development of a scientific specialty. The Phage group and
the origins of molecular biology in: Minerva 10, 1/1972, pp. 51–82.
Orain O. (éd.), Les «années 68» des sciences humaines et sociales in: Revue
d’histoire des sciences humaines 26, 2015.
Plutniak S., L’innovation méthodologique, entre bifurcation personnelle et formation des disciplines: les entrées en archéologie de Georges Laplace et
de Jean–Claude Gardin in: Revue d’histoire des sciences humaines 31,
2017, pp. 113–139.
Plutniak S., L’opération archéologique. Sociologie historique d’une discipline
aux prises avec l’automatique et les mathématiques. France, Espagne,
Italie, 2e moitié du XXe siècle, PhD thesis, EHESS, Toulouse 2017.
Plutniak S. & Tarantini M., An influential outsider. Georges Laplace between
French institutions and Italian prehistory in: History of archaeology.
International perspectives, (éd.) G. Delley, M. Días–Andreu, F. Djindjian,
V. M. Fernández, A. Guidi & M.–A. Kaeser, Archaeopress, Oxford 2016,
pp. 79–89.
Quet M., Mai 68 et la sociologie des sciences. Les revues sur les sciences et la
société, symptôme des restructurations disciplinaires in: Revue d’histoire
des sciences humaines 26, 2015, pp. 83–99.
Raymond P., Dictionnaire topographique du département des Basses–
Pyrénées: comprenant les noms de lieu anciens et modernes, Imprimerie
impériale, Paris 1863.
Richard N., L’institutionnalisation de la préhistoire in: Communications 54,
1992, pp. 189–207.
Rudwick M. J. S., The great Devonian controversy: The shaping of scientific
knowledge among gentlemanly specialists, University of Chicago Press,
Chicago 1988.
Sáenz de Buruaga A., Recorrido y reflexiones en torno al pensamiento analítico de Georges Laplace: movimiento, interdependencia y arquetipos en

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...

147

la construcción de una Arqueología científica in: Seis décadas de tipología analítica. Actas en homenaje a Georges Laplace, (éd.) A. Calvo,
A. Sánchez, M. García–Rojas & M. Alonso–Eguíluz, Facultad de Letras
de la UPV/EHU, Vitoria–Gasteiz 2015, pp. 23–39.
Soulier P., Un siècle de Bulletin de la Société préhistorique française (1904–
2004): déambulation bibliographique au cœur d’une société, savante et
centenaire in: Un siècle de construction du discours scientifique en
préhistoire. XXVIe congrès préhistorique de France, Congrès du
centenaire de la Société préhistorique française, (éd.) J. Évin, Société
préhistorique française, Paris 2007, pp. 27–125.
Star S. L. & Griesemer J. R., Institutional ecology, “translations” and boundary objects. Amateurs and professionals in Berkeley’s museum of vertebrate zoology, 1907–39 in: Social Studies of Science 19, 3/1989, pp. 387–
420.
Tarantini M., Dal fascismo alla repubblica. La fondazione dell’Istituto Italiano di Preistoria e Protostoria nel quadro della ricerca (1927–1960) in:
Rivista di scienze preistoriche 54, 2004, pp. 5–82.
Tarantini M., Georges Laplace in Italia tra tipologismo e antropologismo.
Appunti per una riflessione storica in: Rivista di scienze preistoriche 55,
2005, pp. 31–40.
Tarrête J., L’archéologie, une discipline en partage in: Histoire de la recherche contemporaine 2, 2/2013, pp. 122–131.
Vergez R., Les enclumes de cristal, Juilliard, Paris 1967.
Vila i Mitjà A. & Estévez Escalera J., Georges Laplace. La fuerza de la contradicción interna in: Dialektikê. Cahiers de Typologie Analytique:
Hommage à Georges Laplace, (éd.) F. Gusi i Jener, Diputació de Castelló,
Servei d’Investigacions Arqueològiques i Prehistòriques, Castelló de la
Plana 2006, pp. 140–161.

148

Sébastien Plutniak

ANTIQUITÉS PRÉHISTORIQUES

Fig. 1. Administrative divisions of the French territory in twelve
circonscriptions des Antiquités préhistoriques (1947). Source: Gallia,
Législation archéologique, p. 231.

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...

Fig. 2. Locations of educational, professional associations, and research
institutions and museums related to prehistoric archaeology in France in
1953. Data: A. Leroi–Gourhan, France.

149

150

Sébastien Plutniak

Fig. 3. Relationships between actors based on their co–membership to the
main French anthropological institutions in 1953. Only the names of the
ten most central actors (betweenness centrality) are displayed; grey labels
emphasise the actors positioned at the articulation points of the graph. Groups
of actors sharing a common membership to an institution are included in
the same circular shape (labelled with the name of the institution). Data:
A. Leroi–Gourhan, France.

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...

Source: J.–P. Chaline, Sociabilité et érudition. Les sociétés savantes en
France. XIXe–XXe siècles, p. 54.

151

152

Sébastien Plutniak

Fig. 5. Distinguishing three thematic scopes, annual cumulative sum of
archaeological societies in France between 1824 and 2004.
Data:

The Professionalisation of Science – Claim and Refusal ...

153

Fig. 6. Location, thematic scope and date of creation of the archaeological
societies in France between 1824 and 2004.
Data:
.

154

Sébastien Plutniak

Fig. 7. Spatial distribution and scope of the archaeological societies in France
in 1953.
Data:
.

