Europeanization Through EU External Agreements
and the Issue of “Constitutional Identity”: The Case
of the EU-Armenia CEPA
Author(s): Anna Khvorostiankina
Source: Kyiv-Mohyla Law and Politics Journal 4 (2018): 15–52
Published by: National University of Kyiv-Mohyla Academy

http://kmlpj.ukma.edu.ua/

Europeanization Through EU External
Agreements and the Issue of “Constitutional
Identity”: The Case of the EU-Armenia CEPA
Anna Khvorostiankina

National University of Kyiv-Mohyla Academy,
Department of Legal Philosophy and Constitutional Law
Yerevan Brusov State University of Languages and Social Sciences,
UNESCO Chair on Human Rights, Democracy and Political Science
Abstract
Using the concept of “constitutional identity” as a theoretical basis, this article analyses
the potential transformative influence of the EU-Armenia Comprehensive and
Enhanced Partnership Agreement (CEPA) on the Armenian legal system. In particular,
the author focuses on the Agreement’s capacity to stimulate the implementation of the
EU’s “common values” and transpose the norms, general principles, and methodological
approaches of EU law into the domestic legal order. It is argued that this potential
depends on two elements of the “constitutional identity” of the Armenian legal order:
its axiological core and its openness to external influences.
Key Words: Europeanization, EU common values, principles of EU law, legislative
approximation, legal reforms, constitutional identity, CEPA, Armenia.

3
Introduction
Regardless of its frequent application in legal and political discourses, “constitutional
identity” remains a vague and ambiguous concept with no precise definition.1 One of
1

Michel Rosenfeld opens his chapter “Constitutional Identity” in The Oxford Handbook on
Comparative Constitutional Law with the statement that “Constitutional identity” is an
essentially contested concept as there is no agreement over what it means or refers to” (Michel
Rosenfeld, “Constitutional Identity,” in The Oxford Handbook on Comparative Constitutional
Law, edited by Michel Rosenfeld and András Sajó (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012), 756).
See also, for example: Alejandro Saiz Arnaiz and Carina Alcoberro Llivina, “Why Constitutional
Identity Suddenly Matters: A Tale of Brave States, a Mighty Union and Decline of Sovereignty,”
in National Constitutional Identity and European Integration, edited by Alejandro Saiz Arnaiz
and Carina Alcoberro Llivina (Antwerp: Intersentia, 2013), 1–3; Jose Luis Marti, “Two Different
Ideas of Constitutional Identity: Identity of the Constitution v. Identity of the People,” in
National Constitutional Identity and European Integration, edited by Alejandro Saiz Arnaiz
and Carina Alcoberro Llivina (Antwerp: Intersentia, 2013), 18; Anna Śledzińska-Simon,

16

Kyiv-Mohyla Law and Politics Journal 4 (2018)

the domains where this concept is usually applied is the area of interrelations between
the supranational legal order of the European Union (EU) and the domestic legal
orders of its Member States. Both the Court of Justice of the EU (CJEU) and national
constitutional courts employ it in their argumentation. While the former contributes
to the creation of European constitutional identity through strengthening the valuebased core of the EU’s legal order and developing its fundamental principles, the latter
tend to defend national constitutional identities, establishing the limits for the further
Europeanization of their domestic legal orders.2
Building upon case-law created in a specific “European” context, in my research
I argue that the concept of “constitutional identity” can be applied not only to
characterize the relations between the supranational (EU) legal order and the legal
orders of the Member States, but also to assess the potential and explain the dynamics
of the “Europeanization” of the legal systems beyond the EU borders, in particular
through EU external agreements with third countries. The research is designed as a
case study and focuses on the recently concluded EU-Armenia Comprehensive and
Enhanced Partnership Agreement (CEPA).
For the purposes of this study, I view “constitutional identity” as a set of
characteristics of a legal order, in particular: (1) its axiological core and (2) its relations
with other legal orders.
The axiological core of a legal order finds its legal reflection in the so-called
identity of a constitution. It can be understood as a system of fundamental principles
and values enshrined in the constitution and defining its specific nature. The identity of
a constitution is closely interrelated with the dialogically and consciously constructed
constitutional identity of a people (or imagined political community) built through
political discourse. Sociologically, both depend on the constitutional identity of an actual
political community, which is characterized by harmony (or disharmony) between what
is written in the constitutional text, the constructed identity of the people, and societal
constitutional practices. It shows whether a society is a political community identifying
itself with declared constitutional foundations or whether it exists separately in a
“parallel world” of its own values and practices. The particularities of interrelations
between the legal, political, and sociological dimensions of “constitutional identity” as

“Constitutional Identity in 3D: A Model of Individual, Relational, and Collective Self and its
Application in Poland,” International Journal of Constitutional Law 13.1 (2015): 124, accessed
December 14, 2018, https://doi.org/10.1093/icon/mov007. Moreover, some authors doubt this
concept “is indeed a distinctive phenomenon worthy of its own conceptual class,” underlining
that it “remains underspecified and difficult to distinguish from related phenomena”
(Tommaso Pavone, “Constitutional Identity: An Overview and Some Conceptual Concerns,”
April 23, 2014, accessed December 14, 2018, https://scholar.princeton.edu/sites/default/files/
tpavone/files/jacobsohn-_constitutional_identity_critical_review.pdf).
2

For the purposes of this research, I define “Europeanization” as a domestic response to the
transformative power of the EU, which results in the transposition of European norms, values,
and practices into the domestic legal order.

Anna Khvorostiankina. Europeanization Through EU External Agreements

17

and the Issue of “Constitutional Identity”: The Case of the EU-Armenia CEPA

an axiological core of the legal order are determined by the dynamics of change within
each of the said dimensions.
The second characteristic forming the “identity” of a given constitutional
order determines its relations with other legal orders (international, supranational,
subnational, foreign) and the level of its openness to external influences. This
characteristic finds its reflection in domestic constitutional law and legal practices.
Employing the concept of “constitutional identity” as a basis of its theoretical
framework, this study analyses the potential transformative influence of CEPA on
the Armenian legal system. In particular, it focuses on the Agreement’s capacity to
stimulate the implementation of EU “common values” and transpose the norms,
general principles, and methodological approaches of EU law into the Armenian legal
order. After introducing the theoretical framework of the research, I briefly characterize
the Agreement as the legal basis of EU-Armenia relations. The article then proceeds
with an analysis of the issue of “common values,” focusing on CEPA instruments of
their promotion and their reflection in the domestic legal order. Subsequently, the
issue of legal approximation is discussed. I focus on CEPA mechanisms of the legislative
approximation stricto sensu, Europeanization through the transposition of the general
principles and methodological approaches of EU law into the domestic legal order, and
the potential role of the judiciary in these processes.

1. “Constitutional Identity” and the Processes
of Europeanization and Regional Integration 3
In international academic literature there is no uniform definition of “constitutional
identity”; nor is there a clear understanding of who the subject or the bearer of these
characteristics is (the constitution as a text? A state? The people?) The context of
the application of this concept in judicial argumentation is also varied. As Anna
Śledzińska-Simon shows, the concept is mainly applied: “(i) in decisions concerning the
legitimacy of constitutional amendments; (ii) in decisions concerning the legitimacy
of constitutional migration and engaging in a dialogue between various courts; and
(iii) in decisions concerning integration within a supranational organization.” 4 As one
can note, in the classification of cases offered by Śledzińska-Simon, the first group of
cases focuses on specific “internal” features of a constitutional order (usually reflected
in the provisions of a constitution that cannot be [easily] changed), while two other
groups deal with the interrelation of a national constitutional order with other legal
orders (foreign — in the second group, and supranational — in the third).5
3

The theoretical framework of the article builds upon the revised version of an earlier
conference paper published as: Anna Khvorostiankina, “‘Constitutional Identity’ in the Context
of Post-Soviet Transformation, Europeanization and Regional Integration Processes (the Case
of Armenia),” Armenian Journal of Political Science 1.6 (2017): 45–80.

4

Śledzińska-Simon, “Constitutional Identity in 3D,” 128.

5

Śledzińska-Simon calls these three contexts the “3D model” of constitutional identity
comprising simultaneously three dimensions of self — “the individual self, the relational self

18

Kyiv-Mohyla Law and Politics Journal 4 (2018)

An analysis of the case-law of domestic constitutional courts allows for stating that
the third group can be widened to also include decisions concerning other advanced
(non-membership) relations between the EU and third countries. The same context
can also potentially stimulate the development of the case-law of the second group: in
judicial argumentation in countries that are EU partners there is a tendency to refer to
the case-law of the Court of Justice of the EU (CJEU) as foreign legal material.
What is common to all three categories of cases is the recognition of the existence
of a certain fundamental [value-based] core of a constitutional order, which is to
be preserved (from internal change in the first group of cases or possible external
influence in the second and third groups), or the “commonality” with which the
core of another (EU) legal order serves as a factor legitimizing legal borrowings, legal
integration, or the Europeanization of a third country legal system (in the second
and third groups of cases). Arguably, to enable legal borrowings, full integration or
Europeanization resulting from advanced relations with the EU, the mere recognition
of the “commonality” of the fundamentals of legal orders is not enough: there should
be specific channels (formal or informal) allowing the domestic legal order to “open
up” to the influences of foreign or supranational legal orders. Therefore, to assess the
potential transformative influence of the EU on the legal order of a third country it
is appropriate to analyze together two elements of its “constitutional identity” — its
axiological core and its openness to external influences.

2. Constitutional Identity as the
Axiological Core of a Legal Order
According to one of the approaches widely accepted in international scholarship, the
concept of “constitutional identity” is understood as the identity of a constitution.6
The latter, in its turn, is defined as a set of specific characteristics — “constitutive, or
essential, or definitional core” 7 — which “makes of that constitution that constitution.” 8
Interestingly, these characteristics may comprise both the most important
“values, principles, and rules” which create the basis of the constitutional order and
are unchangeable (or “eternal”),9 and those provisions that make one constitution
and the collective self” (see Śledzińska-Simon, “Constitutional Identity in 3D,” 128).
6

See, for example: Marti, “Two Different Ideas of Constitutional Identity”; Pietro Faraguna,
“Constitutional Identity in the EU — A Shield or a Sword?,” German Law Journal 18.7 (2017):
1617–40; Śledzińska-Simon, “Constitutional Identity in 3D.”

7

Marti, “Two Different Ideas of Constitutional Identity,” 22.

8

Marti, “Two Different Ideas of Constitutional Identity,” 19.

9

In German constitutional law, for example, the provisions which are unamendable under
the “eternity clause” of Art. 79 (3) of the Basic Law are understood as the “identity” of the
constitution (see: Monika Pilsen, “Constitutional Identity, Unconstitutional Amendments and
the Idea of Constituent Power: The Development of the Doctrine of Constitutional Identity
in German Constitutional Law,” I*CON 14 (2016): 412). Formal unamendability, however,
is not a decisive feature of the constitutional “core.” As Marti observes, it can be changed

Anna Khvorostiankina. Europeanization Through EU External Agreements

19

and the Issue of “Constitutional Identity”: The Case of the EU-Armenia CEPA

significantly different (or distinguishable) from the rest.10 P. Faraguna terms the first
group of provisions as “constitutional identity despite difference,” and the second — as
“constitutional identity as difference.” 11 Whereas the first group is based on universal
values, the second protects particularistic ones. As a consequence, the first group of
provisions is practically the same for all European countries (in fact, they constitute
“common constitutional traditions” as one of the sources of EU law).12 The values
underlying such traditions are embodied in Art. 2 of the Treaty on the European Union
(TEU), while particularistic values are arguably protected by Art. 4 (2) TEU stating
that the Union shall respect Member States’ “national identities, inherent in their
fundamental structures, political and constitutional.” 13
Importantly, even within the EU, the perception and practice of fundamental
values may differ in different legal orders.14 The question is, however, what are the limits
for these deviations when it comes to the implementation of “common” or “shared”
EU values 15 and what standards under this pluralistic approach should the EU apply
to third countries, in particular, under bilateral agreements.
The second common understanding of constitutional identity refers to the
“constitutional identity of the people” (or “political community”). Marti observes that
there are at least three possible approaches to this version of “constitutional identity”:
(1) national identity reflected in the constitution, (2) identity of the people constituted
by the constitution (constitutional subject) and (3) the identity of the people as both
the author (constitutive authority) and the subject of a constitution.16 Regardless of the
in principle, but such change will be much more significant than “regular” constitutional
amendments — they will reflect shifts of revolutionary importance (Marti, “Two Different Ideas
of Constitutional Identity,” 24).
10

These may be historically or culturally rooted provisions. For example, in the case of Armenia,
such specific provisions are Article 18 regulating the status of the Armenian Apostolic Church
and Article 19 stressing ties with the Diaspora (The Constitution of the Republic of Armenia
of 5 July 1995, with the amendments of 2005 and 2015, accessed June 30, 2017, http://www.
parliament.am/legislation. php?sel=show&ID=5805&lang=eng).

11

Faraguna, “Constitutional Identity in the EU,” 1622.

12

See, among others: Faraguna, “Constitutional Identity in the EU,” 1632; Marti, “Two Different
Ideas of Constitutional Identity,” 30.

13

The debate on the meaning of Art. 4 (2) and its correlation with Art. 2 is ongoing in the
academic literature.

14

Matej Avbelj, “Pluralism and Systemic Defiance in the EU,” in The Enforcement of EU Law and
Values: Ensuring Member States’ Compliance, edited by Andras Jakab and Dimitry Kochenov
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017), 51–52.

15

The issue became specifically relevant with the Hungarian and Polish rule of law crises. On the
necessity of a common understanding and setting ‘red lines’ for domestic variations see: Armin
von Bogdandy et al., “A Constitutional Moment for the European Rule of Law — Upcoming
Landmark Decisions Concerning Polish Judiciary,” MPIL Research Paper Series 10 (2018): 1–13,
accessed May 13, 2018, https://ssrn.com/abstract=3199809.

16

Marti, “Two Different Ideas of Constitutional Identity,” 32–33.

Kyiv-Mohyla Law and Politics Journal 4 (2018)

20

differences in meaning, what can be noted in all three approaches is the link between
the political community and the constitutional text,17 or the link between the values
supported by the political community and their reflection in a formal constitution. This
link demonstrates that in addition to the formal legal dimension of the constitutional
identity as a value-based core of a constitutional order, there is another — political –
dimension of the same phenomenon. From this perspective, “constitutional identity” is
not a static set of provisions or a state of affairs, but a dynamic system of social relations.
Jacobsohn stresses that “a constitution acquires an identity through experience”;
constitutional identity “neither exists as a discrete object of invention nor as a heavily
encrusted essence embedded in a society’s culture, requiring only to be discovered.” 18
He then continues stating that:
Identity emerges dialogically and represents a mix of political
aspirations and commitments that is expressive of a nation’s past,
as well as the determination of those within the society who seek,
in some ways, to transcend that past. It is changeable but resistant
to its own destruction, and it may manifest itself differently in
different settings.19
Importantly, under this approach, “the people” is not an actual community
consisting of real individuals and social groups. As Rosenfeld argues, it is an “imagined,”
evolving community that “does not correspond to any set of persons crisply delimited in
time and space,” 20 although “it must channel its manifestations and iterations through
persons assembled in plausible even if not actual configurations.” 21
Jacobsohn’s definition implies that constitutional identity is, first, consciously
constructed and, second, historically rooted. Arguably, in the context of post-Soviet
transition, the constitutional courts became one of the most significant “creators” of
constitutional identity “carrying out” — as D. Robertson notes — “a quite new type of
political function” of “transforming societies” through “spreading the values set out

17

As Rosenfeld, agreeing with Jacobsohn, underlines that “constitutional identity furnishes
essential links between the constitution, its environment, and those who launched it as well as
those for whom it was intended” (Rosenfeld, “Constitutional Identity,” 760–61).

18

Gary Jeffrey Jacobsohn, “Constitutional Identity,” The Review of Politics 68 (2006): 361.

19

Jacobsohn, “Constitutional Identity,” 361.

20

Michel Rosenfeld, “The Constitutional Subject, Its Other, and the Perplexing Quest for an
Identity of Its Own: A Reply to My Critics,” Cardozo Legal Studies 358 (2012): 13, accessed May
22, 2018, https://ssrn.com/abstract=2021356.

21

Rosenfeld, “The Constitutional Subject,” 9.

Anna Khvorostiankina. Europeanization Through EU External Agreements

21

and the Issue of “Constitutional Identity”: The Case of the EU-Armenia CEPA

in the constitution throughout their state and society” 22 and developing the so-called
acquis constitutionelle.23
Historical legacies as one of the factors shaping constitutional identity lead us
to the third dimension of constitutional identity — the sociological one: even if on
the level of political discourse the “imagined political community” negates or “seeks
to transcend” its past, in reality the culture and mentality of an actual society is
significantly more resistant to transformations. In other words, the dynamics of change
within three dimensions of constitutional identity — legal, political, and sociological —
differ significantly.
Noteworthy, the discrepancy (or “disharmony”) between the ideas embodied in
the constitution and the social reality, remarkably, is one of the central concepts in
Jacobsohn’s theory of constitutional identity. Although immanent for all constitutional
orders to a certain extent, “disharmony” becomes especially evident in the cases of
societies in transition (as those of post-Soviet space) where there is a tension between
the “transformation” and “preservation” of specific social values.24 In this context,
understanding “constitutional identity” as a value-based core of a constitutional order
simultaneously finding its reflection in legal, political, and social domains, seems to
be a fruitful interdisciplinary (socio-legal) approach allowing for the evaluation of the
extent to which values declared in the constitution and promoted as a part of the
constitutional identity of the people (often under the influence of external factors or
actors) are supported and shared by the society.25 Obviously, in order to strengthen the
rule of law, democracy, and respect for human rights, it is not enough to declare these
values as fundamental in the text of a constitution. Proper implementation in practice

22

David Robertson, The Judge as Political Theorist: Contemporary Constitutional Review
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2010), 1.

23

“The Continuity of Jurisprudential Lines [of Constitutional Courts] and Accumulation of
Constitutional Experience” (Marek Safjan, “Political and Constitutional Courts. A Judge’s
Personal Perspective,” EUI Working Paper Law No. 2008/10, accessed June 17, 2018, http://
cadmus.eui.eu/handle/1814/8101).

24

In Jacobsohn’s words, “[c]onstitutional disharmony creates a need for adaptation and coping
with conflict and dissonance, and constitutional identity must be shaped dialogically with a
view to overcoming the causes of such disharmony” (Rosenfeld, “Constitutional Identity,” 761).

25

According to Vorländer, “Constitutions can only do justice to their central tasks of legitimising
and integrating political communities and their institutions if their normative rules and
offered meanings are accepted and practiced in the social reality, if communication about
fundamental values and patterns of behaviour takes place between the rulers and the
ruled” (Hans Vorländer, “Gründung und Geltung: Die Konstitution der Ordnung und die
Legitimität der Konstitution,” in Geltungsgeschichten: Über die Stabilisierung und Legitimierung
institutioneller Ordnungen, ed. Gert Melville and Hans Vorländer (Cologne; Weimar; Vienna:
Böhlau, 2002), 256 as cited in: Silke Hensel, Ulrike Bock, Katrin Dircksen and Hans-Ulrich
Thamer, ed., Constitutional Cultures: On the Concept and Representation of Constitutions in the
Atlantic World (Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2012), 5).

Kyiv-Mohyla Law and Politics Journal 4 (2018)

22

is what really matters.26 Therefore, the phenomenon of constitutional identity in its
sociological dimension is closely intertwined with the phenomenon of constitutional
culture 27 (or in a broader sense — legal culture 28).
What is the link between “constitutional identity” as the axiological core of a
constitutional order in its legal, political, and sociological dimensions and the processes
of Europeanization?
According to the definition given by C. Radaelli, Europeanization comprises
[the] processes of (a) construction (b) diffusion and (c)
institutionalization of formal and informal rules, procedures,
policy paradigms, styles, “ways of doing things” and shared beliefs
and norms which are first defined and consolidated in the making

26

Comparing more than 100 constitutions, Ginsburg and Versteeg show that countries that
explicitly protect such values as the rule of law in their constitutions tend to have a lower level
of respect for the rule of law in practice than those that do not include rule of law guaranties
in constitutional texts (Tom Ginsburg and Mila Versteeg, “Constitutional Correlates and the
Rule of Law,” in Constitutionalism and the Rule of Law: Bridging Idealism and Realism, edited
by Maurice Adams, Anne Meuwese and Ernst Hirsch Ballin (Cambridge; New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2017), 507, 517).

27

As Siegel observes, “constitutional culture” is “[…] an interlocking system of practices,
institutional arrangements, norms, and habits of thought that determine what questions we
ask, what arguments we credit, how we process disputes, and how we resolve those disputes”
(Andrew M. Siegel, “Constitutional Theory, Constitutional Culture,” Journal of Constitutional
Law 18.4 (2016): 1107). According to Mazzone, “[c]onstitutional culture […] can be said to
include such things as the disposition of regular citizens to recognize and accept that they are
governed by a written document, one that creates institutions of government and sets limits
on what the government may do; the accepted belief that the governing charter is created
by the citizenry; the knowledge that the charter is not timeless, but rather that the citizens
may change it or revoke it under certain circumstances; and the understanding that until the
charter is changed we are bound by it and required to go along with its ultimate results even
though we are free to disagree with them. Constitutional culture also includes the understanding
that a constitution unifies a population beyond those in one’s immediate sphere of acquaintance
such that other people in other places are likewise governed by this written document and that,
whatever our other differences, this is something we have in common” (italics added) (Jason
Mazzone, “The Creation of a Constitutional Culture,” Tulsa Law Review 40.4 (2004): 672). The
last element in conjunction with internalized constitutional values, in my view, compose the
constitutional identity of an actual political community.

28

In his “Law and Society: An Introduction,” L. M. Friedman states that legal culture “determines
when, why, and where people use law, legal institutions, or legal process; and when they use
other institutions or do nothing”; it “sets everything in motion” and “is an essential variable
in explaining the working of law” (cited as in: Roger Cotterrell, Law, Culture and Society: Legal
Ideas in the Mirror of Social Theory (London: Routledge, 2006), 86).

Anna Khvorostiankina. Europeanization Through EU External Agreements

23

and the Issue of “Constitutional Identity”: The Case of the EU-Armenia CEPA

of EU decisions and then incorporated in the logic of domestic
discourse, identities, political and public policies.29
The concept of “Europeanization” thus covers a set of complex processes of
change that transform not only the legislation of a country, but also influence political
culture, the legal mentality, and judicial reasoning; empower civil society, and transform
relations between the state and an individual. Arguably, the transformative influence
may be either directed, initiated, and stimulated by the EU or result from voluntary
genuine change initiated on a domestic level, inspired by European models. In both
cases, when the changes affect a value system, the values should be internalized and
change has to occur in the constitutional identity on the level of the actual society.

2.1. “Constitutional Identity” and the
Vectors of Regional Integration
The next issue to analyze is whether constitutional identity encompasses orientation
towards specific integration projects. On the one hand, the choice of a particular
integration project can be influenced by a range of factors — geopolitical, political,
and economic. On the other hand, however, in some cases geopolitical orientation
may become an element of the constitutional identity enshrined in the constitution or
documents of a constituting character (such as declarations of independence) having
the status of a constitutional value. Here one can speak about the interplay of the
identity of a constitution and that of the people: the people view a specific geopolitical
orientation as preferable (or the only one possible); and the constitutional text reflects
and protects this value.
In post-Soviet space there are several cases of the recognition of the specific
vector of integration as a part of constitutional identity. In particular, in the case of
Lithuania, the constitutional prohibition of joining “in any form any new political,
military, economic, or other unions or commonwealths of states formed on the basis
of the former USSR” 30 became a part of constitutional identity explicitly reflected in
the constitutional text.31 In Moldova, the Constitutional Court ruled that “orientation
towards the European area of democratic values is an element of the constitutional
29

Claudio M. Radaelli, “Whither Europeanization? Concept Stretching and Substantive Change,”
European Integration Online Papers 4 (2000): 3.

30

Par. 1 of the Constitutional Act of 8 June 1992 “On the Non-Alignment of the Republic of
Lithuania with Post-Soviet Eastern Alliances,” accessed April 12, 2018, https://e-seimas.lrs.lt/
portal/legalAct/lt/TAD/TAIS.21154?jfwid=1clcwot6i3. According to Art. 150 of the Constitution
of the Republic of Lithuania, the Constitutional Act is an integral part of the Constitution,
English version: https://e-seimas.lrs.lt/rs/legalact/TAD/TAIS.206072/ (accessed June 30, 2017).

31

Dainius Žalimas, “Eternity Clauses: A Safeguard of Democratic Order and Constitutional
Identity,” Speech of the President of the Constitutional Court of Lithuania, 2, accessed
November 1, 2017, http://www.gjk-ks.org/repository/docs/Speech_of_the_President_of_the_
Constitutional_Court_of_Lithuania_Prof. Dr._Dainius_alimas.pdf.

24

Kyiv-Mohyla Law and Politics Journal 4 (2018)

identity of the Republic of Moldova.” This element, according to the Court, is a defining
one: “the process of European integration […] not only complies with the constitutional
identity of the country, any other adverse orientation is unconstitutional a priori.” 32

2.2. Constitutional Identity as the Openness
of a Constitutional Order
In addition to an axiological basis, constitutional identity also determines the relations
of a constitutional order with other legal orders.33 In today’s realities, national
constitutional orders cannot exist in isolation; they are in dialog with international,
supranational, subnational, and foreign legal orders.34 This dialog results in mutual
(although usually asymmetric) transformative influences. The concept of constitutional
identity in this case helps to characterize the limits and define the available channels
of these possible influences. It indicates the degree of sensitivity and openness of a
constitutional order to various types of external influence, in particular, its adaptability
to external standards and requirements.
The said external influences may be both formal and informal and may be
realized through different “channels” — through formal legal tools provided by national
legislation 35 and/or indirectly through the socialization of the domestic actors involved
32

Judgment on the constitutionality of the Association Agreement between the Republic
of Moldova, on the one hand, and the European Union and the European Atomic Energy
Community and its Member States, on the other hand, and of Law No.112 of July 2, 2014 on its
ratification, English version, accessed November 1, 2017, http://www.constcourt.md/libview.
php?l=en&idc=7&id=583&t=/Overview/Press-Service/News/The-Association-Agreementbetween-the-Republic-of-Moldova-and-the-European-Union-constitutional.

33

This approach echoes Śledzińska-Simon’s theory of constitutional identity as a three-partite
self. She, however, differentiates between “horizontal” (foreign) and “vertical” (supranational)
relations with “others” (see: Śledzińska-Simon, “Constitutional Identity in 3D”). Two notes
should be added here: (1) in Śledzińska-Simon’s approach the focus is made on the selfperception of a subject (individual, relational, or collective selves), while in the approach
proposed in this article openness towards interactions with others, the level of sensitivity or
adaptability to their influences, and available tools channeling influence are underlined; (2) the
separation of “vertical” interactions is valid in the relations between the EU and its Member
States and is significantly less evident in the case of relations with third countries.

34

As Armin von Bogdandy notes in relation to the contemporary notion of legal pluralism and
the interaction of legal orders, “any given constitution does not set up a normative universum
anymore but is, rather, an element in a normative pluriversum” (Armin von Bogdandy,
“Pluralism, Direct Effect, and the Ultimate Say: On the Relationship Between International and
Domestic Constitutional Law,” International Journal of Constitutional Law 6.3–4 (2008): 401).

35

To provide some examples, one can refer to Art. 5(3) of the Constitution of Armenia setting
out a hierarchy of legal norms and providing that “In case of conflict between the norms
of international treaties ratified by the Republic of Armenia and those of laws, the norms

Anna Khvorostiankina. Europeanization Through EU External Agreements

25

and the Issue of “Constitutional Identity”: The Case of the EU-Armenia CEPA

in law-making and law-applying (first of all, judicial) activities. Consequently, the
obstacles for the effective interplay of the national constitutional order with other legal
orders may be created either directly by a constitution or constitutional legislation, or
indirectly by domestic actors. The latter situation is typical for judicial practices in postSoviet countries where constitutional identity is still in the process of formation. On
the one hand, there is a tendency for orientation on international legal standards (and
there are some legislative “channels” for doing this), following foreign “best practices,”
and “borrowing” external experience. On the other hand, these processes are hindered
by methodological problems caused by the particularities of a legal mentality affected
by a positivistic tradition, the lack of relevant information, and a language barrier.36
In summary, the relation between the processes of the Europeanization of a third
country through agreements with the EU and the constitutional identity of the latter
can be characterized as follows. Although an orientation towards integration with the
EU (without membership) in some cases may be encompassed by the value component
of constitutional identity, the adaptability of a third country’s constitutional order
to the requirements of the integration project depends on both its value-based core
of international treaties shall apply”; Art. 81 of the Constitution of the RA stating that “The
practice of bodies operating on the basis of international treaties on human rights, ratified
by the Republic of Armenia, shall be taken into account when interpreting the provisions
concerning basic rights and freedoms enshrined in the Constitution. Restrictions on basic
rights and freedoms may not exceed the restrictions prescribed by international treaties
of the Republic of Armenia”; Art. 15 of the Judicial Code of the RA of 2007 recognizing the
case-law of the ECHR as an official source of law in Armenia. Art. 43 of the Constitution in its
version of 1995 stating that the rights and freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution are not
exhaustive and a person can have other rights, in particular those guaranteed by international
treaties. The Constitutional Court used this constitutional provision as a ground for its
arguments confirming the compliance of the obligations deriving from the ECHR with the
Armenian Constitution, thus confirming the openness of the Armenian constitutional order to
international human rights standards (see par. 13 of Decision DCC‑350 of 22 February 2002).
36

Let us consider the practice of the application of the case-law of the ECHR by domestic courts.
Although ECHR case-law is recognized as an official source of law in Armenia, judges still
face methodological problems while applying it due to the long-lasting domination of legal
positivism during the Soviet era (see: Narine Ghazaryan and Anna Hakobyan, “Legislative
Approximation and Application of EU Law in Armenia,” in Legislative Approximation and
Application of EU Law in the Eastern Neighbourhood of the European Union, edited by Peter Van
Elsuwege and Roman Petrov (London; New York: Routledge, 2014), 205). These problems are
not unique, however: to a certain degree they are typical for post-communist countries (see, for
example: Zdeněk Kühn, “The Application of European Law in the New Member States: Several
(Early) Predictions,” German Law Journal 6.3 (2005): 564; Andriy Meleshevych and Anna
Khvorostyankina, “Ukraine,” in The European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms in Central and Eastern Europe, edited by Leonard Hammer and Frank Emmert (The
Hague: Eleven International Publishing, 2012), 557–96).

Kyiv-Mohyla Law and Politics Journal 4 (2018)

26

and the level of its openness to external influences (formal and informal). While the
former defines the “substance” of adaptation processes, the latter determines their
effectiveness and defines applicable mechanisms and tools.
In the following sections of the article the transformative potential of the EUArmenia CEPA will be assessed through the lens of the concept of “constitutional
identity.” The analysis will start with a brief characterization of the Agreement,
addressing its current status, objectives, and legal basis, the context of its conclusion
and ratification, as well as its institutional framework.

3. CEPA: A New Legal Framework of EU-Armenia Relations
The EU-Armenia Comprehensive and Enhanced Partnership Agreement 37 was signed
on November 24, 2017. After examination by the Constitutional Court of the RA 38
on March 16, 2018 39 and ratification by the National Assembly (the Parliament of
Armenia) on April 11, 2018,40 CEPA became an integral part of the Armenian domestic
legal system, enjoying supremacy over national laws.41 The Agreement is not yet in force

37

Comprehensive and Enhanced Partnership Agreement between the European Union
and the European Atomic Energy Community and their Member States, of the One
Part, and the Republic of Armenia, of the Other Part (Not Yet in Force), OJ L 23 (January
26, 2018), 4–466, accessed June 15, 2018, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?uri=CELEX:22018A0126(01)&qid=1523193570030. The results of an initial legal analysis of
the Agreement have been presented in: Anna Khvorostiankina. “EU-Armenia Comprehensive
and Enhanced Partnership Agreement: What Does It Mean for the Armenian Legal System?,”
Armenian Journal of Political Science 2 (2017): 5–30.

38

Art. 116 (3) of the Armenian Constitution prescribes that international treaties contradicting it
may not be ratified. The Constitutional Court, prior to the ratification of an international treaty,
determines the compliance of the commitments enshrined therein with the Constitution.

39

DCC‑1407 of 16 March 2017 “On the Case of Conformity of the Obligations Stipulated by the
Comprehensive and Enhanced Partnership Agreement between the Republic of Armenia,
of the One Part, and the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community
and Their Member States, of the Other Part, signed in Brussels on 24 November 2017 with
the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia” (in Armenian), accessed June 15, 2018, http://
concourt.am/armenian/decisions/common/2018/pdf/sdv‑1407.pdf.

40

See: Law of the Republic of Armenia on the Comprehensive and Enhanced Partnership
Agreement Between the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community
and Their Member States, of the One Part, and the Republic of Armenia, of the Other Part,
11 April 2018 (in Armenian), accessed May 27, 2018, http://www.parliament.am/legislation.
php?sel=show&ID=6399&lang=arm.

41

Art. 5 of the Constitution of the RA.

Anna Khvorostiankina. Europeanization Through EU External Agreements

27

and the Issue of “Constitutional Identity”: The Case of the EU-Armenia CEPA

pending ratification by all EU Member States.42 However, starting from June 1, 2018, it
has been provisionally applied by the Parties.43
The Agreement aims, in particular, “to enhance the comprehensive political and
economic partnership and cooperation between the Parties, based on common values
and close links, including by increasing the participation of the Republic of Armenia in
policies, programmes, and agencies of the European Union,” 44 replacing the outdated
EU-Armenia Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA) signed in 1996.45 It is
expected that CEPA “will strengthen [EU-Armenia] cooperation in many different
fields such as energy, transport and environment, and lead to increased mobility” and
will “lead to an improved business environment and to new opportunities in trade and
investments.” 46
From the EU’s perspective, CEPA objectives belong to Common Foreign
and Security Policy, Common Commercial Policy, and development cooperation.
Consequently, the legal basis of the Agreement was defined as the combination of
Article 37 TEU, Article 207 TFEU (agreements related to Common Commercial Policy),
and Article 209 TFEU (agreements in the area of development cooperation), read in

42

In accordance with Art. 385(2), CEPA shall enter into force on the first day of the second month
following the date of deposit of the last instrument of ratification or approval.

43

Delegation of the European Union to Armenia, “Step Forward for EU-Armenia Relations
as New Agreement is Provisionally Applied,” accessed June 1, 2018, https://eeas.europa.eu/
delegations/armenia/45736/step-forward-eu-armenia-relations-new-agreement-provisionallyapplied_en. The provisional application is enabled by Art. 385(5) of CEPA.

44

Art. 1(a) CEPA. Furthermore, according to Art. 1, CEPA aims to: enhance the comprehensive
political and economic partnership and cooperation between the EU and Armenia; strengthen
the framework for political dialogue; contribute to the strengthening of democracy and of
political, economic and institutional stability in Armenia; to promote, preserve and strengthen
peace and stability at both regional and international levels, including through joining efforts
to eliminate sources of tension, enhancing border security, and promoting cross-border
cooperation and good neighbourly relations; enhance cooperation in the area of freedom,
security and justice with the aim of reinforcing the rule of law and respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms; enhance mobility and people-to-people contacts; support
Armenia’s efforts to develop its economic potential via international cooperation, including
through the approximation of its legislation to the EU acquis; establish enhanced trade
cooperation allowing for sustained regulatory cooperation in relevant areas and the conditions
for increasingly close cooperation in other areas of mutual interest.

45

Art. 380 CEPA.

46

Remarks by High Representative/Vice-President Federica Mogherini following the signing of
the European Union-Armenia Comprehensive and Enhanced Partnership Agreement (CEPA)
with Edward Nalbandian, Minister of Foreign Affairs of Armenia, Brussels, November 24, 2017,
accessed November 26, 2017, https://eeas.europa.eu/delegations/armenia/36208/remarks-hrvpfederica-mogherini-following-signing-european-union-armenia-comprehensive-and_en.

28

Kyiv-Mohyla Law and Politics Journal 4 (2018)

conjunction with the procedural provisions of Article 218(6)(a) TFEU and the second
sub paragraph of Article 218(8) TFEU.47
In 2017, the new “soft” law document — EU-Armenia Partnership Priorities 48
replacing the ENP Action Plan of 2006 — was adopted to facilitate the implementation
of the Agreement. The Priorities will “shape the agenda for regular political dialogue
meetings and sectoral dialogues” 49 based on CEPA.
After Armenia’s forced “U‑turn” towards membership in the Russia-led Eurasian
Economic Union (following the Eurasian Customs Union) in September 2013 and the
failure of the EU-Armenia Association Agreement, CEPA introduced a new stage in
EU-Armenia relations. The Agreement established the legal basis of a new format of
partnership. For the EU, the newly signed agreement has become “the first of its kind,
as it is concluded with a partner country which is at the same time a member of the
Eurasian Economic Union and in the Eastern Partnership.” 50 From this perspective,
CEPA is a unique legal instrument: it is significantly more elaborate and comprehensive
than PCAs of the 90s and new agreements with former Soviet states of Central Asia; in
some aspects, it resembles Association Agreements concluded with Georgia, Moldova
and Ukraine, diverging from them only in parts affected by Armenia’s participation
in the EAEU.51 Arguably, the Agreement became a result of the interplay of Armenia’s
47

Joint Proposal for a Council Decision on the Conclusion, on behalf of the European
Union, of the Comprehensive and Enhanced Partnership Agreement Between the
European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community and their Member States,
of the One Part, and the Republic of Armenia, of the Other Part, JOIN/2017/037 final —
2017/0238 (NLE), accessed June 17, 2018, https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?qid=1523193570030&uri=CELEX:52017JC 0037. The Agreement does not aim to develop
association relations (Art. 217 TFEU); instead, it establishes “a specific institutional framework
by organising cooperation procedures” (Art. 218 (6)(a)).

48

European Union and Armenia Sign Partnership Priorities, Bruxelles, 21/02/2018–14:17, UNIQUE
ID: 180221_5, accessed March 1, 2018, https://eeas.europa.eu/headquarters/headquartershomepage/40181/european-union-and-armenia-sign-partnership-priorities_en. Partnership
Priorities include (1) strengthening institutions and good governance; (2) economic
development and market opportunities; (3) connectivity, energy efficiency, environment and
climate action; and (4) mobility and people-to-people contacts.

49

Recommendation No. 1/2017 of the EU-Armenia Cooperation Council of 20
November 2017 on the EU-Armenia Partnership Priorities [2018/315], OJ L 60 (March
2, 2018), 51–55, accessed March 15, 2018, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?qid=1522643453339&uri=CELEX:22018D0315.

50

Remarks by High Representative/Vice-President Federica Mogherini following the signing of
the European Union-Armenia Comprehensive and Enhanced Partnership Agreement (CEPA).

51

This is relevant, first of all, for the “economic” part of the Agreement which — in contrast
with the Association Agreements — does not presuppose establishment of the Deep and
Comprehensive Free Trade Area; the “political” part of CEPA is based on the draft EU-Armenia
Association Agreement (see Hrant Kostanyan and Richard Giragosian, “EU-Armenian

Anna Khvorostiankina. Europeanization Through EU External Agreements

29

and the Issue of “Constitutional Identity”: The Case of the EU-Armenia CEPA

“complementarity” approach in its multi-vectored foreign policy, on the one hand, and
the EU’s differentiation and greater flexibility approach within the revised EaP, on the
other hand.52
The institutional framework of the EU-Armenia partnership resembles (with some
exceptions) the institutional frameworks established under AAs and is significantly
more advanced in comparison to the institutional framework under the EU-Armenia
PCA. It includes: a Partnership Council consisting of representatives of the Parties at a
ministerial level,53 a Partnership Committee composed of representatives of the Parties,
in principle at the senior official level,54 sub-committees,55 other bodies assisting
the Partnership Committee,56 a Partnership Parliamentary Committee consisting of
members of the European Parliament and the National Assembly of the RA,57 and
Civil Society Platforms established to enable the active involvement of civil society in
the implementation of CEPA.58 Importantly, in contrast with the PCA and similar to
Association Agreements, CEPA entitles its institutions (the Partnership Council and
Partnership Commission) to make binding decisions.
For an in-depth analysis of CEPA’s transformative potential, it is important to take
into account the social and political context of its ratification and implementation.
The ratification of CEPA by the Armenian Parliament coincided with the beginning of
peaceful protests and acts of civil disobedience against oligarchy, the monopolization
and concentration of power, violations of fundamental rights, the disrespect of the
Relations: Charting a Fresh Course,” CEPS Research Report No. 2017–14, November 2017, 12.
Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3075166). Noteworthy, the “political” part (Art.
5(1)) acknowledges Armenia’s participation in “international organisations and cooperation
formats” in the area of foreign and security policy (which include, in particular, the Russia-led
Collective Security Treaty Organization).
52

See ENP Review (Joint Communication to the European Parliament, the Council, The
European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions. Review of the
European Neighbourhood Policy, 18.11.2015 JOIN (2015) 50 final, accessed March 1, 2018, http://
eeas.europa.eu/archives/docs/enp/documents/2015/151118_joint-communication_review-ofthe-enp_en.pdf).

53

Art. 362 CEPA. Following the beginning of the provisional application of CEPA on June 1,
2018, the first Partnership Council chaired by F. Mogherini took place on June 21, 2018 (Joint
Press Statement Following the First Partnership Council Meeting Between the European
Union and Armenia, accessed June 22, 2018, http://www. consilium.europa.eu/en/press/pressreleases/2018/06/21/joint-press-statement-following-the-first-partnership-council-meetingbetween-the-european-union-and-armenia/).

54

Art. 363 CEPA.

55

For example, the Sub-Committee on Customs (Art. 126) and the Sub-Committee on
Geographical Indications (Art. 240).

56

Art. 364 CEPA.

57

Art. 365 CEPA.

58

Art. 366 (2) CEPA.

30

Kyiv-Mohyla Law and Politics Journal 4 (2018)

rule of law, corruption, and other negative phenomena associated with the rule of the
Armenian Republican Party and its leader Serzh Sargsyan. Having served for two terms
as President of Armenia (2008–2018), on 17 April 2018 Sargsyan was elected Prime
Minister by the Parliament. After the constitutional reform of 2015 that introduced
the parliamentary system of government and significantly strengthened the authority
of the Prime Minister, having made the position of the President a symbolic one, this
election meant, in fact, a third presidential term for Sargsyan. As a result of the protests
he resigned on 23 April 2018. Opposition leader Nikol Pashinyan was elected Prime
Minister of Armenia and formed the new Government.
The new Government immediately started implementing anti-corruption
measures and introduced reforms directed at the establishment of the rule of law and
good governance. Although the process of a peaceful transition of power did not have
any geopolitical connotations and regional integration vectors were not under question,
the dynamics of the initiated reforms created the grounds for cautious optimism
concerning the potential deepening of EU-Armenia relations. Being in harmony with
so-called EU “common” values, these genuinely internal political processes of reform
(in conjunction with the active development of civil society) are expected to facilitate
the proper implementation of CEPA. Moreover, the demand for successful models and
best practices for the “restart” of legal, political, and economic reforms can stimulate
the further Europeanization of Armenia even beyond the formal commitments under
the Agreement.

4. The Implementation of CEPA and the Axiological
Core of the Armenian Constitutional Order
In this section I analyze CEPA values and the mechanisms of their promotion. I then
compare these values with the Armenian “constitutional identity” as an axiological
core of a domestic constitutional order comprising the identity of the Constitution,
that of the people and the actual society. On the basis of this comparison, I evaluate
the potential effectiveness of CEPA in values promotion.
As the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) has recently noted on
several occasions that,
EU law is […] based on the fundamental premise that each Member
State shares with all the other Member States, and recognises
that they share with it, a set of common values on which the
EU is founded, as stated in Article 2 TEU. That premise implies
and justifies the existence of mutual trust between the Member
States that those values will be recognised, and therefore that the
law of the EU that implements them will be respected” 59 (italics
added. — A. Kh.).
59

See: Judgement of 6 March 2018, Achmea, C‑284/16, ECLI: EU: C:2018:158, para. 34 (and case-law
cited therein); Judgement of 25 July 2018, LM, C‑216/18 PPU, ECLI: EU: C:2018:586, para. 35 (and

Anna Khvorostiankina. Europeanization Through EU External Agreements

31

and the Issue of “Constitutional Identity”: The Case of the EU-Armenia CEPA

The so-called “shared” or “common” values of the European Union thus constitute
the cornerstone of the European legal order. In accordance with Art. 2 TEU, they include
“respect for human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law, and respect
for human rights, including the rights of persons belonging to minorities. These values
are common to Member States in a society in which pluralism, non-discrimination,
tolerance, justice, solidarity and equality between women and men prevail.”
The said values are also to be upheld and promoted in the relations of the EU with
the wider world (Art. 3(5) TEU); they serve as a foundation of a “special relationship
with neighbouring countries, aiming to establish an area of prosperity and good
neighbourliness” (Art. 8(1) TEU). The fundamental values are further reflected in the
“principles” of EU external actions (Art. 21(1)).
The concept of “common” or “shared” values is used in the context of the ENP
and is specifically underlined in the new agreements with EaP countries.60 In the same
manner as AAs, CEPA contains several references to “common values.” They can be
found, in particular, in the recital stating that the Agreement takes account of the
values the Parties “share”; in Art. 1 establishing the objectives of CEPA, in particular, to
enhance comprehensive partnership and cooperation based on “common values”; in
Art. 5 stating that cooperation in the area of foreign and security policy shall be based
on “common values and mutual interests.” Furthermore, there are numerous provisions
referring to specific EU values.
According to S. Poli, there are four main ways the EU uses to promote its values
through external action: (1) considering them as “essential elements” of legally binding
agreements with partner countries and associating a non-execution clause in case
of breach; (2) encouraging third countries to ratify and implement legally binding
multilateral agreements based on universal values; (3) making the values a prerequisite
for receiving financial assistance from the EU (in particular, within the European
Neighbourhood Instrument) and (4) applying sanctions in case of the failure to respect
democracy.61
An analysis of CEPA reveals that the Agreement employs the first three ways of
values promotion identified above.62 However, the third way should be viewed more
broadly than in the classification provided by Poli: it should be defined as making
the implementation of values a prerequisite within the conditionality mechanisms
(the incentives of these mechanisms obviously cannot be restricted to the receiving of
financial assistance 63). Similarly to the AAs with Georgia, Moldova, and Ukraine, CEPA
case-law cited therein).
60

See “European Neighbourhood Policy,” Strategy Paper COM (2004), 373 final.

61

Sara Poli, “Introduction,” in The European Neighbourhood Policy — Values and Principles, edited
by Sara Poli (Abingdon, Oxon; New York, NY: Routledge, 2016), 2.

62

The second way can be illustrated, in particular, with Art. 6 CEPA stressing the values of peace
and international justice and requiring ratification and implementation of the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court and its related instruments.

63

Although conditionality based on the “financial assistance” incentive can also be found in
CEPA: see Art. 344 stating that the amount of financial assistance provided by the EU to

Kyiv-Mohyla Law and Politics Journal 4 (2018)

32

employs two types of conditionality: “common values” conditionality and “market
access” conditionality,64 which serve to export EU values in the former case, and the
EU acquis (as a set of rules) in the latter case.65
Noteworthy, all four ways may be characterized as purely legal instruments and
defined as different variations of conditionality (positive and negative). Departing
from a purely legal analysis and applying a socio-legal approach, one can complement
these conditionality mechanisms with the mechanisms of “socialization” proposed in
Political Science and presupposing that the EU “teaches” domestic actors “the principles
and rules of European governance.” 66
Art. 2 of CEPA sets forth the fundamental principles of the Agreement. Some of
these principles (namely, respect for democratic principles, the rule of law,67 human
rights, and fundamental freedoms 68) constitute one of the essential elements of the
Armenia “shall take into account the Republic of Armenia’s needs, sector capacities and
progress with reforms, in particular in areas covered by this Agreement” (italics added).
64

See: Roman Petrov, Guillaume Van der Loo, and Peter Van Elsuwege, “The EU-Ukraine
Association Agreement: A New Legal Instrument of Integration Without Membership?,” KyivMohyla Law and Politics Journal 1 (2015): 12–13, https://doi.org/10.18523/kmlpj52678.2015–1.1–19;
Roman Petrov, “EU Values in Integration-oriented Agreements with Ukraine, Moldova and
Georgia,” in The European Neighbourhood Policy — Values and Principles, edited by Sara Poli
(Abingdon, Oxon; New York, NY: Routledge, 2016).

65

For a detailed description of differences in the methodologies of the export of values and rules
see: Dimitry Kochenov, “The Issue of Values,” in Legislative Approximation and Application of
EU Law in the Eastern Neighbourhood of the European Union, edited by Roman Petrov and Peter
Van Elsuwege (London; New York: Routledge, 2014).

66

Frank Schimmelfennig, “Europeanization beyond Europe,” Living Reviews in European
Governance 7.1 (2012): 8, accessed June 25, 2018, http://www.livingreviews.org/lreg‑2012–1.

67

The rule of law is further stressed in Art. 12 CEPA as a basis for the cooperation of the Parties
in the areas of freedom, security, and justice. Under this article, the consolidation of the rule
of law includes “the independence of the judiciary, access to justice, the right to a fair trial as
provided for by the European Convention on Human Rights, and procedural safeguards in
criminal matters and victims’ rights.”

68

Art. 2(1) of CEPA provisions contains an extensive and open-ended list of international
instruments in the field of human rights and fundamental freedoms (of both binding “hard”
law and non-binding “soft” law nature) in which, according to the Agreement, the Parties must
adhere to in their domestic and external policies. The issue of human rights and fundamental
freedoms as a prerequisite of a conditionality mechanism can be additionally extracted from
other provisions of the “political part”: Art. 15 CEPA obliges the Parties to fully implement Visa
Facilitation and Readmission Agreements. In case of fulfilment of these obligations and provided
that conditions for well-managed and secure mobility are in place, the Parties shall consider in
due course the opening of a visa-liberalisation dialogue. Taking into account the experience of
EaP associated countries, the visa liberalization dialogue will focus on, in addition to security
benchmarks, benchmarks related to fundamental rights (“Visa Liberalisation with Moldova,

Anna Khvorostiankina. Europeanization Through EU External Agreements

33

and the Issue of “Constitutional Identity”: The Case of the EU-Armenia CEPA

Agreement 69; others (the principles of a free-market economy, sustainable development,
regional cooperation and effective multilateralism, good governance, and respect for
international obligations etc.) are not included in the essential element clause, but
are vital for relations under the Agreement and can be viewed as elements of CEPA’s
conditionality mechanisms.
Arguably, essential element clauses in combination with a non-fulfillment
clause 70 and preamble references to the Parties’ commitments constitute one of the
mechanisms of value conditionality. It presupposes that all other provisions of CEPA
(including provisions on economic cooperation and trade relations) can effectively
operate and be implemented only if the specific principles and values are respected
by the Parties. Therefore, the values and principles included in the essential elements
may be considered as the axiological core of the Agreement.
What is the link between this core and the Armenian “constitutional identity”?
Let us consider the constitutional text first. The fundamental values of the rule of
law, democracy, and respect for human rights promoted by CEPA are embodied in
the unamendable provisions of Articles 1, 2, and 3 of the Armenian Constitution.
Consequently, they constitute the basis of its “identity.” In a number of its judgements,
the Constitutional Court has provided an interpretation of these principles. Of
particular interest is the Decision concerning compliance of the EAEU Treaty with
the Armenian Constitution, where the Court introduced the concept of the “axiology of
the Constitution” covering the values and fundamental principles of the constitutional
order,71 including, in particular, the rule of law, respect for human rights and democracy.
The Court examined (although in a very superficial and formalistic way) and confirmed
the compliance of the “axiology” of the commitments under the Treaty with Armenian
constitutional “axiology.” Arguably, this analysis aimed to enhance the legitimacy of
joining a supranational organization which, on the one hand, can potentially limit
national sovereignty and, on the other hand, is not committed to strengthening the

Ukraine, and Georgia,” accessed March 15, 2018, https://ec.europa.eu/home-affairs/what-wedo/policies/international-affairs/eastern-partnership/visa-liberalisation-moldova-ukraine-andgeorgia_en). Thus, the perspectives of visa liberalization offered in CEPA can also serve as a
stimulus for the proper implementation of “common” values in this area.
69

One more essential element is included in Art. 9 and deals with the weapons of mass
destruction, non-proliferation, and disarmament. This essential element is standard for EU
agreements with third countries. As Cremona observes, WMD clauses have been included in
such instruments since 2003 (Marise Cremona, “The ENP and Multilateralism,” in The European
Neighbourhood Policy — Values and Principles, edited by Sara Poli (Abingdon, Oxon; New York,
NY: Routledge, 2016), 85–86). Similar “essential elements” can be found, in particular, in AAs
with Georgia, Moldova, and Ukraine (Art. 10 EU-Georgia AA; Art. 9 EU-Moldova AA; Art. 11 EUUkraine AA).

70

Art. 379 CEPA.

71

See: Decision DCC‑1175 of 14 November 2014.

Kyiv-Mohyla Law and Politics Journal 4 (2018)

34

fundamental constitutional values of respect for human rights, democracy, and the
rule of law.72
In contrast with this Decision, in the Decision on CEPA an analysis of the issue of
values is scarce. The Court merely reproduced the provisions of Art. 2 of the Agreement
with a focus on the “essential element” clause 73 and underlined that, according to the
Preamble of the Constitution, Armenia alleges universal values.74 The Court does not
link these two statements and does not highlight the “shared” nature of the axiological
core of the Armenian constitutional order and the legal values promoted by the EU.75
Arguably, the establishment of this link and the underlining of the commonality of
values would have facilitated judicial reference to EU law for the purposes of the
interpretation of such values (in particular, to rapidly developing case-law and soft
law concerning the rule of law principle in Central Europe).
Regardless of their recognition in the Constitution, the proper implementation of
the rule of law, democracy, and respect for human rights as required by CEPA is still a
problematic issue. As stated above, such proper implementation can only be possible
72

Being an organization of economic cooperation, the EAEU does not merely aim at promoting
the mentioned values; instead, among the principles of its functioning, the EAEU Treaty lists
the respect of the universally recognized principles of international law including the principle
of the sovereign equality of member states and “respect of particularities of the political
order of the member states” (Art. 3 EAEU Treaty). At the same time, although formally EAEU
Member States recognize “European” (or universal) values in their constitutions (see Art. 1 and
Art. 2 of the Constitution of the Republic of Belarus; Art. 1 of the Constitution of the Republic
of Kazakhstan; Art. 1 of the Constitution of the Kyrgyz Republic; Art. 1 and Art. 2 of the
Constitution of the Russian Federation), the implementation of these values is an extremely
problematic issue. All of the listed states are either consolidated authoritarian or semiauthoritarian regimes, not free or partly free (based on the data of Freedom House 2018. See:
https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-world/freedom-world‑2018, accessed July 31, 2018).

73

Para. 7 of Decision DCC‑1407.

74

Para. 14 of Decision DCC‑1407.

75

This lack of theoretical framing of the Decision on CEPA (in contrast to, for example, Decisions
on ECHR and ECHR case-law in the domestic legal system, on the constitutionality of the
EAEU Treaty and Customs Code) can be better explained through the agency approach: such
theoretical (or even philosophical) concepts as “the spirit of the Constitution,” “constitutional
axiology,” “constitutional culture,” as well as frequent reference to international standards of
fundamental rights in argumentation patterns can be individually attributed to then President
of the Constitutional Court Dr. G. Harutyunyan. The examination of his scholarly publications
allows for tracing the influence of his theoretical and argumentative approaches on the Court’s
case-law. The Decision on CEPA was adopted just after the retirement of Dr. Harutyunyan in
March 2018 and before the appointment of the new President of the Court. As a consequence,
the legal positions of the Court appeared to be rather technical and based on a literal
comparison of the obligations under the Agreement and the Constitution. This conclusion is
also confirmed by interview data (May 2018).

Anna Khvorostiankina. Europeanization Through EU External Agreements

35

and the Issue of “Constitutional Identity”: The Case of the EU-Armenia CEPA

when these values are internalized by society. Otherwise, the introduced Europeanization
reforms risk retaining a formal, façade character or may even lead to “pathologies
of Europeanization,” whereby Europeanization processes are instrumentalized by
domestic actors and empower incumbent authoritarian governments against their
political opponents.76 Both situations were typical for Armenia before the change
of government in April–May 2018. Currently, Prime Minister Pashinyan underlines
that democracy is viewed as a “firm belief,” and not as a “geopolitical orientation,” and
that the aim of the government is to conduct effective legal and political reforms —
with or without the participation of the EU — which are viewed as essential for the
development of the state.77
Indeed, the results of observing recent political, legal, and social developments in
Armenia allow for concluding that the process of the internalization of fundamental
values is in progress (although the influence of the authoritarian Soviet past is still not
overcome completely,78 and traditional institutions still influence legal and political
practices). The government is actively taking steps to transform the constitutional
declarations of fundamental values into operating legal provisions.79 What was defined
76

Tanja A. Börzel and Yasemin Pamuk, “Pathologies of Europeanization: Fighting Corruption
in the Southern Caucasus,” West European Politics 35.1 (2011): 79–97. Tanja A. Börzel and
Yasemin Pamuk, “Europeanization Subverted? The European Union’s Promotion of Good
Governance and the Fight Against Corruption in the South Caucasus,” KFG Working Paper
No. 26 (April 2011), accessed May 1, 2018, http://userpage.fu-berlin.de/kfgeu/kfgwp/wpseries/
WorkingPaperKFG_26.pdf.

77

The statement was made at a press-conference devoted to the results of an official visit to
Brussels, on July 12, 2018, and was provoked by Pashinyan’s disappointment with EU policy
towards Armenia: in his words, regardless of the high appraisals and warm welcoming of the
outcomes of the peaceful protests and the reforms already introduced by the new government,
the approach of the EU to Armenia in practical terms has not changed (Official web-site of
Prime Minister, video of the press-conference. http://www. primeminister.am/hy/videos/
item/9MrD 1Vs-F0A/, i n Armenian, accessed July 14, 2018).

78

Simon Payaslian, The Political Economy of Human Rights in Armenia: Authoritarianism and
Democracy in a Former Soviet Republic (London: I. B. Tauris, 2011), 290–93.

79

The change of approach to fundamental constitutional values can also be noticed on the level
of political discourse. Comparing the Programs of government activities, one may notice that
the Government under the rule of the Republican Party stressed the necessity of creating “the
legal basis ensuring the efficiency of public administration in the parliamentary system, the
authorities’ responsibility and accountability to the public, and the rule of law” and focused
mainly on legislative and institutional reforms (see the sections “Vision and Goals of the
RA Government Program” and 1.3. “Human Rights Protection, Justice, and the Fight Against
Corruption” of the Program of the Government of the RA for 2017–2022 Approved by the
Decision of the Government of the RA No 646-A of June 19, 2017, accessed July 1, 2018, http://
www.gov.am/files/docs/2219.pdf). Pashinyan’s Government underlines that in the area of the
said constitutional values and principles there is no legislative gap but the problem was with

Kyiv-Mohyla Law and Politics Journal 4 (2018)

36

in scholarship as a necessity for democratic transition in Armenia — the “dissolving
of oligarchic economic and political structures” and the “reconfiguration of relations”
between the state, individuals, and civil society 80 — is currently in the focus of
government activities 81 and is being gradually achieved.82
In these circumstances, CEPA’s “socialization” mechanisms (in particular in
the form of “dialogues” and “exchanges of information” on various issues between
the Parties, including dialogues with civil society) can facilitate the transformative
influence of CEPA on the “constitutional identity” of the actual society.
As regards the geopolitical orientation as a component of the constitutional
identity, it should be noted that the Armenian Constitution does not stipulate any
restriction on the issue of international or regional cooperation. In contrast with some
other post-Soviet countries, it neither indicates any specific integration priorities or
preferences.83 Armenian foreign policy is based on the principle of “complementarity”
and multi-vectored regional cooperation.84 As a result, Armenia is currently both a
the political will of the authorities to properly implement them (see section 5.1 “Equality
Before the Law, Justice and Human Rights Protection” of the Program of the Government of RA
for 2018 Approved by the Decision of Government N 581-A of June 1, 2018, accessed July 1, 2018,
http://www.gov.am/files/docs/2782.pdf).
80

See: Payaslian, The Political Economy of Human Rights in Armenia, 293.

81

See the Program of the Government of the RA for 2018 Approved by the Decision of
Government N 581-A of June 1, 2018.

82

The former is achieved through the active implementation of anti-corruption measures
and the investigation of corruption-related crimes. The latter — through the strengthening
of the rule of law (of particular importance is the initiation of an investigation of Human
Rights violations in the period of the Republic Party’s rule, including the violent suppression
of peaceful protests against electoral fraud in March 2008. At the time of writing, criminal
charges were filed against the highest officials, including then President R. Kocharyan, who
was charged with “overthrowing the constitutional order in Armenia” see: Radio Freedom,
“Kocharian Charged Over 2008 Crackdown,” accessed July 26, 2018, https://www.azatutyun.
am/a/29392588.‌html); and other (sometimes unusual) methods of building trust and achieving
transparency (e. g. the Prime Minister’s regular on-line streams and direct communication with
people through social media).

83

See: Decision DCC‑1175 of November 14, 2014 in the Case on Conformity of the Obligations
Stipulated in the “Treaty on the Accession to the Treaty of May 29, 2014 On The Eurasian
Economic Union Signed by the Republic of Armenia” Signed on October 10, 2014 in Minsk
with the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia, English version http://concourt.am/english/
decisions/common/pdf/1175.pdf.

84

The Program of the previous Government highlighted deepening bilateral cooperation, in
particular, with Russia, the USA, European counties, Georgia, Iran, China, India, countries
of the Middle East, and multilateral cooperation with the EAEU, the CSTO, the EU, the CIS,
the UN, NATO, and the CoE (see section 2.1 of the Program of the Government of the RA for
2017–2022 approved by the Decision of the Government of the RA No. 646-A of June 19, 2017,

Anna Khvorostiankina. Europeanization Through EU External Agreements

37

and the Issue of “Constitutional Identity”: The Case of the EU-Armenia CEPA

member of the Russia-led EAEU and has enhanced relations with the EU. However,
from the “constitutional identity” perspective, these two regional integration vectors
have different characteristics: while the former is forced by Russia’s leverage, is based
on pragmatic economic interests and security considerations,85 and does not aim at
any value-based systemic change,86 the latter initially (under the rule of the Republican
Party) corresponded to domestic demand for modernization on the basis of EU
templates 87 and had a significant value-based discourse component (although not
translated into realities,88 and was often used as an easy way for Armenian authorities to
accessed July 1, 2018, http://www. gov.am/files/docs/2219.pdf). The same directions of foreign
relations are indicated in the Program of Pashinyan’s Government. However, noteworthy is (1)
stressing the necessity to increase the effectiveness of participation in the EAEU, (2) identifying
the principles of cooperation with Russia, in particular, equality; underlying that military
cooperation with Russia is an important component of the system of national security; (3)
in relations with the EU, focusing on implementation of CEPA and setting the aim to start a
dialogue on visa liberalization (see section 3.2 of the Program of Government of the RA for
2018 approved by the Decision of Government No. 581-A of June 1, 2018, accessed July 1, 2018,
http://www. gov.am/files/docs/2782.pdf).
85

On Russia’s leverage see: Laure Delcour and Kataryna Wolczuk, “The EU’s Unexpected
‘Ideal Neighbour’? The Perplexing Case of Armenia’s Europeanisation,” Journal of European
Integration 37.4 (2015): 495.

86

Among basic principles, Art. 3 EAEU Treaty lists the “respect for specific features of the
political structures of the Member States,” therefore EAEU is formally “indifferent” to the value
systems of the member states.

87

Delcour and Wolczuk, “The EU’s Unexpected ‘Ideal Neighbour’?,” 499. It should be noted that
before April 2018 this “demand” was of a rather pragmatic nature, aimed mainly at sectoral
reforms and — as Delcour and Wolczuk point out in relation to the period of 2009–2013 — was
caused by the necessity to decrease the vulnerability of the incumbent government (Delcour
and Wolczuk, “The EU’s Unexpected ‘Ideal Neighbour’?,” 498–99). The result was technical
legislative reforms that did not bring any systemic change (i. e. overcoming corruption,
dissolving oligarchic informal monopolies, introducing good governance. and improving
democratic institutions etc.). In fact, it was a case of, providing support at “low political cost”
and not endangering the “survival strategy” of the authorities, cooperation with the EU actually
prolonged the rule of the authoritarian government (see: Sieglinde Gstöhl, “Differentiated
Integration and the NEC,” in Legislative Approximation and Application of EU Law in the
Eastern Neighbourhood of the European Union, edited by Peter Van Elsuwege and Roman Petrov
(London; New York: Routledge, 2014), 102). Currently, cooperation with the EU may be viewed
as seeking support for domestic reforms genuinely aiming to bring systemic legal and political
change.

88

As Ghazaryan and Hakobyan note, this was due to the lack of rigour of the EU in pursuing the
“value conditionality” and the formalistic approach of the Armenian authorities in fulfilling
its obligations in this regard (Ghazaryan and Hakobyan, “Legislative Approximation and
Application of EU Law in Armenia,” 214).

Kyiv-Mohyla Law and Politics Journal 4 (2018)

38

get EU support at “low political cost” 89). Currently, as part of a “shared values” discourse,
cooperation with the EU may be viewed as coinciding with the government’s vision of
further development of the constitutional order.
Noteworthy, the value-based core of the constitutional order may also formally
create obstacles for the proper implementation of CEPA. In particular, the Agreement
states that “[t]he Parties shall aim to enhance cooperation in promoting peace
and international justice by ratifying and implementing the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court and its related instruments, and taking into account
their legal and constitutional frameworks.” 90 However, in its Decision of 2004,91 the
Constitutional Court held that the ICC Statute contradicts the Constitution. The
reasoning of the Court was based on two arguments: (1) the absence of the right to be
pardoned or amnestied in the Statute, restricting the scope of rights guaranteed by the
Constitution,92 and (2) the impossibility to complement or modify the national judicial
system through international treaties derived from the principle of sovereignty.93 The
Court underlined that ratification of the Statute would only be possible in case of
introducing amendments to the Constitution. Nevertheless, neither the constitutional
amendments of 2005 nor the reform of 2015 enabled the ratification.94
In this specific case, “constitutional identity” as a value-based core of a
constitutional order — through the constitutional principle of sovereignty — is clearly
intertwined with constitutional identity as the level of the “openness” of the domestic
legal order to external influences.

5. “Constitutional Identity” as the “Openness” of the Domestic
Constitutional Order and Legal Approximation Under CEPA
This section of the article focuses on the interrelation of the level of openness of the
legal order to external influences and the effectiveness of legal approximation 95 under
89

Gstöhl, “Differentiated Integration and the NEC.”

90

Art. 6(2) CEPA.

91

Decision DCC‑502 of 13 August 2004 on the compliance of obligations under the Statute of the
International Criminal Court (Annexed Declaration) signed on July 17, 1998 in Rome with the
Constitution of the RA.

92

Then Art. 40 and 81 of the Constitution of the RA.

93

Then Art. 91 and 92 of the Constitution of the RA.

94

The Concept Paper on the Constitutional Reform of 2015, however, stated that constitutional
reform “must create the preconditions for ratification” of the Rome Statute of the ICC (see
para. 2.6.4 of The Concept Paper on the Constitutional Reform Elaborated by the Specialized
Commission on Constitutional Reforms Adjunct to the President of the RA (draft of September
2, 2014), accessed June 1, 2018, http://www. venice.coe.int/webforms/documents/default.
aspx?pdffile=CDL-REF(2014)033-e). Nevertheless, the wording of the constitutional norms that
the Constitutional Court defined as being in conflict with the Statute, remain the same.

95

The term “legal approximation” is used to describe the comprehensive transformation of a legal
order. In addition to “legislative approximation” to the EU acquis, it covers the absorption of

Anna Khvorostiankina. Europeanization Through EU External Agreements

39

and the Issue of “Constitutional Identity”: The Case of the EU-Armenia CEPA

CEPA. As defined above, the level of openness indicates the capacity to absorb legal
norms and rules, as well as practices and methodological approaches through formal
and informal channels.
According to the Constitution of Armenia, CEPA as an international treaty ratified
by the National Assembly, enjoys supremacy over national legislation 96 (but not over
the Constitution). This constitutional provision serves as the main formal channel
of interaction between the Agreement and the domestic legal order. However, being
complex in nature, in order to achieve its goals CEPA requires more sophisticated
mechanisms of interaction based on a combination of formal and informal channels
and tools. In particular, these mechanisms should allow for the operation of decisions
of CEPA institutions, the implementation of the Agreement’s provisions concerning
legislative approximation, and provisions focusing on general legal principles (in terms
of both law-making and law enforcement), as well as enable the Armenian judiciary to
contribute to CEPA’s proper implementation.
In addition to the existence of such mechanisms “opening” the domestic legal order
to CEPA influence, the effectiveness of the implementation of CEPA will also depend
on how open (formally and informally) the Armenian legal order will be towards the
concurring project of regional integration — the Russia-led EAEU. Although the new
Agreement takes “full account of Armenia’s obligations as a member of the Eurasian
Economic Union,” 97 this, however, does not exclude the possibility of potential conflicts
between EAEU norms and provisions of CEPA, specifically in the areas covered by both
CEPA and the EAEU Treaty.98 One of the reasons for these potential conflicts may be
rooted in the “immanent weaknesses” of the EAEU legal framework.99
the legal principles, methodological approaches, and legal practices necessary for the proper
implementation of the approximated legislation.
96

Art. 5 of the Constitution of the RA.

97

Joint Proposal for a Council Decision on the Signing, on Behalf of the European Union,
and Provisional Application of the Comprehensive and Enhanced Partnership Agreement
Between the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community and their Member
States, of the One Part, and the Republic of Armenia, of the Other Part, September 25, 2017,
JOIN/2017/036 final — 2017/0236 (NLE), accessed June 17, 2017, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legalcontent/EN/TXT/?qid=1511682870752&uri=CELEX:52017JC 0036.

98

Notably, in the course of negotiations “to ensure that the values underpinning CEPA remain
firm,” the EU rejected a “carve-out clause” proposed by the Armenian side, which would allow
Armenia “to opt out of the commitments enshrined in CEPA in areas where the Eurasian
Economic Union might make new provisions” (Kostanyan and Giragosian, “EU-Armenian
Relations: Charting a Fresh Course,” referring to the interview with an EU official (Brussels,
September 5, 2016), 7).

99

Among such specific features of the EAEU Treaty Dragneva, Delcour and Jovanicius identify:
“the mixture between current and future commitments, the problematic institutional
boundaries between the members’ commitments and delegated powers, and the prevalence
of power relations within a highly asymmetric hub-and-spoke context.” (Rilka Dragneva,
Laure Delcour and Laurynas Jovanicius, “Assessing Legal and Political Compatibility between

Kyiv-Mohyla Law and Politics Journal 4 (2018)

40

5.1. Decisions of CEPA Institutions and the
Domestic Constitutional Framework
There are two categories of binding decisions of CEPA institutions:
(1) the decisions of the Council by which Annexes to CEPA will be updated to take
into consideration the development of EU legislation for the purposes of legislative
approximation 100; and
(2) other decisions of CEPA institutions.
For both types of decisions Armenian constitutional law excludes direct
applicability and establishes specific requirements. Implementation of the decisions
of the first type presupposes the ratification of amendments to Annexes in the same
manner as the Agreement itself is ratified,101 including the preliminary control of
constitutionality by the Constitutional Court. Reviewing CEPA, the Court did not
analyze the content of the Annexes and the compatibility of the specific acquis with the
Armenian Constitution. Presumably, in case of amending the Annexes, the Court will
also formally review only the obligation to approximate and will leave it to legislators to
resolve the substantive issue of transposition first (with the possibility of constitutional
control of approximated national law a posteriori).
As regards the second type of decisions, currently Armenian legislation does
not define their legal status and the implementation procedure and does not provide
the possibility of the direct effect of acts adopted by CEPA institutions. Noteworthy,
the implementation of acts of the Eurasian Economic Commission has been recently
regulated in a specific provision of the Law “On Normative Legal Acts.” 102 In contrast to
the previous Law “On International Agreements,” which regulated the implementation
of acts adopted by international organizations (that could arguably have been applied
by analogy in the case of CEPA), the new Law “On International Agreements” 103 is silent
in this regard.
In the absence of legislative regulation, certain guidelines concerning the
interaction of binding decisions of CEPA institutions with the domestic legal order
can be found in the case-law of the Constitutional Court. In particular, in the Decision
concerning the constitutionality of the EAEU Treaty,104 the Court has formulated
European Union Engagement Strategies and Membership of the Eurasian Economic Treaty,”
EU-STRAT Working Paper 2 (2017): 12).
100 Art. 371 CEPA
101

See Decision of the Constitutional Court DCC‑1407, par. 11.

102

Law of the RA HO‑180-N “On Normative Legal Acts” of March 21, 2018 in Art. 24 prescribes that
in case the Eurasian Economic Commission adopts an act the subject matter of which belongs
to the areas of regulation by law in Armenia, the Government should exercise legislative
initiative and introduce the relevant implementing draft law to the Parliament. In all other
cases, the Government adopts an act giving effect to the act of the Commission.

103

Law of the RA HO‑213-N “On International Agreements” of March 23, 2018.

104

Decision DCC‑1175 of 14 November 2014.

Anna Khvorostiankina. Europeanization Through EU External Agreements

41

and the Issue of “Constitutional Identity”: The Case of the EU-Armenia CEPA

several legal positions, arguably applicable to such decisions by analogy. The Court
pointed out that the acts of any international or supranational organization should
be in accordance with the principles of sovereignty,105 the legal equality of the Parties,
and the mutual expediency of international cooperation. Furthermore, restrictions on
human rights [possibly resulting from participation in a supranational organization]
should be in accordance with the norms and principles of international law. The Court
also stressed that the operation of decisions of supranational bodies in Armenia is
possible only within the scope of accordance with the Constitution.106 The Court
held that “any decision adopted by any supranational body with the participation of
the Republic of Armenia, which is not in conformity with these requirements, is not
applicable in the Republic of Armenia. In the case of following these requirements, the
cooperation of Armenia with any international or regional organization will not raise
the issue of constitutionality.” 107
Apparently, to guarantee legal certainty and to ensure the effectiveness of the
implementation of the Agreement, the domestic legislative framework should clearly
define the status and regulate the procedural issues of the operation of acts of CEPA
institutions in the Armenian legal order.

5.2. CEPA Mechanisms of Legislative Approximation
The mechanisms of legislative approximation employed in CEPA resemble the
mechanisms of the AAs, although are less advanced and ambitious due to CEPA’s
more modest objectives. At the same time, in contrast with the EU-Armenia PCA
containing only one general and legally non-binding approximation clause,108 CEPA’s
105

From the point of view of constitutional identity, the concept of sovereignty is of particular
importance. The Case-law of the Constitutional Court indicates that “sovereignty” includes
the possibility of its “sharing” on the basis of a voluntary decision of the Republic of Armenia.
In particular, deciding on the issue of the jurisdiction of the ECHR and the binding force of
its judgements for Armenia, the Court stated that, although the Constitution does not directly
provide the right to apply to the international courts to protect one’s rights, “taking as a ground
the authorizing nature of Article 43 of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia and the
sovereign right of the Republic of Armenia voluntary and on the basis of mutual concordance
to accept such an obligation in the name of the effectiveness of the international co-operation,
it can be noted that the obligations set forth by Articles 36 and 43 of the Convention do not
contradict the spirit of the Constitution of the Republic of Armenia” (para. 14 of the Decision
DCC‑350 of 22 February 2002 On Conformity of Obligations Stated in the Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms […] with the Constitution of the RA,
English version available at: http://concourt.am/english/decisions/common/doc/sdv‑350e.htm,
accessed March 15, 2018; italics added).

106

Para. 7 of Decision DCC‑1175 of 14 November 2014.

107

Para. 7 of Decision DCC‑1175 of 14 November 2014.

108

Art. 43 of PCA.

Kyiv-Mohyla Law and Politics Journal 4 (2018)

42

approximation mechanisms are significantly more elaborate, diverse, and framed with
provisions of a binding nature.109
Furthermore, alongside the establishment of advanced approximation
mechanisms, in contrast with the PCA, CEPA underlines the importance of the
implementation and enforcement of the approximated legislation and establishes
specific mechanisms for the monitoring and assessment of approximation.110 This
novelty is similar to the approach of the AAs and may be considered a reaction to the
shortcomings of previous approximation attempts.111
The obligation of Armenia to “carry out gradual approximation of its legislation
to EU law as referred to in the Annexes” (with exceptions for specific provisions under
Title VI 112) is set forth in Art. 370 of CEPA. This general provision is supplemented with
provisions containing standard approximation clauses in eight chapters of Title V
(Other Cooperation Policies) and Title VII (Financial Assistance, and Anti-Fraud and
Control Provisions) of the Agreement.113 The Annexes linked to these clauses indicate
the EU legislative acts Armenia “undertakes to gradually approximate its legislation to”
and the timeframes for such approximation.114 They do not lead to an opening of the
market but can be elements of other conditionality mechanisms.
The lists of EU legislation contain regulations, directives (including implementing
regulations and directives) and international acts and shall be periodically revised
109

Although the degree of bindingness of different provisions varies.

110

See, in particular, Preamble and Art. 372 CEPA.

111

It should be noted that legislative approximation to the EU acquis is not a new phenomenon
for the Armenian legal system. Some efforts of approximation were made under the PCA
ENP Action Plan and in course of the negotiations concerning the failed AA and DCFTA.
However, regardless of some achievements (see, for example, Delcour and Wolczuk, “The
EU’s Unexpected ‘Ideal Neighbour’?,” 491–507), this process can generally hardly be defined
as successful, as it lacked coherence, a systematic approach, and common methodological
ground. The implementation of the approximated legislation was particularly problematic.
For example, Ghazaryan and Hakobyan report on the active and extensive approximation of
Armenian competition law in the framework of the ENP and achieving compliance with the
EU dynamic acquis (Ghazaryan and Hakobyan, “Legislative Approximation and Application
of EU Law in Armenia,” 201). However, the formal compliance of domestic legislation with the
dynamic EU competition acquis in no way touched upon the problem of politically supported
artificial oligarchic monopolies, therefore not affecting in practice the economic environment
of the country.

112

Trade and Trade-Related Matters.

113

These are: Article 41 with Annex I (transport), Art. 44 with Annex II (energy), Art. 50 with
Annex III (environment), Art. 56 with Annex IV (climate), Art. 65 with Annex V (information
society), Art. 83 with Annex VI (consumer protection), Art. 90 with Annex VII (employment,
social policy and equal opportunities), Art. 361 with Annex XII (anti-fraud regulations).

114

In some cases, the timeframes are not precisely indicated but are to be defined by the
Partnership Council.

Anna Khvorostiankina. Europeanization Through EU External Agreements

43

and the Issue of “Constitutional Identity”: The Case of the EU-Armenia CEPA

by the Partnership Council “in order, inter alia, to reflect the evolution of EU law
and applicable standards set out in international instruments deemed relevant by
the Parties, taking into account the completion of the Parties’ respective internal
procedures” (Art. 371).
In addition to this approximation mechanism (“standard approximation clause +
the lists of the EU legislation and the specified timeframes”), there are also a number
of provisions containing a general requirement to approximate Armenian legislation
with the the EU acquis without specification of relevant EU acts and the timeframes
of approximation. The formulation and binding character of such requirements, as
well as the expected degree of approximation/convergence vary. According to Art. 169,
180, and 192 of Title VI “Trade and Trade-Related Matters,” which are key elements
of the conditionality mechanisms relevant to the liberalization of a cross-border
supply of services,115 “parties recognise the importance of gradual approximation” of
Armenian legislation on postal services, electronic commerce, and transport services
to that of the EU. According to Art. 189, “the Republic of Armenia shall approximate
its regulation of financial services, as appropriate, to the legislation of the European
Union.” Art. 130 dealing with cooperation in the field of technical barriers to trade
states that “the Parties shall endeavour to establish and maintain a process through
which gradual approximation of the technical regulations, standards and conformity
assessment procedures of the Republic of Armenia to those of the European Union can
be achieved.” In accordance with Art. 81 related to consumer protection, the parties
“shall cooperate in order to ensure a high level of consumer protection and to achieve
compatibility between their systems of consumer protection.” Art. 70 states that the
Parties “shall cooperate to promote agricultural and rural development, in particular
through progressive convergence of policies and legislation.” Furthermore, there are
a number of “soft” provisions employing “taking into account” and “making efforts”
formulas.
One more approximation mechanism can be found in the provisions requiring
the implementation of international instruments and compliance with international
standards promoted by the EU. These commitments are either general (referring to
international or European standards generally) or specifically defined (referring to
specific international acts to be implemented).
Other areas of cooperation 116 do not presuppose legislative approximation.
However, the Armenian legal system may benefit from the improvement of national
legislation in these areas through the exchange of information and best practices with
the EU, which can serve as informal channels of the transposition of the EU acquis into
the domestic legal order.
115

According to Art. 373 CEPA, “If the Parties agree that necessary measures covered by Title VI
have been implemented and are being enforced, the Partnership Council, […] shall decide on
further market opening where provided for in Title VI.”

116

Such as company law, accounting and auditing, and corporate governance, industrial and
enterprise policy, cooperation in the areas of banking, insurance, and other financial services.

44

Kyiv-Mohyla Law and Politics Journal 4 (2018)

Importantly, legislative approximation can be done on a voluntary basis and can go
beyond the formal requirements of CEPA. The scope of such voluntary approximation
will apparently depend on the political will of the decision-makers to choose EU
regulatory approaches as models for domestic reforms, as well as on the level of
influence (both formal and informal) of the EAEU in the relevant sectors of regulation.
To achieve more effective interaction between the EU and Armenian legal
orders through approximation processes, it is important to develop an institutional
mechanism and a methodological framework of approximation, both of which are
missing at the time of writing.117 What is also lacking is an effective academia-policy
dialogue on issues of the further development of the Armenian legal system, which
could serve as an informal channel of Europeanization.

5.3. The Transposition of General Legal Principles of EU Law
In addition to the legislative approximation requirements in specific sectors, a number
of provisions of CEPA are directed at the improvement of legislative regulation in
Armenia generally. These provisions reflect general principles of EU law, such as
the predictability of legal regulation, legal certainty, the quality of regulation, good
governance etc.118
Undoubtedly, these provisions— even when they formally concern a specific sector
of bilateral cooperation — have the potential to positively influence the development of
the Armenian legal system as a whole. Similarly to fundamental values, the principles
listed above are not unknown in the Armenian legal order and formally find their
reflection in domestic legislation (their proper implementation, however, requires both
the improvement of legislatives techniques and the establishment and maintenance
of high standards of administrative and judicial procedures). The highlighting of the
abovementioned general principles in CEPA can potentially stimulate and justify the
reference to the EU acquis for the purposes of their interpretation.

5.4. The Role of the Judiciary
5.4.1. The Role of CJEU
Importantly, legislative approximation mechanisms established by the abovementioned
Articles 169, 180, 189, and 192 presuppose a specific procedure of dispute settlement by
an arbitration panel. In particular, “where a dispute raises a question of interpretation of
117

At the time of writing national programs of the implementation of CEPA generally, and of
legislative approximation in particular, were not elaborated. There are several institutions
involved in the process of approximation (e. g. the Parliamentary Standing Committee
on European Integration, the “Centre for Legislation Development and Legal Research”
Foundation in the MoJ, relevant departments in the ministries and other governmentt
agencies); however, the institutional mechanism is not coherent and well-coordinated.

118

See, for example, Articles 308, 313 and 309(1) of CEPA.

Anna Khvorostiankina. Europeanization Through EU External Agreements

45

and the Issue of “Constitutional Identity”: The Case of the EU-Armenia CEPA

a provision of Union law, the arbitration panel shall request the [CJEU] to give a ruling
on the question provided that question is necessary for the decision of the arbitration
panel. […] The ruling [of the CJEU] shall be binding on the arbitration panel.” 119
Similar mechanisms can be found in the AAs with EaP countries 120; they are
called upon to ensure the uniform interpretation of the EU acquis in relations with
third countries.121 Arguably, this mechanism will also serve as a formal “channel” for
absorbing CJEU case-law by the domestic legal order.

5.4.2. The Role of Domestic Courts
CEPA’s focus on the implementation and enforcement of the approximated legislation
indicates the significant role of the judiciary in the process of the Europeanization of
the Armenian legal system. The main mission of the judiciary is, therefore, to properly
apply national legislation adhering to the fundamental principles of the administration
of justice. In some cases, however, such proper implementation may demand taking into
account the EU acquis, including CJEU case-law, for the purposes of the interpretation
of national legislation (although it is not required by CEPA 122).
Arguably, the following obstacles will affect such application:
(1) the nature of legal approximation commitments under CEPA, the absence of
a clear EU‑oriented vector of foreign policy, and the presence of the concurring EAEU
integration project limiting the possibility of judicial activism; 123
(2) inaccessibility of CJEU case-law due to the linguistic barrier, a lack of
awareness of relevant decisions and skills using search tools; 124
119

Art. 342 (2) CEPA.

120

However, in contrast with CEPA, these provisions contain lists of EU acts to be transposed.

121

Guillaume Van der Loo, “The EU-Ukraine DCFTA,” in Legislative Approximation and Application
of EU Law in the Eastern Neighbourhood of the European Union, edited by Peter Van Elsuwege
and Roman Petrov (London; New York: Routledge, 2014), 82.

122

And, consequently, there is no domestic legislation providing a formal “channel” for such
application (in contrast with the case-law of the ECHR, recognized as an official source of law
by Art. 15 of the Judicial Code of the RA).

123

This is in contrast with the situation in Central and East European countries where explicit
orientation towards EU and related domestic policy choices, clear membership perspectives,
and stricter obligations to harmonize national legislation with the EU acquis created favourable
grounds for judicial activism and led to the establishment of the practice of an “EU‑friendly”
interpretation of domestic legislation (see Kühn “The Application of European Law,” 566–68).

124

University curricula usually cover only the fundamentals of EU law and are not oriented
towards skills-training. There is also a lack of scholarly studies on the issues in question as well
as a lack of a dialogue between academia and practitioners serving as an informal channel of
Europeanization. Among recent developments in this field one can mention the establishment
of the Laboratory of Legal Approximation (Center for Interdisciplinary Legal Studies, UNESCO
Chair on Human Rights, Democracy and Political Science, Yerevan Brusov State University

Kyiv-Mohyla Law and Politics Journal 4 (2018)

46

(3) the lack of a coherent theory and the practice of judicial argumentation
based on up-to-date methodological approaches, due to the long-lasting dominance
of legal positivism, generally,125 and the lack of experience in using the EU acquis in
argumentation in particular.126

of Languages and Social Sciences) focusing on the research and training on legislative
approximation methodology and analysis of CJEU case-law.
125

This problem is common for many post-communist legal systems. See, for example: Kühn, “The
Application of European Law”; Meleshevych and Khvorostyankina, “Ukraine,” 563–64.

126

One of the rare examples of the application of the EU acquis alongside the norms of
international law is the decision of the court of general jurisdiction of the administrative
district of Kentron and Norq-Marash of Yerevan (first instance) of April 3, 2015 in case
EKD/1929/02/13 I. Avagyan v. “Prometey Bank” on the recognition of the arbitration clauses of
the loan agreements as invalid. The court refers to the Convention on the Recognition and
Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (1958) and, additionally, states that “recent Directives
of the European Union require Member States to create alternative dispute resolution
mechanisms in a range of areas such as banking and financial services […]. The Republic of
Armenia undertook the obligation to establish the alternative dispute resolution procedure in
accordance with international law”; then the Court mentions PCA, the inclusion of Armenia
in ENP in 2004, and states that under the ENP Action Plan Armenia has also been obliged to
create arbitration procedures in compliance with international standards. The Court notes
that the principles of out-of-court dispute resolution were enshrined in the Recommendation
of the European Commission 1998/257/EC. In the following sections, the Court refers to ECHR
case-law. Noteworthy, this argumentative passage is literally reproduced from the defendant’s
response to the plaintiff’s claim reported in the descriptive part of the judgment. In a number
of cases — civil (concerning financial services) and administrative (issues of migration law
and asylum), of first and appellate instances — the judgements contain references to the EU
acquis (directives and soft-law) only in the descriptive parts reflecting the positions of the
parties. Although the courts themselves do not refer to these sources in motivation parts,
such references can informally influence the further development of judicial argumentation
in the future, providing judges with samples of argumentative patterns. The Constitutional
Court is reluctant to refer to the EU acquis as well (in contrast with the law of the ECHR and
other acts of the CoE). The analysis of relevant judgments shows that there is no coherent
practice of referring to such sources. The references to the the EU acquis (comprising EU soft
law and CJEU case-law) occur in supportive arguments (which by themselves are used only
occasionally when arguments based on national legislation and binding international acts are
lacking or not strong enough) and are rather exceptions than a well-established argumentative
approach (see cases DCC‑991, DCC‑1051, DCC‑1244). While examining foreign legal materials
in the course of preparing advisory opinions on cases, the Legal Advisory Service of the Court
has not usually covered the EU acquis as focusing mainly on the constitutional regulations and
practice of individual European countries (based on the data of interviews with experts of the
Service).

Anna Khvorostiankina. Europeanization Through EU External Agreements

47

and the Issue of “Constitutional Identity”: The Case of the EU-Armenia CEPA

Taking this into account, using the EU acquis in judicial argumentation could be
facilitated through certain legislative drafting techniques. In particular, preambular
references to relevant EU acts in the approximated domestic legislation could serve
as grounds for using both these acts and case-law, interpreting them to construct
arguments based on purposive and “legislator’s intent” approaches.127 This would be
particularly helpful taking into account the gradual and, in some cases, partial nature
of legislative approximation: the indication of the actual scope of approximation by
the legislator would determine the legitimacy and relevance of using CJEU case-law in
domestic judicial argumentation.

6. Conclusion
The analysis of the transformative potential of the newly signed EU-Armenia CEPA
through the prism of the “constitutional identity” concept allows for making the
following conclusions. The “axiological core” of the Armenian Constitution is formally
in harmony with that of CEPA; however, the translation of fundamental values into
legal and political societal practices has been a problematic issue for a long time. The
disharmony between formally declared values and the constructed constitutional
identity of an imagined political community, on the one hand, and their reflection in
the real life of a society, on the other hand, is a result of different dynamics of change
within the legal, political, and sociological dimensions of constitutional identity. This
should be taken into consideration to achieve the goals of the Agreement.
The recent peaceful transition of power in Armenia in April–May 2018 created a
specific environment for CEPA’s implementation. Previously, ruling elites frequently
underlined their commitment to adhere to European values, in both domestic and
international discourses. However, the reality of implementing these values in
practice significantly differed from what was declared, and introduced reforms often
represented a façade change. The incumbent government, to the contrary, tends to
avoid references to the “Europeanness” of the supported constitutional values in its
political discourse, underlining the genuinely domestic character of current political
developments. At the same time, the initiated reforms aim to bring real systemic
change. Reforms being coherently implemented and procedurally in compliance with
fundamental constitutional values can undoubtedly create a favorable environment
for CEPA’s implementation.

127

The possibility of including a preamble into the structure of a legislative act “to define the
objectives and reasons” of its adoption derives from Art. 13(1) of Law of the RA HO‑180-N “On
Normative Legal Acts” of March 21, 2018. The said legislative technique is used, for example, in
Moldova (see Anna Khvorostiankina, “Legislative Approximation and Application of EU Law in
Moldova,” in Legislative Approximation and Application of EU Law in the Eastern Neighbourhood
of the European Union, edited by Roman Petrov and Peter Van Elsuwege (London; New York:
Routledge, 2014), 168).

48

Kyiv-Mohyla Law and Politics Journal 4 (2018)

At the same time, an analysis of the state of the “openness” of the domestic legal
order to interaction with the EU reveals that proper implementation of the Agreement
can be hindered by several factors. First, at the moment, a comprehensive legislative
framework for CEPA’s implementation is lacking (in particular, the status of decisions
of CEPA institutions and institutional and methodological aspects of legislative
approximation need clear regulation). Second, Armenia’s participation in the EAEU and
a certain openness of the legal order to its influences creates the possibility of potential
conflicts between the processes of Europeanization and Eurasian integration. Third,
the judiciary, which is expected to be the main channel of absorbing European norms
and principles and the guarantor of the proper implementation of the approximated
legislation, needs to acquire new knowledge and to develop relevant skills and
methodological approaches. This is caused, in particular, by the necessity to take into
consideration the case-law of the CJEU. Even though there is no such requirement
in CEPA (in contrast to the AAs and some other EU external agreements), this may
be essential for the proper interpretation and implementation of “Europeanized”
legislation.
The transformative capacity of the Agreement, consequently, depends on the ability
of the Armenian legal order to overcome the said obstacles. Proper implementation
of the approximated legislation in accordance with CEPA provisions requiring legal
certainty and predictability, regulatory quality, the transparency of regulation, good
administrative behavior etc. will surely contribute to further improvement of the
Armenian legal system. Apparently, this may be achieved only under the circumstances
of a comprehensive and systematic government approach to the implementation of
the required reforms and the further socialization of domestic actors facilitating the
internalization of “shared” values.
Bibliography
Avbelj, Matej. “Pluralism and Systemic Defiance in the EU.” In The Enforcement of EU
Law and Values: Ensuring Member States’ Compliance, edited by Andras Jakab and
Dimitry Kochenov, 44–64. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017.
Börzel, Tanja A., and Yasemin Pamuk. “Europeanization Subverted? The European
Union’s Promotion of Good Governance and the Fight Against Corruption in the
South Caucasus.” KFG Working Paper No. 26 (April 2011). http://userpage.fu-berlin.
de/kfgeu/kfgwp/wpseries/WorkingPaperKFG_26. pdf.
Börzel, Tanja A., and Yasemin Pamuk. “Pathologies of Europeanization: Fighting
Corruption in the Southern Caucasus.” West European Politics 35.1 (2011): 79–97.
Cloots, Elke. “National Identity, Constitutional Identity, and Sovereignty in the EU.”
Netherlands Journal of Legal Philosophy 2.45 (2016): 82–98.
Cotterrell, Roger. Law, Culture and Society: Legal Ideas in the Mirror of Social Theory.
London: Routledge, 2006.

Anna Khvorostiankina. Europeanization Through EU External Agreements

49

and the Issue of “Constitutional Identity”: The Case of the EU-Armenia CEPA

Cremona, Marise. “The ENP and Multilateralism.” In The European Neighbourhood
Policy — Values and Principles, edited by Sara Poli, 81–98. Abingdon, Oxon; New
York, NY: Routledge, 2016.
Delcour, Laure, and Kataryna Wolczuk. “The EU’s Unexpected ‘Ideal Neighbour’? The
Perplexing Case of Armenia’s Europeanisation.” Journal of European Integration
37.4 (2015): 491–507.
Delegation of the European Union to Armenia. “Step Forward for EU-Armenia Relations
as New Agreement is Provisionally Applied” (June 1, 2018). Accessed June 1, 2018.
https://eeas.europa.eu/delegations/armenia/45736/step-forward-eu-armeniarelations-new-agreement-provisionally-applied_en.
Dragneva, Rilka, Laure Delcour, and Laurynas Jovanicius. “Assessing Legal and Political
Compatibility between European Union Engagement Strategies and Membership
of the Eurasian Economic Treaty.” EU-STRAT Working Paper No. 2 (November 2017).
Faraguna, Pietro. “Constitutional Identity in the EU — A Shield or a Sword?” German
Law Journal 18.7 (2017): 1617–40.
Ghazaryan, Narine, and Anna Hakobyan. “Legislative Approximation and Application
of EU Law in Armenia.” In Legislative Approximation and Application of EU Law in
the Eastern Neighbourhood of the European Union, edited by Peter Van Elsuwege
and Roman Petrov, 191–214. London: Routledge, 2014.
Ghazaryan, Narine. “A New Generation of Human Rights Clauses? The Case of
Association Agreements in the Eastern Neighbourhood.” European Law Review
40.3 (2015): 391–410.
Ginsburg, Tom, and Mila Versteeg. “Constitutional Correlates and the Rule of Law.” In
Constitutionalism and the Rule of Law: Bridging Idealism and Realism, edited by
Maurice Adams, Anne Meuwese and Ernst Hirsch Ballin, 506–25. Cambridge; New
York: Cambridge University Press, 2017.
Gstöhl, Sieglinde.”Differentiated Integration and the NEC.” In Legislative Approximation
and Application of EU Law in the Eastern Neighbourhood of the European Union,
edited by Peter Van Elsuwege and Roman Petrov, 89–107. London; New York:
Routledge, 2014.
Häberle, Peter. “The Constitutional State and Its Reform Requirements.” Ratio Juris
13.1 (2000): 77–94. Cited in: Yaniv Roznai, “Towards a Theory of Constitutional
Unamendability,” Jus Politicum 18 (2017): 5–37. http://juspoliticum.com/uploads/
jp18-t01_roznai.pdf.
Jacobsohn, Gary Jeffrey. “Constitutional Identity.” The Review of Politics 68 (2006): 361–97.
Khvorostiankina, Anna. “Legislative Approximation and Application of EU Law in
Moldova.” In Legislative Approximation and Application of EU Law in the Eastern
Neighbourhood of the European Union, edited by Roman Petrov and Peter Van
Elsuwege, 159–78. London; New York: Routledge, 2014.
Kochenov, Dimitry. “The Issue of Values.” In Legislative Approximation and Application
of EU Law in the Eastern Neighbourhood of the European Union, edited by Roman
Petrov and Peter Van Elsuwege, 46–62. London; New York: Routledge, 2014.

50

Kyiv-Mohyla Law and Politics Journal 4 (2018)

Kostanyan, Hrant, and Richard Giragosian. “EU-Armenian Relations: Charting a Fresh
Course.” CEPS Research ReportNo. 2017–14, November 2017. https://ssrn.com/
abstract=3075166.
Kühn, Zdeněk. “The Application of European Law in the New Member States: Several
(Early) Predictions.” German Law Journal 6.3 (2005): 563–82.
Marti, Jose Luis. “Two Different Ideas of Constitutional Identity: Identity of the
Constitution v. Identity of the People.” In National Constitutional Identity and
European Integration, edited by Alejandro Saiz Arnaiz and Carina Alcoberro
Llivina, 17–36. Antwerp: Intersentia, 2013.
Mazzone, Jason. “The Creation of a Constitutional Culture.” Tulsa Law Review 40.4
(2004): 671–98.
Meleshevych, Andriy, and Anna Khvorostyankina. “Ukraine.” In The European Convention
on Human Rights and fundamental freedoms in Central and Eastern Europe, edited
by Leonard Hammer and Frank Emmert, 557–96. The Hague: Eleven International
Publishing, 2012.
Mogherini, Federica. Remarks by High Representative/Vice-President Federica
Mogherini Following the Signing of the European Union-Armenia Comprehensive
and Enhanced Partnership Agreement (CEPA) with Edward Nalbandian, Minister
of Foreign Affairs of Armenia, Brussels, November 24, 2017. Accessed November 26,
2017. https://eeas.europa.eu/delegations/armenia/36208/remarks-hrvp-federicamogherini-following-signing-european-union-armenia-comprehensive-and_en.
Pavone, Tommaso. Constitutional Identity: An Overview and Some Conceptual Concerns,
April 23, 2014. https://scholar.princeton.edu/sites/default/files/tpavone/files/
jacobsohn-_constitutional_identity_critical_review.pdf.
Payaslian, Simon. The Political Economy of Human Rights in Armenia: Authoritarianism
and Democracy in a Former Soviet Republic. London: I. B. Tauris, 2011.
Petrov, Roman, Guillaume Van der Loo, and Peter Van Elsuwege. “The EU-Ukraine
Association Agreement: A New Legal Instrument of Integration Without
Membership?” Kyiv-Mohyla Law and Politics Journal 1 (2015): 1–19. https://
doi.‌org/10.18523/kmlpj52678.2015–1.1–19.
Petrov, Roman. “EU Values in Integration-Oriented Agreements with Ukraine, Moldova
and Georgia.” In The European Neighbourhood Policy — Values and Principles,
edited by Sara Poli, 99–112. Abingdon, Oxon; New York, NY: Routledge, 2016.
Pilsen, Monika.”Constitutional Identity, Unconstitutional Amendments and the Idea of
Constituent Power: The Development of the Doctrine of Constitutional Identity
in German Constitutional Law.” I*CON, 14 (2016): 411–38.
Poli, Sara. “Introduction.” In The European Neighbourhood Policy –Values and Principles,
edited by Sara Poli, 1–8. Abingdon, Oxon; New York, NY: Routledge, 2016.
Prime Minister. Official web-site. Video of press-conference, July 12, 2018. Accessed July
14, 2018. http://www.primeminister.am/hy/videos/item/9MrD 1Vs-F0A/.
Radaelli, Claudio M. “Whither Europeanization? Concept Stretching and Substantive
Change.” European Integration Online Papers 4.8 (2000): 1–28. https://ssrn.com/
abstract=302761.

Anna Khvorostiankina. Europeanization Through EU External Agreements

51

and the Issue of “Constitutional Identity”: The Case of the EU-Armenia CEPA

Robertson, David. The Judge as Political Theorist: Contemporary Constitutional Review.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2010.
Rodiņa, Anita, and Janis Pleps. “Constitutionalism in Latvia: Reality and Developments.”
In New Millennium Constitutionalism: Paradigms of Reality and Challenges, with a
foreword of Dr. G. G. Harutyunyan, 431–72. Yerevan: Njhar, 2013.
Rosenfeld, Michel. “Constitutional Identity.” In The Oxford Handbook on Comparative
Constitutional Law, edited by Michel Rosenfeld and András Sajó, 756–76. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2012.
Rosenfeld, Michel. “The Constitutional Subject, Its Other, and the Perplexing Quest for
an Identity of Its Own: A Reply to My Critics.” Cardozo Legal Studies 358 (2012):
1–29. https://ssrn.com/abstract=2021356.
Safjan, Marek. “Political and Constitutional Courts. A Judge’s Personal Perspective.”
EUI Working Paper Law 10 (2008): 1–23. http://cadmus.eui.eu/handle/1814/8101.
Saiz Arnaiz, Alejandro, and Carina Alcoberro Llivina. “Why Constitutional Identity
Suddenly Matters: A Tale of Brave States, a Mighty Union and Decline of
Sovereignty.” In National Constitutional Identity and European Integration, edited
by Alejandro Saiz Arnaiz and Carina Alcoberro Llivina, 1–15. Antwerp: Intersentia,
2013.
Schimmelfennig, Frank. “Europeanization Beyond Europe.” Living Reviews in European
Governance 7.1 (2012): 1–31. Accessed June 25, 2018. http://www.europeangovernancelivingreviews.org/Articles/lreg‑2012–1/download/lreg‑2012–1Color.pdf.
Siegel, Andrew M. “Constitutional Theory, Constitutional Culture.” Journal of
Constitutional Law 18.4 (2016): 1067–128.
Śledzińska-Simon, Anna. “Constitutional Identity in 3D: A Model of Individual,
Relational, and Collective Self and its Application in Poland.” International Journal
of Constitutional Law 13.1 (2015): 124–55. https://doi.org/10.1093/icon/mov007.
Van der Loo, Guillaume. “The EU-Ukraine DCFTA.” In Legislative Approximation and
Application of EU Law in the Eastern Neighbourhood of the European Union, edited
by Peter Van Elsuwege and Roman Petrov, 63–88. London; New York: Routledge,
2014.
Von Bogdandy Armin, Piotr Bogdanowicz, Iris Canor, Maciej Taborowski, Matthias
Schmidt. “A Constitutional Moment for the European Rule of Law — Upcoming
Landmark Decisions Concerning Polish Judiciary.” MPIL Research Paper Series 10
(2018): 1–13. Accessed June 25, 2018. https://ssrn.com/abstract=3199809.
Von Bogdandy, Armin. “Pluralism, Direct Effect, and the Ultimate Say: On the Relationship
Between Iinternational and Domestic Constitutional Law.” International Journal
of Constitutional Law 6.3–4 (2008): 397–413.
Vorländer, Hans. “Gründung und Geltung: Die Konstitution der Ordnung und die
Legitimität der Konstitution.” In Geltungsgeschichten: Über die Stabilisierung und
Legitimierung institutioneller Ordnungen, ed. Gert Melville and Hans Vorländer.
Cologne; Weimar; Vienna: Böhlau, 2002. Cited in: Silke Hensel, Ulrike Bock, Katrin
Dircksen and Hans-Ulrich Thamer, ed., Constitutional Cultures: On the Concept

52

Kyiv-Mohyla Law and Politics Journal 4 (2018)

and Representation of Constitutions in the Atlantic World. Newcastle upon Tyne:
Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2012.
Žalimas, Dainius. “Eternity Clauses: a Safeguard of Democratic Order and Constitutional
Identity.” Speech of the President of the Constitutional Court of Lithuania.
Accesssed November 1, 2017. http://www. gjk-ks.org/repository/docs/Speech_
of_the_President_of_the_Constitutional_Court_of_Lithuania_Prof.Dr._Dainius_
alimas.pdf.

3
Anna Khvorostiankina holds a PhD in Legal Theory (Legislation Institute of the
Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, 2012); a Second Level Masters in “Advanced Studies in
European and Transnational Law” (University of Trento, Italy, 2006); and a LL. M.
degree (NaUKMA, Ukraine 2005). Her research interests include the Europeanization
of post-Soviet legal systems, recent developments in the theory and practice of judicial
argumentation in post-Soviet countries, and particularities of the Rule of Law in
societies in transition.

