AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies, Volume3, Number2.May 2019
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no2.10

Pp. 114-121

A Cognitive Study of Metaphors in the Glorious Qur’an: From a Linguistic to a
Conceptual Approach
Mashael AlAjmi
Department of Applied Linguistics, Faculty of Languages
Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

Abstract
The current study investigates the use of conceptual metaphors in the glorious Qur’an, focusing
on four abstract concepts represented in the Qur’an through metaphors. These concepts are
REWARD, HUMILITY, HYPOCRISY, and ARROGANCE, which recur in many positions in the
Qur’an. The researcher takes up selected Qur’anic verses that carry these abstract concepts and
analyzes them at two levels: linguistic and conceptual. The study’s main theoretical contribution
is to show how a linguistic approach can be transformed into a conceptual one and how this
enriches our understanding of abstraction. The linguistic analysis of the verses is supported by
translations of Qur’anic meanings, interpretation of the verses, and cultivating the use of Arabic
and English dictionaries. To perform the cognitive analysis, the researcher uses Lakoff and
Johnson’s Conceptual Metaphor Theory (CMT), which examines metaphor from two domains: the
target domain, which is the abstract concept to be explained and the source domain, which is the
mental mapping that helps us understand that abstract concept. The study finds that metaphors in
the Qur’an are meant to be understood not only linguistically but conceptually too. It concludes by
emphasizing the significance of a conceptual approach to the study of metaphor in the Qur’an not
only for conceptual metaphor theory but also for the interpretation of the Qur’an and for Arabic
linguistics.
Keywords: abstract concept, cognitive, linguistic metaphor, conceptual metaphor, Qur’an,
source domain, target domain
Cites as: AlAjmi, M. (2019). A Cognitive Study of Metaphors in the Glorious Qur’an: From a
Linguistic to a Conceptual Approach. Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies,
3 (2). 114-121. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no2.10

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 |www.awej-tls.org

114

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
A Cognitive Study of Metaphors in the Glorious Qur’an

AlAjmi

Introduction: Metaphor Definition in Language and Psychology
Metaphor in the Oxford English Dictionary is defined as “a figure of speech in which a word
or phrase is applied to an object or action to which it is not literally applicable.” It is employed for
the sake of making an implicit comparison between two different objects (Knowles & Moon,
2006). Geraghty (2013) notes, however, that Arabic does not have one single term for ‘metaphor’,
but rather three more specific terms covering different aspects of the concept specifically than how
it is in English. Abd Al-Qahir Al-Jurjani, known as a “master of Arabic grammar,” devised the
theoretical framework that describes poetic imagery in Arabic and presents these terms:
tashbih )‫(تشبيه‬, tamthil )‫(تمثيل‬, and isti’arah )‫( (استعارة‬Geraghty, 2013, p.1). Tashbih can be
translated as ‘simile’, in which two unlike objects are compared explicitly. Tamthil is similar to
‘extended metaphor’, where the comparison between unlike objects needs a deeper kind of analysis
to infer the meaning. Isti’arah also roughly means ‘metaphor’, but a comparison made by referring
explicitly to only one of the two meaning-elements that compose the comparison. These
definitions, however, are purely linguistic, and do not get at the concept of metaphor held in the
field of cognitive psychology, which involves mapping one experience into another through
analogies in order to understand complex concepts (Vosniadou & Ortony, 1989).
Conceptual Metaphor Theory
In the field of cognitive linguistics, which is rooted in cognitive psychology (Moser, 2000), the
word conceptual was first assigned to the word metaphor in 1980, when George Lakoff and Mark
Johnson proposed Conceptual Metaphor Theory (CMT) in their book Metaphors We Live By.
According to them, metaphor should not be viewed as part of “extraordinary language,” but as
something that is common in our daily life, language, and thinking (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980, p.
4). Knowles and Moon (2006) similarly describe metaphor as “a basic phenomenon that occurs
throughout the whole range of language activity” (p. 2). In fact, metaphor in this view is not
exclusively language-related; instead, metaphors also structure our thoughts and actions—the way
the conceptual system in our brain works is “metaphorical in nature” (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980, p.
4). Lakoff and Johnson (1980) state that “the essence of metaphor is under-standing and
experiencing one kind of thing in terms of another”(p.5). Thus, understanding metaphor
thoroughly involves investigating not only its linguistic aspect but also how language helps people
acquire an understanding of abstract concepts in daily life.
Lakoff and Johnson (1980) examine metaphor from two levels: those of the source domain
and the target domain. The latter relates to the abstract concept to be examined, while the former
relates to the mapping process that occurs in the brain to understand that concept. In order to
demonstrate how their theory works, Lakoff and Johnson give an example that we encounter
frequently in our daily life. ARGUMENT is an abstract concept that can be processed mentally
through the use of the conceptual metaphor ARGUMENT IS WAR. They suggest that WAR is a
physical experience that involves the existence of proponents and opponents, in which each side
must or is generally expected to either lose or win. Processing such an experience in such terms
mediates our understanding of what the abstract concept ARGUMENT means and what actions
are usually associated with it.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

115

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
A Cognitive Study of Metaphors in the Glorious Qur’an

AlAjmi

Types of Conceptual Metaphors
Lakoff and Johnson (1980) classify conceptual metaphors into three types: structural,
orientational, and ontological. A structural metaphor is one in which the subject concept, that is,
the target domain, can be understood and explained through the source domain it corresponds to.
A good example is ARGUMENT IS WAR, given above: the source domain, WAR, “structures
the actions we perform in arguing” (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980, p.5).
The second type of conceptual metaphors is orientational metaphors. As the term suggests,
these are based on orientation in relation to space: “up-down, in-out, front-back, on-off, deepshallow, central-peripheral” (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980, p.15). This kind of spatial orientation does
not explain the target domain in terms of the source domain, as in structural metaphors; instead,
concepts are organized with respect to one another—an example given is HAPPY IS UP, in which
the source domain, which is UP, imparts an orientation to the target domain which is HAPPY. The
same goes for SAD IS DOWN, for example. Such metaphors can be found in many utterances
used in everyday communication, such as I am feeling high/low.
The third type is ontological metaphors, which go beyond orientational metaphors in the
rich basis they give us for understanding and interpreting complex abstractions. Through
ontological metaphors, our experiences are explained in terms of objects, entities, or substances
that can be referred to, counted, and/or categorized. These entities can include ideas, emotions,
and events. An example is INFLATION IS UP, where the experience of prices increasing is
perceived as an entity through the noun inflation (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980).
Studies on Conceptual Metaphor in the Holy Qur’an
The Qur’an is well known as the foundation of Islamic faith, viewed by Muslims as the most
glorious book, from which they take guidance for this life and the hereafter. The language of the
Qur’an manifests the richness of the Arabic language across realms of knowledge and expression.
It is viewed by believers as a miraculous book that contains incomparably eloquent rhetorical
language that cannot and will never be matched by humans. Furthermore, it is understood to
include news from the past, the present, and the future, making it a wonder (Salamah, 2002).
Gaining more knowledge about and from the Qur’an has helped many people develop different
and better explanations of what they may encounter in life.
Studying the use of conceptual metaphor in the Qur’an is a new way of appreciating this
glorious book and the Arabic language. Some studies of metaphor in Arabic tackle how abstract
concepts are rendered and clarified through the use of metaphor with specific reference to the
Qur’an but without referring to any theoretical framework. For instance, the way Al-Handiyani
(2008) examines the use of metaphor in Surat Al-Baqarah (the second chapter of the Qur’an), is at
a purely linguistic, superficial level. Al-Turk (2011) studies metaphors in the Quran in relation to
their meaning, but only descriptively, grouping them under abstract concepts without explaining
the mental mapping process that occurs to allow the reader to grasp such concepts. Hypocrisy,
stinginess, forgiveness, and patience are some abstract concepts she includes in her study. She
classifies such concepts into two groups: prohibited attributes/manners Muslims should avoid and
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

116

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
A Cognitive Study of Metaphors in the Glorious Qur’an

AlAjmi

good attributes/manners Muslims should have. Al-Ameer (2007) published a book on how
description is employed rhetorically in the Qur’an, including a chapter on how abstract concepts
in the Qur’an are represented through physical experiences in order to transfer something abstract
to something concrete. Al-Ameer (2007) and Al-Turk (2011) illuminate our knowledge of the
effectiveness of these Qur’anic metaphors to illustrate abstractions, but this knowledge needs to
be systematized into a theory to enrich Arabic linguistics and our knowledge of the language of
the Qur’an. This is basically what Lakoff and Johnson’s CMT provides.
However, there are a few studies that give a theoretically supported cognitive-linguistic
analysis of metaphors in the Quran. Berrada (2006) examines the metaphorical meanings of
LIGHT and DARKNESS in the Qur’an using a CMT approach, relating LIGHT to positive
qualities and DARKNESS to negative ones. He stresses that the Qur’an (like any other text) must
be interpreted using a conceptual approach to show how metaphors assist the process of
comprehending complex concepts, because this is what metaphors were meant for, that is,
intrinsically how they work. Sani and Ruma (2014) investigate the use of conceptual metaphors in
the Qur’an supported by Lakoff and Johnson’s theory, focusing on LIFE and DEATH as target
domains, concretized in source domains such as the life cycle of plants, which germinate, bloom,
and wither.
Abu Libdeh (2015) studies the way human beings are conceptualized through metaphors
and how such metaphors represent our actions. He explains how the human body represents human
actions. An example is the HEAD, the upper part of human body; in Arabic culture, raising one’s
head is associated with dignity, a positive quality that is thus associated with the upper part of the
body, while the lower part is undignified. Like the other writers cited in the previous paragraph,
Abu Libdeh too emphasizes that Qur’anic metaphors should be conceptualized to reach a better
translation of the meanings of the Qur’an.
Methodology and Data Analysis
In this study, the researcher employs a qualitative research method, describing the focal
metaphors used linguistically first and conceptually second. Nassaji (2015) states that “qualitative
research collects data qualitatively, and the method of analysis is also primarily qualitative. This
often involves an inductive exploration of the data to identify recurring themes, patterns, or
concepts and then describing and interpreting those categories” (pp. 129–130).
The resources that have supported the researcher are several. The first one is, obviously,
the glorious Qur’an itself, which, as an article of Muslim faith cannot be translated and remains
miraculous in itself, only approximated. The second resource is then Al-Hilali and Khan’s English
translation of the Qur’an (1984). The third is the exegeses of the Qur’an by Ibn-Katheer, Al-Tabari,
and Al-Qortoby compiled in the King Saud University Online Electronic Qur’an Project. The
classical Arabic dictionary the Lisan Al-Arab (Ibn Manzur, 1290) and several English dictionaries
were consulted to examine the linguistic meaning of key words related to the metaphor
investigated. The abstract concepts the researcher selected are REWARD, HUMILITY,
HYPOCRISY, and ARROGANCE, each of which recurs in multiple places in the Qur’an. Last
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

117

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
A Cognitive Study of Metaphors in the Glorious Qur’an

AlAjmi

but not least is research presenting the theoretical framework of CMT, primarily Lakoff and
Johnson (1980), which shifts the interpretation of metaphors from a linguistic to a conceptual
orientation. Using these works, the researcher attempts to show how the conceptual approach of
analysis contributes to the linguistic interpretation of metaphors in the Qur’an.
Abstract Concepts Represented through Metaphors in the Qur’an:
1. REWARD:
َّ ‫" َم ْن ذَا الَّذِي يُ ْق ِرض‬
١١ ‫ضا ِعفهُ لَهُ" سورة الحديد آية‬
َ ُ‫سنًا فَي‬
َ ‫َّللا قَ ْرضًا َح‬
‘Who is he that will lend to Allâh a goodly loan so that He may multiply it to him many times?
And it is Allâh that decreases or increases (your provisions), and unto Him you shall return.’
(Sura 57:11)
The metaphor in this verse comes in the form of a question. Linguistically, the two objects
being compared in this verse are a man who lends money to whomever needs it and a man who
lends money to Allah. The difference between the two loans is that the man who lends to somebody
in need may not get his money back, and will take a loss, whereas the person who lends Allah
money will see his money multiplied by Allah, which has been stated by Al-Tabari. The
comparison was made to explain the unseen reward a Muslim gets from the deity when he gives
his money to people in need (LENDING TO THE NEEDY IS LENDING TO GOD).
The linguistic interpretation provided above can be transformed into a conceptual one
through CMT as follows. The metaphor employed in this verse concertizes the abstract concept
REWARD that a Muslim will get in the hereafter. REWARD as a concept deals with feelings that
cannot be expressed physically. This is where CMT is needed. In this verse, the source domain is
INVESTMENT. The amount of money s/he gets back will be much more than what s/he may
expect; this represents the REWARD s/he will get in the hereafter.
2. HUMILITY:
ْ ‫"و‬
٢٤‫يرا" سورة اإلسراء آية‬
ْ ‫اخ ِف‬
ْ ‫ب‬
َّ َ‫ض لَ ُه َما َجنَا َح الذُّ ِل ِمن‬
ً ‫ص ِغ‬
ِ ‫الرحْ َم ِة َوقُ ْل َر‬
َ ‫ار َح ْم ُه َما َك َما َر َّب َيا ِني‬
َ
‘And lower unto them [parents] the wing of submission and humility through mercy, and say: “My
Lord! Bestow on them Your Mercy as they did bring me up when I was young.”’
(Sura 17:24)
This verse involves a compound metaphor that comes in the form of an imperative
structure. The first comparison made is between the man who acts with mercy towards his parents
and a bird that lowers its wings when landing. The second metaphor, ‘the wing of submission and
humility’, compares humility to a bird that lowers its wings. The two comparisons together explain
the meaning of the humility and submission that people should have towards their parents in Islam
(Ibn-Katheer). Lowering the bird’s wings reflects the man’s affection towards his parents (AlQortoby). Humility as represented by the verb root form in the past tense (‫ )تواضع‬means ‘to put
something down’, hence the opposite of holding something up (Ibn Manzur, 1290).
Thus, HUMILITY IS LOWERING SOMETHING. Humility, the target domain, is figured
as a bird’s wing, which the bird lowers in love, respect, and care, much as Muslims bow down and
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

118

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
A Cognitive Study of Metaphors in the Glorious Qur’an

AlAjmi

kneel when they pray, indicating submission and humility before Allah, or as Western people
traditionally took off their hats when greeting someone to show respect.
3. HYPOCRISY:
١٨ ‫ع ْم ٌي فَ ُه ْم ََل يَ ْر ِجعُون" سورة البقرة آية‬
ُ ‫ص ٌّم بُ ْك ٌم‬
ُ "
‘They are deaf, dumb, and blind, so they return not (to the Right Path)’
(Sura 2:18)
Hypocrisy is defined in the Cambridge Dictionary as “a situation in which someone
pretends to believe something that they do not really believe, or that is the opposite of what they
do or say at another time.” In Arabic, as explained by Ibn Manzur (1290), the concept is culturespecific, dealing with hypocrites’ attitude to Islam and Muslims (Ibn Manzur, 1290). The two
definitions show that in both languages hypocrisy can be explained through what hypocrites do.
The verse above describes hypocrites as deaf, since they chose not to hear what the Prophet
Muhammad says; “dumb” or mute, in the sense that they can’t even talk about Islam; and blind,
since they chose not to see where the right path (which is Islam) is (Ibn-Katheer).
In these three (sub-)metaphors of deafness, muteness, and blindness, the recurring theme
is loss of the senses and abilities that can help the person to rightly perceive and reason about the
things around him or her. Deaf people have “lost” their sense of hearing; mute people, their ability
to speak; and blind people, their sight. The metaphor emerges because hypocrites do not physically
lose such senses and abilities, but choose to be like the deaf, blind, and mute in order to disbelieve
or disregard what Allah has expressed through his messenger Muhammad (peace be upon him).
Thus, HYPOCRISY, which is the target domain, can be explained through the conceptual
metaphor HYPOCRISY IS A DELIBERATE LOSS, where DELIBERATE LOSS is the source
domain. When a person deliberately decides to lose something or somebody, it means that s/he
will not pay attention to or care about that thing anymore, or will not listen or speak to that person.
That is, loss means a reduction to zero in all aspects. The process of mental mapping between the
two domains help us understand who hypocrites are and what they do.
4. ARROGANCE:
٢٤ ‫" فَقَا َل أَنَا َربُّ ُك ُم ْاْلَ ْعلَ ٰى" سورة النازعات آية‬
‘Saying: “I am your lord, most high.”’
(Sura 79:24)
The metaphor drawn in this verse is direct: Pharaoh compares himself, illegitimately, to
Allah, Almighty, saying he is the “lord” and “most high”—that no one can be higher or above him
(Al-Tabari). This metaphor conveys Pharaoh’s arrogance—thus, the conceptual metaphor that best
corresponds to it is ARROGANCE IS ABOVENESS, in which the target domain is the abstraction
ARROGANCE and the source domain is ABOVENESS. In our physical world, if something is
put onto something else, nothing below it can be seen unless you remove it. This applies to people
as well as objects—someone high up may be unable to see or hear what is below him/her. The
researcher chose ABOVENESS as a source domain and not HIGHNESS because ‘above’ is a
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

119

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
A Cognitive Study of Metaphors in the Glorious Qur’an

AlAjmi

relative term, entailing being ‘superior’ to someone, whereas ‘high/the highest’ is truly applicable
only to Allah Almighty, carrying the meaning of ‘elevation’ (Merriam-Webster’s Online
Dictionary, 2019).
Conclusion:
The present study has taken up the CMT approach to metaphors, which shifts them from the
linguistic to the conceptual domain, revealing their source and target domains and the relation
between them, and has asserted its significance for and applied it to the analysis and interpretation
of metaphor in the Holy Qur’an. The examples explored have provided insight how linguistic
interpretations of abstract concepts can be transformed into conceptual ones. Lakoff and Johnson’s
theory proved significant in the way it shows how metaphors concretize abstract concepts,
allowing them to be grasped more easily. Arabic linguists should be advised to adapt this scientific
linguistic theory to Arabic and formulate new theories informed by it that enrich the way Arabic
and the Qur’an are studied.
About the Author:
Mashael Al-Ajmi is a faculty member in Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University since
2009. She completed her M.A in applied linguistics from Al-Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic
University in 2014. She is mostly interested in cognitive linguistics to find more on how language
and mind work. She is also interested in many fields of applied linguistics in English as well as
Arabic such as language acquisition, pragmatics, discourse analysis, educational development and
many others. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3949-2383

References
Abu Libdeh, A. (2015). Metaphor and action embodiment in the glorious Qur’an. Arab World
English Journal, 6(3), 136–156.
Al-Ameer, M. (2007). Alwasf fi al-qur’an al-karim [Description in the Holy Book of the
Qur’an]. Beirut: Dar Al-Kotob Al-Ilmiyah.
Al-Handiyani, D. (2008). Al-isti’arah fi surat al-baqarah [Metaphor in the second chapter of the
Qur’an] (Master’s thesis, State Islamic University, Malang, Indonesia.
Al-Turk, S. (2011). Al-isti’arah al-tamthiliyah fi al-qur’an al-karim [Metaphor in the Holy Book
of the Qur’an] (Master’s thesis, An-Najah National University, Nablus, Palestine.
Berrada, K. (2006). Metaphors of light and darkness in the Holy Quran: A conceptual approach
(Master’s thesis). Faculté des Lettres et des Sciences Humanies Ben M’sik, Casablanca.
Geraghty, S. (2013). Classically modern: Abd al-Qāhir al-Jurjānī’s theory of metaphor in the
interpretation of contemporary Arabic fiction (Doctoral dissertation). University of
Wisconsin-Madison.
Ibn Manzur, M. (1290). Lisan al-arab [The Arab tongue]. Available at
https://www.almaany.com/ar/dict/ar-ar/?c=‫العرب‬+‫لسان‬
Knowles, M., & Moon, R. (2006). Introducing metaphor. London: Routledge.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

120

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
A Cognitive Study of Metaphors in the Glorious Qur’an

AlAjmi

Moser, S. (2000). Metaphor analysis in psychology: Method, theory, and fields of application.
Forum: Qualitative Social Research, 1(2). doi:10.17169/fqs-1.2.1090.
Nassaji, H. (2015). Qualitative and descriptive research: Data type versus data analysis.
Language Teaching Research, 19(2), 129–132.
The Qur’an. Interpreted by Ibn-Katheer, Al-Tabari, & Al-Qortoby. Available at
http://quran.ksu.edu.sa/tafseer/
The Qur’an. Translated by T. Al-Hilali & M. Khan. Available at
http://quran.qurancomplex.gov.sa/Quran/Targama/Targama.asp?TabID=4&SubItemID=1
&l=arb&t=eng&SecOrder=4&SubSecOrder=1
Salamah, H. M. (2002). Al-i’jaz al-balaghi fi al-qur’an al-karim [The miraculous rhetoric in the
Holy Book of Qur’an]. Available at
http://ia802906.us.archive.org/20/items/waq57214/57214.pdf
Sani, I., & Ruma, M. (2014). Concretizing the abstract: Conceptual metaphors in the holy
Qur’an. European Academic Research, 2(8), 11000–11012.
Vosniadou, S., & Ortony, A. (Eds.). (1989). Similarity and analogical reasoning. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

121

