Exposure to Armed Conflict and Fertility in Sub-Saharan Africa
Brian C. Thiede1, Pennsylvania State University
Matthew Hancock, Pennsylvania State University
Ahmed Kodouda, George Washington University
James Piazza, Pennsylvania State University
March 2020
Forthcoming at Demography
Abstract
Changes in fertility patterns are hypothesized to be among the many second-order consequences
of armed conflict, but expectations about the direction of such effects are theoretically
ambiguous. Prior research, from a range of contexts, has also yielded inconsistent results. We
contribute to this debate by using harmonized data and methods to examine the effects of
exposure to conflict on preferred and observed fertility outcomes across a spatially and
temporally extensive population. We use high-resolution georeferenced data from 25 subSaharan African countries, combining records of violent events from the Armed Conflict
Location and Event Dataset with data on fertility goals and outcomes from the Demographic and
Health Surveys (n=368,765 women aged 15-49 years). We estimate a series of linear and
logistic regression models to assess the effects of exposure to conflict events on ideal family
size and the probability of childbearing within the 12 months prior to the interview. We find that,
on average, exposure to armed conflict leads to modest reductions in both respondents’ preferred
family size and their probability of recent childbearing. Many of these effects are heterogeneous
between demographic groups and across contexts, which suggests systematic differences in
women’s vulnerability or preferred responses to armed conflict. Additional analyses suggest that
conflict-related fertility declines may be driven by delays or reductions in marriage. These
results contribute new evidence about the demographic effects of conflict and their underlying
mechanisms, and broadly underline the importance of studying the many second-order effects
of organized violence on vulnerable populations.
Keywords
Fertility, Fertility Preferences, Marriage, Armed Conflict, Africa
Acknowledgements
Thanks to Yosef Bodovski and Matthew Brooks for programming assistance.
Thiede acknowledges the assistance provided by the Population Research Institute at Penn State,
which is supported by an infrastructure grant from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development (P2CHD041025). Thiede and Piazza also
acknowledge support from the Penn State Social Science Research Institute and the Penn
State Center for Security Research and Education.
1

Corresponding author: 111A Armsby Building, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802; Email: bct11@psu.edu; Phone: 814-865-2561.

Abstract
Changes in fertility patterns are hypothesized to be among the many second-order consequences
of armed conflict, but expectations about the direction of such effects are theoretically ambiguous.
Prior research, from a range of contexts, has also yielded inconsistent results. We contribute to this
debate by using harmonized data and methods to examine the effects of exposure to conflict on
preferred and observed fertility outcomes across a spatially and temporally extensive population.
We use high-resolution georeferenced data from 25 sub-Saharan African countries, combining
records of violent events from the Armed Conflict Location and Event Dataset with data on fertility
goals and outcomes from the Demographic and Health Surveys (n=368,765 women aged 15-49
years). We estimate a series of linear and logistic regression models to assess the effects of
exposure to conflict events on ideal family size and the probability of childbearing within the 12
months prior to the interview. We find that, on average, exposure to armed conflict leads to modest
reductions in both respondents’ preferred family size and their probability of recent childbearing.
Many of these effects are heterogeneous between demographic groups and across contexts, which
suggests systematic differences in women’s vulnerability or preferred responses to armed conflict.
Additional analyses suggest that conflict-related fertility declines may be driven by delays or
reductions in marriage. These results contribute new evidence about the demographic effects of
conflict and their underlying mechanisms, and broadly underline the importance of studying the
many second-order effects of organized violence on vulnerable populations.

2

Introduction
Armed conflict disrupts many domains of life beyond the immediate effects of violence and
insecurity (Ghobarah et al. 2003; Caldwell 2004). Exposure to such events has been linked to
adverse social and demographic outcomes, including poor child and adult health (Akresh et al.
2012; Minoiu and Shemyakina 2014; Torche and Shwed 2015), migration and displacement
(Verwimp and van Bavel 2004; Adhikari 2012; Bohra-Mishra and Massey 2011; Czaika and KisKatos 2009; Williams et al. 2012; Williams 2015), and declines in economic activity (World Bank
2011). Demographers have also hypothesized that conflict may affect reproductive goals and
behaviors through mechanisms that include shifting patterns of marriage and spousal separation
(Caldwell 2004; Blanc 2004; Cetorelli 2014), changing the relative costs and risks of childbearing
(Lindstrom and Berhanu 1999), inducing replacement effects in response to conflict-related
mortality (Schindler and Brück 2011), and increasing the risk of sexual violence and intrahousehold conflict (Corno et al. 2017). However, these processes may not operate in a consistent
manner, resulting in competing hypotheses about the strength and sign of conflict effects. Tests of
these expectations, across a range of contexts, have yielded inconsistent results with respect to
both the presence and direction of the relationship between conflict and fertility.
We contribute evidence to this literature and extend prior research by using georeferenced
demographic and conflict data to evaluate the association between armed conflict and both fertility
ideals and outcomes across a temporally and spatially extensive population of reproductive-aged
women in sub-Saharan Africa (Boyle et al. 2018; Raleigh et al. 2010). Importantly, these data
allow us to construct and employ new high-resolution measures of women’s exposure to conflict
events. As such, we build upon existing research by simultaneously ‘zooming out’ to study the
demographic effects of conflict across a large target population, and ‘zooming in’ to measure

3

conflict exposure at the spatial and temporal scales at which conflict events unfold and many of
the processes linking conflict and fertility operate (Buhaug and Rød 2006; Williams et al. 2012).
The evidence we generate through this approach makes new theoretical contributions and
has the potential to broadly inform development and humanitarian work as it relates to mitigating
the second-order impacts of conflict. For one, we study the links between conflict and fertility
across a large sample and using harmonized data and methods. This approach permits us to
estimate average effects across an extensive population and to compare effects across subpopulations and contexts. Such comparisons are not confounded by differences in data and
methods, as is often the case when comparing findings across single-country studies. By examining
heterogeneous effects, our analyses provide insights into whether and how women vary in terms
of their level of vulnerability (resilience) to conflict, as well as in their ability and propensity to
modify fertility in response to such events. Relatedly, we examine hypothesized mechanisms
linking conflict and fertility, providing empirical evidence about which explanatory processes are
most salient. Our findings may also have broader implications for theories of fertility by informing
expectations about the demographic effects of comparable shocks to populations’ health and
wealth.
The results of this study are of practical interest given persistently high and increasing
levels of political instability throughout the world, and the corollary need to mitigate the effects of
these events (World Bank 2011). It is important for policymakers and practitioners to consider the
secondary effects of conflict—including changes in reproductive goals and outcomes—which can
have persistent if not always immediate consequences for affected populations (Ghobarah et al.
2003). These issues are particularly pertinent to the sub-Saharan African context that we consider
here. Over recent decades, the region has experienced significant levels of conflict, resulting in at

4

least 428,000 deaths since 2000 alone (ACLED 2019).1 While the dynamics of individual conflicts
are often unique, the countries in our sample share of legacy of weak state institutions and chronic
political instability that, in most cases, stems in part from prolonged periods of European rule
(World Bank 2018). 2 These characteristics have manifest in unique conflict dynamics in the region
vis-à-vis other parts of the world, in terms of both the frequency and types of conflict that have
occurred. For example, African conflicts in the post-Cold War era have often been so-called repeat
civil wars, involved contestation of government transitions, and included complex sets of domestic
and international state and non-state actors (Williams 2017). Sub-Saharan Africa is also
characterized by a distinctive set of demographic dynamics, with persistently high, if
heterogeneous, birth rates across the continent (Bongaarts and Casterline 2013). For example, the
most recent data from the Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) reveal total fertility rates above
4.0 in most African countries, but with a range from 7.6 in Niger to 3.3 in Lesotho. Given these
high average birth rates, the region will continue to account for a disproportionate share of global
population growth into the future (Gerland et al. 2014).
In this paper, we consider the relationship between these distinctive patterns of conflict and
fertility in sub-Saharan Africa. We do so by estimating the effects of localized exposure to conflict
on both fertility ideals and outcomes among women in 25 sub-Saharan African countries between
2000 and 2017. Our paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we describe the conceptual
framework and previous empirical findings that motivate our study. We subsequently define our
specific research objectives and hypotheses, and describe the data and methods employed. We next

1

The casualty figure is for all African countries from January 1, 2000 to January 1, 2018 and includes deaths from
intrastate and interstate conflicts, violent protests, terrorism, and government violence against civilians.
2
Evidence of such weak institutions and political instability comes from the World Bank’s Governance Effectiveness
and Political Stability and Absence of Violence indicators. Both indicators range between -2.50 to 2.50. For 19962018, our sample’s mean score for Governance Effectiveness is -0.75 and for Political Stability and Absence of
Violence is -0.65.

5

present our results, focusing first on how conflict affects ideal family size and recent fertility
outcomes, next on the possible mechanisms linking conflict and fertility, and finally on a series of
robustness checks. We conclude by discussing the broader implications of our findings and
identifying areas for future research.

Conflict and Fertility
Disruptions associated with armed conflict and other forms of political instability have been
hypothesized to change the incentives for, and likelihood of, childbearing in affected populations.
Such changes are expected to operate through multiple mechanisms, which function in complex
and potentially offsetting ways. In stylized terms, these pathways can be separated into four sets
of factors: shifts in patterns of marriage and co-residence; changes in the relative costs and risks
of childbearing; replacement effects; and the consequences of sexual violence. First, conflict may
change patterns of marriage and co-residence by shifting the incentive structure for marriage and
changing the likelihood and duration of spousal separation (Caldwell 2004; Woldemicael 2010;
Cetorolli 2012; Williams et al. 2012). For instance, spouses may separate as some household
members—typically working-age men—are recruited into the military or militia groups, or if
conflict-induced migration patterns lead to the separation of household members (McGinn 2000;
Agadjanian et al. 2011; Verwimp and van Bavel 2004). Similarly, persons who are displaced by
conflict or mobilized for military activity may be less likely to marry given uncertainty associated
with such events and the limited marriage markets among displaced populations and groups of
combatants. Marriage markets may also be disrupted if bride prices or other costs of marriage
change, or the resources to pay such costs are lost due to conflict (Corno et al. 2017). The

6

incentives for marriage may also change due to threat of military mobilization, particularly if
unmarried males are targeted for recruitment (Williams et al. 2012).
Second, conflict may affect fertility goals and behaviors by changing the relative costs and
risks of childbearing. Economic dynamics may spur some of these changes. Conflict often reduces
wealth among affected households (Collier et al. 2003), which can in turn shape the calculus of
fertility decision-making. Economic uncertainties that are associated with armed conflict may
incentivize individuals to have additional children if those children are perceived as likely to
increase future income levels or otherwise provide economic support (Berrebi and Ostwald 2015).
Alternatively, women may perceive an additional child as unaffordable under conflict-induced
income constraints if children are viewed as net consumers of household resources. Conflict may
also affect the relative benefits of childbearing by influencing the costs of controlling fertility via
changing access to contraceptives. Here, conflict is generally expected to disrupt access to
contraceptives (McGinn et al. 2011; Urdal and Che 2013), and in some cases protracted violence
may induce pro-natalist sentiments that increase the social costs of limiting fertility (Palmer and
Storeng 2016). Conflict may further change the costs and risk of childbearing in terms of maternal
and child health, often adversely due to disruptions in healthcare access (Lindskog 2016; McGinn
et al. 2011; Øtsby et al. 2018). In these and perhaps other ways, conflict is expected to affect
demographic outcomes by elevating perceptions of uncertainty across many dimensions of life
(Caldwell 2004).
Third, exposure to violence may change fertility goals and outcomes by inducing
replacement effects, or increases in fertility in response to mortality. Such responses may be driven
by the mortality of one’s child or family member, as was observed in the aftermath of the Rwandan
genocide (Kraehnert et al. 2019; Schindler and Brück 2011). Replacement-effect dynamics may

7

also occur at the community or group level, such as when post-conflict community-building efforts
or a desire to increase ethnic group size lead to pro-natalist sentiment (Chi et al. 2015; Palmer and
Storeng 2016).3 While the evidence for replacement effects in conflict settings is limited, similar
processes have been observed in response to child deaths in other settings, such as those caused
by disease and natural disasters (Olsen 1980; Bongaarts 2001; Lindstrom and Kiros 2007; Hossain
et al. 2007; Nobles et al. 2015).
Finally, armed conflict may affect fertility by increasing the incidence of sexual violence
(McGinn 2000). Rape and other sexual assault have been used as a tool of warfare in many
conflicts in sub-Saharan Africa, including in recent civil conflicts in the Democratic Republic of
Congo, Ethiopia, and Sudan (Hagan et al. 2009; Human Rights Watch 2008; Peterman et al. 2011).
In addition to the perpetration of such violence by combatants, conflict has also been shown to
increase intimate partner sexual violence through both psychological and socioeconomic pathways
(Østby 2016; Wood 2014). In either case, these crimes may influence fertility directly by resulting
in pregnancies and indirectly by affecting victim’s physical and mental health (Dossa et al. 2014;
Pallitto and O’Campo 2004).
These four sets of pathways can plausibly explain the relationship between conflict and
fertility, but do not suggest clear directional hypotheses since they may operate in different
strengths and directions. In line with this conceptual ambiguity, the empirical record is inconsistent
with respect to the direction of conflict effects. Several studies find that conflict reduces fertility.
For example, fertility rates declined during periods of conflict in Angola (Agadjanian and Prata
2002) and Mozambique (Agadjanian et al. 2011), and periods of concurrent war and famine in

Fertility may also increase in response to perceived child mortality risk due to conflict (i.e., “insurance effects”).
However, such processes would require women to perceive that conflict will increase mortality risk over sustained
periods of time, which has not been demonstrated empirically.
3

8

Ethiopia were associated with short-term declines in the probability of conception (Lindstrom and
Berhanu 1999). Likewise, a secular decline in fertility in Eritrea was likely amplified by the 19982000 war with Ethiopia (Woldemicael 2010). According to an empirical study of terrorist attacks
in 170 countries between 1970 and 2007, terrorism has also been linked to declines in the total
fertility rate (TFR) and crude birth rates (CBR) (Berrebi and Otswald 2015). Finally, violent
conflicts were associated with an increase in contraceptive use—and thus presumable decreases in
fertility—during a civil war in Nepal (Williams et al. 2012).
Other studies have found the opposite: that fertility rates increase during episodes of armed
conflict. For instance, conflict intensity in sub-Saharan Africa, measured as battle-related deaths,
has been associated with increases in national fertility rates among the poorest countries in the
region (Urdal and Che 2013). There is also evidence from the Iraqi context of a sharp increase in
fertility rates among women ages 15 to 24 following the 2003 U.S. invasion and subsequent civil
conflict (Cetorolli 2015); and violent events during the Colombian civil war were associated with
increased fertility in the rural areas where conflict was widespread (Torres and Urdinola 2019). In
a final example, Cambodian women’s exposure to conflict during adolescence has been linked to
later-life fertility (Islam et al. 2015).
We contribute to this debate by conducting new tests of the relationship between conflict
and fertility across sub-Saharan Africa and addressing existing limitations regarding the precision
of conflict exposure measures and the ability to compare effects across sub-populations. Many
previous studies have drawn inferences about the effects of conflict by tracking changes in national
fertility rates before, during, and after a given conflict (Woldemicael 2008, 2010; Schindler and
Brück 2011) or comparing fertility dynamics between more- and less-affected regions within

9

countries (Lindstrom and Berhanu 1999). In either case, such national or province-level measures
of conflict and fertility are likely to mask substantial spatial variation.
A number of recent studies have overcome these measurement challenges by using georeferenced conflict data to produce measures of violence for sub-national administrative units (e.g.,
districts), and examining the relationship between conflict exposure (so defined) and demographic
outcomes (Dabalen and Paul 2014; Lindskog 2016; Minoiu and Shemyakina 2012). These analyses
improve upon measurement of conflict exposure by accounting for spatial heterogeneity within
countries but tend to rely on inconsistently sized, and sometimes large, administrative units. These
studies have also focused on narrow geographic contexts (i.e., single countries), making it difficult
to draw comparisons given methodological differences.4 Using high-resolutions measures of
conflict, we apply harmonized data and methods to examine the effects of conflict on fertility
across 25 sub-Saharan African countries and among key sub-populations. Such findings contribute
to theory-building and can shape expectations about the demographic implications of recent trends
in conflict across the continent.

Research Objectives
The overalls goals of this study are to estimate the associations between exposure to armed conflict
and both preferred and recent fertility outcomes, and to explore the mechanisms that may underlie
these relationships. We consider both reproductive preferences and outcomes, in part because the
effects of conflict on the latter may be attenuated by some women’s inability to act upon conflictinduced changes in fertility preferences. For example, a lack of access to contraceptives will reduce
one’s likelihood of realizing conflict-induced declines in fertility preferences; or conversely,

4

One study that has used high-resolution conflict and demographic data across a large multi-national context focused
on maternal and child health rather than fertility (Øtsby et al. 2018).

10

spousal separation will prevent women from realizing increases in preferred family size. We take
the nature and degree of such attenuation as an empirical question for our study.
Towards our overall goal, we take the following five steps: First, we analyze the overall
association between exposure to armed conflict and women’s family size preferences. Second, we
test for variation in conflict effects between demographic groups and across contexts, defined by
educational attainment, parity, rural or urban residence, and reproductive setting as proxied by the
national total fertility rate. We also report the results of complementary country-specific models.
As our third and fourth steps, we conduct a parallel set of analyses of the overall and group-specific
associations between conflict and achieved fertility outcomes, operationalized as the probability
of childbearing during the 12 months prior to the survey. Finally, we explore the pathways that
may underlie the observed relationships (or lack thereof). We estimate parallel models of the
respective associations between conflict and child mortality, marriage, and contraceptive use,
which represent three plausible mechanisms underlying conflict-fertility relationships.

Empirical Strategy
Data
We construct a multi-country and multi-decade database that includes records of women’s fertility
ideals and outcomes, their demographic and socioeconomic characteristics, and their exposure to
armed conflict events. We draw on demographic and socioeconomic data for reproductive-age
women (ages 15-49 years) from a series of DHS surveys fielded between 2000 and 2017. The DHS
program has collected nationally-representative demographic and population health data across
many low- and middle-income countries, with multiple rounds of cross-sectional data collected in

11

many of those places.5 DHS data are collected using a standardized core questionnaire, which
facilitates harmonization across contexts and makes these data particularly well-suited for our
multi-country sample.6 Our measures of armed conflict are derived from the Armed Conflict
Location and Event Dataset (ACLED). The ACLED Project collects, analyzes, and maps the
incidence and characteristics of a range of violent events, from inter-state battles to riots and other
forms of civil unrest (Raleigh et al. 2010). We use ACLED data on the date and location
(latitude/longitude) of conflict events in sub-Saharan Africa, which are currently available from
1997 to the present.
Among the DHS samples that have been collected in the region, we restrict the analytic
sample to countries and years for which conflict event data are available for at least three years
prior to the DHS survey (i.e., years ≥2000) to allow for a 36-month lookback period for conflict
exposure measures. We also restrict our analysis to samples for which geocodes are available at
the cluster (i.e., community) level and that include information on women’s time of residence in
their cluster of enumeration. The former allows us to calculate the number of conflict events that
occurred within a given radius of individuals’ clusters of residence during the time intervals of
interest. Using the latter, we can exclude all recent in-migrants, defined as women who did not
reside in the cluster of enumeration throughout the entire period of conflict exposure. We exclude
these observations since such recent in-migrants were exposed to other unobservable levels of
conflict in their place of prior residence and may differ systematically from the population that
resided in a cluster for the entire exposure interval. Individuals who migrated or were displaced
from the enumeration areas due to conflict and before data collection cannot be observed in the

5

DHS estimates are nationally representative when survey weights are applied.
The DHS has implemented multiple phases of the survey, and in some cases responses options are tailored to the
local context. However, the datasets and variables included in our analytic sample were sufficiently alike to permit
harmonization.
6

12

sample given the cross-sectional design of the DHS. These out-migrants are likely to be positively
selected on socioeconomic characteristics, and therefore have below-average levels of fertility.
Such dynamics would bias our estimates of conflict effects upwards, which we consider in the
discussion of results. After these restrictions, our dataset includes a total of 368,765 observations
from 41 DHS samples collected in 25 sub-Saharan African countries between 2000 and 2017.7 The
sample is described in Table 1, and the geographic distribution of the DHS clusters in our analytic
sample is illustrated in Figure 1.8
(Table 1)
(Figure 1)

Measures
Main analysis
We focus on two primary outcomes in this study: ideal family size and recent fertility. We model
ideal family size to capture women’s preferred fertility outcomes regardless of their ability to
achieve that goal. This first dependent variable represents the number of children that the woman
would ideally like to have in her lifetime, irrespective of actual childbearing.9 We use this variable
as our preferred measure of women’s reproductive goals since it theoretically allows for downward
revisions below one’s achieved fertility, which questions about preferences for another child do

7

The countries (samples) in our data are as follows: Angola (2015), Benin (2001), Burkina Faso (2003), Burundi
(2016), Cameroon (2004), Democratic Republic of the Congo (2007), Eswatini (2006), Ethiopia (2000), Ethiopia
(2005), Ethiopia (2016), Ghana (2003), Ghana (2006), Guinea (2005), Kenya (2003), Kenya (2008-09), Lesotho
(2004), Lesotho (2009), Liberia (2007), Madagascar (2008), Malawi (2000), Malawi (2004), Malawi (2010),
Malawi (2016), Mali (2001), Mali (2006), Namibia (2000), Namibia (2006), Nigeria (2003), Nigeria (2008),
Rwanda (2005), Senegal (2005), Sierra Leone (2008), Tanzania (2004), Tanzania (2015), Uganda (2001), Uganda
(2006), Uganda (2016), Zambia (2007), Zambia (2013), Zimbabwe (2005-06), Zimbabwe (2015).
8
See Table A1 for the distribution of observations by country and the proportion of each sample exposed to conflict,
as defined in the main specification.
9
We exclude non-numeric responses (e.g., “up to God”) from the analysis. The prevalence of such responses is
typically less than 10 percent and has declined over time in sub-Saharan Africa (Frye and Bachan 2017).

13

not. While ideal family size has been shown to be a meaningful construct for capturing changes in
women’s reproductive goals (Yeatmen et al. 2013), we test the robustness of our findings by using
a categorical fertility preference outcome in a supplementary analysis. The results of these models
(see below) demonstrate that our substantive conclusions are not driven by the choice of outcome
variable or patterns of non-numeric responses about ideal family size.
Our second outcome of interest is recent fertility, which we measure using a binary
indicator of whether a woman gave birth to a child during the 12 months prior to the survey. We
use this cross-sectional measure of fertility (rather than the DHS birth histories) to facilitate direct
comparison between our analyses of ideal family size and fertility outcomes. As described above,
we expect that the association between conflict and fertility will be attenuated vis-à-vis the
association of conflict with preferred family size given heterogeneity in women’s ability to realize
conflict-affected changes in preferences.
The independent variable of interest is exposure to armed conflict, operationalized as a
binary of indicator of whether one or more violent conflict events took place within a 10-kilometer
radius of women’s communities of residence during the 36 months prior to data collection. This
approach follows other demographic research (Williams et al. 2012) by focusing on exposure to
discrete violent incidents—that is, one of the multiple events that typically constitute broader
military conflicts. We define conflict events to include battles and incidents of remote violence.10
Battles are violent events involving politically organized, armed state or non-state actors.
Examples include armed clashes between state security forces and insurgents, insurgent capture of
territory through force, and state recapture of territory controlled by rebels. Incidents of remote

10

ACLED includes other categories of violent events such as violence against civilians and violent protests or riots.
We exclude such events for two reasons. First, we are interested in the effects of armed conflict specifically rather
than unrest and instability in general. Second, comparable measures for these types of violence are not available in
the UCDP database, which we use to test the robustness of our findings with ACLED.

14

violence are nonconventional violent acts where the mode of attack does not require the
perpetrator’s physical presence, such as terrorist bombings, the use of improvised explosive
devices (IEDs), shelling, and airstrikes. There is no minimum number of casualties required for an
event to be classified as a battle or remote attack. Therefore, these measures capture instances of
both high- and low-intensity violence.
We measure conflict events within a 10-kilometer buffer with the goal of capturing events
that directly impacted women, their families, and members of their social networks.11,12 Our use
of a 36-month lookback period allows sufficient time to capture lagged effects. For example, when
modeling childbearing in the prior year, our measure will on average capture 21 months of conflict
exposure prior to conception.13 Since there is little existing evidence to guide these specific
decisions, however, we test the sensitivity of our results to the use of alternative measures of
conflict exposure. The results of these and other robustness checks are included in the Online
Supplementary Information.

Mechanisms
To explore the mechanisms that may underlie observed relationships between conflict and
reproductive outcomes, we conduct parallel analyses of the associations between conflict and three
outcomes that correspond to hypothesized causal pathways: the recent death of a child, marriage

11

We account for the error around GPS coordinates in the public-use DHS data by defining a 10-kilometer radius as
the minimum buffer in our analysis. The DHS program randomly displaces the GPS coordinates for all clusters to
maintain confidentiality. The coordinates for urban clusters are displaced by 0-2 kilometers, and rural clusters by 0-5
kilometers, with 1 percent of rural clusters displaced by 0-10 kilometers (Burgert et al. 2013). Our approach is
consistent with the approach of other high-quality sources, including the DHS program’s own geospatial dataset and
IPUMS-DHS.
12
Some countries and regions in the sample did not experience conflict events during the study period. We check the
robustness of our results to excluding these places from the analytic sample in Models A1-A4 in the Online
Supplementary Information.
13
We assume a 9-month gestational period and that the average birth during the prior 12 months occurred at the
mid-point of the interval.

15

or cohabitation, and contraceptive use. First, we measure child deaths using a binary indicator of
whether one or more of a woman’s children died during the previous 36 months. We use the same
lookback period as our conflict measure since we are interested in conflict-related child deaths.
Our second pathway of interest is marriage, which we capture with a binary variable that
differentiates between women who are and are not married. The former includes women who are
formally married or cohabitating and the latter includes those who are single and never married,
widowed, separated, or divorced. The third and final outcome is current modern contraceptive use,
which is modeled as a binary variable.14 These three proposed mechanisms are not exhaustive, of
course, but are theoretically relevant and observed across all rounds of the DHS included in our
sample. We do not test the hypothesized sexual violence pathway due to data limitations, but
discuss existing evidence on this issue below.

Statistical Models
We estimate a series of multivariate regression models to evaluate the respective relationships
between exposure to conflict and both ideal and recent fertility. These models take the general
form:
Y𝑖(𝑠) = α𝑑 + δC𝑗𝑝 + βX𝑖(𝑠) + ρT𝑟 + 𝜀𝑖(𝑠)
where the fertility outcome Y for woman i, drawn from sample s, is a function of conflict exposure
C, measured at the level of community j over time period p, and a set of social and demographic
control variables X. These control variables include the age of the respondent, an ordinal measure
of educational attainment, the number of children ever born to the respondent, and a binary
measure of whether the respondent lives in a rural or urban area. All models also include spatial

14

Models of any contraceptive use (current or previous) yield similar results.

16

(α𝑑 ) fixed effects and linear time trends (T) for each region (r) of sub-Saharan Africa. The spatial
fixed effects control for all time-invariant characteristics at the province level, defined as the first
sub-national administrative unit for each country. The region-specific time terms control for
common changes that occur linearly within each of the four major regions of sub-Saharan Africa
defined by the United Nation Statistical Division. We cluster the standard errors on the DHS
clusters (n=18,880) and apply person-level survey weights throughout the analyses.
Within this overall framework, the models we estimate take multiple functional forms. We
estimate linear regression models of the association between conflict and ideal family size; and
estimate logistic regression models to evaluate the association between conflict and women’s
probability of giving birth in the past 12 months. We also estimate logistic regression models for
our analysis of mechanisms since all three outcomes are binary.15 For each of the two main
outcome variables, we test for variation in conflict effects across demographic groups of interest
by including conflict-by-group interaction terms. These models allow for variation in the
association between conflict and our two reproductive outcomes by women’s educational
attainment, parity, residence in rural or urban communities, and fertility context, as measured by
the total fertility rate in women’s country of residence at the time of enumeration. We also estimate
comparable country-stratified models as an alternative approach to assessing heterogeneous effects
across contexts. These findings are briefly discussed below, and the full results are presented in
the Online Supplementary Information.

Results

The number of children ever born is excluded as a control in the model of women’s marital status. Although premarital childbearing is common and/or increasing in some parts of the region, a substantial majority of women still
do not have a child before marriage (Clark et al. 2017) raising concerns about endogeneity.
15

17

Conflict and Fertility Ideals
We begin by analyzing the association between exposure to armed conflict events and women’s
ideal family size (Table 2). In the first model (Model 1), we compare the preferred family size of
women who were exposed to at least one conflict event during the 36 months prior to the survey
with women living in areas that were conflict-free during the same time interval, controlling for a
set of individual and household characteristics, time invariant province characteristics, and regionspecific time trends. The results reveal a negative association between conflict exposure and
fertility ideals: conflict-affected women report ideal family sizes that are on average 0.05-children
lower than non-exposed women. This effect is just over 20 percent of the marginal difference in
ideal family size associated with a one-child increase in parity (β = 0.241). The magnitude of this
association suggests that, on average, conflict is a relatively limited source of cross-sectional
variation in fertility ideals across sub-Saharan Africa. Given that ideal family size is a relatively
“fuzzy” concept to begin with, even a one-child difference in the ideal family size of an individual
woman may not represent a substantively meaningful change. On the other hand, it is important to
recall that this figure represents an average across a large target population, such that small shifts
in average preferences and probabilities may result in large aggregate changes across the
population. It is also worth noting that this negative association runs contrary to the
abovementioned upward bias potentially induced by selective out-migration from conflict-affected
communities. Moreover, high-fertility contexts—for example demographic “youth bulges”—have
generally been found to produce more rather than less conflict (e.g., Brunborg and Urdal 2005;
Urdal 2006). That we find measures of conflict to reduce women’s ideal family size runs counter
to the expected relationship should the results be driven by reverse causation.

18

(Table 2)
We next evaluate whether the association between conflict exposure and fertility ideals
varies across demographic groups and contexts (Table 3), which we expect given hypothesized
differences in populations’ vulnerability and responses to conflict. We first test for differences by
educational attainment (Model 2). Previous research suggests that better-educated women are
more likely than others to perceive that their fertility is within their control (Behrman 2015) and
may therefore be more likely to respond to the threat of violent conflict by modifying their desired
family size (either upward or downward). On the other hand, better-educated women may have
more resources to buffer the economic effects of conflict, making them less sensitive to these
shocks (Zimmerman and Carter 2003). Consistent with the latter expectation, we find that conflict
prompts only the least-educated women to reduce their desired family size, and that more-educated
women experience statistically different—and near-zero—changes in ideal family size when
exposed to conflict. Among women with no education, exposure to conflict events is associated
with a reduction in ideal family size of 0.37 children—a substantively meaningful association
when considered in the context of other coefficients—while the net conflict effects among women
who completed some or all of primary school are both statistically non-significant at conventional
thresholds (β = -0.027, p = 0.396 and β = 0.044, p = 0.073, respectively).
(Table 3)
Next, we test for variation in armed-conflict effects by parity (Model 3), which may be
expected given differential resource constraints between large and small families (Blake 1981;
Smith-Greenaway and Trinitapoli 2014). Such variation may also be expected given women’s
differential likelihood of revising fertility goals across various stages of their reproductive careers
(Bongaarts 1990; Casterline and El-Zeini 2007; Yeatman et al. 2013). We find that differences in

19

conflict effects by parity are statistically and substantively significant. Women without children
experience statistically significant increases in ideal family size when exposed to conflict, but this
effect is moderated—and then reversed—as women’s parity increases. As such, we observe
increasingly large conflict-induced declines in ideal family size among women with large numbers
of children. According to point estimates, for example, conflict exposure is associated with a 0.07child decline in preferred family size among women with three children and a 0.25-child decline
among women with five children. The pattern of conflict effects across a broader range of parities
is plotted in Panel A of Figure 2. A notable implication of these findings is that women with large
families are more likely to revise their preferred family size downward in response to conflict.
This finding runs counter to the possible influence of ex post rationalization on estimates, whereby
women with higher numbers of children ever born are less likely to revise their fertility ideals to a
lower level (Bongaarts 1990; Casterline and El-Zeini 2007). In contrast, we find the opposite and
speculate that higher-parity women are more responsive to conflict exposure than others since they
have experienced the unique burdens of having multiple children in conflict zones and may already
be facing resource constraints. Such an explanation is consistent with the economic and risk
mechanisms linking conflict and fertility.
The next model tests for differences between rural and urban areas, which may be expected
given systematic differences in wealth, resilience, and reproductive norms between such contexts
in Africa (Eloundou-Enyegue and Giroux 2012; Sahn and Stifel 2003). On the one hand, rural
dwellers may be more isolated in terms of markets and infrastructure (e.g., travel and
communications) than urban dwellers such that violence may have a more localized impact in rural
areas. On the other, populations in urban areas are wealthier, have better security infrastructure,
and may therefore be more resilient in the face of conflict and violence than rural populations. The

20

implications of exposure to violence as measured here may also vary between urban and rural areas
in a more technical sense: given differences in population density and distribution, individuals in
rural areas may be more likely to be personally exposed to a violent event that occurs within a
given radius than an urban resident. Our results provide only limited support for these expectations.
There are not statistically significant differences in conflict effects between rural and urban
populations, but we note that the point estimate of the net conflict effect is statistically significant
for the rural population (β = -0.088, p = 0.035) and not the urban population (β = -0.019, p =
0.504).
The fourth and final interaction model (Model 5) tests for differences in conflict effects
across stages in the fertility transition, as indicated by the total fertility rate of women’s country of
residence at the time of enumeration. Such differences may be expected since perceptions of
control over reproduction and related norms vary across the fertility transition and may thus affect
women’s ability and inclination to modify their fertility (Coale 1973; Hayford and Agadjanian
2011). Overall levels of fertility may also be correlated with perceptions of children as either a net
benefit or cost to the household (Caldwell 1976), which is an important determinant of how women
may respond to conflict-induced economic pressures. The results indicate that conflict effects vary
systematically across the sample, with the strongest, negative effects occurring in high-fertility
contexts. Here it is important to keep in mind the observed total fertility rates range from 3.3 to
7.2 across the sample (mean = 5.3), with the corresponding marginal effects of conflict ranging
from β = 0.116 (p = 0.061) to β = -0.169 (p = 0.002) (Panel B, Figure 2). Across our target
population, negative conflict effects are concentrated in the highest-fertility (and usually leastdeveloped) contexts while conflict has null effects in the lowest-fertility (and usually mostdeveloped) places.

21

As an alternative means of examining contextual variation in conflict effects, we also
estimate and report country-stratified models of ideal family size. We present this extensive set of
results in the Online Supplementary Information (Table A4) but note that our findings show a nontrivial degree of heterogeneity across countries in the sample. While in most cases the effects of
conflict are negative or not statistically significant, in three countries—Angola, Cameroon, and
Rwanda—we observe conflict-related increases in ideal family size. The implication is that the
estimates of our global model cannot be generalized across all countries in the sample.
(Figure 2)

Conflict and Fertility Outcomes
The second set of analyses examines the association between exposure to conflict and recent
fertility outcomes, operationalized as the probability of having a child in the year prior to the
survey. Following a similar sequence of models as our analysis of preferred family size, we first
compare the conditional probability of recent fertility among women exposed to any conflict
events in the prior 36 months with their non-exposed counterparts (Model 6, Table 4). We find
that exposure to conflict is negatively associated with fertility: according to point estimates (odds
ratio, OR = 0.943), conflict-exposed women were approximately 6 percent less likely to have a
child in the 12 months prior to the survey than women residing in areas without armed conflict
events over the previous three years. Holding control variables at their means, this estimated effect
translates into an approximately 1.0 percentage point decline in the predicted annual probability
of childbearing. When applied to our large target population, this relatively small change in
probability may result in an absolutely large number of births that do not occur or are delayed. As
with our model of ideal family size, we note that the negative effect of conflict on recent fertility

22

that we observe runs counter to the conflict-increasing effect of high birth rates hypothesized by
some scholars and to the potential upward bias from selective conflict-related out-migration
(Brunborg and Urdal 2005; Urdal 2006). This pattern suggests that our estimates are unlikely to
be driven by reverse causality or selection bias and, if anything, will be conservative.
(Table 4)
The next set of models test for variation in conflict effects across demographic groups of
interest, motivated by a similar set of expectations as our models of fertility preferences above.
We first examine differences in conflict effects by women’s educational attainment (Model 7,
Table 5). The results show that exposure to conflict is not significantly associated with changes in
recent fertility among women with no education, but conflict effects are statistically different, and
lower, among women with an incomplete or complete primary school education. The net effects
of conflict exposure among these latter two groups are β = -0.112 (p = 0.007) and β = -0.079 (p =
0.014), respectively. These results differ substantively from the models of ideal family size, which
showed negative conflict effects concentrated among women without formal education.
The second interaction model (Model 8, Table 5) tests for differences in conflict effects by
parity. Exposure to conflict is associated with reductions in fertility among women with few or
zero children, but this association is offset and eventually reversed as parity increases. For
example, conflict is associated with a 3.8 percent increase in the odds of recent fertility among
women with 6 children (see Panel A, Figure 3). These findings would suggest that conflictinduced fertility declines among lower-parity women—who appear to increase their ideal family
size when exposed to conflict—are in large part due to involuntary or indirect factors, such as
delayed marriage, spousal separation, or malnutrition-related infecundity. We explore a number of
these pathways in further analysis reported below.

23

Third, we examine differences between rural and urban areas. Consistent with models of
ideal family size, results show non-significant differences in conflict effects between rural and
urban populations. However, the results also suggest that the effects of conflict are null or quite
weak in urban areas (β = -0.039, p = 0.269), whereas among rural populations we find a
substantively and statistically significant negative association (β = -0.076, p = 0.022). Exposure to
conflict is associated with a nearly 8 percent reduction in rural women’s odds of giving birth within
the last year.
We next test for differences in conflict effects across stages of the fertility transition, as
proxied by the national total fertility rate. In contrast to the model of ideal family size, we find no
evidence of systematic variation in conflict effects on fertility according to the broader fertility
context (Panel B, Figure 3). Finally, we again estimate country-stratified models as an alternative
means of testing for heterogeneity across contexts (Table A5 in the Online Supplementary
Information). We find no instances in which the direction of conflict effects differs from the main
model (i.e., is positive), but for many countries the coefficient estimates are not statistically
significant.
(Figure 3)
(Table 5)

Mechanisms
We further explore the above findings by analyzing the relationship between exposure to conflict
and three outcomes that correspond to plausible pathways between conflict and changing
reproductive goals and outcomes. The first of these models examines the relationship between
conflict exposure and the probability that one or more of a women’s children died during the same

24

36-month period over which we measure conflict exposure (Model 11, Table 6). The results show
a non-significant association between conflict and child deaths, which provides provisional
evidence that most women exposed to conflict are not experiencing the child deaths that might
spur a replacement effect. This finding is consistent with the results of the overall models of
fertility goals and outcomes, which were negatively associated with conflict and thus contrary to
what would be observed if replacement effects were strong.
The second model examines the relationship between exposure to conflict and women’s
marital status (Model 12, Table 6), differentiating between currently married and unmarried
women. We find that conflict exposure is associated with a reduction in the odds that a woman
was married at the time of the survey, and thus an increase in the odds that they have never married
or are widowed, separated, or divorced. Point estimates suggest that conflict exposure is
associated with an approximately 7.4 percent reduction in the odds of being married at the time of
the survey. It is important to note that this decline in marriage may be driven by conflictrelated delays in marriage, union dissolution, spousal mortality, or some combination of these
processes. Moreover, the negative association between conflict exposure and marriage is
consistent with much of what we find above, most prominently the negative association between
conflict exposure and observed fertility. Given that a majority of women have children within
marriage in most (though not all) parts of sub-Saharan Africa (Clark et al. 2017, SmithGreenaway and Clark 2018), a delay or decline in fertility will result in fewer recent births.
The negative association between conflict exposure and marriage also helps to explain the
inconsistency in the direction of conflict effects on ideal family size (positive) and recent fertility
(positive) among women without children. Such women are most likely to be single and never
married, such that conflict-related delays in marriage would reduce their likelihood of recently
having children despite increased ideal family size.
25

Third and finally, we analyze the relationship between conflict exposure and current
modern contraceptive use (Model 13, Table 6). We find no evidence of a relationship between
recent exposure to armed conflict and the odds that a woman was using contraceptives at the time
of the survey. This results suggests that conflict events we observe did not systematically affect
contraceptive use.16 This result is consistent with our overall finding of a negative association
between conflict and recent fertility since conflict-induced disruptions to contraceptive use would
have led to an increase rather than decrease in births. Overall, then, this analysis of hypothesized
mechanisms is consistent with results from the main models: it suggests that delays and declines
in marriage may explain at least some of the conflict-induced reductions in reproductive goals and
fertility.
(Table 6)

Robustness checks
In addition to examining potential causal mechanisms, we conducted a series of supplemental
analyses to evaluate whether our substantive conclusions about the effects of conflict on fertility
goals and outcomes were sensitive to key methodological decisions. In the two paragraphs below,
we summarize the results of these tests for our analyses of ideal family size and recent fertility,
respectively. We include a full set of results—including of other supplemental analyses—in the
Online Supplementary Information.
Our finding that exposure to armed conflict is negatively associated with ideal family size
is supported by a parallel logistic regression model predicting the desire for another child (Model

16

We estimate an identical model of current contraceptive use limited to the sample of women who have not had a
child within the past 12 months since those women are less likely to be using contraception because of ongoing
breastfeeding (Model A5, Table A6). We also estimate a comparable model that predicts unmet need for family
planning (Model A6, Table A7). We find no statistically significant conflict effects in either model.

26

A7, Table A8), which suggests our findings are not driven by our choice among these related
outcome variables. We then estimate a series of linear regression models of ideal family size (Table
A9) among a sample restricted to women within ten years of their first marriage17 (Model A8),
using an ordinal rather than binary measure of conflict exposure (Model A9), and measuring
conflict exposure to also include nearby riots and violence against civilians (Model A10). These
models yield results consistent with the main specification and suggest that exposure to multiple
conflict events have particularly strong effects. Additional models of ideal family size employed
binary measures of conflict exposure using alternative radii (50 kilometers and 100 kilometers,
Models A11 and A12) and time periods (24 months and 48 months, Models A13 and A14) to
measure conflict exposure, and all results are generally consistent with the main specification. The
one exception is that the estimated coefficient on the conflict variable falls below conventional
thresholds for statistical significance when measured over a 24-month lookback. Finally, we
replicate our main specification using an alternative conflict dataset from the Uppsala Conflict
Data Program (UCDP; Sundberg and Melander 2013) and results also show a negative association
between armed conflict exposure and ideal family size (Model A15). The point estimate of this
model is larger in absolute magnitude than our main results using ACLED, which suggests our
estimates for this outcome may be conservative.
The second set of robustness checks largely parallel the abovementioned analysis but for
models of recent fertility (Table A10). We first re-estimate our main specification using an ordinal
measure of conflict exposure (Model A16). The point estimates of all conflict variables are
negative, but only the indicator of exposure to one conflict event is statistically significant. We
then employ a more expansive definition of conflict as described above (Model A17) and use

Some analyses of fertility ideals have focused on this sub-population under the assumption such women’s ideal
family size is more dynamic and less prone to ex post rationalization (Bongaarts and Casterline 2013).
17

27

alternative radii (50 kilometers and 100 kilometers, Models A18 and A19) and time periods (24
months and 48 months, Models A20 and A21) for measuring conflict exposure. The models using
a 50-kilometer buffer and a 24-month lookback period to measure exposure both yield results that
are consistent with the main findings, though the coefficient estimates are only marginally
significant. The diminished precision is not necessarily surprising given that the larger spatial
radius represents a conservative test of conflict effects, and that a 24-month lookback period
represents a short time window when modeling recent fertility given a 9-month gestational period.
However, this logic is inconsistent with the null conflict effect when using a 48-month lookback
period, which suggest one should interpret our findings from the main model with some caution.
The models employing a broader definition of conflict and 100-kilometer radius for measuring
conflict each find non-significant conflict effects, which is in line with our argument that proximate
exposure to armed conflict (as distinct from other forms of unrest) is most important for
determining reproductive outcomes. Finally, we again replicate our main specification using
UCDP data (Model A22), but here the results suggest null conflict effects. This finding also
suggests the need for some caution when interpreting the main estimates of conflict effects on
fertility.

Discussion and Conclusion
In this study, we provide new evidence of how conflict has influenced reproductive goals and
outcomes since the early 2000s across 25 sub-Saharan African countries. We build on prior work
in this area by simultaneously ‘zooming out’ to produce estimates across and within a
geographically and temporally broad population, and ‘zooming in’ to measure exposure to
particular types of conflict events at a high spatial and temporal resolution. These localized

28

measures better-correspond to the time periods and spaces in which conflict impacts are
experienced, and thus affect fertility, than the coarse measures used in much of the existing
literature.
Our approach yields results that significantly extend substantive knowledge about whether
and how reproductive goals and outcomes are affected by conflict. We highlight three main
conclusions. First, localized exposure to armed conflict is significantly associated with reductions
in both preferred family size and the probability of recent childbearing among women in the
populations we study. Conflict-exposed women have diminished reproductive goals, and may also
have fewer children—at least in the short run. The correspondence between these two findings
suggests that, on average, conflict-induced fertility declines may be driven by processes that are
intentional (e.g., preventing pregnancies due to economic concerns) or that affect reproductive
goals and behaviors simultaneously (e.g., changes in relationship status). However, it is important
to note that the estimates of average conflict effects are modest in magnitude. Exposure to conflict
influences reproductive goals and outcomes, but not dramatically when viewed across our entire
population of interest. This conclusion highlights the need to also consider the other plausible ways
that households may adapt to conflict (Williams 2013).
Second and relatedly, we find systematic variation in conflict effects between demographic
groups and across contexts. The negative effects of conflict on ideal family size are concentrated
among women with no education, at higher parities, and who reside in rural areas or countries
early in the fertility transition. This set of findings is in line with a scenario in which the poorest
are most vulnerable to conflict and relatedly, conflict-induced resource constraints push women to
desire smaller families. Such changes in reproductive preferences are likely correlated with other
coping behaviors and point to a need for targeting interventions to the most vulnerable sub-

29

populations (Korf 2004). Models of recent childbearing show that conflict also reduces fertility
among rural women. In contrast to the models of ideal family size, however, conflict is also
associated with reductions in births among women who completed some or all of primary school
and who were at lower parities. While declines in ideal family size are not necessarily contradictory
to recent childbearing, these findings suggest that women without education or at high parities may
have been unable to realize conflict-related changes in reproductive goals. The implication for
policymakers is that unmet need for contraceptives, or a lack of empowerment to make
reproductive decisions, may be exacerbated in conflict settings (McGinn et al. 2011).
Third, our parallel analysis of three plausible causal mechanisms show that conflict may
lead to delays or a reduction in marriage, which is in line with a long historical record of
demographic responses to unrest (Caldwell 2004). These changes are consistent with the overall
negative associations between conflict and reproductive goals and outcomes that we observe. They
may also explain corollary findings, such as the conflict-related decline in recent fertility among
low-parity women—who are most likely to be unmarried. The policy responses to conflict-related
delays or declines in marriage are not straightforward and will depend on the root cause of these
changes (e.g., changing economic conditions, mobilization of men into armed groups). This
finding nonetheless highlights the broader disruptions to social life caused by insecurity.
We find no significant associations between conflict exposure and either recent child
deaths or contraceptive use, and therefore little evidence of replacement-effect and contraceptivedisruption pathways. These results are consistent with our overall findings since the latter two
mechanisms would lead to increases rather than the observed decrease in fertility. Notably, we did
not empirically assess whether conflict-related increases in sexual violence operated as a
mechanism in our study since the requisite data were not available for a non-trivial share of our

30

analytic sample. However, an analysis of many of the same DHS samples included in our study
shows that conflict exposure increases women’s risk of experiencing intimate partner sexual
violence (Østby 2016). Read in parallel with our findings, this study suggests that conflict may
also reduce reproductive goals and fertility by adversely affecting intra-household dynamics. With
that said, Østby (2016) did not measure the effects of similar violent acts by combatants and other
non-partners in conflict settings, which is an important topic for future research.
While many of our results are robust to a suite of alternative measurement and analytic
decisions, the estimates of conflict effects on recent fertility were noticeably less consistent across
sensitivity tests than our analysis of ideal family size. Conflict effects on recent childbearing may
be weaker than on reproductive goals given heterogeneity in women’s ability to realize the latter
(Tsui et al. 2017; Wulifan et al. 2016). Further supplementary analysis suggests that the
relationship between conflict and recent childbearing is robust among the sub-populations in which
conflict effects were initially strongest. Readers should nonetheless draw conclusions about
conflict and childbearing cautiously, and this relationship should be further examined in future
research. Our results support the conclusion that conflict disrupts reproduction, but in a manner
that will not manifest as “baby booms” or “baby busts.”
Indeed, our findings and limitations therein raise multiple avenues for additional work on
this topic. For one, while we examined variation in conflict effects across major sub-populations
of interest, the harmonized data and methods we employ are well-suited to examine other
socioeconomic and contextual modifiers of conflict effects. Examples include access to
contraceptives, gender inequality, and the historical frequency of conflict (e.g., chronically
insecure vs. recent outbreaks of violence). The heterogeneous results of our country-specific
models in particular suggest attention to macro-level modifiers is merited. By employing our

31

harmonized approach to such questions rather than comparing results of case studies, researchers
can be confident that observed cross-national differences (or similarities) reflect substantive
moderating processes and not methodological artifacts.
Future research should also work to further explore the causal pathways from conflict
exposure to reproductive goals and outcomes. While our analysis of the relationship between
conflict and plausible causal pathways provided valuable evidence to interpret our main findings,
they were nonetheless limited by the cross-sectional nature of the DHS and the limited
socioeconomic data collected in those surveys. Unpacking mechanisms will in part require the use
of rich longitudinal datasets, which allow for the establishment of proper time order of mediation
processes and that include detailed information on household social and economic conditions over
time. Other novel datasets may also be valuable in this regard. For example, the Sexual Violence
in Armed Conflict (SVAC) dataset (Cohen and Nordås 2014) may help demographers understand
the effects of conflict-related sexual violence on reproductive outcomes, which we could not
empirically study here.
Additional work is also needed to explore the temporal dimensions of fertility responses to
conflict, such as whether conflict-induced fertility declines are persistent or followed by postconflict rebounds among affected individuals (Lindstrom and Berhanu 1999; Agadjanian and Prata
2002; Agadjanian et al. 2011). Decomposing the quantum and tempo effects of conflict on fertility
can enhance knowledge of the processes that explain this relationship and improve estimates of
the demographic consequences of conflict over the long run. Panel data are again best suited for
such analysis, but the DHS retrospective birth records can also be leveraged for these purposes.
These and other extensions of the literature can significantly advance knowledge of how conflict
and similar shocks affect human population dynamics. Given the persistently high levels of

32

conflict across sub-Saharan Africa and other regions of the developing world, continued attention
to the second-order consequences of violence will remain necessary to fully understand the impacts
of insecurity, and to enhance policymakers’ and practitioners’ ability to assist conflict-affected
populations.

33

References
Adhikari, P. (2012). Conflict‐induced Displacement, Understanding the Causes of Flight.
American Journal of Political Science, 57(1), 82-89.
Agadjanian, V. & Prata, N. (2002). War, Peace, and Fertility in Angola. Demography,
39(2), 215–31.
Agadjanian, V., Yabiku, T., & Boaventura, C. (2011). Men’s Migration and Women’s Fertility
in Rural Mozambique. Demography, 48(3), 1029–48.
Akresh, R., Lucchetti, L., & Thirumurthy, H. (2012). Wars and Child Health: Evidence from the
Eritrean–Ethiopian Conflict. Journal of Development Economics, 99(2), 330-340.
Armed

Conflict

Location

and

Event

Database

(ACLED).

Available

online

at:

https://www.acleddata.com/data/. Accessed 11 June 2019.
Behrman, J. A. (2015). Does Schooling Affect Women’s Desired Fertility? Evidence from Malawi,
Uganda, and Ethiopia. Demography, 52(3), 787-809.
Berrebi, C. & Ostwald, J. (2015). Terrorism and Fertility: Evidence for a Causal influence of
Terrorism on Fertility. Oxford Economic Papers, 67(1), 63–82.
Blake, J. (1981). Family Size and the Quality of Children. Demography, 18(4), 421-442.
Blanc, A. (2004). The Role of Conflict in the Rapid Fertility Decline in Eritrea and Prospects for
the Future. Studies in Family Planning, 35(4), 236–45.
Bohra-Mishra, P. & Massey, D. S. (2011). Individual Decisions to Migrate During Civil
Conflict. Demography, 48(2), 401-424.
Bongaarts, J. (1990). The Measurement of Unwanted Fertility. Population and Development
Review, 16(3), 487-506.

34

Bongaarts, J. (2001). Fertility and Reproductive Preferences in Post-Transitional
Societies. Population and Development Review, 27, 260-281.
Bongaarts, J. & Casterline, J. (2013). Fertility Transition: Is Sub‐Saharan Africa Different?
Population and Development Review, 38, 153-168.
Boyle, E., King, M., & Sobek, M. (2018). IPUMS-Demographic and Health Surveys: Version 5.
IPUMS and ICF international, 2018.
Brunborg, H. & Urdal, H. (2005). The Demography of Conflict and Violence: An Introduction.
Journal of Peace Research, 42(4), 371-374.
Buhaug, H. & Rød, J. (2006). Local Determinants of African Civil Wars, 1970–2001. Political
Geography, 25(3), 315-335.
Burgert, C. R., Colston, J., Roy, T., & Zachary, B. (2013). Geographic Displacement Procedure
and Georeferenced Data Release Policy for the Demographic and Health Surveys.
Caldwell, J. C. (1976). Toward a Restatement of Demographic Transition Theory. Population
and Development Review, 2(3/4), 321-366.
Caldwell, J. C. (2004). Social Upheaval and Fertility Decline. Journal of Family History, 29(4),
384-406.
Casterline, J. B. & El-Zeini, L. O. (2007). The Estimation of Unwanted Fertility. Demography,
44(4), 729-745.
Cetorelli, V. (2014). The Effect on Fertility of the 2003–2011 War in Iraq. Population and
Development Review, 40(4), 581–604.
Chi, P. C., Bulage, P., Urdal, H., & Sundby, J. (2015). Perceptions of the Effects of Armed
Conflict on Maternal and Reproductive Health Services and Outcomes in Burundi and

35

Northern Uganda: A Qualitative Study. BMC international Health and Human Rights,
15(1), 7.
Clark, S., Koski, A., & Smith‐Greenaway, E. (2017). Recent Trends in Premarital Fertility
Across Sub‐Saharan Africa. Studies in Family Planning, 48(1), 3-22.
Coale, A. (1973) “The Demographic Transition Reconsidered”. Pp. 53-72 in International
Population Conference, Vol. 1. International Union for the Scientific Study of
Population, Liege.
Cohen, D. K., & Nordås, R. (2014). Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict: Introducing the SVAC
Dataset, 1989–2009. Journal of Peace Research, 51(3), 418-428.
Collier, P., Elliot, V. L., Hegre, H., Hoeffler, A., Reynal-Querol, M., & Sambanis, N. (2003).
Breaking the Conflict Trap: Civil War and Development Policy. World Bank Policy
Research Report #26121.
Corno, L., Hildebrandt, N., & Voena, A. (2017). Age of Marriage, Weather Shocks, and the
Direction of Marriage Payments. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
23604.
Czaika, M. & Kis-Katos, K. (2009). Civil Conflict and Displacement: Village-Level Determinants
of Forced Migration in Aceh. Journal of Peace Research, 46(3), 399-418.
Dabalen, A. & Paul, S. (2014). Estimating the Effects of Conflict on Education in Côte d’Ivoire.
The Journal of Development Studies, 50(12), 1631–46.
Dossa, N. I., Zunzunegui, M. V., Hatem, M., & Fraser, W. (2014). Fistula and Other Adverse
Reproductive Health Outcomes Among Women Victims of Conflict‐Related Sexual
Violence: A Population‐Based Cross‐Sectional Study. Birth, 41(1), 5-13.

36

Eck, K. (2012). In Data We Trust? A Comparison of UCDP GED and ACLED Conflict Events
Datasets. Cooperation and Conflict, 47(1), 124-141.
Eloundou-Enyegue, P. M. & Giroux, S. C. (2012). Demographic Change and Rural-Urban
Inequality in Sub-Saharan Africa: Theory and Trends. In International Handbook of Rural
Demography (pp. 125-135). Springer, Dordrecht.
Frye, M. & Bachan, L. (2017). The Demography of Words: The Global Decline in Non-Numeric
Fertility Preferences, 1993–2011. Population Studies, 71(2), 187-209.
Gerland, P., Raftery A., Ševčíková H., Danan Gu, H., Spoorenberg, T., & Alkema, L. (2014).
World Population Stabilization: Unlikely This Century. Science, 346(6206), 234-237.
Ghobarah, H., Huth, P., & Russett, B. (2003). Civil Wars Kill and Maim People—Long after the
Shooting Stops. American Political Science Review, 97(2), 189–202.
Hagan, J., Rymond-Richmond, W., & Palloni, A. (2009). Racial Targeting of Sexual Violence in
Darfur. American Journal of Public Health, 99(8), 1386-1392.
Hayford, S. R. & Agadjanian, V. (2011). Uncertain Future, Non-Numeric Preferences, and the
Fertility Transition: A Case Study of Rural Mozambique. African Population Studies,
25(2), 419.
Hossain, M., Phillips, J. F., & Legrand, T. K. (2007). The Impact of Childhood Mortality on
Fertility in Six Rural Thanas of Bangladesh. Demography, 44(4), 771–784.
Human Rights Watch. (2008). Collective Punishment: War Crimes and Crimes Against Humanity
in the Ogaden Area of Ethiopia’s Somali Regional State. New York, NY: Human Rights
Watch.

37

Islam, A., Ouch, C., Smyth, R., & Choon Wang, L. (2015). The Long-Term Effects of Civil
Conflicts on Education, Earnings, and Fertility: Evidence from Cambodia. Journal of
Comparative Economics., 44(3), 800–820.
Korf, B. (2004). War, Livelihoods and Vulnerability in Sri Lanka. Development and Change,
35(2), 275-295.
Kraehnert, K., Brück, T., Di Maio, M., & Nisticò, R. (2019). The effects of conflict on fertility:
Evidence from the genocide in Rwanda. Demography. 1-34, forthcoming.
Lindskog, E. (2016). Effects of Violent Conflict on Women and Children: Sexual Behavior,
Fertility, and Infant Mortality in Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of Congo. PhD
Thesis, Stockholm University, Department of Sociology.
Lindstrom, D.P. & Berhanu, B. (1999). The Impact of War, Famine, and Economic Decline on
Marital Fertility in Ethiopia. Demography, 36(2), 247.
Lindstrom, D. P. & Kiros, G.-E. (2007). The Impact of Infant and Child Death on Subsequent
Fertility in Ethiopia. Population Research and Policy Review, 26(1), 31–49.
McGinn, T. (2000). Reproductive Health of War-Affected Populations: What Do We Know?
International Family Planning Perspectives, 26(4), 174–180.
McGinn, T., Austin, J., Anfinson, K., Amsalu, R., Casey, S. E., Fadulalmula, S., & Yetter, M.
(2011). Family Planning in Conflict: Results of Cross-Sectional Baseline Surveys in
Three African Countries. Conflict and Health, 5(1), 11. H
Minoiu, C., & Shemyakina, O. (2012). Child Health and Conflict in Côte d’Ivoire. American
Economic Review, 102(3), 294–99.
Nobles, J., Frankenberg, E., & Thomas, D. (2015). The Effects of Mortality on Fertility: Population
Dynamics after a Natural Disaster. Demography, 52(1), 15-38.

38

Olsen, R. (1980). Estimating the Effect of Child Mortality on the Number of Births. Demography,
17(4), 429–443.
Østby, G. (2016). Violence Begets Violence: Armed Conflict and Domestic Sexual Violence in
Sub-Saharan Africa. Paper presented at the Workshop on Sexual Violence and Armed
Conflict, New Research Frontiers, Harvard University. 2-3 September.
Østby, G., Urdal, H., Tollefsen, A. F., Kotsadam, A., Belbo, R., & Ormhaug, C. (2018). Organized
Violence and Institutional Child Delivery: Micro-Level Evidence from Sub-Saharan
Africa, 1989–2014. Demography, 55(4), 1295-1316.
Pallitto, C. C., & O'Campo, P. (2004). The Relationship between Intimate Partner Violence and
Unintended Pregnancy: Analysis of a National Sample from Colombia. International
Family Planning Perspectives, 30(4), 165-173.
Palmer, J. J. & Storeng, K. T. (2016). Building the Nation’s Body: The Contested Role of Abortion
and Family Planning in Post-War South Sudan. Social Science & Medicine, 168, 84-92.
Peterman, A., Palermo, T., & Bredenkamp, C. (2011). Estimates and Determinants of Sexual
Violence Against Women in the Democratic Republic of Congo. American Journal of
Public Health, 101(6), 1060-1067.
Raleigh, C., Linke, A., Hegre, H., & Karlsen, J. (2010). Introducing ACLED: An Armed Conflict
Location and Event Dataset: Special Data Feature. Journal of Peace Research, 47(5), 651660.
Sahn, D. E. & Stifel, D. C. (2003). Urban–Rural Inequality in Living Standards in Africa.
Journal of African Economies, 12(4), 564-597.
Schindler, K. & Brück, T. (2011). The Effects of Conflict on Fertility in Rwanda. World Bank
Washington, DC.

39

Smith-Greenaway, E. & Trinitapoli, J. (2014). Polygynous Contexts, Family Structure, and
Infant Mortality in Sub-Saharan Africa. Demography, 51(2), 341-366.
Smith‐Greenaway, E., & Clark, S. (2018). Women's Marriage Behavior Following a Premarital
Birth in Sub‐Saharan Africa. Journal of Marriage and Family, 80(1), 256-270.
Sundberg, R. & Melander, E. (2013). Introducing the UCDP Georeferenced Event Dataset.
Journal of Peace Research, 50(4), 523-532.
Torche, F. & Shwed, U. (2015). The Hidden Costs of War: Exposure to Armed Conflict and Birth
Outcomes. Sociological Science, 2(27), 558-581.
Torres, A. F. C. & Urdinola B. Piedad (2009). Armed Conflict and Fertility in Colombia, 20002010. Population Research and Policy Review, 38(2), 173-213.
Tsui, A. O., Brown, W., & Li, Q. (2017). Contraceptive practice in sub-Saharan Africa.
Population and Development Review, 43(S1), 166-191.
Urdal, H. (2006). A Clash of Generations? Youth Bulges and Political Violence. International
Studies Quarterly, 50(3), 607-629.
Urdal, H. & Che, C. P. (2013). War and Gender inequalities in Health: The Impact of Armed
Conflict on Fertility and Maternal Mortality. International Interactions, 39(4), 489–510.
Verwimp, P. & van Bavel P (2005). Child Survival and Fertility of Refugees in Rwanda.
European Journal of Population 21(2–3), 271–290.
Williams, N. E. (2013). How community organizations moderate the effect of armed conflict on
migration in Nepal. Population Studies, 67(3), 353-369.
Williams, N.E. (2015). Mixed and Complex Mixed Migration During Armed Conflict:
Multidimensional Empirical Evidence from Nepal. International Journal of Sociology,
45(1), 44-63.

40

Williams, N. E., Ghimire, D. J., Axinn, W. G., Jennings, E. A., & Pradhan, M. S. (2012). A
Micro-Level Event-Centered Approach to Investigating Armed Conflict and Population
Responses. Demography, 49(4), 1521–1546.
Williams, P. D. (2017). Continuity and Change in War and Conflict in Africa. Prism, 6(4), 3245.
Woldemicael, G. (2008). Recent Fertility Decline in Eritrea: Is it a Conflict-Led Transition?
Demographic Research, 18(2), 27–58.
Woldemicael, G. (2010). Declining Fertility in Eritrea Since the Mid-1990s: A Demographic
Response to Military Conflict. International Journal of Conflict and Violence, 4(1), 150.
Wood, E. J. (2014). Conflict-Related Sexual Violence and the Policy Implications of Recent
Research. International Review of the Red Cross, 96(894), 457-478.
World Bank. (2011). World Development Report 2011. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
World Bank. (2018). World Governance Indicators. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
Wulifan, J. K., Brenner, S., Jahn, A., & De Allegri, M. (2016). A Scoping Review on Determinants
of Unmet Need for Family Planning Among Women of Reproductive Age in Low and
Middle Income Countries. BMC Women’s Health, 16(1), 2.
Yeatman, S., Sennott, C., & Culpepper, S. (2013). Young Women’s Dynamic Family Size
Preferences in the Context of Transitioning Fertility. Demography, 50(5), 1715-1737.
Zimmerman, F. J. & Carter, M. R. (2003). Asset Smoothing, Consumption Smoothing and the
Reproduction of Inequality Under Risk and Subsistence Constraints. Journal of
Development Economics, 71(2), 233-260.

41

Tables

Table 1 Description of sample
Variable

Mean

SD

Ideal family size
Birth in prior year (yes)
Conflict (yes)
Age (years)
Education
None
Incomplete primary school
Complete primary school
Children ever born
Type of residence
Urban
Rural
Period
2000-2006
2006-2011
2012-2017
Region
Southern
Eastern
Western
Central

4.77
0.173
0.131
28.77

2.51
9.54

0.313
0.288
0.400
3.03

2.84

0.288
0.712

-

0.383
0.334
0.283

-

0.074
0.582
0.265
0.079

-

Sample size

368,765

Estimates are calculated using DHS person weights. Distribution
by period and region shown for informative purposes only; regression models control for province fixed e↵ects and region-specific
linear time trends. TFR = total fertility rate.

Table 2 Linear regression models predicting ideal family size
Model 1
Variable
Conflict (yes)
Age
Age2
Education (ref = none)
Incomplete primary school
Complete primary school
Children ever born
Type of residence (ref = urban)
Rural

Province fixed e↵ects
Region-specific linear time trend
R2

(SE)
-0.0501
(0.0253)
-0.0259
(0.0035)
0.0005
(0.0001)

*
***
***

-0.3889
(0.0174)
-0.7757
(0.0196)
0.2406
(0.0035)

***

0.4313
(0.0187)

***

***
***

Yes
Yes
0.3450

***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05, †p<0.10. Standard errors
clustered on DHS communities.

Rural

Yes
Yes
0.3454

0.4309
(0.0187)

-0.4220
(0.0184)
-0.8247
(0.0209)
0.2406
(0.0035)

-0.0261
(0.0035)
0.0005
(0.0001)

-0.3648
(0.0624)
0.3378
(0.0559)
0.4084
(0.0596)

***

***

***

***

***

***

***

***

***

Model 2
(SE)

Yes
Yes
0.3455

0.4319
(0.0187)

-0.3888
(0.0174)
-0.7788
(0.0195)
0.2467
(0.0036)

-0.0258
(0.0035)
0.0005
(0.0001)

-0.0603
(0.0071)

0.1088
(0.0279)

***

***

***

***

***

***

***

***

Model 3
(SE)

Yes
Yes
0.3450

0.4406
(0.0196)

-0.3885
(0.0174)
-0.7752
(0.0196)
0.2406
(0.0035)

-0.0259
(0.0035)
0.0005
(0.0001)

-0.0687
(0.0489)

***

***

***

***

***

***

Model 4
(SE)
-0.0191
(0.0285)

***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05, †p<0.10. Standard errors clustered on DHS communities.

Province fixed e↵ects
Region-specific linear time trend
R2

Type of residence (ref = urban)

Children ever born

Complete primary school

Education (ref = none)
Incomplete primary school

Age2

Age

Conflict (yes) * national TFR

Conflict (yes) * rural residence

Conflict (yes) * children ever born

Conflict (yes) * complete primary school

Conflict (yes) * incomplete primary school

Conflict (yes)

Variable

Table 3 Linear regression models predicting ideal family size

Yes
Yes
0.3451

0.4341
(0.0188)

-0.3881
(0.0174)
-0.7749
(0.0196)
0.2407
(0.0035)

-0.0666
(0.0259)
-0.0259
(0.0035)
0.0005
(0.0001)

0.3040
(0.1364)

***

***

***

***

***

***

*

*

Model 5
(SE)

Table 4 Logistic regression models predicting any
birth in prior year
Variable
Conflict (yes)
Age
Age2
Education (ref = none)
Incomplete primary school
Complete primary school
Children ever born
Type of residence (ref = urban)
Rural

Province fixed e↵ects
Region-specific linear time trend
Pseudo R2

Model 6
(SE)
-0.0582
(0.0250)
0.3783
(0.0057)
-0.0091
(0.0001)

*
***
***

-0.0827
(0.0178)
-0.0872
(0.0186)
0.4821
(0.0047)

***

0.1538
(0.0177)

***

***
***

Yes
Yes
0.1537

***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05, †p<0.10. Standard errors clustered on DHS communities.

Rural

Yes
Yes
0.1537

0.1538
(0.0177)

-0.0682
(0.0186)
-0.0741
(0.0195)
0.4821
(0.0047)

0.3783
(0.0057)
-0.0091
(0.0001)

0.0468
(0.0404)
-0.1591
(0.0530)
-0.1263
(0.0473)

***

***

***

***

***

***

**

**

Model 7
(SE)

Yes
Yes
0.1542

0.1515
(0.0177)

-0.0828
(0.0177)
-0.0832
(0.0186)
0.4750
(0.0047)

0.3784
(0.0057)
-0.0091
(0.0001)

0.0757
(0.0072)

-0.2990
(0.0322)

***

***

***

***

***

***

***

***

Model 8
(SE)

Yes
Yes
0.1537

0.1587
(0.0188)

-0.0825
(0.0178)
0.0870
(0.0187)
0.4821
(0.0047)

0.3783
(0.0057)
-0.0091
(0.0001)

-0.0368
(0.0468)

***

***

***

***

***

***

Model 9
(SE)
-0.0390
(0.0353)

***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05, †p<0.10. Standard errors clustered on DHS communities.

Province fixed e↵ects
Region-specific linear time trend
Pseudo R2

Type of residence (ref = urban)

Children ever born

Complete primary school

Education (ref = none)
Incomplete primary school

Age2

Age

Conflict (yes) * national TFR

Conflict (yes) * rural residence

Conflict (yes) * children ever born

Conflict (yes) * complete primary school

Conflict (yes) * incomplete primary school

Conflict (yes)

Variable

Table 5 Logistic regression models predicting any birth in prior year

Yes
Yes
0.1537

0.1533
(0.0177)

-0.0828
(0.0178)
-0.0873
(0.0186)
0.4821
(0.0047)

0.0060
(0.0310)
0.3783
(0.0057)
-0.0091
(0.0001)

-0.0897
(0.1729)

***

***

***

***

***

***

Model 10
(SE)

Table 6 Logistic regression models predicting child deaths,
marital status, and contraceptive use

Variable
Conflict (yes)
Age
Age2
Education (ref = none)
Incomplete primary school
Complete primary school
Children ever born
Type of residence (ref = urban)
Rural

Province fixed e↵ects
Region-specific linear time trend
Pseudo R2

Model 11
Child
death

Model 12
Married

(SE)

(SE)

-0.0324
(0.0412)
0.1552
(0.0070)
-0.0034
(0.0001)

-0.0764
(0.0254)
0.7319
(0.0042)
-0.0103
(0.0001)

-0.0724
(0.0258)
-0.3554
(0.0301)
0.3086
(0.0051)
0.1980
(0.0285)
Yes
Yes
0.1027

***
***

**
***
***

***

-0.3504
(0.0191)
-0.8217
(0.0199)

Model 13
Current
contraception
use
(SE)
**
***
***

***
***

(excluded)
0.4725
(0.0183)
Yes
Yes
0.2934

***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05, †p<0.10. Standard errors clustered
on DHS communities. Contraceptive use defined to include only
modern methods.

***

-0.0097
(0.0277)
0.3722
(0.0047)
-0.0059
(0.0001)
0.5462
(0.0193)
0.8448
(0.0215)
0.1497
(0.0034)
-0.4396
(0.0199)
Yes
Yes
0.1784

***
***

***
***
***

***

Figures

Figure 1

Map of DHS cluster locations in the analytic sample

Panel A

Figure 2

Panel B

Marginal effects of conflict on ideal family size, by parity (panel A) and total fertility rate of women’s country of residence (panel B)

Panel A

Figure 3

Panel B

Marginal effects of conflict on childbearing in prior 12 months, by parity (panel A) and total fertility rate of women’s country of residence (panel B)

Online Supplementary Information

Table A1 Distribution of sample and conflict
exposure by country
Country

Proportion of
sample

Proportion
exposed
to
conflict

Angola
Benin
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Dem. Rep. Congo
Eswatini
Ethiopia
Ghana
Guinea
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Namibia
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Tanzania
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe

0.037
0.012
0.028
0.041
0.019
0.022
0.010
0.096
0.022
0.017
0.033
0.030
0.014
0.039
0.155
0.052
0.034
0.077
0.024
0.027
0.016
0.046
0.060
0.045
0.042

0.010
0.000
0.000
0.735
0.006
0.292
0.202
0.101
0.085
0.098
0.300
0.153
0.334
0.112
0.029
0.008
0.031
0.190
0.052
0.033
0.085
0.120
0.209
0.156
0.148

Sample size

368,765

Estimates are calculated using DHS person weights.
Conflict is meaured using the definition used in the
main model specifications.

Table A2 Linear regression models predicting
ideal family size
Variable
Conflict (yes)
Age
Age2
Education (ref = none)
Incomplete primary school
Complete primary school
Children ever born
Type of residence (ref = urban)
Rural

Sample

Province fixed e↵ects
Region-specific linear time trend
R2
Sample size

Model A1
(SE)
-0.0520
(0.0253)
-0.0247
(0.0036)
0.0005
(0.0001)
-0.3800
(0.0180)
-0.7602
(0.0202)
0.2438
(0.0036)
0.4260
(0.0192)

Model A2
(SE)
*
***
***

***
***
***

***

Excludes
countries
without
conflict
Yes
Yes
0.3476
353,946

***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05, †p<0.10. Standard
errors clustered on DHS communities.

-0.0669
(0.0259)
-0.0231
(0.0041)
0.0004
(0.0001)

*
***
***

-0.4165
(0.0210)
-0.7499
(0.0236)
0.2464
(0.0040)

***

0.4024
(0.0227)

***

Excludes
regions
without
conflict
Yes
Yes
0.3500
253,008

***
***

Table A3 Logistic regression models predicting any birth
in prior year
Variable
Conflict (yes)
Age
Age2
Education (ref = none)
Incomplete primary school
Complete primary school
Children ever born
Type of residence (ref = urban)
Rural

Sample

Province fixed e↵ects
Region-specific linear time trend
Pseudo R2
Sample size

Model A3
(SE)
-0.0594
(0.0251)
0.3792
(0.0058)
-0.0091
(0.0001)
-0.0775
(0.0181)
-0.0799
(0.0191)
0.4842
(0.0048)
0.1503
(0.0183)
Excludes
countries
without
conflict
Yes
Yes
0.1541
353,946

Model A4
(SE)
*
***
***

***
***
***

***

-0.0673
(0.0253)
0.3761
(0.0068)
-0.0090
(0.0001)

**
***
***

-0.0824
(0.0209)
-0.0905
(0.0222)
0.4804
(0.0056)

***

0.1268
(0.0217)

***

Excludes
regions
without
conflict
Yes
Yes
0.1513
253,008

***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05, †p<0.10. Standard errors clustered on DHS communities.

***
***

Table A4 Coefficient estimates from country-specific
linear regression models predicting ideal family size
Country
Angola
Burundi
Cameroon
Dem. Rep. Congo
Eswatini
Ethiopia
Ghana
Guinea
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Namibia
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Tanzania
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe

0.5569
-0.0025
1.4915
-0.3398
-0.1159
0.0293
0.0571
-0.2233
-0.0982
0.0661
-0.3018
-0.2484
-0.0295
-0.0822
-0.2936
-0.1209
0.3104
-0.4171
-0.0494
-0.1685
0.0577
0.1414
-0.0895

*
***
†

†
*

*
†
*
*
*

(SE)
(0.2669)
(0.0464)
(0.2582)
(0.1741)
(0.1006)
(0.1825)
(0.1111)
(0.1797)
(0.0515)
(0.0756)
(0.2548)
(0.1152)
(0.0609)
(0.3624)
(0.1382)
(0.0669)
(0.1535)
(0.1937)
(0.1109)
(0.0755)
(0.0618)
(0.0864)
(0.0829)

***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05, †p<0.10. Standard errors clustered on DHS communities. Models control for all
variables included in the main specification but replace the
region-specific linear time trend within a linear time trend
for countries with more than one sample in our data. By
default, no time trend is included in models of countries
for which there is only a single sample. Burkina Faso and
Benin omitted due to a lack of conflict-exposed cases.

Table A5 Coefficient estimates from country-specific logistic regression models predicting any birth in prior year
Country
Angola
Burundi
Cameroon
Dem. Rep. Congo
Eswatini
Ethiopia
Ghana
Guinea
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Namibia
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Tanzania
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe

-0.2181
-0.0258
-0.2471
0.0210
-0.1201
-0.1066
0.0449
0.1477
0.0124
-0.1361
0.3501
-0.0953
-0.0734
-0.0594
-0.5181
-0.1569
0.2546
-0.3875
-0.0514
0.0402
-0.0815
-0.1256
-0.1450

*
*
†

(SE)
(0.1711)
(0.0653)
(0.5754)
(0.0970)
(0.2786)
(0.0971)
(0.1809)
(0.1130)
(0.0934)
(0.2212)
(0.2224)
(0.1878)
(0.1470)
(0.2001)
(0.2025)
(0.0695)
(0.1659)
(0.2205)
(0.1504)
(0.0939)
(0.0608)
(0.1222)
(0.2069)

***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05, †p<0.10. Standard errors
clustered on DHS communities. Models control for all variables included in the main specification but replace the regionspecific linear time trend within a linear time trend for countries with more than one sample in our data. By default, no
time trend is included in models of countries for which there is
only a single sample. Burkina Faso and Benin omitted due to
a lack of conflict-exposed cases.

Table A6 Logistic regression models predicting current contraceptive use
Variable
Conflict (yes)
Age
Age2
Education (ref = none)
Incomplete primary school
Complete primary school
Children ever born
Type of residence (ref = urban)
Rural
Sample

Province fixed e↵ects
Region-specific linear time trend
Pseudo R2
Sample size

Model A5
(SE)
-0.0321
(0.0294)
0.4182
(0.0050)
-0.0067
(0.0001)
0.5644
(0.0215)
0.8840
(0.0237)
0.1983
(0.0037)

***
***

***
***
***

-0.4267 ***
(0.0210)
Excludes
women who
gave birth in
prior year
Yes
Yes
0.1925
305,268

***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05, †p<0.10. Standard errors clustered on DHS communities. Contraceptive use
defined to include only modern methods.

Table A7 Logistic regression models predicting unmet need for family planning
Variable
Conflict (yes)
Age
Age2
Education (ref = none)
Incomplete primary school
Complete primary school
Children ever born
Type of residence (ref = urban)
Rural

Province fixed e↵ects
Region-specific linear time trend
Pseudo R2

Model A6
(SE)
-0.0375
(0.0340)
-0.1199
(0.0068)
0.0015
(0.0001)

***
***

-0.3982
(0.0204)
-0.8053
(0.0237)
0.0892
(0.0046)

***

0.4733
(0.0258)

***

***
***

Yes
Yes
0.1577

***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05, †p<0.10. Sample limited to women who report a need for family planning (N
=157,123) Standard errors clustered on DHS communities.

Table A8 Logistic regression models predicting desire for an additional child
Variable
Conflict (yes)
Age
Age2
Education (ref = none)
Incomplete primary school
Complete primary school
Children ever born
Type of residence (ref = urban)
Rural

Province fixed e↵ects
Region-specific linear time trend
Pseudo R2

Model A7
(SE)
-0.0867
(0.0254)
0.1716
(0.0051)
-0.0041
(0.0001)

**
***
***

-0.2559
(0.0181)
-0.2574
(0.0196)
0.3299
(0.0041)

***

0.2205
(0.0200)

***

***
***

Yes
Yes
0.2935

***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05, †p<0.10. Standard errors clustered on DHS communities.

definition = all

**

**

†

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.3451

(0.0217)

-0.0721

**

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.3453

-0.1279
(0.0236)

***

Model A11
(SE)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.3451

-0.0965
(0.0235)

***

Model A12

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.3450

(0.0248)

-0.0346

Model A13
(SE)

***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05, †p<0.10. Standard errors clustered on DHS communities. All conflict types = battles, remote violence,
violence against civilians, riots, and protests. UCDP = Uppsala Conflict Data Program. Sample of Model A2 restricted to women within
10 years of first marriage (sample size = 116,647).

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.3451

(0.0239)

-0.0722

**

Model A14

***

Model A15
(SE)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.3451

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.3451

-0.0125
(0.0345)
-0.0648
(0.0386)
0.0212
(0.0573)
-0.1927
(0.0685)
-0.1244
(0.0424)

Model A10
(SE)

Controls
Province fixed e↵ects
Region-specific linear time trend
R2

†

Model A9
(SE)

-0.1480
(0.0378)
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.3226

(0.0343)

-0.0661

Model A8

Conflict (yes), alt. data = UCDP

Conflict (yes), alt. time period = 48
mo.

Conflict (yes), alt. time period = 24
mo.

Conflict (yes), alt. bu↵er = 100km

Conflict (yes), alt. bu↵er = 50km

Conflict (yes), alt.
types

5+

4

3

2

Conflict (yes), alt. sample = married
<10 years
Number of conflict events (ref = 0)
1

Variable

Table A9 Linear regression models predicting ideal family size

5+

4

3

2

1

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.1537

-0.0848
(0.0343)
-0.0561
(0.0394)
-0.0119
(0.0532)
-0.1060
(0.0820)
-0.0122
(0.0471)

*

Model A16
(SE)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.1536

-0.0208
(0.0205)

Model A17
(SE)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.1537

-0.0304
(0.0180)

†

Model A18
(SE)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.1536

0.0026
(0.0183)

Model A19

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.1537

-0.0453
(0.0258)

†

Model A20
(SE)

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.1537

-0.0361
(0.0234)

Model A21

***p<0.001, **p<0.01, *p<0.05, †p<0.10. Standard errors clustered on DHS communities. All conflict types =
battles, remote violence, violence against civilians, riots, and protests. UCDP = Uppsala Conflict Data Program.

Controls
Province fixed e↵ects
Region-specific linear time trend
Pseudo R2

Conflict (yes), alt. data = UCDP

Conflict (yes), alt. time period = 48 mo.

Conflict (yes), alt. time period = 24 mo.

Conflict (yes), alt. bu↵er = 100km

Conflict (yes), alt. bu↵er = 50km

Conflict (yes), alt. definition = all types

Number of conflict events (ref = 0)

Variable

Table A10 Logistic regression models predicting any birth in prior year

Yes
Yes
Yes
0.1536

0.0014
(0.0362)

Model A22
(SE)

