Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number 4. December 2018
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.28

Pp.380 -391

Indonesian Teachers’ Perception on the Implementation of Lesson Study:
Exploring Teachers’ Awareness of Pedagogical Knowledge

Siti Aimah
English Education Department, Faculty of Foreign Language and Culture
Universitas Muhammadiyah Semarang, Indonesia
Bambang Purwanto
English Literature Department, Faculty of Languages and Arts
Universitas Negeri Semarang, Indonesia

Abstract
This study aims to know Indonesian teachers’ perception of the implementation of lesson
study. A case study was used as the design of this study with six teachers of Islamic
Elementary School in Semarang, Indonesia, were chosen by using purposive sampling. A
questionnaire with the Likert Scale of 1 to 4 was distributed to the respondents after
implementing lesson study. A deep interview was also given to the teachers to explore their
awareness of pedagogical knowledge. The quantitative data were analyzed statistically and
they were used to support the qualitative data got from the interview. The result showed
that the teachers had a new perspective in the pedagogical context in which a preparation
of teaching could be prepared well by formulating and designing the lesson collaboratively
with the other teachers to achieve the learning goal. Through the intensive collaboration
with the teachers, they were more aware to create the effective and meaningful teaching to
the students. They knew how to teach the students through the instructional strategies
designed.
Keywords: awareness, collaboration, lesson study, pedagogical knowledge, teachers’
perception
Cite as: Aimah, S., & Purwanto, B. (2018). Indonesian Teachers’ Perception on the Implementation of
Lesson Study: Exploring Teachers’ Awareness of Pedagogical Knowledge. Arab World English Journal,
9 (4), 380 -391. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.28

380

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Indonesian Teachers’ Perception on the Implementation

Aimah &Purwanto

Introduction
What did we teach to the students? How was it taught? Did we create a positive climate for
learning? Did we stimulate the students to explore their ability in learning? How were &
the students’
responses?
Purwanto Did we get feedback from the students toward our teaching? Those questions are
commonly required by teachers in reflecting their own teaching and learning. However, not all the
teachers are aware to do self-reflection even though it benefits them to improve their teaching.
Clarke (2008) states that reflection on teaching goals, teaching methods, the level of students’
ability, etc. basically promotes the teachers to create an effective teaching. Through reflection,
they can identify the things related to what they have taught such as the mastery of teaching
material, teaching practice, the students’ learning styles, and the strategies that would be used to
counter the problems of teaching (Ibrahim, Surif, Arshad, & Mokhtar, 2012). In fact, some of the
teachers are reluctant to learn with the others through interaction with their peers. They are
ashamed that their problems of teaching will be identified by the others. They think that they will
be regarded as unexperienced teachers who could not counter the problems.
Basically, each teacher faces his/her own problem of teaching. The problems
commonly deal with how to handle the class, how to make the students more active, how
to teach the students with the simplest way to understand, how to simplify the material, and
how to create a meaningful learning (Munijah, conveyed in Workshop of Lesson Study on
March 24, 2018). Those problems are virtually related to pedagogical content knowledge
in which it is an amalgam of teacher’s pedagogical knowledge and her/his understanding
of the content so that it influences the way she/he teaches (Jang, Guan, & Hsieh, 2009).
Pedagogical content knowledge (PCK) which is firstly introduced by Shulman (1987) at
Stanford University is the basic knowledge that the teacher should have pertaining to
teaching. Dealing with the knowledge of pedagogy, it covers pedagogical techniques,
knowledge of students’ prior knowledge, and knowledge of teaching.
Considering about the demands of the government in Indonesia, the teacher needs
to possess four competencies that cover pedagogy, professional, social, and personal (The
Regulation of The Minister of National Education No. 6 Year 2007). It means that to be a
teacher, he/she could not choose only one of them, but all must be mastered in order to
implement the instructional practices in the classroom. Those competencies are very
crucial because they are related each other. When the teacher wants to teach in a classroom,
surely she/he must have her/his pedagogical knowledge that includes the ability to prepare
the needs of teaching including designing the scenario of learning which is very basic need
to prepare (Hudson, 2007; Matanluk, Johari, & Matanluk, 2013). Through the scenario of
learning, she/he must consider what should be done in the first five minute in the classroom,
what should be told to the students, what questions should be posed, what activities should
be explored from the students, what method of learning should be used, etc. (Hudson,
2007). It is not a simple thing to do by the teacher because the teacher should consider
carefully to avoid ineffective teaching.
According to Lenhart (2010), pedagogical knowledge is the knowledge of how to
teach. It means that without having the knowledge of pedagogy, the teacher could not
prepare his/her teaching well. Pedagogical knowledge is used to support the teacher’s
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

381

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Indonesian Teachers’ Perception on the Implementation

Aimah &Purwanto

performance of teaching and learning process, and it needs to be built through the
experiences of teaching practices in the classroom by facing students’ learning problems
with various different characteristics (Aimah, Ifadah, & Bharati, 2017). By knowing
& the
students’
problems of learning, the teacher is expected to counter the students’ problems
Purwanto
of learning, and manage the class well. It is in line with what is expressed by Syahruddin,
Ernawati, Ede, Rahman, Sihes, & Daud (2013) that the teacher’s pedagogical knowledge
could be seen from his/her ability in managing teaching and learning process from planning
to evaluation stages.
Dealing with the phenomena above, to cope with the problems in order to be
effective, the teachers can make an interaction with their peers to learn (Bocala, 2015). The
interaction can be through participation in groups facilitated in a lesson study in which each
participant knows the interactions that should be made. The phases of lesson study include
preparation, implementation, and reflection (Lewis, 2002). In the phase of preparation, the
teachers should prepare and provide their lesson plan to be implemented in the class
collaboratively (Matanluk, Johari, & Matanluk, 2013) so that they could help the students
in learning a particular topic easily (Baba, 2007; Fernandez & Yoshida, 2004; Lewis,
2002). Through collaboration, the teachers have a chance to share their own experiences
of planning and conducting their teaching in the classroom which also encourage them to
have the knowledge to enhance their teaching. This activity also enables them to do
reflection to what they have done in their teaching so that it helps them in strengthening
their pedagogical skills (Shimahara, 1998). The teacher’s preparation encouraging joint
inquiry, teaching practice, and reflection to the classroom instruction is to result the
professional growth (Kotelawa, 2012; Rock & Wilson, 2005).
There are some previous studies which are similar with this study. However, most
of the research only focused on the study of Science and Mathematics. Matanluk, Johari,
& Matanluk (2013) investigated the teachers and students’ perception about the
implementation of lesson study. The result showed that they had a positive perception
towards the implementation of lesson study. Further, it encouraged the teachers to stimulate
the students’ participation in the classroom. Inprasitha & Changsri (2014) concerned with
the teachers’ beliefs about teaching practices in the context of lesson study and open
approach. Teachers’ beliefs of teaching influenced their very own teaching practice. Lesson
study also allowed the teachers a space to provide the students to encounter their problems
of learning.
Considering the gap with the previous studies, this study aims to know Indonesian
teachers’ perception about the implementation of lesson study. Further, it also explores
their awareness of pedagogical knowledge.
Literature Review
In the context of teaching, pedagogical awareness is very crucial for teachers in which they
need to notice and interpret the aspects of classroom practice, and make the decisions of
something occurs in the classroom. Without having pedagogical awareness, teachers will
get difficulties in identifying and reflecting their own teaching including what needs to be
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

382

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Indonesian Teachers’ Perception on the Implementation

Aimah &Purwanto

repaired from classroom practice. Considering the important of awareness as a part of
teacher knowledge that needs to be possessed by teachers, it is then considered as a crucial
factor in implementing instructional practice. It is in alignment with Potari (2013),
&
awareness
Purwanto is related to teacher knowledge and is rooted in the context of the actual
classroom practice.
Teacher knowledge, according to Guerriero (n.d) deals with the process of teaching
and learning, the concept of knowledge, as well as the way the teachers transfer their
knowledge in the practice of teaching. Similarly, Fernandez (2014) mentions that teacher
knowledge is related to skills that needs to know to teach. Shulman (1987) identifies
teacher knowledge which not only focuses on the content, but also teacher’s ability in
teaching. It is then, well known with pedagogical knowledge.
Pedagogical knowledge deals with knowledge of teaching process and methods
used by the teachers including knowledge of teaching preparation, knowledge about
classroom management, knowledge of developing lesson plan, knowledge of teaching
methods and strategies, knowledge of students characteristics, and knowledge of designing
learning evaluation (Aimah, Ifadah & Bharati, 2017; Aksu, Metin & Konyalioğlu, 2014;
Mishra & Koehler, 2006). It is in alignment with Gess-Newsome (1999) that pedagogical
knowledge deals with classroom organization and management, instructional models and
strategies, and classroom communication and discourse. Further, it is believed that
pedagogical knowledge helps to guide teachers’ decision and action in the instructional
practices.
Pedagogical knowledge is necessary knowledge for teachers to implement teaching
and learning process in the classroom. The knowledge encompasses knowledge about
understanding how students learn, planning an instruction of learning, assessing students,
and managing the classroom. Teachers who have deep pedagogical knowledge will
understand how the students construct knowledge, acquire skills, and develop their positive
minds of learning (Aksu, Metin & Konyalioğlu, 2014).
Therefore, it is required by teachers to have the awareness of pedagogy. To possess
pedagogical awareness, it could be facilitated through lesson study. Lewis (2009) defines
lesson study as:
a professional approach in which teachers work together to formulate goals for
student learning and long-term development; collaboratively plan a ‘research
lesson’ designed to bring to life these goals; conduct the lesson in a classroom,
with one team member teaching and others gathering evidence on student
learning and development; and discuss the evidence gathered during the lesson,
using it to improve the lesson, the unit, and instruction more generally (p. 95).
Lesson study provides teachers to make a community learning in which they collaborate together
to formulate the goal of learning, design a creative lesson plan, and implement it into an
instructional practice. In designing the lesson plan, the appropriate strategies are required to create
an effective teaching in which it is based on students’ needs in order to create an effective teaching
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

383

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Indonesian Teachers’ Perception on the Implementation

Aimah &Purwanto

(Aimah, Ifadah & Bharati, 2016). Those strategies are achieved through collaboration between
them intensively (Bocala, 2015) in which it enables to them to share their knowledge and
experiences of teaching including how to counter the students’ learning problems. &
Purwanto

When preparing/designing their lesson plan, teachers predict students’ reaction to specific
activities in the classroom and it requires them to reflect on their teaching approaches (Coenders
& Verhoef, 2018). Through the stages of “plan, do, and see” (Hurd & Musso, 2005), lesson study
emphasizes on student learning. Therefore, teachers are expected to develop their pedagogical
knowledge (known PCK) as proposed by Shulman. In this case, teachers need to understand how
students learn, how to plan an instruction of learning, how to assess students’ learning, and how
to manage the classroom effectively (Aksu, Metin & Konyalioğlu, 2014).
Methods
In this study, a case study was implemented. Six teachers from fourteen at Islamic
Elementary School, Indonesia, were chosen using purposive sampling. The consideration
of selecting the participants was based on the length of their experiences of teaching, the
complexity of the various teaching and learning problems, and the recommendation of the
principal as well. Two instruments were used to obtain the data: questionnaire and
interview. The questionnaire was distributed to the teachers to examine their perception
about the implementation of lesson study in their class. The questionnaire consisted of 15
questions, asking about teachers’ pedagogical knowledge involving the preparation that
they have to set up before teaching. The Likert Scale was used in order to make the
objective answers of their perception with the range of 1 (strongly disagree), 2 (disagree),
3 (agree) to 4 (strongly agree). The quantitative data then were analyzed statistically to see
the teachers’ perception on the implementation of lesson study. To support the quantitative
data, deep interview was also given to support the quantitative data given through
questionnaire.
Findings and Discussions
Teachers’ Perception on the Implementation of Lesson Study
In examining the teachers’ perception on lesson study through questionnaire, it was found that
the implementation of lesson study helped them much in improving their pedagogical knowledge.
The questionnaire consisted of 15 questions that covered some questions pertaining to the ability
of choosing the appropriate method of learning utilizing the learning media, managing the
classroom, evaluating the teaching and learning process in the classroom, mastering the material
taught, knowing how to teach, solving the contextual problems of learning, and communicating
with the students interactively. The result of the questionnaire pertaining to the implementation
of lesson study could be seen in the following table.
Table 1 Teachers’ Perception on the Implementation of Lesson Study
Number of Teachers
Average
Category
6
3.85
Very Good
Based on Table 1, the average of the teachers’ perception on lesson study shows a
good response that is 3.85 (very good). The teachers agreed that lesson study helped them
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

384

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Indonesian Teachers’ Perception on the Implementation

Aimah &Purwanto

in preparing their teaching. If they usually only prepared the materials that would be taught
to the students from the textbook used, through lesson study they were trained to prepare
from designing the lesson plan (it was usually obeyed by them because of their overloads
&
of Purwanto
teaching hours) that covered the detailed activities from the beginning of the study until
the end. It was done in order to be easy for the teachers involved in a group of learning in
lesson study in measuring each point within it.
In the phase of planning, the teachers together with the others collaborated actively
in formulating the scenario of learning. All the teachers involved in a lesson study team
discussed the stages of conducting teaching and learning process in the classroom. They
shared their experience of teaching in the stages of planning to enhance the quality of
teaching. The teacher not only discussed with the others (observers) what must be written
there, but also simulating the scenario of learning created in front of others. Through the
activity, it could not be avoided to make some revisions of what they have designed.
Selecting the use of appropriate media and method of learning which was based on the
students’ problems and characteristics was also important to help the teacher in achieving
the goal of learning. However, dealing with this point, the teacher must be careful in
selecting and implementing the certain technique in the classroom because there were some
illiterate students. It means that they were needed to be assisted intensively during teaching
and learning in order they comprehended what they were studying.
Facing the various students with the different style of learning, made the teachers
to consider the level of which the difficulty of the materials taught. They had to simplify
the materials in order to be easy to understand. Not only knowing what to teach, the
important point for the teacher in teaching is also about how to teach it (Lenhart, 2010).
That’s why in lesson study, the phase of planning is regarded as a crucial factor in
determining whether or not the teaching and learning process will be successful (Rock &
Wilson, 2005). All the participants of a group learning could collaborate to discuss the
teachers’ planning dream, and the purpose of designing a lesson plan in order to meet the
students’ needs. Through this activity, the teachers would grow professionally. They would
understand the students better.
Teachers’ Awareness of Pedagogical Knowledge
Lesson study provides a chance to the teachers to be professional teachers (Rock & Wilson,
2005). Through the stages of lesson study, the teachers got a positive impact on their
instructional practices to be more effective. Their awareness of pedagogical knowledge
was well-built. It could be seen when they had to be careful in preparing their teaching and
anticipating some possibilities that would occur to their students in the classroom. Through
the stage of planning, Bocala (2015), and Kotelawala (2012) explain that the teachers must
formulate the learning goals by implementing instructional strategies that have been
discussed collaboratively in a group of learning. The teachers also selected the materials
that must be based on the goal of learning and the students’ needs. One of the teachers,
Mrs. Ika told the benefit that she got pertaining to her pedagogical knowledge from the
implementation of lesson study in her school.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

385

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Indonesian Teachers’ Perception on the Implementation

Aimah &Purwanto

Sebenarnya banyak manfaat yang saya peroleh melalui kegiatan lesson study ini
seperti bagaimana menentukan tujuan pembelajaran yang harus dicapai. Untuk
mencapai tersebut, langkah-langkah yang harus dilakukan oleh guru harus jelas
&
melalui kegiatan seperti apa di dalam kelas, dari apa yang saya lakukan, dan apa
Purwanto
yang dilakukan siswa, bagaimana sikap mereka, dan lain-lain.
Kemudian...melalui dalam pemilihan media pembelajaran sampai juga harus
dibahas bersama-sama untuk melihat apakah media tersebut cocok atau tidak. Itu
semua menunjang pengetahuan pedagogis saya. Namun sayangnya, nampaknya
tidak mudah untuk selalu berkumpul bersama...Jadwal kami yang berbeda-beda
membuat kami susah untuk berkumpul dan berdiskusi bersama.
Actually, many benefits that I have gained through the activity of lesson study
such as how to determine the learning objectives that must be achieved. To
achieve it, the steps that must be done by the teacher must be clear through what
activities in the classroom, from what I do, and what students do, how they have
to behave, and so on. Then ... through the selection of learning media, it must also
be discussed together to see whether it is suitable or not. Those promoted my
pedagogical knowledge. But unfortunately, it didn't seem easy to gather... Our
different schedules made it difficult for us to gather and discuss together with
others (First Interview, 20180407)
Those conditions are in line with what Baba (2007) says that in a process of planning, the
teachers begin their activities by finding and selecting the materials that are relevant to the
goal of learning and refining the design of learning based on the actual needs of the students
to be written in a lesson plan. Those are required to promote teachers’ pedagogical
knowledge to become professional teachers. The similar view about selecting the material
was also expressed by Mrs. Endah as follows.
Lesson study ternyata sampai membahas tentang materi yang akan diajarkan
kepada siswa apa saja ya? Apakah siswa nanti dapat memahami materi yang
diajarkan atau tidak, apakah materi tersebut sudah disederhanakan sesuai
dengan kemampuan siswa atau belum, dan bagaimana cara mengajarkannya.
Benar-benar sangat detail.
Lesson study discussed what material would be taught to students, didn’t it?
Whether or not the students will able to understand the material taught, and the
material has been simplified based on the students' abilities, and how to teach it.
It’s extremely very detail (Third Interview, 20180428).
Not only about how to select and simplify the material, the important point deals with how
to teach the material to the students as expressed by Mrs. Endah. It is also in line with
Lenhart (2010) in which pedagogical knowledge is about how to teach the material to the
students. In this case, Shulman (1987) highlights that the teachers should represent and
formulate the material in order to be comprehensible to the students.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

386

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Indonesian Teachers’ Perception on the Implementation

Aimah &Purwanto

Mrs. Uswatun who was one of the observers also underlined some points about
designing the instructional strategies, discussing and formulating the indicator of the
observation form used by the other teachers whose role as observers to observe& the
students’
activities in the classroom. In this case, the teachers must think what the students
Purwanto
thought about the material or how their reaction was, what problems usually faced by the
students and their approaches to the problems. That’s why in lesson study cycle, the
teachers illustrated the activities designed in a lesson plan and facilitated them with the
ability in solving their problems through the activities explored.
Kelebihan dari lesson study ini adalah bahwa kita juga harus mampu memprediksi
sikap dan respon yang ditunjukkan oleh siswa seperti apa, termasuk dari teknik
tertentu yang kita gunakan dalam pembelajaran, kita pun juga diharapkan dapat
membayangkan seperti apa sikap-sikap positif mereka. Kondisi ini tentu juga akan
lebih mempermudah para observer untuk mengamati sikap siswa meskipun yang
terjadi sering berbeda.
The advantage of lesson study is that we also have to be able to predict what
students’ attitudes and responses to teaching and learning process, including from
a certain technique that we use, we are also expected to be able to imagine what
their positive attitudes look like. This condition will certainly make it easier for
the observers to observe students' attitudes even though what happens is often
different (First Interview, 20180407).
On different occasion, Mrs. Lusiana also shared a similar view:
Sangat beruntung saya ikut kegiatan lesson study ini. Pengetahuan pedagogis
saya semakin bertambah. Mengajar anak-anak SD sangat lah tidak mudah. Sikap
yang mereka tunjukkan juga biasanya cukup beragam. Ketika saya mencoba
menenangkan siswa pada bagian kanan, yang kiri rame sendiri. Yang kiri
ditertibkan, yang kanan malah menyusul... tapi setidaknya kita dapat melihat
bahwa ada yang salah tidak dengan bagaimana kita mengajar? Sehingga siswa
menunjukkan sikap seperti itu? Mengamati satu per satu siswa dalam satu kelas
tentu juga tidak mudah dan tidak dapat dilakukan oleh satu orang saja. Di sini
kita belajar mengamati apa yang menyebabkan siswa bersikap seperti itu?
Senang sih... tapi juga agak capek...
I was very lucky to join this lesson study. My pedagogical knowledge improved.
Teaching students in the Elementary School is not easy. The attitude they show is
usually quite diverse. When I am trying to handle the students in the right side,
the students in the left one will make noisy then. The students in the left are put
in order, those in the right follow them in the left one as well ... But at least we
can see whether or not there was something wrong with what we had taught that
affected the students to show their attitude. Observing each student in one class
was certainly not easy and could not be done by only one person. Here we could
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

387

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Indonesian Teachers’ Perception on the Implementation

Aimah &Purwanto

learn to observe what caused the students to behave like that. I am so happy ... but
also feel a little bit tired … (Second Interview, 20180419).
&

The
different situation shown by one of the teachers who objected with the process of
Purwanto
lesson study which was very detail in each stage. The teacher had the responsibility to
formulate the initial lesson plan to be discussed with the other teachers in a group of
learning. It should also have covered the problems that must be countered and what
strategies used to. Based on the result of discussion, the teacher must also be ready to revise
the lesson plan. This condition is not always acceptable to teachers who have quite a lot of
teaching hours. Mrs. Rahayu, for example said that:
Saya kan memiliki jam mengajar yang cukup banyak. Tugas-tugas siswa juga
harus dikoreksi. Kalau harus kemudian berkali-kali membuat lesson plan
kemudian merevisi dan seterusnya, saya kok tidak sanggup.
I had a lot of teaching hours. The students’ worksheet must also be checked. If I
have to make a lesson plan many times and then revise it and so on, I am afraid I
could join this activity (Second Interview, 20180419).
Dealing with the condition above, in conducting lesson plan, Fernandez (2002) states that
the teachers should provide adequate time to meet and discuss the lesson plan designed
and/or developed collaboratively. The inadequate time had by the teachers in lesson study
will only make them isolated as they have to make it individually (Cohan & Honigsfeld,
2006). Another problem faced by the members of lesson study is about the Indonesian
culture which is very different from Japan in implementing lesson study. Not all teachers
are confident and comfortable to be observed by the others in open class. Some of them
thought that being observed by the others made them to think that they would be justified
whether or not their performance was good. This view was also shared by Mrs. Rohmah:
Saya tidak bisa membayangkan jika mengajar di kelas nanti diamati oleh guru
sebanyak ini. Bisa-bisa saya malah ngewel (baca: gemetaran). Berkumpul di awal
seperti ini saja sudah riweh (baca: repot) karena jadwal harus diatur, dan banyak
hal yang harus dibahas dan direvisi.
I could not imagine if I had to teach in the classroom and many observers joined
to observe my class. I would be trembling then. Gathering at the beginning of the
process of lesson study was already complicated because the schedule must be
arranged, and many things to be discussed and revised (Third Interview,
20180428).
Observing the teaching and learning process commonly makes the class looks like unnatural. The
students did not feel free to behave. They felt that their attitude was monitored by another teacher.
That’s why the teacher whose class would be observed, asked the students to be good and active
students. This condition was also explained by some of the teachers joining the lesson study.
However, to anticipate the condition, Mrs. Uswatun highlighted that lesson study should be
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

388

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Indonesian Teachers’ Perception on the Implementation

Aimah &Purwanto

implemented continuously in any class. Both the teacher and the students will get used to be
observed and they will look natural for joining teaching and learning process as usual even though
there are some observers in the class.
&
Purwanto

Dealing with the different culture in implementing lesson study, for some teachers who
did not have adequate time, and/or their inconvenience in collaborating to the others, they
preferred to design it individually to be discussed it with the others in the next time. It was effective
for those who were busy in having a lot of teaching hours. The characteristic of Indonesian
teachers who tends to work individually in planning their lesson is also similar with what Nami,
Marandi, & Sotoudehnama (2015) say that Iranian teachers tends to plan their lesson individually.
It was caused by individualist culture of teaching that make them difficult to collaborate.
Conclusion and Suggestion
Indonesian teachers’ perception on the implementation of lesson study shows a good
response (3.85) with the category of very good. Lesson study which is a model of
professional development in teacher education through a collaborative learning helps them
in maintaining their pedagogical knowledge. Pedagogical knowledge relatively depicts a
clear description to teachers’ preparation of teaching (Kotelawa, 2012). The
implementation of lesson study attempts to promote teachers’ preparation of teaching
better. Teaching preparation deals with the awareness of pedagogical knowledge that must
be possessed by the teacher. Without having the awareness of pedagogical knowledge,
teachers surely could not decide what should do to create a meaningful learning as they do
not know what to teach and how to teach to the students with the appropriate strategies.
However, dealing with the implementation of lesson study in Indonesia, it seems
that it needs more efforts in order to be acceptable among teachers. Some teachers’
awareness of pedagogical knowledge is better through a collaborative learning in lesson
study. They admitted that the implementation of lesson study helped them more in
preparing their teaching well. They collaboratively discussed to formulate the learning goal
that must be achieved through the instructional strategies designed. Through collaborative
learning, the teachers could also select the most comprehensible material to be presented
to the students and they know how to teach it (Lenhart, 2010).
The different culture in Indonesia in which the Indonesian teachers are not used to
be observed by many people in their class needs to be evaluated. Teachers should be
involved in some activities to promote their professional development through peer
reflection and the similar activities that encourage them to evaluate their teaching. Teachers
should also open their mind that collaboration is very important to improve their teaching.
About the authors:
Siti Aimah is a lecturer of English Education Department, Faculty of Foreign Language
and Culture, Universitas Muhammadiyah Semarang (Unimus). Her research interest is in
the field of English Language Teaching (ELT) including teaching methodology and
pedagogy. ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5355-4523
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

389

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Indonesian Teachers’ Perception on the Implementation

Aimah &Purwanto

Bambang Purwanto is a lecturer of English Literature Department, Faculty of Languages
and Arts, Universitas Negeri Semarang (Unnes). His research interest is in literature studies
and he has been teaching in English Literature Department since 2008. ORCID
& ID
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7110-2878
Purwanto
References
Aimah, S., Ifadah, M., & Bharati, D. A. L. (2017). Building Teacher’s Pedagogical Competence
and Teaching Improvement through Lesson Study. Arab World English Journal (AWEJ), 8,
(1), 66-78.
Aimah, S., Ifadah, M., & Bharati, D. A. L. (2016). Effective Use of Lesson Plan to Trigger
Students’ Autonomy. Proceeding of International Seminar on Education Technology (ISET)
(Retrieved from https://jurnal.unimus.ac.id/index.php/psn12012010/article/view/1977)
Aksu, Z., Metin, M., & Konyalioğlu, A. C. (2014). Development of the Pedagogical Content
Knowledge Scale for Pre-Service Teachers: The Validity and Reliability Study.
Meditteranian
Journal
of
Social
Sciences,
5,
(20),
1365-1377.
doi: 10.5901/mjss.2014.v5n20p1365
Baba, T. (2007). “How is Lesson Study Implemented?” Japanese Lesson Study in Mathematics:Its
Impact, Diversity and Potential for Educational Improvement. In M. Isoda, M. Stephens, Y.
Ohara & T. Miyakawa (Eds.) Singapore: World Scientific Publishing.
Bocala, C. (2015). From Experience to Expertise: the Development of Teachers’ Learning in
Lesson Study. Journal of Teacher Education, 66, (4), 349-362.
Clarke, P. A. (2008). Reflective Teaching Model: A Tool for Motivation, Collaboration, Selfreflection, and Innovation in Learning. Georgia, Educational Research Journal, 5, (4).
Cohan, A., & Honigsfeld, A. (2006). Incorporating ‘Lesson Study’ in Teacher Preparation. The
Educational Forum, 71, 81-92.
Coenders, F., & Verhoef, N. (2018). Lesson Study: Professional Development (PD) for Beginning
and Experienced Teachers. Professional Development in Education, 1-15. doi:
10.1080/19415257.2018.1430050
Fernandez, C. (2014). Knowledge Base for Teaching and Pedagogical Content Knowledge (PCK):
Some Useful Models and Implications for Teachers’ Training. Problems of Education in the
21st Century. 60, 79-100.
Fernandez, C. (2002). Learning from Japanese Approaches to Professional Development: The Case
of Lesson Study. Journal of Teacher Education, 53, 393-405.
Fernandez, C., & Yoshida. M., (2004) .Lesson Study: A Japanese approach to improving
Mathematics teaching and learning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gess-Newsome, J. (1999). The Complex Nature and Sources of Teachers’ Pedagogical Knowledge.
In J. Gess-Newsome & N. G. Lederman (Eds.) PCK and Science Education (pp. 3-17).
Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Guerriero, S. (n.d). Teachers’ Pedagogical Knowledge and the Teaching Profession. Retrieved
from http://www.oecd.org/education/ceri/Background_document_to_Symposium_ITELFINAL.pdf
Hudson, P. (2007). Examining Mentors’ Practices for Enhancing Pre-service Teachers’
Pedagogical Development in Mathematics and Science. Mentoring and Tutoring, 15, (2),
201-217.
Hurd, J. & Musso, L. L. (2005). Lesson Study: Teacher-Led Professional Development in Literacy
Instruction, Language Arts, 82, (5), 388-395.
Ibrahim, N. H., Surif, J., Arshad, M. Y., & Mokhtar, M. (2012). Self-Reflection Focusing on
Pedagogical Content Knowledge. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 56, 474-482.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

390

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Indonesian Teachers’ Perception on the Implementation

Aimah &Purwanto

Inprasitha, M. & Changsri, N. (2014). Teachers’ Beliefs about Teaching Practices in the Context
of Lesson Study and Open Approach. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 116, 46374642.
&
Jang, S. J., Guan, S. Y., & Hsieh, H. F. (2009). Developing an Instrument for Assessing College
Purwanto
Students’ Perception of Teachers’ Pedagogical Content Knowledge. Procedia Social and
Behavioral Sciences, 1, 596-606.
Kotelawala, U. (2012). Lesson Study in a Methods Course: Connecting Teacher Education to the
Field. The Teacher Educator, 47, 67-89.
Lenhart, S. T. (2010). The Effect of Teacher Pedagogical Content Knowledge and the Instruction
of Middle School Geometry. Dissertation. Liberty University.
Lewis, C. (2002). Does the Lesson Study have future in the United States: Nagoya Journal of
Education and Human Development, 1, 1-23.
Lewis, C. (2009). What is the Nature of Knowledge Development in Lesson Study? Educational
Action Research, 17, (1), 95-100. doi: 10.1080/09650790802667477
Matanluk, K., Johari, K., & Matanluk, O. (2013). The Perception of Teachers and Students toward
Lesson Study Implementation at Rural School of Sabah: a Pilot Study. Procedia-Social and
Behavioral Sciences, 90, 245-250.
Mishra, P. & Koehler, M. J. (2006). Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge: A Framework
for Teacher Knowledge. Teacher College Record. 108, (6), 1017-1054.
Nami, F., Marandi, S. S., & Sotoudehnama, E. (2015). CALL Teacher Professional Growth through
Lesson Study Practice: an Investigation into EFL Teachers’ Perception. Computer Assisted
Language Learning, 1-26. doi: 10.1080/09588221.2015.1016439.
Potari, D. (2013). Promoting Teachers’ Mathematical and Pedagogical Awareness. Journal of
Mathematics Teacher Education, 16, 81-83. doi: 10.1007/s10857-013-9238-3
Rock, T. C., & Wilson, C. (2005). Improving teaching through lesson study. Teacher Education
Quarterly, 32, 77-92.
Shimahara, N.K., (1998). The Japanese Model of Professional Development: Teaching as Craft.
Teaching & Teacher Education, 14, (5), 451-462.
Syahruddin, Ernawati, A., Ede, M. N., Rahman, M. A. B. A., Sihes, A. J. B., & Daud, K. (2013).
Teachers’ Pedagogical Competence in School-Based Management. Journal of Education
and Learning, 7, (4), 213-218.
Shulman, L. S. (1987). Knowledge and Teaching: Foundations of the New Reform. Harvard
Educational Review, 57, (1), 1-22.
The Regulation of the Minister of National Education No. 16 Year 2007 on Teacher Academic
Qualification Standard and Competency. Jakarta.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

391

