Arab World English Journal (August 2019)
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/th.237

Theses ID 237

Pp. 1-74

Teachers' Perceptions of Action Research as a Tool for Professional Development: The Role of the
‘Research for Professional Development’ (RPD) Course for In-Service Omani Teachers
Saif Said Rashid Al -Abri
Nizwa Educational Training Centre
Sultanate of Oman
Author: Saif Said Rashid Al-Abri
Thesis Title: Teachers' Perceptions of Action Research as a Tool for Professional Development: The
Role of the ‘Research for Professional Development’ (RPD) Course for In-Service Omani Teachers
Subject/major: TESOL
Institution: Graduate School of Education, University of Exeter
Degree: MEd in TESOL
Year of Award: 2011
Supervisor: Dr. Jill Cadorath
Key Words: Action research, research for professional development course, teachers’ professional
development
Abstract:
When talking about the educational field in Oman, teachers' professional development is a considerable
concern. A variety of professional development strategies have been introduced to teachers of English and
have been put into practice. Action research is one of these strategies. It is introduced to teachers through
a voluntary course, Research for Professional Development (RPD), which is a sixteen-session course and
lasts for one semester. This course aims to raise teachers' knowledge and skills of action research in order
to support them, as research practitioners, to enhance the quality of their work and to show initiatives in
their schools. However, as it is relatively new in this context, this study attempted to explore teachers'
beliefs on the values of this course with regard to their professional development and the extent to which
these teachers adopted this strategy for their ongoing professional development after the course. The
study was conducted in the Dakhiliya region of Oman and the data was collected from eight teachers
through a semi-structured interview. The findings indicate a conception of the RPD course as a means to
enrich Omani teachers' knowledge and skills of AR. The practical side of the course also raises
participants' awareness of the possibilities of improving their work and gives them insights to solving
their students' problems through systematic inquiries. This study also reveals that, although participants
master this tool, very few of them conduct action research after the course and this is due to the lack of
time, heavy responsibilities and lack of support. Therefore, this study raises the issue that although
providing teachers with knowledge and skills of PD strategies is essential, enabling them to apply these
strategies relies heavily on paying attention to their needs.
Cite as: Al-Abri, S. S. R. (2011). Teachers' Perceptions of Action Research as a Tool for Professional
Development: The Role of the ‘Research for Professional Development’ (RPD) Course for In-Service
Omani Teachers. Graduate School of Education, University of Exeter (Master Thesis). Retrieved from
Arab World English Journal (ID Number: 237) August 2019,1-74.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/th.237

Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

(Student ID: 600052632)

MEd in TESOL

Teachers' Perceptions of Action Research as a Tool for Professional Development:
The Role of the ‘Research for Professional Development’ (RPD) Course for InService Omani Teachers

Graduate School of Education
University of Exeter, 2011

1

Dedication
I shall dedicate this thesis to my mother, who taught me that even the largest task can be
accomplished if it is done one step at a time and whose prayers for my success in my
life have always given me power and enlightened my way.

2

Table of Contents

Title Page ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 1
Dedication --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 2
Contents ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 3
List of Figures and Tables -------------------------------------------------------------- 6
Acknowledgement ----------------------------------------------------------------------- 7
Abstract ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 8
Abbreviations ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- 9
Chapter One: Introduction
1.1.

Introduction to the study ------------------------------------ 10

1.2.

Rationale -------------------------------------------------------- 11

1.3.

Aims of the study --------------------------------------------- 12

1.4.

Organization of the study ------------------------------------ 12

Chapter Two: Background
2.1.

Introduction --------------------------------------------------- 13

2.2.

EFL Teachers' Initial Education and PD ----------------- 13

2.3.

In-service Teachers' PD ------------------------------------- 13

2.4.

RPD Course --------------------------------------------------- 15

Chapter Three: Literature Review
3.1.

Introduction -------------------------------------------------- 18

3.2.

Professional Development --------------------------------- 18

3.3.

Action Research --------------------------------------------- 21

3.4.

Teachers' Beliefs --------------------------------------------- 27

3.5.

Previous Studies --------------------------------------------- 27

3.6.

Conclusion --------------------------------------------------- 29

3

Chapter Four: Methodology
4.1.

Introduction --------------------------------------------------- 31

4.2.

Aims and Methodology of the study ---------------------- 31

4.3.

Participants

4.4.

Research Methods and Procedures ------------------------ 33

4.5.

Research Issues ----------------------------------------------- 35

4.6.

Limitations

------------------------------------------------- 32

-------------------------------------------------- 36

Chapter Five: Findings and Discussion
5.1.

Introduction --------------------------------------------------- 38

5.2.

Teachers' Expectations of the RPD course -------------- 38

5.3.

The extent to which participants’ expectations
were achieved ------------------------------------------------- 41

5.4.

Participants’ views on challenges faced in the
course and their suggestions for improvement---------- 45

5.5.

The connection between the RPD course
and teachers’ PD --------------------------------------------- 48

Chapter Six: Summary, Implications and Recommendations
6.1.

introduction --------------------------------------------------- 54

6.2.

Summary of the findings ----------------------------------- 54

6.3.

Implications and Recommendations ---------------------- 55

6.4.

Suggestions for future research ---------------------------- 56

References -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 57
Appendix 1 RPD Course Objectives ------------------------------------------------- 60
Appendix 2 RPD Course Application Form ---------------------------------------- 61
Appendix 3 RPD Course Outline ----------------------------------------------------- 63
Appendix 4 RPD Course Evaluation Form ----------------------------------------- 66

4

Appendix 5 Professional Development Tools ------------------------------------- 68
Appendix 6 The Differences between AR and Traditional Research ---------- 69
Appendix 7 The Interview Structure ------------------------------------------------ 71
Appendix 8 A Sample of the Interviews' Analysis -------------------------------- 72

5

List of Figures and Tables

1. Fig. 3.3.4.1. The Cycle of Action Research
2. Fig. 4.3.1. Information about the participants

6

Acknowledgements
I consider this a great opportunity to express my gratitude to those who contributed in
this thesis and made it possible. All praise is for my God, Allah, for granting me
patience and determination to complete this study.
I owe my sincerest gratitude to my inspiring supervisor, Dr. Jill Cadorath, for her full
support and guidance throughout my thesis with her patience and knowledge whilst
allowing me the room to work in my own way. I hope that one day I will become as
good an advisor to my students as Jill has been to me.
I also would like to make a special reference to Mr. Simon Etherton, who designed the
RPD course, delivered it and, has, since then, been supervising the trainers responsible
for it. Having understood the significance of such a course, I feel very grateful to him.
I would like also to thank all my colleagues who participated in this study. I appreciate
their time and efforts they spent contributing to this work, regardless of their busy
schedules.
Finally, I appreciate the financial support from the Ministry of Education, who granted
me a scholarship to pursue my Master degree.

7

Abstract
When talking about the educational field in Oman, teachers' professional development
is a considerable concern. A variety of professional development strategies have been
introduced to teachers of English and have been put into practice. Action research is one
of these strategies. It is introduced to teachers through a voluntary course, Research for
Professional Development (RPD), which is a sixteen-session course and lasts for one
semester.
This course aims to raise teachers' knowledge and skills of action research in order to
support them, as research practitioners, to enhance the quality of their work and to show
initiatives in their schools. However, as it is relatively new in this context, this study
attempted to explore teachers' beliefs on the values of this course with regard to their
professional development and the extent to which these teachers adopted this strategy
for their ongoing professional development after the course. The study was conducted in
the Dakhiliya region of Oman and the data was collected from eight teachers through a
semi-structured interview.
The findings indicate a conception of the RPD course as a means to enrich Omani
teachers' knowledge and skills of AR. The practical side of the course also raises
participants' awareness of the possibilities of improving their work and gives them
insights to solving their students' problems through systematic inquiries. This study also
reveals that, although participants master this tool, very few of them conduct action
research after the course and this is due to the lack of time, heavy responsibilities and
lack of support. Therefore, this study raises the issue that although providing teachers
with knowledge and skills of PD strategies is essential, enabling them to apply these
strategies relies heavily on paying attention to their needs.

8

List of Abbreviations

1.

PD

Professional Development

2.

AR

Action Research

3.

RPD

Research For Professional Development

4.

SQU

Sultan Qaboos University

5.

BE

Basic Education

6.

C1

Cycle One

7.

C2

Cycle Two

8.

PB

Post Basic

9

Chapter One: Introduction

1.1.

Introduction to the study

Professional development (PD) is undisputedly a crucial element in all careers in order
to sustain and enhance the productivity of work. In addition to the values gained
through them, enrolling in PD activities represents the commitment of individuals to
raising their awareness of their work, looking deeper into it, and identifying
opportunities and possibilities to improve it. Focusing on the teaching profession, as is
obviously known, teachers do not only teach but also have a responsibility to learn, so it
is considered a dynamic and demanding job. According to Underhill (1999:17), for
teachers, PD is “the process of becoming the best teacher one is able to be, a process
that can be started but never finished”.
One of the paths for effective PD is the adoption of action research (AR). AR is one of
many strategies for PD, but one of the most demanding and, at the same time, one of the
most powerful. It is demanding because teachers go through different procedures. This
requires knowledge and skills in research. However, considering AR as a powerful tool
for teachers' PD, it is worth adopting in that it leads to investigation of one's own work
and aims for better understanding and acting accordingly to enhance classroom practice.
AR has been proved to be a very effective method in teachers' PD, which is “associated
with work-based learning” (McNiff, 2010:41).
PD for teachers is gaining growing attention in Oman. A lot has been done to support
teachers and raise their awareness of different aspects in their profession. At the very
beginning of the last decade, The Teachers' Professional Development Program was
initiated and, since then, has been implemented in all schools. This focuses on PD of
11

teaching staff in general and which takes the forms of presentations and workshops
done by teachers themselves in their schools. Other PD activities such as courses,
workshops and meetings are conducted by trainers and supervisors in training centers,
in all regions in Oman. For English language teachers, these activities usually focus on
issues of concerns within EFL classrooms, aim at developing those teachers' knowledge
and skills and encourage reflective teaching.
As one of the PD strategies that are expected to have a favorable impact on the teaching
profession, AR has recently emerged in the context of Omani English language
teachers. It has been introduced to teachers through a course, Research for Professional
Development (RPD), which aims to widen their knowledge of this strategy and promote
their skills in applying it. However, as it is relatively new, there are still some doubts
about its value and effectiveness in this context. Thus, there is a need to investigate its
success in achieving the aims it is designed for.

1.2.

Rational

This study is inspired by my experience as a teacher trainer in charge of planning and
delivering workshops and courses and the fact that teachers' feedback informs training
programs. Considering the RPD course, this issue has raised a number of issues in my
mind, such as: how those teachers in the Dakhiliya region of Oman benefit from the
course; the level of implementation of AR after one or two years of taking it; how they
perceive the role of AR in promoting them professionally; and the reasons behind their
engagement in research or their reluctance to conduct it.
Investigating this, I believe, will give a clear vision of the current situation, not only
about the course, but more importantly about the Omani teacher researchers' views and
demands in order to adopt such a strategy on a regular basis. Thus, this study aims to
11

investigate the perceptions of the Omani English language teachers in the Dakhilya
region of the connection between the RPD course and their PD.

1.3.

Aims of the study

The present study has the following aims:


To investigate teachers’ opinions about the role of the RPD course in enhancing
their knowledge and skills of AR



To investigate teachers' beliefs and attitudes towards AR as a strategy for PD



To analyze the beliefs and views identified in order to suggest possible actions
for the future.

1.4.

Organization of the study

This study consists of six chapters. Following the introduction, the second chapter will
focus on the background and the context of the study. Then, chapter three will be a
review of the literature. Chapter four will focus on research methodology and the
procedures followed in this study. In chapter five, the major findings and the discussion
will be presented. Chapter six presents a summary of the findings and recommendations
for future practice.

12

Chapter Two: Background

2.1.

Introduction

In this section, the discussion focuses on the background of the study, where initial
teacher education for EFL Omani teachers is highlighted in relation to teachers' PD.
Then, the situation of in-service teacher PD is discussed. After that, the RPD course is
presented with a focus on its aims, methods, participants and content. The last section
under this topic is a brief summary of participants’ evaluation of the course.

2.2.

EFL Teacher's Initial Education and PD

In order to be an English teacher in Oman nowadays, student teachers must complete a
four-year BA degree. Even those who were appointed in the past with a diploma were
recently enrolled in a BA program run by Leeds University in Oman. Focusing on
Sultan Qaboos University (SQU), which is one of the main sources of English Teachers
in Oman, the EFL teacher education program mainly concentrates on building teachers
knowledge of linguistics, pedagogy and methods of teaching; this is expected to provide
students with the basic elements to do their teaching job in the future. PD is included to
a certain extent but still it is not necessarily effective enough, as those who have not yet
been in the field are not aware of what they need to improve.

2.3.

In-service Teachers' PD

Newly qualified teachers, whether those who graduate from SQU, other universities in
Oman or abroad, are appointed in different schools. There are schools for Basic
Education (BE) Cycle one (C1), in which teachers deal with grades 1-4. Others are for
(BE) cycle two (C2) in which teachers deal with students of grades 5-10. Those for
13

students of grade 11-12 are called Post Basic (PB) schools and some of the novice
teachers are also appointed in these.
The training department in the Ministry of Education has the responsibility of preparing
these teachers and familiarizing them with the schools' situations and types of
syllabuses in addition to other important issues related to teaching and learning that are
seen to be of concern for novice teachers. There are courses for those who are newly
appointed in C1, C2 and PB. Attention to PD goes beyond focusing only on novice
teachers, to give courses for senior teachers and courses in language development.
Although these courses are seen as developmental courses, they all share a top-down
compulsory nature. This means that they are imposed on teachers. Teachers are
nominated by their supervisors to attend the courses and by the end they get certificates
of attendance and reports of participation. These courses are obviously considered postdegree training. Most of these courses last for one semester - 15 weeks - and teachers
are trained on a day release basis; one day a week targeted teachers are released from
schools to attend the course.
Despite the top-down nature, training plays a significant role in teachers' development.
All courses, programs and workshops are based on teachers' expected needs and focus
on the grades they teach and curriculum and materials they use. In addition to enhancing
teachers' knowledge and skills, training also develops teachers' reflective teaching
through preparing them to adopt PD tools such as peer observation and team teaching
and by providing opportunities to discuss situations in their classrooms and relating new
knowledge to their work.

14

2.4.

RPD Course

The RPD course, unlike other courses, is voluntary. It introduces teachers to the notion
of AR and supports them in investigating their practice by implementing it in their
classrooms. It was first run in the academic year 2006-2007 for teacher trainers and
supervisors from different regions. Thereafter, this course has been offered to teachers
in all regions of Oman annually.
2.4.1.

Aims of the course

This course aims, as in the course description, at developing teachers’ ability to conduct
effective and meaningful action research in their classrooms. Participants have the
opportunity to conduct an AR project, write up their findings in a 3000 word report and
hold a presentation to share the findings and implications with other colleagues. (For the
RPD course objectives see appendix 1)
2.4.2.

Training Methods

The course is delivered through seminars, group tasks, workshops, presentations, one to
one tutorials and library study. Participants are also given articles to read in advance as
a kind of preparation for the following session discussion or as a further reading of what
is discussed during the day's session. In addition to the tutorials, participants have
constant support via email throughout the course.
2.4.3.

Participants

As mentioned earlier, this course is voluntary. All teachers, 281 male and 574 female
English language teachers in the Dakhiliya region in the year 2010-2011, have the right
to apply for it. However, only twelve participants are enrolled in the course every year.
A circular goes to all schools in the region with a description of the course and with an
15

application form to fill in which helps trainers later to decide on who to enroll in the
course (see appendix 2). Priorities are usually given to those who have a good language
standard so they will face no obstacles in regards to reading literature and writing their
projects. It is worth mentioning that every year participants enrolled in this course have
different teaching expertise. This makes the discussion tasks rich.
2.4.4.

Duration and content

The course starts with a six-day intensive block. It then continues on a day release basis
for ten weeks (for the course outline and summary see appendix 3). Each session lasts
for five hours in which the last half -hour is spent on individual library study in addition
to one-to-one tutorial.
The course initially focuses on theoretical issues and provides the opportunity for
participants to apply these to practical AR projects in their classrooms. It also allows
collaboration between participants, as they support and give one another feedback, and
develops their reflective skills.
2.4.5.

RPD Course Evaluation

By the end of the course participants are requested to fill in a course evaluation form.
(For RPD course evaluation form see appendix 4)
Revising previous end of RPD course evaluation reports, there are certain issues that
participants raised. In general, they had positive views about the course in the sense that
it provided them with a good introduction to teachers' classroom AR and found the
opportunity to conduct an AR project very valuable. At the time of the evaluation, most
of them felt confident about conducting AR and had already decided on their next

16

research areas. However, course participants expressed their concerns about different
aspects related to the course, such as timing of the course and handout distribution.
Although this gives a very general view about participants’ perceptions on the course
and their future intentions to become involved in AR, their views and attitudes need to
be further investigated for three reasons. First, some of the participants' concerns are not
clear enough to build on and need to be discussed to see what exactly they mean and
what they suggest. Second, as the course aims to equip teachers with AR tools for their
continuous PD, it is necessary to find out how successful their plans are in
implementing AR in their classrooms and the extent to which they use what they
learned in their ongoing profession. Third, a study like this will give participants
opportunities to elaborate on their visions of AR as a tool for their PD.
The RPD course has emerged from the awareness of the significance of PD to teachers
that can be derived from reflective teaching. Thus, as an effective tool that can have a
remarkable impact on the teaching profession, AR's position within the Omani EFL
context should be seen from teachers' perceptions and practices. In this section, I have
discussed the situation of teachers' PD for both pre-service and in-service teachers. AR
as a tool for PD for in-service teachers has also been discussed, raising the matter of the
significance of accessing participants' views in order to see its effectiveness in their
situations. All these issues will be discussed in the following chapter.

17

Chapter Three: Literature Review

3.1.

Introduction

The chapter focuses on three areas. First, the issue of PD and its significance in teaching
is highlighted. Second, AR as a PD tool and its procedures and challenges are discussed.
Third, the focus will be on teachers' beliefs and their role in shaping teachers' attitudes
towards their actions and more specifically towards engaging in PD methods like AR.

3.2.

Professional Development

PD means “all types of professional learning undertaken by teachers beyond the point of
initial training” (Craft, 2000:9). Kirk (1988:15-16) claims that no initial training is good
enough to equip teachers with all they need in their “full teaching career” however
“thorough and systematic” it is. This means there is a need to consider continuous PD
for in-service teachers which Craft (2000:9) refers to as “moving teachers forward in
knowledge or skills”.
PD for teachers differs in types and aims. Craft (2000:3) draws attention to the
differences between in-service PD that fulfills school policies or “national priorities”
and that which focuses on individual needs. This raises the issue of the 'Top-down' PD
which is imposed on teachers and the 'Bottom-up' PD in which individuals themselves
seek to implement voluntarily. Edwards (2010b:58) strongly recommends the bottomup strategy if indeed PD is expected to be successful. In my opinion, although the aims,
to a certain extent, may coincide in both types, many differences can occur regarding
teachers' motivation, commitment and, therefore, outcomes.

18

For this reason, individuals themselves should be committed to enhancing their
knowledge and skills. Komba & Nkumbi (2008:71) affirm that the value gained from
“intrinsic drive” of individuals towards PD cannot be gained through any external
pressure; those who are intrinsically motivated to develop professionally are more likely
to “attain new knowledge, skills, attitudes, values and dispositions”.
3.2.1.

Significance of PD

The value of PD is represented in the desire to change, especially when facing
challenges or when seeking possibilities for improving the quality of work. Change can
be sought in awareness, knowledge, attitudes and skills (Freeman, 1989:36). Richards
and Farrell (2005:9-10) mention many reasons for PD to be undertaken by individuals,
such as to be updated with theories and practice and to enhance teaching skills. They
argue that adopting PD activities can also raise understanding of oneself, learners,
curriculum and materials. It “… helps us to remain fresh, alert, up-to-date, and
confident in ourselves and in the topic we teach” (Underhill, 1999:17). I believe this
leads to having deep understanding of the profession.
Moreover, Komba & Nkumbi (2008:70) contend that PD enables teachers to “explore
new roles, develop new instructional techniques, refine their practice and broaden
themselves both as educators and as individuals”. Therefore, enrolling in PD activities
enhances teachers' role and demonstrates their commitments to their own development
as argued by Edward (2010a:64).
Furthermore, Bailey et al. (2001:7) state that “knowledge is power” and working on PD
can lead to both “empowerment and inspiration”. This means that the knowledge
teachers gain through PD activities enables them to show initiatives in their schools.
Underhill (1999:17) makes the assertion that PD allows teachers to have an active role
19

in developing their schools as “learning organizations” and their own profession as a
“learning profession”.
3.2.2.

Reflective practice

As far as Richards and Lockhart (1994:2) are concerned, reflective teaching is an
essential element in PD. They emphasize the need for teachers to have curiosity in
exploring their practice through developing the concept of questioning their actions.
This leads to promotion of self-reflection as an initial step for decision making.
When involved in reflection, teachers go through different levels of the cognitive
process. Brumfit and Rossner (cited in Belleli, 1993:65-66) point out that reflection
involves two levels: first, the stage where teachers reach an understanding of the
'implicit' theories leading their practice, which they refer to as “analysis of
understanding”; and second, “monitoring performance” which includes revising and
reformulating hypotheses through practice and amendment. Thus, reflection raises
understanding of what is really happening and informs future practice.
Wallace (1991:15) demonstrates how “received knowledge” and “experiential
knowledge” are integrated with practice through reflective teaching. This integration
promotes professional competence within teachers. I believe this all leads to reconceptualizing theories and feeling more certain about what to do: “we do not learn by
experience, but by reflecting on experience” (Taylor, 2006:11).
3.2.3.

PD Tools

There are several PD activities which teachers can adopt in order to enhance particular
aspects of their profession. Bailey et al. (2001:11) classify these activities into three
categories, namely activities that are carried out individually, activities that can be
21

carried out either individually or collaboratively and activities that are done
collaboratively. This highlights the options that teachers have and considers teachers
needs and their preferences. For example, individual teachers can adopt tools such as
teaching journals, reflective teaching, and teaching portfolios. Teachers can be involved
in action research, reading, or writing case studies, either individually or
collaboratively. Activities such as peer observation, mentoring and team teaching are
other forms of collaborative PD activities.
Richards and Farrell (2005:14) list more PD activities that the teacher can adopt (see
appendix 5). Craft (2000:11) claims that “being professional means taking responsibility
for identifying and attempting to meet the professional development needs of oneself”.

3.3.
3.3.1.

Action Research
Definition

One of the PD tools that depend on reflection is AR. Richards and Lockhart (1994:12)
define AR as a classroom investigation carried out by teachers themselves in order to
raise their understandings of classroom practice, teaching and learning, which results in
developing their practice to the better. Wallace (1998:15) summarizes the meaning of
AR as “the process of answering questions by using various kinds of evidence in some
kind of reasoned way”. Richards and Farrell (2005:171), meanwhile, separate the two
words and see the word 'research' as conducting investigation systematically and
gathering data in order to find explanations to issues in the classroom, whereas the word
'action' means the intervention for solving classroom practice problems. I can define AR
as teachers' systematic investigations into their practice for the purpose of improvement
that is done through their own intervention and change. In fact AR is not only about

21

problem-solving but it is also, as argued by Bailey et.al. (2001:139), to satisfy teachers'
curiosity and find answers to questions arising during practice.
3.3.2.

AR Characteristics

Just like other research, AR “leads to knowledge”, “provides evidence to support this
knowledge”, “makes explicit the process of inquiry through which knowledge
emerges”, and creates “links between new knowledge and existing knowledge” (McNiff
et al., 1996:14).
On the other hand, McNiff (2010:27-30) notes the differences between AR and other
kinds of research in four major areas - what, who, how and why - which highlights the
unique features of AR (see appendix 6). AR's characteristics are related to the fact that it
is carried out by practitioners who are “best placed” to raise their understanding about
their work and to solve problems in order to improve practice (Bailey et al., 2001:135),
and the requirement of an 'intervention', defined by McNiff et al. (1996:14) as an
“integral part” of the process.
Schmuck (2006:29) describes AR as “tentative”, in the sense that it supports teachers
with possible solutions but not right or wrong answers, and it is “cyclical” (Bassey,
1995:47), which means procedures can be repeated to reach better outcomes. The
validity of teacher researchers' claims can be tested by critical feedback from others and
this makes it also "collaborative" (McNiff & Whitehead, 2010:21).
3.3.3.

Benefits

The idea of including AR in teachers' work does not seem to be very welcomed by
many at first. Llewellyn and Zee (2010:10) concur with Richards and Farrell (2005:172)
that there is a misunderstanding of seeing teachers as researchers in the way that
22

research is seen as another burden added to their workload. This may have resulted from
the use of the word 'research' and the implications that it frequently has of some
systematic process. Therefore, AR should not be too formalized and teachers should
realize its potential as more of a normal part of their work. I believe understanding the
benefits of AR can encourage dedicated teachers to adopt it as a PD strategy.
McNiff and Whitehead (2005:1) see AR as tool that assists teachers in evaluating their
own work. Through evaluating their practice and trying new techniques, teachers come
to an understanding of how things work best. AR promotes teachers' knowledge and
skills and is thus described as “empowering” by Schmuck (2006:29), in the sense that it
equips teachers with tools from which to benefit for their future practices. This
understanding of practice “strengthens the discipline and rigour in what we are already
doing” (McNiff and Whitehead, 2005:vii).
In addition to promoting teachers' knowledge and skills, involvement in AR redetermines their position in the educational field. An interesting claim is raised by
Richards and Farrell (2005:172) that teachers' involvement in AR “redefines” their role.
It goes beyond just testing one's own theories to wider horizons where teachers come to
establish new theories. McNiff and Whitehead (2005:3) and McNiff (2010:136) agree
with Stenhouse (cited in Bailey et al., 2001:135) that AR enables teachers to contribute
to the building of theory suitable to the classroom. I believe, becoming engaged in AR,
the teacher becomes a theory builder and more of a productive agent rather than
receiving educational innovations from outside which may or may not suit his or her
context.
Besides, Richards and Farrell (2005:171) claim that teacher researchers go through
different steps and procedures, “planning and carrying out action”, that enlighten their

23

understanding, not only of teaching and learning but also research skills. In addition to
developing these skills and procedures, it raises teachers' ability in reflection, which is
the backbone of all PD activities that teachers can adopt.
Furthermore, for some teachers the process of conducting AR could be interesting and
enjoyable in addition to being rewarding. “… teachers who have been involved in AR
are overwhelmingly in favour of it” (Nunan, 1993:46).
However, although AR can be very beneficial, it requires “democratic involvement to
those whom it impinges” (Bassey, 1995:47) and needs “commitment to educational
improvement” from the teacher researcher side (McNiff et al. 1996:16). I believe this is
true for all PD strategies. Considering AR procedures and the challenges that might face
teachers when deciding to engage in researching their classrooms (see below), their
commitment should be high enough to pursue adopting the strategy. For this reason,
teachers should not only be encouraged but also supported to adopt AR in their practice.
3.3.4.

Procedures of AR

AR strategy requires going through procedures that involve different activities which
are carefully planned and systematically executed and which can be repeated until the
teacher researcher reaches satisfactory results. Thorne (2006:80) argues that it is not a
linear process and that teachers “should be prepared for a process of continual review
and adjustment”. The following diagram represents the cycle of activities involved in
AR:

24

Gathering data

Diagnosing/identifying
Self-evaluating

problem

Implementing

Formulating

hypotheses

hypotheses

Figure 3.3.4.1 Action Research Cycle, (Craft, 2000, 29)

In the initial step of data collection, the focus could be on something that emerges from
the daily observations and that raises curiosity to find out about an issue that is
interesting or appears to be problematic. This requires “systematic monitoring to
generate valid data” (McNiff et al. 1996:16) using such methods as field-notes, logs,
journals, dairies, personal accounts, and verbal reports (Wallace, 1998:46), based on
regular observation and reflection, as well as interviews and questionnaires.
The following step is diagnosing and identifying problems through carefully analyzing
the data to find out the problematic aspects and to reach a clearer picture of the
investigated issue the teacher formulates hypotheses. The next step is implementing
hypotheses. Here, the teachers implement, observe and evaluate the progress. In order to
reach to a valid result, I believe it is necessary that a reasonable time is spent on the
implementation stage.
Wallace (1998:17) describes this cycle of AR as “a loop process” in which this process
can be repeated till the teacher reaches satisfactory results. Nunan (1993:42) adds two
25

more stages to the cycle: these are “outcomes”, in which the teacher identifies the
outcomes of the project and the benefits, and the final stage of “reporting” it to the
public.
Publishing is helpful in that other teachers can benefit from AR projects (Bassey,
1995:3), they can inspire others to become involved in AR (Hadley, 2003:v), and in
order to “subject them to critical evaluation” (McNiff and Whitehead, 2005:2). It is to
“improve the reputation of the profession” (Altrichter et al., 1993:179). In my view, it
also rewards teachers and gives them a sense of pride.
3.3.5.

Challenges

AR is not without challenges: Nunan (1993:44) mentions time and Bailey et al.
(2001:141) add lack of “recognition” of teachers' effort and time, which can lead to
“demoralization”. Teachers may also have difficulties in conducting AR due to the lack
of researching skills and experience, (Nunan, 1993:44). This involves “technical skills
and knowledge to conceptualize and put into operation the research that interests them”
(Bailey et al., 2001:142). I believe lack of research skills can prevent teachers from
carrying out AR rather than encourage them to seek consultations.
Teachers also need support from experts in AR, 'critical friends' and even the school
administration to facilitate their work and sometime to help in the procedures.
Therefore, “lack of ongoing support”, as stated by Nunan (1993:44), could be a
challenge that requires attention.
There are a number of solutions that may help in overcoming these challenges (Nunan,
1993:44). First, teachers should have a sense of ownership of the project, which means,
it is work that is related to their practice and belongs to them. Second, experts in AR

26

should be available to provide constant support to teachers. Third, teachers should be
trained in research skills and in presenting the outcomes of their projects.

3.4.

Teachers' Beliefs

Teachers' beliefs are “individual's judgment of the truth or falsity of a proposition, a
judgment that can only be inferred from a collective understanding of what human
beings say, intend, and do” (Pajares, 1992:316). It is, therefore, the way teachers judge
issues, either consciously or unconsciously, that can be based on their prior knowledge,
experience and the context they are working in.
There is no doubt that teachers' perceptions on different aspects of their profession
determine the way they act. “It is obvious that what teachers do is directed in no small
measure by what they think…” (National institute of Education cited in Borg, 2006:7).
In this sense, considering teachers' beliefs about a certain aspect of their practice is of
great benefit in recognizing reasons for the way they act and helping to promote their
practice accordingly.
Teachers' beliefs not only affect their daily teaching practice but influence their decision
making for their PD. Frode et al. (2006:32) claim that teachers' perceptions of their roles
and the way they respond to their work both “intellectually and emotionally” have great
influences not only on their teaching routine but also in making decisions about their
continuous PD.

3.5.

Previous studies

There are several studies that focus on the role of AR in professional development.
Thorne and Qiang (1996) investigated the impact of an AR course done for the trainee
teachers at the University of Beijing in the last year of initial teacher education.
27

The AR project resulted in raising participants' awareness of teaching and learning
processes and their ability to consciously reflect on their own practice. Participants
could see the theories and their applications and their students’ needs in addition to
considering AR as a tool to solve their problems.
Another study by Rainey (2000) surveyed the practice of AR within the EFL context to
find out what the EFL teachers know about AR and the extent to which they apply this
strategy. The researcher surveyed 240 teachers in 10 countries and did four follow up
interviews. Her study revealed that only one quarter of those surveyed had heard about
AR. Although the majority of these do not practice AR, they value it and can see its
usefulness to them as classroom teachers. The study also identified reasons for teachers'
reluctance in involving themselves in AR, such as not feeling confident enough, having
negative experiences and receiving no support from authorities.
McDonough (2006) also investigated the effectiveness of an elective AR course on
graduate teaching assistants' PD at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. The
researcher gathered the data from 7 participants through professional journals, reflective
essays, the AR project, course feedback and field notes. Participants reported an
increase in their awareness about pedagogical practices and found the opportunity to
conduct the AR project valuable. Time constraints and administrative demands were the
main obstacles participants had according to this study.
Papasotiriou and Hannan (2006) used semi-structured interviews to investigate 14
Greek primary school teachers' perceptions of the impact of research on their profession
and their practice. This revealed that although teachers seemed to be interested to read
research reports, their practice did not seem to be largely influenced by research

28

findings. The researchers concluded that in order to raise the impact of research in
teaching, teachers should be actively involved in it.
Borg (2009) investigated the perception of research among 505 teachers from 13
countries including Oman. His findings revealed that participants were only aware of
the scientific notion of research. Lack of time, lack of knowledge of research skills and
lack of access to resources prevented teachers from engaging in research. However, the
study showed that those who do research are self-motivated to develop themselves
professionally rather than encouraged by rewards from their institutions.
Cain and Milovic (2010) examined the value of an AR program to 18 senior advisors
from different regions in Croatia who were trained by a foreign expert. Results showed
that the concept of AR was thoroughly understood by participants and that they could
use this tool to communicate with the teachers and principals. This program provided an
opportunity to participants to share their experience with others. However, one
significant issue was raised in this study: advisors were seen as authoritative and so
involving other teachers in their AR projects could be seen as a top-down procedure.

3.6.

Conclusion

The review reveals the significance of PD focusing on AR as a strategy that is sought by
teachers themselves in order to enhance the quality of their work and present them as
active dedicated members of the educational field. In addition to this, the review gives
emphasis to the role of teachers' beliefs in shaping teachers' practice and their decisions
for future involvement in PD activities.
Previous studies showed the effectiveness of AR as a PD channel. They proved the
strong and immediate impact on teachers' and trainee teachers' performance and

29

supported them with a skill for their continuous PD. However, some of the studies
revealed the lack of knowledge of and engagement in AR from the teachers’ side (see
for example Borg, 2009). Interestingly, the challenges in conducting AR vary according
to the context. Where some agree on time as a challenge, others emphasized the lack of
knowledge and support that teachers' receive.
However, there has been very little research done, if any, to follow up teachers' practice
of using AR as a strategy for PD after completing a course in AR. I believe this is a
crucial aspect of the process, as continuing evaluation is essential to its success.
Therefore, in addition to investigating teachers' views about the AR course they
completed, this study intends to explore eight Omani English teachers' perceptions of
AR as a necessary cyclic tool for their PD and the extent to which they find themselves
actively engaged in it iteratively after the course.

31

Chapter Four: Methodology

4.1.

Introduction

This section discusses, first, the aims and the methodology used in this study. Then it
provides details about the participants. After that, the research method and procedures
are stated. Next, research issues are presented. Finally, limitations of the study are
highlighted.

4.2.
4.2.1.

Aims and methodology of the study
Aims

This study aimed to explore in-service Omani English language teachers' views
regarding the role of the AR course on their PD. The study focused on the teachers who
enrolled in the RPD course in the previous two academic years (2008-2009 and 20092010), in the Dakhiliya region.
The study aimed to address the following questions:
1.

What expectations did the teachers have of the AR course?

2.

To what extent were they achieved in regards to: Knowledge of AR? Skills

development?
3.

What challenges did they face as participants in the course? What do they

suggest to overcome these challenges?
4.

What relationship did teachers see between the AR course and their PD?

31

By conducting this study, I hoped that it would yield sufficient information that would
assist, first of all, me as a teacher trainer and the training department in finding out
about the benefits and obstacles that teachers face in conducting classroom AR, either
during or after the course. The other aim was to identify teachers' support needs in and
outside their schools when adopting this strategy.
4.2.2.

Research methodology

This study intended to construct teachers' beliefs concerning the role of the AR course
in their PD and to reach an understanding of this issue by accessing the meanings
participants assigned to it. It is an exploratory research that is carried out via semistructured interviews and follows the interpretive paradigm. One of the factors that
support this paradigm, as argued by Carr and Kemmis (1986:86), is that "… reality can
only be understood by understanding the subjective meanings of individuals". The
interpretive paradigm focuses on actions which can be thought of as "behaviour-withmeaning… intentional behaviour and as such, future oriented" (Cohen et al., 2007:21).
Carr and Kemmis (1986:88) also state that in order to identify the motives and the
intentions that people have for their actions, which is the point of this study, it is
important to "grasp the 'subjective meaning' " which is significant to these people.

4.3.

Participants

The data was collected from eight Omani English language teachers who had taken the
RPD course in the previous two years in the Dakhiliya Region. All of them (four men
and four women) had experience of teaching, ranging from four to seventeen years.
They taught in different school types (C1, C2 and PB) and had considerable
professional and pedagogical knowledge prior to enrolling in the course. However, they

32

had limited research experience before enrolling in the course. The following table
shows information about the study participants.
Table 4.3.1.: Information about the participants

Teacher

BA Degree

School

Experience

Remarks

(year)
Ali

Leeds

C2

17

Senior teacher

Huda

SQU

C2

4

Teacher

Ibtisam

SQU

C1

7

Teacher

Khalid

SQU

PB

5

Teacher

Muneer

SQU

PB

8

Senior teacher

Noora

SQU

C1

11

Senior teacher

Salim

Leeds

PB

18

Teacher

Samia

SQU

PB

7

Teacher

4.4.

Research method and procedures

I used semi-structured interviews to collect data. Cohen et al. (2007:349) state that
interviews allow the researcher to press for "responses about complex and deep issues".
This kind of interview is, as argued by Dornyei (2007:136), suitable when the
researcher has "enough overview of the phenomenon" so the interviewer is able to
design broad questions in advance. Kvale and Brinkmann (2009:102) sets out seven
stages of an interview inquiry, namely thematizing, designing, interviewing,
transcribing, analyzing, verifying and reporting. These are precisely followed in this
study.

33

4.4.1.

Interview design

First, the goals of the study were translated to more detailed and specific objectives.
Then, these were put into questions that form the main body of the interview schedule
(see appendix 7). The formation of these questions was with guidance from the previous
studies on the same topic. The interview was divided into four areas: knowledge of AR
before the course, enrolment in the course, involvement in AR after the course and
beliefs on effects of AR on PD. Each area is supported with prompts (pick-up clues)
that enabled deeper investigation of each.
4.4.2.

Piloting

There is no doubt that piloting research methods is necessary, especially when dealing
with semi-structured interviews; "a few trial runs can ensure that the questions elicit
sufficiently rich data and do not dominate the flow of the conversation" (Dornyei,
2007:137). I piloted the interview twice: both were recorded. The adjustment after
piloting was mainly in procedure rather than content. I discovered that I needed to be
patient with participants and not interrupt them before they completed what they wanted
to say. Bryman (2008:438) claims that such interviews depend largely on the way
participants respond and new questions may arise accordingly. In addition, I needed to
give more time for participants to understand the questions. More probes also were
needed to investigate each topic more deeply. Bernard and Ryan (2010:29) mention that
using probes will enhance the depth of the data.
4.4.3.

Informing & interviewing participants

Participants were informed by e-mail about the study, the area of questions and the
process (including audio recording). Teachers were ensured about the confidentiality of

34

their contributions and anonymity. They had the choice of time and place of the
interviews. Some of the interviews took place in teachers' schools, whereas others were
in informal places (i.e. their houses). At the beginning of each, I briefly introduced the
purpose of the study and thanked them for participating. During the interviews, I made
sure that no harm or embarrassment was caused by "handling the situation sensitively
and professionally" (Cohen et al., 2007:363).
4.4.4.

Transcribing and analyzing

The whole of the interviews were transcribed except for the insignificant material (e.g.
fillers), which was left out. This allowed me to have rich data and go through it several
times before the analysis stage. During the analysis, the themes were based on the
interview topics, but the categories were formed inductively from the respondents'
utterances (see appendix 8).

4.5. Research issues
4.5.1. Ethical issues
Following the ethics in research, participants were given pseudonyms and informed
about the confidentiality of their participation. Another issue that I should raise here is
that some of these participants were tutored by me in the RPD course (3 of them) and
this could put them in a sensitive situation. However, having volunteered to participate
in the study, as well as being reassured that their honest participation would help to
improve the situation, it can be confirmed that this affected neither the process of the
interview nor their honest contribution.

35

4.5.2.

Transferability and trustworthiness

In such a qualitative study the validity and reliability can be ensured, as mentioned by
Ary et al. (2006:504), through several factors such as transferability, and
trustworthiness.
Ary et al. (2006:507) define transferability as the extent to which the finding can be
generalized to other contexts. The description of the context and the participants gives a
clear idea of the situation of my study. It focuses on the Dakhiliya region, and can be
applied not only to other regions in Oman, for teachers who take the same course and
are in the same conditions as my participants, but also to other similar EFL and ESL
contexts. Having similar responsibilities, EFL teachers may have the same concerns
about adopting AR as a tool for their PD, which this study provided insights into.
Involving eight participants in this study, in addition to recording and transcribing the
whole interviews and showing that the responses, to a great extent, were consistent,
raise the trustworthiness of the data collected and the study. This makes the method
used "reproducible and consistent" Ary et al. (2006:509).

4.6.

Limitation

The following are the three main limitations of the study:
- Using only one method to collect data could be considered a limitation. Starting with
a questionnaire and building on the responses, a follow up interview would study the
situation in more depth. Nevertheless, this could give a clear picture about the situation,
could be used as guidance for future studies on similar topics and could help to build
data collection methods for the same purpose.

36

- My position as a teacher trainer, responsible for delivering the RPD course, could be
considered a limitation to this study. This raises issue of imbalances of power.
However, only three participants were tutored by me in this course and comparing their
responses to others' ensured that these were not affected.
- This is considered a small scale study, with a sample of eight participants. However,
the findings are likely to interest trainers in other regions and could be relevant to other
EFL contexts.
The following chapter presents the finding and the discussion of the collected data.

37

Chapter Five: Finding and Discussion

5.1.

Introduction

This chapter presents the findings of the study and the discussion in an attempt to
answer the research questions. Each section focuses on one research question, where the
findings of the sub-themes are highlighted, and this is then followed by a discussion of
the whole theme.

5.2.

Teachers' expectations of the RPD course

Three major areas arose through the interviews that could help in measuring teachers’
expectations of the course: their previous knowledge of AR, their previous experience
of AR and their aims in enrolling in the course.
5.2.1.

Pervious knowledge of AR

Six of the eight participants had a general idea of research, having studied a course
about it as a part of their BA program, but reported having no knowledge of AR. Five of
them mentioned this, even though they were not satisfied with the knowledge of
research they had gained. Noora and Samia, for example, described it as "very limited",
while Muneer thought it was "vague" and "only theoretical". However, Huda thought
that she had prior knowledge about research in general and held a positive view of it.
On the other hand, two out of the eight participants reported that they had had
knowledge of AR prior to enrolling in the course. These were the ones who did their BA
through the Leeds program. For example, Ali said "we studied how to do AR". Both

38

mentioned that they had a course discussing types of research which were suitable for
teachers, and these included AR. Both reported that their knowledge of AR was good.
5.2.2.

Previous Experience of AR

During BA program
Except for these two respondents who had studied at Leeds and had had the chance to
conduct AR, the other participants had conducted no research in the educational field.
Most of these interviewees did theoretical research that focused on social issues. Two of
them did not recall conducting any field research; for example, Noora said "I don’t
remember I did a field research. They were only assignments and we depended on
books as the main resource".
As in-service teachers
None of the participants conducted AR in their classrooms after they graduated. The
majority of the participants reported not feeling confident enough to conduct research.
One reported conducting some collaborative exploratory research in Arabic where they
used questionnaires, but this was not about teaching English. Those who had knowledge
and experience of AR did not feel encouraged to do it afterwards. For example, Salim
said "nobody encouraged us to do AR".
5.2.3.

Participants Aims in Enrolling in the course

All participants claimed that their aim was to improve themselves. Five expressed this
more by indicating that their aims were to develop research skills, learn new strategies
and change for the better. For example, Samia said "I was looking forward to learning
about AR to improve my practice and I applied for the course twice before I got
accepted". Two participants mentioned that this course was expected to refresh their
39

memories of what they learned earlier and give them a chance to conduct more AR in
their classrooms. For example, Ali said "I liked this area in the BA and I thought it
would be a good chance also to conduct another AR project in my classroom".
Individuals also reported "change the working atmosphere" and "to be supported in
conducting research" as their aims.
5.2.4.

Discussion

The results indicate that teachers’ background in AR differs according to their previous
academic studies. Only teachers who did their BA program in Leeds, which represent a
very small percentage of English teachers in Oman, had an idea about AR and
experienced conducting it. This is possibly because they had already had several years
of teaching experience and were studying and teaching at the same time, which made it
a reasonable idea for this group to be introduced to AR. However, other teachers did not
seem to have much knowledge about AR and had not conducted AR before. These
findings are in congruence with Burns (2010:1) who mentioned that language teachers
have "only a hazy idea of what it actually is and what doing it involves".
This resulted in differences in their expectations of the course outcomes. Where the
former group felt this would give an opportunity for revision and a guided AR project,
the latter expected more from the course, such as learning a new strategy for their PD,
developing research skills and finding more ways for change. This matches the opinion
of Bailey et al. (2001:7) that learning new skills and the desire for change are reasons
for engaging in PD activities. Therefore, the teachers showed their expectation that AR
could be "a very valuable way to extend our teaching skills and gain more
understanding of ourselves as teachers, our classrooms and our students" (Burns,
2010:1).

41

In general, the results demonstrate that all participants had the desire to develop the area
of AR and to experience it in their classrooms, through attending the RPD course.
Bordia et al. (2006:04.2) claim that expectations of the process and outcomes of a
certain program if fulfilled can have a great impact on motivation and learning. Since
fulfilling these expectations is a significant issue, it is necessary to see the extent to
which these have been met.

5.3.

The extent to which participants' expectations were achieved

In order to construct a clear idea about participants' views on this, their responses were
categorized into four sub-themes: raising knowledge of AR, enhancing research skills,
the course process and conducting an AR project.
5.3.1.

Raising Knowledge of AR

All the participants agreed that the course had raised their knowledge of methods of data
collection and that they had been thoroughly discussed during the course. The AR cycle
(procedure) was introduced for the first time during the course to five of the
participants. Two of these reported that before the course their concept of research had
been connected with the scientific research. For example, Samia said "when we thought
about research in the past, we only thought about the scientific research". Two
participants mentioned that it enhanced their knowledge of the purpose of teacher
research. Ali felt that this course had developed the concept of AR. He said "… but in
the RPD course I noticed that it is not necessary to have a problem to do an action
research ... it is something you want to improve". Individuals raised other aspects
learned such as "ethics in research" and "benefits of transcribing data".

41

5.3.2.

Enhancing research skills

Skills learned and enhanced varied according to participants’ prior experience of
research. All of the participants emphasized data collection methods and analysis of
data as the skills that they learned and developed. Two of these highlighted the benefits
of discussing and designing questionnaires. Four of the teachers felt that they developed
the skills of stating research questions and three reported on enhancing their reflective
skills, for example Muneer said "I learned how to look at things from different angles”
Khalid also said "I improved my reflective skills and giving feedback to others".
Individuals also expressed skills improved in other aspects, such as "presenting my
work" and "interpreting data".
5.3.3.

The course process

Teachers commented on the benefits of the course process and found the idea of dayrelease helpful in the sense that they spent the whole working day with other course
participants. All participants reported that the course was a chance for them to share
ideas and cooperate with others, which helped them to digest new concepts and made
them better appreciate others' opinions. For example, for Ibtisam "it was a good chance
to share ideas and to get feedback from colleagues". Six participants raised the issue of
the benefits of the tutorials they received. They felt that this raised their awareness and
some found it helpful in conducting their research project. Three of them appreciated
the idea of having the course in English and felt that they improved their language
skills. Three of them mentioned the increase in their motivation; while one found it
motivating to be a teacher researcher, the other two felt motivated to do a Master degree
afterwards.

42

5.3.4.

AR project

A strong belief was expressed by all teachers in the importance of having a practical
side to the course by conducting an AR project. For example, Samia said "if we only
learn theories without practice I think will be useless". They also emphasized the
necessity of choosing a research topic of interest and relevance to one's own workplace.
On one hand, the teachers reflected on their satisfaction with their experience in
conducting AR, the process they went through and the sense of achievement they felt in
their practices and their students' performance. For example, Muneer said "now, as a
senior teacher, when I enter those classes to visit a teacher who teaches those students,
I feel my teaching at that time have an impact on their learning". They reported that
having done AR had brought about a change in their attitudes to learning and their
teaching practice. For example, Ibtisam said "it opened my eyes to see my teaching
differently and encourage me to learn more about it".
On the other hand, two participants felt that the time allocated to conducting their
research projects was very limited. They felt it was not enough and this made Salim,
who had had previous experience in conducting research for a whole academic year,
raise the comment, "this makes it very challenging… all of the teachers who were with
me … all our researches were only on the surface - we can't go deeply because we can't
have the time", and Huda said that she did not have enough time to implement the
action: "My topic was using electronic games to promote grade 8 spelling, but because I
needed to use computers, so I needed for example two days a week to use it so there was
no enough time".

43

5.3.5.

Discussion

Teachers responded positively to the course outcomes and showed general satisfaction
in the areas of learning and improvement in regards to AR. It seems that participants
raised their knowledge of AR, its purposes and procedures. Even those who had prior
knowledge seem to have further developed the concept they had of AR. This is possibly
because AR had been introduced to them as a problem solving technique.
Research skills, such as methods of collecting data and data analysis seemed to be
discussed thoroughly and participants felt that this was a strength in the course. They
highlighted the significance of gaining research skills such as reflection, which is noted
in section 3.3.3. The participants seemed to develop both types of reflexivity, mentioned
by Edge (2011:38), prospective and retrospective; these are, respectively, participants'
effects on their work and the effect of understanding their work on them. Bailey et al.
(2001:154) mention that this enables teachers to "build on strengths and identify
weaknesses" and see teaching from multiple perspectives. These seemed to be gained
not only from discussion and the course process, which they mentioned to be of a great
benefit, but also from the practical side of the course, which they highlighted as vital.
The duration of the research project seemed to be limited in two cases. This is possibly
because, in the first case, the teacher had had experience of conducting an AR project in
a full academic year before the RPD course and this may have affected his view. In the
second case, the choice of the topic to investigate in the short duration of the course
seems to have been unfortunate. Investigating the role of electronic games in raising
spelling requires the ability to access the computers labs consistently, which was not
possible in the teacher’s school. This raises the issue of the need to support teachers in
choosing suitable topics with which they can experience AR for the first time. The role

44

of teacher educators is to "assist teachers to use their practice and their intuitions about
it as a starting point for more systematic and in-depth investigation which calls upon
more formal research techniques" (Brindley, 1992:104). Burns (2010:22-23) claims that
choosing a topic for AR is not an easy one and teachers need to think about many issues
including "resources and materials" they will need to carry out their project.
Identifying the extent to which the teachers' expectations were fulfilled, it is also
necessary to look at the challenges they faced during the course.

5.4.

Participants’ views on challenges faced in the course and their
suggestions for improvement

5.4.1.

Challenges

All of the respondents mentioned workload and time as factors which largely affected
their ability to carry out their research plans. They commented on their teaching
commitments at schools and the heavy responsibilities they had. For example Ali said
that in addition to teachers’ work, teaching, marking duty … etc, "as a senior teacher I
have to visit classes and write reports and do other administrative responsibilities ...”.
Six of the respondents remarked on problems with the extra workload. Although they
appreciated the idea of day release, they felt that its implementation made the situation
worse. Explaining this, Khalid said "I was teaching twenty two lessons in five days and
when I enrolled in the course I had the same twenty two periods in four days".
Five of the participants added that the course itself was demanding and mentioned
reading articles and going through the steps of the research. Although they expected
this, they still felt this was not considered by school administrations. For example,

45

Ibtisam said "we had to attend substitution lessons; we are responsible for school
activities just like other teachers".
Two of the teachers commented on the timing of the course. Having it in the second
semester was difficult for them. For example, Muneer said "at the end of the second
semester, most of the teachers are busy preparing students for committees of evaluation
and busy with other school activities and this also made some participants miss a day or
two in the course". Two commented on the duration of the research project (see section
5.3.4).
5.4.2.

Suggestions for improvement

Agreeing on most of the challenges, the participants suggested some solutions which
they believed would improve the process of the course and make life easier for future
course participants.
For the training center
All the respondents agreed that the choice of participants should be earlier, before the
first semester starts. This also includes informing the school administration of the kind
of work these participants are supposed to do. For example, Ibtisam said "Choose the
participants at the end of the year, so the following academic year school
administration will take this in account when deciding on teachers' timetable and
responsibilities". Khalid also suggested that the "school administration should be
informed what exactly participants are doing and how much work this needs".
Four teachers mentioned that the course should start earlier. Two said that starting the
course in the first semester would be a good idea. Two suggested increasing the

46

duration of the AR project. For example, Huda said that it would be better to start it in
the first semester and submit the report by the middle of the second semester.
Three suggested that the outline of the course and the handouts should be distributed
earlier at the beginning of the course, so teachers could use their free time to go through
them and have an idea of the process beforehand. Muneer, for instance, said "at the
beginning of the course teachers can be given the outline and the handouts of the
course". He also suggested that it was not necessary to meet every week as long as the
participants had access to the tutor when they needed him or her.
For schools
All of them agreed that the school responsibilities given to participants should be
reduced. Informing school administrations earlier can help set the timetable so it will
place no pressure on the teacher later while having day-release. Reducing
responsibilities includes, as suggested by six participants, excluding participants from
some school activities and substitution lessons. This included four participants'
recommendation of having no more than fifteen lessons a week for each participant. For
example, Salim said "teachers who are going to attend this course should make sure
they have no more than fifteen lessons a week".
5.4.3.

Discussion

The respondents seemed to have faced challenges and expressed their strong demands
through their suggestions to overcome these challenges for future course participants.
The results indicated that time constraints and the workload teachers had in their
schools, in addition to the demands of the course itself, made it challenging for those

47

participants. Burns (2010:19) mentioned that time for those teachers is "the major
practical hurdle".
Having direct experience of the course, the participants were able to raise some
suggestions for improving it. Their demands to the training center to send the names of
participants earlier and inform school administrations about the kind of work they are
required to do are reasonable and may give school administrations a chance to cooperate
on it more effectively. Informing schools about this could possibly be seen as a request
from the training center rather than from the teachers themselves.
Starting the RPD course earlier, as suggested, is seen as a chance to finish the course
before the end of the second semester, which is the busiest time of the year for
everyone. This may also provide another solution to the problem of time and workload.
The participants’ idea of distributing the course outline and the handouts could be
considered another way to help teachers be prepared and make use of their free time.
Although participants faced challenges during the course, in general, they see that
cooperation from and between both schools and the training center could help solve the
problem. This may result in enhancing the effectiveness of the course procedures, which
would be of great help to the participants.

5.5.

The connection between the RPD course and teachers' PD

Many issues were raised by participants in regards to the topic. These are categorized
as: general views of AR as a tool for teachers' PD, challenges faced in adopting it and
their suggested solutions.

48

5.5.1.

General View of AR as tool for PD

AR is seen by all participants to be an effective tool for their PD. This is because it
helps to “evaluate current practice”, “solve problems”, “improve teaching and
learning and use new techniques”, “enhance the effectiveness of teaching materials
used”, “enhance reflective skills”, “force teachers to read” and "promote cooperation
between teachers".
Ali stated “it makes you alive as a teacher… because you are doing something besides
teaching”. Noora said “I find it useful, because I noticed a big difference between what
I did before and after”. Other teachers also mentioned that knowing about AR is useful
for further studies.
However, only three of the participants conducted AR after the course. Two of them
mentioned that their research projects were part of a course requirement. Only one
participant conducted it voluntarily and highlighted the support she received from the
school administration in doing so.
Other participants mentioned that they still follow the cycle of AR to improve their
practice but see no purpose in documenting it or writing the research report. For
example Samia said “it would be nice if I write it, it would be a research, but I didn’t,
because there is no encouragement for doing this thing, for example, who do I write the
research to if I write it? It is not going to be published”. Therefore, they mentioned that
they shared their findings only with their colleagues at schools by conducting
workshops or presentations.
Seven participants said they intended to conduct AR in the near future and all had their
topics and plans to do so. However, for some of them this all depends on their work

49

situation. For example, Khalid said “I want to conduct an action research on how I can
improve my students writing skill but I don’t want to start and then stop because of
other school responsibilities”.
5.5.2.

Challenges faced in adopting it as a tool for PD

Being asked about the feasibility of conducting AR in schools by all English teachers,
they agreed that the lack of knowledge will be a challenge to those who have not
attended a course on AR.
In addition, all participants agreed that a heavy workload and lack of time are the main
challenges they faced. Six saw lack of stimulus from the Ministry of Education and
school as a challenge. For example, Khalid said “there is no encouragement to do this
research ... yes there is benefit for me and my students but me as a teacher: I need
some encouragement … free time”. Therefore, Salim said “if there is no change in
teachers' work, it will be difficult for the Omani teachers to use AR … they are asked to
do a lot of things in a very limited time”. Thus, these teachers expressed their demands,
if adopting AR as a tool for their ongoing PD is an option.
5.5.3.

Participants suggestions

For schools
All teachers agreed that school administrations should encourage teachers to do AR.
They suggested reducing the responsibilities these teachers have, such as number of
lessons, school activities, the number of substitution lessons and administrative work.
For example, Ali said “reducing the amount of work given for teachers everyday will be
a big help”.

51

In addition to this, four of the participants mentioned that schools should facilitate the
research process; they mentioned arranging school visits and cooperation. For example,
Huda said “they should help for example in arranging visits”.
For the training center
Six participants suggested that all teachers should have knowledge of AR. These
suggested either “the RPD course should be repeated to all teachers in the region”, as
Ali said, or “a one week course just to raise their awareness about what is it ... what its
benefits ... how to conduct it because they really don’t know this and leave the choice to
them to conduct or not”, as Ibtisam said.
Although they mentioned they felt confident conducting AR, four participants
mentioned that there is still a need for constant support from trainers when they are
undergoing the process. Khalid said “I will need support from the trainer" and this is
"to make sure that I am following the right procedures and get advice to improve it”.
Three participants said they would need support from colleagues who had conducted
AR on similar topics to those with which they were concerned.
Ali suggested a “regular meeting for senior teachers” in the training center to discuss
issues about AR and spread knowledge about findings.
For the Ministry of Education
All participants agreed that research projects conducted in the Omani context would be
more beneficial for teachers and expressed their strong demand for the ministry to
publish them. Two suggested English departments should be responsible for these and
should distribute them to schools. Participants mentioned that this will motivate
teachers to become involved in AR. For example, Salim said “this will encourage more
51

teachers to do more work if they are published”. Samia added that “you can get
feedback from others to enhance your work”.
Four participants suggested that the curriculum department should also consider this
work. For example, Noora said “the strategies that come from teachers' AR and which
they see suitable should be included in the teacher's book so everyone can benefit from
them”.
5.5.4.

Discussion

The teachers' perceptions of AR as a tool for their PD seem to show it gaining a healthy
respect. Teachers could see how this tool was related to their practice and how effective
it was in improving it. This view may result from their experience of conducting their
projects.
Talking about challenges, respondents' views on the lack of knowledge of AR for
teachers could possibly result from their previous experience of the insufficient initial
education they received in this area. It seems that their understanding of its significance
has made participants suggest that all teachers should attend a course in AR. Teachers
seem to face challenges of time, a heavy workload and lack of support. This could also
emerge from teachers' awareness of the kinds of procedures and work demands when
conducting AR.
The teachers, therefore, do not seem to adopt this strategy on a regular basis. Only one
participant conducted AR voluntarily, which could be because she received support
from the school administration, which she mentioned. This raises a significant issue,
which is that although preparing teachers with knowledge and skills of AR is important,
in order to allow them adopt it as a strategy for PD, the necessary assistance should not

52

be ignored. "Teachers clearly can conduct research successfully if they are given the
necessary support and the resources to carry it out" (Brindley, 1992:103).
In addition, the respondents' views on the need for constant support from trainers and
teachers who had conducted AR in their areas of interest raises the issue of
collaboration and receiving feedback from others noted in 3.3.2. Publishing teachers'
AR projects also seems to be of considerable concern to the respondents. Their views
reflect what Altrichter et al. (1993:176-179) mention the importance of disseminating
teachers' work, such as increasing the quality of work and enhancing their professional
self-confidence.

53

Chapter Six: Summary and Recommendations

6.1.

Introduction

This chapter presents a summary of the results of the study and the recommendations. It
also includes suggestions for further research on the area.

6.2.

The summary of the findings

The findings and the discussion of this study highlight the following:
 Omani English language teachers have a limited background in AR.
 The RPD course plays a significant role in raising teachers' awareness of AR and
in raising their researching skills. It also provides them with a valuable
opportunity to conduct AR projects in their classrooms.
 Teachers believe that there is a strong relation between AR and their PD.
 Time constraints, heavy school responsibilities and a lack of encouragement and
support are seen to be the most challenging obstacles that teachers' face, during
and after the course, in adopting AR as a PD tool.
 Not publishing teachers' research is seen by teachers as de-motivating and not
promising for their future practice.
 Enhancing teachers' knowledge and skills of AR is undisputedly critical if
teachers are expected to use it as a tool for their PD. However, considering
teachers' needs in order to go through the process of conducting AR is also
essential and if these needs are not fulfilled, teachers will find it difficult to
pursue the strategy. Therefore, teachers believe that the chance to adopt AR as a

54

tool for their PD depends greatly on the authorities' view of its significance,
which determines the kind of support they can offer.
 Teachers tend to use the research skills gained from the RPD course to improve
their practice, but very few conduct AR projects.

6.3.

Implications and Recommendations

In the light of these results, AR is seen by teachers as a significant tool for their PD.
However, in order to overcome the challenges stated by teachers there is a need to
consider their situation while introducing them to the strategy and when they decide to
use it later in their ongoing practice.
Therefore, certain issues should be considered before the course starts. Training centers
should inform school administrations about the participants before the beginning of the
first semester, so they will be taken into consideration and supported in their schools. It
is also important that teachers' AR project schedules should be included in their school
timetables, so this will ensure specific time allocated to AR with no distraction caused
by other responsibilities.
In addition, other issues can be dealt with during the course to improve the situation. In
the first session, the outline and the handouts of the RPD course should be distributed to
the participants and thoroughly discussed with them. Participants should also be guided
to narrow the scope of their studies and choose reasonable topics to investigate
according to the time limit of the course. Since publishing teachers' work is considered a
significant issue, a session on publishing AR projects should be added to the course in
order to raise teachers' awareness of publishing their work through educational journals.

55

Moreover, after the course, teachers should receive enough support to conduct AR.
Therefore, trainers should offer constant help to these teachers. This should also be
announced to all teachers in all schools. From the side of the Ministry of Education,
teachers should be encouraged through publishing their projects and providing them
with channels to communicate their findings with others.

6.4.

Suggestions for future research

Although this study presents a clear picture of the situation of AR in the Omani context,
further investigations in the area that employ mixed methods of data collection and
cover a wide range of participants are needed. Studies that aim to explore the views of
the ministry and school administrations of teacher researchers and the support they can
provide them with are also of equal importance in order to understand the future
practice of AR. This study has raised issues that will surely improve the situation of AR
for teachers' PD if they are taken into account. As a teacher trainer, I believe working on
these issues can improve both the benefits of the course and teachers' practice of AR.

56

References
Altrichter, H; Posh, P. & Somekh, B. (1993). Teachers Investigate Their Work: An
Introduction to The Methods of Action Research. London: Routledge.
Ary, D., Jacob, L. C., Razavieh, A. & Sorensen, C. (2006). Introduction to Research in
Education (7th ed.). Belmont: Thomson Wadsworth.
Bailey, K. M; Curtis, A. & Nunan, D. (2001). Pursuing Professional Development: The
Self As A Source. Boston: Heinle and Heinle.
Bassey, M. (1995). Creating Education Through Research: A Global Perspective of
Educational Research For the 21st Century. Edinburgh: Kirklington.
Belleli, L. (1993). How We Teach and Why: The Implementation of An Action
Research Model for In-service Training. In J. Edge & K. Richards (Eds.), Teachers
Develop Teachers Research: Papers on Classroom Research and Teacher Development
(pp.65-75). Oxford: Heinemann.
Bernard. H. R. & Ryan, G. W. (2010). Analyzing Qualitative Data: Systematic
Approaches. London: SAGE.
Bordia, S., Wales, L., Pittam, J. & Gallois, C. (2006). Student Expectations of TESOL
Programs. Australian Review of Applied Linguistics, 29(1), 04.1-04.21.
Borg, S. (2006). Teacher Cognition and Language Education: Research and Practice.
London: Research Continuum.
Borg, S. (2009). English Teachers' Conceptions of Research. Applied Linguistics, 30
(3), 358-388.
Brindley, G. (1992). Becoming a researcher: teacher-conducted research and
professional growth. In E. Sadtono (Ed.), Issues in language teacher education (pp. 89105). Singapore: RELC.
Bryman, A. (2008). Social Research Methods (3rd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Burns, A. (2010). Doing Action Research in English Language Teaching: A Guide for
Practitioners. London: Routledge.
Cain, T. & Milovic, S. (2010). Action Research as a tool of professional development of
advisers and teachers in Croatia. European Journal of Teacher Education, 33(1), 19-30.
Carr, W. & Kemmis, S. (1986). Becoming Critical: Educational Knowledge and Action
Research. Sussex: Deakin University Press.
Cohen, L., Manion, L. & Morrision, K. (2007). Research Methods in Education (6th
ed.). Oxon: Routledge.
57

Craft, A. (2000). Continuing Professional Development: A Practical Guide For
Teachers and Schools (2nd ed.). New York: Routledge Flamer.
Dornyei, Z. (2007). Research Methods in Applied Linguistics. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Edge, J. (2011). The Reflexive Teacher Educator in TESOL: Roots and Wings. London:
Routledge.
Edwards, R. (2010a). Teachers as Action Researchers. Modern English Teacher, 19(2),
64-66.
Edwards, R. (2010b). Training and Professional Development. Modern English
Teacher, 19(3), 56-59.
Forde, C., McMahon, M., McPhee, A. D. & Patrick, F. (2006). Professional
Development, Reflection and Enquiry. London: Paul Chapman.
Freeman, D. (1989). Teacher Training, Development and Decision Making: A Model of
Teaching and Related Strategies for teacher Education. TESOL Quarterly, 23(1), 27-45.
Hadley, G. (2003). Action Research in Action. Singapore: SEAMO.
Kirk, G. (1988). Professional Issues in Education: Teacher Education and Professional
Development. Edinburgh: Scottish Academic Press.
Komba, W. L. & Nkumbi, E. (2008). Teacher Professional Development in Tanzania:
Perceptions and Practices. Journal of International Cooperation in Education, 11(3),
67-83.
Kvale, S. & Brinkmann, S. (2009). Interviews: Learning the Craft of Qualitative
Research Interviewing (2nd ed.). London: SAGE.
Llewellyn, D. & Zee, E. V. (2010). Action Research: Expanding The Role Of
Classroom Teachers to Inquirers and researchers. Science Scope, 34(1), 10-15.
McDonough, K. (2006). Action Research and the Professional Development of graduate
Teaching Assistants. The Modern Language Journal, 90(1), 33-47.
McNiff, J. & Whitehead, J. (2010). You and Your Action Research Project (3rd ed.).
Oxon: Routledge.
McNiff, J. (2010). Action Research for Professional Development: Concise advice for
new and experienced action researchers. Dorset: September Books.
McNiff, J.; Lomax, P. ; & Whitehead, J. (1996). You and Your Action Research Project.
London: Routledge Flamer.
MicNiff, J & Whitehead, J. (2005). Action Research for Teachers: A Practical Guide.
London: David Fulton Publications.
58

Nunan, D. (1993). Action Research in Language Education. In J. Edge and K. Richards
(Eds.), Teachers Develop Teacher Research: Papers on Classroom Research and
Teacher Development (pp. 39-50). Oxford: Heinemann.
Pajares, M. F. (1992). Teachers' Beliefs and Educational Research: Cleaning up a
Messy Construct. Review of Educational Research, 62(3), 307-332.
Papasotiriou, C. and Hannan, A. (2006). The impact of education research on teaching:
the perception of Greek primary school teachers. Teacher Development, 10(3), 361-377.
Rainey, I. (2000). Action Research and the English as a Foreign Language Practitioner:
Time to Take Stock. Educational Action Research, 8(1), 65-91.
Richards, J. C. & Farrell, T. S. C. (2005). Professional Development for Language
Teachers: Strategies for Teacher Learning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Richards, J.C. & Lockhart, C. (1994). Reflective Teaching in Second Language
Classrooms. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schmuck, R. A. (2006). Practical Action Research for Change. California: A Sage
Publication Company.
Taylor, C., Wilkie, M. & Baser, J. (2006). Supporting Learning Professionally: Doing
Action Research: A Guide for School Support Staff. London: Paul Chapman Publishing.
Thorne, C. & Qiang, W. (1996). Action Research in Language Teacher Education.
English Language Teaching Journal, 50(3), 254-262.
Thorne, C. (2006). Action Research for Busy Language Teachers: Information for The
First Time Researcher. In A. Warne (Ed.), Action Research in English Language
Teaching in The UAE: Perspectives From Teacher Education at The Higher Colleges of
Technology (pp. 75-87). UAE: Higher College of Technology Press.
Underhill, A. (1999). Continuing Professional Development. IATEFL, 149, 17.
Wallace, M. J. (1991). Training Foreign Language Teachers: A reflective approach.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wallace, M. J. (1998). Action Research for Teachers. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

59

Appendix (1)
RPD Course Objectives

1. To develop an understanding of the need and value of teacher action
research
2. To develop the participants’ understanding of the theory and practice of
conducting teacher action research into practice.
3. To enable participants to conduct meaningful and appropriate action
research into their own practice as a form of professional development
4. To support participants through the process of conducting their own action
research project
5. To develop language skills through reading academic texts, writing
reports, taking part in seminar discussions and presentations
6. To develop presentation and workshop skills
For participants to go on to become a research ‘resource’ in their schools to
support other teachers in their research ideas

61

Appendix (2)
RPD Course Application Form

Application to study on the
Research for Professional Development Course

Name:

File number:

School:

Contact numbers: school-

[name and type]

e-mail-

gsm-

Degree(s):
[University, title and classification]

English certificates and levels:
[e.g. IELTS 5.5; PET 3.4]

61

1. Why would you like to participate on the Research for Professional
Development course?

2. What experience have you had in conducting classroom research? Briefly
outline any research project you have undertaken in the past.

3. Why do you think it is important for teachers to investigate their own
practice?

4. Is there any aspect of your teaching, your classroom or your learners you
think you may want to investigate? Why?

62

Appendix (3)
RPD Course Outline

Session
Session one

Focus
Exploring understandings
about research and
introducing action research

Aims




Session two

Types of research





Session three Action research and
developing research
questions





Session four

Research methods,
triangulation and researching
children





Session five

Session six

Research ethics and
developing a focus for the
inquiry



Developing a research
proposal









Session
seven

Case study research and
sampling





To explore participants’ own beliefs
about research
To understand the purpose of teacher
action research
To begin to identify criteria for
effective and appropriate teacher
action research
To identify characteristics of effective
teacher action research
To explore differences between
quantitative and qualitative research
To understand the links between
teacher development and teacher
action research
To explore the formulation of
effective research questions
To understand the difference between
first and second order data
To identify the basic principles and
procedure of action research
To explore a variety of observational
and non-observational research
methods
To consider the important factors of
researching children
To understand the importance of
triangulation
To develop a clear understanding of
ethical research issues
To explore a focus for the inquiry
To understand how to write a
research proposal
To identify and develop your research
questions
To develop your proposal document
for your research
To think about the purpose and
process of keeping a research journal
To further explore the purpose and
structure of action research
To further explore the purpose and
structure of action research
To explore the purposes and
procedure of conducting case study
research
To consider the decisions required in
selecting the sample for the research
63


Session
Focus
Session eight Observation

Aims





Session nine

Writing questionnaires and
conducting interviews







Session ten

Progress reports and writing
the action research report






Session
eleven

Progress reports and an
introduction to qualitative
data analysis







Session
twelve

Analysing qualitative
interview data







Session

Focus

To continue to develop your own
research questions and proposals
To explore the purpose and procedure
of conducting observation research
To consider the importance of
piloting action research instruments
To review and develop reading and
note taking skills
To continue to develop your own
proposals
To explore the use of questionnaires
and interviews in research
To review and develop reading and
note taking skills
To identify and record appropriate
information from research literature
To review referencing norms
To continue to develop your own
research proposals
To present progress reports
To discuss common themes and
problems
To identify some of the different
ways of organising and structuring a
research report
To review issues of reliability and
validity
To present and share progress on
individual studies
To explore common themes and
problems
To learn how to analyse qualitative
data.
To clarify the difference between
grounded data analysis and a priori
data analysis.
To review reading and find more
references
To present and share progress on
individual studies
To explore common themes and
problems
To learn how to analyse qualitative
interview data
To learn some ways of presenting this
data
To review reading and to find more
references

Aims
64

Session
thirteen

Analysing interaction
transcripts




Session
fourteen

Sharing research through
presentations and reports






Session
fifteen

Analysing and presenting
quantitative data






Session
sixteen

Designing workshops and
evaluating the course





To learn how to analyse qualitative
interaction data
To explore an example of published
research
To learn how to give effective
presentations
To learn about the content and
structure of introductions and
conclusions
To review referencing issues
To learn how to present quantitative
data in reports (using Excel)
To present and share progress and
findings of individual studies
To explore the ‘limitations’ of
research and how to include them in
the action research report
To identify the requirements for
submitting the report
To review progress on finishing the
action research project
To learn how to design effective
workshops
To reflect on understanding of action
research
To evaluate the course

The first six sessions of the course aim to explore participants' understanding of
research and introduce them to classroom AR. Participants here build a focus for
their AR projects and are assisted to develop their research questions. In addition,
other issues like triangulation, researching children and research ethics are
explored. By the end of the sixth session, participants work on their AR proposal
and continue developing it throughout the following sessions. The purpose and
structure of AR are revisited in different sessions and participants are provided
with examples of real classroom AR studies to analyze aspects according to the
focus of the particular session. At different stages of the course, issues related to
AR such as type of data, methods of collecting data, data analysis and writing
AR project are discussed. Participants are encouraged to do two presentations
reporting progress in their projects; the first one is in session seven and the
second one is towards the end of the course. They get feedback on both by the
course tutor and the other participants.

65

Appendix (4)
RPD Course Evaluation Form

1. Do you think this course has provided you with a good introduction to the idea
of teacher research?

2. What aspects of the course did you find most interesting?
The following aspects were the most interesting according to the participants:

3. What would you like to change about the course?

4. How confident do you now feel in your ability to conduct a meaningful,
systematic and ethical research into your own practice?

5. How motivated do you now feel to go on to do more research? What ideas have
you got for your next research project?

6. What did you learn about your practice from undertaking your own research
project on this course?

7. What did you learn about research from undertaking your own research project
on this course?

66

8. How useful did you find the reading on this course?

9. As a result of all the reading, writing, discussions and presentations you have
taken part in this semester for the RPD course, do you feel your English
language has been refreshed or even developed? In what way?

10. How do you feel about your research report?

11. What did you find the most useful thing you learned on this course?

12. Any further comments?

67

Appendix (5)
Professional Development tools

(Richards and Farrell, 2005:14)

68

Appendix (6)
The differences between AR and traditional research
What traditional researchers and action researchers tend to think about their different kinds of
research
What traditional researchers tend to think

What action researchers tend to
think

Only academic practitioners can do research
and generate knowledge.

All practitioners can do research and generate
knowledge.

Practitioners have to be told what to do and
think about their practice.

Practitioners can thick for themselves and
make their own decisions about practice.

Knowledge is a thing that exists in someone's
head (usually an academic's).

Knowledge is a creative process that all
people engage in, intellectually and
physically.

There is an answer to everything, and it can
be discovered somewhere.

There is no final answer to anything.
Knowledge can be created as well as
discovered.

All research will lead to an end point.

There are no end points in life or human
enquiry, only continual process of new
beginnings.

Who studies what
What traditional researcher tend to study

What action researcher tend to
study

Traditional researcher study the world ʼout
thereʻ, from an outsider perspective. They
ask, ʻWhat is going on over there?ʼ

Action researcher study the world ʻin hereʼ,
from an insider prospective. They ask, ʻWhat
is going on in here?ʼ

They study other people, seeing those people
as separate from themselves.

They study themselves, seeing themselves as
connected with everyone and everything else.
The ʻIʼ studies the ʻIʼ in company with other
people.

They offer explanation for what other people
are doing, but remain separate from the
people they are studying.

They offer descriptions and explanations for
what they are doing in company with other
people.

How they study it
69

How traditional researchers tend to study

How action researcher tend
to study

Traditional researcher tend to carry out
experiments on things and people, using
traditional scientific methodology, including
quantitative data gathering and statistical
analysis.

Action researcher investigate their own
practices together with the people they are
with, starting from where they are. They offer
explanations for how they think and act, and
how they are trying to improve things. They
often use qualitative forms of data gathering
and analysis, though they frequently use
quantitative forms too.

They often use control and experimental
groups.

They produce their written and visual
narrative to show their work in action.

They tend to say, ʻIf I do this, that will
happenʼ, aiming to show a cause-and-effect
relationship between what they do and what
other people do.

They do not say, ʻI caused this to happen .ʼ
Instead they say, ʻI had an influence
somewhere.ʼ

Why they study it and what they do with their findings

Why traditional researcher study and
what they do with their findings

Why action researcher study and what
they do with their findings

Traditional researcher want to find out facts
and measurements about the external world.

Action researcher want to find out how they
can improve the world, starting with
themselves.

They do this so that they can make
recommendations about how events can be
predicted and managed.

They take responsibility for what they are
doing, and encourage others to do the same.

They publish their work in scientific books
and papers, usually as printed texts. Their
findings tend to take the form of abstract
theories which they expect other people to
apply to their own practices.

They publish their living theories of practice
in books and papers, often as visual texts, to
influence the development of new open forms
of thinking and practices that carry hope for
the future.

From (McNiff, 2010:27-30)

71

Appendix (7)
Interview
A. Experience of AR before the
RPD Course
Interview schedule:
Name of Teacher:_________________
1.

What research experience did
you have before the course?

Years of Experience:_______________
Name of School:__________________
Date of Interview:________________

Pick up
 How sufficient
 Example

B. Enrolling in the Course
2.

What were your aims of enrolling in the

4.

How would you describe your
experience of conducting AR in
your classroom?

RPD course?
3.

To what extent were they achieved?

Pick up
 Knowledge and skills before and after
 Opinion on the procedures, tutorials
 Challenges faced during the course
 Suggestions to overcome challenges

Pick up




Benefits
Challenges
Suggestions

Involvement in AR after the course

C. Beliefs on wider effects of AR

5.

How viable is conducting AR in your
school by English teachers?

7.

6.

Have you conducted or been involved in
AR process after the course? why? why
not?

What effects do u think AR has
on:
A. Teachers' PD (teaching and
learning, further studies)
B. Educational field

8.

How could AR be valued and
encouraged in schools?

Pick up
 Challenges
 Suggestions

71

Appendix (8)
A Sample of the Interviews' Analysis

72

73

74

