Running title: THE CASE FOR THE PRACTICE BRIEF

1

The Case for the Practice Brief in Community College Studies:
Writing to Bridge Research and Practice

April 2019

Deryl K. Hatch-Tocaimaza1
University of Nebraska–Lincoln

Xiaodan Hu2
Northern Illinois University

Authors Note
A special thanks to Bill Piland, Marissa Vasquez, and Stephanie Estrada of the Journal for
Applied Research in the Community College (JARCC) for their advocacy and partnership in
calling for practice briefs in higher education research. A special thanks to the following
individuals for their early contributions to this paper and background research, as part of a
doctoral course on community college leadership at the University of Nebraska–Lincoln: Adam
Fullerton (U.S. Marine Corps), Jacob Bonander (Southeast Community College, Lincoln, Neb.),
Tara Naughtin (Mid-Plains Community College, North Platte, Neb.), and Mary Pierce (MidPlains Community College, Ogallala, Neb.).

1

Department of Educational Administration, University of Nebraska–Lincoln, 119 Teachers
College Hall, Lincoln, NE, 68588-0360, derylhatch@unl.edu
2
Department of Counseling, Adult and Higher Education, Northern Illinois University, 201-F
Gabel Hall, DeKalb, IL 60115, xiaodan.hu@niu.edu

THE CASE FOR THE PRACTICE BRIEF

2

The Case for the Practice Brief in Community College Studies:
Writing to Bridge Research and Practice
Abstract
Among higher education scholars and observers, there is a perennial call for greater
efforts to bridge research and practice. Yet the chasm between them is a similarly enduring
characteristic of the field of education studies. In this paper, we advocate for the use of the
practice brief as an overlooked and grossly underutilized genre of scholarly writing in the field
of higher education—in particular the field of community college studies—as one way to more
intentionally address the research-practice gap. Crafted, as it so happens, as a practice brief, this
paper posits a working definition, provides an overview of the genre in relation to other types of
scholarly papers and other fields of study, and enumerates key characteristics of practice briefs to
guide authors and peer reviewers. We discuss how practice briefs can be situated within a largely
missing form of educational praxis and scholarship such as evidence-based practice (EBP).
Lastly, we call on the higher education research community to include this genre in very specific
terms within calls for journal submissions, in graduate programs, and in collaboration with
practitioner partners.
Keywords: practice brief, community colleges, evidence based practice, academic
publishing, research practice gap

THE CASE FOR THE PRACTICE BRIEF

3

The Case for the Practice Brief in Community College Studies:
Writing to Bridge Research and Practice
A perennial call to action among higher education scholars and observers is the need for
greater efforts to bridge research and practice (Kezar, 2000). Yet the chasm between them is a
similarly enduring characteristic of the field of education studies. The community college sector
is no exception (Cohen, 2005) despite intentional efforts to address the research and practice
gaps structurally. In recent decades, for instance, there have been efforts such as those backed by
the W. K. Kellogg Foundation (Amey, 2006) and the Carnegie Project on the Education
Doctorate (Perry, 2013, 2015) to transform how community college leaders and scholarpractitioners are trained. Achieving the Dream, launched by the Lumina Foundation in 2004, has
engaged scores of colleges and engaged hundreds of scholars and practitioners in fostering a
“culture of evidence” to support student success (Rutschow et al., 2011). University-based
research and service initiatives such as the Center for Community College Student Engagement
(CCCSE; McCormick, Kinzie, Gonyea, & Paulsen, 2013), the National Resource Center for the
First-Year Experience and Students in Transition (NRCFYS, 2019) and the Community College
Equity Assessment Lab (CCEAL, 2019) have conducted and fostered influential, transformative
research that has changed the rhetorical and policy landscapes of community colleges
nationwide.
Many scholars, for their part, push for great public visibility and engagement in the
national discourse and widespread policy and practices (Kezar, Chambers, & Burkhardt, 2005).
Yet researchers’ ability to inform practice based on empirical evidence and transformative
perspectives remains hobbled by structural trappings of the ivory tower of academe. Among
barriers for tenure-track researchers who study community colleges are the persistent incentives
to seek grants and produce peer-reviewed scholarship often at the expense of engagement with

THE CASE FOR THE PRACTICE BRIEF

4

policymakers and professionals. Despite personal commitments to making an impact in the lives
of individuals and communities, and making their research matter in the real world (Lindholm,
2004), scholars face disincentives due to the kinds of scholarly production valued in the
academy—the peer-reviewed journal article.
For their part, community college practitioners who would otherwise draw from and
contribute to the research literature typically find little translatable value in contributing to and
reading the type of empirical studies that predominate in higher education research journals
(Bers & Calhoun, 2002). For those aspiring community college leaders who pursue higher
education graduate programs to advance their careers, the evidence is clear that they regularly
desire a different emphasis on skills and areas of expertise in tackling contemporary issues than
what is common in academe today (Brown, Martinez, & Daniel, 2002). The convergence of
interests between researchers and practitioners requires an innovative collaboration in
approaching and conducting community college research.
To address the gap between research and practice on the front of academic publishing, we
call on the community college research field to begin integrating the practice brief as a key genre
of scholarly publications in research journals as one way to more intentionally bridge research
and practice. In this paper—crafted, as it so happens, as a practice brief—we posit a working
definition, provide an overview of the genre in relation to other types of scholarly papers and
other fields of study, and enumerate some key characteristics of practice briefs to guide authors
and peer reviewers, and we call on the higher education research community to include this
genre in very specific terms within calls for journal submissions, in graduate programs, and in
collaboration with practitioner partners. Our paper is couched specifically in the community
college sector due to our own professional interests and due to the inherent values and

THE CASE FOR THE PRACTICE BRIEF

5

proposition of these institutions as explicitly grounded in their communities. Nonetheless, as we
trust is apparent, our arguments are applicable to all of the higher education.
What is a Practice Brief? A Working Definition
A practice brief is an article that provides empirically based, conceptually coherent
recommendations and guidance using the best and most current research to tackle a specific,
urgent challenge in everyday language that practitioners can use in immediate, real-world
scenarios they face every day. The notion of a practice brief is certainly not a technical one. In
the common meaning of the term, it indicates simply “a short document designed to support
educators with research-based information as they improve their practice” (Bell & Rhinehart,
2016, p. 1). However, as published in scholarly journals in applied fields, practice briefs also
exhibit rigorous scholarship. The Journal of Children and Poverty (JCP), for instance, instructs
authors to develop a “substantiated coherent argument,” but without using standard research
article structures. Rather than an abbreviated research paper, briefs are designed to go “beyond
the scope of a formal research article” (JCP, 2016, para. 3-4). Whereas JCP relies on editorial
discretion alone for the publication process, other organizations, including Association of Nurses
in AIDS Care (ANAC) and the American Counseling Association (ACA) for instance, pursue the
same rigorous double blind peer review process as other articles in their respective publications.
To fully realize the mutual interests of researchers and practitioners, we argue that peer review is
essential coupled with open access publishing practices wherever possible for the sake of
practitioner access.
For practical purposes of both crafting and reviewing a practice brief, it is instructive to
establish how it differs and compares with other genres of scholarly and academic writing.
Further below in our paper we expand on these ideas to elaborate several key characteristics.

THE CASE FOR THE PRACTICE BRIEF


6

A practice brief is not a short-form empirical research study. Rather, it underscores and
synthesizes implications of empirical studies. In some journals, a practice brief might in
fact respond to a call for papers for a shorter-length “exchange” article or “research in
brief.” However, in practice in today’s higher education journals such entries are usually
empirical pieces of larger studies, such as a content validation (e.g., Hatch, MardockUman, Nelson, 2018; Wood, Reid, Harris, Xiong, 2016) or methodological notes (e.g.
Campbell, 2017), to name two examples. Below we call on editors to make specific calls
for practice briefs to differentiate them from these already established genres.



A practice brief is not a policy brief. However, it may address issues related to policy
decisions, in as much as those decisions are made by practitioners—as opposed to
primarily policymakers and governing agents—in the course of administering and leading
the operations of educational activities. In essence, the difference is plainly contained in
the nomenclature: a practice brief is to practitioners what a policy brief is to
policymakers.



A practice brief is not a scholarly or theoretical essay. However, it does develop a central
argument that may, in the course of enumerating practical recommendations, derive
evidence of conceptual shortcomings in the research literature, which in turn provides a
warrant for a needed research agenda to address practitioners’ actual work.



A practice brief is not a systematic literature view. Indeed, in the brief space allowed, and
given the main purpose to make recommendations, a literature review section at all is in
most cases inappropriate. Instead, from the beginning to the end of the paper, the focus is
on how to do so something about a challenge. Defining the scope and nature of the
challenge needs to be accomplished in a brief introduction. Then, recommendations

THE CASE FOR THE PRACTICE BRIEF

7

throughout should be backed with cited evidence.
A practice brief is, by definition, a short-form manuscript—usually 5 to 12 pages in
length if formatted to APA guidelines and current practice in higher education journals that
accept brief articles. Among the primary higher education journals (Bray & Major, 2011; Wells,
Kolek, Williams, & Saunders, 2015), the only one with a specific call for a practice brief that we
are aware of is the Journal of Applied Research in the Community College (JARCC), which
provides several briefs published in recent years that can serve as exemplars or at least reference
points (e.g., Barhoum, 2017; Dibelka, 2018; Tuliao, Hatch, & Torraco, 2017).
Practice Briefs as a Missing Form of Educational Praxis and Scholarship
The notion of a practice brief can be seen as an important part of intentional
practice/praxis in educational research (Kemmis, 2010) including that envisioned by evidencebased practice (EBP) that is used in various professional and scholarly contexts. Originating
from healthcare professions, EBP is defined as “the process of combining the best available
research evidence with knowledge and skill to make collaborative, patient- or populationcentered decisions within the context of a given healthcare situation” (Howlett, 2014, p. 9). Over
the years, EBP has been adopted and applied to other fields, such as management (Stonebraker &
Howard, 2018), social work (Mullen, Bledsoe, & Bellamy, 2008; Smith, 2013), and education
(Tennille, Solomon, Brusilovskiy, & Mandell, 2016; Volpe & Briesch, 2018). Given its reliance
on the partnership among evidence, practitioner expertise, and individuals’ needs and choices,
EBP aims to bridge the gap between research and practice (McKibbon, 1998). Specifically,
Rahman and Applebaum (2010) noted that researchers may not understand practitioners’
resistance of using the findings, while practitioners can perceive the research focus as being
largely irrelevant to their practices and programs and “being out of touch with the real world” (p.

THE CASE FOR THE PRACTICE BRIEF

8

10). Certainly, this divide between research and practice is prevalent in the community college
sector that the research topics valued by community college practitioners can be distinct from
research topics centered on contemporary issues (Bers & Calhoun, 2002).
It is important to note the limitation of adapting EBP to other fields. For example, in a
critical analysis of EBP in education, Biesta (2007) underscored that, different from the medical
contexts, “being a student is not an illness, just as teaching is not a cure” (p. 8). And so, in order
to more fully acknowledge and center teaching and learning as a morally-committed, co-created
social phenomenon, some have argued that EBP is best paired with its complementary inverse of
practice-based evidence (PBE) wherein researchers and practitioners collaborate to determine
how research-derived recommendations translate to practice (McKeon & McKeon, 2015;
Parrish, 2018).
These partnerships allow for critical appraisal of the best available research, evaluation of
applicability in the context of student values and culture, and collaborative decision making of
crafting and delivering good educational practice for everyday challenges. To answer the call for
connecting community college research and practice (Cohen, 2005), we argue that what the
practice brief embodies is a mechanism or venue to foster such partnerships in ways currently
mostly absent in the higher education research field.
Characteristics of Practice Briefs for Authors and Reviewers
We posit four characteristics that authors and peer reviewers can refer to when evaluating
manuscripts proposed as practice briefs. These characteristics have been developed based on
principles of EBP/PBE discussed above and several years of experience of the first author using
the practice brief as a means of scholar-practitioner development and knowledge dissemination
in a doctoral-level course on community college leadership at the University of Nebraska–

THE CASE FOR THE PRACTICE BRIEF

9

Lincoln. Our hope is that scholar-practitioner teams will expand, develop, and normalize these
guidelines and make practice briefs a widely used means in the broader enterprise of scholarship
in practice.
Characteristic #1: Practice Briefs Provide How-To Guidance Above All
Above all else, a practice brief is a guide to “how to” to do something regarding a
practical problem faced by practitioners, based on a body of evidence. This means that
implications for practice are not secondary to a scholarly argument nor are they placed
subsequent to one. Rather, once a practice brief establishes the topic at hand and provides a
rationale for the paper, it is filled from top to bottom with recommendations for actions grounded
not in anecdotal best practices, but in empirical evidence drawing on a relatively broad literature
base. A practice brief is a “translational” genre of writing rather than an empirical report.
Therefore, practice briefs do not have methods sections, nor a findings section. They do not have
a separate discussion or recommendation section since the whole paper is an argument for action
based on evidence and reasoning.
In some cases, the recommendations in a practice brief might be illustrated by or
illuminated in light of a particular research study (or series of research studies) conducted by the
authors. Nonetheless, the foundation of the recommendations should ideally arise from a
relatively broad or diverse body of knowledge. In contrast to scholarly essays and reviews, the
primary purpose is not how to understand a problem or phenomenon, although it may be
necessary to briefly establish a conceptual definition for the purposes of the paper. Practice briefs
do not have space for separate literature reviews or theory development.
An author may wish or be compelled to use an organizing conceptual framework to
understand the issues and organize the manuscript. If so, it is vital that the author make a case to

THE CASE FOR THE PRACTICE BRIEF

10

readers, who are practitioners and other working stakeholders, why the perspective is warranted
and useful to them in understanding and implementing the recommendations. Conceptual
definitions must be as brief as possible, limited to only what is essential to understand the action
called for. Not all practice briefs need an overall conceptual framework. Instead, it is common to
provide various conceptual perspectives embedded within the discussion of the various empirical
bases of different recommendations.
For authors looking to craft a practice brief based largely on their own novel study (or
series of research studies), it is important to consider whether the scope of that research is broad
enough to truly provide a comprehensive set of recommendations. If an author characterizes the
paper as a “research brief,” “study,” or something else that reflects traditional standards of
reporting empirical studies, this may be evidence that it is not a true practice brief. On the other
hand, there may be countervailing evidence, despite the traditional key phrases and progression,
that a paper could be a practice brief if reformulated.
Characteristic #2: Practice Briefs Are Empirically-Based
A practice brief delivers actionable guidance based on the best and most promising
emerging scholarly research, as opposed to primarily anecdotal, localized, or popular knowledge.
Although a practice brief should rely on empirical research for its recommendations, it is
wholly inappropriate to frame a practice brief around the traditional headings of an empirical
study with a methods section, findings, discussion, implications, and so on. If a paper takes this
form, it is categorically not a practice brief, even if the authors’ main intent is to inform practice.
Even without a traditional empirical study organization, if the recommendations in a practice
brief can only be elaborated after presenting the facts of one’s own study methods and findings,
this may be evidence the manuscript is not a true practice brief, for the same reasons detailed in

THE CASE FOR THE PRACTICE BRIEF

11

the section above. On the other hand, though, one’s own empirical study, even if not fitting for a
practice brief alone, typically presents issues that could be leveraged nonetheless to develop a
separate practice brief that could be a complementary companion piece to an empirical study
report.
Of special consideration is that practice briefs, precisely due to their tackling emerging
challenges for which there is little precedent, sometimes have scant empirical research bases to
draw on regarding how to implement action regarding the issue. If this is the case, the author
must draw on analogous or complementary bodies of literature from other fields or contexts to
triangulate and extrapolate to the issue and setting at hand. For instance, a novel educational
intervention may be based on some theory of action, yet in its implementation subject to
organizational logics never before explored. Prior implementation studies of analogous programs
or organizational studies alone may provide insight lacking in the novel topic. The lack of
evidence for action is by itself insufficient rationale for not citing evidence for recommendations.
Indeed, these are opportunities to call for needed research and to call out academics for (perhaps
not yet) paying attention to pressing issues that practitioners face or that arise from the field, thus
speaking to the potential of the practice brief as a feedback loop to keep research grounded and
relevant.
Characteristic #3: Practice Briefs Tackle Pressing Issues that Are Sufficiently Tailored in
Scope
A practice brief is by definition short. There is room for only the most pressing issues,
and only their most compelling facets for which practitioners have control or responsibility. For
a practice brief to make a valuable contribution, it must be narrowly tailored within a topic area.
Superficial synthesis across domains and large bodies of literature are generally not helpful.

THE CASE FOR THE PRACTICE BRIEF

12

Books and literature reviews are more amenable for authoritative summaries. For instance, the
questions of how to make guided pathways or reform developmental education—to name just
two prominent current examples of challenges receiving attention in the community college
sector—entail coverage far outside the scope of single practice briefs. A handful of pages on
either topic would suffice only to give a broad definition and mostly unserviceable platitudes for
recommendations due to space limitations of complex issues. Smaller aspects of these larger
issues, for certain groups or contexts, for example, may be appropriate for a practice brief.
An author and reviewer should consider, independent of the intellectual novelty of a
paper’s argument, to what extent is the topic/issue a pressing issue that practitioners face or
should be paying attention to? Does the author make a compelling case for the issue at hand? In
other words, does the paper promise to make a meaningful contribution to the literature and
popular rhetoric around the work of community college practitioners, advocates, and
stakeholders? If so, is the topic/issue sufficiently narrow to allow a 5–12 page paper to truly
make a substantive contribution?
Characteristic #4: Practice Briefs Are Aware of Their Audience
Lastly, we argue that a practice brief must have a clear indication regarding its audience.
In scholarly essays and empirical studies it is perfectly acceptable and common for the purpose
of the paper to pursue disembodied or un-contextualized “knowledge” or “understanding” or
efforts to “approach” a phenomenon or construct. Greater knowledge and understanding are
important in practice briefs too, but only as means to taking action and doing. This requires a
clarity of audience, even if across many groups or types of agents whether college faculty, staff,
administrators, governance officials, policymakers, community activists, workforce partners, or
others. An author and reader of a practice brief should be able to immediately see who exactly

THE CASE FOR THE PRACTICE BRIEF

13

could do what right now in light of the information presented.
Conclusion: A Call to Journal Editors, Faculty, and Researchers
Practice briefs are a genre of scholarly literature largely unknown and extensively
underutilized in the field of higher education. Given their potential as a mechanism to bridge
research and practice in a structurally sustainable way, as argued above, we call on stakeholders
to adopt and pursue the practice brief in their work so that it may become an accepted and
common type of paper throughout the higher education research landscape.
In particular, we primarily call on journal editors and editorial board members to carve
out in their calls for manuscripts a specific description of practice briefs among options for
papers accepted. It is not enough to allow for the possibility of a practice brief under a
generalized brief format. Rather, the intentionality of bridging research and practice through
practice briefs needs to be apparent and specific to be more than rhetoric.
Secondly, we invite higher education faculty members to assign their students in graduate
programs to write practice briefs for course assignments, with the goal of disseminating them
through scholarly and professional trade publications. The format is ideal for working
professionals, who make up the majority of higher education graduate students, to leverage their
expertise while learning to articulate scholarly arguments and synthesize high quality empirical
evidence toward problems of practice. Naturally, this type of exercise to bridge research and
practice fits well with CPED and other EdD programs in particular. But it does not exempt PhD
programs where new students can benefit too from learning scholarly reasoning and writing in
this accessible way. As a practical recommendation, the first author of this paper has found
success in requiring students to submit their term papers for publication or dissemination,
whether in peer-reviewed or other venues, in order to receive full credit. Bridging the classroom

THE CASE FOR THE PRACTICE BRIEF

14

and the field is just one other instance of what practice briefs can contribute to.
Lastly, for those faculty, students, and practitioners conducting highly technical or
theoretical higher education research, the practical and policy implications are always urgent
regardless of the scholarly abstraction. Yet implications tend to get buried in the closing
paragraphs of research papers that generally are not read by practitioners. Therefore, we call on
scholars to consider crafting—for each and every paper they write—a complementary but standalone practice brief for dissemination in venues likely to reach practitioners. These companion
practice briefs ideally would be written in collaboration with practitioners, if not involved in the
original research, to ensure their relevancy and potential as translational scholarship.
It is clear that higher education research must be reimagined (Renn & Gonzales, 2019)
including what motivates research and what we do with it (Tachine, Lopez, Dache, & PhelpsWard, 2019). Insofar as there is agreement that research should be grounded in, responsive to,
and conducted in collaboration with and for the benefit of educators and their communities, we
call on the higher education research community to adopt and promote the practice brief as a key
mechanism toward this end.

THE CASE FOR THE PRACTICE BRIEF

15

References
Barhoum, S. (2017). The challenges of community college students in developmental writing
and four ways to help. Journal of Applied Research in the Community College, 24(2),
47–56.
Bell, P., & Rhinehart, A. (2016, September). How to identify and develop practice briefs.
Research & Practice Collaboratory. Retrieved from
http://stemteachingtools.org/assets/landscapes/How-to-Develop-Practice-BriefInitiative.pdf
Bers, T. H., & Calhoun, H. D. (2002). Literature on community colleges: An overview. New
Directions for Community Colleges, 2002(117), 5–12. doi: 10.1002/cc.48
Biesta, G. (2007). Why “what works” won’t work: Evidence-based practice and the democratic
deficit in educational research. Educational Theory, 57(1), 1–22. doi: 10.1111/j.17415446.2006.00241.x
Bray, N. J., & Major, C. H. (2011). Status of journals in the field of higher education. The
Journal of Higher Education, 82(4), 479–503. https://doi.org/10.1353/jhe.2011.0020
Brown, L., Martinez, M., & Daniel, D. (2002). Community college leadership preparation:
Needs, perceptions, and recommendations. Community College Review, 30(1), 45–73.
https://doi.org/10.1177/009155210203000103
Campbell, C. M. (2017). An inside view: The utility of quantitative observation in understanding
college educational experiences. Journal of College Student Development, 58(2), 290–
299. https://doi.org/10.1353/csd.2017.0021

THE CASE FOR THE PRACTICE BRIEF

16

Cohen, A. M. (2005). UCLA community college review: Why practitioners and researchers
ignore each other (even when they are the same person). Community College Review,
33(1), 51–62. doi: 10.1177/009155210503300104
Community College Equity Assessment Lab. (2019). About CCEAL. Retrieved April 3, 2019,
from Community College Equity Assessment Lab website: https://cceal.org/about-cceal/
Dibelka, D. (2018). Emergency management in community colleges: Why colleges need to be
prepared. Journal of Applied Research in the Community College, 25(2), 59–65.
Hatch, D. K., Mardock-Uman, N., & Nelson, M. J. (2018). Content validation of the Community
College Student Success Program Inventory. Community College Journal of Research
and Practice, 42(6), 439–444. https://doi.org/10.1080/10668926.2017.1323694
Howlett, B. (2014). What evidence-based practice is and why it matters. In B. Howlett, E. J.
Rogo, & T. G. Shelton (Eds.), Evidence-based practice for health professionals: An
interprofessional approach (pp. 5-30). Burlington, MA: Jones & Bartlett Publishers.
Journal of Children and Poverty. (2016, July 28). Submitting policy and practice briefs.
Retrieved April 1, 2019, from Institute for Children, Poverty & Homelessness website:
https://www.icphusa.org/jcp/submitting-policy-briefs/
Kemmis, S. (2010). Research for praxis: Knowing doing. Pedagogy, Culture & Society, 18(1),
9–27. https://doi.org/10.1080/14681360903556756
Kezar, A. J. (2000). Higher education research at the millennium: Still trees without fruit?
Review of Higher Education, 23(4), 443–468. https://doi.org/10.1353/rhe.2000.0018
Kezar, A. J., Chambers, A. C., & Burkhardt, J. C. (2005). Higher education for the public good:
Emerging voices from a national movement. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

THE CASE FOR THE PRACTICE BRIEF

17

Lindholm, J. A. (2004). Pathways to the professoriate: The role of self, others, and environment
in shaping academic career aspirations. The Journal of Higher Education, 75(6), 603–
635. https://doi.org/10.1080/00221546.2004.11773579
McCormick, A. C., Kinzie, J., & Gonyea, R. M. (2013). Student engagement: Bridging research
and practice to improve the quality of undergraduate education. In M. B. Paulsen (Ed.),
Higher education: Handbook of theory and research (Vol. 28, pp. 47–92). Dordrecht,
Netherlands: Springer.
McKeon, P. O., & McKeon, M. M. (2015). Evidence-based practice or practice-based evidence:
What’s in a name? International Journal of Athletic Therapy & Training, 20(4), 1-4. doi:
10.1123/ijatt.2015-0055
McKibbon, K. A. (1998). Evidence-based practice. Bulletin of the Medical Library
Association, 86(3), 396-401.
Mullen, E. J., Bledsoe, S. E., & Bellamy, J. L. (2008). Implementing evidence-based social work
practice. Research on Social Work Practice, 18(4), 325–338. doi:
10.1177/1049731506297827
National Resource Center for The First-Year Experience and Students in Transition. (2019).
About us. Retrieved April 3, 2019, from University of South Carolina website:
https://sc.edu/about/offices_and_divisions/national_resource_center/about/index.php
Parrish, D. E. (2018). Evidence-based practice: A common definition matters. Journal of Social
Work Education, 54(3), 407-411. doi: 10.1080/10437797.2018.1498691
Perry, J. A. (Ed.). (2013). The Carnegie Project on the Education Doctorate: The education
doctorate-A degree for our time. Planning and Changing, 44(3/4), 113–329.

THE CASE FOR THE PRACTICE BRIEF

18

Perry, J. A. (2015). The Carnegie Project on the Education Doctorate. Change: The Magazine of
Higher Learning, 47(3), 56–61. https://doi.org/10.1080/00091383.2015.1040712
Rahman, A., & Applebaum, R. (2010). What’s all this about evidence-based practice? The roots,
the controversies, and why it matters. Generations, 34(1), 6–12.
Renn, K., & Gonzales, L. (2019). ASHE 2019 theme announcement. Retrieved April 3, 2019
from
https://mediaspace.msu.edu/media/ASHE2019+Theme+Announcement/1_3p3rm8zf
Rutschow, E. Z., Richburg-Hayes, L., Brock, T., Orr, G. E., Cerna, O., Cullinan, D., … Martin,
K. (2011). Turning the tide: Five years of Achieving the Dream in community colleges
(SSRN Scholarly Paper No. ID 2031257). New York, NY: MDRC. Retrieved from
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2031257
Smith, B. D. (2013). Sustance use treatment counselors’ attitudes toward evidence-based
practice: The importance of organizational context. Substance Use & Misuse, 48, 379390. doi: 10.3109/10826084.2013.765480
Stonebraker, I., & Howard, H. A. (2018). Evidence-based decision-making: Awareness, process
and practice in the management classroom. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 44,
113-117. doi: 10.1016/j.acalib.2017.09.017
Tachine, A. R., Lopez, J., Dache, A., & Phelps-Ward, R. (2019, March 19). Reimagining the
study of higher education: Episode 1. Live webinar commissioned by the Association for
the Study of Higher Education.
Tennille, J., Solomon, P., Brusilovskiy, E., & Mandell, D. (2016). Field instructors extending
EBP learning in dyads (FIELD): Results of a pilot randomized controlled trial. Journal of
the Society for Social Work and Research, 7(1), 1–22. doi:10.1086/684020

THE CASE FOR THE PRACTICE BRIEF

19

Tuliao, M., Hatch, D. K., & Torraco, R. J. (2017). Refugee students in community colleges: How
colleges can respond to an emerging demographic challenge. Journal of Applied
Research in the Community College, 24(1), 15–26.
Volpe, R. J., & Briesch, A. M. (2018). Establishing evidence-based behavioral screening
practices in U.S. school. School Psychology Review, 47(4), 396-402. doi: 10.17105/SPR2018-0047.V47-4
Wells, R. S., Kolek, E. A., Williams, E. A., & Saunders, D. B. (2015). “How we know what we
know”: A systematic comparison of research methods employed in higher education
journals, 1996−2000 v. 2006−2010. The Journal of Higher Education, 86(2), 171–198.
Wood, J. L., Reid Jr., D. O., Harris III, F., & Xiong, S. (2016). Male program assessment for
college excellence (M-PACE): Content validation summary. Community College Journal
of Research and Practice, 40(9), 802–805.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10668926.2015.1107515

