KULTURA – SPOŁECZEŃSTWO – EDUKACJA Nr 2 (12) 2017 POZNAŃ

Felicitas Macgilchrist
Georg Eckert Institute for International Textbook Research,
Braunschweig. University of Goettingen

Backstaging the teacher: On learner-driven,
school-driven and data-driven change
in educational technology discourse
KEYWORDS

ABSTRACT

educational discourse, discourse analysis, digital education, educational technology,
edtech, hegemony, datafication

Macgilchrist Felicitas, Backstaging the teacher: On learner-driven,
school-driven and data-driven change in educational technology
discourse. Kultura – Społeczeństwo – Edukacja nr 2(12) 2017,
Poznań 2017, pp. 83–103, Adam Mickiewicz University Press.
ISSN 2300-0422. DOI 10.14746/kse.2017.12.4.
As digital technologies become more prominent in schools, and
a host of new media products appear in classrooms, critical questions are being asked about the erasure of power and politics in
contemporary education. To explore the discourse on digital education, this paper draws on discourse analysis of ethnographic
interviews with for-profit and non-profit organizations in the field.
It asks (i) what industry insiders describe as driving change in contemporary educational technology (edtech), and (ii) whether new
actors/technologies shaping a novel educational hegemony, and
if so, what this hegemony looks like. Initial findings suggest that
while the teacher was seen as key to driving change in printed
educational materials, three different discourses appear when describing change in today’s educational technology. In the first,
learners drive change; the focus lies on the individual dimension.
In the second, schools drive change; the systemic dimension. In
the third, data drive change; the analytics dimension. Linking
these three discourses is a shift from “education” to “learning”.
The accounts of educational technology simultaneously advocate
for improving opportunities for all students, especially weaker or
disadvantaged learners, and also strengthen the hegemonic shift
across policy and practice towards an instrumental understanding
of education. Overall, the paper suggests that power and politics
are by no means erased from the edtech industry’s accounts of
digital technologies and datafication. The socio-material affordances engineered into the technologies invite particular teaching
practices and thus affect power relations in education.

84

Felicitas Macgilchrist

The field of digital education is often criticised for assuming that technology is
neutral, or that “by focusing on ‘what’s new’, [it] has “failed to ask ‘who has power’”
(Emejulu and McGregor, 2016: 3). However, if we agree with Neil Selwyn, then
the relationship between education and technology touches on the “fundamentally
political questions that are always asked of education and society – that is, questions of what education is, and what education should be” (Selwyn, 2012: 217). In
this article, I argue that although scholarship, advertising and journalism may often assume technology is apolitical, the people involved in designing and developing educational technology by no means do so. Instead, while focusing on “what’s
new” they simultaneously formulate eminently political views on the technology
they are shaping and the power effects it may have. This paper focuses on three
interrelated issues arising in conversations with companies who produce digital
tools and resources for use in school: First, discourses on who or what is driving change in contemporary educational technology. Second, an overarching shift
in understanding “education” as “learning”. Third, what follows from this for the
imagined relationship between teachers and technology, and how that relationship
will shape the future of education.

Context
In the not-too-distant past, educational media were largely print-based. Although
there were CD-ROMS, online materials, web 2.0 and interactive apps, the vast majority of materials produced for use in formal education, and certainly in schools,
were textbooks and other printed materials. For these materials, one set was purchased or copied and distributed to all students in class. Only major educational
publishers (whether for-profit or state-run) could make the large investments necessary to create content. Some publishers were producing differentiated materials so that weaker and stronger students could work through topics with material
aimed at supporting them in the best way possible and enabling them to work at
different levels. However, the overall strategy of developing published materials
could, as one participant in this study suggested, be summarized as a “one size fits
none” approach to the classroom. Teachers, rather than producers, were making
the decisions on how to personalize, individualize and tailor the materials to the
students in their classrooms, because teachers had the most intimate knowledge of
their students’ abilities, needs and motivations. At that time, publishers had teachers in their minds as their imagined primary audience when developing materials; teachers were arguably driving the content which educational publishers were

Backstaging the teacher: On learner-driven, school-driven and data-driven change

85

producing for schools (Sammler, et al. 2016). As one former editor has critiqued,
however, it was often a particular imagined teacher: “Publishers are incentivized to
create materials that appeal to teachers who don’t want to change” (Jobrack, 2011:
xix). Students as end users have always been important, but teachers, schools,
school boards and districts were seen as the gatekeepers between educational publisher and student (Macgilchrist, 2011).
The current juncture is seeing a leap in the breadth of digital materials available for, and being used in, schools. In 2016, for instance, McGraw-Hill, one of the
leading educational publishers in the US, made over 56% of its profit from digital
products, the first time over half its revenue was generated by the digital (rather
than print) side of the business (McGraw-Hill Education, 2017: 5). The focus of
this article is on schools in the United States of America, which has seen various
iterations in its approach to digital technology in schools. Hardware was an initial
priority. Interactive whiteboards, iPads, Chromebooks, etc. have made major inroads into K-12 (i.e. elementary and high school level) education. Alongside this
hardware, digital textbooks were adopted, including open textbooks (Okamoto
2013), and students were encouraged to use the web to find information for projects. The textbooks were mostly digitized versions of the print textbook (and this
is largely the case worldwide, with several Ministries of Education enabling free
access to PDFs of the entire stock of textbooks across the school curricula via their
websites, e.g. Syria, Ecuador, Brazil, Mexico or Iran, cf. Macgilchrist, 2017). The
web was mainly used for Google or Wikipedia searches, with students invariably
following up on the first hits they found, rather than digging deeper and checking
sources (cf. Hodel, 2013). Dedicated early adopter teachers were devising innovative pedagogies for their classes, but “digital practices” remained at an individual
teacher level.
The conversation today revolves around novel pedagogies which enable
schools or districts to make the most of digital tools and resources (e.g. Clapp et
al., 2017; Dezuanni, O’Mara, and Beavis, 2015). There is widespread recognition
that simply using computers, laptops, tablets, phones and interactive whiteboards
is not enough to significantly transform teaching and learning. Nor is it enough
to have innovative pedagogies driven by single teachers who exploit themselves as
cognitive labourers in this new digital education system (Selwyn, Nemorin, and
Johnson, 2016). Although remaining on the margins of mainstream discourse on
“edtech” (educational technology), vocal advocates are discussing critical digital
pedagogy, critical design literacy or radical digital citizenship, where the emphasis
is on a way of being in the world which goes beyond making students ‘effective’
participants in a digital world, and instead fosters a critical approach and encour-

86

Felicitas Macgilchrist

ages collective action for social justice (e.g. Emejulu and McGregor, 2016; Pangrazio, 2016; Strommel, 2014).
With the increasing importance of the digital, two observations can be made:
First, the designers of educational materials now have direct access to students
and individual experimental teachers. The teacher body no longer has the same
gatekeeper role it previously had. Second, this makes it more feasible for new
players to develop products for schools. For several years, observers have been
asking if and how these new actors are shifting the terrain of education. There
has been much speculation about this issue; theoretical models have been proposed (Höhne, 2015), but there has been little empirically grounded study of
how the industry itself accounts for its practices. This article picks up this core
issue and translates it into research questions on two levels: (1) What does the
edtech industry position as driving change in contemporary educational media?
(2) Are these new actors/technologies shaping a novel educational hegemony? And
if so, what does this hegemony look like? It draws on interviews with industry insiders, teasing out three types of discourse about education in the digital world,
and reflecting on the changes and continuities with which these new actors are
entangled.

Methodology and methods
Any study responding to these questions can, of course, only be a snapshot of
current practice. Indeed, the focus here is not on observable practices in today’s
schools, but on accounts of these practices. This paper is part of a larger study on
the “discourse of edtech”, which considers educational policy, media discourse and
edtech development in Germany and the US. The basis for this article is 12 indepth interviews with CEOs, managers, strategists, lawyers, educational advocates
and researchers at organizations related to edtech, based in the US. In March and
April 2017, I spoke for between one and two hours with non-profit and for-profit
organizations; with smaller companies developing one single learning app, and
multi-billion dollar companies with a broad portfolio of print and digital products.
Participants were identified by drawing on the technology literature on successful
edtech companies, and the online presence of vocal advocates in the field of educational data and student privacy.1 In identifying three discourses, I do not mean
In support of open science, but within the constraints of a research ethics of informed consent
agreements and anonymization, I am happy to let readers see the co-text and context of the transcripts on which I draw in this article. Interested readers should contact me by email.
1

Backstaging the teacher: On learner-driven, school-driven and data-driven change

87

to claim that these are the only discourses on driving change in digital education.
However, I do suggest that these discourses resonate with broader discussions on
edtech today.
To this study, I bring an ethnographic sensibility and a discourse analytical
lens. The ethnographic sensibility means I had a set of questions to guide the interviews, but the conversations flowed around the specifics of the person with whom
I was speaking. I see any interview first and foremost as an interpersonal exchange
(DeVault and McCoy 2006); my person is also a research instrument, and any attempt to reduce my presence, i.e. to be objective or distanced, negates the importance of this mental-material-semiotic interaction (Adams, St. Pierre, 2011; Lenz
Taguchi, 2012). Thus, I am – as an ethnographer – fully part of the exchange, and
co-construct (with my verbal and non-verbal cues) the narrative which my interview partner is telling. An ethnographic sensibility also means that I aim to use
vignettes, short stories or detailed case studies to shed light on fundamental societal issues, such as innovation, datafication or what counts as valuable education.
The goal is to tease out how specific discursive fragments or situated practices are
entangled with social-cultural, political, economic, historic and material orderings, and how these orderings write themselves into the specific fragments and
practices.
The discourse analytical lens is core to this study: The guiding questions above
are discourse analytical. On the one hand, the article aims to describe different
accounts of educational change today, and to analyse conflicts among various “discourses”, where discourse refers to way of speaking and doing which privilege certain ways of living and being, and render others undesirable. Through discourse,
certain ideas become common-sense and others become odd; discourses create
subject positions at which people are addressed (e.g. as child, pupil, student or
learner) and from which they are invited/expected to act. I understand discourse,
in this sense, as “the primary terrain of the constitution of objectivity as such”
(Laclau, 2005: 68). On the other hand, the article aims to describe the overarching “hegemonic configuration” in which these conflicts play out, where hegemony
refers to “a whole body of practices and expectations, over the whole of living”; it
is “a lived system of meanings and values – constitutive and constituting – which
as they are experienced as practices appear as reciprocally confirming” (Williams,
1977: 110). Although different sets of ideas, which can be bundled together as
“discourses”, conflict with one another, these conflicts play out within an overarching lived system of shared meanings and values. This system is itself constantly
enacted through everyday practices.

88

Felicitas Macgilchrist

Where ethnography and discourse analysis potentially clash is their differing
levels of empathy: Where ethnography generally aims to understand the meanings
made by participants, discourse analysis aims to critique hegemonic meaningmaking. As my ethnographic self is generating insights with my interview partners,
I am excited about the educational technologies which they are developing. I appreciate their goals of, for instance, improving the learning experience, increasing
equal opportunity and supporting teachers and school reform (see below). I see
clear evidence that their products are serving these goals, and I see a richness to
the field of educational media which was not there several years ago, and which
benefits students, teachers and schools. Yet as a critical discourse analyst, I also
question the way in which the values and priorities of education are subtly shifting
in line with the material affordances of these digital technologies (see below). My
overall research aim is to leave this tension unresolved (Law et al., 2013); to avoid
“tidying” up my analysis to either account for participants’ meaning making, thus
ignoring the broader picture of hegemony, or to ignore the passion for educational
change which I see in these participants in favour of a mono-dimensional critique
of techno-solutionism. Both aspects play into the changes and continuities of formal education today, and I believe that taking both into account is necessary if we
want to understand current practices.

Discourses of change
Different positions were visible in each interview. There was no one single discourse associated with one single speaker, although some participants leaned more
strongly towards one position.
Discourse 1: Learner-driven change, the individual dimension
“I never liked school” said one chief executive officer (CEO). Another CEO was
revising for his GMAT exam and getting frustrated with his printed materials; he
wanted a tool for his iPhone which helped him – as a learner – to learn in a more fun
way. A senior manager said: “Well, what is the best possible learning experience you
can have? What’s the most valuable thing you can have? As a learner? It is to have
a personal tutor, right?” But a personal tutor who knows you very well would be far
too expensive to scale up, so the next best thing is a digital person tutor.
When I asked about the core challenges currently facing the company, one
chief operating officer (COO) noted that shifting their focus away from the learner

Backstaging the teacher: On learner-driven, school-driven and data-driven change

89

was a challenge: “Because we were learner-focused for the first five years of our
company, we had been able to create a learning experience, which is absolutely
best in class. So that has helped us to sell to our clients, even though we don’t have
the same swanky features that a lot of other learning management systems might
have”. A core challenge for this company now was to make the tool more intuitive
and usable for teachers and administrators.
And when I asked about recent developments, one CEO described the gamification elements they have built into the system. “We were against extrinsic [motivation] in the beginning”, he said, “we didn’t intend to do this [add badges] at
all, but we found that kids (…) would do fist pumps and we’d see it in New York
and we’d see it in Denver, and we’d see it in Los Angeles and in Seattle”. Since the
badges and other game elements are so motivating to learners, he continued, we
are adding more.
Across the interviews, the personalized, adaptive part of the technology in
question was often associated with equity and closing the achievement gap. “We
cater the most” to “the weak learners”, said one adaptive learning company, “the
top five, top ten percent they will always be top five, top ten, right?” The question
becomes how to pull the others up so that they are also doing well, maintaining
motivation throughout the course, and not dropping out. Adaptive technology responds with tasks, readings, questions, etc. that are adapted to the learner’s individual capacity and capability at the time they are learning.
This company had reduced the drop-out rate in professional training courses
by 30% since implementing adaptive technology. Imagine “if you can just reduce
the drop-out rate in the US with about the same effort by what our system has
shown”. Expressed in economic terms, the high drop-out rates in US higher education impact on the individuals’ student debt, and thus “it’s the weak students that
have biggest fiscal problem that you need to solve for, right?” When I noted that
although the feedback mechanisms and personalization associated with adaptive
learning clearly had an impact on reducing drop-out rates, there were a number of
other reasons for dropping out, such as family pressures, my interview partner said
quickly, well yes, but those don’t go away. The system of formal learning can, it is
implied, only deal with mechanisms internal to learning. Socio-political-culturaleconomic factors fall outside the mandate of learning companies.
The Data Quality Campaign, a non-profit based in Washington, spends a great
deal of design effort on clarifying for parents, teachers and students how the data
gathered about each individual student (weak and strong) will support their learning experience (see e.g. Fig. 1).

Fig. 1. When teachers are empowered with data, students do better (Data Quality Campaign)

90
Felicitas Macgilchrist

Backstaging the teacher: On learner-driven, school-driven and data-driven change

91

Each of these examples points to similar issues: The problem to be addressed
by the educational technology being developed starts with the learner: How to
help them like school? How to revise better? How to give every learner a personal tutor? How to help them complete their courses? How to use data to support
learners? If we assume all media are designed with an “imagined audience”, the
primary imagined user in these instances is the individual learner; the learner
is driving change at the level of the interface, the design, the algorithms being
engineered into the products, the public conversation about student data. In this
sense, the individual dimension of technology use is driving change: The overall
goal expressed in this discourse is how to improve the individual experience for
the individual user. In this sense, struggles over power are being described here:
the goal is to empower the learner; to shift the decision-making power from the
teacher (who can, in some of these accounts, make school unbearable, and who
were, in other accounts, fairly irrelevant to the product design) to the learner, i.e.
to shift power from the top to the bottom of the traditional hierarchy; this is an
especially acute reflection on power when the learners being described are lowincome, Black or Latinx learners who have traditionally been disadvantaged in
formal education.
Discourse 2: School-driven change, the systemic dimension
“What has eased the process of launching your product?” I asked. “Vision”, said
one director of professional learning and school design, “So, if you’ve got thirty
schools, that they all understand that their superintendent or their chief academic, whoever it is, knows why they’re using it. Because then while implementation
might look different, we’re all moving towards the same goal and we’re all committed to that same goal.” In telling me about her background before founding
the company, one CEO told me about her experiences as a classroom teacher and
founder of a school which became one of the top schools in the US. She attributes
a great deal of that success to the school’s cross-school focus on analytical reading,
academic writing and debate. When she moved on from this school to be Director of Curriculum and Instruction for about 115 schools, she initially thought “oh,
we’ll just do professional development and teach everyone how to do this, just like
we did at [School X].” But in the face of so many competing demands on teachers to do professional development, and the myriad challenges facing schools, especially in disadvantaged neighbourhoods, with the high proportion of students
with English as an additional language, few resources, the threat of violence, etc.
that was far more difficult than she had expected. She reported thinking:

92

Felicitas Macgilchrist

“There are just like so many problems here, how do we even begin. And so
I was like, we can’t do this teacher by teacher, it has to be on a school level, because what I saw was that if a principal said, ‘we’re doing something’, everyone
did it. Some people did it well, some people did it poorly, but it got done. And so
I thought, ultimately, whatever this education technology is going to be, it has to
be something that the school leader can use as a tool for instructional leadership,
it has to work for many different students in many different languages, and it has
to do something everyone sees as valuable.”
Also, when I asked this CEO what she saw as the most innovative things going on in education and technology, her response began with one district’s public
schools which she sees as being “the most innovative and the most sophisticated in
its school reform efforts” in the US. The innovations, she said, are “very tactical”: The
simple ones are the ones that really work. “The most innovative things happening in
schools are teachers rethinking how they spend their minutes in the classroom, who
they spend them with, and what they are doing with that person. (…) And technology is merely a tool that they are leveraging to be able to do those things.”
Several accounts in the interviews echoed this notion of rethinking how teachers spend their minutes. An adaptive learning company told me that they regard
their adaptive learning system as an aid to the teacher: “Because what it can do
is that it can actually make sure that all the trivial knowledge that you don’t need
a teacher to teach, a computer can handle that, and then let the teacher focus on
the more difficult things on Bloom’s taxonomy.” This rethinking impacts on schoolwide practices, and resonates with a story told by another interview participant:
Visiting a school the week before we spoke, she observed how teachers split a class
into two groups. They did small group teaching with one half of the class, while the
other students worked independently on laptops in a shared central space. These
small practical changes are, in a way, tactical school reforms, dramatically changing how teachers work, how they interact with students, and how students interact
with each other and themselves during their school day.
Also, the Data Quality Campaign told me how student data was used in Washington, DC to create a report card for schools on indicators that were relevant to
equity. Looking at the aggregate discipline data, for instance, the school system
found that it punished African American students far more readily than white
students. It reacted to its data by forming a task force and setting up practices to
observe, reflect and change this systematic discrimination. “But, that’s more of an
outlier than it hopefully will be”, my interview partner added.
In these examples, the problem to be addressed starts at the school or district
level. If the school is to implement new tools successfully, it helps to be driven by

Backstaging the teacher: On learner-driven, school-driven and data-driven change

93

an overarching pedagogical vision. Scaling up the process of reforming one school
to the whole school district can’t be done by individual action, but could be engineered into software. Small tactical changes in practice can shift how teachers and
students learn, educate and interact. Legislation encouraging the use of aggregate
data from schools can push reform towards greater equity. The primary imagined
audience in this discourse is the school: students are aggregated into a student
body, teachers are working together for the whole school, legislation and rulings
are for the good of all schools in a district or state, reform is related to racist discrimination. This systemic dimension is driving how new software is engineered,
how classroom practice is organized, and how conversations around student data
unfold, and is thus driving the transformation of education. Again here, specific
power relations are implicitly mobilized when the goal is to reform school practices from outwith the school itself: schools’ current practices are seen to be problematic, hindering some students from achieving their full potential. External forces,
working on the school from beyond its walls and beyond its staff and students, can
be used to solve these problems.
Discourse 3: Analytics-driven change, the data dimension
In one of my final interviews, I mentioned my initial thoughts for this present article, and suggested to my interview partner that his company enacted a “learnerdriven” discourse. “Yeah”, he said, “but I would prefer to say that we’re outcomedriven”. Yes, in reflection and after listening/reading through his interview again,
I see both learner-driven and analytics-driven elements. The problem to be solved
was, in his statements, how to improve the learning experience for the individual.
However, the way to solve the problem is by identifying outcomes, drawing on data
to adapt the learning experience to achieve those outcomes, and using the data to
measure success. Usage data provides transparency: “we can see what a learner is
doing”; teachers couldn’t see that before. “When I was going to school”, he said,
the teacher would ask, “So did you have any problems with what you’re reading
for today?” They would look around, “No? Alright, great, let’s move on”. Because
no-one dared to raise their hand and admit they had a problem. Now, the teacher
can look at the data, can see where most students are struggling, and work on those
specific issues.
As analytics have become more important, the employment strategy of the
large companies has shifted. Where previously an educational publisher had
a host of editors focused on providing long-term, slow-paced support for authors
and content, now, while authors and editors remain important, the emphasis has
shifted to management consultants who can use analytics about the company’s

94

Felicitas Macgilchrist

performance to manage change, to engineers who program the software to work
with data, and to the ongoing fast-paced dynamics of maintaining and improving
platforms and working with data. Where previously about 90% of investment went
into the first stage of creating textbooks before the launch, speculated one edtech
manager who works with change at a major educational publishing house, now
with adaptive technologies about 50% is now spent correcting, updating, maintaining the systems after the product has been launched. Similarly, companies are
disinvesting in complex higher order content which is not conducive to being reworked as (numeric) data. In higher education, for instance, the STEM (science,
technology, engineering and mathematics) fields, which have a tradition of using
tests frequently, have a much higher demand for edtech products. These resources,
which ease the teacher’s job of grading and make the student’s job of revising for
and completing tests more enjoyable, are in far higher demand than materials for
courses on, e.g. English literature, which “can quite simply be better with actual
books”. Logically, a company in which “every last dollar” is going into software
rather than books is also shifting its focus to STEM rather than literature.
Almost all the edtech companies I spoke with present reports on their websites on the measurable success attributable to their products. With math product
X, for instance, Grade 4 students show 1.55 years growth in math competence in
just one year; integrating literacy platform Y into classrooms closes the achievement gap for low income students by 264%, Black students by 456% and Hispanic students by 749%.2 Several cooperate with universities to conduct research,
others fund independent research on their product, and the larger companies
invest in dedicated Research & Development units. Measurable learning success, closing the achievement gap, and generally using data to demonstrate the
advantage of their product over their competitors are key in this field. Whereas
textbooks win prizes for design, sales or innovation, there are no prizes for “effectiveness”, because there is very little data available on textbooks’ impact on
learning (cf. Jobrack, 2011: xviii).
One COO told me his product is based on “three learning modalities”: Instructional content, i.e. “things that will help you be better at the topic”; memorizing,
i.e. “things you need to remember”, like Pythagoras theory; and assessment, i.e.
“things you need to be assessed on” (formative or summative). What about further
modalities of learning such as creativity or critical thinking, I asked. Our platform
“is not at a point that we can test you on all of that. So that’s not where we excel”,
2
To ensure the semi-anonymity of my interview partners, I have not cited the source of these
effectiveness studies; the figures are those quoted in the reports.

Backstaging the teacher: On learner-driven, school-driven and data-driven change

95

he replied. It excels at exams, in particular numeric exams. Similarly, although the
Data Quality Campaign takes on a broad understanding of “data”, arguing that
teachers have always acted on data when they have been acting on their observations of students in class, the prevailing understanding of “data” in their materials
(see Fig. 1 above) refers to measurable, numerical, chunked items. A literacy app
may provide space for comments, thoughts and reflections, and thus enable the
human dimension of student-teacher interaction, but these text snippets do not
feed into the adaptive component of the app. The texts are created within the app
but they are not “data”.
In this sense, data are central, and particular things count as data. The central problem to be addressed is poor achievement on testable tasks. The issue for
the organizations – as realized in this discourse – is how to make data visible/
actionable, and how to improve the visible data on achievement, e.g. test scores,
years of math progress, or Lexile measures. In this discourse, the material dimension of data is driving change: creativity and creative critical appraisal cannot be
measured, and thus do not count as data at the moment. If investment is being
so strongly channelled into digitally manageable courses and specializations, then
the ‘bookish’ fields – of complex creativity and critique – are seeing disinvestment.
With the data dimension, we see the clearest realisation of an apolitical stance
(data makes the process transparent; data is presented as neutral), yet also the most
visible form of hard power: job losses.

The complexities of privatization, education and learning
The previous section explored the first of the two questions guiding this article:
What is driving change in contemporary educational media? It identified three
(overlapping, interwoven, yet distinct) discourses: learner-driven, school-driven
and data-driven change. In this section, I draw on these three discourses to think
through the second question: Are new actors/technologies shaping a novel educational hegemony, and if so, what does this hegemony look like? This section suggests that one guiding concept knots the three discourses together, and reflects on
broader implications for education and today’s socio-political order.
Many of the concerns about the new actors entering the field of education
through media/technology products relate to their origins in private, for-profit
companies (Apple, 2006; Ball and Youdell, 2009). Fred van Leeuwen, General Secretary of Education International, captured a core dichotomy in his foreword to
a report on Hidden Privatisation in Public Education:

96

Felicitas Macgilchrist
To put it in the starkest possible way: is education about giving each child, each young man or
woman, the opportunity to develop his or her full potential as a person and as a member of society? Or is education to be a service sold to clients, who are considered from a young age to be
consumers and targets for marketing? (van Leeuwen in Ball and Youdell, 2009: 3f)

This stark contrast is, however, if we look closely at the accounts given above,
arguably too binary. My interview partners are strong advocates for educational
equality, for supporting learners to develop their potential and achieve success in
society. Their accounts do not see children as consumers and marketing targets. It
is also quite clear, given current privacy regulations, that marketing is not the way
to monetize data generated from school education. Yes, the private companies are
oriented to making a profit – and there are deep ambivalences about for-profit actors entering public education – but the relationship between profit, students and
potential seems more complex than van Leeuwen’s questions imply.
Looking at the interviews, the issue is not about an either/or option (opportunity vs. marketing), but about (re-)defining the “good” of education. First, part
of education does become a service to be sold to clients, where the clients are
school boards, school districts, etc. rather than students. But the service aims precisely to develop a young person’s full potential as a learner. Privatization is thus
not opposed to, but entangled with, classic conceptions of good education. Second,
whereas there were no non-profit textbook publishers in the US before the emergence of OER, some of the most successful edtech products today are produced
by non-profit entities. These companies tend to offer their main learning product
free, with additional professional development components offered for a fee. The
CEO of the non-profit edtech company included in this study was very clear that
education should be understood as a “public good” and supported by a different
economic logic than for-profit companies can realise. Again, educational technology is not opposed to, but entangled with, classic conceptions of good education.
As this previous paragraph suggests, however, “learning” emerges in the interviews as a key word when talking about education. Most participants I spoke to are
clear in their terminology: They are speaking about learning, rarely about education. A theory of learning tends to be engineered into the software, where learning
is understood as a concrete task, specific learning outcomes can be listed, measured,
assessed, and the assessments compared to other measures (other classes, other children or the child’s previous work), rather than theories which imagine learning as
an open, exploratory, emancipatory and social practice. The material affordances of
digital technology lend themselves well to thinking in terms of independent learning and measurable learning outcomes. As Gert Biesta (2013) reminds us, however,
learning is not education. Education can be thought of as a whole complex process

Backstaging the teacher: On learner-driven, school-driven and data-driven change

97

including, but not reduced to, learning, and always involving risk: “Yes”, writes Biesta, “we do educate because we want our students to learn and achieve”, but that
does not mean that a “situation in which there is a perfect match between input’ and
‘output’ is either possible or desirable”. Instead, there is always a “risk” in education,
“because education is not an interaction between robots but an encounter between
human beings” and “because students are not to be seen as objects to be moulded
and disciplined but as subjects of action and responsibility” (Biesta, 2013: 1). Education is not “a product to be packaged, automated, and delivered” (Veletsianos and
Moe 2017). In digital education, a “pedagogy of uncertainty” (Britzman (2009: xi)
retains its value, and “the mystery of what it means to teach, or to learn” has not been
(cannot be) solved (Ross et al., 2014: 58).
This distinction between learning and education relates to the stories above
of dividing the task of teaching between teachers and software: In those stories,
teachers delegate some aspects of teaching/learning to the tool, and spend more
intense time with smaller groups of students on the other aspects of education.
This will not always be a risky space, but the space opens the possibility for unexpected human encounters: where teachers encourage critical reflection on the
digital resources or where peers interact with one another; where uncertainty, risk
and mystery are welcome; where it is about, as van Leeuwen says above, developing students’ “full potential as a person and as a member of society” rather than
[simply] their full potential as a learner.
However, current educational policy focuses increasingly not on learning as
a part of education, but on learning rather than education. In this sense, the fundamentally political questions of “what education is and should be” is being softly
resolved in favour of learning. Driven by educational psychology, large-scale international surveys such as the Programme for International Student Assessment
(PISA), Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) or the
International Computer and Information Literacy Study (ICILS), and national/
federal curriculum reform, attention is shifting from education to pre-defined,
measurable and risk-free learning outcomes. My interview partners, while often
explicitly orienting to equality and social justice, also implicitly orient to (measurable) learning, and their accounts are thus intimately entangled with today’s
general discursive shift. In this sense, the explicit political struggles noted above,
e.g. empowering students or enacting tactics for school reform, take place on a discursive terrain in which pre-defined learning outcomes, and the ‘datafied’ learner,
constitute the (almost) unquestioned educational hegemony.
Before turning to how this educational hegemony is entangled with broader
shifts in the socio-political order, I want to reflect on one specific point of contes-

98

Felicitas Macgilchrist

tation: the potential roles for the teacher in digital education. Teachers, as I noted
above, are no longer the main gatekeepers between student and media provider,
they have been ‘backstaged’. So, a first concern is whether the widespread use of
high quality, content-rich, interactive, adaptive technologies is turning the teacher
into a behaviour manager. In this scenario, students work independently and in
groups on tasks led and structured by the technological tools at their disposal.
The students take on responsibility for their education and their learning. The
teachers’ primary task is to keep students on task, and stop misbehaviour. This
deprofessionalization would be a major ‘disruption’ to current educational practice. Some of the interview partners quite clearly voiced concerns about teachers’
competencies. They were quick to acknowledge that some teachers in schools are
excellent, but “the majority” are performing poorly. According to this view, most
teachers do not offer students a higher quality interaction than the software does.
In fact, the negative impact teacher talk can have on students is eliminated if the
software is used more frequently. This second scenario chimes with longstanding
discussions in US education on “teacher-proofing” the curriculum (cf. Apple 2000:
70), in which the goal is to plan a curriculum so tightly and tie it so intimately to
textbook content, accountability or performance management, that even the most
“incompetent” teacher can’t damage the students. A disdain for teaching as a profession – which can also be tied to gendered labour (Apple, 1986) – undergirds
this scenario. It dominates some public conversations, but is also hotly contested.
Or, a second scenario, does the discourse of learning (rather than education),
which is so predominant in the interviews, position teachers as highly skilled professionals, but nevertheless reduce education to one specific aspect, i.e. achieving
pre-defined learning outcomes? Interactive technologies would, in this view, finally enable the teacher to take on the role of facilitator which constructivist learning theories from Piaget to Vygotsky have long been advocating. The teacher’s role
is then primarily to guide successful, efficient, effective, engaging, active learning. The teacher – as learning resource – helps students meet the demands of the
world as it is, but does not interrupt current common-sense, critique the digital
technologies, or open a space for the risk of emergent responsibilities and action.
Teaching to the test is hard to avoid in this second scenario, since the priority lies
in achieving high test scores, good grades and measurably improved learning outcomes. The “fiscal” reason for supporting students to learn better and achieve good
grades is to ensure they complete the course, reducing overall drop-out rates and
student debt. The impact of teachers on course completion and student success
is understood as internal to learning. Other factors (economic pressures, unpaid
care work, family responsibilities, getting enough food and water to concentrate

Backstaging the teacher: On learner-driven, school-driven and data-driven change

99

throughout the day, etc.) would not be addressed by teachers. In this sense, the
individuality of the learner is also internal to their learning; their individual life
situation is rarely made relevant to how the technology will work (or not work) for
them. The three discourses outlined in the preceding section all play strongly into
this ‘learnification’ scenario. Rather than shaping a ‘novel’ educational hegemony,
they are strengthening a common sense (of education as learning) which has become almost self-evident (and thus hegemonic) today. This hegemony undergirds
Biesta’s concern that as the teacher’s role shifts from teacher to facilitator we “give
up on the very idea of education” (Biesta, 2013: 46).
Third, some lines of flight flowing away from this hegemony are, however,
also visible in the interviews. They illustrate the ongoing struggles over what
counts as education, which are playing out, not only among educational theorists, but also among edtech developers. Digital resources used in a split-class
format, for instance, in which half the class work independently on their computers/tablets with individualized learning, while the other half receive smallgroup instruction with their teacher, position the teacher (and teaching) as core
to the educational experience. These products aim to foster closer, more intense, encounters among teacher and students than are currently enabled by the
public/state school system with its large classes. They create a space in which
risk can be welcomed, because the core of this space is one in which students
and teachers address one another, and in which teachers or students can interrupt the pre-defined learning outcomes or side-track with personally important issues; there is space in which teaching can bring “something radically
new” (Biesta, 2013: 53) to students; in which teachers can focus on listening to
and caring for students (Doxtdator, 2017; Prinsloo, 2016); or in which teachers can bring uncomfortable and “difficult knowledge” (Britzman, 1998: 117)
to the classroom which may lead to students producing “simply thrilling lines
of flight” in unexpected directions (Adams St. Pierre 2008: 193). In this sense,
digital education prefigures a new assemblage of human and non-human actors,
since students receive individualised feedback from not only their teachers and
peers, but also from software. Education, in this sense, is about the whole person, it includes space to reflect together on the technology and to take a critical
distance to the media being used. It enables learning not just in the medium but
about the medium; and learning not just about a subject but from one another
(Todd, 2003). And it enables teachers to bring something external to the learning event into the exchange. In this scenario, which was a core scenario for my
interview partner in the non-profit company, students do more than learn, and
the teacher is quite explicitly an educator.

100

Felicitas Macgilchrist

Educational hegemony: data, policy and practice
The hegemonic understanding of education as learning is in turn entangled with
– i.e. is constituted by and constitutes – broader shifts in the socio-political order, as datafication becomes increasingly prominent across our materialdiscursive
lives. Discussions on datafication, i.e. the representation of social life in computerised data, abound in the fields of medicine, crime prevention, finance, media
and politics (Hepp, 2016; O’Neill, 2016; Süssenguth, 2015). Datafication is linked
to concepts such as the “quantifiable self ” and the “transparent society” and to
an increasing (self-)surveillance in our world today (Han, 2012). Some observers
suggest that big data is undermining democracy with the threat of an “algocracy”
(Danaher, 2014); at the very least, algorithmic filtering is a “human rights issue”
(Tufekci, 2014). This critique is accompanied by observations of how data play into
the tensions among power, liberation, exploitation and struggles for equality and
social justice (Emejulu and McGregor, 2016; Jordan, 2015).
Given the extensive data collected during formal schooling, there is now also
an emerging body of work on datafication in education, and how data is entangled
with shifting socio-cultural, political, economic, historic and material orderings
and normalisations. Datafication brings, for instance, a new logic of investment
into everyday school practice (Thompson and Cook, 2016); data tools prefigure
techniques of digital educational governance (Williamson, 2016); data play into
“the surveillance and performative culture of accountability” which “both affirms,
legitimates and seduces through discourses of quality while increasingly regulating and governing” education (Roberts-Holmes and Bradbury, 2016: 600). Data
flows and platforms are seen here as policy instruments for controlling education,
with significant (detrimental) impacts on teachers’ professionalization (Selwyn
2016). Again, these studies aim to provide a necessary critical reflection of educational data practices, including the “hidden mediators” who are becoming more
powerful (Hartung 2016). However, this focus on hegemony tends to neglect the
accompanying lines of flight (cf. Selwyn, Henderson, and Chao, 2015).

Concluding words
Contestation over the role of the teaching profession is, for instance, one area
where struggles over politics, exploitation and the power to shape change become
visible. Deciding which school practices and pedagogies should be fostered and
implemented to achieve the promises of digital education means deciding what

Backstaging the teacher: On learner-driven, school-driven and data-driven change

101

the teacher’s role is in relation to digital technologies, in particular those data technologies which adapt to the individual learner’s needs. This paper has suggested
that, far from claiming that technology is neutral, edtech providers often clearly
describe how their product is participating in the “fundamentally political questions” over what counts as good education (Selwyn, 2012: 217). This includes their
expectations of teachers, and the practices which are engineered into the products,
i.e. the software’s socio-material-discursive affordances, the kinds of knowledge,
interaction and action in which a product invites its users to engage. One conclusion from this study is that, as these new data actors emerge, and established actors
reorient to develop new data technologies, they aim to shape educational policy,
practice and pedagogy in particular ways. The change they envision is driven by an
orientation to learners, to schools and/or to data analytics.
In sum, this paper has highlighted ways in which digital education is more
complex than the binary option of either offering young people up to private interests as consumers and marketing targets or developing their full potential as
people and members of society. Clarifying the expectations of a society for how
teachers can relate to technology and data in different spaces of schooling – and
advocating for how they should relate – will shape the kinds of education and/or
learning which young people experience in schools. Thus far, this conversation is
only happening on the margins of public discourse on education and datafication.
Leaving these expectations under the radar will also shape how young people experience school, since it delegates decisions on how to imagine future teacher roles
to the educational technology developers and to the material affordances of the
tools they are designing.

References
Adams E., Pierre St. (2008). Deleuzian concepts for education: The subject undone. [In:] I. Sementsky
(ed.). Nomadic Education: Variations on a Theme by Deleuze and Guattari, Rotterdam, pp. 183–196.
Adams E., Pierre St. (2011). Post qualitative research: the critique and the coming after. [In:]
N.K. Denzin, Y.S. Lincoln (eds). The SAGE Handbook of Qualitative Research, Thousand Oaks,
pp. 611–626.
Apple M.W. (1986). Teachers and Texts: A political economy of class and gender relations in education.
New York.
Apple M.W. (2000). Official Knowledge: Democratic Education in a Conservative Age. 2nd ed. New
York.
Apple M.W. (2006). Educating the “Right” Way: Markets, Standards, God, and Inequality. New York.
Ball S.J., Youdell D. (2009). Hidden Privatisation in Public Education. Brussels. http://download.ei-ie.
org/docs/IRISDocuments/Research%20Website%20Documents/2009-00034-01-E.pdf.

102

Felicitas Macgilchrist

Biesta G. (2013). The Beautiful Risk of Education. London.
Britzman D. (1998). Lost Subjects, Contested Objects: Toward a Psychoanalytic Inquiry of Learning.
Albany. New York.
Britzman D. (2009). The Very Thought of Education: Psychoanalysis and the Impossible Professions.
Albany.
Clapp E.P, Ross J., Ryan J.O., Tishman S. (2017). Maker-Centered Learning: Empowering Young People
to Shape Their Worlds. San Francisco.
Danaher J. (2014). Rule by algorithm? Big data and the threat of algocracy. [In:] Philosophical Disquisitions. http://philosophicaldisquisitions.blogspot.de/2014/01/rule-by-algorithm-big-data-andthreat.html [28 Apr 2017].
DeVault M.L., McCoy L. (2006). Institutional Ethnography: Using interviews to investigate ruling relations. [In:] D.E. Smith (ed.). Institutional Ethnography as Practice. Oxford. pp. 15–44.
Dezuanni M., O’Mara J., Beavis C. (2015). “Redstone is like electricity”: Children’s performative
representations in and around Minecraft. “E-Learning and Digital Media” Band 12, Heft 2,
pp. 147–163.
Doxtdator B. (2017). Maybe we’re not afraid: on Edtech’s inability to imagine the future. Retrieved
28 April, 2017, from http://www.longviewoneducation.org/maybe-not-afraid-edtechs-inabilityimagine-future/.
Emejulu A., McGregor C. (2016). Towards a radical digital citizenship in digital education. “Critical
Studies in Education”, pp. 1–17.
Han B.-C. (2012). Transparenzgesellschaft. Berlin.
Hartung S. (2016). Between assessments, digital technologies and big data: The growing influence of
‘hidden’ data mediators in education. “European Educational Research Journal” Band 15, Heft
5, pp. 523–536.
Hepp A. (2016). Kommunikations- und Medienwissenschaft in datengetriebenen Zeiten. „Publizistik“,
Band 61, Heft 3, pp. 225–246.
Hodel J. (2013). Verkürzen und Verknüpfen. Geschichte als Netz narrativer Fragmente: Wie Jugendliche
digitale Netzmedien für die Erstellung von Referaten im Geschichtsunterricht verwenden. Bern.
Höhne T. (2015). Technologisierung von Bildungsmedien. „Die Deutsche Schule“ Band 2015, Heft 1,
pp. 8–19.
Jobrack B. (2011). Tyranny of the Textbook: An Insider Exposes How Educational Materials Undermine
Reforms Lanham. Maryland.
Jordan T. (2015). Information Politics: Liberation and Exploitation in the Digital Society. London.
Laclau E. (2005). On Populist Reason. London.
Law J., Afdal G., Asdal K., Lin W., Moser I., Singleton V. (2013). Modes of Syncretism: Notes on noncoherence. “CRESC Working Paper” 119.
Lenz Taguchi H. (2012). A diffractive and Deleuzian approach to analysing interview data. “Feminist
Theory“ Band 13, Heft 3, pp. 265–281.
Macgilchrist F. (2011). Schulbuchverlage als Organisationen der Diskursproduktion: Eine ethnographische Perspektive. „Zeitschrift für Soziologie der Erziehung und Sozialisation“ Band 31, Heft
3, pp. 248–263.
Macgilchrist F. (2017). Digitale Schulbücher: Chancen und Herausforderungen für den politischen Fachunterricht. [In:] H. Gapski, M. Oberle, W. Staufer (eds). Medienkompetenz als Herausforderung
für Politik, politische Bildung und Medienbildung. Bonn.
McGraw-Hill Education. (2017). McGraw-Hill Education Q4-2016 Update.

Backstaging the teacher: On learner-driven, school-driven and data-driven change

103

Okamoto K. (2013). Making Higher Education More Affordable, One Course Reading at a Time: Academic Libraries as Key Advocates for Open Access Textbooks and Educational Resources. “Public
Services Quarterly” Band 9, Heft 4, p. 267–283.
O’Neill C. (2016). Weapons of Math Destruction. New York.
Pangrazio L. (2016). Reconceptualising critical digital literacy. Discourse. “Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education” Band 37, Heft 2, pp. 163–174.
Prinsloo P. (2016). Failing our students: Not noticing the traces they leave behind, Open distance teaching and learning. Retrieved 28 April, 2017, https://opendistanceteachingandlearning.wordpress.
com/2016/11/07/failing-our-students-not-noticing-the-traces-they-leave-behind/.
Roberts-Holmes G., Bradbury A. (2016). Governance, accountability and the datafication of early
years education in England. “British Educational Research Journal” Band 42, Heft 4, pp. 600–613.
Ross J., Sinclair C., Knox J., Bayne S., Macleod H. (2014). Teacher Experiences and Academic Identity:
The Missing Components of MOOC Pedagogy. “MERLOT Journal of Online Learning and Teaching” Band 10, Heft 1, pp. 57–69.
Sammler S., Macgilchrist F., Müller L., Otto M. (2016). Textbook Production in a Hybrid Age: Contemporary and Historical Perspectives on Producing Textbooks and Digital Educational Media.
Eckert.Dossiers 6.
Selwyn N. (2012). Ten suggestions for improving academic research in education and technology.
“Learning, Media and Technology” Band 37, Heft 3, pp. 213–219.
Selwyn N. (2016). “There’s so much data”: Exploring the realities of data-based school governance.
“European Educational Research Journal” Band 15, Heft 1, pp. 54–68.
Selwyn N., Henderson M., Chao S.-H. (2015). Exploring the role of digital data in contemporary
schools and schooling – ‘200,000 lines in an Excel spreadsheet’. “British Educational Research
Journal” Band 41, Heft 5, pp. 767–781.
Selwyn N., Nemorin S., Johnson N. (2016). High-tech, hard work: an investigation of teachers’ work in
the digital age. “Learning, Media and Technology” pp. 1–16.
Strommel J. (2014). Critical Digital Pedagogy: a Definition. Hybrid Pedagogy. “A Digital Journal of
Learning, Teaching and Technology”, http://www.digitalpedagogylab.com/hybridped/criticaldigital-pedagogy-definition/.
Süssenguth F. (ed.). (2015). Die Gesellschaft der Daten. Bielefeld.
Thompson G., Cook I. (2016). The logic of data-sense: thinking through Learning Personalisation.
“Discourse: Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education”. pp. 1–15.
Todd S. (2003). Learning From The Other. Albany.
Tufekci Z. (2015). What Happens to #Ferguson Affects Ferguson: Net Neutrality, Algorithmic Filtering
and Ferguson, 14 August 2014, https://medium.com/message/ferguson-is-also-a-net-neutralityissue-6d2f3db51eb0.
Veletsianos G., Moe R. (2017). The Rise of Educational Technology as a Sociocultural and Ideological Phenomenon. “EduCauseReview”. http://er.educause.edu/articles/2017/4/the-rise-of-educational-technology-as-a-sociocultural-and-ideological-phenomenon.
Williams R. (1977). Marxism and Literature. Oxford.
Williamson B. (2016). Digital education governance: data visualization, predictive analytics, and ‘realtime’ policy instruments. “Journal of Education Policy” Band 31, Heft 2, pp. 123–141.

