"x"
"1" "A Growing Que er Divide:"
"2" "The Divergence between Transnational Advocacy Networks"
"3" "and Foreign Aid in Diffusing LGBT Policies"
"4" "Kristopher Velasco*"
"5" "University of Texas at Austin"
"6" "*For helpful comments, I would like to thank Liam Swiss, Pamela Paxton, participants of the International Sociological Association’s World Congress , and three anonymous reviewers .  Further, I would like to thank Terrance Chapman’s seminar course for inspiring this project.  Correspondence should be addressed to Kristopher Velasco, Department of Sociology, University of Texas at Austin, 305 E 23rd Street, Austin, TX 78712-1699 (email:  krisvelasco@utexas.edu)"
"7" "ABSTRACT:"
"8" "Despite notable successes, countries are increasingly polarized in their response to calls for LGBT rights – with some countries strongly complying with new normative expectations while others openly defy them. To explain these divergent paths, I investigate the transmission of global LGBT norms via two mechanisms: transnational advocacy networks and foreign aid conditionalities. In examining LGBT policy adoption across 110 non-OECD countries between 1990-2016, I find evidence that  how  states are exposed to LGBT norms can indeed help explain polarization. Exposure to LGBT norms through transnational advocacy networks enhances the effect of global pressure and is associated with more progressive policy adoptions, while greater dependence on foreign aid minimizes the influence these expectations are having. Consequently, this study provides new insights into how the mechanism through which countries are exposed to norms shapes compliance and adds new evidence questioning the effectiveness of foreign aid as a tool to advance LGBT rights."
"9" "While  popular discourse and research focuses  on the  adoption  of policies benefitting  lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) communities , especially in Wester n , industrialized countries,  this attention de-emphasizes  the growing chasm  among  states and  their regulation of LGBT populations  outside  these settings  ( Currier 2012 ;  Hadler and Symons 2018;  Symons and Altman 2015; Weiss and Bosia 2013) .  Because , in part,  such  studies look to the emergence of new global , cultural  norms , or expectations,  around LGBT rights as a key factor in explaining LGBT policy adoption  (Fernández and Lutter 2013; Frank and McEneaney 1999;  Kollman 2007 ) , th eir global scope   tends  not to capture  nascent  evidence of resista nce and  policy   backlash .  Consequently,   local  case studies  are  document ing  how the same  normative expectations  explaining  cross-national policy adoption  are also  prompting  anti-LGBT policies  and spurring what Weiss (2013) calls ‘anticipatory countermovements , ’  such as the infamous “Kill the Gays” bill in Uganda ( Dreier 2018;  Nuñez-Miet z and Iommi 2017).  Insights from such case studies are requiring scholars to re-examine global models to better explain the realities around LGBT  politics  in recent years  ( see  Halder and Symons 2018  and  Roberts 2018)."
"10" "T o illuminate the  mechanisms  driving this   divide , I investigate   how  countries  are connected to the international community .  S cholars of social norms  suggest  that social relations are important mechanisms through which norms transfer ( Boli and Thomas 199 9 ;  Hec hter and Opp 2001 ). In particular,  the quality  and   charact er of these social relations determine how actors interact and negotiate with such expectations  and, ultimately,   modify behaviors  (Opp 2001) .  In the realm of international relations, neo-institutionalists  contend that  states a dopt  “appropriate” behaviors  once  legitimated on the world stage  (Meyer, Boli, Thomas, and Ramirez  1997).  The  deepe r states are embedded within the  international  community , such as through  transnational advocacy networks ,   the  more likely they are to adhere  to new  expectations  (i.e. LGBT rights)  (Ayoub 2016) .  Meanwhile,  realist  scholars  instead  emphasize the externalities, or outside consequences, that compliance  with a  norm brings  (Horne 2001 ) . For example, the adoption of economic liberalization and democratic reforms in developing  countries was coupled with threats  of  losing foreign aid  (Sanahuja 2000 ; Siegel and Weinberg 1977).  While  both approaches emphasize  relations , underlying assumptions  differ  in why these relations matter .  Therefore,  the   growing  evidence showing  transnational advocacy networks and foreign aid conditionali ty as  both becoming mechanism s through global LGBT norms are being pushed (Kretz 2013;   Ojilere 2018 ;  Pat ernotte and Kollman 2013 ; Seckinelgin 2018 )  provides an opportunity to assess how these different types of  connections  to   the international community  explain norm polarization and policy change  outside the most industrialized countries ."
"11" "To assess the effects of  different ties in advancing  global  LGBT norms ,  I perform  two-way fixed effects  models using data  from  1 10   non-Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries   from  199 0 -2016 .  For the dependent measure, I use  ILGA’s  State Sponsored Homophobia Report  to develop an index comprised of 1 6  LGBT policies  (Velasco 2018) . I predict a country’s  index value  by developing  a novel  measure of global LGBT norms  and  i nteracting this term with  two measures of ties with  the international community: 1) centrality  within  LGBT transnational advocacy networks; and 2) strength of relationship s  with foreign aid granting countries."
"12" "Findings demonstrate that the  growing divide among stat es can be explained, in part, by   how  states  are connected to the  global arena  and how  t he n ature of these interactions  change the way  norms are received, negotiated, and enacted. Namely, s tates connected via transnational advocacy networks respond positively, adopting more progressive policies, while states  with more aid partners  and funding  challenge  pro- LGBT expectat ion s   and  resist changing  polic ies and , in some cases, act counter to  these expectations .   For those concerned about advancing the treatment of LGBT communities,  results demonstrate that  the focus should be on  foster ing   civil society  and question the effectiveness of  stipulating policy changes thro ugh aid con ditionality   ( Biruk 2014; Kretz 2013;  Ojilere 2018 ; Seckinelgin 2018 ) ."
"13" "The  Spread of LGBT Policies"
"14" "In 1991, a resident of Tasmania filed a complaint against the United Nations  (UN)  Human Rights Committee arguing that the anti-sodomy laws of the Australian state violated his privacy rights under the International Covenant o n Civil and Political Rights  (ICCPR)  (Baisley 2016 ).  I n 1994, the Committee agreed in  Toonen v. Australia  that anti-sodomy policies  violated the treaty’s anti-discrimination provisions, prompting the  Australian  federal government t o overturn the state statute (Baisley 2016 ).  Toonen  serves as an important  symbolic and substantive achievement  as  the first time a  UN  body   explicitly considered concerns expressed by members of  the LGBT community to fall under within  established  human rights  obligations  – a goal of transnational LGBT activists  for several decades (Rupp 2011) ."
"15" "Following ,   the  1990s saw a n increasing number of LGBT-related policy changes. For example, although some states started to already decriminalize same-sex sexual acts, this  expanded during the 1990s  ( Frank and McEeaney 1999 ). Meanwhile, states that already had anti-sodomy provisions removed  pushed  for more progressive agendas such as same-sex unions ( Kollman 2016 )."
"16" "Although Western  Europe historically led  the way on progressive reforms  (Hull 2006 ), advancements hav e not been limited to this region .  Recently , states across Latin America, North America,  Central  Europe, and South Africa have all adopt ed marriage equality  (Carroll 2016;  Paternotte and Kollman 2013 ) . Latin America has also  been a leader in  enacting  LGBT non-discrimination policies, such as in employment  (Corrales 2017; Encarnación 2016 ). In 2015, Nepal followed South Africa in establishing one of the most pro-LGBT constitutions  in the world (Mahato 2017 ).   And i n  2017, the Supreme Court of Taiwan  ruled  the island-nation’s ban on same-sex ma rriages  unconstitutional (Chappell 2017 )  – giving the legislature two years to enact marriage equality. In 2019, Taiwan  bec ame  th e first Asian  nation  to introduce marriage equality.   Figure 1, below, outlines the number of non-OECD countries that have adopted a select set of LGBT policies between 1990 and 2016 to demonstrate that policy growth is indeed a global phenomenon and n ot limited to the industrialized West."
"17" "[FIGURE 1 HERE]"
"18" "Positive policy reforms have not been universal, however.   Beginning in 2006, several provinces within  Russia  passed “anti-propaganda” laws that sought to protect public morality vis-à-vis sexual orie ntation and gender identity. In 2013, the f ederal government followed  with  a national  ban on the promotion  of such “amoral” identities (Persson 2015 ). Opponents of this law often cite the vagueness of it as one of its most  detrimental features. For example, while some claim that the legislation’s primary goal is to limit sexual  acts , in practice it  deter s  any expression of LGBT identity within public  space  (Buyantueva 2018 ). Following Russia, Algeria, Nigeria, and Lithuania  a ll adopted similar provisions and additional states also limited public promotion to varying degrees  (Carroll 2016)."
"19" "Furthermore, some states have  intensified   anti-sodomy  provisions or  laws  criminalizing same-sex sexual acts  (Hadler and Symons 2018) .  For  example,  in 2004 Tanzania criminalized same-sex acts between women in addition to men ( Human Rights Watch 2013 a )  with Maldives following in 2014. In 2005, Cameroon started to aggressively arrest people accused of breaking  their  sodomy laws despite  rarely  enforcing  such provisions  historically  ( Human Rights Campaign  2013 b ).  I n  2014, Uganda  and Nigeria both adopted laws intensifying the punishment for same-sex acts while Nigeria’s bill also re-banned same-sex marriages  ( Nuñez-Mietz and Iommi 2017 ;  Chitando and  v an Klinken  2016 ).  Weiss  and Bosia  (2013) refers to these actions, and similar ones by  other states,  as “anticipatory countermovements,” because these countries are trying to prevent the  advancement of LGBT rights even before there’s a robust domestic demand for them."
"20" "As a result of these varied state responses toward LGBT communities, several scholars have d eveloped new conceptual tools to explain these events. For example, in the aptly named  Queer Wars , Symons and Altman (2015 ) echo arguments made by Weiss and Bosia (2013) and Nuñez-Mietz and Iommi (2017) that it is the  inherently  globalized  nature of current LGBT discourses that can explain both advancements in some countries and active resistance in others  (see Langlois 2017 for critique on overemphasizing global, top-down processes) .  Indeed, Hadler and Symons (2018) build on these arguments to highlight how public opinion regarding homosexuality is polarizing, in part, due to the globalized nature of the present debate.  Th e present  assessment asks, then,  how   can  the globalization of LGBT  human rights norms  produce polarization   explicitly  within policies ?"
"21" "Explaining Cross-National  Policy  Diffusion"
"22" "In studying  LGBT policy adoption ,  scholars  of international relations  increasingly look to  how  transnational forces shape  domestic process es  (Kollman 2007;  Paternotte and Kollman 2013 ) . Although  the domestic arena   still remain s  important  (Langlois 2017) , within an ever-connected world, it is necessary to consider factors that extend beyond the state  and their relation to those unique local contexts ."
"23" "Though t here are many perspectives that consider transnational processes and mecha nisms prompting policy change, f or the  purposes of this study, I  primarily consider  two competing arguments for why actors comply, or not, with normative standards: neo-institutionalists who emphasize the  appropriateness  of complianc e and  realist  scholars who emphasize the role of externalities and sanctions to achieve compliance."
"24" "World Society: A  Neo- Institutional  Perspective"
"25" "To explain the isomorphic political structures across states,  a growing body of literature within  international relations  looks to  the development of no rmative expectations .  Scholars from this tradition argue that domestic policy debates are influenced and driven by the “world society” – a network of international organizations, non-governmental organizations, states, and epistemic communities that “create, institutionalize, and disseminate gl obal models,” (Longhofer, Schofer, Miric, and Frank  201 6: 1749; Meyer et al.  1997; Boli   and Thomas 1999 ; Dobbin, Simmons, and Garrett 2007).  Although Boli and Thomas (1999) first charac terize the world society as relatively flat, with norms being achieved through consensus and taking a truly global quality, subsequent work challenges this characterization by highlighting the structural inequality within these networks (Beckfield 2003, 2010), the role of Western gatekeepers   ( Linde 2018 ), and the emergence of regionalized norms or ‘multiple modernities’ ( Hadler and Symons 2018;  Roberts 2018). Nev ertheless, as  the world society develops expectations for “appropriate” policy scripts, these  macro-level, global  norms and emerging discourses  indeed  get internalized by domestic actors and shape policy making  processes (Boli and Thomas 1999 ; Meyer et al. 1997).   Rather than investigating how regionalized norms alter the meaning and resonance of LGBT rights,  then , I focus on the role of dominant,  Westernized  global norms to contrast how ideas of  appropriateness  from these state shape policies as opposed to  externalities  emanating from these  very  same states."
"26" "By looking at the global landscape, it appears th at this theoretical frame is pertinent  for assessing issues pertaining to sexual orientation and gender identity. Since the early 1990s, international organizations, namely the UN system, started to address LGBT causes  with increased veracity  (Baisley 2016 ;  Mulé, McKenzie, and  Khan 2016 ).  Although LGBT activists targeted international organizations like the UN and, especially, European bodies long before this (Paternotte 2016; Rupp 2011, 2014), a number of events, including  Toonen,  help to symbolically demarcate the arrival of LGBT issues onto the global agenda.  In 1995, for example, lesbian organizations were allowed to formally participate in the Fourth Conference on Women’s Rights in Beijing for the first time ( Baisley 2016 ). The then-named International Gay and Lesbian Association (ILGA) received consultative status through the Economic and Social Council at the UN  in 1993  – although it was rescinded the following year due to backlash from U.S.-based religious actors (Rupp 2011). Finally, in 1991, Amnesty International, a key gatekeeping organization (Linde 2018), incorporated sexual orientation into their prisoners of consciousness campaigns after years of lobbying from ILGA which helped to legitimize sexual orientation as a human right."
"27" "While identifying when new global norms, which are “behavioral prescriptions that are accepted by subjects as legitimate and authoritative” (Halliday 2009:268) at the global level, is difficult given the “amorphous mist” quality of cultural expectations (Ghaziani 2009), the institutionalization of new ideas within international organizations is one key mechanism and indicator that new standards are emerging (Kentikelenis and Seabrook 2017). Therefore, the aforementioned events helped to establish the saliency of LGBT rights explicitly as human rights on the global stage and marked an important turning point in transnational organizing (Baisley 2016; Kollman and Waites 2007; Linde 2018)."
"28" "Over the  subsequent  decades,  various  UN  bodies  continued to make intermit tent  progress in promoting issues related to sexual orientation and gender identity (Baisley 2016;  Linde 201 5 ; Mulé, McKenzie, and Khan 2016; O’Flaherty and Fischer 2008). Since 2006, in particular, the re have been larger strides made within the international space. The first LGBT organizations to receive consultative status since ILGA’s acceptance and subsequent removal took place in this year ( Linde 201 5 ). The Organization of American States, the European  Union, and the African Commission for Human People’s Rights all since passed resolutions in support for LGBT communities (Ayoub and Paternotte 2014; Encarn an ción 2011). Also, in 2013, the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights partnered with LGBT civil society organizations to launch “Free and Equal ,”  its largest human rights campaign to address homophobia, transphobia, discrimination, and violence across the world (Mulé, Khan, and McKenzie 2017). Then-Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon called it the most “unprecedented”  human rights  initiative  by the UN  (UN 201 3 )."
"29" "One important  way  for  states  to   connect to  the world society  and  be  socialized by  global norms  is through  transnational advocacy networks – often  embodied through  international non-governmental  organizations  (INGOs).    INGOs play  a unique role  in being “carriers of world culture,” ( Boli and Thomas 1999 ). A range of studies  demonstrate  that  greater  ties to INGOs make  state s  more likely to  adhere to international norms because these transnational advocacy networks anchored by INGOs  are able to help translate global expectations  to the domestic audience , increasing their salience,  and maintain pressure against the dome stic government to  uphold   new script s  ( Ayoub 2016;  Boyle, Kim, and Longhofer 2015;  Keck and Sikkink 1998 ; Paxton, Hughes, and Green 2006 )."
"30" "St udies trying to understand the adoption  of particular LGBT policies  increasingly acknowledge that how a country is situated in a global context that increasingly promotes rights for LGBT communities is a key factor  ( Karimi and Bayatrizi 2018;  Kollman 2007; Pa ternot t e 2015 ) . For  example, Ayoub (2015 , 2016 ) find s   greater  connections  to  the  world society  through transnational advocacy networks  positively  influence s  LGBT policy adoptions in Europe.  Additionally, by increasing the salience of LGBT rights, in particular, scholars find it increases the likelihood of members of LGBT communities to publicly come out (Garretson 2018). These dual processes encourage the likelihood of actors within the state to internalize LGBT norms – an important step in modifying behaviors (Ayoub and Garretson  2017 ).  Therefore:"
"31" "H1: As global  LGBT  norms d evelop , states are more likely to  adopt pro- LGBT policies."
"32" "H2: States  more embedded within the   world society  are more likely to adopt  pro- LGBT policies."
"33" "The Role of Externalities and Consequences"
"34" "While neo-institutional ists  scholars  point to  the appropriateness of norms to explain compliance and actor behavior , realists  contend  that states  adopt new policies as a response to changes within their incentive structure (Dobbin, Simmons, and Garrett 2007).  As stated by Horne (2001: 9): “Norms thus emerge when behavior produces externalities, when people recognize a right to sanction such externality-producing behaviors, and when the group has the ability to enforce its decisions.”  For example, changes within powerful institutions like the United  Nations , the World Bank, or the International Monetary Fund  (IMF)  could make states reliant upon these organizations for trade, security, or financial assistance likely to adhere to the preferred policy (Gleditsch and Ward 2006 ; Hafner-Burton 2005)."
"35" "Specifically, the use of foreign aid dollars may be a particularly important  externality, or outside ramification,  when understanding the diffusion of policies. In her 2011 study, Bush found that states with increased reliance on foreign aid were more likely to adopt gender quotas within their national parliaments.  Others have highlighted how aid conditionality imposed through the World Bank, the IMF, and other international organizations can lead to effective policy changes ( Sanahuja 2000 ; Siegel and Weinberg 1977).  Tying back to scholars of social norms,  compliance is not the result of the “ought-ness” of the norm, but, rather, the rational incentive to follow preferred practices."
"36" "Alternatively,  Swiss (2017)  demonstrates that foreign aid transactions are not necessarily cold, rational material transactions compelling certain actions. Instead, Swiss (2017: 113 , emphasis added )  conceptualizes  aid ties “as a broader transnational  relationship  between states.”  Therefore, following previous work on norm transfer, foreign aid is an effective tool precisely  because of its relational attributes, falling  within previously established mechanisms."
"37" "C onversations around LGBT equality  are now  intertwine d  with debates on economic development ,  fiscal-based rationales to extend rights , and the appropriateness of doing so (Jolly 2000) . For example, economist Lee Badgett  and  colleagues (2014 a ) did  a n  assessment on  how homophobia impacted the  Indonesia n economy  – estimating losses as high as $12 billion.  Working with USAID, Badg ett  and colleagues (2014 b )  also analyzed  how LGBT inclusion impacts development in emerging economies   around the globe .   Even LGBT people and  their allies promote similar  arguments. The U.S.-based National LGBT Chamber of Commerce and its global partners held an event in 2017 with the World Bank “ to discuss the value of LGBTI inclusion for the public sector, private sector, and for international economic development efforts,” (Crehan 2017).  Rao (2015:41) refers to the process of tying LGBT rights to productivity, development, and markets as  homocapitalism,  stating that “the basic argument is simple enough. Homophobia imposes  avoidable costs on economies by lowering productivity and output as a result of workplace discrimination.” Within this framework, it is the economic incentives that compliance brings that is driving adoption of global LGBT norms."
"38" "Within the broad umbrella of  homocapitalism,  f oreig n aid  is one  important mechanism and policy lever to advance LGBT rights  (Bergenfield and Miller 2014; Biru k 2014; Bosia 2014; Currier 2012 ; Encarnación 2016; Kretz 2013; Lind 2014; Mason 2018 ; Ojilere 2018 ; Seckinelgin 2018 ).  In a 2011 speech in Cairo, then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton famously stated that “gay rights are human rights, and human rights are gay rights,” (Clinton 2011) . Shortly after this speech, Clinton’s State  Department and the British government ,  under then-Prime Minister David Cameron ,  announced that foreign aid decisions will  factor in  the t reatment of LGBT communities (Kretz 2013 ).  Upon this  announcement , which  Cameron made to a meeting of commonwealth states in Australia, the UK Foreign Office stated, “if countries can afford to prosecute and imprison people for consensual relations, then they can  clearly afford to lose aid,” (Martin 2011 ).  In addition to taking  LGBT treatment  into aid decisions ,  Secretary  Clinton also announced the creati o n of the Global Equality Fund – an initial fund of $ 3 million to provide support for civil society organizations fighting for LGBT rig hts within oppressive states ( Brettschneider, Burgess, and Keating 2017 ; Mason  2018 )."
"39" "Following these announcements, connecting aid and the treatment of sexual mi norities began to spread  to other aid-granting agencies and  institutions   – as is typically done in foreign aid policy (Swiss 2018).  Bergenfield and Miller (2014) reviewed how twelve of the world’s largest development agencies, such as European Union, UN Development Program, the World Bank, and several state agencies ,  like USAID ,  handled   LGBT   issue s . A key takeaway is that leaders of nearly all organizations  have  made public statements linking their work to discrimination based on sexual o rientation and gender identity,  although there is variation in the  extent  these statements have made their way into official  policy .   Nevertheless, a new  institutional norm within  development agencies  emerged  (Bergenfield and Miller 2014; Hechter and Opp 2001; Swiss 2018). This  recent  development makes   the need of  understanding  its  effects  that much more salient. To date, there are few quantitative studies investigating this exact dynamic. Following this perspective on the role of material incentive,  therefore :"
"40" "H3: States  receiving more  foreign aid are m ore likely to enact pro- LGBT policy reform."
"41" "Understanding Backlash , Resistance, and Polarization"
"42" "Thus far,  the proposed explanations have  centered on the  expansion  of LGBT policies.  As mentioned , though, there  is also backlash and resistance to these advancements  and  increased polarization across  the international arena  – a process  of growing  research interest  ( Ayoub 2019;  Dreier 2018; Nuñez-Mietz and Iommi 2017; Symons and Altman 2015; Weiss and Bosia 2013 ).   Within this emerging lit erature, scholars argue this  growing queer divide  is  attributable to  the unique ways global norms threaten  alternative  norms, such as self-determination  and local collective identities  ( Hechtor and Opp 2001;  Tilly 1993) . Below, I outline how the key dri vers of expanding LGBT policies (e.g.  global norms, advocacy net works, and foreign aid)  could also explain the emerging queer divide."
"43" "International Norm Polarization"
"44" "To explain the polarization transpiring, Symons and Altman (2015) look to expand on Finnemore and Sikkink’s “norm life cycle” model. Symons and Altman argue that similar to norm development and cascade, polarization is driven by a network of states an d activists working against  new expectation s . In  reference to the women’s rights,  the authors argue “two spirals emerged wherein the Vatican, many Middle Eastern states, and conservative allies in Western civil society opposed a women’s rights agenda supported by many Western states and some non-Western civil society allies . ” (69)."
"45" "Similar to this  cou nter-network  against women’s  rights, a new network began  f orming in  the early 2000s  to counter expectations linking  sexual o rientation and gender identity to traditional  human rights protections – encompassing  Russia, the UN Arab and Africa Group, Organization of Islamic Cooperation, and Western  Christian missionaries (Grossman 2015; Nuńez-Mietz and Iommi 2017; Weiss and Bosia 2013) . For example, not only  did   Ru ssia adopt  a nti-propagan da legislation, but it pushes  against LGBT rights  internationally   under the veil of  ‘ universal traditional values’  (Horvath 2016). Additionally, Christian missionaries  helped fund  the “Kill the G ays” bill in Uganda and  similar  projects  throughout Africa ( Dreier 2018;  Grossman 2015 ). Together, these  actors  are developing a network to challenge the “norm life cycle”  and attempting to  prevent a compl ete cascade of norm acceptance by promoting alternatives against the dominant global narrative."
"46" "O ne key focal point  in arguments countering  LGBT norms   is  the  threat they  present to  another  norm: self-determination.   Self-determination for nations is often characterized as having two distinct components: that citizens should choose their own form of government and a right to form their own collective identity (Hec hte r and  Opp  2001 ; Tilly 1993 ).  Given its enshrinement  in the UN Charter, self-determination is a strong norm within international arena and is a primary cause for the proliferation of new countries and separatist movements since World War II (Tilly  1 993).  Indeed, much of the discourse of political leaders resisting LGBT rights is through  the framing that they are anti thetical to local identities and customs ( Currier 2012).  Because of this, the compliance with LGBT norms may be less likely  given the presence of alternatives  (Hec hte r and Opp 2001).  Indeed, greater integration into the world society may mean a greater adherence to the norm of self-determination, creating a  conflict between norms – when presented with competing or alternative choices, it makes the consolidation of any single behavioral expectation more difficult (Hechter and Opp 2001)."
"47" "T o explain the differences in state resistance to LGBT rights in Central and Eastern Europe, Ayoub (2014) argues that “successful norm diffusion is moderated by differing perceptions of threat…social understandings within the domestic realm define the way state actors respond to international pressures,” (338). Queer and feminist scholars have demonstrated the close link between sexuality and the state (Conrad 2001; Stychin 2003). Stychin (1998: 9) outlines the historical narrative that homosexuality “is linked to conspiracy, recruitment, opposition to the nation, and ultimately a threat to civilization.” Therefore, as normative understandings of new definitions of sexuality and gender identity emerge, states with an opposing view may harden opposition as a means of protecting national sovereignty (for example in Iran, see: Karimi and Bayatrizi 2018)."
"48" "Therefore, greater integration into the world society via transnational advocacy networks  and stronger exposure to global LGBT norms  could mean competition between globally legitimated ideas  and local collective identities –  r esulting  in a  negative  interaction and  explain ing  part of the polarization seen. Indeed, Hughes and colleagues (2015) find that for women’s rights, stronger ties resulted in weakening the effect of women’s norms."
"49" "H4:  Greater embeddedness within transnational advocacy networks will reduce the effect of global LGBT norms in improving LGBT policies."
"50" "Alternatively,  t here is growing evidence that aid conditionality measures put in place by Western governments and international organizations are ha ving a counter effect – reflecting the inherent power dynamics within these types of social relations  (Kr e tz 2013; Seck in elgin 2018 ) .  For example, Weiss and Bosia (2013) outline how an increasing number of states outside of the West are instrumentalizing conditionality measures to push back against LGBT rights as a threat to national identity and as a means to consolidate power. Biruk (2014) analyzed the complex dynamics between foreign aid, national identity, and sexual orientation in Malawi. In the conclusion, Biruk states:"
"51" "“As the figure of conditional aid gains transnational legitimacy, moral concerns and imperatives are increasingly tied to North-South flows of dollars and resources. Notabl y , some African LGBT groups have spoken out against typing aid packages to LGBT rights, suggesting that conditional aid not only reinforces the argument that sexuality is a western construct but also distracts attention from the intersectional and structural oppressions that affect all Africans,” (469)."
"52" "Additionally, scholars have found that aid conditionality measures re-invoke histories of imperialism that violate state autonomy (Biruk 2014)  and that such  homocapitalist  practices are inappropriate  within African countries (Ojilere 2018 ; Seckinelgin 2018 ) . Therefore, this type of relationship may make it easier for countries to deny normative expectations because while viewed as a violation to the broader global community, domestic constituencies are likely to reward such be haviors (Weiss and Bosia 2013) .  How countries differentially  experience aid relations, then, could explain why some are reacting n egatively to LGBT expectations resulting in polarization.  Therefore:"
"53" "H5:  More ties to donor-countries will reduce the effect of global LGBT norms in improving LGBT policies."
"54" "Domestic Considerations"
"55" "While international relations scholars focus on globalizing forces, others emphasize domestic attributes that situate how the state will respond to international ideas (Zurn and Checkel 2005).  For example, Ayoub (2015) highlights that state “porousness” , as indicated by  degree to which outside ideas can influence domestic policy through information flows , has  a significant association with LGBT policy adoption in Europe.  Hafner-Burton (2005) also contends that state openness, through trade as a percentage of GDP, also improves human rights practices within a state."
"56" "Inglehart and Norris (2003)  posit in their modernization theory that as states democratize and industrialize, respect for gender equity and minority rights should improve.  Given the interwoven dynamics between gender and sexuality, modernization may be key factor in explaining LGBT policy adoption (Ayoub 2015 ; Encarnacion 2014 ).  Several other domestic factors have also been linked to domestic policies toward minority communities and human rights, broadly, and LGBT communities, specifically. An important one is the proportion of women parliamentarians, shown to improve conditions for minority populations and social welfare programs (Paxton and Hughes  2017 ). Another common indicator of human rights practices is population density due, in part, to “the threat (real or perceived) that large populations pose to entrenched regimes” (Cole 2012, 1148-1149 ) ."
"57" "Data and Methods"
"58" "Dependent Variable."
"59" "LGBT  Policy Index.   While most studies on LGBT policy adoption tend to focus on a single policy, such as same-sex marriages or the decriminalization of same-sex acts ( Fernández and Lutter 2013; Frank and McEneaney 1999 ), this study instead turns to a newly constructed policy index (Velasco 2018). The LGBT  Policy Index is comprised of 1 6  different policies, ranging from the death penalty for same-sex  sexual  acts to hate crime protections and joint  adoptions for same-sex couples (see Table 1 for full list of policies).  By having a measure that encompasses both restrictive and progressive policies, the index is better able to capture policy change in either direction compared to single-policy measures.  Policy indices are also more desirable than single measures because they able to capture multiple manifestations of the same underlying phenomena (Ayoub 2015, 2016;  Corrales 2017;  Htun and Weldon 2012)."
"60" "To construct the index,  data on  different policies , except LGB people allowed to openly serve in the military,  is collected from  ILGA’s  annual  State Sponsored Homophobia Report .  The report documents the status of a variety of LGBT-related policies in countries and territories, including year of adoption, links to legislative or policy texts, and some contextual information around the policy like degree of implementation.  Due to the  level of   detail , this report is used in a variety of cross-national LGBT research ( Reynolds  2013;  Ayoub 201 5,  2016; Frank et al.  2010; Frank and McEneaney 1999; LaViolette 2009 ; Velasco 2018 ).  For data on the military, Reynolds (2013) and  The Hague Centre for Strategic Studies LGBT Military Index were consulted."
"61" "F or  a reported policy  to be encompassed within the index, it must be adopted, either through judicial ruling, parliamentary adoption, or executive decree, at the national level. So although same-sex acts are criminalized in several provinces in Indonesia (Carroll 2016), Indonesia  is  not coded as having this policy since it is not implemented federally. Policies that are restrictive in nature are coded -1 and those more progressive or accessible are coded as +1 . Totals are them summed over to create a composite index score for each country in each year  (see Velasco 2018  for validation of the measure).  The index captures the scope of policy adoption as it relates to LGBT rights but does not capture their degree of implementation (Hafner-Burton and Tsutsui 2005). Nevertheless, scholars argue that understanding the adoption process it still meaningful because of the effects they have on signaling state preferences, mobilizing movements,  and eventually influencing  lived experiences (Htun and Weldon 2012)."
"62" "[TABLE 1 HERE]"
"63" "Independent Variables"
"64" "Global LGBT  Context .  To meas ure the broader global context , I conduct a confirmatory factor analysis  (CFA)   using three sources of data. By conducting a CFA, I am able to create an index measuring the underlying latent construct,  global  LGBT  norms , while assessing goodness-of-fit statistics ( Brown 2014;  Hughes, Krook, and Paxton 2015). The first source of data is the cumulative number of resolutions, reports, concluding observations, and general comments published throughout the UN system that make explicit refer ences to sexual orientation or  gender identity. This data is collected annually by the International Commission of Jurists. Given the unique role of the UN in the international system, statements from this body have an elevated position to signal and express positions  and models for  the global community ( Kentikelenis   and Seabrooke 2017;  Krook and True 2012; Strang and Meyer 1993). The first concluding  observation was made in 1982 and then every year from 1992 onward."
"65" "The second measure is the cumulative number of LGBT INGOs around the world (Hughes, Krook, and Paxton 2015 ; Velasco 2018 ).  Using the  Yearbook of International Organizations (YIO) , published by the Union of International Associations, I coded INGOs based on whether their aim described working on behalf of any part of the LGBT community.  Given that INGOs are often considered carriers of world culture (Boli and Thomas 1999), the growth of INGOs in a particular issue area tends to coincide with general interest and attention paid to the topic (Davies 2014)."
"66" "The third measure is the global cumulative count of  English-language  newspaper articles that mention LGBT  communities using  LexisNexis.  This measure serves as a way to capture  the extent to which  L GBT norms  are  present within popular discourse  ( Adamczyk et al. 2017;   Grossman 2015 ; Ortiz, Myers, Walls, and Diaz   2005; Strand 2012 ).  Correlations among the three indicators range from .75 to .96 and strong goodness  of fit statistics from the CFA demonstrate t hat these items are indeed measuring an underlying construct. The resulting index,  Global LGBT  Norms , is scaled to  the cumulative count of LGBT INGOs."
"67" "Transnational Advocacy Networks  (Tan) .   To capture t he neo-institutional expla nations  for how  global LGBT  norms influence  policies,  I  use two  measure s for  the degree to which countries are integrated into the world society ,   and therefore exposed to normative expectations,  via transnational advocacy networks.  First, I use a traditional measure of the number of country-level ties to LGBT INGO s   (Paxton et al.  2006; Longhofer  et al. 2016 ; Frank and McEneaney 1999). This measure coincides with the argument that the overall strength of the relationships will influence how norms are received.  Second,  following  Hughes and colleagues (2009) , I use  social network analyses to determine the position of counties connected to one another via joint membership in INGOs  – also called INGO Network Country Scores (INC Scores).   INC Scores , rather than raw counts,  are able to take into consideration  who  countries are connected to and recognizes that not all ties result in the same exposure to the global community and international norms (Hughes et al. 2009; Paxton  et al. 2015 ).  Using data from the  YIO , I create a two-mode , Country  by  LGBT INGO  matrix every three years ,  beginning in 1991. To calculate the  INC Score , I then convert the two-mode matrix into a one-mode, Country  by  Country matrix ,  where the cells represent joint membership in an LGBT INGO. Eigenvector centrality is then used to calculate a country’s position within the network ( Borgatti 2005; Borgatti and Everett 1997;  Hughes et al. 2009; Paxton et al. 2015).  Centrality ranges from 0 to 1, with one as  most central actor.  Centrality  and ties  are calculated every three years  with  previous observations carried forward to fill in missing values ."
"68" "Foreign Aid.   Two measures of foreign aid are used,  representing different ways through which norms can transmit from the international community to recipient states.  First, following Swiss (2017), I calculate the number of OECD donor countries each non-OECD country receives any type of assistance from  (or in-degrees) .  This measure seeks to instead understand the  relational  aspect of these ties, rather than strictly conceptualizing them as material transfers (Swiss 2017). The second approach is  a  more traditional measure  of foreign aid:  annual net receipts of official development assistance as a percentage of gross domestic  income  (G N I )  in constant 2010 U.S.  dollars  ( Yuichi  Kono and Montinola 2009).   This measure is logged due to the  skewed distribution. Data for both measures is  provided  by the OECD   ﻿ Query Wizard for International Development Statistics ."
"69" "To provide comparisons across variables, all transnational advocacy and foreign aid measures are standardized using z-scores."
"70" "Controls."
"71" "Other Donors .  Recent studies on LGBT policy adoption have found that when countries have affiliations with and seek resources from communities outside of the Western-dominated global community, they are less likely to adopt progressive policies and may even implement more restrictive legislation (Ayoub 2014; Nuñez-Mietz and Iommi 2017).  Therefore, I control for the number of non-OECD donors a country receives assistance from. Countries that receive assistance from China and Saudi Arabia, for example, may be less influenced by pressures stemming from the more Western-dominated global landscape."
"72" "Women in Parliament .   Using the Varieties of Democracy dataset, women in parliament is measured as the proportion of women in the lower chamber (or unicameral) national parliament (Lindberg et al. 2014). Missing values are replaced using the previous year’s observation (Hughe s, Krook, and Paxton  2015)."
"73" "Level of Democracy.  D emocracy is measured using data from Freedom House  due to the well-fitting conceptualization of democracy employed (Bollen and Paxton 2000) . Freedom House rates countries level of democratization on a 1 to 7 scale, with 1 being most democratic. This score is inversed so higher values correspond to greater consolidation of democratic practices (Norris, Frank, and Martinez i Coma 2013)."
"74" "Control variables for  Trade, Population Density,  and  Economic Development  are all gathered from the World Bank (2018).  Trade is measured as the percent of overall gross domestic product (GDP). Population density is measured as the number of residents per square kilometer, while economic development is measured as GDP per capita  in constant 2010 U.S. dollars . GDP per capita is logged to minimize skew in the distribution.  In cases when the GDP per Capita was reported as zero for a country, these cases were  dropped."
"75" "Cultural  Globalization .  Social porousness is measured using the KOF Index for  Cultural  Globalization developed by Dreher (2006). This measure , ranging from 0 to 100,  is  derived from  five   component parts:  1) Imports and exports of cultural goods as a percent of the population ; 2)  Imports and exports of personal, cultural, an d  recreational services as a percent of the population ; 3)  percent of international trademarks registered; 4) Number of McDonald’s restaurants, as a percent of population; and 5) Number of IKEAs, as percent of the population . Higher values indicate a greater degree of  cultural  connections to the international community."
"76" "Methods and Sample"
"77" "To assess h ow the aforementioned factors  influence  LGBT policy adoption , this study uses  two-way  fixed effects models with  cro ss-sectional time series data  (Beck and Katz 1995).  Because it is the change w ithin the global context and variation in countries’   connections to the   international community   theorized to influence  LGBT policies ,  country and year-level fixed effects are employed.  Results  ensure that time invariant country-level attributes, like unique cultural factors, are controlled for. Additionally, year fixed effects ensure that these models are measuring changes within the newly created  Global LGBT  Context   variable and not conflating this change with time.  To account for the violation of independence, robust standard errors are clustered at the country level (Beck and Katz 1995). All independent variables and control variables are lagged  one year to ensure proper time  ordering."
"78" "Data is  only  collected f or   countries that are recipients of aid from OECD countries. Therefore, OECD member-states are excluded from this analysis since  they are not exposed one of the mechanisms  – allowing  for an analysis  that  de-center s  industrialized, primarily Western countries.   Only c ountries  with  population s  greater than 500,000 in  1990  are included . Analyses begin in 199 0  because this time period is often seen as the beginning LGBT  human rights norms being recognized on the world stage and more intense transnational organizing  (Kollman and Waites 2009).  Due to missing values on some predictor variables, the resulting sample includes 110 countries  –  resulting in  2,826  country-year observations.  Descriptive statistics are provided in Appendix I."
"79" "Results"
"80" "Table 2 . shows the results from the  two-way fixed effects  models  predicting  LGBT Policy Index . Model 1 serves as a baseline for how   Global LGBT  Context   are  associated with index scores. Model s  2 - 3  build on this by adding in   Transnational Advocacy   and Models  4 - 5  test  Foreign Aid . Beginning with the baseline model, there is a significant, positive association between the  Global LGBT  Context   and a country ’s position on the  LGBT Policy Index   ( b =. 064 ,  p <.001) .  Between 199 0  and 2016 , then,  this suggests an average of increase of roughly  2  points on the  LGBT Policy Index  –  a sizeable effect attributed  solely to increases in norms around LGBT rights.  T h e baseline model accounts for 2 3 % of the within-country variation in the  LGBT Policy Index   during the panel."
"81" "[TABLE 2 HERE]"
"82" "How countries are connected to the global community , though, may  influence the e ffect  global norms are having.  Model s  2 - 3  assess how the  Global LGBT Context   changes depending upon  how  embedded  countries are  within transnational advocacy networks.  Model 2 considers the structural position within these networks through eigenvector centralit y  –  INC Scores . Model 2a reveals that there is  a negative  association between  Tan  INC Scores  and  LGBT Policy Index.   This is an unexpected association given that  world society  literature suggests that countries more deeply embedded within the international community via such networks are theorized to be more likely to comply with international norms. I n Model 2b, however, once an interaction term is included, results demonstrate that the effects of global norms are indeed stronger for those more centrally positioned within these networks  ( b =.0 33 ,  p <.001).   Therefore, to properly understand the association network centrality, via  INC Scores , has with LGBT policies it is imperative to factor in the social context.  In Model 3, transnational advocacy networks are measured through traditional tie counts  –  In-Degree . Model 3a shows that unlike  Tan  INC Scores , Tan  In-Degree   have a  positive  association with  LGBT Policy Index  ( b =.2 4 9,  p <.05). This suggests that it is not the structure of ties  or which countries have mutual membership in the same INGOs,  but simply having relationships  to INGOs themselves  is what is important .  In turning to Model 3b, the interaction between Global LGBT Context and  Tan In-Degree  is  similarly significant – revealing that as global norms get stronger the effect of INGO ties also increases and vice-versa.  However, when comparing the standardized interactions in Models 2b and 3b, the interaction effect is larger for  Tan  INC Sores   than   In-Degree   ( b =.0 33 ,  p <.001 vs.  b =.01 9 ,  p <.001)."
"83" "Next, Models 3-4  test how the effects of global norms are influenced by countries that have  stronger relationships with foreign aid donors .  Model 4a reveals that   Foreign Aid N et ODA   by itself  does not have a significant association with the  LGBT Policy Index . T hrough the interaction term in Model 4b, however,  it is evident that unlike  Tan   measures, co untries  with  a greater dependence on  Foreign Aid   respond negatively to the global context ( b =-.01 3 ,  p <.0 5 ).  A s  the   Global LGBT  Context   grow s,  push ing norms through these types of channels, such as by threatening aid ,  has  an increasingly negative effect on LGBT policies. The standardized interaction terms for  Tan  In-Degree   and  Foreign Aid  Net ODA   are roughly similar in magnitude but in opposite directions,  b =. 0 1 9  vs.  b =-.01 3 , respectively.  Models 5a and 5b reveal that  Foreign Aid In-Degree  are not significantly associated with  LGBT Policy Index  nor does it moderate the effects of the  Global LGBT Context.  Suggesting that it is the material tie to donor countries rather than the more social element that influences how recipient countries are interpreting and responding to these relationships."
"84" "[FIGURE 2  HERE]"
"85" "Figure 2.  highlights the average marginal effects for   Tan   and  Foreign Aid  connections  changes at different values for the  Global LGBT Context .  In parentheses are the years in which different values for the global context are achieved. Although the  Global LGBT Context  is presented in consistent four-unit intervals, the years are not consistently spaced which reflects the exponential growth of LGBT norms over the previous decades.  W hat is immediately noticeable  are the divergent trends between these two forms of social relationships between countries and  how they are exposed  to  the   Global LGBT  Context .  First, w hen there were few expectations around LGBT rights, having ties to LGBT INGOs had no significant effects associated with the  LGBT Policy Index . However, as pressure grows over time, integration becomes highly coup led  with policy improvements .  In comparing between the measures,  INC Scores  within the network enhances the effects of normative expectations more so than simply just having ties  (In-Degree ).   This follows  Hughes and colleagues (2009) argument that the world society is a fundamentally networked theory and that ties to other central actors are more effective at exposing countries to normative standards than any type of tie, generally."
"86" "Second,  Foreign Aid   both  relations  diminish the effect of the  Global LGBT Context  over time. Although  In-Degrees  is not statistically significant, the  Net ODA  measure is.  W hile elaborated upon further below, these findings reveal that indeed it is the quality and character of social relations between states and the international community that determines how they understand and enact normative behaviors.  Additionally, it is important to note that while  Global LGBT  Context   strongly influence policy adoption, the change in this effect size through these interaction terms is modest."
"87" "Now turning to the control variables,  while all of the variables, save  GDP per Capita , are in the theorized direction of influence, only  Population Density  has a  statistically  s ignificant association with the  LGBT Policy Index .  Following previous arguments, countries that have seen dramatic increa ses in population density are  more inclined to restrict human rights practices in order to control populations – this finding builds on that evidence.  The lack of significant associations with any of the other variables may be due, in part, to the conservative model design with the implementation of two-way fixed effects that account for specific within-country changes while ensuring these are not conflating with time."
"88" "Discussion and Conclusion"
"89" "While recent years have been celebrated for the promotion of LGBT policies in a variety of contexts ,  across the global landscape there is new evidence  of states working  to resist and counter LGBT norms and discourses ( Ayoub 2019;  Bosia 2014;  Hadler and Symons 2018;  Weiss and Bosia 2013). This study expands current understanding of LGBT policy adoption by assessing the differential effects global norms are having based upon  how  countries are exposed and connected to the international arena  with a specific aim of understanding recent linkages  between LGBT rights and foreign aid . More importantly, these findings provide some of the first  quantitative  evidence for how different exposure  mechanisms  to global norms can explain  polarization amongst state s .  Lastly, while  some view  foreign aid conditionality as the “stick”  for  transmitting policy preferences  (Kretz 2013; Weyland 2005) , these findings suggest that this approach is ineffective and, potentially, counter toward one’s aims when it comes to moving LGBT policy adoption.  This adds to growing evidence questioning the viability of hard conditionalities as a mechanism for changing LGBT policies (Ayoub 2 019 )."
"90" "First, findings from this study add to the already established body of literature demonstrating that to understand why countries adopt certain LGBT policies, it is important to take the global context into consideration (Ayoub 2015, 2016; Ayoub and Paternotte 2014; Frank and McEneaney 1999; Kollman 2007; Paternotte 2015; Velasco 2018).  As international actors, such as the United Nations, INGOs, and  other states , continue to promote LGBT rights  both transnationally and internationally , states will continue to experience pressures, symbolic or material, to comply. But unlike previous studies, these findings explicitly consider how the process of polarization is also linked to the global context by considering two  different types of connections and focuses beyond the traditionally studied  industrialized  West ."
"91" "The degree to which countries are integrated into the world society via LGBT transnational advocacy networks and, thus, exposed to LGBT norms is foundational to understanding the proliferation of progressive  LGBT policies adoption . Using social network analyses to  develop  LGBT INGO Network Country Score s   (Hughes et al. 2009; Paxton et al. 2 01 5) reveals the effects  of global norms increase as countries move closer to the core.  Even using traditional counts of LGBT INGOs showcase similar findings. The stronger effects f or centrality measures  supports previous theorization  that it is  who  countries are connected to through these transnational relationships that matters more   so than having connections to INGO actors, generally (Hughes et al. 2009; Paxton et al. 2015).  The differential effects add to the growing body of research showing that understanding the structure of social relationships and not just relationships themselves can provide new insights across a range of social processes (Hughes et al. 200 9 )."
"92" "The more unexpected findings come about when assessing the  effects of foreign aid relationships  on LGBT policy adoption.  Since David Cameron first announced linking UK foreign aid dependent among LGBT protections in 2011, the idea of coupling these two policies have spread across a variety of development  assistance institutions (Bergenfield and Miller 2014; Biru k 2014; Bosia 2014; Currier 2012 ; Encarnación 2016; Kretz 2013; Lind 2014; Mason 2018). While individual case studies in developing countries suggested that this policy may not be as effective as first  hoped (Biruk 2014; Currier 2012 ; Mason 2018), there had yet to be a cross-national comparison to assess if the findings from case studies were unique or reflective of a broader process. This study demonstrates that; indeed, normative pressure does not increase fo r countries with greater ties to development assisting countries  – it in fact has a ne gative effect."
"93" "To explain why this is the case, Weiss and Bosia (2013) develop the term  political homophobia . They argue that political leaders exercise homophobia as a political tool against the international community, especially when domestic audiences view LGBT norms as a threat. Therefore, countries that have a higher dependence on foreign aid may feel more exposed and at risk to LGBT norms from the international community and try to counter these efforts by mobilizing  political homophobia  to secure public support . This similarly matches to the processes Biruk (2014) finds in Malawi when the UK threatened foreign aid due to the government’s imprisonment of two gay men. To understand when domestic audiences and/or political leaders are likely to view LGBT norms as threats, Ayoub (2014, 2016) and Nuñez-Mietz and Iommi  ( 2017) argue that it is most likely to occur when national identity is draped in religious identity. While this is certainly true, findings from this  study suggest that foreign aid ties  may also trigger similar responses of backlash and resistance that threats to cultural identity markers do. Future research is necessary, though, to fully adjudicate these dynamics as the present study is limited in being able to tease apart these processes."
"94" "These findings are not without limitations, however.  As mentioned, part of the polarization in LGBT rights is due to growing counter-mobilization networks (Weiss and Bosia 2013). This study does not assess the degree to which states are connected to these opposing forces and, therefore, misses a potential aspect of LGBT norm polarization and resistance – especially driven by religious actor s (Dreier 2018).  Also, I use the world society approach to understanding the normative environment, which theorizes one dominating global standard, though Western -biased , permeating across all countries (Boli and Thomas 1999). However, more recent literature has started to stress the importance of regional norms and multiple modernities (Roberts 2018). Variation in regional norms are presently excluded  but taking them into account in subsequent research will be  fruitful in understanding  from  where states  seek  normative legitimacy on this issue .  Additionally, foreign aid is only one type of externality and there are other types of social relationships that may be more effective tools for prompting compliance with LGBT norms. Also, the nascency of foreign aid conditions may mean that more time is needed for their effects to be felt. However, the negative interaction suggest that they may have even more negative effects a s  norms develop. Lastly, the interaction effects, while robust to various model specifications, are modest.  While centrality in the network enhances the effects of global norms, these effects were already substantial so the marginal effect is limited. Additionally, while foreign aid relations have a negative effect, this is only significant in more recent years when normative pressures are at their highest."
"95" "Nevertheless, however, this study is able to advance our understanding of how norms influence state behavior, generally, and are associated with polarization around LGBT rights, specifically. For world society scholars, this study again demonstrates the importance of norms in pushing policy change but adds to the debate by demonstrating that  how  countries are tied to the international community and experience norms is fundamental to understanding the type of policy response they will have. And for foreign aid scholars, findings reveal the limitations for foreign aid conditionality on contentious policy. While conditionality has been successfully tied to democratic  practices, generally (Sanahuja 2000; Siegel and Weinberg 1977), when trying to apply this logic toward less agreed upon policy prescriptions, conditionality can spur opposite outcomes. For those wanting to advance LGBT rights, then, findings from this study suggest that the best avenue is to invest in local LGBT civil society  organizations  while trying to limit the impression of  coercive  Western imposition ."
"96" "References"
"97" "Adamczyk, Amy, Chunrye Kim, and Margaret Schmuhl. 2017. “Newspaper Presentations of Homosexuality across Nations: Examining Differences by Religion, Economic Development, and Democracy.”  Sociological Perspectives :  1–27."
"98" "Ayoub, Phillip M   . 2014. “With Arms  Wide Shut: Threat Perception, Norm Reception, and Mobilized Resis tance to LGBT Rights.”  Journal of Human Rights  13(3):337–62."
"99" "________ . 2015. “Contested Norms in New-Adopter States: International Determinants of LGBT Rights Legislation.”  European Journal of International Relations  21(2):293–322."
"100" "________. 2016.  When States Come Out: Europe’s Sexual Minorities and the Politics of Coming Out . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press."
"101" "________. 2019. “Tensions in Rights: Navigating Emerging Contradictions in the LGBT Rights Revolution.” Pp. 43–58 in  Contesting Human Rights , edited by A lison  Brysk and M ichael  Stohl. Edward Elgar Publishing."
"102" "Ayoub, Phillip M. and Jeremiah Garretson. 2015. “Getting the Message Out :  Media Context and Global Changes in Attitudes toward Homosexuality.”  Comparative Political Studies :0–48."
"103" "Ayoub, Phillip M. and David Paternotte. 2014.  LGBT Activism and the Making of Europe: A Rainbow Europe?  New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan."
"104" "Badgett,  M.V. Lee,  Amira Hasenbush, and Winston Ekaprasetia Luhur. 2017.  LGBT Inclusion in Indonesia   and Its Economic Effects .  Los Angeles, CA:   The Williams Institute, UCLA School of Law. Retrieved from   https://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/ wp-content/uploads/LGBT-Exclusion-in-Indonesia-and-Its-Economic- Effects-March-2017.pdf ."
"105" "Badgett, M. V. L ee ,  Sheila Nezhad, C. Waaldijk, and Rodgers Y. Meulen .  2014.  The  Re lationship  Be tween LGBT  I nclusion and  Ec onomic  D evelopment: An  A nalysis of  E merging  Ec onomies . Los Angeles, CA: The Williams Institute- USAID. Retrieve from http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla. edu/research/international/lgbt-incl-econ-devel-nov- 2014 ."
"106" "Baisley, Elizabeth. 2016. “Reaching the Tipping Point?: Emerging International Human Rights Norms Pertaining to Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity.”  Human Rights Quarterly  38(1):134–63."
"107" "Beck, Nathaniel and Jonathan N. Katz. 1995. “What to Do (and Not to Do) with Time-Series Cross-Section Data.”  American Polit ical Science Review  89(3):634–47."
"108" "Beckfield, Jason. 2003. “Inequality in the World Polity: The Structure of International Organization.”  American Sociological Review  68(3):401–24."
"109" "________ . 2010. “The Social Structure of the World Polity.”  American Journal of Sociology  115(4):1018–68."
"110" "Bergenfield, Rachel and Alice M. Miller. 2014. “Queering International Development   ? An Examinatio n of New ‘LGBT Rights’ Rhetoric , Policy and Programming among International Development Agencies.”  LGBTQ Policy Journal , Harvard Kennedy School Retrieved from:  https://ssrn.com/abstract=25144066 ."
"111" "Biruk, Crystal. 2014. “‘Aid for Gays’: The Moral and the Material in ‘African Homophobia’ in Post-2009 Malawi.”  The Journal of Modern African Studies  52(03):447–73."
"112" "﻿ Boli, John and George M. Thomas. 1999.  Constructing World Culture: International Nongovernmental Organizations Since 1875 . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press"
"113" "Bollen, Kenneth A. and Pamela Paxton. 2000. “Of Liberal Democracy.”  Comparative Political Studies  33(1):58–86."
"114" "Borgatti, Stephen P. 2005. “Centrality and Network Flow.”  Social Networks  27(1):55–71."
"115" "Borgatti, Stephen P. and Martin G. Everett. 1997. “Network Analysis of 2-Mode Data.”  Social Networks  19:243–69."
"116" "Bosia, Michael J. 2014. “Strange Fruit: Homophobia, the State, and the Politics of LGBT Rights and Capabilities.”  Journal of Human Rights  13(3):256–73."
"117" "Boyle, Elizabth H. Minzee Kim, and Wesley Longhofer. 2015. “Abortion Liberalization in the World Society, 1960-2009.”  American Journal of Sociology  121(3): 882-913."
"118" "Brettschneider, Marla, Susan Burgess, and Christine Keating. 2017.  LGBTQ Politics: A Critical Reader.  New York, NY: NYU Press."
"119" "Brown, Timothy A. 2014.  Confirmatory Factor  Analysis  for Applied Research.  Guilford Publications."
"120" "Bush, Sarah Sunn. 2011. “International Politics and the Spread of Quotas for Women in Legislatures.”  International Organization  65(1): 103-137."
"121" "Buyantueva, Radzhana. 2018. “LGBT Rights Activism and Homophobia in Russia.”  Journal of Homosexuality  65(4): 456-483."
"122" "Carroll, Aengus. 2016. “ State Sponsored Homoph obia 2016: A World Survey of Sexual Orientation Laws: Criminalisation, Protection, and Recognition.”  International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association ."
"123" "Chappell, Bill. 2017. “Taiwan’s High Court Rules Same-Sex Marriage is Legal, in a First for Asia.”  National Public Radio.  Retrieved:  https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2017/05/24/529841027/taiwans-high-court-rules-same-sex-marriage-is-legal-in-a-first-for-asia ."
"124" "Chitando, Ezra and Adriaan van Klinken, eds.  Christianity  and Controversies over  Homosexuality  in Contemporary Africa . Routledge."
"125" "﻿ Cole, Wade M. 2012. “Human Rights as Myth and Ceremony? Reevaluating the Effectiveness of Human Rights Treaties, 1981-2007.”  American Journal of Sociology  117(4):1131–71."
"126" "C onrad, Kathryn. 2001. “Queer Treasons: Homosexuality and Irish National Identity.”  Cultural Studies  15(1): 124-13 7."
"127" "Corrales, Javier. 2017. “Understanding the Uneven Spread of LGBT Rights in Latin America and the Caribbean, 1999-2013.”  Journal of Research in Gender Studies  7(1): 52-82."
"128" "Currier, Ashley. 2012.  Out in Africa: LGBT Organizing in Namibia and South Africa . Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press."
"129" "Davies, Thomas Richard. 2014.  NGOs: A New History of Transnational Civil Society . Oxford, UK: Oxford  University Press."
"130" "Dreher, Axel. 2006. “Does Globalization Affect Growth? Evidence from a New Index of Globalization.”  Applied Economics  38:1091–1110."
"131" "Downs, George W., David M. Rocke, and Peter N. Barsoom. 1996. “Is the Good News about Compliance Good News about Cooperation?”   International Organization  50(3):379–406."
"132" "Dreier, Sarah K. 2018. “Resisting Rights to Renounce Imperialism: East African Churches’ Strategic Symbolic Resistance to LGBTQ Inclusion.”  International Studies Quarterly  62:423–36."
"133" "Encarnación, Omar G. 2011. “Latin America’s Gay Rights Revolution.”  Journal of Democracy  22(2):104–18."
"134" "_________. 20 16.  Out in the Periphery: Latin America’s Gay Rights Revolution . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press."
"135" "Fernández, Juan J. and Mark Lutter. 2013. “Supranational Cultural Norms, Domestic Value Orientations and the Diffusion of Same-Sex Union Rights in Europe, 1988-2009.”  International Sociology  28(1):102–20."
"136" "Frank, David John, Bayliss J. Camp, and Steven A. Boutcher. 2010. “Worldwide Trends in the Criminal Regulation of Sex, 1945 to 2005.”  American Sociological Review  75(6):867–93."
"137" "Frank, David John and Elizabeth H. McEneaney. 1999. “The Individualization of Society and the Liberalization of State Policies on Same-Sex Sexual Relations, 1984-1995.”  Social Forces  77(3):911–43."
"138" "Frank, Dobbin, Beth Simmons and Geoffrey Garret. 2007. “The Global Diffusion of Public Policies: Social Construction, Coercion, Competition, or Learning?”  Annual Review of Sociology  33: 449-472."
"139" "Garretson, Jeremiah J. 2018.  The Path to Gay Rights: How Activism and Coming Out Changed Public Opinion . Ne w York, NY: NYU Press."
"140" "Ghaziani, Amin.  2 09. “An “ Am orphous  M ist”? The  P roblem of  M easurement in the  St udy of  C ulture.\"  Theory"
"141" "and Society  38 (6):  581-612."
"142" "Gleditsch, Kristian Skrede and Michael D. Ward. 2006. “Diffusion and International Context of Democra tization.”  International Organization  60(4): 911-933."
"143" "Grossman, Guy. 2015. “Renewalist Christianity and the Political Saliency of LGBTs: Theory and Evidence from Sub-Saharan Africa.”  Journal of Politics  77(2):337–51."
"144" "Hadler,  Markus and Jonathan Symons. 2018. “World Society Divided: Divergent Trends in State Responses to Sexual Minorities and Their Reflection in Public Attitudes.”  Social Forces  96(4 ) :  ﻿ 1721-1756 ."
"145" "Hafner-Burton, Emilie M. 2005.  “ Trading Human Rights: How Preferen tial Trade Agreements Influence  Government Repression . ”  International Organization  59(3): 593-629."
"146" "Halliday, Terence C. 2009. \"Recursivity of global normmaking: A sociolegal agenda.\"   Annual Review of Law and Social Science  5: 263-289."
"147" "Hechter, Michael, and Karl-Dieter Opp, Eds. 2001.  Social norms . Russell Sage Foundation,"
"148" "Horne, Christine. 2001. “The Enforcement of Norms: Group Cohesion and Meta-Norms.”  Social Psychology"
"149" "Quarterly: 253-266."
"150" "Htun, Mala and S. Laurel  Weldon. 2012. “The Civic Origins of Progressive Policy Change: Combating Violence against Women in Global Perspective, 1975–2005.”  American Political Science Review  106( 03):548–69."
"151" "Hughes, Melanie M., Lindsey Peterson, Jill Ann Harrison, and Pamela Paxton. 2009. “Power and Relation in the World Polity: The INGO Network Country Score.”  Social Forces  87(4): 1711-1742."
"152" "Hughes, Melanie M., Mona Lena Krook, and Pamela Paxton. 2015. “Transnational Women’s Activism and the Global Diffusion of Gender Quotas.”  Inte rnational Studies Quarterly  59(2):357–72."
"153" "Human Rights Watch. 2013a.  Treat Us Like Human Beings.  Human Rights Watch.  https://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/tanzania0613webwcover_0_0.pdf ."
"154" "Human Rights Watch. 2013b.  Guilt  b y Association: Human Rights Violations in the Enforcement of Cameroon’s Anti-Homosexuality Law.  Human Rights Watch. Retrieved from  https://www.hrw.org/sites/default/files/reports/cameroon0313_ForUpload.pdf ."
"155" "Ibhawoh, Bonny. 2014. “Human Rights for Some: Universal Human Rights, Sexual Minorities, and the Exclusionary Impulse.”  International Journal  69(4):612–22."
"156" "Inglehart, Ronald, and Pippa Norris. 2013.  Rising Ride . New York, NY: Cambridge University Press."
"157" "Karimi, Ahmad and Zohreh Bayatrizi. 2018. “Dangerous Positions: Male Homosexuality in the New Penal Code of  Iran.”  Punishment & Society  146247451878746."
"158" "Keck, Margaret E., and Kathryn Sikkink. 1998.  Activists Beyond Borders.  Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press."
"159" "Kentikelenis, Alexander E. and Leonard Seabrooke. 2017. “The Politics of World Polity: Script-Writing in International Organizations.”  American Sociological Review  82(5):"
"160" "Kollman , Kelly. 2007. “Same-Sex Unions : The Globalization of an Idea.”  International Studies Quarterly  51(2):329–57."
"161" "________. 2016.  The Same-Sex Unions Revolution in Western Democracies: International Norms and Domestic Policy Change.  Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press."
"162" "Kollman, Kelly and Matthew Waites. 2009. “The Global Politics of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Human Rights: An Introduction.”  Contemporary Politics  15(1):1–17."
"163" "Kretz, Adam J. 2013. “Aid Conditionality as (Partial) Answer to Antigay Legislation: An Analysis of British and American  Foreign  Aid Policies Designed to Protect Sexual Minorities.”  Vienna Journal of International  Constitutional Law  7 ."
"164" "Krook, Mona Lena and Jacqui True. 2012. “Rethinking the Life Cycles of International Norms: The United nations and the Global Promotion of Gender Equality.”  European Journal of International Relations  18(1): 103-127."
"165" "Langlois, Anthony J. 2017. “Queer Rights?”  Australian Journal of International Affairs  71(3):241–46."
"166" "﻿ LaViolette, Nicole. 2009. “Independent Human Rights Documentation and Sexual Minorities: An Ongoing Challenge for the Canadian Refugee Determination Process.”  The International Journal of Human Rights   13(2–3): 437–476."
"167" "Lind, Amy. 2014. “‘ O ut  in International Relations: Why Queer Visibility Matters.”  International Studies Review  16(4):601– 60 4."
"168" "Linde, Robyn. 2015. “A Seat at the Table: International LGBTQ Rights at the United Nations.”  Global Policy Journal  26"
"169" "_______ . 2018. \"Gatekeeper  P ersuasion and  I ssue  A doption: Amnesty International and the"
"170" "T ransnational LGBTQ  Ne twork.\"   Journal of Human Rights   17(2): 245-264."
"171" "Longhofer, Wesl ey, Evan Schofer, Natasha Miric, and David John Frank. 2016. “NGOs, INGOs, and Environmental Policy Reform, 1970–2010.”  Social Forces  94(4):1743– 17 68."
"172" "Mahato, Roshan. 2017. “The Movement for Human Rights for  Sexual and Gender Minorities in Nepal: The Beginning, 2001-2015.”  International Development, Community, and Environment (IDCE).  148."
"173" "Mason, Corinne L. 2018.  Routledge Handbook of Queer Development Studies.  New York, NY: Routledge."
"174" "Meyer, John W., John Boli, George M. Thomas, and Francisco O. Ramirez. 1997. “World Society and the National State.”  American Journal of Sociology  103(1):144–81."
"175" "Mulé, Nick J., Camerson McKenzie, and Maryam Khan. 2016. “Recognition and Legitimisation of Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity (SOGI) at the UN: A Critical Systemic Analysis.”  British Journal of Social Work  46(8): 2245-2262."
"176" "Mulé, Nick J., Maryam Khan, and Camerson McKenzie. 2017. “The Growing Presence of LGBTQIs at the UN: Arguments and Counter-Arguments.”  International Social Work ."
"177" "Norris, Pippa, Richard W. Frank, and Ferran Martínez i Coma. 2013. “Assessing the Quality of Elections.”  Journal of Democracy  24(4):124–35."
"178" "Nuñez-Mietz, Fernando G. and Lucrecia García Iommi. 2017. “Can Transnational Norm Advocacy Undermine Internalization? Explaining Immunization against LGBT Rights in Uganda.”  International Studies Quarterly  61(1):196–209."
"179" "O’Flaherty, Michael and John Fisher. 2008. “Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity and International Human Rights Law: Contextualising the Yogyakarta Principles.”  Human Rights Law Review  8(2):207–48."
"180" "Ojilere, Aloy. 2018. “The Diplomacy of Homocapitalism Against Africa.”  World Affairs  22(1): 152- 163."
"181" "Ortiz, David, Daniel Myers, Eugene Walls, and Maria-Elena Diaz. “Where Do We stand wih Newspaper Data?”  Mobilization: An International Quarterly  10(3): 397-419."
"182" "Paternotte, David. 2015. “Global Times, Global Debates? Same-Sex Marriage Worldwide.”  Social Politics  22(4):653–74."
"183" "Paternotte, David and Kelly Kollman. 2013. “Regulating Intimate Relationships in the European Polity: Same-Sex Unions and Policy Convergence.”  Social Politics  20(4):510–33."
"184" "Paxton, Pamela, Melanie M. Hughes, and Jennifer L. Green. 2006. “The International Women’s Movement and Women’s  Political Representation, 1893–2003.”  American Sociological Review  71:898–920."
"185" "Paxton, Pamela, Melanie M. Hughes, and Nicholas E. Reith. 2015. “Extending the INGO Network Country Score, 1950-2008.”  Sociological Science  2:287-307."
"186" "Persson, Emil. 2015. “Banning ‘Homosexual Propaganda’: Belonging and Visibility in Contemporary Russian Media.”  Sexuality and Culture  19(2):256–74."
"187" "Picq, Manuela Lavinas, and Markus Thiel, eds.  2015.  Sexualities in world politics: How LGBTQ claims shape international relations . Routledge."
"188" "Ortiz, David, Daniel Myers, Eugene Walls, and Maria-Elena Diaz. 2005. “Where Do We Stand with Newspaper Data?”  Mobilization: An International Journal  10(3):397–419."
"189" "Rahul, Rao. 2015. “Global Homocapitalism.”  Radical Philosophy  194:38–49."
"190" "Ramzy, Austin. 2 019.  “ Taiwan Legislature Approves Asia’s First Same-Sex Marriage Law.”   The New York Times.  May 17 . Retrieved fr om  https://www.nytimes.com/2019/05/17/world/asia/taiwan-gay-marriage.html ."
"191" "Reid, Graeme. 2018. “Taiwan Referendum Threatens Same-Sex Marriage.”  Human Rights Watch.  October 10. Retrieved from  https://www.hrw.org/news/2018/10/10/taiwan-referendum-threatens-same-sex-marriage# ."
"192" "Reynolds, Andrew. 2013. “Representation and Rights: The Im pact of LGBT Legislators in Comparative Perspective.”  American Political Science Review  107(2): 259-274."
"193" "Roberts, Louisa. 2018. “Changing Worldwide Attitudes toward Homosexuality: The Influence of Global and Region-Specific Cultures, 1981–2012.”  Social Science Research :1–18."
"194" "Rupp, Leila J.  2011.  \"The  P ersistence of  T ransnational  O rganizing: The  C ase of the  H omophile"
"195" "M ovement.\"  The   American Historical Review  116 (4) : 1014-1039."
"196" "Rupp, Leila J.  2014.  \"The European  O rigins of  T ransnational  O rganizing: The International Committee for"
"197" "Sexual Equality.\" In  LGBT Activism and the Making of Europe , pp. 29-49. Palgrave Macmillan, London."
"198" "Sanahuja, José Antonio.  2000.  “Trade, Politics, and Democratization: The 1997 Global Agreement between the European Union and Mexico.”  Journal of Interamerican studies and World affairs  42(2): 35-62."
"199" "﻿ Siegel, Richard L. and Leonard Weinberg. 1977.  Comparing Public Policies: United States, Soviet Union, and Europe.  Dorsey Press."
"200" "Strand, Cecilia. 2012. “Homophobia as a Barrier to Comprehensive Media Coverage of the Ugandan Anti-Homosexual Bill.”  Journal of Homosexuality  59(4): 564-579."
"201" "Strang, David and John W. Meyer. 1993. “Institutional Conditions for Diffusion.”  Theory and Society  22(4): 487-511."
"202" "Stychin, Carl Franklin. 1998.  A Nation by Rights: National Cultures, Sexual Identity Politics, and the Discourse of Rights . Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press."
"203" "_______ . 2003.  Governing Sexuality: The Changing Politics of Citizenship and Law Reform . Portland, Oregon: Hart Publishing."
"204" "Swiss, Liam. 2017. “Foreign Aid Allocation from a Network Perspective: The Effect of Global Ties.”  Social Science Research  63:111–23."
"205" "_______. 2018.  The Globalization of Foreign Aid: Developing Consensus.  New York, NY: Routledge."
"206" "Swiss, Liam and Wesley Longhofer. 2016. “Membership Has Its Privileges: Shared International Organizational Affiliation and Foreign Aid Flows, 1978-2010.”  Social Forces  94(4):1769–93."
"207" "Symonds, Jonathan and Dennis Altman. 2015. “International Norm Polarization Sexuality as a Subject of  Human Rights Protections.”  International Theory  7(1): 61-95 ."
"208" "Thoreson, Ryan R.  2014.  Transnational LGBT activism: Working for sexual rights worldwide . U of Minnesota Press."
"209" "Tilly , Charles . 1993.  European Revolutions, 1492–1992.  Oxford, UK: Blackwell ."
"210" "United Nations. 2013. “ UN Unveils ‘Free & Equal’ Campaign to Promote Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual,   Transgender Rights.”  United Nations News. July 26, 2013. Retrieved from https://news.un.org/en/story/2013/07/445552-un-unveils-free-equal-campaign-promote-lesbian-gay-bisexual-transgender-rights."
"211" "Valocchi, Steve. 1999. “Riding the Crest of a Protest Wave? Collective Action Frames in The Gay Liberation Movement, 1969-1973.”  Mobilization: An International Journal  4(1):59–73."
"212" "Velasco, Kristopher. 2018. “Human Rights INGOs, LGBT INGOs, and LGBT Policy Diffusion, 1991 – 2015.”  Social Forces  97(1): 377-404."
"213" "Weber, Cynthia. 2017. “Thinking about Queer Wars: ‘International Polarization’ and Beyond .”  Australian Journal of International Affairs  71(3):231–35."
"214" "﻿ Weiss, Meredith. 2013. “Prejudice Before Pride: Rise of an Anticipatory Countermovement.” In  Global Homophobia: States, Movements, and the Politics of Oppression , edited by Meredith Weiss and Michael Bosia, 149– 1 73."
"215" "Weiss, Mered ith L., and Michael J. Bosia, eds. 2013.  Global Homophobia: States, Movements, and the Politics of Oppression.  Champaign, IL: University of Illinois Press."
"216" "Weyland, Kurt. 2005. “Theories of Policy Diffusion: Lessons from Latin American Pension Reform.”  World Politics  57(2):262–295."
"217" "World Bank. 2018. “World Development Indicators.” Retrieved from  http://data.worldbank.org/indicator ."
"218" "Yuichi Kono, Daniel, and Gabriella R. Montinola. 2009. \"Does  F oreign  A id  S upport  A utocrats,  D emocrats,"
"219" "O r  B oth?.\"   The Journal of Politics   71(2): 704-718."
"220" "Zürn, Michael and Jeffrey T. Checkel. 2005. “Getting Socialized to Build Bridges: Constructivism and Rati onalism, Europe and the Nation-State.”  International Organization  59(4): 1045-1079."
"221" "Figure 1. Changes in Selected LGBT Policies in Non-OECD States, 1990-2016"
"222" "Figure  2 . Marginal Effects Plot"
"223" "APPENDIX I."
