New Zealand Teens
and digital harm:
Seeking and
accessing support
PREPARED BY DR. EDGAR PACHECO AND
NEIL MELHUISH

What is this about?
This factsheet is part of a larger quantitative
research project led by Netsafe in partnership
with the Ministry for Women exploring New
Zealand teens’ experiences of digital risk and
harm. It presents findings about the support
sought by 14 to 17-year-olds who experienced
unwanted digital communications1 in the prior
year. More specifically, it reports on who they
turned to for support, the reasons for their
choice, and the perceived usefulness of any
help they received.
The findings highlight the important role that
family (particularly parents) and close friends
play in the actions teenagers take to cope with
online incidents2.

Summary of findings
• Two thirds of teens who experienced one
or more unwanted digital communications
in the prior year sought someone’s
support.
• About half of those who sought support
approached their parent or caregiver.
Nearly a third preferred the help of a close
friend.
• In contrast, just over a third (34%) did not
contact anyone for help.
• Girls were more likely to seek support from
a close friend compared to boys.
• While it was more common for younger
teenagers to seek support from their
parents or caregivers, older teens
preferred to contact a close friend.
• Nearly 8 in 10 participants commented that
‘trust’ was behind their decision to ask for
the support of a parent/caregiver or a close
friend.
• Also, a large majority (over 8 in 10)
considered that the support received was
helpful.

1

Defined as an online experience(s) mediated/facilitated by an unsolicited electronic communication(s) that might or might not cause
distress and/or harm to the person who deals with it (e.g., receiving spam, seeing inappropriate content, or being threatened online).

2

In this report we use the terms unwanted digital communications and online incidents interchangeably.

1

This factsheet is for parents and educators
who are seeking to better understand teens’
experiences of online risks and challenges,
and to provide appropriate support to teens in
their care. For service providers and
government agencies these evidence-based
insights can inform policy development and
help to improve prevention and service
delivery to young New Zealanders, so they
can take advantage of new technologies while
safely navigating the digital environment.

What we know so far
Recent research conducted by Netsafe and
the Ministry for Women has explored the
relationship between New Zealand teens and
their online environment, and its implications
for digital harm. Evidence shows that
technologies, such as social media and mobile
devices, play a key part in the everyday life of
teenagers. However, a significant number of
teens have experienced unwanted digital
communications, and these experiences are
more likely to negatively affect girls than boys
(see Ministry for Women, 2017; Netsafe, 2018a,
2018b).

What we did
We conducted a nationally representative
survey with a sample of 1001 teenagers aged
from 14 to 17 in the second semester of 2017.
This factsheet only reports the responses of
those participants who said they experienced
an unwanted digital communication (n=689) in
the prior year.
As previously mentioned, the focus is on
teens’ seeking and accessing support. By this
we mean teens reaching out to people and
organisations for help in resolving an online
incident. Personal actions teens took to
manage online incidents (e.g. blocking or
unfriending someone) have already been
reported in a previous study (see Netsafe,
2018b).
Netsafe, with support from the Ministry for
Women, planned and designed the research
instrument. Data collection and initial analysis
was carried out by Colmar Brunton. The
margin of error of this study is +/- 3.7% on the
specific sample (teens who have experienced
unwanted digital communications).

On the topic of teens’ access to support, our
previous research has provided some
interesting insights. Findings based on focus
group data reveal that teens perceive little in
the way of useful formal support being in place
for them; barriers to seeking help include
personal concerns about their behaviours
being exposed to others (Ministry for Women,
2017). In addition, insights based on
representative data show that when asked
about what support teens would seek if they
received an unwanted digital communication
in the future, teens said they would first turn to
parents and close friends for help and, to a
lesser extent, the police or a teacher (Netsafe,
2018b).

What we found

This factsheet complements this evidence by
reporting on teens’ actual help-seeking
behaviour, and their views on how effective
this was in managing unwanted digital
communications.

Girls (39%) were significantly more likely to
seek support from a close friend than boys
(24%). In contrast, boys (37%) were more likely
than girls (31%) not to contact anyone for
support.

SEEKING AND ACCESSING SUPPORT
Of those participants who experienced
unwanted digital communications, two thirds
sought support to deal with a range of online
incidents.
Parents or caregivers (46%) were the most
common source of support followed by a close
friend (32%). Less significant were a close
relative, such as sister or brother (7%), and a
teacher (4%). Interestingly, just over a third of
respondents said they did not seek support
from anyone in the list of options provided to
them (34%) – see Figure 1.

2

MAIN SOURCE OF SUPPORT
46%

My parent or caregiver

32%

A close friend
Another close relative (e.g.
sister or brother)

7%

A teacher

4%

Police

3%

A school counsellor

3%

An Internet service
provider / platform (e.g.
Google, Facebook)

2%

Other (please tell us)
An online-based peer
support (e.g. online
community)
A telecommunications
company (e.g. Spark,
Vodafone)

A follow-up question asked those participants
who sought the support from more than one of
the listed options in the previous question
(n=441) to specify who they relied as their main
source of support.
Among these participants, over half (58%) said
a parent or caregiver was their main source of
help while 31% indicated a close friend was
considered the most important source to
manage an unwanted digital communication –
see Figure 2.

1%

58%

My parent or caregiver

1%
31%

A close friend

0
Another close relative (e.g.
sister or brother)

I did not contact any of the
above

5%

34%
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50%

Figure 1. Types of support accessed by teens

2%

A school counsellor

Other

1%

Police

0%

An online-based peer
support (e.g. online
community)

0%

A telecommunications
company (e.g. Spark,
Vodafone)

0%

Base: Respondents who had experienced at least one incident
of unwanted digital communication in the last year (689)

For younger teenagers (those aged 14 and 15
years old) it was more common to seek
support from their parents or caregivers while
older teens (16 and 17 years old) preferred a
close friend: specifically, 57% for teens aged 14
years and 47% for those aged 15 years.
Meanwhile, for 17-year-olds (35%) contacting a
close friend for help was more common.

0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

Figure 2. The main types of support accessed by teens

The percentage of Māori (55%) and Pacific
teens (48%) who reported having looked for
support from their parent or caregiver was
higher than in other ethnic groups.
For teens with disabilities who experienced an
unwanted digital communication, seeking help
from a parent/caregiver (49%), a close friend
(35%), and a teacher (6%) was more common
than for non-disabled teens (45%, 31%, and 3%,
respectively).

Base: Respondents who had experienced at least one incident
of unwanted digital communication in the last year (441)

There was no significant statistical difference
regarding girls’ and boys’ preference for a
parent/caregiver as the main source of
support. However, help from a close friend
was higher among girls (35%) than boys (28%).
In terms of age, it was more common among
younger teens to mention a parent/caregiver

3

as the main source of support compared to
older teens. For instance, the percentage of
14-year-olds (64%) was higher than that of 17year-olds (50%). Also, 17-year-olds (40%) were
almost twice as likely to ask a close friend for
help compared to 14-year-olds (22%).
REASONS FOR CHOOSING SUPPORT
The survey included an open-ended question
asking participants to explain in their own
words the reasons for approaching their
chosen source of support. The purpose of
asking this question was to identify key
themes or categories based on their
perceptions. A total of 441 participants
responded to the question.
Trust is a key reason for seeking help. Nearly
8 in 10 participants commented that trust was
behind their decision to ask for the support of
a family member (mostly parents and in some
cases siblings) and/or a close friend.
For those who sought help from their parents,
this trust was based on openness, listening,
and the supportive relationship they said they
have with them. For example, several
participants indicated having good
communication with their parents, who often
talk and advise them about being safe.
Teenagers said trust was mainly built and
maintained because their parents are “easy to
talk to”, do not “make a big deal” about
incidents, and are there to “help you
unconditionally.” In addition to advice and
emotional support, parents also helped
participants in dealing with instances such as
hacking, talking with the school, and/or
confronting a stranger online or whoever sent
an unwanted digital communication.
Trust was also related to participants’
perceptions that their parents have the
experience and knowledge to manage risks
and challenges in general. Several participants
commented that their parents “know how to
guide” or “have a good answer” regarding
coping with online incidents. Some teens also
pointed out that having previously received

support and advice about personal and
school-related issues motivated them to look
for the support of their parents. Interestingly,
several teens, particularly girls, stressed the
role of their mums in coping with online
incidents. These participants indicated that
their mums not only were “good at sorting
stuff” and “very supportive”, but also
understood “stuff about teens”.
In a few cases, instead of trust, it was parents’
control and supervision that led teens to ask
for their support. For example, one participant
commented on being “raised in discipline
family [sic]”. Another indicated they had “to be
upfront” because their parents regularly
“check my devices”. However, parents’
monitoring also created discomfort as one
teen described it: “My parents access my
accounts until I am 18 [sic]. I don't like these
rules and have discussed it with them”.
As previously described, close friends were
the second most important source of support
for participants who experienced unwanted
digital communications. Again, trust was an
important reason for asking for their support.
Participants commented, for instance, that a
close friend “would not overreact” about an
online incident, “would listen without getting in
trouble”, “would be more reliable”, and that
they are of a “similar age…and help you to
understand what is going on.”
Another theme that emerged from the analysis
was familiarity of their source of support with
either the sender or the specific online
incident. In this respect, just over 1 in 10 said
they sought someone’s help, especially a
close friend, because they knew the sender of
the unwanted digital communication. These
participants commented, for example, that
their friends helped them to deal with the
sender who was an acquaintance or part of
their social network. Some participants
indicated, for example, that their close friends
“knew the person that sent the inappropriate
pic [sic]”, that “it turned out to be their friends”,
that they also knew “what that person [sender]

4

is like” and that they asked for their help
because “it was about a girl at school”. One
participant said they turned to their best friend
so they “could collectively confront them the
next day.” Others indicated they relied on their
close friends because they were contacted by
or had confronted the same person in the
past. As one participant put it: “My close friend
got contacted by the same person so of
course the close friend was who I told first.”
In a few cases participants did not actively
seek support but received it anyway due to
proximity. These participants, for instance,
indicated that their parents or a close friend
were “right beside me” when the online
incident happened.
Some participants did not answer the question
directly but preferred to give reasons why they
did not ask their parents for support. These
respondents indicated that they wanted to
avoid embarrassment or worrying them about
the online incident.
PERCEIVED HELPFULNESS OF SUPPORT
Participants were also asked about the
perceived helpfulness of the support they
received. The large majority (over 8 in 10) had
a positive impression and indicated support
received was helpful/very helpful – this was
particularly the case for those who asked
parents/caregivers for help. Only 2% say the
support they received was ‘not helpful’ – see
Figure 3.
In terms of gender, the overall positive
perception of the usefulness of the support
received was slightly higher for girls (86%)
than boys (81%). No significant statistical
differences were found in terms of age groups.
For some ethnic groups the perceived
usefulness of support was higher compared to
others. While Māori (91%) and Asian teenagers
(87%) said their source of support was
helpful/very helpful, NZ European/Pākehā
(82%) and Pacific teens (82%) considered it
less so.

In their own words
• I feel I can tell my parents anything and
normally they have a good answer.
- Male, 16, NZ European/Pākehā
• Because I trust them [parents] and they
contacted the school. They are calm and
also they have helped with previous issues.

- Female, 14, NZ European/Pākehā
• My mum gets results and doesn't judge.

- Male, 16, NZ European/Pākehā
• I didn't want my parents to worry and I feel
I'm old enough to deal with it.
- Female, 17, NZ European/Pākehā
• I am encouraged to tell my parents
everything, no matter whether I am in the
right or wrong. I will never be told off, just
thanked for telling them and we work our
way through things.

- Female, 15, NZ European/Pākehā
• [My friend] Had a similar experience and
made problem go away.

- Male, 16, Māori
• I didn't want to deal with it myself, so I
turned to the closest friend I had.

- Male, 17, NZ European/Pākehā
• She [a close friend] knew the person that
sent the inappropriate pic.

- Female, 17, NZ European/Pākehā
• Teenagers feel embarrassed to go to their
parents … a close friend might help you
understand what is going on because
he/she/it might have gone through
something similar.

- Female, 15, NZ European/Pākehā
• ‘Cause my parents don’t understand and
my friend would get it, and I would not
need to explain the whole thing to my
friend but I would to my parents.
- Female, 16, NZ European/Pākehā
• Too embarrassing to go to an adult. Easier
to go to a friend, they understand.
- Female, 16, NZ European

5

On the other hand, while a large proportion of
teens with disabilities (79%) perceived that
their source of support was helpful/very
helpful, this percentage was slightly lower
compared with the views of non-disabled
teens (84%).
55%

28%

12%
0%
1 Not at all
helpful

2%
2

2%
3

4

5 Very
Not
helpful applicable

Further, our study suggests that positive social
mediation, based on the emotional support
and practical help provided both by parents
and close friends, can help teens to manage
digital harm and distress. As the findings show,
parents’ and friends’ support is not only highly
regarded by teens but is also perceived to be
effective. Therefore, policies and programmes
aimed at preventing digitally mediated harm
should consider and encourage this form of
support.
Our insights are also consistent with findings
from our prior qualitative research (see
Ministry for Women, 2017) in which older teens
(16 and 17 years old) indicated their preference
for the support of close friends. Furthermore,
by including the experiences of younger teens
(15 and 16 years old), this study reveals that the
role of parents in regard to these teens’
experiences of digital harm is more prominent.

Figure 3. Perceived helpfulness of support received

Base: Respondents who had experienced receiving at least one
unwanted digital communication in the last year (689)

Concluding remarks
This factsheet has presented findings about
the support sought and accessed by teens,
aged 14-17 years old, to manage unwanted
digital communication, the reason for
approaching their source of support, and the
perceived usefulness of the help received.
The findings show that parents, followed by
close friends, are the first line of support in
dealing with unwanted digital communications.
These insights are in line with international
research that has highlighted how important
and beneficial these types of social
connections are for teens in the context of
online risks and challenges (see Dowling &
Carey, 2013; Duerager & Livingstone, 2012;
Fridh, Lindström, & Rosvall, 2015).
As teens mostly connect online at home,
parents not only have the responsibility but
are also best positioned to guide their
children’s online experiences (Mascheroni,
Murru, Aristodemou, & Laouris, 2013).

In addition, another study (see Netsafe, 2018b)
indicated that teenagers would primarily seek
the help of parents and then close friends if
they experienced unwanted digital
communications in the future. As described in
this factsheet, the findings confirm this helpseeking behaviour among New Zealand teens
who had these experiences in real life.
Another key finding is the importance of trust
in the help-seeking behaviour of New Zealand
teens. As participants’ comments indicate,
trust is largely the reason for seeking the
support of parents and friends. This point has
implications for parents of teens who look for
help. According to teens, parents having open
communication with their children, listening to
them, and not being judgemental about
experiences of risk and online behaviour are
useful attitudes and foster an environment of
trust. This point is particularly relevant for
younger teens who relied more on the support
of their parents than their older peers. Thus, it
is necessary for parents to invest in the quality
of the relationship with their children, so online
incidents are not only positively responded to
but also prevented.

6

Our insights also have implications for schools
and educators. Considering that most parents
would like online safety information to be
provided by their kids’ school (Staksrud &
Ólafsson, 2013), there is a role that schools still
play in supporting parents’ efforts to prevent
or manage experiences of digital harm.
Permanent and open dialogue with parents
will provide schools with a better idea of the
type of information and resources parents
need, which can help them to build closer
relationships with their children.
The understanding of teens’ help-seeking
behaviour in the context of digital harm
requires further exploration. This factsheet
presents representative, but high level,
findings based on key demographics (age,
gender, ethnicity and disability). However,
evidence about specific groups of teenagers
such as those at greater risk (e.g. exposure to
family violence) is non-existent to the best of
our knowledge. Research and policy will need
to address the situation of vulnerable teens
(for instance, whether they seek support, and
how effective it is) as they are more likely to be
affected by negative online experiences
(Odgers, 2018).

What’s next?
Evidence from this factsheet and our previous
research is contributing to Netsafe’s
development of new online safety resources
and tools for parents and caregivers, family,
whānau, and schools and kura.
A recent example is the new version of the
Netsafe Kit. This resource provides
comprehensive information for educators on a
range of topics including strategic approaches
to planning and responding to online
incidents. A key aspect is the role of family and
whānau in the digital life of their students and
the wider school community. The Kit will be
available from July 2018 and can be accessed
at https://www.netsafe.org.nz/the-kit/

References
Dowling, M. J., & Carey, T. A. (2013). Victims of
bullying: Whom they seek help from and why: An
Australian sample. Psychology in the Schools,
50(8), 798–809. https://doi.org/10.1002/pits.21709
Duerager, A., & Livingstone, S. (2012). How can

parents support children’s internet safety?
Retrieved from http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/42872/
Fridh, M., Lindström, M., & Rosvall, M. (2015).
Subjective health complaints in adolescent victims
of cyber harassment: Moderation through support
from parents/friends - a Swedish population-based
study. BMC Public Health, 15(1), 949.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-015-2239-7
Mascheroni, G., Murru, M. F., Aristodemou, E., &
Laouris, Y. (2013). Parents. Mediation, selfregulation and co-regulation. In B. O’Neill, E.
Staksrud, & S. McLaughlin (Eds.), Towards a Better

Internet for Children?: Policy Pillars, Players and
Paradoxes (pp. 211–225). Gotenborg: Nordicom.
Ministry for Women. (2017). Insights into digital harm:
The online lives of New Zealand girls and boys.
Wellington, New Zealand. Retrieved from
http://women.govt.nz/documents/insights-digitalharm-online-lives-new-zealand-girls-and-boys
Netsafe. (2018a). New Zealand teens’ digital profile: A
Factsheet. Retrieved from
https://www.netsafe.org.nz/wpcontent/uploads/2017/12/SEXTING-NZ-Report-Dec7-2017v2-2.pdf
Netsafe. (2018b). New Zealand teens and digital harm:

Statistical insights into experiences, impact and
response. Retrieved from
https://www.netsafe.org.nz/NZ-teens-and-digitalharm_statistical- insights_2018.pdf
Odgers, C. (2018). Smartphones are bad for some
teens, not all. Nature, 554(7693), 432–434.
https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-018-02109-8
Staksrud, E., & Ólafsson, K. (2013). Awareness.
Strategies, mobilisation and effectiveness. In B.
O’Neilll, E. Staksrud, & S. McLaughlin (Eds.),

Towards a Better Internet for Children?: Policy
Pillars, Players and Paradoxes (Nordicom, pp. 57–
76). Goteborg.

7

NEW ZEALAND TEENS AND DIGITAL HARM: SEEKING AND ACCESSING SUPPORT
Wellington, New Zealand, June 2018
www.netsafe.org.nz
research@netsafe.org.nz
Recommended citation: Netsafe. (2018). New Zealand teens and digital harm: Seeking and accessing support.
Retrieved from: https://www.netsafe.org.nz/youth-accessing-support-factsheet-2018
ISBN: 978-0-473-44503-4
ATTRIBUTION-NONCOMMERCIAL-SHAREALIKE
https:/ /creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/ [English]
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/legalcode.mi [Te Reo Māori]

