TED Talks as Data
Katherine M. Kinnaird and John Laudun
07.19.19
Peer-Reviewed By: Ian Milligan
Clusters: Data
Article DOI: 10.22148/16.042
Dataverse DOI: https://github.com/kinnaird-laudun/data/tree/master/Release_v0
Journal ISSN: 2371-4549
Cite: Katherine M. Kinnaird and John Laudun, “TED Talks as Data,” Journal of
Cultural Analytics. July 19, 2019.

A group of teenagers cluster near their lockers, enjoying quick conversations between classes. One of them goes a little too long and,
realizing it, addresses the group and the situation by announcing,
“Well, thanks for coming to my TED talk.” The rest laugh, nod their
heads, and the conversational flow returns to normal before the bell
sounds announcing that classes are about to begin. (From field notes
by one of the authors.)
Over the past decade, TED talks have achieved a high level of cultural currency.
In addition to the original event, which continues, the various spinoff events,
e.g. TEDMed or TEDGlobal, and the localized versions (TEDx), there is a TED
radio hour on National Public Radio as well as a considerable infrastructure designed to formalize the inclusion of TED talks in education. The nature of a TED
talk has so saturated American culture that one of us has documented, in fact,
the saying noted above offered when someone has monopolized conversation
too long: “Thanks for coming to my TED talk.”1
1 Part of this research was performed while the authors were visiting the Institute for Pure and
Applied Mathematics (IPAM), which is supported by the National Science Foundation, as part of

1

Katherine M. Kinnaird and John Laudun

Cultural Analytics

Such an ironic notion of a TED talk relies on audience familiarity with the original, and, like other uses of irony and parody, reveals an intuitive grasp of the nature of a thing or form. One indication of the maturity of the genre is that even
parodies of the form of most TED talks have themselves been given as talks.2
The emergence of a stable form, TED talks as a genre, paired with the perceived
success of that form has even elicited guides and coaches.3 our own interest is in
understanding the nature of TED talks not only in terms of what makes a talk popular, but how do topic, gender, discipline, and vocabulary manifest themselves
in a TED talk, and are TED talks as distinct as parodies suggest? That is, can we
build a computational model of a TED talk? Additionally, can such models help
discern patterns of influence among speakers and topics?
In the process of doing such work, we found ourselves downloading, parsing, collating, and compiling a fair amount of data that in the interest of advancing culture analytics theories and methods, this paper introduces a collection of cleaned
and collated data sets of TED talk transcripts, including meta-information about
each talk and relevant speakers. We contextualize the utility of having such data
sets by considering TED talks as a particular kind of cultural artifact: one that
offers us a chance to open up the inventory of human textual production, that
confronts us with the status of such artifacts, and that can be added to the archaeological record. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next
section, we offer three perspectives on TED talks and their transcripts as data, as
cultural artifacts, and as examples of human oral tradition. After our consideration of the dimensions of the data set, in the following section we introduce how
the TED talk data set was scraped and cleaned from the raw HTML files and then
preview a selection of the data set. In the final section, we summarize our contributions and preview avenues for future work using this newly compiled data
set.

the Cultural Analytics Long Program. The first author is the Clare Boothe Luce Assistant Professor
of Computer Science and Statistical and Data Science at Smith College and as such, is supported by
Henry Luce Foundation’s Clare Boothe Luce Program. The second author was supported by Dr. Doris
Meriwether/BoRSF professorship. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of any of the
funding agencies.
2 Will Stephen. How to sound smart in your TEDx Talk. https://youtu.be/8S0FDjFBj8o. 2014.
3 Peter Smith. How to Give a TED Talk. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ohZk7pPJN8o. 2012;
Fia Fasbinder. Want to Get on the TED Stage? Here’s How. https://www.inc.com/fia-fasbinder/howdo-you-get-on-the- ted-stage-do-this-first.html. 2017.) Building off previous work on TED talks that
has mainly focused on delineating what makes a “good” talk, usually measured in terms of popularity,((June Cohen. What Makes A Great TED Talk. https://youtu.be/RVDfWfUSBIM. 2010; Sebastian
Wernicke. Lies, damned lies and statistics (about TEDTalks). http : / / www . ted . com / talks / lies _
damned _ lies _ and _ statistics_about_tedtalks. 2010.

2

Cultural Analytics

TED Talks as Data

2. The Nature of the Data Set
Conceived in the same year as, and featuring demonstrations of, the compact disc
and the Apple MacIntosh, the first TED conference in 1984 included presentations by Benoit Mandelbrot, Nicholas Negroponte, and Stewart Brand. It was six
years before the next instance of the conference, but during that time, according
to the TED mythos, the world came around. During the nineties, TED expanded
beyond its original trinity of “technology, entertainment, and design” and, in the
process, built a broader base of supporters, many of whom became regular attendees, sometimes known as “TEDsters.” As the decade closed, TED’s original
curator reached out to Chris Anderson, who had himself begun a similarly diverse media enterprise, Future, in 1985. By the end of 2001, Anderson had taken
over the running of the conference. By 2005, recognizing the expanding catalog
of content that TED had accumulated over the years, the conference that was
now increasingly a multimedia organization began offering a selection of those
talks which had received the highest ratings in video form. From the start, the
videos were offered under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercialNoDerivs (BY-NC-ND). Within six months, the 44 talks published had been
viewed more than three million times. With that success, the TED organization
invested in expanding the online offerings. Its efforts were rewarded with a number of awards, culminating with a Peabody Award in 2012.4
The other, named TED conferences have diverse origins and developments. The
first of these was TEDMED, started in 1998 by TED’s founder Richard Wurman
and was restarted in 2008 under new ownership. In 2010, TEDMED talks became a part of the offerings on TED website. Anderson started TED Global in
2005 with the idea of having an internationally focused series of conferences held
in a different location around the world each year. TEDWomen began in 2010
as a three-day conference and continues to the present. TEDYouth began the following year in 2011 with a focus on middle and high school students and a mix
of speakers and hands-on activities. In addition to these series, there is of course
also TED-Ed and the TED Radio Hour, both launched in the spring of 2012. Finally, there is TEDx, those talks which operate under the umbrella of TED by
following the format for speakers and using its branding. In return, organizers
4 TED itself maintains a robust collection of “about” pages.
In compiling this brief history of TED and its products, we have drawn upon not only the organization’s own account
(https://www.ted.com/about/our- organization/history-of-ted) as well as Anderson’s own TED
talks, like the one he gave in 2002 (Chris Ander- son, “TED’s Nonprofit Transition,” TED 2002
[https://www.ted.com/talks/chris_anderson_shares_his_vision_ for_ted]) but also a number of writeups about TED as it gained greater visibility and which, in turn, gave it more visibility. See for example this Forbes’ report from 2012: “Here’s Why TED and TEDx are So Incredibly Appealing”(Mark
Fidelman. Here’s Why TED and TEDx are So Incredibly Appealing. 2012.

3

Katherine M. Kinnaird and John Laudun

Cultural Analytics

of TEDx events agree not to pay speakers, only to collect fees to offset conference
costs, and to relinquish copyrights to materials to TED.
Given the span of time, the stops and starts, the discovery of new audiences and
new platforms, the original 18-minute format of TED talks has been flexed in
many ways. While our sense might be, based on anecdotal information and experience—which is often reinforced by parodists and consultants, that TED talks
are stable, we see this as something to be explored. The dataset presented in this
paper offers one avenue for such exploration. If changes in scope or form are
detectable, one of the questions then becomes how such changes are discerned,
or not discerned, by TED’s various audiences.
TED talks can be viewed through several lenses, as cultural artifacts, as data, as
performances, as examples of human speech. In “TED Talks as Texts” (2.1), we
explore the interesting opportunity that TED Talks present as objects of cultural
study. In “TED Talks as Talk” (2.2), we discuss the nature of TED talks as highly
composed but orally presented texts and how their hybrid nature presents some
unique difficulties as well as some compelling opportunities for a consideration
of textuality. In “TED Talks as Data” (2.3), we preview elements of our data set,
which includes not only the talks but who gave the talk, when and where it was
given, how many times a talk has been watched, as well as how the talk was tagged
and described by the TED organization.

2.1 TED Talks as Texts
Current efforts to model human textual productivity using computational methods have mostly focused, to date, on either very large texts or very small ones. In
the digital humanities, a range of computational studies focused mostly on novels have begun to explore the discernibility of genres and trends.5 In the information and social sciences, small texts (like tweets) and specific social interactions
(like re-tweeting and following) have mostly stood in as objects to trace other
kinds of phenomena, be they cascades through social networks or the networks
themselves.6 This divergence in focus has meant that considerations of texts has
5 Matthew Jockers. Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary History. University of Illinois
Press, 2013; Andrew Piper. Enumerations: Data and Literary Study. University of Chicago Press,
2018; Christof Schoch. Topic Modeling Genre: An Exploration of French Classical and Enlightenment
Drama. 2017. doi: {http://digitalhumanities.org:8081/dhq/vol/11/2/000291/000291.html}; Ted Underwood. “The Life Cycles of Genres”. In: Cultural Analytics 23 (2016). http://culturalanalytics.org/
2016/05/the-life-cycles-of-genres/.
6 PS Dodds, KD Harris, IM Kloumann, CA Bliss, CM Danforth (2011), “Temporal Patterns of Happiness and Information in a Global Social Network: Hedonometrics and Twitter,” PLoS ONE 6 (12):

4

Cultural Analytics

TED Talks as Data

tracked from the rather large productions of a relatively small number of individuals to the rather small productions of the rest of humanity in the form, largely,
of social media posts. There is also, we should note, differences in accessibility
and in ontology of texts: the study of the large texts is circumscribed at one end
of their history by efforts to digitize physical objects and, at the other end, by the
entanglements of copyright; the study of small texts is mostly of “born digital”
objects that are both numerous and easily available.
While there have been a number of interesting studies of what might be termed
“texts in the middle” like reviews of books and movies drawn from sites either
dedicated to such endeavors or from more general purpose fora, e.g. Reddit, we
feel there is more work to be done on and among middle-sized texts.7 These
mesoscale texts, ranging from a few dozen words to a few thousand words, have
been the principle products of verbal behavior for most of human history.8 Many
of these texts can be, and have been, classified under familiar names: myths, legends, tales, jokes, anecdotes, to name but a few genres long the purview of folklorists and anthropologists interested in how humans shape their views of the
world, and thus the world itself, through stringing words together.
Accessible corpora of such texts are, however, few and far between. As much
as folklorists have relied upon indices of tale types and motifs (smaller units of
discourse), neither the indices nor the texts upon which they are built have transitioned into digital forms that can be easily queried or called upon for computational analysis.9 Wanting to have texts that had some dimension of orality to
e26752. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0026752; Filippo Menczer, “The Spread of Misinformation in Social Media,” in Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW)
Companion Volume. Ed. by Jacqueline Bourdeau et al. 2016, p. 717. doi: 10.1145/2872518.2890092.
url: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/ 2872518.2890092; Chengcheng Shao et al. “Anatomy of an online
misinformation network,” In: PLoS ONE 13.4 (2018), e0196087. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0196087.
url: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196087.
7 Tim Tangherlini has explored the promise of these middle-sized texts both as digitized fieldwork
collections (Timothy R. Tangherlini, „The Folklore Macroscope,” Western Folklore 72 (1), (2013): 727) and as born-digital community forum posts (TR Tangherlini, V Roychowdhury, B Glenn, CM
Crespi, R Bandari, A Wadia, M Falahi, E Ebrahimzadeh, and R Bastani, 2016. “Mommy Blogs” and
the Vaccination Exemption Narrative: Results From A Machine-Learning Approach for Story Aggregation on Parenting Social Media Sites. JMIR Public Health Surveill 2: e166.).
8 We borrow the term mesoscale from manufacturing, where it designates objects between those
produced by the manufacturing as many of us imagine it, things like washing machines or cars, which
are considered macroscale, and the smaller kinds of objects like the circuits on a computer chip, considered microscale. We are using mesoscale to designate medium-sized texts, and in doing so we recognize that this middle ground has been the focus of consideration within the philosophy of science
(see, for example, (Crawford L. Elder. “On the Reality of Medium- Sized Objects”. In: Philosophical
Studies: An International Journal for Philosophy in the Analytic Tradition 83.2 [1996], 191-211.)
9 The exception to this situation is The Danish Macroscope (Timothy R Tangherlini. “The Folklore Macroscope”. In: Western Folklore 72.1 [2013], 7-27; Timothy R Tangherlini and Peter Broad-

5

Katherine M. Kinnaird and John Laudun

Cultural Analytics

them, so that we could at least try to see what role it might play in their formation,
we decided to create a corpus of transcribed texts that have at least some of their
origin in an oral performance and those oral performances could be, if needed
or desired, accessed as well. While Youtube offers a wide-rage of such texts with
their automated closed captioning processes, such transcriptions are not without
their problems and hand editing is often recommended.10 In response to these
criticisms, we sought to work with texts whose transcriptions had been proofed
and revised by human eyes. The ever-growing collection of TED talks presented
itself as one place to start.
Thus, TED talks offered us a body of middle-sized texts which were already well
established in both the public eye as well as in some scholarly considerations.11
As researchers focused on appraising current mathematical models of textuality
and exploring novel models of our own, we think there is more to map than even
what Moretti suggests in his declaration that there is an “uncharted expanse of
literature … which calls for a maximum methodological boldness.”12 If there
is to be a compelling sociology of literature, the boldness is in both examining
what we conventionally consider as literature as well as bracketing it to allow into
our consideration the wide variety of vernacular literatures which came before,
continue to exist alongside, and, even now, morph into ever new forms.

2.2 TED Talks as Talk
One possible objection to a consideration of TED talks as cultural productions is
their obviously highly produced and commodified nature, to which one response
might be: how is this different from the production of literary forms like the
novel, subject to editorial interventions and concerns about publishability based
on numbers of readers? Another objection to TED talks might allow them in
as culture but not allow them as literary. Two responses to such an objection are
possible, one inclusionary and one exclusionary in nature. The inclusive response
well, The Danish Folklore Macro- scope: Modeling Complexity in the Evald Tang Kristensen Collection.
http://etkspace.scandinavian.ucla.edu/ macroscope.html. [Visited on 11/17/2018]).
10 National Center on Disability and Access to Education. http://ncdae.org/resources/cheatsheets/
youtube.php(Visited on 01/19/2019).
11 Wesley Shumar. “ ‘Being TED’: The University Intellectual as Globalised Neoliberal Consumer
Self ”. In: Learning and Teaching-the International Journal of Higher Education in the Social Sciences
9.2 (2016), 89-108. doi: 10 . 3167 / latiss . 2016 . 090205; Ana Belen Martinez Garcia. “TED Talks
as Life Writing: Online and Offline Activism”. In: Life Writing 15.4 (2018), 487-503. doi: 10 . 1080
/ 14484528 . 2017 . 1405317; George Veletsianos et al. “Public comment sentiment on educational
videos: Understanding the effects of presenter gender, video format, threading, and moderation on
YouTube TED talk comments”. In: PLoS ONE 13.6 (2018). doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0197331.
12 Franco Moretti, “The Slaughterhouse of Literature”. In: Language Quarterly 61.1 (2000), 207-227.

6

Cultural Analytics

TED Talks as Data

would argue for getting more humans into not only the archeological-historical
record but also the literary record, making literature more important and more
robust simply by the depth and diversity of the forms within which individuals
can express themselves and their moment in time. The exclusive response argues
that literature, as a form of production, must be bounded, and the only way to
begin to discern those boundaries is to know what literature is not. If TED talks
are not literary, then how are they not and what questions does that raise about
past and current conceptions of literature or what possibilities does it offer the
domains of literary production and the study of that production in terms of useful ideas, structures, or methods? We think by being hybrid texts, TED talks offer
investigators an opportunity to examine where talk becomes marked as a particular kind of performance, a subject that has been a consideration of folkloristics
for quite some time.
That noted, the data being released here are the transcripts of TED talks, which
are not, as folklorists and linguistic anthropologists would be keen to note, not
the talks themselves. Such transcripts offer an hybrid object for analysis of cultural phenomenon, especially with the additional data about the speakers, the
view counts, and the discussion threads attached to each talk. The widespread
popularity of TED talks means there is a broad sense of what a TED talk is in
terms of form, content, and style. And their length places them firmly within the
realm of the kinds of discursive production in which most human beings engage.
This bridge to the rest of humanity is not without its difficulties. While the transcripts are not the talks themselves, they are a fair representation of an oral performance, something with which folklorists and anthropologists have long been
concerned. While TED talks are obviously the result of practice and polish, it is
entirely possible to argue that many conversational texts we encounter in daily
life are themselves the net result of similar amounts of practice and polish either
in the mouth of the person performing them or in the mouths of previous performers who have passed the text along. 13
0:14 Thank you so much, Chris. And it’s truly a great honor to have the opportunity
to come to this stage twice; I’m extremely grateful. I have been blown away by

13 The notion that a given text, be it a story or song, gets refined through its re-tellings is central to a
number of folkloristic theories. Chronicling the people and ideas of late twentieth century American
folklore studies, Bill Ivey notes that “Unlike fixed texts of civilizations, the lore of the folk lives in oral
tradition, and the subtle changes introduced through face-to-face transmission gives folklore texts
special validity, a truth fored through shared expression refined over time” Bill Ivey, Rebuilding an
Enlightened World: Folklorizing America, Indiana University Press, 2018, 49. Describing the effects
on one of the more prosaic folklore forms, the legend, Bill Ellis notes that “the more narrators tell
their stories, the more they will focus on the narrative elements that most efficiently re-present the
most successful translation of the events described” Bill Ellis, Aliens, Ghosts, and Cults: Legends We
Live, University Press of Mississippi, 2001, 64.

7

Katherine M. Kinnaird and John Laudun

Cultural Analytics

this conference, and I want to thank all of you for the many nice comments about
what I had to say the other night. And I say that sincerely, partly because
(Mock sob) I need that.
0:40 (Laughter)
0:45 Put yourselves in my position.
0:47 (Laughter)
0:54 I flew on Air Force Two for eight years.
0:57 (Laughter)
0:59 Now I have to take off my shoes or boots to get on an airplane!
1:02 (Laughter)
1:05 (Applause)

Table 1: Table 1: An excerpt from a Al Gore’s TED talk in 2006 with parentheticals
from both the speaker and the audience included in the transcript text along.14
So, while TED talks are far from conversational discourse, they offer researchers
the opportunity to explore what dimensions of oral textuality might be open to
algorithmic analyses. TED talks, qua texts, represent an interesting oral-literary
hybrid: they are performed orally but not spontaneously. They are clearly the
product of considerable scripting, which may involve writing but may simply involve a lot of rehearsing. The talks themselves are given without reference to a
script, unlike other performances (e.g., political speeches) but are more scripted
than the kind of daily performances which have been the focus of folkloristic
and anthropological inquiry. Most importantly, the transcripts which are a part
of the data set are not, however, the product of the speakers but of the TED organization: they are produced after the fact, by a combination of TED staff and
crowd sourcing. A TED representative we contacted reported the following:
[A] ll transcriptions for TED talks are created by our Translation
team, aided by hundreds of contributors in our “TED Translator”
program. TED Translators are volunteers from around the world
who enable the inspiring ideas in them to crisscross languages and
borders. They use a free, online subtitling tool called Amara, which
volunteers can use to find talks, create subtitles, peer review transcriptions and trans- lations, and message other TED Translators.15
14 The notion that a given text, be it a story or song, gets refined through its re-tellings is central to a
number of folkloristic theories. Chronicling the people and ideas of late twentieth century American
folklore studies, Bill Ivey notes that “Unlike fixed texts of civilizations, the lore of the folk lives in oral
tradition, and the subtle changes introduced through face-to-face transmission gives folklore texts
special validity, a truth fored through shared ex- pression refined over time” Bill Ivey. Rebuilding an
Enlightened World: Folklorizing America. Indiana University Press, 2018, p. 49. Describing the effects
on one of the more prosaic folklore forms, the legend, Bill Ellis notes that “the more narrators tell their
stories, the more they will focus on the narrative elements that most efficiently re-present the most
successful translation of the events described” Bill Ellis. Aliens, Ghosts, and Cults: Legends We Live.
University Press of Mississippi, 2001, p. 64.
15 Per correspondence with TED Support. See also the page explaining the transcription process
as part of the larger translation process: https://www.ted.com/participate/translate/transcribe.

8

Cultural Analytics

TED Talks as Data

While the relationship between any particular in-house transcription effort and
the crowd-sourced effort is not entirely clear, there is a qualitative difference between these transcripts and transcripts available via automated systems such as
those found on YouTube or a script from which a speaker worked. The result of
the TED in-house transcription efforts are transcripts that look like the beginning of Al Gore’s 2006 talk excerpted in Table 1.
The transcripts are formatted as tables on TED web pages, with approximate time
codes on the left and blocks of text on the right. Also on the right are parentheticals from both the speaker’s performance as well as the audience’s reaction. In
the example, taken from Al Gore’s talk in 2006, we have both an internal parenthetical, describing a particular moment in Gore’s presentation, “(Mock sob)”, as
well as several examples of the audience’s response to Gore, “(Laughter)”. None
of these are a part of the text itself, however, and when compiling vocabulary
and modeling topics, we have removed these. (But we did want to be able to keep
them in mind when, for example, analyzing the texts for sentiment.)
Because the texts available on the TED website are transcripts of a spoken
performance, we had to confront at least one question about the status of these
texts: accuracy. That is, how closely does a transcript track with an author’s
intention? Accuracy here is in two dimensions: words and syntax. That is, does
a given transcript accurately capture the words the speaker used and the way in
which the speaker strung them together? We chose a number of presentations to
watch with the transcripts next to us and we were satisfied that, especially when
it came to matters of lexicon, the transcriptions were of a high quality. Whether
a speaker meant a semi-colon, a colon, or a period was not something we felt we
could gauge: so how a speaker intended coordination of clauses and how those
clauses are represented in a transcript is not something that can be relied upon.
Researchers interested in syntactical dimensions will need to be aware of this.
Setting aside the matter of transcription, TED talks present the possibility of exploring the nature of performance. Over the last fifty years, folklorists, anthropologists, linguists and communications scholars have built upon an initial delineation of performance as one way to think about verbal art, expanding it to
address a wide range of human behavior associated and/or bound up with verbal acts.16 Such notions of performance extend from formally-staged events, like
16 Folklorist Richard Bauman, pursuing a line of inquiry begun by linguist Dell Hymes(Edwin Ardener, ed. Soci- olinguistics and the ethnography of speaking. London: Tavistock Press, 1971, pp. 4793), was the first to articulate the notion of “verbal art as performance”(Richard Bauman. “Verbal
Art as Performance”. In: American An- thropologist 77.2 [1975], 290-311). Subsequent work by other
scholars and scientists elaborated on the nature of performance and its possible boundaries (Elizabeth

9

Katherine M. Kinnaird and John Laudun

Cultural Analytics

those on TED talks that also include staging for the screen, to a wide variety of
informal events that include whispered gossip in high school corridors. Beyond
the fundamentals of average speaking rate that one can deduce from the metadata already available in the current data set, further explorations of prosody are
possible that might begin to establish how TED talks participate in both fundamental forms of prosody and/or, as parodies suggest, innovate in particular (and
peculiar) ways loudness, and rhythm, timing and speaking rate.17 A macroscopic
examination of intonation patterns and pitch, speech stress, speaking rate, and
rhythm and other paralinguistic and extralinguistic features promises to help us
understand how gender, domain expertise, and rhetorical situations play out.

2.3 TED Talks as Data
The current output of this project, and the materials we are releasing, are
collated versions of the TED talks with meta information about both
the talks and the speakers themselves. Below we detail the central data
sets contained within this release as well as some of the supplementary materials available. The data can be found at our GitHub page:
https://github.com/kinnaird-laudun/data/tree/master/Release_v0. The data
itself is comprised of information from 2656 talks downloaded from the main
TED site in the summer of 2018. We used the list of talks maintained as a
Google Sheet that Dan Colman reported on Open Culture.18 Our method for
downloading and cleaning the talks into a series of CSVs is explained in the next
section.
While the TED site publishes transcripts to talks at TEDx events, we are narrowing our focus to those at the main TED event and the seven major series. These
satellite events are organized locally and use their own criteria for inviting speakers. This means that the talks at the main TED events and the TEDx events have
different kinds of selection bias associated to them. Furthermore, not all TEDx
talks are published on the TED website, which introduces another layer of selection bias. So as not to give the impression that the dataset includes all (or even a
Fine. The Folklore Text: From Performance to Print. Indiana University Press, 1984).
17 Some early work on performances by poets by MacArthur, Zellou, and Miller focused on 12
prosodic features and suggests that, at least for formal readings of poetry, there are “four stylistic tendencies that begin to characterize reading styles more precisely than the binary of neutral vs. expressive”(Marit MacArthur, Georgia Zellou, and Lee Miller. “Beyond Poet Voice: Sampling the (Non-)
Performance Styles of 100 American Poets”. In: Journal of Cultural Analytics [2018]).
18 https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Yv_9nDl4ocIZR0GXU3OZuBaXxER1blfwR_
XHvklPpEM/; Dan Colman.
1756 TED Talks Listed in a Neat Spreadsheet.
http://www.openculture.com/2014/06/1756- ted-talks-listed-in-a-neat-spreadsheet.html. 2014.

10

Cultural Analytics

TED Talks as Data

representative sample of) TEDx talks, we have chosen not to include any of the
TEDx talks presented on the TED website in this release.19
In the data release directory are the following five files:
• a CSV exported from the Google sheet20 in May 2018
• a CSV containing the metadata as well as the transcripts of the talks that
occurred at the annual TED event: TEDonly_final.csv
• a similar CSV as the one above but of the talks from one of the seven major series (TEDActive, TEDGlobal, TEDMED, TEDSummit, TEDWomen,
TEDYouth): TEDplus_final.csv
• TEDonly_speakers_final.csv - CSV of the talks at the main TED event collated with meta information about the speakers
• TEDplus_speakers_final.csv - CSV of the talks at one of the seven major
series collated with meta information about the speakers
• a copy of the TED license (CC BY-NC-ND) at the time of this release, the
same license under which this release is made.
Both the TEDonly and TEDplus files in this release include the following features
for each talk:
•
•
•
•
•

Official TED identification number
Public URL
Name(s) of the speaker(s)
Headline assigned by TED
Description of the talk as it appeared on the talk’s main page

•
•
•
•
•
•

Particular TED event at which the talk occurred
Duration of the talk (in seconds)
Date on which the talk was published on the TED site
Tags assigned to the talk by TED
Number of views the talk had received as of summer 2018
Transcribed text of the talk

The two CSV files with the meta information provided on the TED website about
the speakers include the following, delineated by speaker:
• the speaker’s occupation,
19 The larger repository of which this data release is a part includes a working directory one level
above the release with our Jupyter Notebooks that can be adjusted to process the existing TEDx talks
into a collated dataset.
20 https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Yv_9nDl4ocIZR0GXU3OZuBaXxER1blfwR_
XHvklPpEM/.

11

Katherine M. Kinnaird and John Laudun

Cultural Analytics

• the speaker’s introduction as given on the TED site, and
• the profile of the speaker beginning with the phrase “Why you should listen
to …” In addition to these CSVs, we also are making available:
• The URL lists which we derived from the original Google sheet and used
as input for wget.21

Originally, we wished to include all the HTML files involved for all of the talks,
including the HTML for the speaker pages, the page in which a talk is embedded,
the transcript pages, and, finally, the discussion page for each talk, but given the
generosity of the TED organization in allowing us to share the data above in this
structured fashion, we have elected to set aside that data from release. For those
interested in exploring the changing nature of the organization’s web infrastructure, which has included some substantive changes to the HTML, we are happy
to make the data available upon request. These are the complete HTML, available
to be parsed in various ways.22
The Jupyter notebooks contain our Python work as well as a log of our command
line operations. While we recognize that both Python and Jupyter are actively
developed and maintained, the notebooks here are mostly included as documentation of our process. In keeping with recent discussions about reproducibility
of research, the notebooks make it possible for interested individuals to see what
we do and to reproduce those results however they see fit.23
There are additional files in the GitHub repo in the parent directory of the data.
These files are described in the associated Jupyter Notebooks within the release
directory associated with this paper.24
The release of this data falls within the scope of the Creative Commons license
that TED operates under—CC BY-NC-ND 4.0—as this is an analytical, collated,
and clean dataset of the TED talk transcripts. Additionally, we are sharing the
transcripts in a new format without creating a derivative of them, which is explicitly permitted under the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license. Additionally, we have
21 For further considerations of reproducibility within cultural analytics see (Andrew Piper.

Do we
know what we are doing? 2019. url: http://culturalanalytics.org/2019/04/do-we-know-what-we-aredoing/
22 We offer the HTML files of the TED talks and the speaker profiles both in keeping with the
permissions of the TED organization and as an archive of these sources in their current form. As we
note below, some of our original explorations in 2016 used different code to parse the pages, revealing
that the TED site has undergone at least one revision since then. The Google sheet itself has also seen
the addition of columns and a change in name of some of the headers.
23 We cannot guarantee that the code will itself run as is as Python and Jupyter evolve nor that the
code will work out of the box on any particular machine setup.
24 The GitHub directory is located at: https://github.com/kinnaird-laudun/data.

12

Cultural Analytics

TED Talks as Data

sought and gained explicit approval from TED for this release.25

3 Methods for Acquiring and Cleaning the Data
Due to the storage methods on the TED website and the evolution of the pages
over time, collating information about the TED talks is a non-trivial process. Beginning with the Google sheet26 listing the URLs of the talks, the process involves
a number of steps: (1) acquiring the HTML files, (2) extracting the desired metainformation from within the hybrid JSON/HTML structure of a file, (3) parsing
the speaker information from the separate set of files and joining it to the appropriate talks, and (4) inspecting all the output files by hand for errors and missing
data and then making those corrections and additions. As the enumeration of
the process makes clear, the files within our data release build on each other. The
exported Google sheet is leveraged to create the TEDonly and TEDplus files by
cataloging the locations of those talk pages. The files with the speakers’ meta
information are expansions of the files without.27

3.1 Acquisition of TED transcripts
Like many websites serving as media delivery platforms, the TED site continues
to evolve as the collection of TED talks grows with each event. This evolution
can be viewed through the growth of the Google sheet28 that catalogues the talks
on the TED site. When Open Culture first reported the existence of the sheet
in 2014, the list contained 1756 TED talks.29 In 2016, when we first decided to
begin collaborating and made TED talks a place to start having a dialogue about
the application of statistical methods to humanities inquiries, the list contained
2209 talks. At the time of our update in June 2018, the list had grown to 2755
talks.
25 Specifically, TED has granted us permission for “this use on a one-time, non-precedent setting
basis.” A copy of the email, which serves as the official license, can be provided upon request.
26 https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Yv_9nDl4ocIZR0GXU3OZuBaXxER1blfwR_
XHvklPpEM/.
27 Please note that the Jupyter notebooks in the data directory (one level up from the release) should
be considered historical in nature: while the code in them can be run, in some cases input and output
files have subsequently been moved and/or renamed as our own processes and priorities became
clearer to us. We welcome their use: just know that some editing of the loading and saving of the
working files may be needed.
28 https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Yv_9nDl4ocIZR0GXU3OZuBaXxER1blfwR_
XHvklPpEM/.
29 Colman, 1756 TED Talks Listed in a Neat Spreadsheet, op. cit.

13

Katherine M. Kinnaird and John Laudun

Cultural Analytics

The number of talks can be partially explained by the inclusion of talks at TEDx
events that have become very popular. TEDx events are organized locally but
without explicit oversight from the TED organization: “TEDx events are planned
and coordinated independently, on a community- by-community basis, under a
free license from TED”.30 As the selection criteria is not consistent between TEDx
events and the main TED events, including their seven major series - TEDActive,
TEDGlobal, TEDMED, TEDSummit, TEDWomen, TEDYouth - and because not
every TEDx talk is included on the main TED website, we narrowed our data
collation to only the main TED events and series: so the speaker files are only
applicable to the main and major series. (All the talks available for download in
June 2018 are available in the merge file.) The Google sheet31 serves as the starting
point for our data collation, as it lists the main URL for each TED talk. Using this
list, we download the main pages and then amend the URLs to download the transcripts and discussions by appending "/transcript" and "/discussion".
All of the HTML pages are part of the supplemental materials to this data release,
both as a source of additional information about the TED talks not currently part
of the CSVs in this data release and as an archive of the TED website itself.32 Also
part of this data release is the code from the most recent parsing of the files (June
2018). We note that between 2016 and 2018, the TED website was revised such
that much of the code written for parsing the HTML pages in 2016 had to be
rewritten in order to work on the files downloaded in 2018.33

3.2 Extracting Descriptions and Transcripts
From the collection of pages, we then separate the meta-information about the
talks from the syntax of the website. The TED webpages are a combination of
conventional HTML and a hybrid JSON, meaning that this separation step is an
iterative process. Using Python’s BeautifulSoup and json modules as well as some
regular expressions, we extract a tuple of the talk information–including a talk’s
identifier, description, view count, and the TED event at which it occurred–which
30 https://www.ted.com/about/programs-initiatives/tedx-program.
31 https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Yv_9nDl4ocIZR0GXU3OZuBaXxER1blfwR_

XHvklPpEM/.
32 While the archival usage is not obvious, the dynamic nature of the TED website was driven home
to us when we began work on the downloaded files in 2018 and soon discovered how much our code
from 2016 had to be revised or rewritten to work in 2018. And, at least in the case of accompanying
time signatures throughout a talk, some of the data was no longer available.
33 The 2016 files and the accompanying code are available by request to anyone interested in exploring differences between both the code and the content of the TED website itself.

14

Cultural Analytics

TED Talks as Data

we then placed into a row in a CSV file.34
Getting the text of the talk was a similar process, but due to the coding of these
files, this step involved collecting all the divs of the classGrid cell flx-s:1
p-r:4.As shown in Table 1, the transcripts provided by TED’s in-house transcription efforts include more than just the words spoken by the speaker(s). The
transcripts are formatted as tables on TED web pages, with approximate time
codes on the left and both blocks of text as well as parentheticals external to the
text and, in most cases, to the speaker on the right.35 So for example, Al Gore’s
talk from Table 1 would start as:
Thank you so much, Chris. And it’s truly a great honor to have the
opportunity to come to this stage twice; I’m extremely grateful. I
have been blown away by this conference, and I want to thank all of
you for the many nice comments about what I had to say the other
night. And I say that sincerely, partly because (Mock sob) I need
that. (Laughter) Put yourselves in my position. (Laughter) I flew on
Air Force Two for eight years. (Laughter) Now I have to take off my
shoes or boots to get on an airplane! (Laughter) (Applause) …
In the above example, we have both an internal parenthetical, describing a
particular moment in Gore’s presentation which is part of the performance,
the mock sob, as well as several examples of the audience’s response to Gore,
laughter and applause. We leave these parentheticals in with the understanding
that different analysts will have different understandings of what is, and is not,
part of the text. In our work, we remove the parentheticals for the operations
that focus on lexicon and include them when dealing with affect.36

3.3 Adding Speaker Information
TED talks often gain popularity due to the fame of the speaker, but there are also
cases of speakers rising to the national conversation due to a viral TED talk. The
close relationship between TED talk transcript and speaker motivates the need
for collated data files with meta information for both the speaker(s) and the talk
34 A detailed description of the process is available in the “Parsing the Descriptions” Jupyter notebook that is included with this data release.
35 See the “Parsing the Transcriptions” Jupyter notebook in the data release.
36 There are additional notes on parentheticals, as well as the regex we found useful, in the Jupyter
notebook on tokenization. We emphasize that users of the data will need to process the text as they
think best for their purposes.

15

Katherine M. Kinnaird and John Laudun

Cultural Analytics

itself. This process begins with the gathering of speaker information, parsing of
talks’ speakers, and matching speaker meta information.
The extracting of the speaker information–their occupation, their introduction,
and their profile–is a similar process to the extraction of meta information
about the talks. Each speaker has a page within the speaker index page, e.g.,
/speakers/ellen_t_hoen. After downloading all the speaker pages using
the parsed relative URL for each speaker, we created another text file to feed
wget and extract the various types of meta information.
Demographic information such as race, gender, and age of the speaker is not
provided by TED on the speaker pages. This kind of demographic information
would need to be gleaned from third-party sources. However, initial work has
been done to automatically detect each speaker’s self-identified gender from their
introduction and profile text leveraging the proportion of gendered pronouns in
these short texts. This work is in early stages and is beyond the scope of this paper
that is a collation of information tracked and stored by TED.
While not all talks have more than one speaker, for the talks that do, we separate
individual speakers into their own columns. This step is a simple splitting of the
speakers string on the word ‘and.’ This separation process can occur in parallel to
the extraction of speaker information. This step is crucial because speaker meta
information is usually by individual speaker and not by groups of speakers. For
example, while the two co-founders of Google Sergei Brin and Larry Page have
given TED talks together, they each have their own profiles within the TED ecosystem. Once the speakers are separated into their own columns, the adding of
the majority of the speakers’ meta information uses operations like merge and
join from pandas in Python.37

3.4 Hand-coding
We would be remiss not to note that in collating information about TED talks
into one data set, small amounts of hand-coding are necessary. The reasons for
each of these hand-coding steps vary, but each instance of hand-coding is done
following visual inspection of the data and confirming that (1) hand-coding is
necessary and (2) finding the missing information within the TED eco-system.
Below are a few examples with their Talk ID numbers.38
37 Details

of this merging can be found in the associated Jupyter notebooks.
transcripts that we are releasing as part of this data release are labeled as transcript.##. The
numbers at the end of the file name are not the talk identification number as given by TED. The talk
identification number is instead buried within the HTML coding.
38 The

16

Cultural Analytics

TED Talks as Data

• Bill and Melinda Gates as speakers - Talk ID 1964: This is one example that
fails due to the speaker separation process. In these TED talk HTML files,
the speakers are listed at ‘Bill and Melinda Gates.’ This means that when
we split on ‘and’, we end up with ‘Bill’ as speaker one and ‘Melinda Gates’
as speaker two. For colloquial usage–like a website–stating the speakers of
this talk as ‘Bill and Melinda Gates’ makes absolute sense, but as speaker
entities, they are ‘Bill Gates’ and ‘Melinda Gates.’
• Gustavo Dudamel and the Teresa Carreño Youth Orchestra - Talk ID 466:
This talk also fails due to the speaker separation process but for a slightly
different reason. Here the presenter is both the conductor - Gustavo Dudamel - and his orchestra - the Teresa Carreño Youth Orchestra - as one
entity. This is a more formal use of ‘and’ than in the above example. By
splitting on ‘and’ we incorrectly split a speaker into two parts that are not
speakers within the TED eco-system in their own right. We find a similar
issue with Tals ID 1972, as Gabby Giffords and Mark Kelly are treated as
one speaker entity in the TED ecosystem.
• Talks with missing speakers - Talk IDs 1722 and 1786: As we inspect the
data sets after adding the speaker information to each talk, we noticed two
talks that had no speakers. Investigating further on the TED website, these
talks did have speakers but where that information was stored on those
talks’ pages was coding differently than other pages.
• Duplicate speaker names - TED IDs 72, 211, 1785, 3633, and 8420: Within
our listing of TED speakers, we have two sets of duplicate names. We have
two speakers named Chris Anderson (one the curator of TED and the second a drone maker) and two named Michael Green (one an economist
and the other an architect). So when we join speakers with their talks, the
python code does not know which Chris Anderson (or Michael Green)
to select, so it creates a talk row for each of the identically named speakers. For the hand-coding, we found these duplicate talks and selected the
correct speaker.

Each of the above examples is unique in why they fail to correctly match the
speaker meta informa- tion to the talk. Furthermore, writing one single script
to deal with each of these cases correctly, while possible, would be time better
served by doing manual adjustments as the cases are (1) very limited in number
and (2) rely on our contextual understanding. The first two examples stumble on
colloquial and formal uses of and. Writing a script to check for colloquial versus
formal uses of and would require a computer to understand the differences in
17

Katherine M. Kinnaird and John Laudun

Cultural Analytics

these usages. The third example would require a broader scraping of the HTML
files which would likely mean that we would return additional information that is
not relevant to our search, which in turn would require additional cleaning. The
fourth case requires one to understand the content of the talk and the occupations
of the potential speakers in order to correctly match the right person with the
duplicated name to each talk. This additional check in code requires either a
lengthy list of possibilities to be checked or a sophisticated artificial intelligence
system.
We also run into unicode issues when matching speaker’s meta-information with
their talks. For some speakers with accents in their names, the CSVs with the
talk information did not store their names correctly, either adding strange subsequences of characters or changing the letters in the name.39 This of course
results in speaker meta-information not being matched correctly. To resolve this,
we do a version of the procedure resolving the duplicate speaker names above. In
our resolution, we also overwrite the incorrect encoding of speakers’ names in
the names columns.40
The hand-coding step highlights the necessity for careful collation of data and for
human oversight during that process. In working with the TED talk and speaker
meta-information, we find examples of incorrect spellings due to errant encoding, conflicts between colloquial and intentional use of ‘and’ for denoting multiple or single speakers, and matching talks with speakers when two speakers share
the same name. The diversity of these issues and the kinds of resolutions that they
require illustrate that humans need to be an engaged part of the data wrangling
process.

3.5 Preview of the Cleaned TED Data
In our data presentation of the TED talk transcripts, each talk is its own row with
the different types of meta-information listed in the columns. Table2is a snippet
of one talk’s row in the version that includes meta-information of the speaker(s):
we have transposed the rows and columns for the sake of space in order to provide
readers with an example of what is available for any given talk.
39 It is interesting that it seemed to only be the files with the talks that have issues with accents while
the files containing only speaker meta information encode accents within names as expected.
40 To ensure that our hand coding decisions and work are also in the dataset without speaker metadata, we create our final version of that data by simply removing the columns associated to speaker
metadata from the combined talk and speaker file. The only columns left are those associated to the
talk meta-information and those that list the name(s) of the speaker(s).

18

Cultural Analytics

Talk_ID
public_url
headline
description

event
duration
published
tags
views
text

speaker_1
speaker1_occupation
speaker1_introduction
speaker1_profile

TED Talks as Data

1
https://www.ted.com/talks/al_gore_on_averting_climate_crisis
Averting the climate crisis
With the same humor and humanity he exuded in ”An Inconvenient
Truth,” Al Gore spells out 15 ways that individuals can address
climate change immediately, from buying a hybrid to inventing a
new, hotter brand name for global warming.
TED2006
00:16:17
6/27/06
alternative energy, cars, global issues, climate change, environment, science, culture, sustainability, technology
3266733
Thank you so much, Chris. And it’s truly a great honor to have
the opportunity to come to this stage twice; I’m extremely grateful. I have been blown away by this conference,
and I want to thank all of you for the many nice comments
about what I had to say the other night. And I say that
sincerely, partly because (Mock sob) I need that. (Laughter) Put
yourselves in my position. (Laughter) I flew on Air Force Two
for eight years. (Laughter) Now I have to take off my shoes or
boots to get on an airplane! (Laughter) (Applause) …
Al Gore
Climate advocate
Nobel Laureate Al Gore focused the world’s attention on the
global climate crisis. Now he’s showing us how we’re moving towards real solutions.
Why you should listen: Former Vice President Al Gore is
co-founder and chairman of Generation Investment Management.
While he’s is a senior partner at Kleiner Perkins Caufield &
Byers, and a member of Apple, Inc.’s board of directors, Gore
spends the majority of his time as chair of The Climate Reality
Project, . . .

speaker_2
speaker2_occupation
speaker2_introduction
speaker2_profile
speaker_3
speaker3_occupation
speaker3_introduction
speaker3_profile
speaker_4
speaker4_occupation
speaker4_introduction
speaker4_profile

Table 2. A transposed row from TEDonly_speakers_final.csv of data showing
labels in use and the associated data: please note that the talk itself and the
speaker profile have been truncated for the sake of space.

4 Conclusions and Future Work
The main contribution of the current work are collated data sets of TED talks
from both an inclusive set of all talks published on the TED website as well a
more focused set of the main TED events sponsored by the TED organization
itself. These collections, whether of the few thousand inclusive set or the 1754
talks with extended speaker information, offer well-documented texts. Their
rich metadata offer researchers in the humanities and data science a number of
avenues for considering texts in various contexts, be they domain, gender, pop19

Katherine M. Kinnaird and John Laudun

Cultural Analytics

ularity, or the discourse that accompanies them. While one version of this data
focuses solely on meta-information about the talk itself, a second version also
includes meta-information about the speakers. These data sets have been contextualized through a tri-lens discussion of TED talks as texts, talk, and as data.
There is, of course, always more to do when it comes to data processing and munging. For example, compiling the additional data for the many (though incomplete
on the TED website list of) TEDx talks that would, perhaps, give further insights
into how genders and disciplines, as well as topics, fare outside of central TED
events. To this end, in this work, we have articulated our data collation methods
and made available the code used during this process.
One of the immediate outcomes of doing this work is how the process itself asks
questions and forces analysts to make decisions which must then be explained
and defended: for example, determining what constitutes a talk. Our own work
on TED talks is fundamentally focused on making the text of the talks the center
of much of our analysis: what words are used by what kinds of speakers, as well
as how those words constitute larger semantic formations, like topics, or reveal
rhetorical moves or changes in modality that would allow us to infer, if anything,
the relationship between texts and their non-textual traits (like views)? As a result, talks which featured texts with no to few words were less interesting to us,
despite these largely being musical performances. (The possibility of asking questions about the nature of talks in which talk does not feature is something we leave
for another time.)41
In addition to their middle-sized nature as well as their hybrid status as oralliterary texts, TED talks also come with a great deal of metadata. The ability to
compare the two lengths of a text, the time it takes to be delivered versus the
number of words within it, is but one possibility among many. While popularity
is one gauge for a talk’s importance, we think the increasing interest in methods
for detecting text re-use could reveal which talks have had more subtle, less easily
discerned affects on contemporary discourses. With all the data available in the
TED talk data set, we hope to encourage new lines of research for investigating
cultural phenomena.
In the introduction to their exploration of possible intersections between cultural
analytics and critical race studies, So, Long, and Zhu note that cultural analytics,
with the cultivation of large data sets of texts and the adoption of computational
technologies, has pursued “an expanding array of topics, including genre and
41 Richard Bauman. Let Your Words be Few: Symbolism of Speaking and Silence Among SeventeenthCentury Quakers. Waveland Press, 1983.

20

Cultural Analytics

TED Talks as Data

cultural prestige”.42 Cast often as thought leaders and the shapers of public conversations on topics, TED speakers and their talks offer analysts an opportunity
to examine the relationship between ideas and the marketplace(s) in which they
are embedded. With the variety of speakers addressing diverse topics in a highly
prestigious forum, the talks - along with their transcripts and meta-data - provide insight into current practices in the commodification, and to some degree
the reception, of ideas, images, and events.43 With a plethora of metadata not
only about a talk’s performance date, its publication date, its popularity, and a
rich set of data about its speaker(s), the current data set opens new avenues of
research and is just a first step towards understanding the intersection of texts
and the world they hope to shape and are, in turn, shaped by.

Unless otherwise specified, all work in this journal is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

42 Richard Jean So, Hoyt Long, and Yuancheng Zhu. “Race, Writing, and Computation: Racial Difference and the US Novel, 1880-2000”. In: Journal of Cultural Analytics (2019). doi: 10.22148/16.031.
43 We note that more work should be done to understand the bias that is present among the TED
talks given that the TED speakers as a group do not match the racial, gender, or socioeconomic diversity of the general population in the United States or globally.

21

