Religion, contact and ambivalent attitudes towards the rights of gays and
lesbians in Barbados
Mahalia Jackman
Department of Economics, University of the West Indies, Cave Hill Campus, Barbados,
Email: mahalia.jackman@cavehill.uwi.edu or mahalia.jackman@outlook.com

This is a pre-published draft. A revised version of this paper has been
published in the Journal of Homosexuality and available at Taylor and
Francis via https://doi.org/10.1080/00918369.2019.1601434. Please cite the
published version
Abstract
Over 70 countries in the world currently carry anti-gay laws, among which is Barbados,
a small English-speaking Caribbean island. This study evaluates whether heterosexuals
in Barbados are consistent or ambivalent in their attitudes towards anti-gay law reform
and the extent to which competing messages from interpersonal contact and religion
affect ambivalence. The analysis revealed that a majority of heterosexuals hold
ambivalent attitudes about gay and lesbian rights. Moreover, results from a multinomial
logistic regression imply that Barbadians whose views on sexuality were theologically
based were less likely to support restrictions on same-sex intimacy when they have a
close relationship with a gay man or lesbian. However, this decline in support for the
laws brought about by meaningful contact did not translate to support for gay and
lesbian rights among the religiously inclined. Rather, it manifested itself as a state of
attitudinal ambivalence.
Keywords: gays; lesbians, rights, ambivalence, attitudes, religion, contact, LGBT,
Barbados

1

Introduction
Currently, one of the most contested global issues concerns the rights of same-sex couples.
In the Global North, the fight for the legality of same-sex intimacy has largely been won, and
current discourse on rights for sexual minorities focus on marital and adoption rights.
However, the advancement of the rights of sexual minorities in other countries significantly
lags that of the Global North. As at 2017, over 70 countries carry laws that criminalised
private consensual same-sex intimate acts (Carroll & Mendos, 2017), among which is the
small English-speaking Caribbean state under review in this paper: Barbados. In Barbados,
same-sex relations are not legally recognised; there are no laws prohibiting discrimination on
the basis of sexual orientation; and finally, Barbados carries laws that define the type of sex
that is appropriate between consenting adults (Alexander, 1994). A common view is that the
current laws are anchored by public disapproval of sexual minorities (Commonwealth Human
Rights Initiative, 2011). However, without empirical evidence to the contrary, it seems naïve
to assume that there is a uniform stance on sexuality in Barbados. Many social and political
psychologists have moved away from the traditional view that attitudes are univalent, and it
is generally accepted that many persons may feel ambivalent about an issue (Conner &
Armitage, 2008; Huckfeldt & Sprague, 2000)
The term ambivalence is often used to describe the expression of conflicting
viewpoints or simultaneously holding positive and negative attitudes towards an issue
(Hoffarth & Hodson, 2016). The literature suggests that there are a number of antecedents of
ambivalence, among which is the fact that social reasoning is not determined by a single
stimulus but is developed from multiple domains such as one’s social networks and nuggets
of one’s core beliefs (Heinze & Horn, 2009; Huckfeldt & Sprague, 2000). Hence, we often
arrive at a position on an issue through different social and cognitive processes. For a subset
of individuals, all these factors may point in the same direction, making it easy for them to
take a firm position on an issue. However, many other individuals receive messages from
both sides of the debate, and so, may end up in a state of attitudinal ambivalence (Huckfeldt
& Sprague, 2000). Policies regulating same-sex relationships, the case I examine here, is
among the chief issues that individuals may receive competing messages about from their
evaluative predispositions. These cross-pressures, in turn, could lead to mixed feelings about
gay and lesbian rights. In this paper, I focus on the cross-pressures coming from
interpersonal contact and religion.

2

When thinking about extending basic rights to same-sex couples, individuals often draw
on teachings from their religion. Many religious institutions preach against same-sex
intimacy (Olson, Cadge, & Harrison, 2006), which is not surprising as many religious texts
have passages that are viewed as criticisms of same-sex intimacy (Comstock, 1991; Siker,
2007). Persons may also base their opinions on informational assumptions (Heinze & Horn,
2009), for instance, the information gained via interpersonal contact with gays and lesbians
(Smith, Axelton, & Saucier, 2009). Personally knowing someone who identifies as “gay”
often breeds empathy towards and trust of gay men and lesbians (Herek & Capitanio, 1996).
Receiving competing messages from these two evaluative predispositions could lead to
mixed feelings about lesbian and gay rights. In fact, there is research to support this line of
thinking. Garner (2013) showcases that there is significant variation in sexual prejudice
among Evangelical Christians when these individuals personally know a sexual minority.
Garner (2013) proposes that this pronounced variability in attitudes reflects the conflict
between religious opposition towards the rights of gays and lesbians and the prejudice
reducing effects of interpersonal contact. Against this backdrop, the current study seeks to
determine the extent to which citizens of Barbados support the anti-gay laws. It attempts to
answer the following research questions:
1. Are attitudes towards the anti-gay laws consistent or do individuals in Barbados hold
conflicting feelings about the anti-gay laws?
2. If inconsistent, to what extent is attitudinal ambivalence influenced by competing
messages from interpersonal contact with gays and lesbians and religious values?
The findings from this study should be particularly useful to Barbados. In the last decade,
the anti-gay laws of Barbados have received considerable international attention, and public
officials in the country have come under fire for the continued criminalisation of private
sexual acts (Jackman, 2016). In spite of international criticism, Barbados has chosen to keep
the laws on the books. The choice to put international relations at risk suggests that strong
domestic social forces could be at play. In fact, a common narrative in the literature on sexual
prejudice in the Caribbean is that Caribbean citizens are largely intolerant of gay men and
lesbians (Gromer, Campbell, Gomory, & Maynard, 2013). If policymakers believe that
Barbadians are strongly against law reform, they may opt to keep the laws in place to
maintain public favour. However, Murray (2006, 2009) suggests that the claim that
Barbadians are homophobic is both correct and incorrect. Murray believes that Barbadian
attitudes towards lesbians and gay men are complex, and not as univalent as the literature
would suggest. As such, an understanding of the various dimensions of attitudes in Barbados
3

is imperative, as this could aid policymakers and activists understand how the general public
would react to policy intervention.
Notwithstanding the obvious benefits for Barbados, the study also has relevance
outside of the Barbadian context. First, this paper focuses on ambivalence in attitudes
towards the human rights of same-sex couples. While much is known about the factors
influencing the approval/disapproval of same-sex intimacy, not many studies have
exclusively focused on attitudinal ambivalence (Hoffarth & Hodson, 2014). The study thus
adds to the sparse body of knowledge on the factors influencing ambivalence towards samesex relationships. Second, bans on private sexual acts are currently an important human rights
issue, one that has captured the attention of key international bodies, economic stakeholders
and governments around the world. Theoretically, the fight to eradicate the bans on same-sex
intimacy is at the global level. This international humanitarian effort requires an
understanding of sexual prejudice in every country (Lin, Button, Su, & Chen, 2016)—or, at
the very least, an understanding of attitudes across a variety of cultural contexts. Yet, to date,
most national-level studies on opinions on the rights of sexual minorities tend to focus on a
subset of Western countries (mainly the US and Western Europe), where the fight for the
legality of same-sex sexual acts has already been won (Jackman, 2016). The lack of studies
on this issue outside North America and Western Europe limits our understanding of anti-gay
attitudes, which in turn is an impediment to collective action to reduce state-sponsored
discrimination against gay men and lesbians at the global level. By focusing on Barbados,
this study adds to the sparse body of work examining sexual prejudice in countries that are
not classified as developed and/or still criminalise same-sex intimacy. While the findings of
this study cannot be assumed to be universal for countries with anti-gay laws, it does seem
plausible that better parallels can be made with Barbados than countries in the West, who, in
comparison, currently hold a much more liberal stance on same-sex intimacy.

Background
The Socio-Legal Situation of LGBT persons in Barbados
Barbados is a small English-speaking Caribbean island. According to the latest census
(Barbados Statistical Service, 2013), the island has a population of 277,821 persons,
predominantly of African descent (over 90%). Barbados is currently classified as a highincome country (World Bank, 2018) with very high levels of human development (United
Nations Development Programme, 2018) and high scores in terms of political rights and civil
4

liberties (Freedom House, 2017). In spite of these achievements, conditions remain difficult
for same-sex couples: Barbados still carries anti-gay laws, with some of the harshest penalties
in the Western hemisphere.
The laws of Barbados are often classified as part of the dark legacy of British
imperialism (Jackman, 2016, 2017). In 1553, Britain criminalised the act of “buggery” (that
is, anal sex) under the 1553 Buggery Act1. The crime of buggery was punishable by death
until the enactment of the Offences against the Person Act 1861 (West & Woelke, 2002),
which lowered the punishment for the crime of “buggery” to life imprisonment, or a
minimum of ten years. While the early British laws criminalised penetrative sex between
men, sex between men was not the sole target of the law. It was also an offence to commit an
act of ‘buggery’ with a female or with any animal. The first laws to explicitly target intimacy
between men came in 1885. Section 11 of the 1885 Criminal Law Amendment Act said:
“Any male person who, in public or private, commits or is a party to the commission
of, or procures or attempts to procure the commission by any male person of, any act
of gross indecency with another male person, shall be guilty of a misdemeanour, and
being convicted thereof shall be liable at the discretion of the Court to be imprisoned
for any term not exceeding two years, with or without hard labour”

Though the 1885 laws gave no formal definition of what constituted an act of “gross
indecency” between men, acts of gross indecency have often been interpreted as all intimate
acts between men other than anal sex (Waites, 1998).
Barbados, like many other British colonies, was subjected to its colonial master’s antisodomy provisions. Today, the laws are seen as representative of Caribbean culture
(Jackman, 2016), strengthened through local mores, values and socialization (Beck et al.,
2017). Since gaining independence from Britain, legislators in Barbados have revised several
laws governing sex (Robinson, 2009) but opted to keep laws that largely resemble those
implemented during colonialism. Section 9 of Chapter 154 of Barbados’ 1992 Sexual
Offences Act states that
“Any person who commits buggery is guilty of an offence and is liable on conviction on
indictment to imprisonment for life.”

The country also criminalises acts of “serious indecency”, as stated in Section 12 of Chapter
154 of Barbados’ 1992 Sexual Offences Act:

The Buggery Act was repealed that same year (in 1553) on the accession of Queen Mary, but re-enacted by Queen
Elizabeth I in 1563.
1

5

“A person who commits an act of serious indecency on or towards another or incites another
to commit that act with the person or with another person is guilty of an offence and, if
committed on or towards a person 16 years of age or more or if the person incited is of 16
years of age or more, is liable on conviction to imprisonment for a term of 10 years.”

As can be seen above, the laws do not differentiate between acts done in private or
public, or whether acts or consensual or forced. The laws are also applicable to all persons
regardless of gender or sexual orientation or orifice(s) used. Nonetheless, the laws are often
misinterpreted as applying to individuals of a specific sexual orientation and gender identity,
rather than sexual acts (AIDS-Free World, 2010; Gaskins, 2013). In Barbados, buggery is
synonymous with same-sex intimacy (Griffith & Wickham, 2018), and Barbadians tend to
use the terms “decriminalisation of buggery” and “decriminalisation of homosexuality”
interchangeably (Abramschmitt, 2008). At this juncture, I should point out that these laws are
not currently used to target private consensual acts (Jackman 2016). However, the lack of
formal enforcement does not mean that these laws are harmless. One must bear in mind that
laws are part of a larger socio-political process, and so they help shape norms by prefiguring
values, prejudices and interests (Tankard & Paluck, 2017; van den Akker, van der Ploeg, &
Scheepers, 2013). The anti-gay laws in Barbados thus create the presumption that gays and
lesbians are criminals and legitimize sexual prejudice.
In the last few years, state-sponsored homophobia in Barbados has received
considerable international attention. For instance, the International Gay and Lesbian Human
Rights Commission and the Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative have both accused
Barbadian public officials of failing in their obligation to protect fundamental human rights
(Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative, 2011; International & Gay and Lesbian Human
Rights Commission 2011, 2012). Barbados is a signatory to various human rights documents
(such as the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights) whose treaty bodies stipulate the right to
equality, non-discrimination and privacy for all persons. The Joint United Nations Program
on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) has also called for the overturning of the country’s anti-gay laws,
arguing that in addition to violating human rights, they also have a negative impact on
HIV/AIDS prevention and access to healthcare (UNAIDS, 2010).
Statements made by some public officials in Barbados suggest that public opinion of
sexual minorities serves as a barrier to law reform. For example, in response to
recommendations from the United Nations (UN) Human Rights Committee to remove the
anti-gay laws, the Government of Barbados noted that:

6

“Barbados cannot accept at this time, the recommendation to decriminalize such sexual acts
between consenting adults of the same sex. Decriminalization of sexual acts between adults of
the same sex has not received the consensus of religious denominations or the public of
Barbados as a whole. In fact, significant sections of the community are opposed to such
decriminalization…It must be noted that Barbados is a heavily religious society, and there is a
significant lobby by the church on such issues.” (UN Human Rights Committee, 2009)

A key observation is that government officials in Barbados cite the church as a strong veto
player in the politics of lesbian and gay rights. This is in line with the general theme on work
published in the Caribbean, which suggests that sexual prejudice is largely driven by
conservative Christian beliefs (Cowell, 2011; Gutzmore, 2004; Maiorana, Rebchook, Kassie,
& Myers, 2013).
Census data indicates that roughly 79.4% of the Barbadian population claim a
religious identity, and Christianity holds the largest number of adherents (Barbados Statistical
Service, 2013). Specifically, approximately 76 percent of Barbadians nominate Christianity
as their religion, meaning that over 95 percent of the religiously affiliated are Christian.
Opposition from religious interest groups, coupled with public subscriptions to conservative
Christian views about sexual orientation, could make the retrenchment of these laws difficult.
Policymakers have thus opted for the ‘wait until society evolves’ approach to law reform.
Interestingly, recent work by Griffith and Wickham (2018) suggests that Barbadian attitudes
are evolving. Using nationally representative data, the authors report that in 2013, 67.3
percent of Barbadians stated that they accepted or tolerated lesbians and gay men, compared
with 62.9 percent in 2004. Griffith and Wickham also report statistically significant declines
in social distance: fewer individuals were willing to reject friends, family, children,
employees, employers, teachers, and/or public officials who identified as “gay”. However,
the authors note that though acceptance is on the rise, a majority of persons (over 50%) still
want the buggery laws on the books.
The findings by Griffith and Wickham (2018) show that in spite of the charged sociolegal environment, the situation is not monolithic and attitudes towards the LGBT community
may not be as stark as suggested by the political elites. There is even anecdotal evidence in
line with this view. For example, in Barbados, a well-known self-identified transgender
woman has won the coveted title of Best Flag Person at the Grand Kadooment2 on numerous
occasions (Murray, 2009), and currently holds the record for the most wins (twenty as at June

Kadooment is the grand finale of Barbados’ largest annual national festival ‘Crop Over’. It is a carnival parade
and features several bands whose members, ‘the revellers’, make their way down the streets dressed in elaborate
costumes and dancing to soca and/or calypso music. The Crop Over season normally begins in May/June and ends
on Kadooment Day, which is the first Monday in August.
2

7

2018). More than this, in February 2018, the Easy magazine (a subsection of one of
Barbados’ leading newspapers “The Nation”) featured a same-sex couple (women) on the
cover and also featured a multi-page spread where the couple spoke candidly about their
relationship. While the evidence to date does not necessarily mean that this society fully
accepts members of the LGBT community, it does call depictions of a uniform anti-LGBT
stance into question. One cannot help but wonder: to what extent do citizens of Barbados
actually fully support the laws currently on the books? More than this, are individuals
consistent in their views? In what follows, I evaluate the prevalence of support for the antigay laws of Barbados.
Previous Research and Research Hypothesis
As noted in the introductory remarks, very few studies have focused on how conflicting
messages from one’s evaluative predispositions influence ambivalence towards same-sex
couples and their respective rights. Recent works by Craig, Martinez, & Kane (2005), Bean
& Martinez (2014) and Steele & Helmuth (2018) have sought to remedy this problem.
Analysing a state-wide telephone survey of residents in Florida, Craig, Martinez, & Kane
(2005) found that many individuals were ambivalent about issues related to gay and lesbian
rights and that ambivalence was related to conflict among citizen’s underlying core values,
chiefly, egalitarianism and traditional marriage roles. Bean & Martinez’s (2014) study
focused on Evangelicals in the US. Using data from the 2010 Baylor religion survey, Bean
and Martinez opine that institutionalised sources of ambivalence have generated tensions
among Evangelicals. Specifically, the authors found that ambivalent Evangelicals were more
likely to be politically liberal and more likely to believe that same-sex attraction is innate
than Evangelicals who consistently oppose extending rights to same-sex couples. Finally,
Steele & Helmuth (2018) used data from the General Social Survey to analyse how ten
indicators of socially structured conflicts (that is, conflicting norms associated with
institutionally and socially influenced status positions) affect attitudinal ambivalence in the
US. Steele & Helmuth found that the more structural conflicts a person experiences, the
more likely they are to express ambivalent attitudes. The current study builds on the
aforementioned empirical work on the determinants of ambivalent attitudes towards
extending rights of same-sex couples - this time around, focusing on a non-US context and
the role of religion and interpersonal contact.

8

As is well documented, religion and interpersonal contact are key determinants of
attitudes towards policies regulating same-sex intimacy. In his classic functionalist analysis
of prejudice against gay men and lesbians, Gregory Herek (Herek, 1991) suggests that sexual
prejudice may serve a value-expressive function, allowing people to express values that are
important to them. For example, some individuals may express sexual prejudice as a means
of affirming their religious beliefs, teachings and values (Kuhar, 2013). Some religious
individuals thus argue that they cannot support laws extending civil rights to gay men and
lesbians as this would violate their religious beliefs, teachings and values (Herek, 1991). It is
therefore not surprising that a principal justification for hostility towards lesbians and gays
men is religious morality (Herek, 1991). One of the most consistent findings in the academic
literature is that religious individuals tend to be less accepting of gays and lesbians than the
religiously unaffiliated and are also less supportive of their rights (Hayes & Dowds, 2015;
Walls, 2010; Whitehead & Perry, 2016).
On the other hand, interpersonal contact with gays and lesbians is believed to reduce
sexual prejudice, and this logic stems from Allport’s intergroup contact theory (Allport,
1954). The basic idea is that by interacting with members of the out-group, the in-group
learns about the out-group, and this new information may challenge stereotypes and
overgeneralised information that can influence attitudes (Skipworth, Garner, & Dettrey,
2010). With less stereotypical information, direct attitudes towards the out-group may
become more tolerant. Recently, a significant amount of research has shown that
heterosexuals who have interpersonal contact with gay men and lesbians tend to express more
positive attitudes towards this group than individuals with no contact (Becker, 2012; Herek &
Capitanio, 1996; Herek & Glunt, 1993; West & Hewstone, 2012). There is also evidence of
an intimacy effect – the closer the connection, the greater the impact ( Becker, 2012; Becker
& Scheufele, 2009). Essentially, close relationships with sexual minorities allow others to
gain intimate information, and this personalisation is believed to aid in reducing prejudice
(Herek & Capitanio, 1996).
Given this study’s concept of ambivalence as expressing conflicting views towards a
single issue, the main research hypothesis of this study is that the conflicting messages from
interpersonal contact and one’s religion makes holding a univalent stance on the anti-gay
laws difficult. Specifically, persons with a close contact that identifies as gay or lesbian, but
whose views on sexuality are theologically based will be more ambivalent about the
criminalisation of consensual same-sex acts than their equivalent with no contact.

9

Methods
Participants and recruitment
The study utilised secondary data obtained from the 2013 Caribbean Development Research
Services (CADRES) ‘Attitudes towards homosexuals’ survey. The initial database consisted
of 830 Barbadian adults (50.2% female, 49.8% male). As I focus on heterosexual
ambivalence, individuals who identified as gay/lesbian (22 persons) and bisexual (30
persons) were removed from the sample. A large segment of persons (72) chose the option ‘I
prefer not to say’ when asked about their sexual orientation, and 17 persons did not provide a
response. As the orientation of the latter subsets of individuals were unclear, I opted to
remove them from the analysis. This initially reduced the sample size to 689 individuals. The
study also focuses on ambivalence in the form of conflicting attitudes towards the laws,
defined as persons who support law reform in one dimension, but are against law reform in
another dimension. The survey items capturing support for the laws provided survey
participants with three response options: “Yes”, “No” and “Unsure/Prefer not to say”.
Persons who chose “Unsure/Prefer not to say" were removed from the analytical sample as it
would be difficult to discern between those who chose this option due to internal conflict,
those who chose this option as they were indifferent and those who had an opinion but
preferred not to state it. List-wise removal of the “Unsure/Prefer not to say” responses and
missing observations across the various survey items resulted in an analytical sample of 397
individuals.
According to the CADRES reports (Caribbean Development Research Services,
2013)3, participants were recruited using stratified random sampling techniques, with the
primary strata being age and gender. Interviewers were randomly assigned to areas associated
with the polling districts in Barbados. The polling districts are almost equal subdivisions of
constituencies, which are normally used for electoral purposes. The polling districts were
numbered, allowing for a random selection of specific divisions, which CADRES then
translated into geographical districts. In each instance, interviewers selected 12, 24, 36 or 48
households in a random manner (1 in 3), and conducted interviews at each of the 12, 24, 36
or 48 households. One respondent in each of these households became the interviewee. The
survey was largely administered via face-to-face interviews, though interviewers complied
with requests from respondents to complete the questionnaire on their own. The section of
the survey that asked about sexual orientation and interpersonal contact with lesbians and gay

3

CADRES did not provide information about the response rates.

10

men was set aside for interviewees to answer on their own, as CADRES viewed these as
confidential issues. Interviewers were advised to only complete this section of the form if
requested by the respondent.

Measures
Ambivalence towards the rights of gays and lesbians
The literature suggests two ways of measuring ambivalence (Hoffarth & Hodson, 2016). The
first is subjective ambivalence, which is measured by asking participants to indicate their
ambivalence (that is, whether they feel torn or conflicted on an issue). The second measure is
that of calculated ambivalence, where a researcher constructs ambivalence from using
separate self- reported attitudes. The second measure is used in this study.
The following four questions from the CADRES surveys were used to construct a measure
ambivalence towards the current laws:
•

“Presently, the laws of Barbados outlaw the act of Buggery/Sodomy, whether between
two men or a man and a woman regardless of whether the act is in public or private,
consensual or forced. Do you generally support the maintenance of this law?”

•

“Currently, the laws of Barbados with respect to Buggery/Sodomy are NOT being
enforced (except in instances of forced sex/rape). Do you think that the state should
enforce these laws by investigating and prosecuting persons who engage in these acts (by
consent)?”

•

“Do you think that the laws of Barbados should penalise two men for having ‘sexual
intercourse’ in private?”

•

“Do you think that the laws of Barbados should penalise two women for having ‘sexual
intercourse’ in private?”

As mentioned in the participants and recruitment subsection, individuals who opted for
“Unsure/Prefer not to say” were removed from the analysis, leaving persons who chose
“Yes” or “No” on these four items. Given the categorical nature of these survey items, I
constructed a simple 3-category variable to capture the simultaneity of conflicting opinions.
The first category captures individuals who consistently oppose law reform, that is, want the
buggery/sodomy laws maintained, enforced and believes that two men or women should be
penalised for having sex in private; the second category is made of those who consistently

11

support law reform; and the final category comprises of persons who are ambivalent (for
example, chooses “No” for some aspect(s), but “Yes” for others).

Religion
Unfortunately, the CADRES survey did not include popular measures of religiosity, such as
frequency of church attendance or the importance of religion to one’s life. However, one of
the survey's items could be used to capture the impact of religious information on attitudes
towards same-sex relationships. Respondents were asked to state the source of their views on
sexuality. This variable was dichotomized, with a value of "1" if the respondent noted that
their main source of views on sexuality came from religious sources; 0 otherwise.
Interpersonal Contact
The interpersonal contact variable was derived from the survey item that asked
participants whether or not they had any friends who identify as gay. This variable was coded
as a binary variable, which took on a value of “1” if the individuals’ response was “Yes” and
“0” otherwise.
Control Variables
The study also controlled for the impact of age, gender, education and feelings about sexual
minorities. These controls were included because of their presumed correlations with sexual
prejudice (Craig, Martinez, & Kane, 2005; Steele & Helmuth, 2018). These variables were all
categorical, largely reflecting the structure of the CADRES survey items. Specifically, the
gender variable was in binary form, with men serving as the reference category. Age was
recorded using three distinct age groups: (1) 18–30 (contrast); (2) 31–50 and (3) 51 and over.
Education was divided into three categories: (1) compulsory schooling (that is,
primary/secondary education); (2) post-secondary education; and (3) tertiary education,
where the base category is compulsory schooling. Finally, attitudes towards lesbian and gay
male sexual orientation were measured using responses to the following survey item "What
word best describes your attitude towards homosexuals?". The response options were: (1)
hate (reference category); (2) tolerate; (3) accept; and (4) don't know. Table 1 provides some
descriptive statistics for all the independent variables used in the study control variables.

12

Results
Support for the anti-gay laws
Figure 1 presents the distribution of the survey items used to construct the dependent
variable. In each case, a majority of the final sample supported the maintenance of the antigay laws as is (74 per cent) and their enforcement (67 per cent). Public support for the
maintenance and enforcement appears to echo the political narrative that Barbadians do not
support law reform. However, Figure 1 also shows evidence of mixed attitudes. While a
majority of the sample supported the maintenance and enforcement of the laws, they did not
support the penalisation of sex between persons of the same sex, with approximately 59 per
cent of the analytical sample opposing penalising two men for having sex in private and 65
per cent against penalising sex between women.
Turning to the constructed measure of ambivalence (Figure 2), only 27 per cent of the
sample consistently supported having the laws on the books, 15 per cent of the sample were
consistently against the anti-gay laws, while a majority of the sample (57 per cent) gave
conflicting responses. The analysis thus far indicates that attitudes towards law reform in
Barbados are not set in black and white. Rather, there is a large grey area, as a significant
subset of Barbadian nationals hold seemingly conflicting attitudes about the current laws.
Having determined that a significant share of persons hold mix views about the current laws,
an obvious question that arises is: who is likely to have these mixed feelings? In this study, I
posit that the mixed views on these laws stem from conflicting predispositions, one of which
is the cross-pressures of religion and interpersonal contact with gays and lesbians. This is
evaluated using multinomial models in the next subsection.
Multinomial regression results
To investigate the role of contact and religion in influencing attitudinal ambivalence,
ambivalence was estimated as a function of religion, contact and the control variables via a
multinomial logistic regression. I opt to use a multinomial logistic regression model as the
dependent variable (the ambivalence construct) consists of three unordered categories.
Ambivalent attitudes serve as the reference category.
The estimated results from the multinomial model are presented in Table 2.
Individuals whose views on sexuality have a theological base were more likely to
consistently support the laws than be ambivalent (𝑝 < 0.001). Meanwhile, having friends
that identify as gay or lesbian reduced the likelihood of uniformly supporting the laws
13

relative to being ambivalent (𝑝 < 0.01). With respect to the control variables, women,
persons under 31 and those with more positive attitudes towards gay and lesbians were less
likely to be opponents of gay and lesbian rights, and more likely to report conflicting views
on the issue. The second column of Table 2 shows factors influencing the likelihood that an
individual consistently supports gay and lesbian rights relative to being ambivalent. Persons
with religiously inspired views on sexuality were less likely than persons with non-religious
views to lend their full support to lesbian and gay rights (𝑝 < 0.05). However, there is no
evidence that interpersonal contact influenced the probability of consistently supporting gay
and lesbian rights relative to being ambivalent. Further, the only control variable that was
statistically significant in this case was feelings towards gays and lesbians, where individuals
who reported feelings of tolerance or acceptance towards sexual ministries were more likely
to fully support fully support gay and lesbian rights, while those who reported negative
feelings towards gays and lesbians were more likely to be ambivalent.
To recap, the main aim of this study was to showcase how conflicting attitudes about
anti-gay laws could arise from cross-pressures of information about sexual minorities via
interpersonal contact and religion. To complete this task, I augmented the multinomial model
with an interaction term of "source of views on religion" and “interpersonal contact” to gain
insights on how competing messages influences the conflict. A joint test of significance
suggested that the interaction term statistically influences the probability that an individual
was in the ambivalent category (𝜒 ) (1) = 5.18; 𝑝 < 0.05), as well as the probability that an
individual was in the ‘consistent support for the laws’ category (𝜒 ) (1) = 6.85; 𝑝 < 0.01).
However, the interaction term had a statistically insignificant impact on the likelihood that an
individual supported extending basic rights to gays and lesbians (𝜒 ) (1) = 0.00; 𝑝 >
0.10). As the interaction terms are not directly interpretable, I used effect plots in order to
assess their substantive effects. Effect plots allow us to visualise the marginal effects of
variables included in the multiplicative interaction term. This was done using the
"marginsplot” post-estimation command in Stata. The effect plots for the interactions that
were significantly significant are given in Figure 3. The figure shows that religious persons
with social contact with gays and lesbians were less likely to consistently support the laws
than those without contact. In line with my a-priori expectations, the results suggest that those
whose views on sexuality were shaped by religion but also had gay friends were more likely
to be conflicted when it comes to government regulations on same-sex intimate acts. For
individuals receiving competing messages from religion and interpersonal contact, the
14

predicted probability of reporting conflicting attitudes was 15.6 percentage points greater
than persons whose views on sexuality were theologically based but had no friends that
identifies as “gay”.

Discussion and Concluding Remarks
Barbados currently carries laws that not only discriminate against same-sex couples, with
maximum penalties ranging from 10 years to life imprisonment. Notwithstanding the obvious
problems these laws pose for gays and lesbians living in the country, it should be noted that
these laws are currently not used to prosecute persons on the basis of their sexuality. So, if
not enforced, why do policymakers opt to maintain the laws? Various statements by political
elites portray Barbadians as largely intolerant of sexual minorities and cite public opinion and
religious actors as a significant barrier to the repeal of these laws. Yet, while a common view
is that these laws are anchored by public support, very few studies have emerged to
empirically test whether the attitudes and behaviours of the general population are actually in
line with this view. Against this backdrop, this paper investigated the prevalence of support
for anti-gay laws in Barbados.
First, the study looked at the extent to which heterosexuals wanted the current laws
maintained/enforced and supported the penalisation of persons of the same-sex engaging in
sexual acts in private. There was mixed support for the preservation of anti-gay laws: while
the majority stated they wanted the current laws maintained and enforced, only a minority
endorsed the state penalising private sex between two persons of the same sex. It is possible
that Barbadians may be viewing intimate same-sex acts through two lenses. For instance,
when asked ‘general’ questions about the retention and enforcement of Barbados’ anti-gay
laws, persons may give a response that reflects their beliefs about or level comfort with gays
and lesbians. By reformulating the question and asking about two men or two women
engaging in sex in private, the latter two survey items lead respondents to think about the
individual (not the act) and to also think about the issue within the context of a government
meddling in someone's sex life. Taken together, law support in Barbados appears symbolic:
persons view intimacy between persons of the same sex as wrong and believe that laws
should be in line with this perspective, but do not actually want persons to be penalised for
consensual acts in private.
The finding of mixed views on gay and lesbian rights should be of key interest to
advocates on the island. Corrales (2015) points out that in order to obtain change, activists
15

would need to (1) operate in countries where courts are progressive, (2) have strong political
connections, and (3) frame the issue in a way that resonates with majoritarian sentiments.
Focusing on the latter requirement presented by Corrales (2015), the results presented in this
study provides some insight on how activists may be able to frame the issue of gay and
lesbian rights in a way that appeals to public sentiment. Specifically, the results suggest that
when entering into conscience debates about these laws, advocates would be better able to
garner support for their removal if they base their arguments on the right of the government
to regulate sex between persons in private. However, this alone may not be enough to
engender change. Recent work by Jackman (2017) revealed that many residents believe that
the current laws are a reasonable expression of Barbados’ moral standards (57%), important
from a health perspective (55%) and protect young persons from abuse (39%). It is possible
that ill-founded fears about what law reform could lead to (e.g. deterioration of public health
or an increase in incidents of child abuse) could reduce the willingness to extend basic rights
to gays and lesbians. Even though some persons may view the regulation of sex between two
persons in private as a gross intrusion of privacy, it may be considered a necessary ‘evil’ to
protect the fabric of Barbadian society. Thus, along with careful framing of their arguments,
activists must also work on combating ill-founded beliefs about gays and lesbians, possibly
through awareness workshops or campaigns. The logic here is that in light of accurate
information about gays and lesbians, persons may no longer perceive them as a threat and
may change their attitudes about them.
In the second stage of the study, I evaluated the extent to which conflicting messages
from evaluative dispositions could lead to varying attitudes towards lesbian and gay rights in
Barbados. Religious individuals with interpersonal contact with sexual minorites were less
likely to consistently support the laws than those without contact. However, the interaction
of religion and interpersonal contact did not significantly affect the likelihood that an
individual consistently supported gay and lesbian rights. Rather, persons who take their cues
on sexuality from their religion, but also have a gay/lesbian friend were more likely to be
conflicted about the laws. This suggests that while interpersonal contact reduces support for
the laws for religiously inclined individuals, it does not fully translate to them lending full
support to gay and lesbian rights, but rather leads them to a state of ambivalence. Taken
together, while persons do not readily abandon religious teachings, the information gained
from meaningful contact may be enough to challenge the rhetoric of religious institutions and
to mitigate support for law retention. Another take away from the study is that while
Barbadians, in general, have become more tolerant over the last decade (as shown by Griffith
16

and Wickham, 2018), some have become supporters of lesbian and gay rights, while others
may have moderated their opposition to lesbian and gay rights but remain conflicted about
the issue. This lends credence to the view that ambivalence could reflect a transitory stage
towards more liberal views on lesbian and gay male sexual orientations (Loftus, 2001) and
may even serve as “an indicator of fertile ground for social change” (Steele & Helmuth,
2018).
While this study sheds some light on support for anti-gay laws in Barbados, it is not
without its limitations. First, the literature has identified a set of ideologies (such as gender
role ideologies, individualism and authoritarianism) that also affect these attitudes, and, if in
conflict, could lead to mixed views about the anti-gay laws. Unfortunately, the CADRES did
not include measures that could adequately capture these values, and so could not be included
in this study. Secondly, this study primarily focused on what contributes towards public
attitudes toward anti-gay laws. However, as alluded to in the Background section of this
study, laws are essentially socialising agents, and so, the laws themselves may be impacting
on citizen’s attitudes, the extent of which could not be captured in this study. Moreover,
while public tolerance could engender a climate that would be more receptive to law reform,
attitudes by themselves are insufficient to bring about law reform and increase equality. Lax
and Philips (2009) find that in addition to public opinion, state adoption of policies affecting
lesbians and gay rights in the US was also influenced by government liberalism and interest
groups. To complement the work presented here, future studies should undertake empirical
analyses of the attitudes/values of policymakers and the main interest groups (i.e. the
religious organisations) in Barbados.
Even with the aforementioned limitations, this study makes a significant contribution
to the literature. As mentioned previously, much of the empirical work to date focuses on
attitudes towards same-sex relationships within the context of Western societies, where the
fight for the legality of same-sex intimacy has already been won. Given the mounting global
attention towards LGBT rights, particularly the removal of bans on same-sex sexual relations,
there is a pressing need to investigate attitudes towards gays and lesbians outside of the
Western context. This paper, then, is a step towards narrowing the gap in the aforementioned
literature. It is hoped that the results from this study inspire more research on attitudes
towards gays and lesbians and their respective rights in other countries with anti-gay laws on
the books. The more we know about sexual prejudice, the more likely efficacious
programmes and strategies can be developed and implemented to persuade individuals to
reject sexual prejudice.
17

References
Abramschmitt, C. (2008). Is Barbados ready for same-sex marriage? Analysis of legal and
social constructs. Social and Economic Studies, 61-88.
AIDS-Free World. (2010). The Unnatural Connexion: Creating Social Conflict Through
Legal Tools Retrieved from Georgetown, Guyana: http://www.aidsfreeworld.org/OurIssues/Homophobia/The-Unnatural-Connexion.aspx
Alexander, M. J. (1994). Not just (any) body can be a citizen: The politics of law, sexuality
and postcoloniality in Trinidad and Tobago and the Bahamas. Feminist Review, 48(1),
5-23.
Allport, G. W. (1954). The nature of prejudice. New York, US: Addison-Wesley.
Barbados Statistical Service. (2013). 2010 Population and Housing Census Volume 1.
Retrieved from Bridgetown, Barbados:
Bean, L., & Martinez, B. C. (2014). Evangelical ambivalence toward gays and lesbians.
Sociology of Religion, 75(3), 395-417.
Beck, E. J., Espinosa, K., Ash, T., Wickham, P., Barrow, C., Massiah, E., . . . Nunez, C.
(2017). Attitudes towards homosexuals in seven Caribbean countries: implications for
an effective HIV response. AIDS Care, 29(12), 1557-1566.
Becker, A. B. (2012). Determinants of public support for same-sex marriage: Generational
cohorts, social contact, and shifting attitudes. International Journal of Public Opinion
Research, 24(4), 524-533.
Becker, A. B., & Scheufele, D. A. (2009). Moral Politicking Public Attitudes toward Gay
Marriage in an Election Context. The International Journal of Press/Politics, 14(2),
186-211.
Caribbean Development Research Services. (2013). Attitudes towards homosexuals in
Barbados (2013). Retrieved from Caribbean Development Research Services,
Barbados:
Carroll, A., & Mendos, L. R. (2017). State Sponsored Homophobia 2017: A world survey of
sexual orientation laws: criminalisation, protection and recognition. Retrieved from
Geneva, Switzerland:
Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative. (2011). Criminalised States.
Comstock, G. D. (1991). Violence against lesbians and gay men. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Conner, M., & Armitage, C. J. (2008). Attitudinal ambivalence. In W. D. Carno & B. Prislin
(Eds.), Attitudes and attitude change (pp. 261-286). New York, US: Psychological
Press.
Cowell, N. M. (2011). Public Discourse, Popular Culture and Attitudes Towards
Homosexuals in Jamaica. Social and Economic Studies, 60(1), 31-60.
Craig, S. C., Martinez, M. D., & Kane, J. G. (2005). Core values, value conflict, and citizens’
ambivalence about gay rights. Political Research Quarterly, 58(1), 5-17.
Freedom House. (2017). Freedom in the World 2017: Populists and Autocrats -The Dual
Threat to Global Democracy.
Garner, A. (2013). Ambivalence, the intergroup contact hypothesis, and attitudes about gay
rights. Politics & Policy, 41(2), 241-266.
Gaskins, J. (2013). ‘Buggery’ and the Commonwealth Caribbean: a comparative examination
of the Bahamas, Jamaica, and Trinidad and Tobago In C. Lennox & M. Waites (Eds.),
Human Rights, Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity in The Commonwealth:
Struggles for Decriminalisation and Change (pp. 429-454). London: School of
Advanced Study, University of London.

18

Griffith, A., & Wickham, P. (2018). Tolerance, Acceptance, or Ambivalence?: Changing
Expressions of Attitudes towards Homosexuals in Barbados. Sexuality Research and
Social Policy, 1-12.
Gromer, J. M., Campbell, M. H., Gomory, T., & Maynard, D. M. (2013). Sexual Prejudice
Among Barbadian University Students. Journal of Gay & Lesbian Social Services,
25(4), 399-419.
Gutzmore, C. (2004). Casting the first stone!: Policing of homo/sexuality in Jamaican popular
culture. Interventions, 6(1), 118-134.
Hayes, B. C., & Dowds, L. (2015). Religion and Attitudes Towards Gay Rights in Northern
Ireland: The God Gap Revisited. In S. D. Brunn & D. A. Gibreath (Eds.), The
Changing World Religion Map: Sacred Places Identities, Practices and Politics (Vol.
XIII, pp. 3321-3340). New York, US: Springer.
Heinze, J. E., & Horn, S. S. (2009). Intergroup contact and beliefs about homosexuality in
adolescence. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 38(7), 937-951.
Herek, G. M. (1991). Stigma, Prejudice, and Violence Against Lesbians and Gay Men. In J.
C. Gonsiorek & J. D. Weinrich (Eds.), Homosexuality: Research implications for
public policy (pp. 60-80). Newbury Park, CA: SAGE.
Herek, G. M., & Capitanio, J. P. (1996). " Some of my best friends": Intergroup contact,
concealable stigma, and heterosexuals' attitudes toward gay men and lesbians.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22, 412-424.
Herek, G. M., & Glunt, E. K. (1993). Interpersonal contact and heterosexuals’ attitudes
toward gay men: Results from a national survey. Journal of Sex Research, 30(3), 239244.
Hobolt, S. B., & Klemmemsen, R. (2005). Responsive government? Public opinion and
government policy preferences in Britain and Denmark. Political Studies, 53(2), 379402.
Hoffarth, M. R., & Hodson, G. (2014). Is subjective ambivalence toward gays a modern form
of bias? Personality and Individual Differences, 69, 75-80.
Hoffarth, M. R., & Hodson, G. (2016). Ambivalence. Encyclopedia of Personality and
Individual Differences, 1-4.
Huckfeldt, R., & Sprague, J. (2000). Political consequences of inconsistency: The
accessibility and stability of abortion attitudes. Political Psychology, 21(1), 57-79.
International, & Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission (2011). Human Rights
Violations of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender (LGBT) People in Jamaica: A
Shadow Report. Retrieved from Geneva:
International, & Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission (2012). Human Rights
Violations of Lesbian, Bisexual, and Transgender (LBT) People in Guyana: A Shadow
Report. Retrieved from New York:
Jackman, M. (2016). They called it the ‘abominable crime’: an analysis of heterosexual
support for anti-gay laws in Barbados, Guyana and Trinidad and Tobago. Sexuality
Research and Social Policy, 13(2), 130-141. Retrieved from
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s13178-015-0209-6. doi:10.1007/s13178-015-0209-6
Jackman, M. (2017). Protecting the fabric of society? Heterosexual views on the usefulness
of the anti-gay laws in Barbados, Guyana and Trinidad and Tobago. Culture, health &
sexuality, 19(1), 91-106.
Kuhar, R. (2013). Introduction to the issue:“In the Name of Hate: Homophobia as a Value”.
Southeastern Europe, 37(1), 1-16.
Lax, J., & Phillips, J. (2009). Gay Rights in the States: Public Opinion and Policy
Responsiveness. American Political Science Review, 103(3), 367-386.

19

Lin, K., Button, D. M., Su, M., & Chen, S. (2016). Chinese College Students’ Attitudes
Toward Homosexuality: Exploring the Effects of Traditional Culture and
Modernizing Factors. Sexuality Research and Social Policy, 13(2), 158-172.
Loftus, J. (2001). America's liberalization in attitudes toward homosexuality, 1973 to 1998.
American Sociological Review, 66(5), 762-782.
Maiorana, A., Rebchook, G., Kassie, N., & Myers, J. J. (2013). On Being Gay in
Barbados:“Bullers” and “Battyboys” and their HIV Risk in a Societal Context of
Stigma. Journal of Homosexuality, 60(7), 984-1010.
Murray, D. A. (2006). Who's right? Human rights, sexual rights and social change in
Barbados. Culture, health & sexuality, 8(3), 267-281.
Murray, D. A. (2009). Bajan queens, nebulous scenes: Sexual diversity in Barbados.
Caribbean Review of Gender Studies, 3, 1-20.
Oldendick, R. W. (2002). The Role of Public Opinion in Policy and Practice. Public Policy &
Practice, 2(1), 30-35.
Olson, L. R., Cadge, W., & Harrison, J. T. (2006). Religion and Public Opinion about Same‐
Sex Marriage. Social Science Quarterly, 87(2), 340-360.
Robinson, T. (2009). Authorized sex: Same-Sex Sexuality and Law in the Caribbean. In C.
Barrow, M. d. Bruin, & R. Carr (Eds.), Sexuality, Social Exclusion and Human
Rights: Vulnerability in the Caribbean Context of HIV (pp. 3-22). Kingston, Jamaica:
Ian Randle Publishers.
Siker, J. S. (2007). Homosexuality and religion: An encyclopedia: Greenwood Publishing
Group.
Skipworth, S. A., Garner, A., & Dettrey, B. J. (2010). Limitations of the contact hypothesis:
Heterogeneity in the contact effect on attitudes toward gay rights. Politics & Policy,
38(5), 887-906.
Smith, S. J., Axelton, A. M., & Saucier, D. A. (2009). The effects of contact on sexual
prejudice: A meta-analysis. Sex Roles, 61(3-4), 178-191.
Steele, S. M., & Helmuth, A. S. (2018). Predicting Ambivalence: When Same-Sex Sex Is
Only “Sometimes Wrong”. Journal of homosexuality, 1-22.
Tankard, M. E., & Paluck, E. L. (2017). The effect of a Supreme Court decision regarding
gay marriage on social norms and personal attitudes. Psychological science, 28(9),
1334-1344.
UN Human Rights Committee. (2009). Consideration of reports submitted by States parties
under Article 40 of the Covenant - International Convenant on Civil and Political
Rights (Barbados): Information received from Barbados on the implementation of the
concluding observations of the Human Rights Committee (CCPR/C/BRB/CO/3).
Retrieved from http://www.refworld.org/docid/4a9fb80f2.html:
UNAIDS. (2010). The Status of HIV in the Caribbean. Retrieved from Port of Spain,
Trinidad and Tobago:
United Nations Development Programme. (2018). Human Development Report Indices and
Indicators: 2018 Statistical Update. Retrieved from New York, USA:
van den Akker, H., van der Ploeg, R., & Scheepers, P. (2013). Disapproval of homosexuality:
Comparative research on individual and national determinants of disapproval of
homosexuality in 20 European countries. International Journal of Public Opinion
Research, 25(1), 64-86.
Waites, M. (1998). Sexual citizens: legislating the age of consent in Britain. In T. Carver &
V. Mottier (Eds.), Politics of Sexuality: Identity, Gender, Citizenship (pp. 25-36).
London, UK: Routledge.
Walls, N. E. (2010). Religion and support for same-sex marriage: Implications from the
literature. Journal of Gay & Lesbian Social Services, 22(1-2), 112-131.
20

West, D., & Woelke, A. (2002). England. In D. J. West & R. Green (Eds.), Sociolegal control
of homosexuality: A multi-nation comparison (pp. 197-220). United States: Springer
Science & Business Media.
West, K., & Hewstone, M. (2012). Culture and contact in the promotion and reduction of
anti-gay prejudice: Evidence from Jamaica and Britain. Journal of Homosexuality,
59(1), 44-66.
Whitehead, A. L., & Perry, S. L. (2016). Religion and Support for Adoption by Same-Sex
Couples The Relative Effects of Religious Tradition, Practices, and Beliefs. Journal
of Family Issues, 37(6), 789-813.
World Bank. (2018). World Bank Country and Lending Groups. In: World Bank.

21

Table 1: Descriptive statistics for independent variables
Frequency (Per cent)
Key independent variables
Source of Views on Sexuality
Other Sources (base)
Religion

199 (50.1%)
198 (49.9%)

Interpersonal Contact
Have Gay/lesbian Friends
Other (base)

179 (45.1%)
218 (54.9%)

Control Variables
Age
18-30 (base)
31-50
Over 50

129 (32.5%)
161(40.6%)
107 (27.0%)

Gender
Men (base)
Women

209 (52.6%)
188 (47.4%)

Education
Compulsory (base)
Secondary
Tertiary

147 (37.0%)
134 (33.8%)
116 (29.2%)

Feelings towards homosexuals
Hate (Base)
Tolerate
Accept
Don’t Know

93 (23.4%)
166 (41.8%)
94 (23.7%)
44 (11.1%)

Notes: Sample size: 397. Based on estimation sample

22

Table 2: Results from Multinomial Logit Regression
Support Law
reform vs
Ambivalence

Religious Sources of Views on Sexuality

Support
Discriminatory
Laws vs
Ambivalence
0.984** (0.268)

Interpersonal Contact

-0.888** (0.282)

0.036 (0.335)

Control Variables
Age (base: 18-30)
31-50
Over 50

0.717* (0.314)
0.807* (0.349)

-0.270
-0.009

(0.363)
(0.400)

-0.810**(0.262)

-0.284

(0.318)

Education (base: compulsory schooling)
Secondary
Tertiary

0.102 (0.305)
0.235 (0.325)

-0.158
-0.020

(0.381)
(0.382)

Feelings towards gays and lesbians (base:
Hate)
Tolerate
Accept
Don’t Know

-0.968** (0.316)
-0.902* (0.413)
-0.363 (0.399)

1.837* (0.769)
2.998***(0.776)
1.080 (0.950)

Woman

-0.825* (0.331)

Notes: (1) Sample size: 397; (2) Log-Likelihood: -323.00; (3) Pseudo R-squared: 0.196; (4) Standard errors in
parentheses; and (5) ***, **, * and + indicates statistical significance at the 0.1, 1, 5 and 10 per cent levels
respectively

23

Figure 1: Heterosexual support for the anti-gay laws
Yes
26%

74%

MAINTAIN LAWS
AS IS

No

33%
59%

65%

41%

35%

PENALISE TWO
MEN FOR HAVING
SEX IN PRIVATE

PENALISE TWO
WOMEN FOR
HAVING SEX IN
PRIVATE

67%

ENFORCE THE
LAWS

Notes: Sample size: 397. Based on estimation sample

24

Figure 2: Consistent and Inconsistent support for the anti-gay laws

15%
Conflicted
Support anti-gay laws
28%

57%

Does not support antigay laws

Notes: Sample size: 397. Based on estimation sample

25

Figure 3: Interaction effects – The role of competing messages from religion and
interpersonal contact on ambivalence and consistent support for the laws

Predicted Probability

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Ambivalence
Religious with contact

Consistently support the laws
Religious without contact

26

