Anita Basso

Mathematics Anxiety in Pre-Service Elementary Teachers and its Impact on their Teaching

Mathematics Anxiety in Pre-Service Elementary Teachers and its Impact on
their Teaching
ANITA BASSO

Abstract
Anxiety in pre-service elementary teachers (PSETs) often affects their views of mathematics as well as the
practices and teaching methods they choose to use. Due to this, many PSETs often choose to use traditional teaching
methods in the classroom which can have counteractive effects on their math anxiety (Harper & Daane, 1998; Olson
& Stoehr, 2019; Tooke & Lindstrom, 1998). The goal of this paper is to better comprehend and discover the ways in
which math anxiety in PSETs impacts their teaching and whether there are ways to limit these negative emotions
about mathematics. Much of the research on this topic look at either PSETs’ beliefs/views or their teaching
practices. The focus of this paper will be to analyze the relationship between their beliefs/views and their teaching
such to look at how one influences the other or if they have a symbiotic relationship as well as looking at how one’s
individual psychology influences these beliefs/views. Using a symbolic interactionist lens, the arguments provide
evidence from the literature that looks at the relationships between people and others. Moreover, in touching upon
these relationships, this paper also delves into gender issues and stereotypes that have influenced these relationships.
The implications of this paper deal primarily with the impact of gender stereotypes on teaching and anxiety as well
as what teaching practices are most favourable when looking at reducing anxiety levels in PSETs.

Introduction
Math anxiety has been discussed in the literature for many years. It has been defined numerous times and
involves specifically the feelings one develops when in contact with mathematics (Beilock, Gunderson, Ramirez,
Levine & Smith, 2010; Gonzalez-DeHauss, Furner, Vasquez-Colina, & Morris, 2017; Harper & Daane, 1998; Lake
& Kelly, 2014; Malinsky, Ross, Pannells, & McJunkin, 2006; Olson & Stoehr, 2019; Tooke & Lindstrom, 1998).
They are negative emotional and physiological responses to thinking, doing, and teaching mathematics (Beilock et
al., 2010; Gonzalez-DeHauss et al., 2017; Harper & Daane, 1998; Lake & Kelly, 2014; Malinsky et al., 2006; Olson
& Stoehr, 2019; Tooke & Lindstrom, 1998). Due to this, many individuals have a fear of mathematics and this can
potentially have negative implications for PSETs. Given elementary teachers are usually expected to be able to teach
numerous types of courses at different levels, a PSET who has math anxiety will tend to avoid mathematics as much
as possible given their fear controls their ability (Olson & Stoehr, 2019). The causes of math anxiety in PSETs range
from their own perceptions of their abilities to the influence that outside agents (such as teachers) have on their
perceptions (Beilock et al., 2010; Malinksy et al., 2006; Perry, 2011). The potentially detrimental behaviour of these
outside agents can influence PSETs’ views about mathematics and how it should be taught (Lake & Kelly, 2014).
Moreover, the teaching methods that may have fostered math anxiety in students tend to be replicated given they are
straight forward, step-by-step types of instruction which are easy to follow (Olson & Stoehr, 2019). However, this
type of instruction only amplifies math anxiety and in order to reduce it, different teaching methods should be used
(Harper & Daane, 1998).
The purpose of this paper is to better comprehend why PSETs have math anxiety and are generally anxious
about teaching and doing mathematics. In looking at their past experiences as well as the teaching methods that were
used in their classrooms, it becomes more evident why this math anxiety appears to be in a type of endless loop.
According to Lake & Kelly (2014), numerous PSETs choose not to enrol in many math courses due to their “math
anxiety, negative beliefs, stereotypes, and lack of confidence” (p. 263). This further exacerbates the problem given
that having a “lack of knowledge in mathematics can also lead to math anxiety” (Lake & Kelly, 2014, p. 263).
Therefore, what we get is this endless loop of math-anxious individuals. Specifically, people’s fear and perceptions
of mathematics impede their understanding of it which can impede how their students learn mathematics and their
math knowledge. Then PSETs’ students are stuck with similar sentiments and the cycle follows. What this signifies
is that the relationships that PSETs had and will have with their students will influence how math is perceived and
the type of teaching style in which they choose to use to teach mathematics. If PSETs are capable to break this cycle
and begin to move away from traditional methods (which are methods that have been shown to increase math

1 of 6

Anita Basso

Mathematics Anxiety in Pre-Service Elementary Teachers and its Impact on their Teaching

anxiety (Harper & Daane, 1998; Lake & Kelly, 2014; Tooke & Lindstrom, 1998)), then perhaps this loop will stop.
Therefore, in looking at this, this paper will try to answer the following: How does math anxiety in pre-service
elementary school teachers (PSETs) impact their teaching?

Key Construct
Math Anxiety
Math anxiety is the negative feelings and emotions that someone associates with the thought of doing and
engaging with mathematics (Beilock et al., 2010; Gonzalez-DeHauss et al., 2017; Harper & Daane, 1998; Lake &
Kelly, 2014; Malinsky et al., 2006; Olson & Stoehr, 2019; Tooke & Lindstrom, 1998). It can take on different
physiological symptoms commonly related to stress (Olson & Stoehr, 2019). These include “sweaty palms, racing
heart rate, dry lips, pale face, nausea”, etc. (Olson & Stoehr, 2019, p. 72). It can also take on “emotional responses”
such as “fear, panic [and] hatred” (Olson & Stoehr, 2019, p. 72). It has also been linked to impeding an individual’s
achievement and performance in mathematics (Beilock et al., 2010; Olson & Stoehr, 2019). Math anxiety can
“[affect] teacher behaviour” (Jackson & Leffingwell, 1999, as cited in Lake & Kelly, 2014, p. 263) as it impacts
their confidence in their abilities to do/understand mathematics (Lake & Kelly, 2014). Due to this, “teachers might
pass on this anxiety to their own students, or negatively impact their own students’ math achievement, as a result of
[their] discomfort with the subject, decreased time spent in math lesson preparation, or ineffective use of math
instructional time” (Gonzalez-DeHauss et al., 2017, p. 40).

Theoretical Framework
Symbolic Interactionism
I have taken a symbolic interactionist lens while looking at the interactions and relationships between PSETs
and their students as well as PSETs and their former/current teachers (i.e. their professors). In using this lens, I am
primarily looking at how these social interactions are constructed (Willis et al., 2007) and due to these constructions,
what type of impact does it have for PSETs’ teaching and the practices they choose to use. In essence, how they
interpret mathematics can impact their views and beliefs. These may result in unfavourable feelings and emotions
and therefore, can affect the way in which they act.
Erving Goffman’s Concept of Performances. According to Goffman (2008), people who have an audience
put on a performance. What this signifies is that they have “an influence on the observers” (Goffman, 2008, p. 22).
In a teaching context, the teacher is the performer, the students are the observers, and teaching is the performance. In
discussing math anxiety through this lens, what we can see is that how a teacher constructs their meaning of
mathematics and what it signifies for them can ultimately impact their “performance” which is observed by a group
of individuals who may internalize what is shown to them.

Results of the Review
The Relationship between PSETs and their Past Teachers
When PSETs enter university, they have already been in contact with and communication with previous
teachers. This contact with their teachers can have an impact on their perceptions of their math abilities as well as
the feelings they encounter when completing mathematics (Malinsky et al., 2006). According to Perry (2011),
“students’ motivation and attitudes toward mathematics develop early and are strongly influenced by teacher actions
and attitudes” (p. 2). Moreover, due to a teacher’s detrimental behaviour (including teaching style used (i.e.
authoritarian) as well as personal anxiety about mathematics), this can impact a student’s math anxiety (Jackson &
Leffingwell, 1999, as cited in Lake & Kelly, 2014; Harper & Daane, 1998). Therefore, for students, this anxiety
tends to manifest in elementary school and is usually brought over to secondary school (Harper & Daane, 1998).
More specifically, when certain teachers hold negative views and stereotypes of mathematics, this can influence how
they teach the course and the importance they place on mathematics (Beilock, et al., 2010; Malinsky et al., 2006).
Gender-related views and stereotypes. According to Malinsky et al. (2006), when looking at the anxiety
scores of PSETs based on the Mathematics Anxiety Scale-Revised (MARS-R), they showed a significant difference
between genders with women demonstrating higher levels of anxiety than men. Beilock et al. (2010) attribute some
of this difference with the impact that female teachers’ beliefs regarding mathematics have on their female students’
perceptions of their math abilities. According to the authors, the beliefs about mathematics that female teachers have
negatively impact female students’ math achievement and their perceptions of their math abilities (Beilock et al.,
2010). More specifically, young children tend to model their teachers especially in cases when “they believe to be

2 of 6

Anita Basso

Mathematics Anxiety in Pre-Service Elementary Teachers and its Impact on their Teaching

gender-typical and appropriate” (Beilock et al., 2010, p. 1862). In their study, Beilock et al. (2010) looked at the
math anxiety levels of female teachers and its influence on female students’ math achievement at the beginning of
the year and at the end. They found significant differences in levels of math anxiety and student performance at the
end of the year in comparison to the beginning. Beilock et al. (2010) posit that because this begins from a young
age, it may influence how the child will approach mathematics in high school and in college. While this study does
provide significant findings that shape how young female students’ math achievement may be affected by their
teachers, there can be other influences, such as “parents, peers, and siblings” (Beilock et al., 2010, p. 1862) who may
help reinforce possible gender stereotypes about math ability which can inadvertently impact students’ math
achievement (Beilock et al., 2010).
Teaching Practices and Methods Used
PSETs’ math anxiety can influence the types of methods and teaching practices that they use in the
classroom (Harper & Daane, 1998; Tooke & Lindstrom, 1998). According to multiple authors, some PSETs may be
more inclined to use traditional teaching methods given this is what they are most familiar with (Harper & Daane,
1998; Olson & Stoehr, 2019; Tooke & Lindstrom, 1998). These include “[expecting] correct answers over concept
development, competition and speed over understanding, and role repetition over critical thinking” (Geist, 2012, as
cited in Lake & Kelly, 2014, p. 264). This is consistent with Goffman (2008) because it relates back to how a preservice teacher thinks they should act (or perform) in the classroom. Their performance (i.e. their teaching) becomes
affected by the type of learning they received. When teachers follow this, the teacher’s role in the classroom is more
authoritarian which can negatively impact a student’s belief in their abilities and can result in math anxiety (Harper
& Daane, 1998). This, however, goes against what the literature states are most beneficial for PSETs. According to
the literature, to help lessen PSETs’ math anxiety, it is beneficial to use different teaching methods in the classroom
(Harper & Daane, 1998; Lake & Kelly, 2014; Tooke & Lindstrom, 1998), to create a supportive classroom
environment (Tooke & Lindstrom, 1998; Gellert, 2000) and to give students opportunities to do methods courses in
their university studies (Harper & Daane, 1998; Tooke & Lindstrom, 1998).
Using Different Teaching Methods. According to Harper and Daane (1998), they suggest that teachers
should use methods stated by the standards of the National Council for Teaching Mathematics (NCTM). More
specifically, the teacher can “[engage] students in appropriate mathematical tasks to foster problem-solving and
mathematical discourse, [use] group work, and [demonstrate] beliefs and attitudes about learners and mathematics”
(Harper & Daane, 1998, p. 31). However, according to Tooke and Lindstrom (1998), the types of methods used by
the teacher such to limit math anxiety in PSETs can sometimes have little impact. They stated that their results
showed no significant difference between traditional and non-traditional teaching practices for reducing the level of
anxiety in PSETs. However, when incorporating both types of teaching practices within a methods course, this
demonstrated a significant improvement in the math anxiety levels of PSETs (Tooke & Lindstrom, 1998). In
comparison to both Harper and Daane (1998) and Tooke and Lindstrom (1998), Lake and Kelly (2014) state that
despite the use of manipulatives and emphasis on conceptual understanding, courses focusing on elementary math
education rarely diminish levels of anxiety held by pre-service female elementary teachers. This may be due to the
fact that this anxiety has been engrained in their beliefs for many years and engaging in one methods course did not
completely change these beliefs (Lake & Kelly, 2014). Relating this back to Goffman (2008), what we see is that the
type of teaching methods used by a teacher can influence how their students will take in the material.
Creating a Supportive Classroom Environment. According to Taylor and Brooks (1986), they suggest
that creating a supportive classroom environment can help reduce math anxiety in PSETs (as cited in Tooke &
Lindstrom, 1998). This relates to Gellert (2000) who posits that this type of environment provides a safe space for
students to learn. If this is the case, and if PSETs “understand what caused their own anxiety, they may be better
able to promote an atmosphere that helps inhibit math anxiety in children” (Harper & Daane, 1998, p. 34). Relating
this back to Goffman (2008), if a PSET understands their anxiety, this can affect their performance in the classroom.
Therefore, when they are teaching, they can better create a classroom where students feel comfortable with
mathematics.
In a classroom setting, the instructor should promote an environment where mistakes are encouraged and
where students feel at ease to “take risks” which can “reveal their lack of understanding” (Stipek, 1998, as cited in
Gonzalez-DeHauss, et al., 2017, 2017, p. 44). In doing so, this gives learners opportunities to look over their work
and better understand the reason behind their mistakes which can help them build their math skills (GonzalezDeHauss et al., 2017). The classroom can also be a place where cooperative learning is encouraged such to allow

3 of 6

Anita Basso

Mathematics Anxiety in Pre-Service Elementary Teachers and its Impact on their Teaching

PSETs opportunities to “problem-solve” (Gonzalez-DeHauss et al., 2017, p. 44) as well as allow “learners to
scaffold each other’s learning” (Gonzalez-DeHauss et al., 2017, p. 44). In doing this, the “elementary education
classroom” (Gonzalez-DeHauss et al., 2017, p. 44) can be a place where a “community of learners” flourishes and
where PSETs can master their math skills by working with each other (Gonzalez-DeHauss et al., 2017, p. 44).
Impact of a Methods Course. The teaching practices used in methods courses often differ from the
practices used in other courses at the university level. Sometimes, given the goal or purpose of what the course is
trying to achieve, the types of methods used are more akin to those suggested by the NCTM (such as group
discussions, “fostering problem-solving” (Harper & Daane, 1998, p. 31), etc.) (Harper & Daane, 1998). These tend
to relate more to constructivist approaches of teaching which suggests that students construct knowledge from
previous knowledge they have using critical thinking (Ileris, 2018). For example, in a study conducted by Harper
and Daane (1998), they state that their participants benefitted from the use of a methods course to lessen their math
anxiety given that the methods used by their professors were paramount to diminishing their anxieties. For instance,
the authors stated that participants preferred when their professors would speak to them instead of lecturing and
when they used manipulatives in the classroom (Harper & Daane, 1998). In contrast to Harper and Danne (1998),
Tooke and Lindstrom (1998) focused primarily on how a methods course helped PSETs better understand how to
teach math and how students learn it. Through a pretest/post-test analysis using the Mathematics Anxiety Rating
Scale for Adults (MARS-A), there was a significant relationship between math anxiety levels and completing a
methods course (Tooke & Lindstrom, 1998). In the methods course, how the information was presented to the
students differed from the traditional course (Tooke & Lindstrom, 1998). For example, instead of stating, “This is
what you must learn” (Tooke & Lindstrom, 1998, p. 138), the methods course reframed the statement as “This is
how children learn this” (Tooke & Lindstrom, 1998, p. 138). This is consistent with Goffman (2008) because of the
way that professors acted (or performed) in the classroom influenced how PSET viewed mathematics. In essence, in
changing the way they (i.e. professors) spoke, PSETs became more comfortable with mathematics and appreciated
the type of teaching that their professors used. Changing the way the course is taught can help PSETs see the ways
in which children may have difficulties with how mathematics is taught. Therefore, the emotional responses they
may have with regards to doing mathematics may be better understood (Tooke & Lindstrom, 1998).
However, even when professors use teaching practices that are not traditional such as emphasizing the use
of manipulative and conceptual understanding, the beliefs held by PSETs regarding mathematics are rarely
influenced which affects their math anxiety (Lake & Kelly, 2014). According to Lake and Kelly (2014), even once
female students have completed a methods course, they still felt some anxiety toward teaching and doing math. The
authors posit that this is primarily since their beliefs about mathematics and its nature have been cultivated through
years of math courses and that one methods course can only help to a degree (Lake & Kelly, 2014).
Individuals’ Psychology
In certain circumstances, math anxiety is affected by one’s personal relationship with it. More specifically,
it is how one internalizes math anxiety and the ways in which one associates it with other aspects of one’s life
(Gonzalez-DeHauss, et al., 2017; Olson & Stoehr, 2019; Tooke & Lindstrom, 1998).
Evaluation Anxiety. When teachers are under a type of evaluation, math anxiety becomes more prevalent
(Tooke and Lindstrom, 1998). This is further exacerbated given that the math anxiety that PSETs’ face can be
influenced by their relationship with not only their professors and former teachers, but also by their classmates
(Gonzalez-DeHauss et al., 2017). Symbolic interactionism can help explain how these relationships can determine
the level of anxiety that PSETs feel when completing mathematics and mathematics-related tasks. More specifically,
Gonzalez-DeHauss et al. (2017) further elaborate “that the thought of under-performing in the eyes of others, or the
fear of being faced with their own inability to master and understand the material, makes PSETs enrolled in teacher
preparation math coursework particularly at-risk for math anxiety” (p. 43).
Test Anxiety and Math Anxiety. A different form of evaluation anxiety is test anxiety. Multiple researchers
(Boaler, 2014; Lake & Kelly, 2014; Olson & Stoehr, 2019) have examined the relationship between test anxiety and
math anxiety. According to Boaler (2014), “timed tests cause early onset math anxiety for students across the
achievement range” (p. 469). The type of stress that students experience while taking a timed math test is not the
same as the stress they feel when completing the same type of mathematics problem in a different setting (Boaler,
2014). In actuality, students display stressful behaviour only when completing timed tests and they do not display
this elsewhere (Boaler, 2014). Moreover, this stress affects the working memory of an individual which research has
shown is important for academic success (Beilock, 2011, as cited in Boaler, 2014). More specifically, when

4 of 6

Anita Basso

Mathematics Anxiety in Pre-Service Elementary Teachers and its Impact on their Teaching

someone is stressed, “the pressure blocks their working memory and facts with which people are familiar cannot be
recalled” (Beilock, 2011, as cited in Boaler, 2014, p. 470). The stress that students experience while taking a timed
test can result in them not being able to access their working memory which can “cause them to question their math
ability and, in many cases, develop further stress and anxiety” (Boaler, 2014, p. 470).
In the case for PSETs, a study by Olson and Stoehr (2019) explains how the female participants mentioned
having feelings of “[uncertainty, shame, panic, or fear when performing math tests]” (p. 74). This inadvertently
affected their views about their math abilities which resulted in them changing their beliefs about mathematics
(Olson & Stoehr, 2019). Some of the participants related their feelings while taking tests to their math abilities and
concluded that this signified that they were not able to do mathematics (Olson & Stoehr, 2019). This suggests that
tests (including timed tests) can have a negative impact on a student’s self-efficacy and beliefs about their abilities to
do mathematics. Therefore, once they enter elementary teacher education courses where they are required to do and
learn more mathematics, these sentiments that they feel may be brought back up (Olson & Stoehr, 2019). Looking at
this through a symbolic interactionist lens, what is apparent is that the relationship that PSETs have with
mathematics during their school years (which can be affected by tests) can impact their sentiments about
mathematics during their university years. When this is the case, it can affect the type of teaching methods they
choose to use later on.
Affect and Perceptions of One’s Ability (Self-Efficacy). The types of sentiments that one associates with
mathematics due to prior experience with it can impact how one will teach it (Gonzalez-DeHauss et al., 2017; Perry,
2011). In particular, when students adopt mastery-approach goals of learning, they tend to have more positive
sentiments (Gonzalez-DeHauss et al., 2017; Perry, 2011). Therefore, instructors should promote these types of goals
in their students in order to limit math anxiety. When performance-oriented goals are encouraged, learning tends to
be “valued as…a means to reach some external goal” (Perry, 2011, p. 3). Performance-oriented goals can be both
beneficial and detrimental. If students have performance-approach (Perry, 2011, p. 3) goals, then students seek
praise and encouragement for their abilities and competence (Perry, 2011). In contrast, performance-avoidance
(Perry, 2011, p. 3) goals signify that students “seek to prevent unfavourable judgements of their ability” (Perry,
2011, p. 3). If this is the case, a student can begin to question their math abilities, which can lead to lower selfefficacy which can be a “predictor of PSETs’ math anxiety” (Gonzalez-DeHauss, et al., 2017, p. 44). Therefore, in
relating this back to Goffman (2008), if a teacher does not feel comfortable with mathematics and decides to have
performance-avoidance goals, this can affect their teaching which inadvertently affects how their students will learn.
Multiple researchers (Gonzalez-DeHauss et al., 2017; Perry, 2011) have investigated the relationship
between achievement goals, self-efficacy and math anxiety. More specifically, PSETs’ attitudes toward doing and
teaching mathematics differ based on the goals they set forth for the classes that they take (Gonzalez-DeHauss et al.,
2017; Perry, 2011). Moreover, these goals can affect the level of math anxiety one has (Gonzalez-DeHauss et al.,
2017; Perry, 2011). Specifically, if an individual’s goal for teaching and learning mathematics relates more to
“mastery-avoidance or performance-avoidance” (Gonzalez-DeHauss et al., 2017, p. 43), then the chances that they
may develop math anxiety augment (Gonzalez-DeHauss et al., 2017). These types of goals discourage students from
trying “more demanding academic tasks and seeking out resources that further their learning” (Gonzalez-DeHauss et
al., 2017, p. 43). Furthermore, these goals can also potentially hinder them from getting aid from someone else when
they need it because they do not want to appear as though they are “incapable or not measuring up against their
peers” (Gonzalez-DeHauss et al., 2017, p. 43).

Discussion and Implications
Math anxiety can be debilitating for some individuals (Olson & Stoehr, 2019). It makes it such that doing
simple things related to mathematics become difficult given that it brings up certain emotions and sentiments (Olson
& Stoehr, 2019). Therefore, if PSETs have this anxiety, it can affect how they teach mathematics to their students
which can affect students’ math knowledge (Lake & Kelly, 2014). Because of this, it is paramount that the research
looks at ways to reduce this in PSETs. By looking at the research through a symbolic interactionist lens, it can help
explain why social factors such as the interactions that PSETs have between themselves and their students or their
former/current teachers can augment their math anxiety and/or can help to reproduce this anxiety in others. Looking
at this, we can see what this potentially can signify for future students and whether this anxiety cycle or loop can
end.

5 of 6

Anita Basso

Mathematics Anxiety in Pre-Service Elementary Teachers and its Impact on their Teaching

Implications
The implications of this paper suggest that in order to reduce math anxiety in PSETs, it is important that we
promote a classroom environment where mistakes are encouraged, and more cooperative learning can take place
(Gonzalez-DeHauss et al., 2017). Therefore, we must look more closely at the relationship between individuals since
the teacher’s role can help improve the classroom climate.
Limitations
The literature that looks at gender and math anxiety tend to identify gender as a binary construct, i.e.
women and men. Therefore, one of the limitations of this is that it reinforces this socially constructed view of
gender. One way to change this perspective would be to potentially discuss stereotypes of math anxiety instead of
labelling it as gender stereotypes. In this way, one can discuss the implications of math anxiety in a non-binary
manner.
Connections to Future Research
The research analyzed in this paper looked primarily at why and how teachers’ math anxiety impact student
learning and whether there are factors/ways that can limit this. It also touched upon gender stereotypes and their
impact on teachers’ views of mathematics and mathematics learning. For these reasons, future research can delve
more deeply into why math anxiety appears to affect women more than men. A lot of the literature cites the Beilock
et al. (2010) study. Therefore, as a continuation, more research can look at female pre-service teachers’ math anxiety
and its impact on female students’ math success and achievement. Moreover, there can be research done which
looks at male students’ achievement when their teachers display math anxiety.

References
Beilock, S., Gunderson, E., Ramirez, G., Levine, S., & Smith, E. (2010). Female teachers' math anxiety affects girls'
math achievement. Source, 107(5), 1860-1863. doi:
Boaler, J. (2014). Research suggests that timed tests cause math anxiety. Teaching Children Mathematics, 20(8),
469-474. doi: 10.5951/teacchilmath.20.8.0469
Gellert, U. (2000). Mathematics instruction in safe space: Prospective elementary teachers' views of mathematics
education. Journal of Mathematics Teacher Education, 3(3), 251-270.
Goffman, E. (2008). The presentation of self in everyday life. New York: Anchor Books.
Gonzalez-DeHass, A., Furner, J., Vásquez-Colina, M., & Morris, J. (2017, 12 1). Pre-service elementary teachers'
achievement goals and their relationship to math anxiety. Learning and Individual Differences, 60, 40-45.
Harper, N., & Daane, C. (1998). Causes and reduction of math anxiety in preservice elementary teachers. Action in
Teacher Education, 19(4), 29-38.
Illeris, K. (2018). An overview of the history of learning theory. European Journal of Education, 53(1), 86-101.
Lake, V., & Kelly, L. (2014). Female preservice teachers and mathematics: Anxiety, beliefs, and stereotypes.
Journal of Early Childhood Teacher Education, 35(3), 262-275.
Malinksy, M., Ross, A., Pannells, T., & McJunkin, M. (2006). Math anxiety in pre-service elementary school
teachers. Education, 127(2), 274-279.
Olson, A., & Stoehr, K. (2019). From numbers to narratives: Preservice teachers experiences’ with mathematics
anxiety and mathematics teaching anxiety. School Science and Mathematics, 119(2), 72-82.
Perry, C. (2011). Motivation and attitude of preservice elementary teachers toward mathematics. School Science and
Mathematics, 111(1), 2-10.
Tooke, D., & Lindstrom, L. (1998). Effectiveness of a mathematics methods course in reducing math anxiety of
preservice elementary teachers. School Science and Mathematics, 98(3), 136-139.
Willis, K., Daly, J., Kealy, M., Small, R., Koutroulis, G., Green, J., . . . Thomas, S. (2007). The essential role of
social theory in qualitative public health research. Aust N Z J Public Health, 31, 438-481.

6 of 6

