Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.3

Pp. 29-39

The Wider Social Context of School and Thai EFL University Learners
Sureepong Phothongsunan
Department of Business English,
School of Arts, Assumption University of Thailand

Abstract
The objectives of this study are to investigate a group of 14 Thai English as a Foreign Language
(EFL) students’ views on their learning context outside the classroom and the extent to which it
has an influence on their English learning in their tertiary education. From the language classroom
comes further the wider social context of university in which EFL students learn outside the formal
learning environment in relation to the opportunities to use and to be exposed to the target
language. Two data collection methods are employed: questionnaires and interviews. It is revealed
that the students perceive that the wider social context indeed influences their learning experiences
outside as well as in the language classroom in two major aspects: self-development in English
use and drawing on English as a common means of communication or a lingua franca (ELF)
whereby there is an implicit search for similarities through English. Many further report that the
specific university culture and its environment play a great role in their English learning,
motivating or demotivating them to use English for communication. Implications from the study
can be made to Thai EFL universities to focus on the stance on English and their efforts to make
the school environment more conducive to English use and learning.
Keywords: English as a foreign language (EFL) English as a lingua franca (ELF), school Culture,
social context, university learners

Cite as: Phothongsunan, S. (2019). The Wider Social Context of School and Thai EFL
University Learners, Saudi Arabia. Arab World English Journal, 10 (2) 29-39.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.3

29

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Wider Social Context of School and Thai EFL University Learners

Phothongsunan

Introduction
The wider school context is a social context in which informal opportunities could be available to
learners for language use and learning. With these informal opportunities, the researcher believes
that learners can engage in genuine and meaningful interaction with different people, teachers and
peers alike, in their daily activities in a school or university setting. In the process, they can be
exposed, for example, to a wide variety of language systems in use such as vocabulary and
language structures. These informal opportunities, nonetheless, depend on the school’s
organisation and setting. These relate to the institution’s rationale, priorities and goals which can
create opportunities where foreign language learners are able to develop their language within the
school environment (Spolsky, 1989). In this instance, the wider social context outside the
classroom may also constitute a power incentive or/and disincentive for further learning (Candlin
& Mercer, 2001). In the case of Thailand, this is an important issue because schools and
universities are on the whole encouraged to promote the use of English outside the formal
classroom as a means of supporting classroom learning.
To begin with, some background information on a university environment where this
research was conducted is needed. The university represents an international community of
students and teachers where English is used as a medium of instruction across all subjects. For the
researcher, this context is thus considered unique and worth studying. Understanding how the
wider school context could impact the way English is learned and perceived means that it would
help to see how the learners could engage in their learning context outside the classroom to
improve their English language use.
The issue of school culture and English learning in Thailand needs addressing. In fact,
studies have shown that the social climate of a school can influence the variety of student outcomes
from social-emotional functioning and behaviour to grades and educational performance (Cook et
al. 2000). A caring and positive school climate has been shown to foster attachment to school or
university, which in sequence promotes learning, To understand the learners’ wider school
experiences, it is important that these areas or issues be discussed. Generally, universities in
Thailand have different orientations towards English learning. These could relate to university
culture and, in particular, university leadership, such as whether the university administrators are
in favour of promoting English use within the wider social context of university. This is because
university culture includes the professional culture of educators, standards of local organisation
and administrative practice (Husén & Postlethwaite, 1994). Thus, the way universities at large
perceive English learning could also account for the way English can be used by learners within
such environments. If English learning is well-taken for examination purposes, universities may
concentrate on classroom learning where the focus is on learners’ passing the examinations. In this
case, contexts outside the classroom would seem insignificant to developing learners’ proficiency
in English. This relates to the notion presented by Spolsky (1989) that school or university
rationale, priorities and goals for the target language are vital as they seem to determine whether
learners can use English outside the language classroom either to practise or to continue learning
the target language.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

30

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Wider Social Context of School and Thai EFL University Learners

Phothongsunan

Two main research questions in the study are:
1. What are the perceptions of Thai EFL university learners of their learning context outside
the classroom at university?
2. How does the wider university context help the learners improve their English?
Literature Review
Universities both public and private are set up for the purpose of providing a controlled and
supportive learning environment with educational facilities for learners to excel academically and
in co-curricular activities. In other words, university students are to be provided with different
learning experiences so that they can enhance their potentiality to develop academically and
socially. For English learning, an environment where learners are afforded a range of English
learning experiences where they can use and be exposed to the language in the classroom as well
as outside the classroom is therefore necessary (Malmkjær & Williams, 1998).
By and large universities have different orientations towards the learning of English. Some
universities’ rationale for English learning seems to be confined to examinations (Ewell, 2004). It
would appear that if a university focused on English learning in terms of examinations, learners
would have a different conception of learning English since they would prioritize studying English
to pass examinations rather than learning English outside the classroom for true communicative
purposes. On the contrary, if a university intended to be an English speaking community and had
a policy to ensure that English is a dominant subject in university, English would be viewed as a
language that would benefit learners in many different ways at present and in the future. English,
this way, is perceived as an integral and necessary part of the administration, curriculum and social
practices of the school (Corson, 1990).
Support for English learning at university
It can be said that all universities in Thailand provide support for learning English outside of the
classroom. These university support programmes normally range from formal to relatively
informal activities involving learners from different forms (Bakhurst, 2009). Such programmes
seem to involve all university students despite their English language proficiency. Some promote
highly proficient English language learners as peer role models for low proficient learners through
different activities where efforts are made to establish a community of practice where less able
English learners could learn from the more able ones. There have been universities providing
facilities such as a radio station where learners can be exposed to English through radio broadcasts
and some provide access to television and movie shows in English for learners which could be
through an on-site viewing facility or movie rental service.
In addition to facilities, these seems to be other forms of informal support for English
learning at school such as an English club run by students, a toastmaster or debate club to enhance
public speaking skills and so on. On top of that, activities and programs supporting and
encouraging easy-going English learning are arranged relatively by universities (Coffield, 2000).
It would be rational to argue that differences in students’ attitudes would arise if some
universities have specific policy or strategies to improve students' English proficiency while some
do not. Clearly, universities with specific policy where different programmes are drawn to focus
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

31

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Wider Social Context of School and Thai EFL University Learners

Phothongsunan

on different aspects of learners' language development would focus on learners' affective
dimension as well so that students could be reassured about using English confidently within the
university environment without feeling awkward or reluctant.
Learners and English: Opportunities to use and to be exposed to the language
To understand learners’ social experiences with English within the wider social context of school,
learners’ perceptions of their friends, teachers and administrators in light of the university culture
and English learning as a basis for understanding their experiences in context are to be investigated
(Van Marsenille, 2015). In certain university culture, students may find speaking English difficult
for fear of incorrectness. Thus, learners’ views about the university community’s use of English
could account for the difficulty or simplicity they find in speaking English.
What appears to be most influential when it comes to the wider university context is the
way university administrators manage learning in university and set an example by using the
language evidently which could influence how the whole school approaches the issue of learning
the English language (Parr, 2014). These insights seem to indicate that strong leadership and
models are important in universities in Thailand.
Further insights into the learners’ experiences with English can be offered through informal
school practice which refers to the learners’ perceptions of and responses to various school
initiatives and efforts to extend their use and learning of English outside the classroom (Van
Marsenille, 2015). This implies where there are opportunities for students to use and to learn
English through informal support activities provided or supported by universities. Opportunities
to use English are up to learners as well because if they do not feel that they need to improve or
emerge themselves in English, these activities would not be of their interest which relates to how
learners feel about themselves in terms of seeing themselves as active users of English and also
probably in using the language accurately. Another issue related to learners’ using English might
be linked to the purpose of speaking the language itself if there is a valid purpose to use it.
Teachers’ willingness or reluctance to use English outside of the classroom will be
discussed next. It can be said that students do not use English perhaps because teachers do not
want to use it. Using English involves power relations (Norton, 2000). Unless teachers realise that
they hold power to influence learners to speak or use English, learners would not have a fine
opportunity to practically use English. As long as EFL teachers are supportive of their learners
using English in the wider context of university, it more or less reflects the university’ attitude
towards English. This applies both to formal and informal contexts of learning. From another
perspective, teachers’ lack of enthusiasm to use English outside of the classroom appears to
highlight the indecisive role of English in an EFL context. While English is considered a very
important foreign language today, not all the teachers particularly non-native non-English subject
teachers believe in the importance of using English socially outside of class (Eskildsen &
Theodórsdóttir, 2017).
Equally important is an issue related to peer culture, accounting for the learners’
perceptions of the extent to which their social interactions with different peers outside the formal
learning environment influence their use and learning of English. On one level, there could be an
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

32

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Wider Social Context of School and Thai EFL University Learners

Phothongsunan

issue of identity amongst second language (L2) learners where speaking English could be seen as
a sign of diverging from their native-language peer group. In which case, there appears to be peer
pressure that can reduce learners’ desire to speak English. Peer social interactions in fact have been
found to impact student performance in many ways (Smith & Brain, 2000). One possible reason
is that speaking English involves strong emotional commitment on the part of learners. Unless
learners have a positive image of themselves, it would be difficult for them to make an effort to
communicate orally in English. On another level, learners may have a different value for English
learning dependent upon the extent to which universities put an emphasis on examinations or
speaking English or both.
When English is perceived as a part of the general culture at university, there would be a
need to try to use the language. In this case, interaction with other peers who use the language
conduces to learning English. According to van Lier’s (1996), second language learners can also
develop their language through collaborating and interacting with second language speakers of
different proficiency levels. Here the notion of learning a language as a social and collaborative
activity seems evident. Through their interaction with more capable peers, they can see how they
can become better English language learners who can develop their own capabilities in English.
From one perspective, this seems to be manifested through a university effort to promote good
English language learners as peer role models for other learners at university.
As previously reviewed, learners’ experiences within the wider social context of university in
relation to the opportunities to use and to be exposed to English are related to whether learners
can use English with their teachers, the extent they can use the language in university activities
arranged specifically for English and also, whether within their small peer culture, there is a chance
for them to use the language.
Methodology
Using a case study, this research looks into a social inquiry on the meanings and values of acting
persons, in this case, EFL students, and therefore on their subjective, complex action (Crotty,
2000). Thus, to consider an interpretation of a sequence of events to be adequate and meaningful
on the basis of past experience, there is a need to isolate individual phenomena, the wider context
of learning at university, to trace learners’ unique development in the area of investigation.
Sampling
The students who took part in this study represent a group of 14 Thai undergraduates studying in
the School of Arts in a private university in Thailand. They were in their third and fourth years of
study in a four-year degree program. Five participants were male and the nine others were female.
Purposively selected, they were asked to participate in the study based on the fact that they had
been studying in this university for at least three years and would have sufficiently been exposed
to the university ambience, facilities and services, as well as administration regarding English use
policy and directives. They had all passed English IV, the last and most difficult of the four
compulsory English courses at the university. Their GPA fell in a range between 2.53 to 3.32 out
of a four point sale, which is considered largely satisfactory in terms of academic performance.
None of them had studied abroad.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

33

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Wider Social Context of School and Thai EFL University Learners

Phothongsunan

Data collection
In collecting data from the sample group, two instruments were employed. A questionnaire survey
was initially developed. It is a method to collect the data and it can help form the questions and
receive the responses without having to talk with the participants (Walliman, 2018). A
questionnaire is used very often in gathering information about people’s beliefs, attitudes, and
values (Sommer & Sommer, 2002). Therefore, the questionnaire is one effective way to investigate
Thai EFL learners’ views of their university learning context which serves as the main theoretical
framework of this study. A 5-point Likert-scale questionnaire with ten questions was used to guide
and evaluate the level of the participants’ views. The reasons why the questionnaire was used in
collecting data are that a questionnaire is an effective way expected to yield the learners’ views
towards the subject of the current study (Richards & Rodgers, 2014). Second, the survey
instrument helps provide the main grounds to construct the semi-structured interview questions.
Third, with a survey questionnaire, the data collection process takes a short period of time. In this
study, the Thai version of the questionnaire, translated from English, was employed to avoid
problems with the participants’ misunderstanding the language when completing the
questionnaire.
Afterwards, semi-structured interviews with six participants were employed to obtain
additional insights into the participants’ views towards their Thai university context and how they
perceived their context to be conducive to their English learning development. These six
interviewees were purposively selected according to their varying points from the questionnaire
responses, grouped into three levels: high, medium and low. The questions used in the interviews
were meant to crosscheck the results from the questionnaire and to probe further to seek the
participants’ views about their context in-depth. An interview is considered an outstanding means
to discover complicated beliefs, thoughts, feelings and attitude (Baxter, & Babbie, 2004).
Additionally, an interview is often seen as the most regular and special methods to discover
individual’s life experience.
The interviews were conducted in Thai and lasted about 20 minutes each session. All the
interview sessions were audio-recorded with permission from the participants. Each interview was
then transcribed into English for data analysis. To verify the accuracy and reliability of the scripts,
the researcher had the help of a student assistant as inter-rater in double-checking all the
transcriptions at random.
Data analysis
Initially, the quantitative data analysis was completed and then the follow-up interview questions
were derived based on the questionnaire results. Both quantitative and qualitative data were
analyzed. First, the quantitative data analysis was conducted using PASW statistics 18. The main
descriptive statistics of frequency, percentage, mean and standard deviation (SD) were computed
using the rating scores of the participants’ views.
The semi-structured interview was conducted to investigate learners’ views on the
importance of their university context and the extent to which it helps them with their English
learning. The interviews were recorded and he audio-recording transcribed. The qualitative data
analysis used is thematic strategies and coding categories according to the pre-determined themes
Arab World English Journal
34
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Wider Social Context of School and Thai EFL University Learners

Phothongsunan

and emerging themes from the data. These emerging themes were later included according to the
prominent categories.
As this is a mixed method study, the data analysis consists of the combination of both
statistical and thematic data analytic techniques (Teddlie, & Tashakkori, 2009). In this case, the
data was analyzed back and forth for both statistical and thematic analysis. Moreover, according
to Sommer and Sommer (2002), it is deemed rational to use more than one method to analyze data
or probe for additional data if detailed responses are needed for research.
Findings and Discussion
To answer the first research question, two important findings can be pointed out: university culture
and the university physical environments in which English learning occurs.
In relation to university culture, all participants reported that their university context is
unique and unlike other contexts as English is used in their context as a medium of instruction and
as an international language for learning in class and outside. They also strongly indicated that
they have to use English at all time to communicate with non-Thai lecturers and classmates outside
of the classroom though they can use Thai with Thai lecturers. Many of the participants found that
their university context supports their English skill development especially for their speaking and
listening to the degree that they can use English for communication with confidence and without
being seen as showing off their English skills. In addition, the participants greatly concurred that
not they do not feel embarrassed in engaging in English conversations with peers and instructors
outside the classroom (M= 4.70).
Most of the participants also had a very positive overall impression on the university
physical milieu (M=4.52), justifying that the university has emphasized using only English in
signposts around campus and announcements made both in spoken and written forms, including
in social media presence such as Facebook and the university’s website. Many interviewees (N=5)
added that they hardly see any sign in Thai, making the university ideal for learning English as
students would be exposed to English as much as possible.
The participants perceived that they can efficiently improve their English proficiency in
the university context (M=4.48), leading to their self-development in English, the process by which
their English abilities are gradually developed. Five of the participants have also stressed the value
of their university courses, their engagement with peers and lecturers for self-improvement.
In response to the second research question, the extent to which the wider university
context can help the learners improve their English, it was found that the said university context is
seen as an ELF context (M= 4.58) where English is used as a lingua franca, or a common means
of communication or contact language for speakers of different native languages, in this case for
the students whose native language is Thai. From the participants’ general perceptions, English is
seen as a necessity to be learned and used as a way to create commonality and similarities among
the university students and lecturers from different countries and backgrounds even though nativelike competency of speakers from Inner Circle countries such as the UK, the USA and Australia
is satisfactory if possible. All of the interviewees (N=6) reported that this context is totally different
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

35

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Wider Social Context of School and Thai EFL University Learners

Phothongsunan

from their real life environment. According to them, they hardly use English at all outside the
context when they are back home or hang out with their Thai friends even though having foreign
friends or classmates is an exception. Two added that using English outside of the university makes
them feel uncomfortable and alienated and that is why they would avoid using English if possible.
In addition, the university’s continuous effort in promoting the use of English in the
wider context of the university is perceived favorably by the participants as well (M=4.32). It was
found that it is a university rule that Thai is not to be used in student academic advising where the
students have to meet with their advisor every semester to discuss their academic progress and
personal problems. During the academic advising session held in their advisors’ offices, the
students have to use English to make themselves understood.
The students identified this context as helping them to improve their English for their
lifelong learning (M=4.35). Five of the participants being interviewed explained that learning
English is a slow process and it takes time to master. This context thus “teaches me to like learning
English little by little as it something I have to use and get used to” said one interviewee. It was
also revealed by two participants that the wider university context helps build their character and
attribute as proficient and assertive users of English.
From the findings, the university context under investigation has a unique culture and
environment where English is strongly emphasized. The salient use of signposts and signals in
English is related to the notion of linguistic landscape which is the visibility and notice of
languages on public and commercial signs in a given area or region (Landry & Bourhis 1997). The
languages used in public signs indicate what languages are locally relevant (Kasanga, 2012).
Linguistic landscape signs actually describe the identity of a certain context and almost represent
the language of its inhabitants at a moment in time. In case of the current study, this shows the
collective identity of the context as English is a more dominant language than the students’ own
native language, Thai. Corresponding to this, it can be said that the move to using English in higher
education globally as the most significant current trend in internationalization is prevalent in this
context. The use of English as a medium of instruction in all its undergraduate programs has played
an important role in internationalization of the education itself. According to Huang (2006),
internationalization is becoming one of the most important and increasingly complex factors of
higher education. In fact, higher education institutions in all regions of the world are addressing
the international dimension of higher education in a way that reflects their values, priorities,
opportunities and available resources. Nonetheless, one salient benefit and recent trend of
internationalizing programs where English is used is to attract international students from all
around the world.
The issue of self-development in English proficiency arises among a number of
participants in this study. The effects of English language proficiency on adjustment to university
life are reported in Andrade (2009)’s study. Her study examined how English language proficiency
affected academic and social adjustment, identified types of support, and considered the effects of
English proficiency on intercultural learning. It was found that students were generally satisfied
with their English proficiency, appreciated learning English in the EMI (English as a medium of
instruction) context, and felt their English was improved through course work and social
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

36

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Wider Social Context of School and Thai EFL University Learners

Phothongsunan

interaction in and outside the classroom. It was also revealed that intercultural interaction aided
English development and intercultural growth. The findings by Andrade (2009) resemble what this
study has found in terms of how students’ self-perceived English proficiency is positive and
encouraging in the context of learning with heavy exposure to English through social interaction
or engagement with others.
As the majority of the students perceived that the university context in question is an
ELF context, it seems that nothing is wrong in keeping features of the students’ first language (L1)
including their accent. To the students in this study, English as a lingua franca would be a contact
language among its users of the language, regardless of where they are from or whether or not they
are native English speakers or even in the event of their sharing the same native Thai language.
According to Jenkins (2007), ELF is oriented to the norms of mutual negotiation involving efforts
and adjustments from all concerned parties. As a result, English is not a single variety but actually
differs from one territory to another. Therefore, Asian English or even Thai English is not an issue,
which relates to what most of the participants regarded. What matters more is to consider the
needs of the students who are learning English to mainly communicate with other non-native
speakers. In this situation, English is used as a common and shared language between the people
who use it. Thus, the students’ needs in this context would be quite different from students who
want to study in the UK or USA to integrate within that culture and may want to sound as much
like a native English speaker. The significance for students using ELF, on the other hand, is to be
as intelligible as possible to the people they intend to communicate with. By creating intelligibility
using English, the EFL students could find and retain unity and resemblances both among
themselves and their teachers, most of whom are non-native speakers of English.
Conclusion
Employing a mixed method approach in exploring the Thai EFL university learners’ views on the
ways in which they perceive their wider university context and how the university context helps
to advance their English, this study, shed light on the significance of the milieu outside of the
classroom particularly in a distinct English laden university context in an EFL country where
English is generally not a local medium of communication. Findings from this study show that the
university context under study impinges on the students’ English learning experiences in terms of
supporting their self-development in English and identifying English as a regular means of
communication to create cohesion. The specific university culture and its ambience also come into
play given the use of English for communication in this context. The findings would be useful for
other Thai EFL universities to recognize the role that university contexts play in encouraging
English learning and exposing EFL learners to English extensively. Research in the future with
different groups of EFL students in various conditions are worthy of investigation. These can
provide EFL and ESL educators with valued insights into how much learners’ association with
English within the wider social context is dictated by university practices and culture. Also, further
research involving learners’ views on issues of teaching and learning of English in relation to the
opportunities to use and to be exposed to English through activities arranged by university should
be considered.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

37

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Wider Social Context of School and Thai EFL University Learners

Phothongsunan

About the Author:
Sureepong Phothongsunan works at the Theodore Maria School of Arts, Assumption University,
Thailand. Holding a doctorate in TEFL from the University of Exeter, UK, he has published books,
articles, and research in English Language Teaching and English for Specific Purposes.
Orchid ID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8115-4375
References
Andrade, M. S. (2009). The Effects of English Language Proficiency on Adjustment to
University Life. International Multilingual Research Journal, 3(1), 16-34.
Bakhurst, D. (2009). Reflections on activity theory. Educational Review, 61(2), 197-210.
Baxter, L. A. & Babbie, E. R. (2004). The basics of communication researchh. Belmont,
California: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning.
Candlin, N.C. & Mercer, N. (Eds.). (2001). English Language Teaching in its Social Context. A
Reader. London: Routledge.
Coffield, F. (Ed.). (2000). The necessity of informal learning. Bristol: The Policy Press.
Cook, T. D., Murphy, R. F., & Hunt, H. D. (2000). Comer's school development program in
Chicago: A theory-based evaluation. American Educational Research Journal, 37, 535597.
Corson, D. (1990). Language Policy Across the Curriculum. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters Ltd.
Crotty, M. (2000). The Foundations of Social Research: Meaning and Perspective in the
Research Process. London: SAGE Publications Inc.
Eskildsen, S. W. & Theodórsdóttir, G. (2017). Constructing L2 Learning Spaces: Ways to
Achieve Learning inside and outside the Classroom. Applied Linguistics, 38(2), 148-164.
Ewell, P. (2004). General education and the assessment reform agenda. Washington, DC:
Association of American Colleges and Universities.
Husén, T. & Postlethwaite, T.N. (Eds.). (1994). The International Encyclopedia of Education.
Oxford, England: Pergamon.
Jenkins, J. (2007). English as a Lingua Franca: Attitude and Identity. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Huang, F. (2006). “Internationalization of Curricula in Higher Education Institutions in
Comparative Perspectives: Case Studies of China, Japan and The -162- 高等教育ジャー
ナ
ル─高等教育と生涯学習─ 15（2007) in J. Higher Education and Lifelong Learning
15
(2007), Netherlands,”, Journal of Higher Education, 51(4).
Kasanga, L. A. (2012). Mapping the linguistic landscape of a commercial neighbourhood in
Central Phnom Penh. Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 33(5),
1–15.
Landry, R., & Bourhis, R. Y. (1997). Linguistic landscape and ethnolinguistic vitality: An
empirical study. Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 16, 23–49.
Malmkjær, K. & Williams, J. (1998). Context in Language Learning and Language
Understanding. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Norton, B. (2000). Identity and Language Learning: Gender, Ethnicity and Educational Change.
England: Pearson Education Limited.
Parr, C. (2014). English language use ‘most significant internationalisation trend for HE’.
The World University Rankings. Retrieved from
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

38

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Wider Social Context of School and Thai EFL University Learners

Phothongsunan

https://www.timeshighereducation.com/news/english-language-use-most-significantinternationalisation-trend-for-he/2013009.article on March 10, 2019.
Richards, J. C. & Rodgers, T. S. (2014). Approaches and Methods in Language Teaching.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smith, P. & Brain, P. (2000). Bullying in schools: Lessons from two decades of research.
Aggressive Behavior, 26, 1-9.
Sommer, B. & Sommer, R. (2002). A Practical Guide to Behavioral Research: Tools and
Techniques. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Spolsky, B. (1989). Conditions for Second Language Learning. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
van Lier, L. (2001). Constraints and Resources in Classroom Talk: Issues of Equality and
Symmetry. In C. N. Candlin and N. Mercer (Eds.), English Language Teaching in its
Social Context, 90-107. London: Routledge.
Van Marsenille, A. (2015). Informal language learning: the perspective of higher education
students in Brussels: A case study. Doctoral thesis. The Open University.
Walliman, N. (2018). Research Methods: The Basics. London: Routledge: Taylor and Francis
Group.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

39

