Fraud and Misconduct in Research: Detection,
Investigation, and Organizational Response. By Nachman
Ben-Yehuda and Amalya Oliver-Lumerman. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press, 2017. Pp. xii+266. $75.00.1

Martin Reinhart
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin
martin.reinhart@hu-berlin.de

The fascination for scientific misconduct is as old as science itself,
however, the sociology of science has only scratched the surface of the
phenomenon. Some historical examples can illustrate the multiple ways in
which science and misconduct are implicated: As a practical epistemical
problem, the founders of the Royal Society were highly interested in who
can be trusted as a reliable truth-teller and who may have ulterior motives.
As a means of power, the dispute over who invented calculus between
Leibniz and Newton featured some hefty accusations of plagiarism. In a
more reflective and political mode, Charles Babbage, in 1830, feared science
to be declining and provided one of the first typologies of scientific
misconduct. In journalism, the misconduct of those that we expect to be
dispassionate and unbiased seekers of truth is of seemingly timeless public
interest, albeit with varying degrees of sensationalism. Finally, as an object
of scientific study, Robert K. Mertons work on priority disputes and the
ambivalence of scientists laid the foundation for understanding science from
its fringes: when knowledge claims are contested and when the scientific
ethos fails. However, he also declared the history of science as
comparatively free from misconduct, so much so, that little might be learned
from studying it.
1 appeared as: Martin Reinhart, "Fraud and Misconduct in Research:
Detection, Investigation, and Organizational Response by Nachman Ben-Yehuda
and Amalya Oliver-Lumerman," American Journal of Sociology 124, no. 5 (March
2019): 1598-1600.

1

The potential for research on scientific misconduct lies in
understanding the larger context, i.e. science, from how scientists separate
the normal from the erroneous and from the fraudulent. The topic should be
of strategic interest (not just for criminology) for two reasons: First, there is
no central authority in science, such as state-centralized law enforcement,
and the detection, investigation, and punishment of misconduct happens
mostly through professional self-governance; e.g. by journals, funders,
universities, or online platforms. It is thus an ideal case for studying
decentralized forms of social control. Second, where trials before a court can
rely on the judgment of scientific experts, cases of scientific misconduct are
about these scientific experts and thus lay open the production of scientific
knowledge in the making. Incriminating scientific work routinely raises
issues not just of what constitutes the factual truth in a specific case, but of
what the general standards for scientific truth claims should be.
Despite the potential for addressing such far-reaching issues in
epistemology or social theory, a subfield that deals exclusively with
scientific misconduct is only slow to emerge, mainly because data is
notoriously difficult to acquire. For a long time, most work relied on a few
cases that were made public by the media or through hear-say. In the last
decade, more research has emerged either based on surveys, asking scientists
about their own possibly questionable behavior, or based on analysis of the
increasing number of retracted scientific publications. In this context, the
book by Ben-Yehuda and Oliver-Lumerman makes a significant empirical
contribution.
By collecting documentation for 748 cases of scientific misconduct,
the authors establish a comprehensive database that overcomes the problem
of previous case-based studies that relied on mostly anecdotal evidence.
They draw from heterogeneous sources (from the Office of Research
Integrity to Wikipedia), include all disciplines, and cover a time-frame
dating back to the 1890s. This sample is still biased, e.g. with respect to
country (the USA are overrepresented) or discipline (biomedicine is
overrepresented), which the authors openly discuss, but it covers the visible
side of scientific misconduct in an unprecedented way. The strength of their
approach lies not in answering the question of how much misconduct there
really is, but in being able to analyze how detection, investigation, and
sanction are portrayed in reports on publically known cases. From these, the
book shows a wide variety of findings with respect to who finds and reports
misconduct (mostly collaborators and colleagues), who is incriminated
(mostly researchers in vulnerable career stages), who investigates (mostly
research institutions and rarely law enforcement or courts), and what
sanctions follow (mostly temporary exclusion from funding or other
academic activities). Some of these confirm findings from earlier studies,
e.g. the number of cases has increased over time similarly as the number of
retracted publications, while others may seem contradicting, e.g. falsification
and fabrication of data is very rarely reported in surveys while the authors
find them as the most frequent types of misconduct in their database. The
2

analysis of such "frequency patterns" make up chapter 2 as the core of the
book and will, hopefully, inform much of future research on scientific
misconduct.
Besides an introduction and a conclusion, the book contains three
further and more theoretical chapters: Chapter 3 develops an approach based
on the organizational context of scientific misconduct by drawing on the
concept of organizational fields. Chapter 4 discusses the terminology
surrounding scientific misconduct: from fraud to deception to deceit to
deviance. Chapter 5 builds on the idea of scientific norms and a social
control perspective to examine the forces that make researchers deviant and
ultimately to speculate about the frequency of scientific misconduct. Neither
do these three chapters draw systematically from the preceding empirical
work, nor do they generate a continuous argument that would result in a
coherent and more general approach. Each chapter reads as a separate
attempt to grapple with the ambivalence and multiplicity of scientific
misconduct by drawing illustratively from individual cases as (anecdotal)
evidence. While this may make for exciting reading, as some of the
described cases are indeed sensational, it also lays open that the book tends
to provide spectacle where a rigorous analysis and argumentation would be
expected. The authors prematurely resort to trying to reassure the reader that
"while fraud in research is underreported, it is not, by any means, a major
characteristic of science" (198). In effect, the potential for understanding
science through the multiple lenses of misconduct remains underdeveloped.
The book provides empirical work that is urgently needed to bring more
professional distance to debates and research on scientific misconduct; what
the field now needs are approaches that draw on the current state of research
in criminology and the sociology of science.

3

