Teaching and Learning about ethical practice: The case analysis
Rochelle E. Tractenberg, PhD, MPH, PhD
Reprint Requests:
Rochelle E. Tractenberg
Building D, Suite 207
Georgetown University Medical Center
4000 Reservoir Rd. NW
Washington, DC 20057
rochelle.tractenberg@gmail.com
Collaborative for Research on Outcomes and –Metrics; Departments of Neurology, Biostatistics,
Bioinformatics & Biomathematics, and Rehabilitation Medicine, Georgetown University
Medical Center, Washington, D.C.

Acknowledgement: The author is the Chair (2017-2019) and former Vice-Chair (2014-2016) of
the ASA Committee on Professional Ethics; perspectives and opinions are solely those of the
author and do not reflect the opinions/perspectives of the Committee or the ASA. There are no
actual or potential conflicts of interest.
Running Head: Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis
Keywords: case analysis; stakeholder analysis; ethical statistical practice; ASA Ethical
Guidelines; ethics education; statistics and data science

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 2

Abstract
Statistics, biostatistics, and data science are unique disciplines/a unique discipline in the
sciences: anyone with an Internet connection and computing device can utilize the methods from
these disciplines –irrespective of preparation to do so. Most empirical and all experimental
sciences require some form of data analysis, including qualitative methods. However, even those
in degree or formal educational programs learning about statistics/biostatistics/data science do
not receive training in what constitutes “ethical practice”. The American Statistical Association
(ASA) maintains, and recently (2018) updated, Ethical Guidelines for Statistical Practice.
Understanding and being able to utilize these Guidelines (GLs) is relevant for all applications of
statistical and data science methodologies – whether for true “research” (following the scientific
method) or for business or other predictive/decision-making support. Thus, students who will go
on to be statisticians and non-statisticians alike need to learn about ethical statistical practice,
including those who seek to apply these methods in marketing, policy, and higher education.
This article describes how to employ the case study method to teach the ASA GLs, using simple
vignettes and a specific tool called a “stakeholder analysis template”. The template is introduced
as a method for understanding the harms and benefits, as well as the stakeholders, in each of a
series of tasks common to the collection, analysis/manipulation, and drawing of inferences or
conclusions based on data in any shape or size. The ASA Ethical Guidelines are discussed with
respect to their potential to guide data collection and munging (two specific tasks), with three
learning objectives: 1. describe how different individuals (“stakeholders”) may be affected by
decisions and actions; 2. enumerate harms and benefits that are most clearly relevant for each
stakeholder with respect to the activity; and 3. identify which ASA GL Principles (and/or
specific elements) seem most relevant to this activity. The stakeholder analysis template is
intended to facilitate teaching and learning – and the ultimate utility – of the ASA Ethical
Guidelines for Statistical Practice.

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 3
1. Ethics education and training for statistical practice
Statistics, biostatistics, and data science are unique disciplines/a unique discipline in the
sciences: anyone with an Internet connection and computing device can utilize their methods –
irrespective of preparation to do so. Moreover, all disciplines with experiments or inference tests
must use at least some of the key constructs from the domain. The American Statistical
Association (ASA) has developed and promulgated a set of Ethical Guidelines (GLs) for
Statistical Practice – most recently revised in 2018 (ASA 2018 – see Appendix)– that describe
ethical practice in observable ways. The ASA GLs are relevant for all who engage with data,
whether or not they self identify as “statisticians”, “biostatisticians”, or “data scientists” and
whether or not they are members of the American Statistical Association (ASA). Those who use
these methods, tools, and techniques have ethical obligations to the profession (ASA GLs A and
D), those who contribute data or from whom data are obtained (ASA GLs B and C), and to those
with whom (ASA GLs A, E, and F) or for whom (ASA GLs C, D, E, F, and H) they are applied.
As noted in the Purpose of the Guidelines,
“The principles expressed here should guide both those whose primary occupation is
statistics and those in all other disciplines who use statistical methods in their
professional work. Therefore, throughout these Guidelines, the term "statistician"
includes all practitioners of statistics and quantitative sciences, regardless of job title or
field of degree, comprising statisticians at all levels of the profession and members of
other professions who utilize and report statistical analyses and their implications.” (ASA
2018)
Failing to inform new practitioners – at all levels - of these obligations does not make the
responsibilities go away- but it does ensure that fewer practitioners are able to take responsibility
for ethical practice. One way to support the diffusion of the ASA Ethical Guidelines throughout
the practice of statistics and data science is to encourage all practitioners (as defined above) to
become familiar with them and how they work. The full Guidelines document (as approved by
the ASA Board in April 2018) appears in the Appendix.
These obligations are as essential to “ethical statistical practice” as is the knowledge of methods
and their appropriate use and reporting1. Tractenberg (2016-a) noted that, just as “(g)raduate
instruction in statistics requires the presentation of general frameworks and how to reason from
these.” (Hubert & Wainer, 2011:62), “instruction in statistics also requires the presentation
of general ethical frameworks, and instruction and practice in how to reason from these.”
(emphasis in original; Tractenberg 2016-a: p 517)
However, most if not all statistics education focuses on the latter and the former is left to chance
(or, deemed the responsibility of future employers to train into our students). It is especially
important to introduce the construct of ethical statistical practice to those who receive formal
training in the technical aspects of that practice. While “ethical statistical practice” is obviously a
priority for trainers of the next generation of professionals, this training is also essential for those
who will not go on to be formally employed as statisticians, biostatisticians, or data scientists;
arguably this describes many, if not most, PhD students and all those medical and clinical
1

The ASA actively seeks input on the Ethical Guidelines and the Committee on Professional
Ethics (of which this article’s author is Chair, 2017-2019) created an ongoing comment and

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 4
students who are encouraged to “do research”. Considering the reproducibility crisis in the
biomedical sciences (Baker, 2016) and ongoing concerns with data privacy –and the continuing
analysis and exploitation of that data – it is difficult to justify not committing to preparing data
collectors, wranglers, analyzers, and interpreters to do each of these tasks in an ethical manner.
In addition to promoting ethical practice whenever data are used, such a commitment can
promote both professionalism and intellectual humility throughout technical and professional
preparation to engage with data. One barrier to a wider acceptance of this commitment is that the
ASA GLs are most often discussed by ASA members with ASA members – but, ASA members
are by no means the only people working with data. To accomplish the Purpose of the
Guidelines, that they guide all who work with data, these discussions need to happen among
those outside of the ASA. Another barrier is that simply sharing the ASA GLs is not sufficient –
training and practice in how they can be used is also needed (see Tractenberg, 2016-a; 2016-b).
Many institutions that carry out federally funded research offer training in “the responsible
conduct of research”, RCR, or “research ethics training”. The overwhelming majority of such
training focuses on the ethical treatment of research subjects; but these features are less
important for non-experimental work –which may still include hypothesis and inference testing.
The Office for Research Integrity perspective has been more global: rather than targeting “the
responsible conduct of research”, their objective is to promote “responsible conduct in research”
(Steneck, 2007, emphasis added). The construct of “ethical practice” is relevant for all
applications of statistical and data science methodologies – whether for true “research”
(following the scientific method) or for business or other predictive/decision-making support –
including applications in marketing, policy, and higher education. Thus, instructors and mentors
should ensure that all our graduates and trainees understand both the relevance of the ASA
Ethical Guidelines for Statistical Practice, and how to use these GLs when they are needed but
also, to limit the situations in which ethical guidance is needed.
The easiest approach is to distribute the ASA GLs widely, but this is unlikely to have the desired
(or any) effect. Instead, this article describes how to employ the case study to teach the ASA
GLs. The case study is a method for teaching (NCCSTS site) that has historically been used for
business and ethics education. The primary objective for this article is to enable statistics and
data science practitioners to understand case analysis and how to use it to teach ethical practice
principles, with examples from the ASA GLs (2018). The following sections briefly define the
case study method (Section 2), then introduce a tool that can be useful for facilitating case
analyses, a stakeholder analysis template (Section 3). The results of the stakeholder analysis
identify ASA GL principles that can be informative, so the GLs are introduced next (Section 4).
Using the GLs to identify an ethical challenge and formulate and justify a course of action is the
next section (Section 5). Finally, summarizing the case analysis makes learning observable, and
assessable (Section 6).
2. The case analysis and ethics education
“Ethical case analysis is a common exercise for identifying and reasoning about ethical
challenges in complex situations” (https://sites.psu.edu/ethicsofdatamanagement/unit1/usingethical-concepts-to-analyze-case-studies/). In general case analyses teach by “…asking students
to devise and defend solutions to the problems presented by each case.”

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 5
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Case_method. In ethics education, a case study is typically a story
or vignette that describes at least one actor (someone who must decide how to act or whose
actions are presented) and at least one stakeholder (someone who has been, or could be, affected
by the actor). Ethical principles (or rules) are provided to assist the learners in determining if any
rules or ethical guideline has been broken or violated, i.e., if unethical behaviors are identified.
Many different resources exist for stories and vignettes that can be used to seed or stimulate
discussions about ethical considerations (e.g., https://www.scu.edu/ethics/ethics-resources/ethicscases/; https://kenan.ethics.duke.edu/multimedia-publications/case-studieswhitepapers/teachingcaselettes/; http://ethics.iit.edu/eelibrary/node/17816). However, key concepts of interest in RCR
training have been identified by the National Institutes of Health, including: conflict of interest;
authorship; the roles and responsibilities of mentors and mentees; and the role of the scientist in
society (see also Stenneck 2007). Because these topics are fairly specific to the biomedical
sciences, and because all were developed before “data science” or even “Big Data” were
identified as career path options, case analysis/ethics case materials that have RCR topics list
items as their focal learning objectives may have little to no overlap with what a statistician and
data scientist might encounter “at work”. In fact, “offshoot” resource archives are emerging –
with a majority focusing on artificial intelligence (AI) and other aspects of technology that relate
to data (e.g.,
http://ethics.iit.edu/eelibrary/search/site/Responsible%20Conduct%20of%20Research?f%5B0%5
D=im_field_subject%3A1309 - with 136 entries as of 31 March 2019). These resources may also
not be appropriate for the purposes of teaching ethical statistics and data science practice, as they
focus on the creation or implementation of technology, rather than having to do with either
statistics or data science (beyond specific computational aspects of either). They also do not
feature the ASA or ACM ethical guidelines (e.g., “teaching data ethics”;
https://www.scu.edu/ethics/focus-areas/technology-ethics/resources/an-introduction-to-dataethics/, a 2018 instructional module which mentions no professional practice guidelines).
An important aspect of case analysis is that the vignette must engage learners with guidance –
rules, laws, or guidelines that can be used to analyze the case. The context in which you practice,
i.e. your team/lab, workplace, or industry, may have established “ways of doing things”, but that
is only one source of information as you evaluate the case or consider your options; it may be
biased. The definition of “unethical behavior” is difficult to pinpoint when there is no consistent
description of what is “ethical”. Many organizations (the ASA included) seek to define what an
ethical practitioner does, so that others in and outside of the profession can recognize the ethical
practitioner. Providing these guidelines does not seek to bias or direct the learner’s decision
making, but rather, to contextualize their thinking about responsibilities and issues in authentic,
applied/practical, contexts. The observability of ethical practice that guidelines present both
describes ethical behavior and also supports new practitioners’ aligning themselves with that
discipline.
While professional guidelines come into existence, in part, to delineate and describe the
professionals as a community (Tractenberg et al. 2015), their existence alone does not affect
practice (without enforcement, such as exists for law and medicine). Professional guidelines
must be taught and practiced. There are perhaps no more compelling rationales for teaching
professional guidelines than the existence of “norms” that ignore or go against professional

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 6
practice standards. In the biomedical research context, the norms of p-hacking, hypothesizing
after results are known (HARKing), and failing to correct for multiple comparisons –all
representing unethical failures to report fully and transparently, contrary to ASA GL Principles
A, B, and C - have created a reproducibility crisis (Freedman, 2010; Collins & Tabak, 2014;
Baker 2016). Thus, training all new practitioners to reconsider what they know or accept as
“standard practice” (Stark & Saltelli, 2018) will ultimately benefit the profession and those who
depend upon its practitioners to be ethical.
Cases can be quite complex (eg. https://aiethics.princeton.edu/case-studies/case-study-pdfs/), but
they can also be very simple. The complexity of the cases that are used to teach ethics should be
dictated by what the learners can already do and what the instructor hopes to move them
towards. In this article, we assume that learning the contents of the GLs, and how to use them in
everyday practice, are the main objectives; learning how to do a formal case analysis for its own
sake is not an objective. With those assumptions in mind, we first consider two aspects of
statistical and data science practice: data collection and data munging2. The learning objectives
associated with our discussion of cases around these activities are:
• describe how different individuals (“stakeholders”) may be affected by decisions and
actions;
• enumerate harms and benefits that are most clearly relevant for each stakeholder with
respect to the activity; and
• identify which ASA GL Principles (and/or specific elements) seem most relevant to this
activity.
Without any detail beyond “you are collecting data” or “you are munging data”, instruction and
discussion can support learning that can support ethical practice throughout a career. However,
with additional detail (and for those learners who can do the above-mentioned basic reasoning), a
slightly more substantial vignette can be created and used to teach how the GLs can be leveraged
to identify whether an ethical problem exists or will be created, and then to make a decision and
justify that decision about what to do. The minimum additional information could be “you are
asked to collect data using an automated procedure”, or “you are given data sets without
information about how the data were collected, and instructed to munge them”. The additional
context is vague – and not necessarily unethical; the objective would be to encourage practice in
vague situations specifically to avoid unethical steps. Knowing which GL principles offer
guidance on how to respond ethically in these vignettes would be predicated on the earlier
learning – deepening the engagement with the construct of “ethical practice”. Finally, more
elaborate stories can be found or created, challenging the learner to describe and justify decisions
that they make, using the GLs. If learners identify gaps in the GLs – noting where they offer
insufficient guidance, then such analyses could be forwarded to the ASA to help strengthen the
GLs in the future.
3. The stakeholder analysis template
2

According to Wikipedia, data munging is defined as “computer jargon for a series of potentially
destructive or irrevocable changes to a piece of data or a file. It is sometimes used for vague data
transformation steps that are not yet clear to the speaker”
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mung_(computer_term)

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 7

Stakeholder is defined “one who is involved in or affected by a course of action” (MerriamWebster https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/stakeholder); in the context of ethical
case analysis, the stakeholder is simply an individual, or group, that might be affected by the
outcome of the case. Clearly, identifying who might be affected, and the nature of that effect, are
essential in understanding risks and benefits that might be associated with any decision or
activity. Ethical case analysis implicitly requires that stakeholders are identified; however, this is
not often a focus of instruction or practice. Because statistics and data science can have farreaching implications, consideration of stakeholders warrants more attention than is typical; so to
facilitate the learning goals articulated in the previous section, the stakeholder analysis template
was created and appears in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Stakeholder Analysis template
Potential result:
HARM5
BENEFIT5

UNKNOWN4

UNKNOWABLE3

Stakeholder1:
YOU2,3
Your boss/client
Unknown
individuals2
Employer
Colleagues
Profession
Public/public
trust
There are two dimensions to the Stakeholder Analysis Template. The first dimension, captured in
the columns, represents “Potential Results”. These capture those effects of a decision or action,
summarizing them according to whether or not they may represent net negatives. Potential
negative results of any action or decision, or harms, include costing money, time, effort;
negatively impacting reputations or persons; and other types of conceptual (intangible) or actual
(tangible) damage. Like harms, potential positive results, or benefits, could be tangible or
intangible – and they can have immediate or delayed effects. Benefits could include earning or
gaining money; the removal of a harm; saving time or effort; improving reputation; and
demonstrating expertise or superiority; among other things.
Since the effects of any action or decision may be negative for one entity, person, or group while
positive for another, the potential result must be considered with respect to each “Potential
Stakeholder” (the second dimension in the template). It may be surprising to realize that one of
the potential stakeholders is you, the person making the decision. As described earlier, harms
(costs in time, effort, and reputation) are easily recognized to yourself, as are benefits. These
should be considered first because understanding the potential harms and benefits to yourself can
also help you to recognize what they may be for the next stakeholder, your boss or client. If a
decision costs you time (a harm), this could be a harm to your immediate boss or client as well.
By contrast, deciding to formally identify a data breach at work could be perceived as a harm to
you (you could be punished if your boss does not want others in the company to find out) and a

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 8
benefit to you (you would be forewarned that maybe your employer will soon be out of business
or targeted by authorities). Only when the results of decisions or actions – in terms of both harms
and benefits – are recognized can they be balanced against each other to make a justifiable
decision (Tractenberg & FitzGerald, 2012).
You and your boss/client are fairly clear, recognizable, stakeholders. By contrast, “unknown
individuals” are not recognizable stakeholders per se, but if you make a programming decision in
the creation of an algorithm, or a distributional assumption in an analysis, there could be
predictable but not-specific results for these unknown individuals. A simple example is males
versus females: prior to 2015 the National Institutes of Health did not require that genetic sex
effects should be considered and potentially modeled separately
(https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/not-od-15-102.html) – making the scientific and
statistical assumption that all human subjects (after controlling for age, height, and weight in
many cases) are exchangeable. The decision to require specification of sex effect hypotheses in
proposed research, or to justify not including such specification, represents an acknowledgement
that failing to consider sex effects in biomedical science is not appropriate, and is insufficiently
rigorous. In terms of harms or benefits, failing to consider that heart attack symptoms differ for
men and women (Coventry et al. 2011) for example, and making assumptions in analyses or
algorithms that ignore the specific symptoms that women experience, will end up potentially
harming “unknown women”. The benefit to “unknown men” might be “more is understood about
the symptoms prior to a heart attack”. Medical professionals may never warn women about what
might in fact occur to them. Thus, the assumption that “human subjects are exchangeable” has
great potential to do tangible and lasting harm to those –unknown individuals - about whom such
an assumption is wrong. Even when we know that “women experience heart attack symptoms
differently from men”, we will not know the specific women for whom the decision to model all
humans the same will have this harm, thus the category of stakeholder is “unknown individuals”.
Unknown individuals also comprises customers – e.g., all those customers who are known to
have data/records associated with them, even though the specific ones whose data will be
breached is unknown.
Identifying your “employer” as a stakeholder may seem more straightforward, but “your
employer” could be a person or the corporate entity that is your company’s name. Harms and
benefits can accrue to both; making your decision about notifying the authorities about a data
breach could affect the corporate “employer” without affecting the CEO/owner. The more
important aspect of this stakeholder is that harms and benefits could accrue to them based on
your performance or decision. If you are self-employed, you are the face of your company; so
while a benefit may accrue to you when you fail to notify the authorities about a data breach “at
your company” (e.g., save yourself a lot of paperwork; limit the likelihood that a reporter will
publicize the breach and name you specifically, etc.), this would actually constitute a harm to
your employer (your personal brand) – demonstrating that your company cannot be trusted by a
potential customer.
Few practitioners in statistics and data science work alone, so recognizing that decisions we
make about ethical problems can affect our “colleagues” should not be surprising. Some
statisticians and data scientists are the only professional in that field on a team or in a working
group – meaning that our colleagues in those situations are unaware of the ethical practice

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 9
guidelines we are obliged to follow. If you fail to act on an ethical guideline principle, nonstatisticians may never find out; but if they do, their trust in you would be diminished (a harm to
you). You might, however, inadvertently create a situation where they might also be faced with
ethical dilemmas caused by your action or decision; complicating their jobs creates a harm to
them.
Professional Guidelines are developed by those in practice, in part, to delineate the qualifications
to practice and to encourage public trust in “the profession” (Tractenberg et al. 2015). Some
fields (e.g., medicine, law) have methods for controlling licenses to practice; all those who
violate professional or ethical guidelines harm the profession – by suggesting that these controls
do not act to keep “bad actors” out of practice. Those who ignore ethical challenges do not
strengthen the profession – even if ignoring data breaches seems to benefit the individual (“keep
your head down”; “go along to get along”), they harm the profession overall. When an
individual, acting in a professional capacity, behaves unethically or ignores unethical behavior,
the profession is impacted negatively.
The final stakeholder to consider is the public/public trust. When a representative of a profession
is unethical, not only is that a harm to their profession but it also diminishes the public’s trust in
the profession, how that profession is regulated, and whether or not federal funds should be
allocated to support or otherwise engage with that profession. The public – people who are not
(yet) your customers, and people who are definitely “unknown individuals”, but whose stake in
the ethical practice of statistics and data science is very real – represent the cultural context in
which we are educated, trained, and employed. The public also influences legislation –for or
against our profession. Western culture tends to believe itself to be evidence-based: decisions are
supposed to be supported by evidence and data (although see Pencheva, 2019 and McGoughy
2019, both discussing the campaign for Britain to leave the European Union (“Brexit”). Part of
that evidence is “evidence that practitioners of statistics and data science can be trusted” – harms
accrue to the public trust when, e.g., data breaches happen – the public may seek to require
stricter legal controls on data collection (e.g., the General Data Protection Regulation, (EU)
2016/679; see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_Data_Protection_Regulation). Public
sentiment towards federally funded research can also become negative if the public, or the public
trust, are harmed.
It is also important for the person completing the stakeholder analysis template to recognize two
types of unknown information, which are the final two columns in the table:
• Unknown. It is possible for a decision to be required early in a project (for example),
before an effect for a given stakeholder can be established as a “harm” or a “benefit”.
Thought experiments, in which these effects are imagined - rather than observed or
remembered from personal experience - (https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/thoughtexperiment/) or simulations can help to determine which of these is more likely; and an
important aspect of the stakeholder analysis template is to document where more
information is needed. Additionally, whether a potential stakeholder is – or will become –
an actual stakeholder may also need to be determined.
•

Unknowable. Both early and late in a project, it may be simply impossible to determine
whether the effects for a particular stakeholder will be positive (benefit) or negative

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 10
(harm). Whenever something appears in the “unknowable” column, it suggests that
whatever decision is taken currently may need to be revisited in the future. Recognizing
something as “unknowable” does not mean it should be ignored, but rather suggests that
more thinking or more specification is required –possibly both.
Now that we have discussed every cell (row x column intersection) of the stakeholder analysis
template, we can consider what information it might hold as a whole.
1. Knowing to whom harms may accrue can guide you to where the professional guidelines
can assist in decision making. This is the topic of the next section.
2. Articulating the harms that may accrue to YOU is essential for you to “treat others’ data
as you would your own” (Loukides, Mason & Patil, 2018: Chapter 3). You need to
recognize the harms that can accrue to you before you can compare those to you and
those to others. Moreover, “others’ data” could relate to your boss/client, your employer,
unknowable others, or the public. Recognizing whether or not benefits or harms accrue to
these different types of “others” is the only way for you to make a decision about how
you want other people to treat your data: in someone else’s table, you are the client, an
unknowable other, or part of the public.
3. If there are no recognizable harms, and plausibly no “unknowable” harms <for which
your decision would be responsible>, then there can be no conflict. It is really important
to recognize whether something truly is unknowable or if it is actually something that can
be known – but you just don’t know it. The key words here are “recognizable” and
“plausible” – your failure to recognize something doesn’t mean it does not exist. And,
beware of straw man3 or red herring4 harms!
4. If there are plausible harms (or benefits) that you cannot identify, but you believe/suspect
may exist, then there is insufficient information for you to make a decision and you need
more information. Recognizing this – instead of making an uninformed decision – is
currently not part of the norm. Learning how to use this table and complete a case
analysis is essential for enabling informed decisions about ethical challenges for current
and future practitioners.
5. All harms are not the same; all the benefits are not the same; and harms and benefits are
not exchangeable.
Discussion about stakeholders and harms/benefits that may result from any of the standard
activities in statistics and data science can strengthen the learners’ engagement with GLs, and
also encourage consideration –and acceptance - of the responsibilities to practice ethically that
the GLs describe (lest any of the harms befall any of the stakeholders).
4. ASA Ethical Guidelines

3

“Straw Man”: defined as “an argument, claim or opponent that is invented in order to win or
create an argument”, Cambridge English Dictionary.
4
“Red Herring”: defined as “something that takes attention away from a more important
subject”, Cambridge English Dictionary.

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 11
The ASA Ethical Guidelines, revised in 2016 and 2018, include eight principles, each of which
has 4-11 elements. The eight general principles for ethical statistical practice
(http://www.amstat.org/ASA/Your-Career/Ethical-Guidelines-for-Statistical-Practice.aspx) are
listed here; see the Appendix for the specific elements.
A. Professional Integrity and Accountability
The ethical statistician uses methodology and data that are relevant and appropriate,
without favoritism or prejudice, and in a manner intended to produce valid, interpretable, and
reproducible results. The ethical statistician does not knowingly accept work for which he/she is
not sufficiently qualified, is honest with the client about any limitation of expertise, and consults
other statisticians when necessary or in doubt. It is essential that statisticians treat others with
respect.
B. Integrity of data and methods
The ethical statistician is candid about any known or suspected limitations, defects, or
biases in the data that may impact the integrity or reliability of the statistical analysis. Objective
and valid interpretation of the results requires that the underlying analysis recognizes and
acknowledges the degree of reliability and integrity of the data.
C. Responsibilities to Science/Public/Funder/Client
The ethical statistician supports valid inferences, transparency, and good science in
general, keeping the interests of the public, funder, client, or customer in mind (as well as
professional colleagues, patients, the public, and the scientific community).
D. Responsibilities to Research Subjects
The ethical statistician protects and respects the rights and interests of human and animal
subjects at all stages of their involvement in a project. This includes respondents to the census or
to surveys, those whose data are contained in administrative records, and subjects of physically
or psychologically invasive research.
E. Responsibilities to Research Team Colleagues
Science and statistical practice are often conducted in teams made up of professionals
with different professional standards. The statistician must know how to work ethically in this
environment.
F. Responsibilities to Other Statisticians or Statistics Practitioners
The practice of statistics requires consideration of the entire range of possible
explanations for observed phenomena, and distinct observers drawing on their own unique sets
of experiences can arrive at different and potentially diverging judgments about the plausibility
of different explanations. Even in adversarial settings, discourse tends to be most successful
when statisticians treat one another with mutual respect and focus on scientific principles,
methodology and the substance of data interpretations.
G. Responsibilities Regarding Allegations of Misconduct

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 12
The ethical statistician understands the differences between questionable statistical,
scientific, or professional practices and practices that constitute misconduct. The ethical
statistician avoids all of the above and knows how each should be handled.
H. Responsibilities of Employers, Including Organizations, Individuals, Attorneys, or
Other Clients Employing Statistical Practitioners
Those employing any person to analyze data are implicitly relying on the profession’s
reputation for objectivity. However, this creates an obligation on the part of the employer to
understand and respect statisticians’ obligation of objectivity.
The ASA GLs themselves mention stakeholders that also appear in the template; so familiarity
with the GLs can help learners understand the variety of stakeholders who can be affected by
their actions and decisions. For example, benefits accrue to the profession when principles A and
F in particular are followed (i.e., “the profession” is a stakeholder whenever considerations
involve these principles), while the public is a clear stakeholder whenever principle C is
involved. Moreover, employers have a responsibility to respect the obligations of the statistician
to be objective. Since the GLs describe what “the ethical statistician” does – to decrease the
likelihood of harms accruing- following the guidelines will support ethical statistical practice.
Table 2 outlines a few basic harms and benefits that can arise for each stakeholder, in the process
of data collection. ASA GL principles that may inform how to avoid the harms that are identified
are also included.
Table 2: Identifying ethical challenges that can arise in data collection.
Stakeholder

HARMS

BENEFITS

YOU

Potential legal liability if data
incorrectly obtained; getting consent
is hard
Principles A, B, D, E, F, G

Easy to collect=better

Your
boss/client

Potential legal liability if data
incorrectly obtained
Principles A, B, C, D, E, F, G

Less time, easy to collect =
more $$

Unknown
individuals

Potential group biases arise;
unknown consent=potentially
negative provenance
Principles A, B, D

No benefits

Employer

Potential legal liability if data
incorrectly obtained
Principles A, B, D, E, F, G, H

Less time, easy to collect =
more $$

Colleagues

Sharing ill-gotten data implicates
them as well
Principles A, B, D, E, F, G

You spend time &
incur liability,
colleagues get free

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 13
data!
Profession

Working with ill-gotten data
undermines credibility
Principles A, B, C, D, E, F, G

Possible innovation using data,
or in how to collect more data,
makes everyone’s jobs easier

Public/public
trust

Ill-gotten data undermines credibility
of those who collect it, and possibly
also the profession that allows –
and/or benefits from -such collection.
Principles B, C, D

Public may never find out (not
actually a benefit to THEM!)
but if they do, maybe there are
legal recourses they can benefit
from (also not a real benefit!
Legal recourse is expensive and
time consuming!)

Note that Table 2 shows multiple GL Principles are applicable to mitigate or avoid harms to all
stakeholders. The relationships between the GLs and benefits is less clear; the process assumes
that ethical practice is an overall benefit. The stakeholder analysis table can be used – with the
simple prompt “collecting data” – to encourage consideration (listing, discussing, comparing,
ranking) of harms and benefits that accrue to each stakeholder; alternatively the same table can
be used to ask learners to list which principles would help ensure data collection avoids harms
(and how each accomplishes that). For example, GL Principle B discusses Integrity of data and
methods (emphasis added):
“The ethical statistician is candid about any known or suspected limitations, defects, or
biases in the data that may impact the integrity or reliability of the statistical analysis.
Objective and valid interpretation of the results requires that the underlying analysis
recognizes and acknowledges the degree of reliability and integrity of the data.”
The ethical statistician:
• Item 5: “Clearly and fully reports the steps taken to preserve data integrity and valid
results.”
• Item 10: “…exercises due caution to protect proprietary and confidential data,
including all data that might inappropriately reveal respondent identities.” (emphasis
added)
In addition to offering guidance about how to avoid harms to different stakeholders, GL B.5 and
GL B.10 both also suggest how to MEET ethical challenges arising in data that have already
been collected:
The ethical statistician:
• Item 5: “Clearly and fully reports the steps taken to preserve data integrity and valid
results.”
• Item 10: “…exercises due caution to protect proprietary and confidential data,
including all data that might inappropriately reveal respondent identities.” (emphasis
added)
The decision/ethical way forward is to document everything you do/have done (“fully report the
steps”) specifically to meet the challenge (to protect the data and sources). Then, make sure all

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 14
reports go along with all results and data from this collection that you go on to share, publish, or
present.
“Case analysis” need not be elaborate – or based on extensive cases/vignettes - to be an effective
teaching tool.
5. Using the ASA GLs to identify an ethical challenge, and formulate and justify a course of
action.
Sometimes we are asked to perform, or tasked with, activities that are contrary to these GLs, and
at other times it can be difficult to fully follow one GL principle. An example would be how to
follow Principle C, and respect both the public and a client if the client asks for an analysis or
algorithm that might create bias against (harms to) unknown individuals in the public. Thus, in
addition to learning the GLs themselves, it can also be helpful to understand how to prioritize
them. The stakeholder analysis template can help here, too. There is another approach to ethical
problem solving that bears mentioning: ethical reasoning, a learnable skill set that can be taught
and improved upon throughout a career (Tractenberg & FitzGerald, 2012). There are six
elements of knowledge, skills, and abilities (KSAs) that are required for ethical reasoning:
1. Identify and ‘quantify’ prerequisite knowledge: a practitioner should know the ASA
GLs and be able to use them to complete the stakeholder analysis template. This
prerequisite knowledge is essential for ethical practice, as well as for deciding what to do
when faced with requests to practice unethically.
2. Identify or recognize the ethical issue: In Table 2 we saw that the activity “data
collection” has the potential to create harms if GL principles are not followed as data are
collected. Without more context, “the ethical issue” is recognize as simply “not following
the GLs leads to harms”. The ASA GLs specify in their statement of purpose that “Above
all, professionalism in statistical practice presumes the goal of advancing knowledge
while avoiding harm; using statistics in pursuit of unethical ends is inherently unethical.”
I.e., ethical practice advances knowledge while avoiding harm, so statistical and data
science practice that does not seek to avoid harm will be unethical. We must also act
ethically in response to a specific order, request, or situation, particularly when these
involve unethical behavior (or requests that we engage in them) by others.
3. Identify decision-making frameworks. The ASA Ethical Guidelines for Statistical
Practice represent a “virtue ethics” decision-making framework, which can be
summarized as, “what would the (ideal) ethical practitioner do in this case?”
Alternatively, a utilitarian framework can be helpful to sort out the positive and negative
effects of a decision on each of the stakeholders. The utilitarian perspective can generally
be summarized as, “how can benefits be maximized while harms are minimized?” Both
of these frameworks are supported by the stakeholder analysis template.
4. Identify and evaluate alternative actions (on the ethical issue). There are always a set
of decisions that can be made in any circumstance: either i) agree to comply with an
unethical request, or ii) decline to comply with an unethical request; or, a) do nothing, b)
consult or confer with a peer or a supervisor – using the professional guidelines or other
resources, or c) report violations of policy, procedure, ethical guidelines, or law. NB:
“reporting” is clearly required when law and policy are violated.

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 15
5. Make and justify a decision. Using the alternative actions outlined in step 4, articulating
the decision of what to do in the face of the ethical challenge. Rather than acting, without
justifying the act or decision, some discussion of how stakeholder effects were
considered will document the reasoning for you at a later point or for others. Stakeholders
and benefits/harms should be considered, and as was noted for the stakeholder analysis
template, not all benefits are equal, neither are harms, and harms and benefits are not
exchangeable. So the justification is not a simple matter of counting up harms or benefits.
6. Reflect on the decision. Thinking about what is hard, what additional information would
have been helpful, how to get better at these challenging features of ethical reasoning,
and how to help create the culture that promotes fluency in ethical reasoning are all
reflections that may seem like “an extra step” for those new to this kind of reasoning, but
will in fact support a more ethical work place in the future. Such reflection can also serve
as case studies to be analyzed by others in the future.
Table 3 is another stakeholder analysis template, filled out for the activity of data munging.
Specifically, the vignette (case) for this analysis is given below and the stakeholder analysis
follows:
You have obtained data from multiple sources and provenance information about the data
is inconsistent – different people at work describe it differently and there is no real
evidence about the provenance of any of the data.
Table 3. Stakeholder analysis for data munging vignette.
Stakeholder

HARM

BENEFIT

YOU

Potential legal liability if munging
across confidentiality levels breaks
anonymity in one set.
Principles B, C, D, E, F, G, H

Easy to collect=better; munged data
may be harder to trace source of
breach (not a REAL benefit!!!)

Your
boss/client

Potential legal liability if munging
makes incorrectly obtained data
more widely available
Principles B, C, D, E, F, G, H

Munging easy to collect variety of
data = better than collecting/getting
good data.

Unknown
individuals

unknown provenance in SOME data
can create harms to other data after
munging and can inject bias.
Principles B, C, D, E, F,

No benefits

Employer

Potential legal liability
Principles B, D, H

Less time, easy to collect = more $$

Colleagues

Sharing ill-gotten data implicates
them if they use it.

Sharing bad data is bad.

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 16
Principles B, C, D, E, F
Profession

Munging that breaks confidentiality
undermines credibility
Principles A, B, C, D, E, F

Possible innovation makes everyone’s
jobs easier

Public/public
trust

Broken confidentiality undermines
credibility
Principles A, B, C, D, E, F

Public will never find out. (not
actually a benefit to THEM!)

Data munging can violate many of the GL Principles if not done thoughtfully.
Just as in the data collection example, Principle B, Item 10 describes the ethical statistician as
one who: “…exercises due caution to protect proprietary and confidential data, including all
data that might inappropriately reveal respondent identities.” (emphasis added) Ethical data
munging can be made more likely even if just this ONE principle and item are followed. In data
munging, everything possible must be done to ensure that proprietary and confidential data are
protected.
In addition to obligations relating to the data, there are also obligations relating to those who
contributed to the pool of data you may be munging:
D. Responsibilities to Research Subjects
The ethical statistician protects and respects the rights and interests of human and animal
subjects at all stages of their involvement in a project. This includes respondents to the
census or to surveys, those whose data are contained in administrative records, and
subjects of physically or psychologically invasive research.
Specifically, D.3: “Protects the privacy and confidentiality of research subjects and data
concerning them, whether obtained from the subjects directly, other persons, or existing
records.” And D.6. : “In contemplating whether to participate in an analysis of data from a
particular source, refuses to do so if participating in the analysis could reasonably be interpreted
by individuals who provided information as sanctioning a violation of their rights.”
The combination of the stakeholder analysis table and the two GL principles (B and D) that are
identified as relevant to preventing harms to every stakeholder represent prerequisite knowledge
for identifying the ethical problem here: You are being asked to munge data from different
sources whose origins cannot be confirmed. You cannot determine if the data have been ethically
sourced – so, munging that data, and particularly making it available to others, is not ethical.
Choosing the virtue ethics framework, D.6 strongly suggests the decision to be made in this
vignette: “the ethical statistician does not participate in the analysis of data that does not have
sufficient documentation or evidence that the data were not obtained by violation of the rights of
those giving the data.“
7. Conclusions.

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 17
The case study is a method for teaching that is commonly used to teach ethics, and which can be
used to teach ethical practice principles in statistics and data sciences. The stakeholder analysis
template provides a framework for evaluating one’s knowledge about a given case or situation,
helping to identify ethical challenges as they occur: subtleties and the non-exchangeability of
harms, and of benefits, and the non-equivalence of these in any circumstance can be recognized
with this template. The relevant ASA GL principles can be identified and prioritized using this
template; it also helps to formulate and justify a course of action.
If new practitioners learn, and learn to apply, the GLs from an early point in their professional
training, then the main type of ethical challenge will arise from someone asking for something
that is contrary to the GLs. In those cases, the practitioner who knows the GLs – and knows
Principle H should protect them from being asked to violate the GLs at work – would be able to
use the GLs to justify how and why they cannot comply with a request to practice unethically.
Unfortunately, very few new practitioners (to date) have learned the ASA GLs, leading to
struggles throughout the career. “The entire community of scientists and engineers benefits from
diverse, ongoing options to engage in conversations about the ethical dimensions of research and
(practice),” (Kalichman, 2013: 13). This perspective, from the engineering ethics education
community, is also true for the community of statisticians and data scientists – whether they
engage with “the community of scientists and engineers” or not.

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 18
APPENDIX:
Ethical Guidelines for Statistical Practice
Prepared by the Committee on Professional Ethics
of the American Statistical Association
Revised by the Committee on Professional Ethics
Approved by the ASA Board
April 2018
Purpose of the Guidelines
The American Statistical Association's Ethical Guidelines for Statistical Practice are intended to
help statistics practitioners make decisions ethically. Additionally, the Ethical Guidelines aim to
promote accountability by informing those who rely on statistical analysis of the standards that
they should expect. The discipline of statistics links the capacity to observe with the ability to
gather evidence and make decisions, providing a foundation for building a more informed
society. Because society depends on informed judgments supported by statistical methods, all
practitioners of statistics, regardless of training and occupation or job title, have an obligation to
work in a professional, competent, respectful, and ethical manner.
Good statistical practice is fundamentally based on transparent assumptions, reproducible results,
and valid interpretations. In some situations, Guideline principles may conflict, requiring
individuals to prioritize principles according to context. However, in all cases, stakeholders have
an obligation to act in good faith, to act in a manner that is consistent with these Guidelines, and
to encourage others to do the same. Above all, professionalism in statistical practice presumes
the goal of advancing knowledge while avoiding harm; using statistics in pursuit of unethical
ends is inherently unethical.
Ethical statistical practice does not include, promote, or tolerate any type of professional or
scientific misconduct, including, but not limited to, bullying; sexual or other harassment;
discrimination based on personal characteristics; or other forms of intimidation.
The principles expressed here should guide both those whose primary occupation is statistics and
those in all other disciplines who use statistical methods in their professional work. Therefore,
throughout these Guidelines, the term "statistician" includes all practitioners of statistics and
quantitative sciences, regardless of job title or field of degree, comprising statisticians at all
levels of the profession and members of other professions who utilize and report statistical
analyses and their implications.

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 19
A. Professional Integrity and Accountability
The ethical statistician uses methodology and data that are relevant and appropriate, without
favoritism or prejudice, and in a manner intended to produce valid, interpretable, and
reproducible results. The ethical statistician does not knowingly accept work for which he/she is
not sufficiently qualified, is honest with the client about any limitation of expertise, and consults
other statisticians when necessary or in doubt. It is essential that statisticians treat others with
respect.
The ethical statistician:
1. Identifies and mitigates any preferences on the part of the investigators or data providers that
might predetermine or influence the analyses/results.
2. Employs selection or sampling methods and analytic approaches appropriate and valid for the
specific question to be addressed, so that results extend beyond the sample to a population
relevant to the objectives with minimal error under reasonable assumptions.
3. Respects and acknowledges the contributions and intellectual property of others.
4. When establishing authorship order for posters, papers, and other scholarship, strives to make
clear the basis for this order, if determined on grounds other than intellectual contribution.
5. Discloses conflicts of interest, financial and otherwise, and manages or resolves them
according to established (institutional/regional/local) rules and laws.
6. Accepts full responsibility for his/her professional performance. Provides only expert
testimony, written work, and oral presentations that he/she would be willing to have peer
reviewed.
7. Exhibits respect for others and, thus, neither engages in nor condones discrimination based
on personal characteristics; bullying; unwelcome physical, including sexual, contact; or other
forms of harassment or intimidation, and takes appropriate action when aware of such
unethical practices by others.

B. Integrity of data and methods
The ethical statistician is candid about any known or suspected limitations, defects, or biases in
the data that may impact the integrity or reliability of the statistical analysis. Objective and valid
interpretation of the results requires that the underlying analysis recognizes and acknowledges
the degree of reliability and integrity of the data.
The ethical statistician:
1. Acknowledges statistical and substantive assumptions made in the execution and
interpretation of any analysis. When reporting on the validity of data used, acknowledges
data editing procedures, including any imputation and missing data mechanisms.
2. Reports the limitations of statistical inference and possible sources of error.

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 20
3. In publications, reports, or testimony, identifies who is responsible for the statistical work if
it would not otherwise be apparent.
4. Reports the sources and assessed adequacy of the data; accounts for all data considered in a
study and explains the sample(s) actually used.
5. Clearly and fully reports the steps taken to preserve data integrity and valid results.
6. Where appropriate, addresses potential confounding variables not included in the study.
7. In publications and reports, conveys the findings in ways that are both honest and meaningful
to the user/reader. This includes tables, models, and graphics.
8. In publications or testimony, identifies the ultimate financial sponsor of the study, the stated
purpose, and the intended use of the study results.
9. When reporting analyses of volunteer data or other data that may not be representative of a
defined population, includes appropriate disclaimers and, if used, appropriate weighting.
10. To aid peer review and replication, shares the data used in the analyses whenever
possible/allowable, and exercises due caution to protect proprietary and confidential data,
including all data that might inappropriately reveal respondent identities.
11. Strives to promptly correct any errors discovered while producing the final report or after
publication. As appropriate, disseminates the correction publicly or to others relying on the
results.

C. Responsibilities to Science/Public/Funder/Client
The ethical statistician supports valid inferences, transparency, and good science in general,
keeping the interests of the public, funder, client, or customer in mind (as well as professional
colleagues, patients, the public, and the scientific community).
The ethical statistician:
1. To the extent possible, presents a client or employer with choices among valid alternative
statistical approaches that may vary in scope, cost, or precision.
2. Strives to explain any expected adverse consequences of failure to follow through on an
agreed-upon sampling or analytic plan.
3. Applies statistical sampling and analysis procedures scientifically, without predetermining
the outcome.
4. Strives to make new statistical knowledge widely available to provide benefits to society at
large and beyond his/her own scope of applications.
5. Understands and conforms to confidentiality requirements of data collection, release, and
dissemination and any restrictions on its use established by the data provider (to the extent
legally required), and protects use and disclosure of data accordingly. Guards privileged
information of the employer, client, or funder.

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 21

D. Responsibilities to Research Subjects
The ethical statistician protects and respects the rights and interests of human and animal
subjects at all stages of their involvement in a project. This includes respondents to the census or
to surveys, those whose data are contained in administrative records, and subjects of physically
or psychologically invasive research.
The ethical statistician:
1. Keeps informed about and adheres to applicable rules, approvals, and guidelines for the
protection and welfare of human and animal subjects.
2. Strives to avoid the use of excessive or inadequate numbers of research subjects, and
excessive risk to research subjects (in terms of health, welfare, privacy, and ownership of
their own data), by making informed recommendations for study size.
3. Protects the privacy and confidentiality of research subjects and data concerning them,
whether obtained from the subjects directly, other persons, or existing records. Anticipates
and solicits approval for secondary and indirect uses of the data, including linkage to other
data sets, when obtaining approvals from research subjects, and obtains approvals
appropriate to allow for peer review and independent replication of analyses.
4. Knows the legal limitations on privacy and confidentiality assurances and does not overpromise or assume legal privacy and confidentiality protections where they may not apply.
5. Considers whether appropriate research-subject approvals were obtained before participating
in a study involving human beings or organizations, before analyzing data from such a study,
and while reviewing manuscripts for publication or internal use. The statistician considers the
treatment of research subjects (e.g., confidentiality agreements, expectations of privacy,
notification, consent, etc.) when evaluating the appropriateness of the data source(s).
6. In contemplating whether to participate in an analysis of data from a particular source,
refuses to do so if participating in the analysis could reasonably be interpreted by individuals
who provided information as sanctioning a violation of their rights.
7. Recognizes that any statistical descriptions of groups may carry risks of stereotypes and
stigmatization. Statisticians should contemplate, and be sensitive to, the manner in which
information is framed so as to avoid disproportionate harms to vulnerable groups.
E. Responsibilities to Research Team Colleagues
Science and statistical practice are often conducted in teams made up of professionals with
different professional standards. The statistician must know how to work ethically in this
environment.
The ethical statistician:

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 22
1. Recognizes that other professions have standards and obligations, that research practices and
standards can differ across disciplines, and that statisticians do not have obligations to
standards of other professions that conflict with these Guidelines.
2. Ensures that all discussion and reporting of statistical design and analysis is consistent with
these Guidelines.
3. Avoids compromising scientific validity for expediency.
4. Strives to promote transparency in design, execution, and reporting or presenting of all
analyses.
F. Responsibilities to Other Statisticians or Statistics Practitioners
The practice of statistics requires consideration of the entire range of possible explanations for
observed phenomena, and distinct observers drawing on their own unique sets of experiences can
arrive at different and potentially diverging judgments about the plausibility of different
explanations. Even in adversarial settings, discourse tends to be most successful when
statisticians treat one another with mutual respect and focus on scientific principles,
methodology and the substance of data interpretations. Out of respect for fellow statistical
practitioners, the ethical statistician:
1. Promotes sharing of data and methods as much as possible and as appropriate without
compromising propriety. Makes documentation suitable for replicate analyses, metadata
studies, and other research by qualified investigators.
2. Helps strengthen the work of others through appropriate peer review; in peer review, respects
differences of opinion and assesses methods, not individuals. Strives to complete review
assignments thoroughly, thoughtfully, and promptly.
3. Instills in students and non-statisticians an appreciation for the practical value of the concepts
and methods they are learning or using.
4. Uses professional qualifications and contributions as the basis for decisions regarding
statistical practitioners' hiring, firing, promotion, work assignments, publications and
presentations, candidacy for offices and awards, funding or approval of research, and other
professional matters.

G. Responsibilities Regarding Allegations of Misconduct
The ethical statistician understands the differences between questionable statistical, scientific, or
professional practices and practices that constitute misconduct. The ethical statistician avoids all
of the above and knows how each should be handled.

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 23
The ethical statistician:
1. Avoids condoning or appearing to condone statistical, scientific, or professional misconduct.
2. Recognizes that differences of opinion and honest error do not constitute misconduct; they
warrant discussion, but not accusation.
3. Knows the definitions of, and procedures relating to, misconduct. If involved in a misconduct
investigation, follows prescribed procedures.
4. Maintains confidentiality during an investigation, but discloses the investigation results
honestly to appropriate parties and stakeholders once they are available.
5. Following an investigation of misconduct, supports the appropriate efforts of all involved,
including those reporting the possible scientific error or misconduct, to resume their careers
in as normal a manner as possible.
6. Avoids, and acts to discourage, retaliation against or damage to the employability of those
who responsibly call attention to possible scientific error or to scientific or other professional
misconduct.
H. Responsibilities of Employers, Including Organizations, Individuals, Attorneys, or
Other Clients Employing Statistical Practitioners
Those employing any person to analyze data are implicitly relying on the profession’s reputation
for objectivity. However, this creates an obligation on the part of the employer to understand and
respect statisticians’ obligation of objectivity.
Those employing statisticians are expected to:
1. Recognize that the Ethical Guidelines exist, and were instituted, for the protection and
support of the statistician and the consumer alike.
2. Maintain a working environment free from intimidation, including discrimination based on
personal characteristics; bullying; coercion; unwelcome physical (including sexual) contact;
and other forms of harassment.
3. Recognize that valid findings result from competent work in a moral environment.
Employers, funders, or those who commission statistical analysis have an obligation to rely
on the expertise and judgment of qualified statisticians for any data analysis. This obligation
may be especially relevant in analyses that are known or anticipated to have tangible
physical, financial, or psychological impacts.

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 24
4. Recognize that the results of valid statistical studies cannot be guaranteed to conform to the
expectations or desires of those commissioning the study or the statistical practitioner(s).
5. Recognize that it is contrary to these Guidelines to report or follow only those results that
conform to expectations without explicitly acknowledging competing findings and the basis
for choices regarding which results to report, use, and/or cite.
6. Recognize that the inclusion of statistical practitioners as authors, or acknowledgement of
their contributions to projects or publications, requires their explicit permission because it
implies endorsement of the work.
7. Support sound statistical analysis and expose incompetent or corrupt statistical practice.
8. Strive to protect the professional freedom and responsibility of statistical practitioners who
comply with these Guidelines.

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 25
References
American Statistical Association (2018). American Statistical Association (ASA) Ethical
Guidelines for Statistical Practice. Downloaded from on 21 April 2018.
Baker M. (2016). 1,500 scientists lift the lid on reproducibility. Nature 533, 452–454 (26 May
2016) doi:10.1038/533452a
Collins FS & Tabak LA. (2014). Policy: NIH Plans to enhance reproducibility. Nature 505 (30
Jan 2014): 612-613. Downloaded from http://www.nature.com/news/policy-nih-plans-toenhance-reproducibility-1.14586 on 10 March 2016
Coventry LL, Finn J, Bremner AP. (2011). Sex differences in symptom presentation in acute
myocardial infarction: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Heart Lung 40(6):477-91. doi:
10.1016/j.hrtlng.2011.05.001.
Freedman DH. (2010). Lies, damned lies, and medical science. The Atlantic November 2010
issue; downloaded from http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2010/11/lies-damned-liesand-medical-science/308269/ on 7 November 2015.
Hubert L & Wainer H. (2011). A statistical guide for the ethically perplexed. In AT Panter & SK
Sterba (Eds)., Handbook of ethics in quantitative methodology. New York, NY: Routledge. pp
61-124.
Loukides M, Mason H, Patil DJ. (10 July 2018). Doing good data science. Downloaded from
https://www.oreilly.com/ideas/doing-good-data-science on 15 July 2018
McGoughy E. (2019). Could Brexit be void? 29(3) King's Law Journal 331-343
King's College London Law School Research Paper No. 2018-29. Downloaded from
https://poseidon01.ssrn.com/delivery.php?ID=8721190911241130260241010021240890870490
730700640250211111130771020700941011181240001200320620060060270021121061110970
660260070000290260490191270690860310940910171240180520420671000010641041140670
72026004117079095122125109075120125086104097074116086104&EXT=pdf
on 31 March 2019.
Kalichman M. (2013). Why teach research ethics? In, National Academy of Engineering (Eds).
Practical Guidance on Science and Engineering Ethics Education for Instructors and
Administrators. Washington, DC: National Academies Press. Pp. 5-16.
Penchava D. (2019). Brexit and migration: our new research highlights fact-free news coverage.
Downloaded from https://theconversation.com/brexit-and-migration-our-new-researchhighlights-fact-free-news-coverage-109309 on 31 March 2019.
Stark PB & Saltelli A. (2018). https://www.significancemagazine.com/2-uncategorised/593cargo-cult-statistics-and-scientific-crisis Downloaded from
https://www.significancemagazine.com/2-uncategorised/593-cargo-cult-statistics-and-scientificcrisis on 18 July 2018.
Steneck NH (2007). Introduction to the Responsible Conduct of Research – Revised Edition.
Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services. Downloaded from
http://ori.dhhs.gov/documents/rcrintro.pdf on 1 January 2010.
Tractenberg RE, Russell AL, Morgan G, FitzGerald KT, Collmann J, Vinsel L, Steinmann M,
Dolling LM. (2015) Amplifying the reach and resonance of ethical codes of conduct through
ethical reasoning: preparation of Big Data users for professional practice. Science and
Engineering Ethics 21(6): 1485-1507. DOI 10.1007/s11948-014-9613-1

Teaching Ethical Practice with Case Analysis - 26
Tractenberg RE & FitzGerald KT. (2012). A Mastery Rubric for the design and evaluation of an
institutional curriculum in the responsible conduct of research. Assessment and Evaluation in
Higher Education. 37(7-8): 1003-21. DOI 10.1080/02602938.2011.596923.
Tractenberg RE. (2016-a). Institutionalizing ethical reasoning: integrating the ASA’s Ethical
Guidelines for Professional Practice into course, program, and curriculum. In, J. Collmann & S.
Matei (Eds)., Ethical Reasoning in Big Data: An Exploratory Analysis. New York: Springer.
115-139.
Tractenberg RE. (2016-b). Why and How the ASA Ethical Guidelines Should Be Integrated into
Every Quantitative Course. Proceedings of the 2016 Joint Statistical Meetings, Chicago, IL. Pp.
517-535.

