Choosing the right place?
An experimental examination of ethnic preferences in housing decisions

Christoph Zangger∗

Residential preferences are often treated as exogenous causes of social and ethnic
segregation.

In this paper, this assumption is challenged.

Instead, this contribution

proposes and evaluates how residential preferences are shaped by the conditions of
one's neighbourhood. This approach acknowledges the mutual dependence of experienced neighbourhood and housing conditions, residential preferences, and segregation
patterns. Doing so, an alternative explanation for the often documented ethnic preferences in housing decisions is elaborated and tested by applying multilevel generalized
linear latent and mixed logit models to unique, geocoded data from a choice experiment. Results indicate that people dier in their evaluation of the social and ethnic
composition of housing alternatives' residential surroundings. Moreover, these heterogeneous evaluations are largely independent of respondents' own ethnic background.
Instead, the observed taste heterogeneity varies over respondents' bespoke neighbourhoods.

However, the evaluation of the social and ethnic composition of the housing

alternatives does not vary over larger administrative neighbourhoods. This result highlights the importance of proximate, small-scale geographic processes in shaping people's
residential preferences.

Keywords:

Housing Choice, Residential Preferences, Choice Experiment, Ethnic Background

Introduction
Ethnic and social segregation and its consequences for individual life chances are an enduring hot
topic on both the political as well as researchers' agenda (e.g., Iceland and Hernandez, 2017; Rokem
and Vaughan, 2019; Sampson, 2012). Following Schelling's (1971) well-known model of (ethnic)
∗

University of Zurich, zangger@soziologie.uzh.ch

tipping points in people's residential mobility decisions, researchers have intensively studied the
formation of residential preferences and their consequences in terms of social and ethnic segregation (e.g., Aldén et al., 2015; Clark, 1991; Emerson et al., 2001). However, residential preferences
only explain part of the observed levels of segregation in today's metropolitan areas. People's situational context, in particular the resources they possess, also crucially determines their residential
mobility and housing choices (e.g., Iceland and Hernandez, 2017; Musterd, 2005). Moreover, ethnic
residential segregation can also be attributed to discriminatory practices of landlords who limit
the scope of choice for minorities (e.g., Auspurg et al., 2017; Flage, 2018).

These complex and

intertwined causes make it hard to isolate the contribution of people's preferences for patterns of
residential segregation.
When it comes to assessing people's residential preferences, most studies use either the observed
housing decisions or simulation studies (e.g., Clark and Fossett, 2008; Emerson et al., 2001; Fossett,
2006; van Ham and Clark, 2009). With the former, however, it is not possible to fully disentangle
people's preferences from unobserved characteristics, tastes, opportunities, and limitations that are
associated both with their observed choice and the predictors used in the model. Meanwhile, only
few studies have tried to study residential preferences directly by means of survey experiments
(e.g., Bruch and Mare, 2006; Ibraimovic and Hess, 2018).

This is surprising given that these

methods bear the advantage of causally revealing the factors that shape the formation of people's
preferences (Train, 2009). Moreover, focusing on preferences rather than choices is also valuable
because preferences can be understood as people's demand for housing which can be used for future
planing and development.
Against the background of the documented neighbourhood inuences on people's residential mobility decisions (Lee et al., 1994), this contribution examines how people's residential preferences
are formed by the conditions they experience in their neighbourhoods.

More specically, using

a choice experiment in which the social and ethnic composition of dierent housing alternatives
was systematically varied paired with geocoded data that allows for the construction of bespoke
neighbourhoods, this contribution evaluates how people's residential preferences dier across neighbourhoods. Doing so, this contribution also examines how experienced neighbourhood conditions
add to the explanation of varying responses to the social and ethnic composition of available housing alternatives.
segregation.

Consequently, preferences are not treated as an exogenous cause of residential

Instead, this paper stresses the importance of people's experienced neighbourhood

context to explain varying residential preferences. To this end, experienced neighbourhood conditions, individual background, and characteristics of potential housing alternatives are incorporated
and tested in a coherent model.

The remainder of this contribution is organized as follows. The next section briey summarizes
existing research and elaborates on the theoretical background.

The third section discusses the

data and the methodological approach used to assess the research question, namely the choice
experiment, the construction of bespoke neighbourhoods, and the pursued mixed logit modelling
strategy (Train, 2009).

The results of dierent model specications are presented in the fourth

section. Finally, the fth section concludes with a critical discussion of the results and summarizes
the implications for both research and policy concerned with residential mobility and social and
ethnic segregation.

Background
To evaluate people's residential preferences, housing decisions are framed in a broad rational action
model. Taking dierent constraints and opportunities into account, for example, the availability
of dierent housing alternatives on the market or individual monetary resources, people prefer the
housing alternative that is associated with the highest subjective utility, for example, with regard
to housing characteristics or life cycle events (e.g., Ioannides, 1987; McFadden, 1978; Rossi and
Shlay, 1982):

max Uj = U (Zj ),

(1)

That is, people try to maximize the utility associated with dierent observed and unobserved factors

Zj

over housing alternatives

j.

Given the subjective evaluation of dierent housing alternatives,

it has been suggested that the observed levels of social and ethnic segregation are also partly due
to varying preferences of dierent social and ethnic groups (e.g., Clark, 1991; Schelling, 1971). In
the present context, this implies that some groups might emphasise certain commodities or the
composition of a neighbourhood

j

when comparing it to an alternative

k

while others would largely

be indierent to, for example, the social and ethnic background of their prospective neighbours.
There is an ever growing literature focusing on the factors

Zj

that shape the utility associated

with a particular housing alternative. On the one hand, there is considerable research focusing on
the individual and joint decision making processes of households in residential choices, pointing
to, for example, dierences across social strata, age, change of workplace, or family size (e.g.,
Dieleman, 2001; Wang and Li, 2006; Weinberg, 1979). On the other hand, there is research that puts
residential mobility into the larger context of the available housing alternatives and their respective
neighbourhoods (e.g., Clark and Fossett, 2008; Lee et al., 1994; Timmermans and Noortwijk, 1995;
van Ham and Clark, 2009).
Although it can be considered to be the foundation of the well-known model of segregation by

Schelling (1971), bringing the individual and the contextual perspective on people's residential
preferences together has often proven to be problematic. In this regard, explanations that focus on
individual preferences in the housing market often neglect structural constraints and discrimination
experienced by ethnic minorities as well as the fact that preferences themselves are also the result
of experienced neighbourhood conditions (Bruch and Feinberg, 2017; Bruch and Mare, 2006). This
last point is then also the motivation for the present research: Preferences are not fully individual
but they are dynamic and formed in a social environment (Ioannides, 2013; Lévy-Garboua et al.,
2006). Regarding residential preferences, we would thus expect that people update their evaluation
of what the ideal neighbourhood looks like based on the experiences made in their current (and
previous) surroundings.

This in turn then also inuences their evaluation of dierent housing

alternatives.
Against the background of the formation of individual residential preferences in a socio-spatial
context (Bruch and Feinberg, 2017; Ioannides, 2013), this paper hypothesizes that ethnic preferences in housing decisions are also attributable to people's perception of the social environment
of their current neighbourhood. In other words: Rather than a true cause of observed levels of
segregation, the often documented ethnic dierential in people's location and housing decisions is
also a consequence of segregation patterns itself and the resulting social and ethnic composition
of people's residential surroundings.

This view then stresses a mutual dependence of segrega-

tion, residential mobility, and housing preferences (Bruch and Mare, 2012). With regard to the
above outlined utility maximization in people's residential decision making, we would thus expect
that currently experienced neighbourhood conditions are important determinants when evaluating
dierent housing alternatives and thus crucially shape the utility attributed to dierent housing
opportunities and the therewith associated neighbourhood conditions.

Data & methods
This contribution uses a choice experiment and geocoded data collected in four major cities in
Switzerland (Basel, Bern, Winterthur, and Zurich). Since discrete choice experiments allow for the
identication of causal factors in the formation of people's preferences, they are especially suited
for this purpose (Johnson et al., 2013; Train, 2009). Before discussing the design and data in detail,
the next section briey outlines the general idea of discrete choice experiments, their construction,
benets, and limitations.

Discrete choice experiments
Discrete choice experiments (DCE) combineas any type of factorial survey experiment (Auspurg
and Hinz, 2015; Zangger and Becker, 2019)the advantages of traditional experiments with the
ones of classic survey research. Unlike in the case of
choices in the real world, they are used to assess

revealed preferences, that is, people's observed

stated preferences, that is, choices in a hypothetical

situation (Train, 2009).
Making use of a random assignment of respondents to treatment conditions and an ecient manipulation of dierent treatment combinations, DCEs allow for the identication of causal eects.
While real-world choices are often conducted in a narrow context with only little variation in the
attributes of interest (e.g., people's responsiveness to house prices and rents might be underestimated when housing is in short supply), DCEs try to mimic a situation free from such (unobserved)
constraints. Since respondents are based on a random sample from the population of interest rather
than a (self-) selected group of participants as in laboratory experiments, the high internal validity
of experimental designs is paired with the external validity of survey research methods (Zangger
and Becker, 2019). Consequently, they make a generalization of respondents' preference structure
to the population of interest more feasible.
In a typical DCE, respondents are confronted with a choice set of at least two dierent alternatives. The alternatives consist of a combination of dierent levels of attributes that are expected
to inuence people's choice. Since the set of all potential combinations (commonly referred to as

full factorial ) is usually too large for practical purposes, researchers seek to reduce the number of
dierent choice sets by means of

fractional factorial

designs that ensure both the orthogonality of

the dierent dimensions and level balance. Consequently, the manipulated dimensions are independent of each other and each level appears, on average, about the same number of times, ensuring
a maximum level of precision and unbiased estimates (Auspurg and Hinz, 2015).

Doing so, an

ecient identication of causal eects is still possible although not all treatment combinations are
presented to the respondents.
However, DCEs are not free of criticism. While they might be adequate to reveal respondents
preferences, such preferences do not automatically correspond to choices in the real world (Train,
2009).

Likewise, the dimensions in a DCE must contain all the necessary information for re-

spondents to make their decision in the hypothetical situation. If crucial information is lacking,
respondents might resort to unobserved heuristics thatin the best caseintroduce additional
noise and thus lower the statistical precision of estimates or even introduce bias if such heuristics
are systematically associated with one or several of the dimensions in the DCE (Johnson et al.,

2013). It is thus important that all the necessary context to make a decision is provided in a DCE.
At the same time, the complexity of the hypothetical situation should be limited and the number
of experimentally altered dimensions should not be too large.

1

Data
In the present case, each respondent was presented one choice set with three alternatives.
sample choice set is depicted in Figure A1 in the Appendix.
asked to help a friend who needs a new place to stay.

A

In the DCE, respondents were

All three alternatives were described as

suiting their friend and it was thus up to the respondents to make a recommendation. Additional
contextual information about the situation of respondent's hypothetical friend was provided in a
short introduction at the beginning of the DCE. It included her or his household's composition
and income. All the experimentally altered dimensions of the DCE and the situational context are
summarized in Table 1.

[Insert Table 1 here]

Based on existing literature and a quantitative pretest, seven dimensions were manipulated
in the experimental design: the size of the apartment or house (in square meters), the type of
housing (a house, an early 20

th century apartment, and an apartment in a housing block), the

distance to the city centre (in minutes), the rent, an indicator for the neighbourhood's social
and ethnic composition (measured as the type of local stores), whether there are parks or other
recreational amenities nearby, and the physical state of the neighbourhood environment (whether
streets, sidewalks, and gardens are well-kept, have grati, or even garbage). Moreover, the number
of rooms for each of the alternatives and that the dwelling had been renovated in the course of the
last ve years was included as additional but constant information.
Given that the full factorial for this generic DCE was rather large (amounting to
treatment combinations), a fractional factorial
The relative

D-eciency

36 × 2 = 10 458

D-ecient design of 162 choice sets was constructed.

of the nal design was 76.94. This design allows for the identication of

the main eects of all dimensions of interests as well as interactions of the rent dimension with the
size dimension and interactions of the indicator of a neighbourhood's social and ethnic composition
with the physical state of a neighbourhood's environment.
The choice experiment was included in a survey on people's living conditions in four Swiss cities.
Respondents were chosen through a stratied cluster random sampling. In a rst step, administrative neighbourhoods in the cities of Basel, Bern, Winterthur, and Zurich were chosen at random,
using the size of inhabitants in each as a probability weight. This resulted in 77 administrative

neighbourhoods to be included in the survey. These administrative neighbourhoods vary in size
(from roughly 2'000 up to 30'000 inhabitants) and comprise, on average, 11'855 inhabitants. At the
same time, these administrative neighbourhoods have their own history and are well known to inhabitants. In a second step, a total of 100 coordinates within these administrative neighbourhoods
were drawn at random. These random coordinates are the centres around which bespoke neighbourhoods were constructed. Finally, the 20 households closest to this random coordinates were
invited to participate in the survey. If the coordinates corresponded to a housing block with more
than 20 households, the latter were selected at random within that particular housing block. Given
this sampling strategy, the data allows for the construction of geocoded bespoke neighbourhoods
of door-to-door neighbours, nested in larger administrative neighbourhoods in the four cities.
To complete the survey, respondents could either use a paper and pencil or online version of the
questionnaire. The response rate for this mixed-mode survey was about 42%, resulting in 823 data
sets. After deleting observations with missing values on the dependent variable and those with less
than 3 neighbours in bespoke neighbourhoods, this number reduces to 798 observations. Although
the participation was voluntary and no incentives were used, this response rate isat least for
the Swiss contextrather high. Nevertheless, non-response is likely selective. This is especially
relevant when examining the result of the choice experiment for dierent subgroups. Consequently,
a straightforward generalization of the results is not feasible.

However, the combination of an

experimental design with geocoded survey data nevertheless depicts a unique opportunity to study
contextual inuences in the formation of residential preferences.
Both the administrative and the bespoke neighbourhoods vary considerably regarding their ethnic composition. The share of people without Swiss citizenship varies between 16.8% and 54.9% in
administrative and between 0% and 85.71% in bespoke neighbourhoods. Of the respondents in the
sample, 32% were not born in Switzerland and 26.9% do not have Swiss citizenship. Descriptive
statistics of all the measures used in the analysis are available in Table A1 in the appendix.

Methodological approach
Given the setup of the experiment, a choice modelling approach is followed to investigate people's
residential preferences. Assuming that the observed choice in the choice experiment depicts the
alternative

j

to which respondent

i

attributes the highest utility, a natural model to consider is

McFadden's (1974) conditional logit model. This approach models the probability that alternative

j

is chosen by respondent

i

as

eZj β
.
P r(Y = j|Z) = PK
Zk β
k=1 e

(2)

However, such a model only allows for eects of characteristics that dier between alternatives.
While this is no problem for the analysis of the dimensions in the choice experiment, the characteristics of the respondent are constant across alternatives. Likewise, since the DCE in the present
case is a generic rather than a branded choice experiment (Kuhfeld, 2010), respondent main effects do not have any substantial meaning.

2 To assess whether people born abroad dier in their

residential preferences from those born in Switzerland, one thus needs to either include interaction
terms of individual background characteristics and the dimensions of interest or run the analyses
separately for migrants and people born in Switzerland.
Conditional logit models, however, rely on the assumption of an independence of irrelevant alternatives (IAATrain, 2009): For any two alternatives

j

and

k,

the ratio of the choice probabilities

only depends on the dimensions of these alternatives (the common denominator of both choice
probabilities from equation (2) cancels out). Given the generic design of the present choice experiment, this assumption is rather unrealistic. A framework that allows for unrestricted substitution
patterns and random taste variations are mixed logit models.

Mixed logit models express the

choice probabilities in the form

Z
P r(Y = j) =

Lj (β)f (β)dβ,

(3)

where

eVj (β)
Lj (β) = PK
Vk (β)
k=1 e
is the logit choice probability evaluated at parameters
utility that depends on

β

β

and

Vj (β)

is the observed portion of the

(Train, 2009).

In the present context, we take the conditional logit models as a starting point to estimate the
(xed) inuence of the dierent dimensions in the choice experiment on respondents' residential
preferences. In a rst step, the analyses are conducted separately for people with and without a
migration background in order to test whether there is evidence for an ethnic gradient in people's
residential preferences. We then relax the IIA and check for random taste variations in

β

(Train,

2009). More specically, it is evaluated if such a variation can be attributed to particular groups
of respondents, namely whether people with and without a migration background dier in their
evaluations of a potential neighbourhood's social and ethnic composition. Finally, the variation

in

β,

that is, respondents' heterogeneous preferences, are linked to their own bespoke and admin-

istrative neighbourhoods using multilevel generalized linear latent mixed models (Skrondal and
Rabe-Hesketh, 2003). Doing so, it is evaluated to which extent varying preferences might be the
result of dierent experienced neighbourhood conditions.

Results
Assessing people's residential preferences
The rst two columns in Table 2 depict the eects (log odds) of the experimentally altered dimensions on people's housing preferences when using conditional logit models.

Comparing the

results for people who were born in Switzerland with those who were born abroad, we generally
notice a similar pattern of eects.

Both groups prefer larger dwellings.

This eect, however, is

more pronounced for people with a migration background. Likewise, an increasing distance of a
housing option to the city centre is associated with a lower likelihood of choosing that particular
alternative: A one minute increase in the distance leads to a 3% (e
of choosing that alternative.

−0.029

) decrease in the odds

Unsurprisingly, a higher rent decreases the likelihood to choose a

particular housing alternative.
There are, however, some more pronounced dierences between people with and without a
migration background in the evaluation of the type of housing as well as the neighbourhood's
social and ethnic composition. While both groups do not dierentiate between a single house or an
early 20

th century apartment (both are in short supply in Swiss cities), people born in Switzerland

dislike living in a housing block.

On the other hand, people with a migration background do

not discriminate between the three dierent types of housing.

Regarding the social and ethnic

composition of an available housing alternative, people born in Switzerland prefer to live in a
`typically Swiss' neighbourhood, that is, a neighbourhood which is described as mainly featuring
well-known retailers. If the neighbourhood has mainly Turkish and Tamil shops, an indicator for
an ethnically diverse neighbourhood, the odds of preferring that alternative are approximately
60% lower (e

−0.933

).

Surprisingly, this eect is even more pronounced for people not born in

Switzerland. Their odds of preferring a housing alternative in an ethnically mixed neighbourhood
are almost 65% (e

−1.029

) lower. At the same time, people with a migration background also dislike

living in a gentrifying, upper class neighbourhood, in which local businesses are mainly cafés and
small boutiques. Although the eect is in the same direction, the coecient for people born in
Switzerland is not signicant at the conventional 5%-level.
Similar patterns of eects for people with and without a migration background can be found

in the case of the remaining experimentally altered dimensions. Both groups prefer having public
green spaces such as parks close to the their home. Likewise, the indicator of the physical state
of the neighbourhood has similar eects for both groups.

If the neighbourhood of a particular

housing alternative is described to have grati on some walls rather than clean gardens, streets,
and sidewalks, the likelihood of choosing that particular neighbourhood is signicantly lower. This
eect is even more pronounced if the neighbourhood is described to have garbage and bulky waste
on sidewalks and streets.
Finally, although not shown in Table 2, the interaction of a neighbourhood's social and ethnic
composition with the physical state of the neighbourhood is not signicant. Likewise, interacting
the indicator of household composition (presence of school-aged children) with a housing alternative's social and ethnic composition as well as the physical state of the neighbourhood does not
lead to conclusive results either. Moreover, using the relative rent, that is, dividing the rent by the
income of their hypothetical friend leads to the same result as when this contextual information is
not included.

[Insert Table 2 here]

As a more straightforward examination of the eects, respondents' willingness to pay (WTP)
for each of the categorical dimensions in the choice experiment was calculated (Hole, 2007). The
WTP is obtained by dividing the estimated coecient of interest by the cost coecient from the
conditional logit models in Table 2. More specically, the WTP for a change in dimension

k

is

given as

W T Pk = −
where

βC

βk
,
βC

(4)

is the cost parameter, that is, the estimated eect of the rent to pay for a housing

alternative.

3 Figure 2 depicts the result of this exercise. Both respondents born abroad as well

as those born in Switzerland are willing to pay about 400.- Swiss Francs more to avoid living in
an ethnically mixed neighbourhood. Likewise, they would only live in a more auent, gentrifying
neighbourhood if the monthly rent was approximately 200.- Swiss Francs less. This eect, however,
is only marginally signicant for people without a migration background. By far, the biggest eect
can be attributed to the state of the residential environment. Especially people who were not born
in Switzerland are willing to pay up to 600.- Swiss Francs more to live in a neighbourhood with
well-kept gardens and clean streets instead of in a neighbourhood that depicts physical signs of
disorder. Compared to the average rent in the choice experiment (amounting to 2119.- Swiss Francs
per month), this corresponds to a 28.3% higher rent to avoid such, presumably, disadvantaged
neighbourhoods.

[Insert Figure 1 here]

So far, we assumed that the evaluation of dierent attributes and dimensions of the choice
experiment is xed and that respondents show a proportional substitution pattern in line with
the IIA (Train, 2009)at least within the evaluated subgroups of people born in Switzerland and
those born abroad. In the next section, we evaluate this assumption using mixed logit models and
assess the heterogeneity in people's residential preferences.

Accounting for heterogeneous tastes
Some respondents might care more about certain attributes than others do (preference heterogeneity). To account for such heterogeneous tastes, mixed logit models with correlated random eects
were estimated (Train, 2009).

Columns 3 and 4 in Table 2 depict the results of these models.

Alternatively, it would also be possible to model the heterogeneity by scaling the idiosyncratic
error for each respondent (Louviere et al., 2008). Doing so, however, results in an inferior model
t.
While the pattern of the xed eects is roughly the same as in the case of the conditional logit
models, the mixed logit models reveal signicant variation among respondents when evaluating
the indicator of a neighbourhood's social and ethnic composition. This is especially the case when
the neighbourhood is described as being ethnically diverse. Moreover, the xed coecient for a
neighbourhood's ethnic composition is now much larger for people born in Switzerland, indicating
that they are, on average, more likely to dislike living in ethnically mixed neighbourhoods. The
more pronounced heterogeneous tastes when evaluating a neighbourhood's ethnic composition is
likely also due to the crude dierentiation between native born and rst generation migrants: Both
groups are quite heterogeneous. While people born in Switzerland are partly second generation
migrants, the rst generation comprises respondents from neighbouring countries that are very similar to people without any migration background as well as other groups of migrants with a very
distinct social and economic background. Grouping people from (north-)western European countries and those from Anglo-Saxon countries together with those without any migration background
at all, however, leads to very similar results.
The mixed logit model can be used to save individual-level parameters using a simulation approach (Train, 2009). Figure 2 depicts the density of the individual random parameter for both
categories of a neighbourhood's social and ethnic composition. In this regard, it becomes apparent
that people dier considerably in their evaluation of a neighbourhood's social and ethnic composition. While the random parameters are roughly centred around the values of the xed eects

estimates (β̂ ), they depict a considerable spread.

Some observations have positive values, indi-

cating that these respondents regard either a gentrifying, more auent neighbourhood (cafés &
boutiques) or a ethnically mixed neighbourhood (Turkish & Tamil shops) as a desirable residential environment. While the distributions of people with and without a migration background are
almost identical in the case of gentrifying neighbourhoods, they dier somewhat in their response
to an ethnically mixed neighbourhoods. The probability mass of the random eect's distribution
of people born abroad is to the right of the one of people born in Switzerland. Although the vast
amount of the distribution is still below zero, this indicates that people born abroad generally are
less sceptical about living in ethnically mixed neighbourhoods than their native-born counterparts.

[Insert Figure 2 here]

In the remainder of this section it is evaluated to what degree this heterogeneous responses to a
neighbourhood's social and ethnic composition can be explained by respondents' own neighbourhoods. To this end, multilevel generalized linear latent mixed models (GLLAMM  Skrondal and
Rabe-Hesketh, 2003) were estimated.

Evaluating the link to people's own neighbourhood
The last two columns in Table 2 depict the result of allowing for respondents' evaluation of a neighbourhood's social and ethnic composition to vary as a function of their own administrative and
bespoke neighbourhood. However, given the small number of respondents with a migration background and the complexity of such models, running separate models for people born in Switzerland
and those born abroad is not feasible. Instead, the model is estimated for the whole sample.

4 While

the xed parameter estimates are again in line with the eects found in the previous models, the
explanatory power of respondents' own neighbourhood composition varies with the scale at which
such neighbourhoods are constructed.
On the one hand, the second-last model in Table 2 informs us that the evaluation of a housing
alternative's social and ethnic surroundings does not vary over people's current administrative
neighbourhoods. On the other hand, allowing for response heterogeneity at the level of bespoke
neighbourhoods seems to be more promising. In the last model of Table 2, there is a signicant
share of variance that can be attributed to respondents' own bespoke neighbourhoods of their
closest 20 neighbours. This is especially the case for the indicator of a gentrifying, more auent
neighbourhood. A similar result is obtained for the indicator of an ethnically diverse neighbourhood, although it marginally misses statistical signicance at the 5% level. However, since these
results are based on the whole sample, it cannot be ruled out that this association depicts in-

dividual dierences regarding the ethnic background of respondents: Given the levels of ethnic
and social segregation in the real world, neighbours in the bespoke neighbourhoods likely have
similar individual characteristics.

The fact that people born abroad have very similar tastes as

those born in Switzerland, especially regarding their evaluation of a housing alternative's social
and ethnic composition, nevertheless strengthens an interpretation in line with the theoretical argument. This is also supported by the fact that the heterogeneity among individual respondents
was mainly found in their evaluation of the ethnic composition and less in the social composition
of a housing alternative's neighbourhood (models 3 and 4 in Table 2).

Meanwhile, the pattern

is exactly reversed when linking the observed heterogeneity to their experienced neighbourhood
conditions.
Summing up, it has been demonstrated how both native Swiss as well as those born abroad show
similar residential preferences. However, this rst impression, which does not support an ethnic
dierential in people's housing preferences and thus challenges often-articulated views on the causes
of segregation, is somewhat put into perspective when we account for heterogeneous preferences.
It has then been shown how people dier in their evaluations of the social and ethnic composition associated with dierent housing alternatives. Finally, it has been demonstrated how these
heterogeneous preferences can partially be linked to people's currently experienced neighbourhood
conditions.

Discussion
Social and ethnic segregation is often conceptualized as a consequence of individual and household
residential preferences and housing decisions (Clark and Fossett, 2008; Clark, 1991; Schelling,
1971).

Such a view, however, not only neglects structural constraints encountered by dierent

groups when making a housing location decision, but it also tends to treat preferences as exogenous.
Emphasizing that residential preferences are formed within the experienced neighbourhood context
(Bruch and Feinberg, 2017; Bruch and Mare, 2006), this paper proposes an alternative view.
Preferences are conceptualized in a utility maximization perspective in which people evaluate
dierent housing alternatives according to characteristics of the alternatives and person-specic
traits (e.g., according to individual ethnic background).

Moreover, preferences and tastes are

allowed to be inuenced by experienced neighbourhood conditions.
Using geocoded data that allows for the construction of small-scale neighbourhoods including the
20 closest door-to-door neighbours in four Swiss cities and a choice experiment, the paper examined
to which extent the often documented ethnic residential preferences (Clark, 1991; Fossett, 2006;

Ibraimovic and Hess, 2018) can be attributed to respondents' own neighbourhoods. Thus, rather
than asking to which extent ethnic preferences might explain observed levels of social and ethnic
segregation in urban areas, this paper looks at the reverse link of how such segregation patterns
are also a potential cause for the heterogeneity in people's residential and housing preferences. To
this end, this contribution made use of conditional and mixed logit models as well as a multilevel
approach that allows for residential preference heterogeneity to be explained by respondents' own
neighbourhood context (Skrondal and Rabe-Hesketh, 2003; Train, 2009).
Results indicate that people born in Switzerland and those with a migration background do not
dier systematically in their evaluations of a neighbourhood's social and ethnic composition when
making a housing decision in the choice experiment. More importantly, however, the evaluation
of both the ethnic as well as the social environment of a housing alternative's neighbourhood is
heterogeneous: Although people are generally less likely to prefer an ethnically mixed neighbourhood in the choice experiment, there is a considerable share of respondents who evaluated such
neighbourhoods positively.
in Switzerland.

This pattern is especially pronounced in people who were not born

Although this heterogeneity cannot be fully attributed to a (crude) measure of

respondents' own ethnic background, a signicant share of this taste heterogeneity can be linked
to respondents' own bespoke neighbourhoods. At the same time, people's tastes seem not to vary
across administrative neighbourhoods. Consequently, this nding stresses small-scale processes at
the local level in the explanation of people's heterogeneous responses to the ethnic composition
of housing alternatives. Likewise, it also highlights the often documented limitation of using predened geographical measures such as census blocks or wards to assess neighbourhood conditions
(e.g., Coulton et al., 2013; Logan, 2018).
However, there are several limitations to keep in mind. Based on the presented evidence, it cannot be ruled out that a more dierentiated measurement of individual ethnic background would
reveal signicant dierences among ethnic groups. Moreover, the bespoke neighbourhoods in this
study are very small, comprising only the 20 closest households. While this is due to the sampling
strategy of the survey, it also brings the disadvantage of risking a confusion between a contextual
eect and unmeasured individual dierences. Compared to the larger administrative neighbourhoods, neighbours in these small bespoke neighbourhoods are very similar to each other and one
might thus wrongly attribute individual taste heterogeneity that is due to respondents own social and ethnic background to dierences across bespoke neighbourhoods. Finally, in the choice
experiment respondents were asked to make a recommendation for a friend instead of to chose
an adequate housing for themselves. Although this might hinder a straightforward generalization
of the documented preferences, this approach also ensures that respondents abstract more from

their own current housing condition and thus render the estimates more conservative. Similarly,
using descriptions of dierent types of neighbourhood businesses in the choice experiment might
not be the best way to measure people's response to the social and ethnic composition of housing
alternatives' surroundings. At the same time, alternative measures such as the information about
the share of migrant populations (e.g., Ibraimovic and Hess, 2018) might induce social desirability
bias. Likewise, people usually do not judge neighbourhoods by means of such statistical information but rather based on daily experiences with people and the infrastructure they encounter in
the local context.

Nevertheless, a more detailed examination for dierent ethnic groups and at

dierent geographic levels of (bespoke) neighbourhoods would put the results of this study to the
test.
In conclusion, the ndings of this paper put the role of the hypothesized and often documented
ethnic residential preferences into perspective. As a consequence, explanations of residential segregation that focus solely on the role of people's housing and residential preferences might overestimate their relevance. Rather, both researchers as well as policy makers should investigate the
mutual links between experienced neighbourhood conditions, residential mobility decisions, and
segregation patterns more closely. Preferences are not exogenous but are formed within the wider
socio-spatial context, which is the result of dierent social processes such as discriminatory practices of landlords, individual mobility decisions, and perceived neighbourhood change (Auspurg
et al., 2017; Bruch and Feinberg, 2017; van Ham and Clark, 2009). Future research can thus only
benet from accounting for these mutual dependencies by investigating the heterogeneity in people's residential preferences in more detail. However, the evidence presented in this paper relies
on stated rather than revealed preferences (Timmermans et al., 1994). It is likely that situational
constraints have a much bigger impact when studying real-world housing decisions. Meanwhile,
such constraints might also add their share to the explanation of the documented ethnic residential preferences, because dierent social and ethnic groups encounter dierent constraints and
opportunities in the local context when making a housing decision. Consequently, such structural
inuences need to be disentangled from people's preferences.

To do so, future research might

greatly benet from combining stated with revealed preferences to circumvent the shortcomings of
both approaches.

Notes
1 The
2A

literature suggests to experimentally alter ve to nine dimensions (Auspurg and Hinz, 2015).

signicant interaction, for example, of respondents' ethnic background with one of the available alternatives

would only imply that this particular group is more likely to choose, say, option B in the choice experiment,

independently of the dimensions describing that alternative.
3 Likewise,

we could also calculate respondents' WTP with regard to the distance to the city centre. Doing so

reveals the same pattern (not shown).
4 Doing

so for the conditional and the mixed logit models leads to comparable results as the ones obtained for

the native-born subsample, although the eects are generally more signicant due to the larger sample size.

References
Aldén L, Hammarstedt M and Neuman E (2015) Ethnic Segregation, Tipping Behavior, and Native
Residential Mobility.
URL

International Migration Review

49(1): 3669. DOI:10.1111/imre.12066.

http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/imre.12066.

Auspurg K and Hinz T (2015)

Factorial Survey Experiments.

Number 175 in Quantitative Appli-

cations in the Social Science. Thousand Oaks: Sage.

Auspurg K, Hinz T and Schmid L (2017) Contexts and conditions of ethnic discrimination: Evidence from a eld experiment in a German housing market.

Journal of Housing Economics

35(1): 2636. DOI:10.1016/j.jhe.2017.01.003.

Bruch E and Feinberg F (2017) Decision-making processes in social contexts.

Sociology

Annual Review of

43: 207227.

Bruch EE and Mare RD (2006) Neighborhood Choice and Neighborhood Change.

nal of Sociology

American Jour-

112(3): 667709.

Bruch EE and Mare RD (2012) Methodological Issues in the Analysis of Residential Preferences,
Residential Mobility, and Neighborhood Change.

Sociological Methodology

42(1): 103154.

Clark WA and Fossett M (2008) Understanding the social context of the Schelling segregation
model.

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences

105(11):

41094114.

URL

http:

//www.pnas.org/content/105/11/4109.short.
Clark WAV (1991) Residential Preferences and Neighborhood Racial Segregation: A Test of the
Schelling Segregation Model.

Demography

28(1): 1.

Coulton CJ, Jennings MZ and Chan T (2013) How Big is My Neighborhood?
Contextual Eects on Perceptions of Neighborhood Scale.

Psychology

Individual and

American Journal of Community

51(1-2): 140150.

Dieleman FM (2001) Modelling residential mobility; a review of recent trends in research.

of housing and the built environment

16(3-4): 249265.

Journal

Emerson MO, Chai KJ and Yancey G (2001) Does Race Matter in Residential Segregation? Exploring the Preferences of White Americans.
DOI:10.2307/3088879. URL

American Sociological Review

66(6):

922935.

http://www.jstor.org/stable/3088879?origin=crossref.

Flage A (2018) Ethnic and gender discrimination in the rental housing market: Evidence from a
meta-analysis of correspondence tests, 20062017.

Journal of Housing Economics

41: 251273.

DOI:10.1016/j.jhe.2018.07.003.

Fossett M (2006) Ethnic Preferences, Social Distance Dynamics, and Residential Segregation: Theoretical Explorations Using Simulation Analysis.

The Journal of Mathematical Sociology 30(3-4):

185273. DOI:10.1080/00222500500544052.

Hole AR (2007) A comparison of approaches to estimating condence intervals for willingness to
pay measures.

Health Economics

16(8): 827840. DOI:10.1002/hec.1197.

Ibraimovic T and Hess S (2018) A latent class model of residential choice behaviour and ethnic
segregation preferences.

Housing Studies

33(4): 544564. DOI:10.1080/02673037.2017.1373749.

Iceland J and Hernandez E (2017) Understanding trends in concentrated poverty:

Social Science Research

62(1): 7595. DOI:10.1016/j.ssresearch.2016.09.001.

Ioannides YM (1987) Residential Mobility and Housing Tenure Choice.

Economics

19802014.

Regional Science and Urban

17: 265287.

Ioannides YM (2013)

From neighborhoods to nations: The economics of social interactions. Prince-

ton University Press.

Johnson FR, Lancsar E, Marshall D, Kilambi V, Mühlbacher A, Regier DA, Bresnahan BW, Kanninen B and Bridges JF (2013) Constructing Experimental Designs for Discrete-Choice Experiments: Report of the ISPOR Conjoint Analysis Experimental Design Good Research Practices
Task Force.

Value in Health

Kuhfeld WF (2010)

16(1): 313.

Marketing research methods in SAS.

Cary, NC: SAS Institute Inc.

URL

http://support.sas.com/techsup/technote/mr2010.pdf.
Lee BA, Oropesa R and Kanan JW (1994) Neighborhood Context and Residential Mobility.

mography

De-

31(2): 249270.

Logan JR (2018) Relying on the Census in Urban Social Science:.
540549. DOI:10.1111/cico.12331. URL

City & Community

http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/cico.12331.

17(3):

Louviere JJ, Street D, Burgess L, Wasi N, Islam T and Marley AA (2008) Modeling the choices of
individual decision-makers by combining ecient choice experiment designs with extra preference
information.

Journal of Choice Modelling

1(1): 128164. DOI:10.1016/S1755-5345(13)70025-3.

Lévy-Garboua L, Meidinger C and Rapoport B (2006) Chapter 7 The Formation of Social Preferences: Some Lessons from Psychology and Biology. In:

Altruism and Reciprocity,

volume 1. Elsevier.

Handbook of the Economics of Giving,

ISBN 978-0-444-50697-9, pp. 545613.

DOI:

10.1016/S1574-0714(06)01007-4.

McFadden D (1974) Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior. In: Zarembka P
(ed.)

Frontiers in Econometrics. New York:

Academic Press, pp. 105142.

McFadden D (1978) Modeling the choice of residential location.

Transportation Research Record

673: 7277.

Musterd S (2005) Social and Ethnic Segregation in Europe: Levels, Causes, and Eects.

of Urban Aairs

Journal

27(3): 331348.

Rokem J and Vaughan L (2019) Geographies of ethnic segregation in Stockholm:
mobility and co-presence in shaping the `diverse' city.

Urban Studies

The role of

56(12): 24262446. DOI:

10.1177/0042098018795561.

Rossi PH and Shlay AB (1982) Residential mobility and public policy issues: Why families move
revisited.

Journal of Social Issues

Sampson RJ (2012)

38(3): 2134.

Great American City. Chicago and the enduring neighborhood eect.

Chicago:

Chicago University Press.

Schelling TC (1971) Dynamic Models of Segregation.

Journal of Mathematical Sociology

1(1):

143186.

Skrondal A and Rabe-Hesketh S (2003) Multilevel logistic regression for polytomous data and
rankings.

Psychometrika

68(2): 267287. DOI:10.1007/BF02294801.

Timmermans H, Molin E and Van Noortwijk L (1994) Housing choice processes: Stated versus
revealed modelling approaches.

Journal of Housing and the Built Environment

9(3): 215227.

Timmermans H and Noortwijk Lv (1995) Context dependencies in housing choice behavior.

ronment and Planning A 27(2):
Train KE (2009)

Envi-

181192.

Discrete choice methods with simulation.

2 edition. Cambridge University Press.

van Ham M and Clark WAV (2009) Neighbourhood Mobility in Context: Household Moves and
Changing Neighbourhoods in the Netherlands.

Environment and Planning

41(6): 14421459.

Wang D and Li Sm (2006) Socio-economic dierentials and stated housing preferences in
Guangzhou, China.

Habitat International

30(2): 305326.

Weinberg DH (1979) The Determinants of Intra-Urban Household Mobility.

Urban Economics

Regional Science and

9: 219246.

Zangger C and Becker R (2019) Experiments in the sociology of education: causal inference and
estimating causal eects in sociological research on education.

Handbook on the Sociology of Education,
ward Elgar, pp. 153171.

In:

Becker R (ed.)

Research

Research Handbooks in Sociology. Cheltenham: Ed-

