Chemosociality in Multispecies Worlds
Endangered Frogs and Toxic Possibilities in Sydney
EBEN KIRKSEY
Alfred Deakin Institute, Deakin University, Australia

Abstract

Chemosocial communities have formed in Sydney, Australia, as a result of

encounters with industrial pollution. If biosociality involves social relationships that emerge
from biological conditions, then chemosociality involves altered, attenuated, or augmented
relationships that emerge with chemical exposures. Some social groups have coalesced
around place-based political action, while other chemosocial associations have proved to be
ephemeral, evanescent, and conditional. Building on earlier work by multispecies ethnographers who have studied social relationships among humans and animals, this article follows
chemicals into more-than-human realms. Fragile multispecies worlds have emerged in a
complex landscape shaped by chemical weapons industries, municipal landﬁlls, government
remediation programs, real estate speculation, and a multitude of chemical and biological
agents. Legacy dumping grounds in the Sydney Olympic Park have become habitat for the
green and golden bell frog, an endangered species. While the normal world order of this frog
has been lost with the spread of a deadly fungal disease, toxic chemicals have enabled the
continuation of its social life. Temporary spaces of immunity have emerged where life is protected and threats are negated by poisonous compounds that double as a cure.
Keywords

chemoethnography, extinction studies, afterlife, multispecies ethnography, che-

mopower

Introduction

T

he Sydney Olympic Park, a polluted industrial zone that was remediated for the 2000
Summer Games, has become an unexpected site of reemergence for green and

golden bell frogs (Ranoidea aurea), a threatened species that has experienced catastrophic

declines.1 While many amphibians have been harmed by toxic chemical exposures—
such as pesticides from agricultural production, industrial runoff, and hormones in
waterways—bell frogs have persisted here in polluted areas while vanishing from many
protected conservation zones.2 This article brings together insights of chemoethnography

1. Pyke and White, “Review of the Biology.”
2. Stuart et al., “Status and Trends”; Stockwell, “Impact and Mitigation,” 26.

Environmental Humanities 12:1 (May 2020)

DOI 10.1215/22011919-8142198 © 2020 Eben Kirksey
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of a Creative Commons license (CC BY-NC-ND 3.0).

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

24

Environmental Humanities 12:1 / May 2020

and multispecies studies to trace the interactions of biological and chemical species
through shadowlands—a term introduced by Val Plumwood to describe the unrecognized
places that provide material and ecological support to market economies and modern
dreamworlds.3 Reaching across conventional disciplinary divides I ask a series of questions: Which species are ﬂourishing in polluted shadowlands? What conditions of social
life have emerged in polluted landscapes and waterways amid the interactions of multiple chemical species? How should we care for endangered animals whose altered lifeways are now dependent on human-produced toxins?
Drawing inspiration from studies of human social worlds, one might characterize
the world of green and golden bell frogs as an arena of shared discourse—where frogs
sing to one another in choruses—and a space of social action where they have sex and
“do things together.”4 In the Sydney Olympic Park these endangered frogs have a mode
of life and sociality that has been altered by chemical by-products. This species is living
with conditions of alterlife that have been “recomposed by the molecular productions of
capitalism,” to use a key idea from Michelle Murphy. “Alterlife names life already altered, which is also life open to alteration.”5
Altered bodies, subjectivities, and affects often emerge with toxic exposures.6
Among humans, nonnormative states of “cognition, proprioception, emotion, agitation,
muscle strength, tunnel perception, joint pain, and nocturnality” have emerged from
chemical encounters, according to Mel Y. Chen.7 Even while chemical exposures enfeeble bodies and minds, they can also create ongoing possibilities for life.8 Speculating
about subjective experiences and embodied phenomenologies across the species interface, this article characterizes an alter-world for endangered frogs that has emerged in
the artiﬁcial wetlands of the Sydney Olympic Park.9 The conditions of social life that
have emerged in this microcosm illustrate a phenomenon that has become ubiquitous
in the era of late industrialism: chemosociality.
Chemosociality designates the altered, attenuated, or augmented relationships
that emerge with chemical exposures. Encounters with toxins can produce intoxication,
altered social experiences, and a shifting sense of normality for both humans and other
animals.10 Social worlds that develop from these shared exposures often involve
creativity—at least in human realms—as people learn to live with non-normative personalities, idiosyncratic subjectivities, and quirky memories.11 Like the cultural innovation

3. Plumwood, “Shadow Places.”
4. Clarke and Star, Social Worlds, 113.
5. Murphy, “Alterlife and Decolonial Chemical Relations,” 497.
6. Agard-Jones, “Bodies in the System.”
7. Chen, Animacies, 196.
8. Roberts, “Reﬂections”; Derrida, Dissemination; Stengers, Cosmopolitics I, 29.
9. Buchanan, Bussolini, and Chrulew, “General Introduction.”
10. Murphy, Sick Building Syndrome; Shapiro, “Attuning to the Chemosphere”; Pollock, “Queering Endocrine Disruption,”185.
11. Jain, Malignant, 219; Kafer, Feminist, Queer, Crip, 15.

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

Kirksey / Chemosociality in Multispecies Worlds

25

that took place in colonial contact zones amid “conditions of coercion, radical inequality, and intractable conﬂict,”12 social improvisation is a hallmark of communities that
have formed as by-products of industrial chemistry.
Chemosociality is a kindred concept to biosociality. In the words of Adriana Petryna, biosociality engenders “novel social groupings bound by the hopes, fears, fates,
and politics that have been made available to sufferers on the basis of biological knowledge.”13 While Paul Rabinow initially described new forms of biosocial identity that
emerged with DNA testing technologies,14 Deborah Bird Rose expanded the idea to include claims of political belonging and personhood that arise from illnesses such as
HIV.15 Some biosocial communities have been oriented toward activism aimed at securing treatment or compensation,16 while other groups have emerged from genetic tests
that reveal evidence of shared genealogical identities.17 Chemosociality has taken on
varied forms and political orientations amid fraught colonial, racial, gendered, and military histories.18 Among humans, new virtual and place-based chemosocial communities have formed to campaign against industrial polluters and toxic dumps.19 Shared
chemical exposures in other contexts, like ephemeral clouds of exhaust emitted by a
passing vehicle, can instead produce ﬂeeting moments of recognition and solidarity
that never resolve into political action.20
By introducing the idea of chemosociality in the context of biological communities
and ecological assemblages, I insist that modern humans are not exceptional in our
dependence on synthetic chemistry.21 Multispecies ethnographers have long studied
sociality in spaces where the provision of food changes relationships among animals,22
where contagious fears leap across species boundaries,23 and where humans patiently
dwell together with animals in close proximity.24 As ethnographers start to follow
chemicals through complex landscapes—shaped by industrial production, modern war,
urban planning, and real estate speculation—it is important to not just treat the environment as a backdrop to human agency, industry, and action. It is critical to consider
emergent chemosocial assemblages in multispecies worlds.

12. Pratt, Imperial Eyes, 6.
13. Petryna, Life Exposed, 14.
14. Rabinow, Making PCR, 99.
15. Rose, Wild Dog Dreaming, 147.
16. Epstein, Impure Science; Petryna, Life Exposed.
17. Rose, Politics of Life Itself, 176; Nelson, Social Life of DNA.
18. Murphy, “Alterlife,” 497.
19. Shapiro and Kirksey, “Chemo-Ethnography,” 484.
20. Choy and Zee, “Condition.”
21. Haraway, When Species Meet, 11.
22. Franklin, Dolly Mixtures.
23. Song, Pigeon Trouble.
24. Candea, “I Fell in Love with Carlos the Meerkat.”

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

26

Environmental Humanities 12:1 / May 2020

Toxic Sydney
When Australia won the bid to host the 2000 Olympics, the local committee began
developing an unexpected site: the industrial precinct of Homebush in Sydney. The history of industry in this area began in the late eighteenth century, shortly after the colonial government divvied up land belonging to local Aboriginal groups, the Wanng-al
clans, and gave it to white settlers. John Blaxland acquired 520 acres in 1806 where he
established a tweed mill, a salt works, a ﬂourmill, and a limekiln with white workmen
as well as Chinese and women servants.25 The ﬁrst large-scale industrial enterprise in
Homebush was a slaughterhouse. According to the Olympic Park website, by 1923 the
Homebush Abattoir “was the biggest of its kind in the Commonwealth” with upward of
1,600 employees and a “killing capacity of 18,000 to 20,000 sheep, 1,500 cattle, 2,000 pigs
and 1,300 calves per day.”26 Blood, manure, and other waste caused algal blooms and
began attracting large sharks to Sydney Harbour. A building boom in Sydney led to the
establishment of the State Brickworks in 1925, which began mining slate in Homebush,
carving out a 23.5 acre open-pit mine. The brickworks further polluted waterways with
silt. Gradually workers dug out a deep quarry, which became known as the brick pit.
The landscape became dotted with oil reﬁneries, paint factories, landﬁlls, a gasworks,
pesticide factories, and warehouses for storing naval munitions.
Chemosocial communities formed in other parts of Sydney in the 1970s when
activists in Botany, a predominantly white neighborhood, began to campaign against
Orica—a chemicals company that was stockpiling hexachlorobenzene and other toxic
wastes.27 When Sydney won the bid for the Olympic Games, city planners saw an opportunity to continue the work of these grassroots activists on a bigger scale. They chose
Homebush for the Olympics because they wanted to clean up the area and found an
opportunity for funding the remediation work, according to Gavin Birch, a geological
scientist who served on the Olympic Environmental Committee. “The area was originally an intertidal wetland,” Birch said, and in earlier eras it was seen as a swampy
wasteland “so they ﬁlled it in with anything they could ﬁnd—from garbage to building
materials, to drums [of ] very highly toxic organic pollutants.”
In the run up to the Olympics, Gavin Birch produced knowledge in Sydney’s shadowlands. Birch worked with his PhD students to take 4,513 core samples of soil in
Homebush where they found elevated levels of toxic heavy metals—including chromium, copper, lead, and zinc.28 “Some of the most toxic substances were actually located in 44 gallon drums,” Birch said. “They just piled some of the most awful stuff into
these drums and deposited them in wetlands.” Union Carbide, which had been

25. Sydney Olympic Park, “Colonial History.” www.sopa.nsw.gov.au/About-Us/History-and-Heritage
/Colonial-History (accessed March 12, 2019).
26. Sydney Olympic Park, “Industrial History.” www.sopa.nsw.gov.au/About-Us/History-and-Heritage
/Industrial-History (accessed March 12, 2019).
27. Brown, “Ratbag of Botany”; James, “Taking Us for Village Idiots”; Hillier et al., “Our Battle.”
28. Suh et al., “Spatial Distribution.”

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

Kirksey / Chemosociality in Multispecies Worlds

27

manufacturing DDT and Agent Orange for the Vietnam War on the nearby Rhodes Peninsula, dumped waste in Homebush Bay. After Union Carbide shuttered their plant in
1985, the legacy of chemical warfare lingered in the water.29
Some of the synthetic chemicals that were manufactured in Homebush generated
what Deborah Bird Rose calls double death: a process that uncouples life and death, diminishing death’s capacity to turn dying back toward the living.30 At sites like Homebush Bay where highly toxic organic chemicals accumulated dangerous waste disrupted
cycles of life and death. As toxins accumulated in bodies and ecosystems, relationships
among a diversity of interdependent beings began to unravel.31
Some by-products of industry, such as chromium and lead, were accidental toxins
that inadvertently spread death through ecological communities. Other chemicals,
such as Agent Orange and DDT, were deadly by design. Mosquitoes and other unwanted
insects were targeted with large scale DDT spraying campaigns in Australia and many
other parts of the world. Agent Orange was developed by the US Department of the
Army. It was used in Vietnam as a broad spectrum poison to kill crops and destroy
some 5.5 million acres of forest—depriving the Vietnamese people of food and eliminating vegetation concealing soldiers.32 When Vietnamese refugees ﬂed to Australia during
the war, many settled in urban areas near Homebush Bay. During the 1980s and 1990s
Homebush became a shadow place for white upper-class Australians whose geopolitical
adventures and everyday lives were supported by pollution that disproportionately impacted Vietnamese migrants as well as Lebanese, Chinese, Indian, Pakistani, Afghan,
and Cambodian communities.33
James Nguyen, a Vietnamese artist who moved to Australia when he was eight,
lived near these toxic sites in a suburb called Villawood. In the early 1990s he remembers having family picnics and riding his bike along the Duck River, a tributary that
runs into Homebush Bay. Multilingual signs told the public not to ﬁsh or swim in the
waterways (ﬁg. 1), but after school Nguyen would often play in the shadowlands—in a
maze of concrete channels, underground tunnels, and storm drains at the headwaters
of the Duck River. Along with his childhood friends—mostly other immigrants from
Southeast Asia and the Middle East—he found a zone of toxic sovereignty and freedom,
away from the watchful eyes of parents and the state.34 Like Aboriginal children who
swam, ﬁshed, and played in the nearby Georges River—despite similar warnings about
pollution—these children found a space of freedom from dominant white culture.35

29. Birch and Taylor, Contaminant, 45.
30. Rose, Wild Dog Dreaming.
31. Carson, Silent Spring, 22; Rose, Wild Dog Dreaming, 87.
32. Fuller, “US Moves to Address Agent Orange.”
33. Plumwood, “Shadow Places,” 141.
34. Povinelli, Geontologies.
35. Goodall and Cadzow, Rivers and Resilience, 192–93.

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

28

Environmental Humanities 12:1 / May 2020

Figure 1. Fishing and swimming is prohibited in many parts of the Sydney Harbour because of legacy
pollution. Photograph courtesy of James Nguyen.

“It is ironic that the Vietnamese migrant community chose to settle in this particular part of Sydney,” Nguyen said, “where chemical warfare continues to be a specter.”
Research shows that tidal ﬂows in the Duck River have transported dioxins from Agent
Orange and DDT production facilities into the waterway.36 In 2018 Nguyen collaborated
with his aunt, Nguyen Thi Kim Nhung, to make a ﬂoating charcoal wreath. They walked
in open toed sandals—through mangrove sprouts at the former Union Carbide dump
site—to place the wreath in the open waters of Homebush Bay. Nguyen said, “The performance was a symbolic gesture to reckon with the stories and memories of war in a
new home where the chemical agents of war were manufactured.” Nguyen thinks
about his own possible chemical exposures in Sydney as strangely comforting since
migration comes with the “guilt of leaving behind people who were exposed to war and
its social and chemical legacies.”37
The diverse chemosocial communities of Sydney have taken different forms—
shaped by topology, hydrology, the built environment, the half-life of toxins, cultural
locations, historical circumstances, and privileges associated with race and class. The
furtive spaces of sovereignty and autonomy claimed by Asian and Aboriginal children
differ markedly from the public political forums created by adult white activists who
campaigned for cleanups in other parts of the city.38 Chemosocial relations in the

36. James Nguyen, quoted in Birch and Taylor, Contaminant.
37. Author interview with James Nguyen, May 17, 2018, Sydney, Australia.
38. Brown, “Ratbag of Botany”; James, “Taking Us for Village Idiots”; Hillier et al., “Our Battle.”

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

Kirksey / Chemosociality in Multispecies Worlds

29

neighborhoods surrounding the shadowlands where these children played involved
ephemeral moments of recognition—shared looks when strangers on the street inhaled
pungent industrial odors or read occasional newspaper articles about cancer clusters.39
“As recent migrants we were politically disenfranchised,” said Nguyen. “We did not
have the political or cultural capital to transform moments of recognition into publically
visible action.” Even still, some of Nguyen’s childhood friends have since assumed
important roles in society—as senior staff members of elected ofﬁcials, as urban planners and architects—where they have quietly inﬂuenced government policy about
industrial pollution.
Some industrial chemicals did not obey systems of privilege in Sydney.40 As studies of the harbor sediments were conducted, toxins were found in the waterways of upscale neighborhoods: aldrin was accumulating in Double Bay, heavy metals in Mosman
Bay, and DDT in Neutral Bay.41 As imperceptible toxic exposures were rendered perceptible, political and economic forces aligned to deal with legacies of industrial pollution,
colonialism, militarism, and capitalism. Increasingly concrete chemosocial formations
emerged from neighborhoods that were connected by shared toxic waterways. People
from relatively privileged social locations leveraged their access to public forums and
policy makers.42
In the late 1990s, Sydney’s political leaders used the Olympic Games as an opportunity to muster resources and develop new practices of responsibility toward the legacy of industrial pollution. Ofﬁcials began experimenting with “alter-modes of collaboration and study that simultaneously aimed at world-building and dismantlement.”43
Sydney’s Olympic Games opened up hopes in blasted landscapes, new potentials for future life, as toxic waste dumps of the recent past were dismantled and replaced with
new infrastructures and architectures of care.44
Before construction began Janet Laurence, a renowned Australian environmental
artist, was part of a charrette—with international architects, designers, curators, and
environmental scientists—to imagine possible futures for the Sydney Olympic Park. “At
the charrette we devised the idea of the ‘Green Games’ and started laying plans for a totally green autonomous village with some of the best solar panel and geothermal experts in the world,” Laurence said. But a sudden shift in the political landscape interrupted the planning process. “We were developing a totally idealistic plan, but then the
government changed and John Howard was elected as Australia’s Prime Minister.” Howard was from the conservative party and was generally opposed to environmental
conservation as well as multiculturalism and nonwhite immigrants. Sydney’s Green

39. Choy and Zee, “Condition”; Shapiro and Kirksey, “Chemo-Ethnography.”
40. Murphy, “Uncertain Exposures.”
41. Birch and Taylor, Contaminant, 39.
42. Brown, “Ratbag of Botany”; James, “Taking Us for Village Idiots”; Hillier et al., “Our Battle.”
43. Murphy, “Alterlife,” 497.
44. Kirksey, Brodine, and Shapiro, “Hope in Blasted Landscapes”; Shotwell, Against Purity.

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

30

Environmental Humanities 12:1 / May 2020

Games proceeded, but in a political landscape that was much friendlier to real estate
developers and the business community.45
Conﬂicting narratives emerged during the remediation process, according to Anne
Loxley who curated the public art at the Sydney Olympic Park. “Swarms of people in
hazchem suits would be working on things, and sometimes there would be this terrible
smell,” she remembers. Loxley, who is now Senior Curator at Sydney’s Museum of Contemporary Art (MCA), wondered, “How safe is it here? What is happening?” Boosters of
the remediation process claimed “this is going to be a brilliant new asset for Sydney
and the State” and Loxley “wanted to believe that it was going to be great, it was going
to be wonderful.”46 Reﬂecting back on the project, she said that the government was involved in the fabrication of hope in a historically disadvantaged area of Sydney, a place
where politicians are now trying to court votes.
Even as some imagined futures became increasingly ephemeral, concrete hopes
emerged in this postindustrial landscape as the hydrology and topography were reengineered with the goal of containing legacy pollution. The site contained over 160 hectares of contaminated waste that included power station ash, demolition rubble, asbestos, domestic garbage, dredging material from the river, and industrial hydrocarbons.
Rather than export this waste to other places in Australia or abroad, rather than dispersing the slow violence of chemical agents across time and space, the Olympic Environmental Committee insisted on local accountability and responsibility.47 Landﬁlls
were dug up and rebuilt with new containment technologies. Hazardous chemical
wastes—such as DDT, dieldrin, chlordane, endrin, and DDD—were treated on-site.
Treated toxins were consolidated inside capped and lined landﬁlls built to minimize
runoff into waterways.48 Flows of contaminated water were rerouted into an infrastructure of pumps and treatment facilities. This shadow place became a public parkland
dotted with remediated waste mounds—monuments to responsibility amid the toxic
legacies of capitalism and modern war.49
The remediation project at the Sydney Olympic Park was undergirded by modernist optimism about the material world.50 Hydrologists, geologists, and engineers assumed that their knowledge of chemical interactions, soil structure, and water ﬂows
could contain deadly agents and mitigate risks to socially acceptable levels. Boundaries
and borders, however, are often porous and permeable.51 Calculations about chemical

45. Author interview with Janet Laurence, August 29, 2018, Sydney, Australia.
46. Author interview with Anne Loxley, September 25, 2018, Sydney, Australia.
47. Nixon, Slow Violence, 2.
48. Sydney Olympic Park Authority, “Fact Sheet—Remediation.” January 2014. www.sopa.nsw.gov.au//media/ﬁles/sopa/sopa/publications/fact-sheets/web_fs_remediation_2015.pdf.
49. Plumwood, “Shadow Places,” 146.
50. Shapiro and Kirksey, “Chemo-Ethnography,” 488.
51. Jackie Brookner, “Transdisciplinary and Porosity.” www.multispecies-salon.org/transdisciplinarity
-porosity/ (accessed March 12, 2019).

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

Kirksey / Chemosociality in Multispecies Worlds

31

interactions often fail to account for the contingency of the world.52 But, as this infrastructure failed to completely contain legacy pollution from the twentieth century, new
opportunities for ﬂourishing emerged for endangered frogs.
Bell Frogs in the Brick Pit
Today one of the iconic sites in the Sydney Olympic Park is the Brick Pit, a colossal hole
created by the early twentieth-century brickworks. An elevated walkway now encircles
this pit and frames encounters with a spectacular postindustrial landscape. The shadowlands have been turned into a tourist attraction. New memory practices have emerged
with park signs, websites, and walking tours that reckon with the long history of legal
and illegal dumping in Homebush Bay. An elderly white gentleman whom I met on a circular walkway encircling the Brick Pit told me about the pesticides, paints, oils, and resins made at nearby factories. “The stench was terrible,” he said. “They thought that the
tide would take it away.”53 He situated historic toxic exposures within an account of
class inequality and local infrastructures, saying, “Workers in this industry didn’t have
access to major roadways or public transport, so they had to live close to where they
worked.”
The Brick Pit was an industrial wasteland that served as a garbage dump from
1977 to 1982, after brick production ceased. A layer of “municipal garbage and putrescible waste,” some 45 feet deep, was removed from the pit in preparation for the Sydney
Olympic Games.54 Soil samples revealed concentrations of copper, lead, zinc, and chromium ranging beyond the threshold levels where adverse biological effects are expected
to occur more frequently.55 The presence of green and golden bell frogs in the Brick Pit
was initially puzzling for conservationists. Unexpectedly, during the remediation efforts, puddles became ephemeral social spaces and breeding habitats for this endangered animal.
Green and golden bell frogs were once one of the most common frogs in urban
areas of Sydney with a wide distribution along the eastern coast of Australia. These
frogs were once so abundant that they were fed to snakes in zoos and sacriﬁced for dissection in schools. This adaptable animal became an invasive species after being introduced to New Zealand, New Hebredes, and New Caledonia.56 Worldwide declines in frog
populations were ﬁrst noticed in the 1970s—particularly in Australia and the Americas.
Upward of 165 species of amphibians have been reported extinct. About 1,895 amphibian species, more than one-third of all described frogs, salamanders, and caecilians, are

52. Kirksey et al., “Hope in Blasted Landscapes.”
53. This character is a composite to preserve anonymity and narrative ﬂow. Recordings were made with
permission and have been accurately transcribed.
54. Suh, Birch, and Hughes, “Hydrochemistry in Reclaimed Lands,” 742.
55. Suh et al., “Spatial Distribution and Source,” 60; Department of Environment and Conservation, “Assessment Levels,” 25.
56. Tyler, “Introduction and Current Distribution.”

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

32

Environmental Humanities 12:1 / May 2020

formally designated as threatened or endangered.57 Green and golden bell frogs experienced catastrophic declines throughout eastern Australia—disappearing from over 90
percent of their former range in the 1980s and 1990s.58 The government formally classiﬁed this species as endangered in 1995.59
Many different hypotheses emerged to explain the sudden decline of green and golden
bell frogs and other amphibians—global warming, deforestation, habitat loss, pesticides—
all putting humans at the center of the story.60 Anthropocentric stories gave way to a
more complex multispecies story when a new microscopic pathogen, a kind of fungus
called chytrid, was described in 1999.61 The same year that the emergent fugal disease
was described a green and golden bell frog mortality event took place in the Sydney
Olympic Park with seventeen frogs conﬁrmed dead as a result of chytrid infection.62
One interpretive panel on the Brick Pit walkway notes that there are winners and
losers in the urban environment: “Some native species are thriving by living off our
urban lifestyles. Seagulls, ravens, magpies, red-back spiders, brown snakes and bulrushes
are doing okay because of us. Green and golden bell frogs are winners in the Brick Pit.
They appear in large numbers where earth has been disturbed and degraded. . . . But
there’s another side to the story. It’s all very well that some opportunistic species thrive
in cities, but for every one that does there are hundreds that don’t. Losses still exceed
gains.” Even as an endangered frog species is persisting in this postindustrial landscape,
other organisms are failing. Only some species are able to persist in conditions of alterlife, with life altered by chemical exposures and histories of colonialism, warfare, and
capitalism.63
The patterns of bell frog deaths were counterintuitive in the Olympic Park and the
broader Sydney region: they were dying off in protected conservation zones, and persisting in sites with legacy industrial pollution.64 Rather than simply preserve the
past—rather than just use sites like the Brick Pit and nearby mounds of industrial
waste as cultural mnemonic devices—the Sydney Olympic Park began to manage ongoing processes of chemical decay, physical change, and biological emergence. In Curated
Decay Caitlin DeSilvey notes that the emergence of new forms of growth is contingent
on decomposition that channels death back into life through the action of enzymes
and microorganisms.65 Rather than simply celebrate emergent ecological dynamics

57. Amphibian Ark, “Frightening Statistics.” www.amphibianark.org/the-crisis/frightening-statistics/ (accessed March 12, 2019).
58. Pyke and White, “Review of the Biology.”
59. Australian Government, “Species Proﬁle and Threats Database.” www.environment.gov.au/cgi-bin
/sprat/public/publicspecies.pl?taxon_id=1870 (accessed March 12, 2019).
60. Bateson, Peripheral Visions; Pyke and White, “Review of the Biology”; Shotwell, Against Purity.
61. Kirksey, Emergent Ecologies.
62. Penman et al., “Impact of a Chytrid-Related Mortality Event.”
63. Murphy, “Alterlife,” 497.
64. Threlfall, “Do Green and Golden Bell Frogs (Litoria aurea) Occupy Habitats with Fungicidal Properties?”; Stockwell, “Impact and Mitigation.”
65. DeSilvey, Curated Decay, 11.

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

Kirksey / Chemosociality in Multispecies Worlds

33

Figures 2 and 3. An elevated walkway at the Sydney Olympic Park allows visitors to view the habitat of the
green and golden bell frog. High-rise apartment buildings are sprouting up in the landscape just beyond this
postindustrial conservation zone. Photograph by Eben Kirksey.

within a landscape shaped by chemical pollution, researchers began making situated
judgements about the effects and actions of particular chemical agents and biological
species.66
Chytrid fungi were determined to be the main threat to green and golden bell frogs
in the Sydney Olympic Park, along with introduced mosquito ﬁsh (Gambusia sp.) and native birds such as kookaburras (Dacelo sp.) and white ibis (Threskiornis). Anecdotal reports from Latin America suggest that the spread of chytrids can be prevented by garden variety pollutants such as antibiotics, laundry detergent, and other soaps. These

66. Kirksey, Emergent Ecologies, 218–19.

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

34

Environmental Humanities 12:1 / May 2020

low grade pollutants seem to have structured emergent ecosystems where some endangered frogs persist in Costa Rican coffee plantations and urban waterways.67 Sydney
Olympic Park is one of the ﬁrst sites where biologists have started to intensively study
a basic applied research question: Can toxic pollution cure frogs infected with pathogenic chytrid fungi?
Caragh G. Threlfall, then an undergraduate student at the University of Wollongong, began systematically investigating the impacts of pollution on green and golden
bell frogs with her 2006 honors thesis. She found very high concentrations of copper
and zinc in locations with sizable populations of green and golden bell frogs.68 Working
with laboratory cultures of the kind of chytrid that kills frogs (B. dendrobatidis), she
found inconclusive results. Copper seemed to initially reduce the growth and reproduction of the fungus at a very low dose (0.5 ppm), but after 14 and 28 days the growth in
the experimental treatments caught up to the untreated control cultures.69 Subsequent
studies with other kinds of chytrids found that heavy metals have the properties of Plato’s pharmakon: these poisons have unstable attributes with effects that can shift from
one extreme to the other depending on the dose, the circumstances, or the context.70
Copper and other chemical waste from industrial production have structured an
alter-world in the Sydney Olympic Park where green and golden bell frogs persist. After
an epidemic disease destroyed their normal world order, social life for these amphibians only became possible within toxic chemical ecologies.71 Green and golden bell frogs
formed chemosocial communities in polluted human environments. These once-robust
animals have become fragile forms of alterlife.72 One conservationist told me, “All of the
old guys who used to work on the landscaping here, said: ‘If you just dug a hole they
would be breeding in it.’ They were everywhere.” As different construction projects
came and went ecologists learned about this frog along the way.73 While working in a
dynamic human-built landscape, with a shifting base of knowledge, conservationists
tried to stabilize this frog’s world.
Life Support Technologies
At the Sydney Olympic Park I found conservation biologists and hydrogeologists who
were trying to recreate a habitat for endangered frogs, while managing a massive

67. Kirksey, Emergent Ecologies, 161.
68. Threlfall, “Do Green and Golden Bell Frogs (Litoria aurea) Occupy Habitats with Fungicidal Properties?,” iv.
69. Threlfall, “Do Green and Golden Bell Frogs (Litoria aurea) Occupy Habitats with Fungicidal Properties?,” 56; see also Threlfall et al., “Do Green and Golden Bell Frogs Litoria Aurea Occupy Habitats with Fungicidal Properties?”
70. Henderson et al., “Copper (II), Lead (II), and Zinc (II) Reduce Growth”; Derrida, Dissemination; Stengers, Cosmopolitics I, 29.
71. Chen, Animacies, 196.
72. Murphy, “Alterlife,” 497.
73. Bateson, Peripheral Visions.

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

Kirksey / Chemosociality in Multispecies Worlds

35

industrial pollution cleanup effort. The park is publicly funded and is run by a team of
civil servants with diverse expertise. Rather than try to restore an imagined past, ecologists, engineers, urban planners, and architects have collaborated here to craft alterfutures.74 The park staff developed new infrastructures that tried to purify water of
chemical and biological contaminants.75 The park staff tried to make the endangered
frogs live (faire vivre) while applying a politics of death to predators and pathogens that
presented an existential threat to this species. Classic strategies of biopower were applied to the domain of biology itself.76
Cutting-edge digital technologies and DNA sequencing protocol were pared with
gardening equipment and everyday infrastructures to create and sustain microcosms
for the green and golden bell frog at the Sydney Olympic Park. Over two hundred artiﬁcial ponds were created during the massive environmental remediation and restoration
program ahead of the Olympics. The ponds were purpose-built for this endangered species. But, only a handful of the ponds actually became home to a robust population of
green and golden bell frogs. Mesh frog fences were erected to keep animals off roadways. Underpasses were built to give them the option of passing underneath. Many
frogs have been microchipped, with the same technology commonly used in dogs and
cats, to track their movements and population dynamics. DNA testing was used to monitor the genetic diversity of frog populations and also the distribution of pathogenic
chytrid fungi. But, the frogs largely stayed put—ignoring the massive infrastructure
that was constructed around them.
If Foucault had visited the Sydney Olympic Park, perhaps he would have seen
forms of life that have been seized and imprisoned by biopolitics—creatures that have
been reduced to organic matter barely capable of reproduction.77 Here animals were isolated from historical and ecological forces assailing them, separated from worldly happenings.78 Bird nets, keeping out predators such as kookaburras and white ibis, stretch
over some of the plastic-lined artiﬁcial ponds. Elaborate pumping mechanisms that
periodically drain the frog ponds undergird the Sydney Olympic Park to kill ﬁsh and
eels that eat frog eggs and tadpoles.
A glass pavilion on the rim of the Brick Pit uses microﬁltration to remove particles
from the water that are larger than 0.2 microns, which includes water parasites, viruses,
bacteria, and most notably the deadly chytrid fungus. This ﬁltered water is stored in the
Brick Pit and then pumped through the artiﬁcial frog ponds in the park. But this elaborate and costly artiﬁcial infrastructure has been unable to eliminate chytrids. The fungus

74. Murphy, “Alterlife,” 497.
75. Shotwell, Against Purity.
76. Rabinow and Rose, “Biopower Today”; Youatt, “Counting Species.”
77. Foucault, “Right of Death.”
78. Esposito and Hanaﬁ, “Community, Immunity, Biopolitics,” 85–86; Kirksey, Emergent Ecologies, 66.

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

36

Environmental Humanities 12:1 / May 2020

Figure 4. A purpose-built pond for green and golden bell frogs on top of a remediated landﬁll. Netting keeps
out birds and other predators, but the chytrid fungus is still able to get inside this infrastructure of care. The
pond needs to be periodically topped up with water since it is leaking into the landﬁll below. Photograph by
Eben Kirksey.

lives on frog skin and reproduces via tiny spores that use a ﬂagella to swim through the
water column, much like a human sperm. While chytrids are eliminated from the water
supply with the microﬁltration system, these tenacious parasites are entering the puriﬁed water farther downstream. The spores are able to live in small droplets of water
and can move between bodies of water on the toes of birds, human shoes, or on the
skin of some frog species that are asymptomatic disease carriers.
Despite ongoing efforts to make endangered frogs live, chytrid fungal infections
continued to drive population declines in Sydney Olympic Park. Predators such as birds,
ﬁsh, and eels continue to eat green and golden bell frogs as well as their eggs and tadpoles, despite best efforts to keep them at bay. Ecologists monitoring the long-term
demography of frogs at the park report that they are still at “risk of extinction or rapid
and dangerous decline.”79 Ongoing care work is sustaining life for frogs in the Sydney
Olympic Park amid continuing processes of chemical decay, material change, and the
emergence of new biological diseases.80 The technology and infrastructure maintaining
these populations are fragile and dependent on people for ongoing maintenance, repair,

79. Pickett et al., “Six-Year Demographic Study Reveals Threat,” 251.
80. DeSilvey, Curated Decay, 20.

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

Kirksey / Chemosociality in Multispecies Worlds

37

and care.81 Artiﬁcial ponds leak as the landﬁlls underneath them settle. Water slowly
seeps out into the accumulated waste below.
When water ﬁlters through landﬁlls, a liquid called leachate emerges. Another
elaborate infrastructure under the Sydney Olympic Park was built to contain runoff and
channel the ﬂow of this toxic pollution toward processing facilities. Leachate ﬂows are
channeled away from open waterways and toward twenty-six pump pits that were installed during the earthworks preparation for the Olympic Games. Leachate is pumped
from these pits into twelve kilometers of pipes that lead to three storage tanks and a
central processing facility run by a private contractor called Cleanaway.82
Engineering practices and infrastructures designed to contain industrial pollution
and waste are unable to completely contain risks. Writing of landﬁlls in Canada, Myra
Hird notes that “leachate moves between geological strata . . . between space and time.
As it moves, leachate disperses known, unknown, and unknowable entities.” She suggests that we address the potential future harm connected to chemical toxins leaking
from landﬁlls by bringing “buried and forgotten waste to the surface of our ethical
landscape.”83
Within the broader landscape of Sydney, the leachate treatment infrastructure at
the Olympic Park is ethically exemplary—demonstrating an ongoing commitment to
responsibility and care. Ian Wright, an outside expert on aquatic insects who has led
political campaigns to stop coal companies from dumping heavy metals into waterways, visited the facility with me in February 2018. “Do you know one of the things
that really interests me about this being treated?” Wright asked me rhetorically. “Most
leachate in Sydney is not treated.” While government regulators have tried to force
landowners throughout the city to take responsibility for legacy pollution, Wright said
that many corporate polluters have taken evasive measures. “Often they will walk
away, go bankrupt and change name of the company,” he said.
The ethical sensibilities of ecologists, urban planners, and waste management experts came together at the Sydney Olympic Park in the design of infrastructure that
aimed to purify the water.84 But, lively chemical and biological agents continued to
move across porous boundaries. When vibrant populations of green and golden bell
frogs began to ﬂourish in the polluted runoff from some of the most toxic sites in the
park, the staff did not know how to respond. As their biopolitical strategies for managing populations of endangered frogs showed signs of failing, as biopower ceased to be
efﬁcacious, park staff struggled to understand emergent forms of chemopower.85 The
staff struggled to care for a novel chemosocial world.

81. Puig de la Bellacasa, Matters of Care; Star, “Ethnography of Infrastructure.”
82. Sydney Olympic Park Authority, “Fact Sheet—Remediation.” January 2014. www.sopa.nsw.gov.au//media/ﬁles/sopa/sopa/publications/fact-sheets/web_fs_remediation_2015.pdf.
83. Hird, “Waste, Landﬁlls,” 108.
84. Shotwell, Against Purity.
85. Rabinow and Rose, “Biopower Today.”

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

38

Environmental Humanities 12:1 / May 2020

Euphoric Chemosocialities
Thousands of green and golden bell frog tadpoles emerged in a pond of toxic waste
shortly after the Sydney Olympic Park Authority opened the new Blaxland Landﬁll
Leachate Treatment facility in August 2013. This facility had not been designed with
the well-being of frogs in mind, but instead was planned as a sustainable treatment
facility for leachate with low energy use, no chemical use, and no sludge production.86
After contractors noticed the frogs breeding in their open-air leachate-processing pond,
employees of the Sydney Olympic Park collected the resulting tadpoles and transported
them to other less-polluted ponds for release. But, even after these tadpoles were relocated, the population of green and golden bell frogs at the leachate treatment facility
continued to persist.
If the normal world of the green and golden bell frog was lost with the spread of
the pathogenic chytrid fungus, these frogs began ﬁnding emergent opportunities for
existence and reproduction in sites with hazardous chemical waste.87 While frogs in
the purpose-built ponds elsewhere in the Sydney Olympic Park were barely persisting
(in pools that had been carefully isolated from leachate contamination), the frogs in
Blaxland were unexpectedly ﬂourishing in an emergent ecosystem structured by legacies of pollution. Frogs began creating social spaces—places for calling in unison, for
sex, and for spawning—while living with chemical dependencies.
Since a mind-boggling diversity of contaminants are processed at the Blaxland
Landﬁll Leachate Treatment facility, it is difﬁcult to discern which particular legacy pollutant has enabled the continued life of endangered frogs. The facility was built on a mound
of consolidated waste—soil soaked with tar, or polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons—from
Petroleum and Chemical Corporation Australia Ltd. Nearby, in Wilson Park—a grassy
ﬁeld where people regularly play Australian-rules football—a sign renders visible a layered palimpsest of industrial waste. The Petroleum and Chemical Corporation Australia
“produced town gas, chemical solvents, and road tar from the cracking of crude oil.” The
company contaminated “approximately 230,000 tons of soil and groundwater with tar
and other hydrocarbon wastes from oil reﬁning operations.”
While the Blaxland Landﬁll Leachate Treatment facility sits atop highly toxic tarsoil, it actually processes liquid runoff from elsewhere: the Blaxland Common Landﬁll
which is capped with clay underground. Above ground is a children’s playground and
skate park.88 Underneath the playground lies waste from the Auburn and Hardies Landﬁlls, which received Sydney’s garbage from 1960 to 1984. The landﬁlls contain asbestos

86. Water and Carbon Group, “Blaxland Landﬁll Leachate Treatment,” waterandcarbon.com.au/project
/blaxland-landﬁll-leachate-treatment (accessed March 12, 2019).
87. Murphy, “Alterlife,” 497.
88. Sydney Olympic Park Authority, “Fact Sheet—Remediation.” January 2014. www.sopa.nsw.gov.au//media/ﬁles/sopa/sopa/publications/fact-sheets/web_fs_remediation_2015.pdf.

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

Kirksey / Chemosociality in Multispecies Worlds

39

Figures 5 and 6. (Top) Green and golden bell frogs spontaneously emerged in polluted water at the Blaxland
Landﬁll Leachate Treatment facility. (Bottom) Water from nearby landﬁlls is treated here in a series of
bioremediation pools. Silverwater Correctional Complex is visible in the background, behind a row of trees
and a razor wire fence. Blaxland Riverside Park, on the opposite side of the prison, has a skate park and a
playground on top of a remediated landﬁll. Photographs by Elizabeth Lara and James Nguyen; published with
permission from the Sydney Olympic Park Authority.

and demolition materials as well as industrial, commercial, and domestic waste.89
Closely cropped grass, thick with clover, now covers expansive ﬁelds and mounds of
slowly decaying garbage. A brochure for the site says: “The Blaxland Common Landﬁll
site covers an area of approximately 20 hectares within the world-class parkland precinct of Sydney Olympic Park. . . . Given the public visibility of the site, the solution’s

89. The Water and Carbon Group, “SOPA Sustainable Leachate Treatment,” vimeo.com/92696127
(accessed March 12, 2019).

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

40

Environmental Humanities 12:1 / May 2020

aesthetic appeal was critical.” This public park and playground is situated between the
Newington Armory—where explosives were once stored—and the Silverwater Correctional Complex, which still houses a maximum security prison.90
One of the main chemical pollutants treated at Blaxland, ammonia, can be highly
toxic to ﬁsh, amphibians, and other aquatic animals. Leachate treatment at Blaxland begins in a tank at the top of a small hill, a mound of soil that is contaminated with tar.
This tank periodically discharges water from a stone pyramid structure through an aeration cascade—a series of eight teardrop-shaped bowls that channel a slow trickle of
water down the slope. From there the leachate ﬂows into raised beds, with gravel and
aquatic plants. Sprinklers help water the system and expose the leachate to air. In the
gravel beds the aim is to cultivate oxygen-consuming (aerobic) bacteria to catalyze a
particular chemical reaction: transforming the ammonia (NH3) into nitrate (NO2–) and
nitrite (NO3–). Microbes that love Nitrogen, or nitrophiles, thrive within the emergent
ecological community of this microenvironment. Bacteria such as Nitrobacter and Nitrosomonas can break down ammonia in the presence of oxygen.91 These microbial communities too might be understood as chemosocial formations. The metabolic processes
of microbes, that are thriving in new chemical landscapes, have produced new entangled possibilities of life where one kind of microbe eats the waste of others.92 Microbial metabolisms have also likely coproduced the conditions of social life for green and
golden bell frogs.
Two long and wide trenches, called “free surface wetland” on the Blaxland facility’s
website, host a separate microbial community that further metabolizes the landﬁll runoff. The trenches have shallow standing water, only about 10 cm deep. The leachate enters these trenches through white PVC pipes with bright green algal growth around the
steady trickle of water. A diversity of marsh plants grows in the trenches. Microbial
communities in the roots of these plants are critical to this bioremediation system. The
stagnant waters of the lower leachate pools are anaerobic (with no or low oxygen), in
contrast to the aerated beds on the hill. Here bacteria transform the nitrate (NO2–) and
nitrite (NO3–) into nitrogen gas. This dense plant growth also serves as an ideal habitat
for amphibians, since it provides cover from predators such as white ibis and laughing
kookaburras. It is here, in stagnant water amid aquatic plants, where green and golden
bell frogs have been congregating and breeding.
This site claims to be “one of the most innovative leachate treatment solutions in
Australia” and the values of hypervisibility, transparency, and sustainability were built
into the design.93 The government agency running the park, the Sydney Olympic Park

90. Muir, “Design of a Movement Corridor.”
91. The Water and Carbon Group, “SOPA Sustainable Leachate Treatment,” vimeo.com/92696127 (accessed March 12, 2019).
92. Hird, Origins of Sociable Life; de Lorenzo, “From the Selﬁsh Gene to Selﬁsh Metabolism”; Landecker,
“Antibiotic Resistance and the Biology of History.”
93. The Water and Carbon Group, “Low Energy Leachate Treatment System: Sydney Olympic Park.”
2013. waterandcarbon.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/WCG-Case-Study-SOPA.pdf.

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

Kirksey / Chemosociality in Multispecies Worlds

41

Authority (or SOPA), has tried to turn the facility into an example of best practices
aimed at ensuring environmental protection and public safety.94 At other toxic sites Michelle Murphy notes that sensing technologies have been deployed to produce “historically speciﬁc terrains of invisibility” or “regimes of imperceptibility,”95 since toxicological
experts know how to tinker with humidity levels, animal models, and device types to
support preordained conclusions that are friendly to industrial agendas. While SOPA
declined to comment on the methods used to sense pollution at Blaxland, some pollutant monitoring data from this facility are freely available on the Internet. Ammonia is
only one among many toxic chemicals that appear in these data. Cobalt, nickel, dioxins,
and copper have all been detected in liquid waste at the Blaxland.96
While chemical sensing technologies can reinforce the modernist dream of the
imminent calculability and knowability of the material world,97 the data from Blaxland
reveal a cloud of epistemological uncertainty with concentrations of various toxic
agents ﬂuctuating widely over time. It is difﬁcult to know with assurance which chemicals at Blaxland have the properties of the pharmakon for green and golden bell frogs.98
One thing is clear: green and golden bell frogs continue to ﬁnd conditions for life at this
leachate processing facility. “Blaxland is booming,” said one ecologist during a formal
presentation in October 2017 to a group of frog enthusiasts, the Frog and Tadpole Society (FATS). “We have had massive breeding events.”
The mass mating of frogs has made amphibians the symbol of unrestrained sexuality in the popular imagination of Europe. Figures of giant batrachian orgies appeared
in the writing of George Orwell and in more recent ﬁction that mixes together scenes of
human-frog sex, spawning, and death.99 Normal modes of sociality and sexuality among
green and golden bell frogs, before the chytrid fungus disrupted their world, were actually more subtle and antagonistic than these popular images. In 1979 a PhD student described males calling throughout summer days, and intensely at night, while perched
on low mats of emergent vegetation. “Conspeciﬁc callers are not tolerated at distances
of less than about a meter without vocal challenge.”100 Males attracted females with a
call that has been likened “to droning or growling followed by several short grunts.”101
As females approached the calling suitors, the males circled around behind and gripped
them in a characteristic embrace called amplexus—holding on, sometimes for days at a

94. Sydney Olympic Park, “Site Remediation.” www.sopa.nsw.gov.au/About-Us/History-and-Heritage
/Site-Remediation (accessed March 12, 2019).
95. Murphy, Sick Building Syndrome, 267, 274.
96. Sydney Olympic Park Authority, “Publication Data Blaxland Sustainable Leach Treatment Wetlands,”
www.sopa.nsw.gov.au/-/media/ﬁles/sopa/sopa/publications/environmental-monitoring-data/publication-data-blaxland-sustainable-leachate-treatment-wetlands.xlsx (accessed March 12, 2019).
97. Shapiro and Kirksey, “Chemo-Ethnography.”
98. Stengers, Cosmopolitics I.
99. Sleigh, Frog, 141–42.
100. Humphries, “Dynamics of a Breeding Frog Community,” 58.
101. Pyke and White, “Review of the Biology,” 573.

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

42

Environmental Humanities 12:1 / May 2020

time, until the females laid eggs. Male frogs also frequently grasped one another in
“homosexual amplexus” in these historic sites that were largely free from industrial
pollution.102
Queer frogs have emerged elsewhere as a result of exposures to endocrine disrupting toxins. Media hype about sex-changing chemicals in public waterways prompted
Eva Hayward to write an essay that asks, “Can we address the impacts of toxic substances on vulnerable people and animals without appealing to society’s basest fears
about sexual disruption? Can we foster environmental responsibility without invoking
anxiety that our most intimate reproductive environments have been inﬁltrated by an
industrial world? Is there a way to re-evaluate ecological resilience—such as the sexchanging response—and meet the future organisms that we are becoming?”103 Hayward
suggests that we might develop better practices for living with toxic pollution in places
where new forms of life are emerging, while imagining ways to reconﬁgure political
and economic systems that produce waste affecting everyone, including animals.
At the Blaxland Sustainable Leachate Treatment Facility toxic exposures have not
apparently produced queer transformations for green and golden bell frogs. Instead,
potentially hazardous chemicals have produced a situation where heterosexual reproduction and presumably also homosexual amplexus takes place as normal. The choruses of green and golden bell frogs that appeared at the Blaxland seem to be like those
observed by Humphries in 1979. A strange sense of normality prevails as endangered
animals call, grapple, and hold one another in amorous embraces. But this place is
haunted by uncanny specters of chemical toxins with indeterminate properties.104 Mel
Chen has described a “toxic sensorium,” a set of affective states and phenomenological
experiences, that emerges for people diagnosed with heavy-metal poisoning.105 Mood
swings, irritability, depression, fatigue, excitation, difﬁculty focusing, feeling out of control are part of the intoxication experienced and theorized by Chen.106 Speculating across
the species interface, it seems plausible that green and golden bell frogs may live with a
toxic sensorium in Blaxland. Chemosocial bonds may be emerging for some animals
with intoxicating chemicals that might be both dangerous and pleasurable. Anne Pollock
argues that animals exposed to toxins might sometimes enjoy getting “fucked up” like
humans on recreational drugs.107
Chemosociality among Blaxland’s frogs may or may not be euphoric, in the sense
of subjective experiences of excitement, exhilaration, and animation. But, perhaps Blaxland is a site of euphoria for green and golden bell frogs, in the terms of Roberto Esposito and Zakiya Hanaﬁ’s biopolitics, where this endangered form of life “is able to

102. Humphries, “Dynamics of a Breeding Frog Community,” 58.
103. Hayward, “Ciliated Sense.”
104. Stengers, Cosmopolitics I, 29; Hird, “Waste, Landﬁlls.”
105. Chen, Animacies, 196–97.
106. Chen, Animacies, 207.
107. Pollock, “Queering Endocrine Disruption,” 185.

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

Kirksey / Chemosociality in Multispecies Worlds

43

reproduce itself without interruption” beyond the historical and ecological conditions
impinging on its existence.108 In the technical terms of Sara Ahmed, perhaps these
frogs are full of hap, if not happy, since they are living with the contingency of what
happens.109 In contrast to the designated frog habitat elsewhere in the Sydney Olympic
Park, the pools at the leachate treatment facility were not enclosed with netting during
my tour. White ibis, known predators of green and golden bell frogs, were lingering
around the pools of waste. A laughing kookaburra, sitting nearby on a plastic pipe, was
staring intently at the marsh plants, head feathers ﬂat against its head, ready to dive
into the polluted water. In contrast to the purpose-built frog ponds elsewhere in Sydney
Olympic Park, where threats to frogs were being carefully managed, here endangered
forms of life were ﬂourishing amid chemicals with unstable properties and lively
dynamics in multispecies worlds.
While green and golden bell frogs were ﬁnding opportunities for life in this waste
treatment facility, ecologists remained concerned about the long-term consequences of
toxic exposures. One researcher told me that frogs from the leachate ponds have a distinct color: lime green. Green and golden bell frogs have been systematically removed
from the Blaxland site and enfolded in the infrastructures of care throughout the Sydney Olympic Park. While toxins have produced a chemosocial ﬂourishing, an emergent
multispecies world, ecologists speculate that it will be short lived. Conservationists in
Sydney Olympic Park are trying to create and sustain conditions for less-toxic interdependent worlds.110 As park managers take responsibility for “the molecular productions
of capitalism in our own pasts and the pasts of our ancestors, as well as into the future,”111 others are investing in visions of a postindustrial utopia.112 But, the purity practices of these ecologists—their attempts to separate endangered nature from the toxic
products of industrial culture—seem to be failing. Amid ongoing population declines of
green and golden bell frogs, the ecologists may be forced to replace strategies of biopower with chemopower.
Bubbles of Hope
The Sydney Olympic Park is being styled as a “new golden mini city” that will have “45storey residential towers, and a thriving shopping/cafe precinct” by 2030. With a $10 billion investment planned, a combination of public and private funds, ofﬁcials hope to attract 23,500 residents and offer 34,000 jobs.113 When I visited in February 2018 I stayed in
one of the freshly constructed high-rise towers, and found ongoing construction all
around. My twenty-third ﬂoor AirBnB apartment commanded a view of the Brick Pitt

108. Esposito and Hanaﬁ, “Community, Immunity, Biopolitics,” 85.
109. Ahmed, Promise of Happiness, 45.
110. Shotwell, Against Purity, 93.
111. Murphy, “Alterlife,” 497.
112. Harvey, Spaces of Hope, 85.
113. Tabakoff, “Olympic Park.”

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

44

Environmental Humanities 12:1 / May 2020

and Homebush Bay where a luxury shopping mall and IKEA sat atop the former Union
Carbide plant. Fleeting conversations with other high-rise residents revealed that most
were cosmopolitan professionals from Asia and the Middle East.
Public signs about legacy pollution dot the landscape of the Sydney Olympic Park,
but toxic specters were largely absent from the imagery and discourse prevailing in the
high-rise apartment building where I stayed. In the elevator I struck up conversations
with a medical student from Hong Kong, an architect from Shenzhen, and a retired couple from Beijing. When asked about the chemical pollution under the playground and
near their apartment buildings, most shared modernist dreams about the ability of experts to calculate and contain risks.114 Proximity to noxious chemicals was not generating chemosocial solidarities, or expectations of a transcendent future with a ﬁnal solution, but instead hopes for an unchanging present—where risks were mitigated in
intimate spaces of domesticity and public spaces of recreation and play.115 In hallway
conversations I found that endangered frogs were also beyond the purview of residents’
social worlds.
Many white Australians, who vividly remember twentieth-century controversies
about toxic waste disposal in the area, continued to visit the Sydney Olympic Park for
work, recreation, and public events such as sporting competitions and concerts. But,
few whites were buying real estate despite serious incentives in a high-priced market.
Contaminated landscapes were being remade by oblique powers that reinscribed racialized exposures. In a city where memory and privilege continue to be unequally distributed across racial lines some people were ﬁnding modest hopes—for their own ﬁrst
apartments or homes—in places that others remembered as a wasteland.116 The 2011
Australian government census reveals that an overwhelming majority of Sydney Olympic Park residents (78 percent) were born outside Australia. Demographic data reveal a
population that is highly educated with employment rates and income levels that are
higher than the Australian average. A large proportion of Olympic Park residents, 20
percent, were born in mainland China. A diversity of other nations is also represented
in the neighborhood: South Korea, India, Hong Kong, and Iran.117
With conservative political parties gaining power during my research, some Australians were experiencing a growing “fear of racialized immigration into the vulnerable national body at a time when its economic sovereignty was in question.”118 Amid
xenophobic political campaigns targeting Asians and unskilled migrants, Malcom Turnbull’s conservative coalition government announced major changes to immigration
laws in April 2017, eliminating a broad class of temporary business and work visas.

114. Shapiro and Kirksey, “Chemo-Ethnography,” 488.
115. Zee, “Holding Patterns.”
116. Murphy, “Uncertain Exposures.”
117. Australian Bureau of Statistics, “2016 Census QuickStats: Sydney Olympic Park.” quickstats.census
data.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2016/quickstat/SSC13716 (accessed March 12, 2019).
118. Chen, Animacies, 171.

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

Kirksey / Chemosociality in Multispecies Worlds

45

Chinese buyers, who spent $32 billion in Australian real estate investments in 2015–16,
began pulling their capital out of potentially toxic assets in Sydney’s market.119
In parallel a developer called Mirvac announced an initiative in 2017 to build 690
new properties in the Olympic Park. Marketing campaigns targeted ﬁrst-time buyers
who had the opportunity to purchase apartments for $575,000 to $749,000 with just a 5
percent deposit.120 But by early 2018 market analysists labeled the Sydney Olympic Park
as a no-go zone for property investors because of the risk of major price falls.121 The
market could not support all of the new properties that were being built. When residents of the upscale Opal Tower apartment building heard loud cracking noises on
Christmas eve in 2018, around 3,000 residents were evacuated from the high-rise where
I stayed and other buildings nearby, as authorities feared a collapse was imminent.122
The Opal Tower did not collapse, but the incident marked a clear break from earlier intoxicating dreams about the new golden mini city in the park. In the aftermath of this
near disaster, property values fell and lawsuits mounted.123 Ambivalent hopes about living with chemical and ﬁnancial toxicity began to emerge for the residents.124
David Harvey has described spaces of hope that have emerged at the intersection
of anarchic market forces. Ways of life are being continually destroyed by ecological,
spatial, and cultural upheavals that open up opportunities for new investments of capital. In the face of these destructive forces, Harvey describes “a political or even utopian
longing that desires a simpler, less volatile, more manageable, and secure life.”125 Green
and golden bell frogs are persisting amid upheavals—ongoing changes to the landscape—
that have been wrought by successive waves of capital investment, despoilment, and
remediation in Sydney. While these endangered animals do not likely harbor utopian
longings and political desires, they nonetheless inhabit spaces of hope constructed by
their caregivers and sustained by ongoing investments in protective infrastructures. If
the conservationists who care for these frogs lose funding, then future generations of
this population might be restricted to abandoned leachate pools.
As the real estate bubble of Sydney deﬂates, the government-funded care work at
the Sydney Olympic Park could cease. Amid unruly market dynamics, the less-toxic
interdependent worlds that have been created for frogs and people could disappear.126
As molecular products of capitalism slowly reverberate through time and space, testing
our collective capacity to care, fragile forms of alterlife may persist in the shadows.127 In

119. Stewart, “Chinese Interest.”
120. Corderoy, “Sydney Olympic Park.”
121. Devine, “Parramatta and Olympic Park Area Declared No Go Zones for Investors.”
122. Noyes, “Sydney Olympic Park.”
123. Tan, “Maurice Blackburn Walks Away.”
124. Chen, Animacies, 220–21.
125. Harvey, Spaces of Hope, 85.
126. Shotwell, Against Purity, 93.
127. Nixon, Slow Violence; Murphy, “Alterlife.”

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

46

Environmental Humanities 12:1 / May 2020

blasted landscapes where corporations have a legacy of abdicating responsibility, hopes
for precarious ways of life circulate in temporary spaces of immunity where life is protected and threats are negated.128 Green and golden bell frogs have found a fragile chemosocial bubble—a space where poisons offer the ambivalent cure of the pharmakon.129
Chemosocial solidarity is building across divides of class, race, and even species.
Recognition of shared experiences of vulnerability is growing as conditions for ﬂourishing become increasingly evanescent. Episodes of life in ephemeral ponds, or in toxic
efﬂuent that is deemed unsuitable for a proper existence, reﬂect the dynamics of temporality and futurity in other milieus. The short-term spaces of survival that have
emerged in leachate pools may involve “the present fullness of a becoming whose arc
may extend no further,” to borrow the language of Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick.130 As life on
earth becomes inescapably entangled with industrial chemicals, novel symbiotic associations and social formations will continue to arise. Caring for these emergent worlds
demands improvisation and tact amid shifting contingencies. Embracing the present
fullness of altered life and sociality means expecting the unexpected—sustaining lively
relationships with responsibility and accountability while remaining open to an unknown future to come.

EBEN KIRKSEY is an associate professor of anthropology at Deakin University in Melbourne, Australia. He has published two books—Freedom in Entangled Worlds (2012) and Emergent Ecologies
(2015)—as well as one edited collection, The Multispecies Salon (2014). Princeton’s Institute for
Advanced Study hosted Kirksey in the 2019–20 academic year, where he completed a book on
gene editing, the innovation economy, and social inequality. This book, The Mutant Project, will
be released in October 2020.

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank the Swamp Gems—namely Elizabeth Lara, Cameron Allan McKean, Kuai Shen,
and Zoe Combe—for dwelling and thinking with me in the Sydney Olympic Park. Participants in the
Sydney Toxic Tour at 4S in 2018—especially Nicholas Shapiro, Hannah Landecker, James Nguyen,
and Janet Laurence—graciously shared their insights related to haunting chemical traces, intoxicated
animals, environmental epigenetics, and chemoethnographic methods. Jennifer Mae Hamilton and
Astrida Neimanis were generous hosts for a Composting Feminisms walking workshop where I discussed my work in progress. This research was funded by the Australian Research Council’s Discovery Early Career Researcher Award (DE140100918) to study “the Amphibian Ark.”

References
Agard-Jones, Vanessa. “Bodies in the System.” Small Axe 17, no. 3 (2013): 182–92.
Ahmed, Sara. The Promise of Happiness. Durham NC: Duke University Press, 2010.
Bateson, Mary Catherine. Peripheral Visions: Learning along the Way. New York: HarperCollins, 1994.
Birch, Gavin F., and Stuart E. Taylor. The Contaminant Status of Sydney Harbour Sediments: A Handbook for
the Public and Professionals. Sydney: Sydney EEHSG of the Geological Society of Australia, 2004.

128. Sloterdijk, Bubbles, 12; Esposito and Hanaﬁ, “Community, Immunity, Biopolitics,” 86.
129. Derrida, Dissemination; Stengers, Cosmopolitics I, 29.
130. Sedgwick and Frank, Touching Feeling, 149; see also Ensor, “Queer Fallout,” 156.

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

Kirksey / Chemosociality in Multispecies Worlds

47

Buchanan, Brett, Jeffrey Bussolini, and Matthew Chrulew. “General Introduction: Philosophical Ethology.”Angelaki 19, no. 3 (2014): 1–3. doi.org/10.1080/0969725X.2014.975977.
Brown, Paul. “The Ratbag of Botany: Activism and Community Participation around Industrial Sites
in Southeastern Sydney.” In Local Heroes: Australian Crusades from the Environmental Frontline,
edited by Kathleen McPhillips, 110–28. Annandale, NSW, Australia: Pluto Press, 2002.
Candea, Matei. “‘I Fell in Love with Carlos the Meerkat’: Engagement and Detachment in Human-Animal
Relations.” American Ethnologist 37, no. 2 (2010): 241–58. doi:10.1111/j.1548–1425.2010.01253.x.
Carson, Rachel. Silent Spring. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin, 1962.
Chen, Mel Y. Animacies: Biopolitics, Racial Mattering, and Queer Affect. Durham, NC: Duke University
Press, 2012.
Choy, Timothy, and Jerry Zee. “Condition—Suspension.” Cultural Anthropology 30, no. 2 (2015): 210–23.
doi.org/10.14506/ca30.2.04.
Clarke, Adele, and Susan Leigh Star. The Social Worlds/Arenas/Discourse Framework as a Theory-Methods
Package. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008.
Corderoy, Julia. “Sydney Olympic Park: Mirvac’s ‘Pavilions’ Development to Help First Home Buyers.”
News.com.au, February 28, 2017. www.news.com.au/ﬁnance/real-estate/buying/major-apartment
-development-to-offer-ﬁrst-homebuyers-dibs/news-story/1c25072db315a6035eada287106f28a1.
de Lorenzo, Victor. “From the Selﬁsh Gene to Selﬁsh Metabolism: Revisiting the Central Dogma.” BioEssays 36, no. 3 (2014): 226–35.
Department of Environment and Conservation. “Assessment Levels for Soil, Sediment, and Water.”
Contaminated Sites Management Series, 2010. www.der.wa.gov.au/images/documents/your
-environment/contaminated-sites/guidelines/2009641_-_assessment_levels_for_soil_sediment_
and_water_-_web.pdf.
Derrida, Jacques. Dissemination. Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1981.
DeSilvey, Caitlin. Curated Decay. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2017.
Devine, Aidan. “Parramatta and Olympic Park Area Declared No Go Zones for Investors.” Daily Telegraph, January 12, 2018.
Ensor, Sarah. “Queer Fallout: Samuel R. Delany and the Ecology of Cruising.” Environmental Humanities
9, no. 1 (2017): 149–66. doi.org/10.1215/22011919–3829172.
Epstein, Steven. Impure Science: AIDS, Activism, and the Politics of Knowledge. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996.
Esposito, Roberto, and Zakiya Hanaﬁ. “Community, Immunity, Biopolitics.” Angelaki 18, no. 3 (2013):
83–90. doi:10.1080/0969725X.2013.834666.
Foucault, Michel. “Right of Death and Power over Life.” In The Foucault Reader, edited by Paul Ranibow,
258–72. New York: Pantheon, 1984.
Franklin, Sarah. Dolly Mixtures: The Remaking of Genealogy. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2007.
Fuller, Thomas. “US Moves to Address Agent Orange Contamination in Vietnam.” New York Times,
August 9, 2012. www.nytimes.com/2012/08/10/world/asia/us-moves-to-address-agent-orange
-contamination-in-vietnam.html.
Goodall, Heather, and Allison J. Cadzow. Rivers and Resilience: Aboriginal People on Sydney’s Georges River.
Sydney: UNSW Press, 2009.
Haraway, Donna J. When Species Meet. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Harvey, David. Spaces of Hope. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000.
Hayward, Eva. “Ciliated Sense.” In Theorizing Animals: Re-Thinking Humanimal Relations, vol. 11, edited
by Nik Taylor and Tania Signal, 255–80. Boston: Brill, 2011.
Henderson, Linda, Bo Pilgaard, Frank H. Gleason, and Osu Lilje. “Copper (II), Lead (II), and Zinc (II) Reduce Growth and Zoospore Release in Four Zoosporic True Fungi from Soils of NSW, Australia.”
Fungal Biology 119, no.7 (2015): 648–55. doi.org/10.1016/j.funbio.2015.04.002.
Hillier, Nancy, Julia Gennissen, Beverley Pickering, and Richard Smolenski. “Our Battle with Hexachlorobenzene: Citizen Perspectives on Toxic Waste in Botany.” In “Toxic Risk and Governance:
The Case of Hexachlorobenzene,” edited by Paul Brown and Suzanne Benn. Special issue, Journal of Environmental Management 90, no. 4 (2009): 1605–12. doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2008.05.015.

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

48

Environmental Humanities 12:1 / May 2020

Hird, Myra. The Origins of Sociable Life: Evolution after Science Studies. New York: Palgrave MacMillan,
2009.
Hird, Myra. “Waste, Landﬁlls, and an Environmental Ethic of Vulnerability.” Ethics and the Environment
18, no. 1 (2013): 105–24. doi.org/10.2979/ethicsenviro.18.1.105.
Humphries, Robert Blair. “Dynamics of a Breeding Frog Community.” PhD diss., Australian National
University, 1979.
James, Peggy. “Taking Us for Village Idiots: Two Stories of Ethnicity, Class, and Toxic Waste from Sydney, Australia.” In Echoes from the Poisoned Well: Global Memories of Environmental Injustice, edited
by Sylvia Hood Washington, Heather Goodall, and Paul C. Rosier, 271–84. Oxford, UK: Lexington
Books, 2006.
Jain, Sarah S. Lochlann. Malignant: How Cancer Becomes Us. Berkeley: University of California Press,
2013.
Kafer, Alison. Feminist, Queer, Crip. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2013.
Kirksey, Eben. Emergent Ecologies. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2015.
Kirksey, S. Eben, Nicholas Shapiro, and Maria Brodine. “Hope in Blasted Landscapes.” Social Science Information 52, no. 2 (2013): 29–63. doi.org/10.1177/0539018413479468.
Landecker, Hannah. “Antibiotic Resistance and the Biology of History.” Body and Society 22, no. 4
(2016): 19–52. doi.org/10.1177/1357034X14561341.
Muir, Glenn. “Design of a Movement Corridor for the Green and Golden Bell Frog Litoria aurea at Sydney Olympic Park.” Australian Zoologist 34, no. 3 (2008): 297–302. doi.org/10.7882/AZ.2008.007.
Murphy, Michelle. “Alterlife and Decolonial Chemical Relations.” Cultural Anthropology 32, no. 4 (2017):
494–503. doi.org/10.14506/ca32.4.02.
Murphy, Michelle. Sick Building Syndrome and the Problem of Uncertainty: Environmental Politics, Technoscience, and Women Workers. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2006.
Murphy, Michelle. “Uncertain Exposures and the Privilege of Imperception: Activist Scientists and
Race at the US Environmental Protection Agency.” Osiris 19 (2004): 266–82.
Nelson, Alondra. The Social Life of DNA: Race, Reparations, and Reconciliation after the Genome. Boston:
Beacon Press, 2016.
Nixon, Rob. Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the Poor. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 2011.
Noyes, Jenny. “Sydney Olympic Park: Opal Tower Residents Evacuated after Concerns Building May
Collapse.” Sydney Morning Herald, December 24, 2018. www.smh.com.au/national/nsw/opal
-tower-residents-evacuated-after-concerns-building-may-collapse-20181224–p50o4b.html., 2011.
Penman, Trent D., G. Muir, E. Magarey, and E. Burns. “Impact of a Chytrid-Related Mortality Event on
a Population of the Green and Golden Bell Frog Litoria aurea.” Australian Zoologist 34, no. 3 (2008):
314–18. doi.org/10.7882/AZ.2008.009.
Petryna, Adriana. 2002. Life Exposed: Biological Citizens after Chernobyl. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Pickett, Evan John, Michelle Pirrie Stockwell, Deborah Sheena Bower, Carla Jean Pollard, James Ian
Garnham, John Clulow, and Michael Joseph Mahony. “Six-Year Demographic Study Reveals
Threat of Stochastic Extinction for Remnant Populations of a Threatened Amphibian.” Austral
Ecology 39, no. 2 (2014): 244–53. doi.org/10.1111/aec.12080.
Plumwood, Val. “Shadow Places and the Politics of Dwelling.” Australian Humanities Review 44 (2008):
139–50. australianhumanitiesreview.org/2008/03/01/shadow-places-and-the-politics-of-dwelling/.
Pollock, Anne. “Queering Endocrine Disruption.” In Object Oriented Feminism, edited by Katherine
Behar. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2016.
Povinelli, Elizabeth. Geontologies: A Requiem to Late Liberalism. Durham, NC: Duke University Press,
2016.
Puig de la Bellacasa, Maria. Matters of Care: Speculative Ethics in More than Human Worlds. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 2016.
Pratt, Mary Louise. Imperial Eyes: Travel Writing and Transculturation. London: Routledge, 1992.

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

Kirksey / Chemosociality in Multispecies Worlds

49

Pyke, Graham, and Arthur White. “A Review of the Biology of the Green and Golden Bell Frog Litoria
aurea.” Australian Zoologist 31, no. 4 (2001): 563–98. doi.org/10.7882/AZ.2001.003.
Rabinow, Paul. Making PCR: A Story of Biotechnology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996.
Rabinow, Paul, and Nikolas Rose. “Biopower Today.” BioSocieties 1, no. 2 (2006): 195–217.
Roberts, Jody A. “Reﬂections of an Unrepentant Plastiphobe: Plasticity and the STS Life.” Science as
Culture 19, no. 1 (2010): 101–20. doi:10.1080/09505430903557916.
Rose, Nikolas. The Politics of Life Itself: Biomedicine, Power, and Subjectivity in the Twenty-First Century.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2009.
Rose, Deborah Bird. Wild Dog Dreaming: Love and Extinction. Charlottesville: University of Virginia
Press, 2011.
Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky. Touching Feeling: Affect, Pedagogy, Performativity. Durham, NC: Duke University
Press, 2003.
Shapiro, Nicholas. “Attuning to the Chemosphere: Domestic Formaldehyde, Bodily Reasoning, and
the Chemical Sublime.” Cultural Anthropology 30, no. 3 (2015): 368–93. doi.org/10.14506/ca30.3.02.
Shapiro, Nicholas, and Eben Kirksey. “Chemo-Ethnography: An Introduction.” Cultural Anthropology
32, no. 4 (2017): 481–93.
Shotwell, Alexis. Against Purity: Living Ethically in Compromised Times. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2016.
Sleigh, Charlotte. Frog. London: Reaktion, 2012.
Sloterdijk, Peter. Bubbles: Microspherology. Los Angeles: Semiotext(e), 2011.
Song, Hoon. Pigeon Trouble: Bestiary Biopolitics in a Deindustrialized America. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press, 2010.
Star, Susan Leigh. “The Ethnography of Infrastructure.” American Behavioral Scientist 43, no. 3 (1999):
277–391. doi.org/10.1177/00027649921955326.
Stengers, Isabelle. Cosmopolitics I. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2010.
Stewart, Emily. “Chinese Interest in Australian Property Cools as Tougher Regulations Bite.” ABC
News, August 31, 2017. www.abc.net.au/news/2017–08–31/chinese-property-investment-starts
-to-cool/8858866.
Stockwell, Michelle. “Impact and Mitigation of the Emerging Infectious Disease Chytridiomycosis on
the Green and Golden Bell Frog.” PhD diss., University of Newcastle, 2011.
Stuart, Simon N., Janice S. Chanson, Neil A. Cox, Bruce E. Young, Ana S. L. Rodrigues, Debra L. Fischman, and Robert W. Waller. “Status and Trends of Amphibian Declines and Extinctions Worldwide.” Science 306, no. 5702 (2004): 1783–86. doi:10.1126/science.1103538.
Suh, Jeong-Yul, G. F. Birch, and K. Hughes. “Hydrochemistry in Reclaimed Lands of the 2000 Olympic
Games Site, Sydney, Australia.” Journal of Coastal Research 20, no. 3 (2004): 709–21. doi.org/
10.2112/1551-5036(2004)20[709:HIRLOT]2.0.CO;2.
Suh, J-Y., G. F. Birch, K. Hughes, and C. Matthai. “Spatial Distribution and Source of Heavy Metals in
Reclaimed Lands of Homebush Bay: The Venue of the 2000 Olympic Games, Sydney, New
South Wales.” Australian Journal of Earth Sciences 51, no. 1 (2004): 53–67.
Tabakoff, Nick. 2016. “Olympic Park: Sydney’s Newest City.” Daily Telegraph, October 10, 2016. www
.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/project-sydney-olympic-park-will-be-our-new-golden-minicity
/news-story/c75421d7cb36b8f6af09a907a5f1c4c9.
Tan, Su-Lin. 2019. “Maurice Blackburn Walks Away from Opal Tower Class Action.” Australian Financial Review, February 5, 2019. www.afr.com/real-estate/maurice-blackburn-walks-away-from
-opal-tower-class-action-20190205–h1avuq.
Threlfall, Caragh G. “Do Green and Golden Bell Frogs (Litoria aurea) Occupy Habitats with Fungicidal
Properties?” Honours Thesis, University of Wollongong, 2006.
Threlfall, C., D. Jolley, N. Evershed, R. Goldingay, and W. Buttemer. “Do Green and Golden Bell Frogs
Litoria aurea Occupy Habitats with Fungicidal Properties?” Australian Zoologist 34, no.3 (2008):
350–60. doi.org/10.7882/AZ.2008.012.

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

50

Environmental Humanities 12:1 / May 2020

Tyler, Michael J. “The Introduction and Current Distribution in the New Hebrides of the Australian
Hylid Frog Litoria aurea.” Copeia 1979, no. 2 (1979): 355–56. doi:10.2307/1443428.
Youatt, Raﬁ. “Counting Species: Biopower and the Global Biodiversity Census.” Environmental Values
17, no. 3 (2008): 393–417.
Zee, Jerry C. “Holding Patterns: Sand and Political Time at China’s Desert Shores.” Cultural Anthropology 32, no. 2 (2017): 215–41. doi.org/10.14506/ca32.2.06.

Downloaded from http://read.dukeupress.edu/environmental-humanities/article-pdf/12/1/23/806286/23kirksey.pdf
by guest

