Forthcoming in: Petry, J. (2019) ‘Securities exchanges: Subjects & agents of financialization’,
D. Mertens, P. Mader & N. van der Zwan (eds.) The Routledge International Handbook of
Financialization. London: Routledge.
Johannes Petry
Department of Politics and International Studies, University of Warwick
Abstract
How have exchanges shaped financialization? This chapter argues that similar to other financial
market actors, securities exchanges have themselves undergone a significant transformation. In
the last 25 years, marketization, internationalization, and digitization have fundamentally
changed the way exchanges function, turning them from national marketplaces into markets
actors. As a result of this transformation, exchanges have become crucial agents in processes
of financialization. First, by organizing capital markets they influence market dynamics,
facilitating volatility and market stability. Second, exchanges have turned into agents of
disintermediation, selling and exporting financial technologies and expertise, facilitating the
development of capital markets globally. Third, exchanges have emerged as politically and
economically powerful players, both vis-à-vis other market actors but also towards regulators
and states. Overall, through their transformation exchanges have become crucial actors in the
spreading of capital markets, the transformations of contemporary finance and the politics of
financialization.
Introduction
Securities exchanges are core institutions of modern capitalism, almost metonymic with capital
markets and their development. But how have these institutions contributed to financialization?
In vernacular language, the terms stock exchange and stock market are often used
interchangeably. Exchanges are depicted as neutral spaces; they themselves are not perceived
as actors in their own right. However, as this chapter argues, this is an outdated understanding
of exchanges as these have transformed fundamentally and in so doing have become important
agents of and key actors in financialization – both promoting financialization and acting as
infrastructures within financialization processes.
Similar to other financial institutions, since the 1980s marketization, internationalization, and
digitization have fundamentally transformed exchanges and their role in capital markets. From
being mere marketplaces – national, member-controlled, non-profit organizations and physical
trading locations with little agency – exchanges have transformed into what can be called
market actors: autonomous and profit-driven actors who sell their markets, technologies,
products and services to investors, and who actively create, regulate and shape (electronic)
markets around the world and across asset classes. Thereby, exchanges were both shaped by
financialization but also became key actors in financialization processes themselves. To explore
this issue, this chapter discusses three interrelated questions: What is an exchange? How (and
why) have they changed? And why does this matter for financialization?
1

Next to secondary literature, the chapter draws on financial news coverage, financial market
databases, an analysis of 312 annual reports from exchanges, 1 and 59 expert interviews
conducted with exchanges, brokers and other market participants in London, Frankfurt, Hong
Kong, Shanghai and Singapore between May 2017 and September 2018. The rest of this chapter
is structured as follows. Section one provides an overview of the existing literature on
financialization and exchanges. Section two analyses the transformation of exchanges from
marketplaces to market actors by highlighting how and why they changed through
marketization, internationalization and digitization. Section three discusses exchanges after this
transformation. Section four outlines why this matters for the study of financialization, focusing
on how exchanges shape the workings of capital markets, financial globalization and the spread
of disintermediated financial practices, as well as changing power dynamics in global finance.
Section five concludes.
Exchanges in the financialization literature
Capital markets stand at the heart of and are a precondition for most of the phenomena
associated with financialization (see Mader et al. 2019, this volume). But as this book section
emphasizes, financialization is not only an external, structural force. It is enacted by and
through certain agents. Surprisingly, exchanges – those actors who organize capital markets –
have received relatively little attention in the financialization literature. In fact, exchanges are
mostly viewed as neutral marketplaces with little or no agency.
Next to historical accounts of individual exchanges (e.g. Michie, 1999), political economists
have rather focused on the impact that financial liberalization had on exchanges’ members
(Moran, 1990; Cerny, 1989), the electronification of exchange markets (Zaloom, 2006; Gorham
and Singh, 2009), the politics of establishing certain exchanges (Posner, 2009; Lütz, 1998;
Lavelle, 2004) or their role as policy actors (Mügge, 2011). Their own role as actors in capital
markets has been analyzed only partially (Botzem and Dahl, 2014; Wójcik, 2012), focusing for
instance on them creating financial products (Millo, 2007), facilitating high frequency trading
(HFT) (MacKenzie et al., 2012), and the fragmentation of equity markets (Castelle et al., 2016).
But these accounts have not linked exchanges and their activities to broader processes of
financialization. However, as the next sections demonstrate, exchanges have both been
impacted by financialization themselves and have over time become crucial agents for capital
market development and the politics of financialization.
What is an exchange?
In its beginnings, the exchange was solely a marketplace, a physical location (e.g. a coffee
house) where merchants met to negotiate business deals and eventually agreed to jointly finance
enterprises. Pre-modern forms of exchanges have already existed at least since the 14th century
in Venice, Florence and Genoa. This was followed by the founding of the Amsterdam Stock
Exchange through the Dutch East India Company in 1602 which – while not the first exchange
as such – was the first embodiment of what we perceive as modern stock markets. As Braudel
(1983: 101) noted, “what was new in Amsterdam was the volume, the fluidity of the market
and publicity it received, and the speculative freedom of transactions”. Thus, the modern
exchange was born. And from their inception until the 1980s, exchanges did not change much.
2

For sure, the advent of pre-modern information technologies such as the telegraph led to
changes in trading practices, a consolidation and establishment of national-level exchanges,
regulation changed with recurring market crashes, existing markets matured, and new markets
for products such as futures emerged (see Engel, 2013). But little about the basic principles of
what exchanges were and how they functioned changed.
Historically, (almost) all securities exchanges were member-owned. The members held all the
power, the exchange was a non-profit organization and did not have much agency. As
Weitzman (2011: 184) stated about the historic development of Chicago’s commodity
exchanges, “member control was reflected in their attitude to even the most senior exchange
employees, who the traders regarded as their employees.” The function of exchanges was that
of marketplaces where members could trade securities, commodities or other assets. Such
trading took place on a trading floor, pit or ring, where only physically present members could
trade a small range of products, limited both by national boundaries and asset classes, for
instance stocks of one countries’ companies or certain commodities (e.g. base metals). This
hardly changed over the centuries. As a special issue on exchanges in ‘The Banker’ (Skeete,
2008) stated, “[u]ntil the 1980s, exchanges would, in their essentials, have been recognizable
to a merchant who was trading in the 14th century – the time of their inception”.
However, in the 1980s and 1990s, exchanges themselves became subject to three interlinked,
mutually reinforcing processes which overhauled their role in capital markets. First, while
exchanges gained more agency, as market actors they also became themselves subjected to
competitive pressures (marketization) from other exchanges. Second, from a mostly national
focus their business activities became international, leading to consolidation and cooperation
between exchanges (internationalization). Third, they turned from physical trading locations
into financial technology companies (digitization). While these macro-processes (which are
closely linked with financialization themselves) impacted all aspects and elements of financial
markets, in the next section their impact on exchanges is analyzed before turning to how these
transformed exchanges subsequently contributed to financialization processes.
Marketization: ownership, agency and competition
Marketization does not only encompass shifting ownership structures, it also works at a deeper
level, and is best understood as the facilitation of “policies and processes oriented towards
continuing the diffusion of market discipline” (Carroll and Jarvis, 2014: 1). Likewise, the
marketization of exchanges is characterized by both changes in ownership structures as well as
the introduction of competitive dynamics.
The marketization of exchanges is strongly linked to neoliberal economic reforms and
restructuring which placed a greater emphasis on privatization and financial market
deregulation in the 1980s and 1990s. Financial liberalization reforms such as May Day in the
US (1975), the Big Bang in the UK (1986) or the EU Investment Services Directive (1993)
allowed brokers to charge varying commission rates, enabled foreign participation in previously
national stock markets and abolished rules requiring orders to be executed solely on exchanges,
introducing a great deal of competition into the exchange industry. Exchanges were now
suddenly in a marketplace for marketplaces (Castelle et al., 2016). In the face of such pressures,
exchanges needed to modernize, become more efficient and customer focused, which is why
many demutualized and went public, becoming traded on capital markets themselves. While
3

the first member-owned exchange only demutualized in 1993, 50% of the world’s largest
exchanges had demutualized by 2002 and by 2010 they were all demutualized (with the notable
exception of the state-owned Chinese exchanges). Further, many of these exchanges self-listed
and 69% had become publicly traded companies by 2018 (see figure 1).
While older scholarly accounts of how exchanges work stressed the role of the exchange’s
members (see Abolafia, 1996; Baker, 1984), through demutualization a lot of the power to
organize the marketplace shifted towards exchanges themselves, whose role became much more
architectural in that sense. As one interviewee told me:
“I think, demutualization is probably the most striking [change] in the fact that the
exchanges are now fully in charge of their own destiny. They can decide what they want
to compete on, decide what they want to launch, what areas of business they want to
expand or attract from, whereas before they were looking after their own membership.
[…] So, I think it’s really taking charge of their corporate direction… [that] is probably
the biggest single change.”2
However, while exchanges gained more agency, they now had to generate profits and maximize
shareholder value in a completely different environment. As Lee (2002: 1) noted, at the end of
this process, “exchanges now have customers, not members”. Exchanges now also had to
compete with their former members and owners (e.g. banks, brokers) – who tried to side-step
exchanges by setting up or backing non-exchange trading platforms such as alternative trading
systems (ATS), inter-dealer crossing networks or dark pools – and with one another, for listings,
customers, order flow and market share as they needed to generate profits. This process was
intensified by regulations such as Regulation ATS (1998) in the US or MiFID (2005) in Europe
which facilitated this competition. By 2010, European exchanges had lost more than 20% of
the trading on stock markets and between 2005 and 2009 NYSE’s US-market share decreased
from 79.1% to 27.4% (Lannoo and Valiante, 2010).
The rapid development of over the counter (OTC) derivative markets also pressured futures
exchanges, as emphasized by former Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME) chairman Leo
Melamed who stated that: “it is no secret that the combined onslaught of globalization, OTC
competition, and technological advancement, have put enormous pressure on traditional futures
exchanges. Indeed, in some quarters, there is a growing belief that the good days for traditional
exchanges is behind them” (cited in Nystedt, 2004: 4). The looming internationalization of
exchanges only intensified these dynamics.
Internationalization: expansion, consolidation and cooperation
From being institutions mainly focused on their respective national markets shielded from the
outside world, increasing cross-border integration from the 1980s onwards exposed exchanges
to global markets themselves which both increased competitive pressures on exchanges but also
created possibilities to scale up their business, to exploit or create new markets. Liquidity
attracts liquidity – size matters, and in a global world, their national markets had become too
small: in order to survive, exchanges had to gain in size and had to venture into global markets.
As erstwhile national institutions – in the words of former NYSE CEO John Thain “every
country has an army, a flag and an exchange” (Biglari, 2007) –, exchanges started to form huge
organizations spanning the globe. While the first international mergers and acquisitions (M&A)
4

between exchanges only occurred in the early 1990s, 71% of the largest exchanges had engaged
in international M&A activities by 2018 (see figure 1). As a result of a series of mergers in the
1990s and 2000s, previously ‘individual’ marketplaces such as the NYSE, Chicago Mercantile
Exchange or Nasdaq became (acquired by) globally active exchange groups such as ICE Group,
CME Group or Nasdaq OMX that now controlled markets all around the world.3 Exchanges
also started to acquire many of their non-exchange competitors, literally buying back some of
the market share they had lost a few years earlier.4 Futures exchanges also started buying stock
exchanges and vice versa, as well as trading venues for bonds, foreign exchange, carbon
emissions, commodity and financial derivatives – with 85% of the largest exchanges now
offering trading in multiple asset classes (see figure 1). However, mergers between exchanges
have political limitations as exchanges are still understood as quasi-public, quasi-national
institutions with a strategic importance for their respective economies, as demonstrated by
many failed high-profile mergers between exchanges.5 Less liberal countries such as Taiwan or
Korea do not even allow foreigners to own a majority of their exchanges or exchanges are
completely state-owned as in China.
Next to consolidation within their own industry, exchanges started buying other financial
services providers such as, index and data providers or clearing houses – all leading to a
diversification of exchanges’ business models. Further, exchanges started to form alliances,
create joint ventures, cross-list and jointly develop products or create connectivities between
markets by linking their trading platforms and facilitating the development of HFT
infrastructures (Wójcik, 2012; MacKenzie et al., 2012). From the 1990s onwards, exchanges
also started to internationalize their operations, opening offices around the world to gain access
to local financial communities; these offices are usually staffed with sales and business
development personal whose job is to onboard new clients and open up new markets. While
CME was the first exchange to open an international office in 1987, in 2002 the then top-20
exchanges had already established 48 offices, and in 2017 the top-20 exchanges had 181
offices.6 Overall, internationalization amplified the competitive pressures that exchanges had
been subjected to but also opened up opportunities for consolidation, an expansion of their
business models, new forms of inter-exchange cooperation and for them to venture into new
markets.
Digitization: electronic trading, data and technology
Despite powerful images such as commemorating Initial Public Offerings (IPOs), the
ceremonial ringing of the bell, or hectic activity on open out-cry trading floors, after the late
1990s traditional face-to-face trading was gradually superseded by electronic markets (Gorham
and Singh, 2009). Already launched as fully electronic marketplaces, newcomer exchanges
such as OM, Nasdaq, ICE or Eurex soon acquired vast market shares across asset classes,
forcing incumbent floor-based exchanges such as NYMEX or LIFFE to their knees in breath
taking market showdowns. The future of trading was bound to become electronic. By 2008, all
major exchanges had adopted electronic trading. By 2018, 68% had closed their physical
trading floors (see figure 1) – often only keeping them to “keep up appearances” for the
spectacle, ceremonial events and news reporting. However, digitization also fundamentally
changed the workings of exchanges.

5

On one side, electronic trading facilitated the marketization and internationalization of
exchanges. Digitization further curtailed the power of the exchange’s members who long tried
to resist electronification. Instead of members physically making markets and prices in the
trading pits, rings and floors via open-outcry (see Zaloom, 2006), the shift from floor-based to
electronic trading transferred a lot of their power to the exchanges themselves. By running
electronic matching engines, exchanges were able to replace the price-making function
originally performed by floor-trading members which enabled them to facilitate financial
trading on their terms. Digitization also increased competition as now everyone with some
venture capital and a few lines of code was able to create a new trading platform. As already
discussed, these platforms massively drove down the price of trading, partially because they
did not have the huge overhead of traditional exchanges.7 On the other side, the proliferation of
data and computing capacity opened up completely new business fields for them. As exchanges
were hard pressed to find new sources of revenue, they realized that the electronification of
markets and the rapid development of information technology created many opportunities for
them to capitalize upon. As Wójcik (2012: 131) noted, “while in the mid-1980s it was an
achievement for SEAQ in London to execute up to 10 trades per second […], in 2010 computers
[could] generate thousands of orders per second each.”
Digitization had fundamentally changed the game. Market data became a resource that could
be utilized by exchanges who realized that they sat on a gold mine. Not only could they sell
market data, they could also use it to create new services and products, such as analytical tools,
indices, reporting, post-trade services such as central clearing or settlement or sell their
technology – often enforcing the exclusivity of their products through a vertical silo business
model. Consequently, exchanges started investing heavily into market data, data analytics, and
indices, which facilitated the expansion of new asset classes such as financial derivatives based
on continuous streams of market data (Millo, 2007). As a result, exchanges have increasingly
become “content providers” (Lee, 2002), selling market data, technology and other services to
their clients.
Digitization also facilitated the internationalization of exchanges. Instead of requiring access to
a physical trading floor in one specific location, everyone with the necessary hard- and software
could participate in these markets, as long as regulatory and organizational obstacles had been
resolved. Digitization overhauled traditional trading technologies (open-outcry floor trading)
tied to their traditional corporate governance form (mutuality), reinforced marketization and
internationalization pressures, and simultaneously opened up a whole new range of business
opportunities for exchanges.
The exchange as market actor
Despite these processes of marketization, internationalization and digitization, the public
perception of exchanges is still nostalgically clinging to their historic form, taking little account
of the fact that between the 1980s and today, exchanges have changed beyond recognition. First,
while exchanges have become actors in their own right, they have also become subject to
competition, forcing them to innovate, generate profits and diversify their business model.
Second, exchanges have become more global and complex institutions. Third, exchanges have
become electronic markets and financial technology companies. From being mere marketplaces
– national, member-controlled, non-profit organizations and physical trading locations with
6

little agency – exchanges have transformed into what can be called market actors: autonomous
and profit-driven actors who sell their markets, technologies, products and services to investors,
and who actively create, regulate and shape (electronic) markets around the world and across
asset classes. Figure 1 summarizes this transformation of exchanges.

Figure 1: the transformation of exchanges (1980-2018).
Once “traditional” stock exchanges today only make between 5-20% of their profits through
the listing and trading of stocks – which is their original function for facilitating corporate
finance (Zysman, 1983). Exchanges have diversified their business horizontally – by adding
new asset classes to their portfolio – and vertically, by offering various other products and
services. You can now buy proprietary market data and data analytic tools from exchanges,
license their indices, use their benchmarks as reference prices, trade various financial products
and asset classes on their different trading platforms – not only equities but also bonds,
currencies, commodities or derivatives –, co-locate your servers next to theirs, and use their
clearing house, settlement, collateral management, custodian services and regulatory reporting
tools. Through this consolidation, exchanges gained control over large parts of capital market
trading infrastructures – a business that turned out to be hugely profitable.
An analysis of exchanges’ business segment revenue reporting illustrates these changes. At
London Stock Exchange (LSE) Group, stock trading revenues declined to 8.40%, while its
index business FTSE Russell (37.65%) and post-trading/clearing business LCH.Clearnet
(36.72%) became much more prominent (LSE, 2017). ICE Group who runs the NYSE, the
7

world’s largest stock market, as well as dozens of other marketplaces such as LIFFE or NYBOT,
has over the years heavily invested into data, analytics and indices, now generating 54% of its
revenue with this business segment (ICE, 2017). In 2017, stock trading revenues at Nasdaq –
the company that, next to the iconic Nasdaq market, also runs ten markets in Northern Europe
– were at only 11% while its corporate services (27.89%), market data (23.72%) and technology
(12.08%) segments all became more important (Nasdaq, 2017). Over time, stock trading
revenue at Deutsche Börse Group decreased from 35.35% in 2000 to 7.17% in 2017 while
derivatives and clearing increased to 40.70% and its post-trade business to 36.02% (DBG, 2017).
This development is similar for most global exchanges. While trading stock trading has become
less important, exchanges today mostly generate their rising revenues through derivatives, posttrading services, indices and market data.
While traditionally, every country had an exchange of varying size, a new global hierarchy
between exchanges has emerged. An enormous concentration of marketplaces, liquidity and
power has taken place, and a majority of markets is now controlled by a few global exchange
groups (CME Group, ICE Group, Nasdaq, Deutsche Börse Group, LSE Group and Cboe).
While these global exchange groups are complemented by a few regional players (HKEx, SGX,
Euronext) and some larger national exchanges (Japanese JPX, Brazilian B3, Canadian TMX,
Indian and Chinese exchanges). These global exchange groups run the largest, most prestigious
markets, dominate discussions within the industry, own important technological know-how,
indices and products as well as large parts of global market infrastructures. Within a context of
asset management capitalism, exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and a rise of passive investment
(see Fichtner 2019, this volume), exchanges have only gained additional power to shape
markets. Today, a small number of global exchanges holds significant power over the
governance, development and organization of global capital markets.
How exchanges shape financialization
As the contributions to this part of the handbook highlight, financialization is not only an
external, structural force, it is enacted by and through certain agents. While exchanges have
themselves been influenced by processes of financialization as discussed above, they are also
crucial actors in and agents of financialization processes. First, as market organizers, exchanges
shape capital market dynamics, facilitating volatility and speculation. Second, exchanges are
crucial facilitators of capital market development globally. Third, power dynamics within
capital markets have shifted with exchanges becoming more powerful actors vis-à-vis both
other market actors as well as states.
Shaping capital markets: financialized trading, volatility and speculation
By creating, organizing and enabling capital markets in the first place, exchanges are able to
shape their form, content and dynamics. Rather than investors who are active within a market,
exchanges play a much more architectural role for markets as they control and create the
infrastructural arrangements that are necessary for their functioning in the first place. As
organizers of markets, exchanges provide a public good and should be concerned with the longterm stability of markets, but they are also profit-driven businesses in need to create shareholder
value. This is an important contradiction at the heart of exchanges because in their roles as
8

market organizers and marketplayers they have contradictory incentives. As the NYSE (cited
in Macey and O'Hara, 2005: 572) stated in a 2003 white paper (while still mutually-owned),
“the [cooperative ownership] structure [of the NYSE] seeks to maximize the efficiency,
reliability and integrity of the market, rather than to maximize profit as in the public company
model.” Not only have exchanges’ business models become more short term-oriented, but this
also has effects on the markets they organize.
As exchanges’ revenues depend on investors trading in their markets, they have an incentive to
develop these markets in a way that trading activity (and thereby speculation and volatility)
increases. Exchanges for instance provide the necessary infrastructures (i.e. co-location, direct
market access), trading rules (new order types, e.g. flash orders) and products (data analytic
tools, real-time market data) that enable HFT in the first place. While proponents of HTF argue
that it increases market liquidity, its opponents argue that it actually sucks up liquidity, severely
threatens market stability and that HFT trading is usually to the detriment of less technologically
sophisticated traders (MacKenzie et al., 2012: 288-290). Exchanges also facilitate the increased
trading of derivatives for instance by creating these financial products in the first place (Millo,
2007) as well as encouraging larger trading volumes through market maker schemes or fee
rebates for those investors who trade large volumes of these contracts. By facilitating high
trading volumes and by reinforcing corporate governance standards, exchanges also facilitate
shareholder value orientation in listed companies (Erturk 2019, this volume).
More than mere bystanders, exchanges are gatekeepers of capital markets, deciding who gets
in, what is traded and how trading is conducted, as investor strategies are influenced by trading
regulations and the products they can use – they are agents of financialization as they engage
in financial structuring and liquidity provision (see Chiapello 2019, this volume). While
deregulation was meant to facilitate market processes, control over marketplaces has since
concentrated in the hands of a few global exchanges who are now crucial in enabling
financialized corporate practices and speculative trading which leads to volatility in markets,
potentially impacting financial stability.
Financial globalization: spreading capital markets around the world
From 1980 to 2005, the number of countries with stock exchanges has increased from 59 to 117
(Weber et al., 2009). By connecting evermore investors, providing them with more investment
opportunities and internationalizing financial products and markets, exchanges also facilitate
the globalization of capital markets. Cross-border market integration is not a given, but only
possible through institutional changes such as widespread regulatory harmonization (e.g.
MiFID), the formation of global marketplaces through exchanges (e.g. through trading hour
extensions), or the creation of links between markets (e.g. cross listings). While the role of the
state and international financial institutions (Lavelle, 2004), domestic political coalitions
(Zhang, 2009) and pressures from global markets (Cerny, 1989) have been highlighted as push
factors for capital market development, the role of exchanges in these processes is less well
understood (but see Botzem and Dahl, 2014).
Where does the knowledge of how to create capital markets come from? In fact, global
exchange groups have been crucial in training regulators, investors and “local” exchange
operators in how advanced financial markets work. Further, they have been exporting their
financial technologies and infrastructures to underdeveloped markets, helped to develop these
9

in the first place and sometimes even run these smaller markets, promising to create growth by
capitalizing on their economies of scale and help create new financial products and services. In
return, the global exchanges earn fees, buy (a stake in) those (much) smaller exchanges and
have preferential access to their market data and products. While primarily commercially driven,
there is also an almost missionary element to these activities as these global exchanges see it as
their task to spread the gospel of efficient markets across the globe (Weitzman, 2011).
This role of exchanges can for instance be observed in how capital markets developed in East
Asia. Nasdaq for instance “provides technology to more or less all the exchanges in AsiaPacific”,8 thereby helping them to develop these capital markets. CME Group also has multiple
cooperations and ownership stakes with Asian exchanges helping to develop financial products
or enable their trading on CME’s 24h-trading platform Globex.9 Next to cross-listings with
Korean (KRX) and Taiwanese (TAIFEX) exchanges, Deutsche Börse formed a joint venture
with the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the China Financial Futures Exchange (CFFEX), the
China Europe International Exchange (CEINEX), whose aim is to facilitate China’s capital
market development abroad. The Japanese (JPX) and Korean (KRX) exchanges meanwhile
have heavily invested in South East Asian markets, partially owning and establishing new
exchanges in Myanmar, Laos and Cambodia, while as part of the Belt and Road Initiative
Chinese exchanges have partially acquired exchanges in Pakistan, Kazakhstan or Bangladesh.
Countless similar arrangements exist or have already been conducted. Exchanges have turned
into agents of financial globalization, spreading the development of capital markets globally,
thereby immensely facilitating financialization processes.
The politics of financialization: shifting dynamics of power and governance in finance
Through consolidations in the exchange industry, global giants like CME, ICE or Nasdaq have
emerged as actors with tremendous political and economic power, directly influencing power
dynamics within global finance and the politics of financialization. While banks were once their
owners/members, this relationship has changed completely as they have become clients and
competitors of now demutualized, profit-driven global exchanges. While for a long time banks
had the upper hand, trying to circumvent paying exchange fees by backing ATS or by
threatening to move their derivatives business OTC, 10 post-global financial crisis these
dynamics have reversed. Banks have been increasingly constrained by regulations, while
exchanges have consistently gained business from them: by facilitating central clearing on
(exchange-owned) clearing houses, by trying to get OTC derivatives trading onto exchanges
(futurization) and by lobbying regulations such as MiFID II, EMIR and Dodd-Frank (see for
instance Ferrarini and Moloney, 2012; Helleiner et al., 2018). While the power of banks has
somewhat decreased since the global financial crisis, the centrality of exchanges in global
finance has increased significantly.
Next to their increased power within finance, power dynamics towards states have also changed
(see also Wang, 2019, this volume). This is especially important in light of the historically close
relationship between states and exchanges, with the perception of exchanges as national icons
with a quasi-public task of running capital markets, thereby conducting many monitoring,
regulatory and supervisory functions. By occupying these roles, exchanges had a privileged
position in policy processes or preferential access to policy makers. As for instance one former
exchange representative noted:
10

“So, we would have for example a monthly meeting with the Bank of England. One
month they would host lunch, next month we would host lunch. It was because the
government through the Bank would like to have a finger at the pulse of what was
happening. […] So, that gave us some leverage in the corridors of power… with the
government, the Treasury and across the political hue. […] Exchanges had an important
role to play.”11
While exchanges are no longer quasi-public national institutions but rather profit-oriented
global corporations, close relationships between exchanges and states still persist today, which
raises questions over whether their influence might have become too big. In contrast to banks,
trust in exchanges and their actions remains relatively unquestioned post-crisis – also because
they facilitate a neutral image of themselves. As Botzem and Dahl (2014: 78) emphasize,
“rather than highlighting their own actorhood, they depict themselves as a marketplace […]
which leads to a vast underrating of their impact on processes of economic and institutional
change”.
But their actions are anything but neutral. As index providers, exchanges for instance decide
about countries’ inclusions or exclusions into their indices, yielding considerable power over
investment flows (Alloway et al., 2017), whereas by enabling hedging and exit possibilities
(Hardie, 2012) or by deciding on clearing house collateral frameworks they can have a
significant impact on countries’ refinancing operations (Genito, 2019) – in both instances
constraining governments’ behaviors and nudging them towards conforming with a neoliberal
rulebook of disintermediated, ‘free’ capital markets that exchanges organize (see for instance,
Doll, 2019). Overall, exchanges have been central in the politics of financialization and
financial regulation.
Conclusion
While exchanges represent one of the institutional foundations of modern capitalism, since the
late-1980s, exchanges have undergone a major transformation, being impacted by
financialization processes themselves. From solely being marketplaces, marketization,
internationalization and digitization led to a transformation of exchanges and overhauled their
role in capital markets. First, from having little agency, demutualization turned exchanges into
actors in their own right but also subjected them to market dynamics and competitive pressures.
Second, from a mainly national focus their business became increasingly international and they
diversified their geographical and business scope enormously. Third, due to digitization they
turned from being physical trading locations to running electronic markets and becoming
financial technology companies. Today, exchanges are global corporations with a wide variety
of business activities, both acting within and organizing, governing, shaping capital markets –
in that sense they have turned from marketplaces to market actors.
Thereby, exchanges have become both important agents of and key actors in financialization.
First, by organizing markets exchanges decide what can be traded and by whom. However, their
transformation has created incentives for them to create market structures that facilitate more
volatility and speculation, thereby contributing to financialized trading and corporate
governance practices. Second, through selling and exporting their financial technologies and
expertise, exchanges have been important actors in the development of capital markets and
spreading market-based financial practices globally. Third, exchanges have emerged as
11

powerful players within global finance, both vis-à-vis banks but also with regard to regulators
and states, influencing financial regulation and the politics of financialization. By raising
questions about the changed role of exchanges in capital markets, this chapter highlights the
role of exchanges as important actors in and agents of financialization. Capital markets do not
emerge out of a vacuum, but actors propel their development. Exchanges are one of these
important actors.
While this chapter provided an overview of exchanges, their transformation and how they
contribute to financialization processes, obviously exchanges are not uniform and there are
significant differences between them. State-owned exchanges in China for instance certainly
play a different role in markets than global exchanges. A future avenue of research could
therefore be a more detailed, comparative analysis of the (possibly diverging) roles that
exchanges perform in capital markets and financialization processes. It also remains unclear
how exchanges relate to other market actors in a changing post-crisis global financial ecosystem,
for instance to banks, high frequency traders, index providers or asset managers. And,
especially when it comes to derivative markets, exchanges are still dwarfed by OTC trading.
How do these different markets interact and what does it entail for the power of exchanges? In
a changing post-financial crisis world, addressing these questions could offer important insights
for our understanding of current transformations of global finance and its role in financialized
capitalism.

References
Abolafia, M. Y., 1996. Making Markets: Opportunism and Restraint on Wall Street. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Alloway, T., Burger, D. & Evans, R., 2017. Index Providers Rule the World—For Now, at Least.
Bloomberg, 27 November.
Baker, W. E., 1984. The Social Structure of a National Securities Market. American Journal of
Sociology, 89(4), pp.775-811.
Biglari, H., 2007. Strategic view: Exchanges seek a new model. Financial Times, 16 November.
Botzem, S. & Dahl, M., 2014. Trust in transparency: value dynamics and the reorganization of the Baltic
financial markets. In: Alexius, S. & Hallström, K. T. (eds.) Configuring Value Conflicts in
Markets. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, pp.63-81.
Braudel, F., 1983. Civilization and capitalism, 15th–18th century: The wheels of commerce. New York:
Harper & Row.
Carroll, T. & Jarvis, D. S. L. (eds.), 2014. The Politics of Marketising Asia. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Castelle, M., Millo, Y., Beunza, D. & Lubin, D. C., 2016. Where do electronic markets come from?
Regulation and the transformation of financial exchanges. Economy and Society, 45(2), pp.166200.
Cerny, P. G., 1989. The ‘Little Big Bang’ in Paris: financial market deregulation in a dirigiste system.
European Journal of Political Research, 17(2), pp.169-192.
DBG, 2017. Financial Report. Frankfurt: Deutsche Börse Group.
Doll, I. O., 2019. Argentina Wants MSCI to Upgrade Local Shares to Emerging Status. Bloomberg.

12

Engel, A., 2013. Futures and risk: the rise and demise of the hedger-speculator dichotomy. SocioEconomic Review, 11(3), pp.553-576.
Ferrarini, G. & Moloney, N., 2012. Reshaping Order Execution in the EU and the Role of Interest
Groups: From MiFID I to MiFID II. European Business Organization Law Review, 13(4),
pp.557-597.
Genito, L., 2019. What Markets Fear: Understanding the European Sovereign Debt Crisis Through the
Lens of Repo Market Liquidity. PhD Thesis, University of Warwick.
Gorham, M. & Singh, N., 2009. Electronic Exchanges: The Global Transformation from Pits to Bits.
Burlington, MA: Elsevier.
Hardie, I., 2012. Financialization and Government Borrowing Capacity in Emerging Markets.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Helleiner, E., Pagliari, S. & Spagna, I. (eds.), 2018. Governing the World's Biggest Market: The Politics
of Derivatives Regulation After the 2008 Crisis. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
ICE, 2017. Annual Report. Altanta: Intercontinental Exchange Group.
Lannoo, K. & Valiante, D., 2010. The MiFID Metamorphosis. European Capital Markets Institute,
ECMI Policy Brief No. 16/October 2010.
Lavelle, K. C., 2004. The Politics of Equity Finance in Emerging Markets. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Lee, R., 2002. The future of securities exchanges. The Wharton Financial Institutions Center, Working
Paper 02-14.
LSE, 2017. Annual Report. London: London Stock Exchange Group.
Lütz, S., 1998. The revival of the nation-state? Stock exchange regulation in an era of globalized
financial markets. Journal of European Public Policy, 5(1), pp.153-168.
Macey, J. R. & O'Hara, M., 2005. From Markets to Venues: Securities Regulation in an Evolving World.
Stanford Law Review, 58(2), pp.563-616.
MacKenzie, D., Beunza, D., Millo, Y. & Pardo-Guerra, J. P., 2012. Drilling through the Allegheny
Mountains. Liquidity, materiality and high-frequency trading. Journal of Cultural Economy,
5(3), pp.279-296.
Michie, R., 1999. The London Stock Exchange: A History. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Millo, Y., 2007. Making things deliverable: the origins of index-based derivatives. The Sociological
Review, 55(2), pp.196-214.
Moran, M., 1990. The Politics of the Financial Services Revolution The USA, UK and Japan.
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Mügge, D., 2011. Widen the market, narrow the competition: banker interests and the making of a
European capital market. Colchester: ECPR Press.
Nasdaq, 2017. Annual Report (Form 10-K). New York: Nasdaq Group.
Nystedt, J., 2004. Derivative Market Competition: OTC Markets versus Organized Derivative
Exchanges. International Monetary Fund, IMF Working Paper WP/04/61.
Posner, E., 2009. The Origins of Europe's New Stock Markets Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Skeete, H., 2008. A new breed of exchange. The Banker, 5 May.
Weber, K., Davis, G. F. & Lounsbury, M., 2009. Policy as myth and ceremony? The global spread of
stock exchanges, 1980–2005. Academy of Management Journal, 52(6), pp.1319-1347.

13

Weitzman, H., 2011. Chicago's Decade of Innovation: 1972-1982. In: Harris, L. (ed.) Regulated
Exchanges: Dynamic Agents of Economic Growth. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.174201.
Wójcik, D., 2012. The global stock market: issuers, investors, and intermediaries in an uneven world.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Zaloom, C., 2006. Out of the Pits: Traders and Technology from Chicago to London. Chicago:
University Chicago Press.
Zhang, X., 2009. From banks to markets: Malaysian and Taiwanese finance in transition. Review of
International Political Economy, 16(3), pp.382-408.
Zysman, J., 1983. Government, markets and growth: financial systems and the politics of industrial
change. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

1
This sample (n=44) is comprised of the largest stock and derivatives exchanges globally as well as the largest
exchanges for each region (e.g. Johannesburg Stock Exchange for Africa).
2
Interview with business development unit of global exchange in London (11 October 2017).
3
Wall Street Journal, 3 March 2016, p.17; see also: https://tinyurl.com/y54zs6jh (last accessed: 10 September
2018).
4
Nasdaq acquired BRUT in 2004 and Inet in 2006, NYSE bought Archipelago/ArcaEx in 2006, LSE acquired a
majority in Turquoise in 2009, and in 2017 Cboe acquired BATS Global Markets.
5
Such as attempted takeover of LSE by Nasdaq in 2006, TMX Group by LSE in 2011, or mergers between the
Australian and Singaporean exchanges in 2011, NYSE Euronext and Deutsche Börse in 2012, and between
Deutsche Börse and LSE in 2017.
6
Data obtained from exchanges’ annual reports (2002 and 2017)
7
Interview with CEO of alternative trading system in London (11 October 2017).
8
Interview with general manager of global exchange in Hong Kong (5 July 2017).
9
See: http://www.cmegroup.com/international/ (last accessed: 22 June 2018).
10
Interviews with business development units of global exchanges in London and Frankfurt (11 October and 2
November 2017).
11
Interview with former CEO of exchange in London (8 January 2018).

14

