Extending the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways at the city scale to inform future vulnerability
assessments – The case of Boston, Massachusetts
Jayne Lino1,2, Guillaume Rohat1,3,4*, Paul Kirshen2, Hy Dao1
1

Institute for Environmental Sciences, University of Geneva, Switzerland
School for the Environment, University of Massachusetts Boston, MA, United-States
3
Faculty of Geo-Information Science and Earth Observation, University of Twente, The Netherlands
4
National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), Boulder, CO, United-States
*
Corresponding author: guillaume.rohat@unige.ch
2

Submitted to the Journal of Extreme Events (August 07, 2019).

Abstract
Climate change will impact cities’ infrastructure and urban dwellers, who often show differentiated
capacity to cope with climate-related hazards. An emerging research field, using the latest global
socioeconomic and climate scenarios – namely the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs) and
Representative Concentration (RCPs) – is exploring how different socioeconomic pathways will
influence future society’s ability to cope with climate change impacts. While the SSPs have been
extensively used at the global scale, their use at the local and urban scale has remained rare, as they
first need to be contextualized and extended for the particular place of interest. In this study, we
present and apply a method to develop multi-scale extended SSPs at the city and neighborhood scale.
Using Boston, Massachusetts, as a case study, we combined scenario matching, experts’ elicitation,
and participatory processes to contextualize and make the global SSPs relevant at the urban scale. We
subsequently employed the extended SSPs to explore future neighborhood-level vulnerability to
extreme heat under multiple plausible socioeconomic trajectories, highlighting the usefulness of
extended SSPs in informing future vulnerability assessments. The large differences in outcomes hint at
the enormous potential of risk reduction that social and urban planning policies could trigger in the
next decades.

1. Introduction
Global climate change will affect cities worldwide (Romero Lankao and Qin 2011), with a wide range
of impacts on cities’ infrastructure and urban dwellers (Revi et al. 2014). Ways in which climate-related
hazards – such as flooding, droughts, and heat waves (Guerreiro et al. 2018) – will affect urban areas
has been well-documented by the climate Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability (IAV) research
community over the past decades. A substantial part of the existing literature has also been dedicated
to understanding the differential vulnerability of urban population to climate-related hazards (Cooley
et al. 2012, Garschagen and Romero-Lankao 2013, de Sherbinin and Bardy 2016, Kashem et al. 2016).
However, very little is known about ways in which socioeconomic development and demographic
change will influence future vulnerability to climate-related hazards (Rohat 2018, de Sherbinin et al.
2019). Up until recently, most assessments of future urban climate risks typically projected the effects
of various climate change scenarios and projections under current socioeconomic conditions
(Birkmann et al. 2013). Neglecting the role of socioeconomic development in shaping future
vulnerability and climate risks is particularly problematic in that it creates a systematic bias in climate
adaptation decision-making (Ebi et al. 2016).
1

Partly to address this issue, the climate change research community developed a new scenario
framework, made up of climate change scenarios (RCPs – Representative Concentration Pathways; van
Vuuren et al. 2011) and socioeconomic scenarios (SSPs – Shared Socioeconomic Pathways; O’Neill et
al. 2017) developed in parallel. The SSPs – which have the potential to foster the integration of
socioeconomic projections in IAV research (Kriegler et al. 2012) – are five global socioeconomic
development trends organized along different combinations of challenges to adaptation and
challenges to mitigation (see O’Neill et al. 2017) and comprise global narratives with country-level
quantification for key indicators such as population, education (KC and Lutz 2014), urbanization (Jiang
and O’Neill 2017), and GDP (Crespo Cuaresma 2017). Being global development trends, the SSPs
purposely lack of sectoral and regional details and should be “extended” – that is, contextualized for a
particular sector and/or region (van Ruijven et al. 2014) – to be used in sectoral and/or local studies.
Since the publication of the global SSPs narratives (O’Neill et al. 2017), sectoral extension and
quantification of the SSPs have flourished, e.g. extended SSPs for health (Ebi 2013, Sellers and Ebi
2017), food security worldwide (Hasegawa et al. 2015), the water sector (Wada et al. 2016, Yao et al.
2017), fisheries (Maury et al. 2017), forestry (Kemp-Benedict et al. 2014), population distribution
(Jones and O’Neill 2016), and urbanization (Li et al. 2019). However, there has been only a few regional
extensions, limited as for now to extended SSPs for the Barents Region (Nilsson et al. 2017), the SouthEast US (Absar and Preston 2015), West-Africa (Palazzo et al. 2017), New Zealand (Frame et al. 2018),
the Mediterranean coast (Reimann et al. 2018), the Baltic Sea (Zandersen et al. 2019), Europe (Kok et
al. 2019, Rohat et al. 2018), Tokyo (Kamei et al. 2016), and Houston (Rohat et al. in revision). The two
latter set of extended SSPs – which are the only existing urban extended SSPs to our knowledge – have
been developed based on the review of historical trends, and subsequently refined through an
interactive process with key local experts using individual interviews and/or questionnaires.
Using the City of Boston, Massachusetts, as a case study, we build upon existing efforts and present an
approach to develop extended SSPs at both the city and neighborhood-scale that are locally relevant
while connected to the global SSPs framework. In addition, we demonstrate how extended urban SSPs
can be useful tools to explore future vulnerability in cities and inform future urban climate risk
assessments. This paper is structured as followed. We first introduce the case study and detail the
methods employed to extend the global SSPs. We then present the citywide and neighborhoodfocused extended SSPs and provide an overview of a qualitative assessment of future vulnerability to
extreme heat under each extended SSP. We conclude with a reflection on the suitability of the SSPs
framework for climate risk assessments at the urban scale and provide suggestions for further
research.

2. Study area
The City of Boston, located on the East coast of the US, is the capital of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts and hosts ~700’000 inhabitants. While having a strong economy – with major industries
in health care and professional, scientific, and technical services (BPDA 2017) – and one of the lowest
unemployment rates in the country, Boston is also characterized by important and increasing
socioeconomic and racial inequalities. The City acknowledges its inequalities, ageing infrastructure,
and rising costs of real estate as posing significant challenges to its capacity to adapt to stresses and
shocks, such as climate-related hazards (BRC 2016).
Extreme heat is one of the main climatic threats in Boston, with climate change leading to more
frequent, more intense, and longer heat waves (Douglas et al. 2016), which are also exacerbated by
the urban heat island effect (Street et al. 2013, Coutts et al. 2015, Melaas et al. 2016). The City of
Boston’s climate change vulnerability assessment (City of Boston 2016) predicts climate change alone
is expected to triple the annual heat-related deaths by 2050 and will potentially lead to failures of
critical infrastructures, such as transportation and energy systems. The city-wide vulnerability
assessment also recognizes the differentiated vulnerability within its population, with older adults,
2

children, people with health conditions, people of color, people with low- to no-income, and people
with limited English proficiency considered to be particularly vulnerable (City of Boston, 2016).
In this study, we focus on two adjacent neighborhoods, namely Jamaica Plain and Roxbury (Figure 1).
As they house both low-income and high-income communities in proximity to each other and are
racially/ethnically diverse, they are particularly relevant to explore the differentiated vulnerability of
populations exposed to the same local environment and climate-related hazards.

Figure 1. Map of the city of Boston, Massachusetts (East Coast of the United States), with the two
selected case study neighborhoods and the localization of green/open spaces.

3. Methods
We developed and applied a three-step workflow (Figure 2) to extend the global SSPs at both the cityand neighborhood-level. We first matched the global SSPs with existing local scenarios, then used
experts’ elicitation to define city-wide extended SSPs, and finally used participatory processes to
contextualize and extend the city-wide SSPs at the neighborhood-level. The participatory processes
were also instrumental in identifying local drivers of vulnerability, which were used to assess future
vulnerability to extreme heat under the neighborhood-level extended SSPs. Because extending the five
SSPs at the local level would likely result in redundancies and would complicate participatory
processes, we focused on three SSPs that appeared to be the most contrasted and relevant to explore
future vulnerability, that is, SSP1, SSP2, and SSP4. SSP1 is defined as a scenario favoring increased
adaptation capacities, with decreased socioeconomic inequalities and increased investments in health
and education, while SSP4 describes a future with increased inequalities and stratification, with
differentiated access to health care and education. SSP2 represents the middle-of-the-road, with
continuation of current trends and persistence of existing socioeconomic inequalities.

3

Existing local
scenarios

Global SSPs

Scenario matching

Intermediate
scenarios
Experts’ elicitation

City-wide
extended SSPs
Participatory
processes

Local drivers of
social vulnerability

Neighborhood-level
extended SSPs
Assessment of future social
vulnerability to heat

Figure 2. Schematic workflow to extend the global SSPs at the city- and neighborhood-levels. Existing
scenarios are shown in yellow, methods are shown in red, and outputs are shown in blue.

3.1. Scenario matching
The use of existing scenarios as a starting point to develop new scenario narratives – instead of starting
from scratch – is a common practice in scenario development and a few studies extending the global
SSPs have made use of this approach (Kemp-Benedict et al. 2014, Absar and Preston 2015, Kok et al.
2019, Rohat et al. 2018). Methods to match scenarios of different scenario sets include the
classification around two axes (Busch 2006, Kok et al. 2013), the classification by archetypes (Hunt et
al. 2012, van Vuuren and Carter 2013), and the comprehensive matching of each narratives’
assumption (Kok et al. 2019, Palazzo et al. 2017, Rohat et al. 2018). In this study, we used the latter to
match the global SSPs narratives with local scenarios developed by the Metropolitan Area Planning
Council (MAPC 2014). As it is often the case at the city-scale, contrasted socioeconomic development
scenarios are scarce. To our knowledge, the MAPC scenarios are the only comprehensive
socioeconomic and urban development scenarios for the City of Boston. The MAPC scenarios comprise
two different scenarios, namely Status Quo and Stronger Region, which depicts future socioeconomic
and urban development in Boston up to 2040. Although both the MAPC and SSPs have been quantified
for key socioeconomic variables such as population growth, we relied only on the qualitative part of
the scenarios (that is, the narratives) to match the scenarios, as the narratives cover a much larger
range of domains than the quantitative part.
Resulting from the scenario matching exercise, the “intermediate scenarios” (see Figure 2) were used
to guide the experts’ elicitation process to design the final city-wide extended SSPs.

3.2. Experts’ elicitation
We followed the stepwise approach described in (Knol et al. 2010) and conducted in-person semistructured interviews (ranging from one to two hours) with eight selected experts with a deep
understanding of the local context and local dynamics. The interviews included two experts working
on scenario development at the MAPC, three socioeconomic, housing, and demographic experts
4

working at the Boston Planning and Development Agency, two public health experts with academic
backgrounds, and one public health expert working for the Boston Public Health Commission.
Experts were presented with a synthesis of the current state of Boston, the global SSPs, and the
intermediate scenarios, and were then asked to identify important drivers (and uncertainties) of local
socioeconomic and urban development and to subsequently provide qualitative assumptions for each
driver, under each extended SSP, for mid-century. Combining expert’s opinion and assumptions with
existing intermediate scenarios, we constructed the final city-wide extended SSPs.

3.3. Participatory processes
Participatory processes are a common approach to design socioeconomic and environmental scenarios
at the regional and local scale (Kok et al. 2014, Nilsson et al. 2017, Palazzo et al. 2017) as well as to
identify local drivers of vulnerability to climate-related hazards (Reckien 2014, Maharjan et al. 2017).
In this study, the participatory processes took form of attendance and intervention during seven
community meetings across the neighborhoods of Jamaica Plain and Roxbury (see Figure 1) and of a
number of longer individual interviews with residents, mostly from low-income communities and
ethnic minorities. Altogether, ~60 residents of the two neighborhoods took part in the participatory
processes. They provided input on key aspects of socioeconomic and urban development that are
important to local communities and identified neighborhood-level implications of the city-wide
socioeconomic scenarios for a number of specific aspects and key drivers of local development.
Combining residents’ perspectives with the city-wide extended SSPs, we built local narratives for our
neighborhood-level extended SSPs. These scenarios were therefore strongly oriented by local
communities’ perception of future socioeconomic and urban development and by the implications of
city-wide trends at the neighborhood-level.
The participatory processes were also used to identify local drivers of vulnerability to extreme heat
and their evolution under the local socioeconomic scenarios. We particularly focused this part of the
participatory processes on the identification of extrinsic drivers of vulnerability related to the
socioeconomic and urban context (i.e., related to adaptation capacities and the built environment),
rather than intrinsic drivers of vulnerability (i.e., related to individual characteristics, such as age,
disability, or health conditions) (Kovats and Hajat 2008).

4. Results
4.1. City-wide scenarios
4.1.2. Intermediate scenarios resulting from the matching
Results from the scenario matching exercise (Table 1) show that the Stronger Region scenario of the
MAPC (MAPC 2014) depicts trends that are comparable to that of SSP1, while the Status Quo scenario
can be matched with SSP2.
The Stronger Region scenario’s main narrative revolves around the economic strength of the city,
which attracts a more diverse and young workforce, resulting in high population growth, a trend
towards urban living, more compact housing types, and an overall trend towards more compact and
sustainable urban development. With an economic growth focused on human well-being, a
moderately high population growth, and compact and sustainable urban development, SSP1 is indeed
a good match to the Stronger Region scenario.
The Status Quo scenario’s narrative describes an overall perpetuation of historical trends and middleof-the-road pathway. This consists for instance of moderate population growth and persisting or slowly
improving inequalities. In Boston, this scenario describes an ageing population, the continuous decline
5

of household sizes, and overall preferences for single-family homes. With a middle-of-the-road
socioeconomic development, SSP2 is indeed a good match to the Status Quo scenario.
Depicting low population and economic growth, high increase in inequalities, and overall decrease of
investments and highly unequal access to public health services, SSP4 could not be matched with one
of the MAPC scenarios.
Table 1. Main assumptions of the global SSPs – for SSP1, SSP2, and SSP4 only (O’Neill et al. 2017) –and
the MAPC scenarios (MAPC 2014).

Economic
development
Population
growth
Racial and
ethnic diversity
Favored
households
arrangement
Urban
development
pattern
Investments in
health and
education
Inequalities

SSP1

SSP2

SSP4

Stronger
Region

Status Quo

Moderate/high,
focus on human
well-being

Moderate,
uneven

Moderate/low,
highly unequal

High

Moderate

High

Moderate

Low

High

Moderate

-

-

-

High

Moderate
Single-family
homes

-

-

-

Multi-family
and multipurposes
homes

Concentrated

Historical
patterns

Mixed

Towards a
compact city

Continuation
of historical
patterns

Increase

Decrease

Unequal

-

-

Decrease (low)

Persist (steady)

Increase (high)

Decrease

Persist

4.1.2. Main trends of extended scenarios
Results of the experts’ elicitation process show that the focus areas most relevant at the local scale are
socioeconomic and racial equity, demographic structures, affordable housing, urban development,
and public health. Provided with the intermediate scenarios resulting from the match of SSP1 with
Stronger Region scenario and of SSP2 with Status Quo scenario – and with global SSP4 scenario, which
could not be matched with any of the MAPC scenario – experts interpreted and contextualized the
main trends for the city of Boston, leading to three contrasted scenarios at the city-scale (Table 2).

6

Table 2. Assumptions of the extended SSPs for Boston (SSPsBoston) for a few selected main drivers.
SSP1Boston
Sustainable development
and social equity

SSP2Boston
Perpetuation of current
trends

Socioeconomic and
racial equity

Increase

Decrease

Economic growth

Higher

High

Population growth
Diversity
Housing
affordability
Institutional
coordination and
response capacity
Access to parks and
green spaces

Higher
Higher

High
High

Slower growth,
characterized by
uncertainty
Lower
Lower

Increase

Decrease

Strong decrease

Higher

Low

Lower

Increase (equitable)

Maintained

Unequitable

Name

SSP4Boston
Increased inequalities
Strong decrease

4.1.3. City-wide extended SSPs narratives
In addition to contextualizing the main trends of the intermediate scenarios – and of global SSP4 – for
Boston area, the experts’ elicitation process proved useful in developing full detailed narratives of each
extended SSP for Boston (hereafter SSPBoston).
SSP1Boston – Sustainable development and social equity: Boston’s development and policies
focus on reducing poverty and socioeconomic and racial inequalities. Equitable access to
infrastructure and services, such as health care, education, and affordable housing, as well as
job opportunities is the foundation of this development pathway. This scenario depicts
increased international immigration flows and increased federal funds for social and affordable
housing programs. High economic growth benefits low- and middle-income households and
job growth arises mainly from the education and health care sectors. This prosperity attracts
more people to the city, thus resulting in high demographic growth. Boston’s economy benefits
from a larger, younger, and more diverse workforce. Urban development focuses on human
well-being and equitable access to quality infrastructure and services. Boston follows a trend
towards urban living and compact growth as multifamily housing increases. Existing green
spaces and street trees are maintained and improved while new spaces are developed and the
prevalence of street trees increases throughout the city. At the same time, trust in local
government institutions increases, facilitating access to services and care for particularly
vulnerable populations. Coordination between local institutions increases, making them more
effective and responsive to deal with public health crises and emergencies.
SSP2Boston – Perpetuation of current trends: Boston’s development trends remain similar to
what we could be seen over the past few years. Efforts to address socioeconomic and racial
inequity persist, but are overshadowed by national dynamics and the city’s overall fast-paced
economic development, creating mostly high-wage and low-wage jobs. High-end housing is
developed throughout the city and the increasing demand for affordable housing is not met
by new developments, as funds to develop new affordable housing units lack, resulting in poor
housing quality outcomes for low-income people and people of color. Inequalities and
segregation persist and worsen in some areas, and segregation continues to increase in the
city and within its neighborhoods. While some improvements and renovations are made to
energy and transportation infrastructure as the city grows, overall infrastructure continues to
7

degrade. Existing parks and green spaces are preserved, but street trees remain more
prevalent in higher income areas and few new public green spaces are created. Efforts are
made to improve coordination between institutions, although resources lack, offering limited
results and making it difficult for them to respond effectively in instances of public health crises
and emergencies. Public health officials increase their outreach efforts, particularly for
vulnerable population groups, such as un-documented immigrants, people of color, lowincome people, and people with limited English proficiency, although trust in government is
low.
SSP4Boston – Increased inequalities: Boston’s development trends are highly influenced by a
privatization trend that further affects public funding and programs, leading to a sharp
decrease in federal funding for social programs and affordable housing as well as more
restrictive immigration policies that limit population growth and economic development. The
resulting impacts are thus widespread. Socioeconomic, racial, and income inequalities
significantly worsen as the city grows around high-wage industries (finance, education, and
health care) and low-wage industries (food preparation, hospitality, etc.). The city is
increasingly segregated, with high-income and low-income areas. Increasing value of land and
high-end developments push for a compact form of growth, although this is not favorable for
low-income communities as quality of life, and access to services and infrastructure is
increasingly defined by a neighborhood’s income level. Housing costs in the city are
increasingly high and federal funds lack to develop any new affordable housing units. There is
a large gap in between the city’s rising poverty rate and existing affordable units. Some lowincome communities are even pushed out of the city and segregation significantly worsens,
restricting access to infrastructure and services to low-income households and people of color.
Newly developed green spaces and parks are likely private, and existing green spaces and
public areas are not well maintained. The prevalence of chronic diseases and opioid-related
addictions increases, disproportionately impacting low-income communities. Investments in
health care is uneven, making access to care more difficult for low-income communities and
people of color. Public funds lack, affecting coordination in between institutions as well as their
individual ability to function.

4.2. Neighborhood-level scenarios
Following the participatory processes, the city-wide extended SSPs were further downscaled and
contextualized to the two adjacent neighborhoods of Jamaica Plain and Roxbury. Noticeably, most
participants – who mainly originated from low-income communities or ethnic minorities – had
difficulty imagining more optimistic pathways (such as the one described under SSP1) and were more
convinced that their neighborhood would follow the pathway described in SSP2 or SSP4. Nevertheless,
the three city-wide narratives were still extended to the neighborhood-scale and led to the
development of extended SSPs for the two neighborhoods (hereafter SSPJP-R, standing for “SSPs
Jamaica Plain – Roxbury”).
SSP1JP-R – Sustainable development and social equity: Socioeconomic and racial inequalities
are significantly reduced in the neighborhood, due to widespread policy and urban
development efforts to reduce poverty and ensure equity in access to quality housing,
infrastructure, and services. Trust in government increases, as assistance is made accessible
for lower-income families, people of color, and immigrants. As population growth in the city
increases, neighborhoods densify, but affordable and quality housing is ensured for lowerincome families. Old industrial areas and abandoned buildings are re-purposed to allow both
compact and efficient growth and an increase in the prevalence of green spaces and vegetation
across the neighborhood. Access to public transportation increases, as buses and trains run
8

more frequently, and large investments in infrastructure render them more reliable and
comfortable. This allows a more widespread use of public transportation and reduces
congestion.
SSP2JP-R – Perpetuation of current trends: Socioeconomic and racial inequalities keep
increasing in the neighborhood. Existing affordable housing units remain, but real estate costs
keep on rising as the neighborhood’s population becomes increasingly white and high-income.
Low-income people are priced-out of their neighborhood, while homeless people have to
move to other areas. However, some low-income pockets remain (mostly in Roxbury) along
with subsidized housing units. Low-income communities, immigrant communities, and
communities of color still struggle to get access to affordable, quality housing and to welfare
programs, further increasing inequalities. Trust in government from these communities
remains low. New apartment buildings are built on old industrial sites and lack vegetation.
Although existing green spaces are maintained, there is an overall decrease in the presence of
street trees and vegetated areas in the neighborhood. Although some investments are made
in public transportation, they are not sufficient to keep up with degrading infrastructure, thus
further affecting reliability and efficiency for passengers, as well as overall comfort.
SSP4JP-R – Increased inequalities: Socioeconomic and racial inequalities rise rapidly due to highwage and low-wage job growth and a lack of effort by local and federal government to fight
them. Access to affordable housing and assistance programs for low-income people and
people of color is increasingly difficult and restricted, while trust in government is extremely
low. The impacts of these trends are magnified in comparison to the current trends scenario.
The neighborhood becomes increasingly gentrified and segregated, displacing many lowincome and homeless people. Few low-income pockets remain, mainly in Roxbury, where
quality of life and access to services is compromised. This pathway favors a compact form of
growth, with new high-end developments throughout the neighborhood. The overall
prevalence of trees decreases and new green spaces are privatized. Higher-income residents
increasingly use individual motorized transportation and ride-sharing services, increasing
congestion. Public transportation infrastructure degrades, further compromising accessibility
and reliability. This particularly affects low-income residents and those with health conditions
and physical disabilities who rely on public transportation.

4.3. Future vulnerability
4.3.1. Local drivers of vulnerability
The participatory processes were not only useful to design the neighborhood-level extended SSPs, but
also to identify the local drivers of vulnerability to extreme heat. Six key drivers of local vulnerability
were identified, namely (1) socioeconomic and racial inequalities, (2) access to air conditioning (AC),
(3) social isolation, (4) access to transportation, (5) the prevalence of green spaces and trees, and (6)
infrastructure and the built environment.
(1) Inequalities – Low-income residents and residents of color identified socioeconomic and
racial inequalities as being a core aspect of their vulnerability, as they exacerbate the effects
of other drivers, e.g. their ability to afford air conditioning and quality housing as well as their
access to green spaces and trees, transportation, and quality health care.
(2) Access to AC – A large proportion of residents rely on window AC units, as many older
buildings and homes do not have central AC. In higher-income areas, residents reported to
have at least a few units for their homes, but often chose to stay in just one or two rooms, thus
significantly affecting their daily routine. While most people have access to AC in higher9

income areas, many residents in low-income areas reported not being able to afford AC units
and/or the high utility bills related to their use. In some housing developments, residents had
access to an air conditioned community room during periods of extreme heat, although they
reported it was often not used by residents as there was nothing for them to do there.
Residents, both in higher- and lower-income areas, were concerned about the lack of AC in
public schools – concerned both for the children’s health and their ability to learn during
extreme heat events (Figure 3a).
(3) Social isolation – Residents generally reported that extreme heat affected their desire to
go outside and engage in their usual social activities (Figure 3b). Residents in higher-income
areas reported everyone remained indoors during periods of extreme heat, as they generally
had access to AC. In lower-income areas, although residents without AC (or with too few units)
had a tendency to go outdoors, residents who were particularly sensitive to the heat, such as
elderly people and people with health conditions, tended to remain indoors. Participants were
overall concerned of social isolation, particularly among the elderly and people with health
conditions, as they were forced to stay indoors. Residents were concerned extreme heat
further isolated the elderly and people especially sensitive to heat, and rendered them unable
to go to the pharmacy, to medical appointments, to get groceries, or attend social gatherings.
Participants particularly sensitive to the heat reported it affected their ability to get assistance
when they needed it.
(4) Access to transportation – During periods of extreme heat, most residents reported they
avoid moving around as they felt the use of public transportation resulted in high exposure to
the heat. Although many buses and trains are air conditioned, it is not always very effective
(for instance during rush hour) and transit stops are particularly hot. Underground train stops
are expected to be hot and uncomfortable, and numerous bus stops do not have sufficient
shade nearby (Figure 3d). Many residents also reported the use of AC in buses and trains often
renders it too cold, causing them to be exposed to large temperature differences, particularly
when required to change buses or trains. For these reasons, many avoided using public
transportation as much as possible. Residents in higher-income areas reported that during
periods of extreme heat, they were much more likely to use ride-sharing services rather than
use public transportation, walk, or bike.
(5) Prevalence of green spaces and trees – Residents perceived there is an overall lack of
vegetation, green spaces, and trees in their neighborhoods. While existing parks are
maintained, residents noticed there has been a decrease in the overall prevalence of trees and
vegetation in their streets, as old trees are cut down and new developments often lack any
kind of vegetation. Residents recognized the importance of having trees and green spaces in
their neighborhoods as they provide a significant source of cooling. Participants considered
the prevalence of street trees as particularly important when trying to get around, as trees can
provide shade in the street to people who are walking, getting to transit stops, or waiting for
the bus. Residents in lower-income areas noticed that the prevalence of trees and green spaces
is much scarcer in their neighborhood (Figure 3e) than in higher-income areas. However, in
lower-income areas, participants reported more people spent time outside during periods of
extreme heat, mostly in streets, parks, and in the free water parks and pools made available
by the city (Figure 3c). Some residents in lower-income areas expressed their desire to have
more green spaces to be able to stay outside in the heat and have social gatherings in the
summer.
(6) Infrastructure and built environment – Residents were generally concerned with ageing
infrastructure, specifically the electric grid and transportation infrastructure, which have been
subject to failure during extreme weather events (including extreme heat) in the region.
Increasing population density, combined with an ageing infrastructure, increased their
concerns about power outages, which would compromise access to AC, fridges, fans, and other
necessary devices. Residents were concerned about how this would affect already vulnerable
populations, for instance the elderly or non-English speakers, who may not have access to
10

information related to power outages, maintenance, and assistance. Participants also
witnessed the use of AC causing several power outages in older buildings in their
neighborhood, resulting in several hours without access to power during extreme heat events.

a

“Sometimes, I just try to get to a grocery store so I
can get some air conditioning for a while.”

d

“I feel like I’m suffocating waiting for the bus or the
train. I often get asthma attacks outside.”

“I have to stay home all day during heat waves. One
AC unit isn’t enough to feel comfortable at home,
and when it’s on I have to wear a mask to avoid
inhaling harmful particles.”
“During heat waves, we can’t get children to focus.
We can’t follow our lesson plans and we can end up
falling behind. We can barely open the windows,
and don’t have a room with AC in the school.”

b

c

“I am alone most of the summer. I cannot attend
social gatherings and medical appointments, and
sometimes I have to go without food. I am
constantly afraid something is going to happen to me
and I can’t get help from anybody.”

e

“I don’t know where I could have gone with the
children if we didn’t have access to that pool nearby.
It’s good that the pools are open for those who need
it the most.”

Figure 3. Selection of quotes (a, b, c, d) from residents involved in the participatory processes and
pictures (d, e) to emphasize certain drivers of heat-related vulnerability raised by the residents.

4.3.2. Future vulnerability assessment
The identification of local drivers of vulnerability – through participatory processes – and their
combination with neighborhood-level socioeconomic scenarios allows to determine the influence of
different socioeconomic pathways (that is, the extended SSPs) for future (mid-century) vulnerability to
extreme heat at the neighborhood-scale and for challenges to adaptation. The latter are defined
environmental and socioeconomic conditions that make adaptation more difficult and therefore
increase future climate risks (O’Neill et al. 2014). Detailed trends for key drivers of vulnerability under
each extended SSP – and the resulting potential extreme temperature impacts on the society – are
presented in Table 3. Overall, SSP1JP-R, being a sustainable development and social equity pathway,
depicts a neighborhood where challenges to adaptation to extreme heat are low (Figure 4), due to
efforts made at all levels to reduce inequalities and poverty as well as to promote sustainable urban
planning and investments in critical infrastructure. In contrast, SSP4JP-R depicts a neighborhood with
high challenges to adaptation to extreme heat for the increasing number of low-income people, who
often end up in poor quality housing. This results in uncertain access to AC and low access to reliable
and comfortable transportation. On the other hand, the increasingly white and high-income
population in the neighborhood has sufficient access to resources to cope efficiently with extreme
heat. Finally, SSP2JP-R, being a middle-of-the-road pathway, depicts medium to high challenges to
adaptation, in large part due to increasing socioeconomic and racial inequalities, restraining access to
sufficient resources for low-income people to cope with and adapt to extreme heat, as well as to a lack
of sufficient investments in critical and transport infrastructure.
11

Table 3. Trends of key drivers of local vulnerability to heat under each neighborhood-level extended
SSPs as well as the resulting potential extreme temperature impacts on the society.
SSP2 JP-R

SSP4 JP-R

Keep increasing. Low-income
people and people of color
continue to struggle for access
to quality housing. The
neighborhood’s population
becomes increasingly white and
high-income. Low-income
residents are progressively
priced-out of their
neighborhood.

Rising inequalities feed into
economic instability for lowincome residents. The rising
poverty rate and lack of new
affordable housing units further
segregate neighborhoods, which
becomes essentially high-income
and white with pockets of lowincome communities.

As local efforts increasingly
seek to reach out to vulnerable
population groups, people
determined as especially
vulnerable are able to get
access to basic cooling features.
New buildings developments
have central AC, and there is an
increasing prevalence of AC in
public schools.

Increasing inequalities restrict
access to AC for low-income
people, who cannot afford AC
units or the increased utility bills
related to their use. On the other
hand, higher-income people do
not struggle for access to AC and
all new high-end developments
have central AC.

Social isolation

Social isolation remains an
issue in the neighborhood,
but its effect on vulnerability
to extreme heat is mitigated
by increased prevalence of
AC, increased access to
transportation, and efficient
institutions aiming to reach
vulnerable populations.

The awareness of especially
vulnerable people and
increased coordination across
institutions has the potential to
help some people, but the lack
of funds and resources prevents
further progress. The results of
new programs to reduce social
isolation are limited and
inequalities deeply affect the
ability of socially isolated
people to cope with extreme
heat.

Worsening public transportation
infrastructure, increasing
inequalities, lack of access to
assistance programs, and lack of
trust in government increase the
burden of social isolation
regarding vulnerability to
extreme heat, as it is more
difficult for socially isolated
people to get access to the
assistance and care they need
during periods of extreme heat.

Access to
transportation

Investments in public
transportation infrastructure
increase access to
comfortable and reliable
public transportation. While
only small improvements at
transit stops make them more
comfortable, increased
frequency and reliability
make public transportation
more efficient and desirable,
increasing the ability of
people who are especially
sensitive to the heat to get
around.

Continuing investment in public
transportation infrastructure is
insufficient to keep it from
degrading, resulting in
increasingly unreliable and
inefficient service for
passengers. People who are
dependent on public
transportation and sensitive to
heat are further isolated, as no
actions are taken to cool down
transportation infrastructure
such as bus stops.

Public transportation
infrastructure keeps degrading.
As segregation increases,
restricting access to
infrastructure to low-income
people and people of color, the
public transportation system
becomes unreliable and
inefficient. This makes it difficult
for people who depend on public
transportation to tend to their
needs during periods of extreme
heat.

Socioeconomic
and racial
inequalities

Access to AC

SSP1JP-R
Inequalities decrease,
resulting in a lower poverty
rate and decreased
segregation. Trust in
government institutions
increases and facilitates
access to assistance programs
for low-income people and
people of color, while
affordable and quality
housing increases throughout
the neighborhood.
Lower-income people have
increased access to AC as
inequalities decrease and
access to assistance programs
increases. In older buildings,
residents still have to rely on
window units, but special
attention is paid to people
especially sensitive to the
heat. With increased public
funding available, cooling is
offered in public schools.

12

Prevalence of
green spaces
and trees

Infrastructure
and the built
environment

Extreme
temperature
impacts on the
society

Prevalence of green spaces
and trees increases evenly
across the neighborhood,
thus serving cooling and
recreational purposes. The
increase in trees makes it
more comfortable for
residents to walk in the
streets, and get to transit
stops, stores, etc. Moreover,
increased access to green
spaces favors outdoor
activities and gatherings.
While new buildings have
central AC, old buildings and
infrastructure are maintained
and renovated to
accommodate efficient and
reliable cooling. Investments
are made in public
infrastructure, ensuring their
resilience to climate-related
hazards and access to energy
and cooling features during
periods of extreme heat.
Globally low, mainly due to
an increased access to cheap
AC, an increased in the
prevalence of green areas,
and social policies leading to
lower inequalities.

Prevalence of green spaces and
trees is generally maintained
across the neighborhood.
Although residents report some
trees are cut down, some local
efforts to plant trees are
successful. However, green
spaces and trees still lack in
lower-income areas, where
streets still lack shade and
vegetation.

Existing parks and vegetation in
low-income areas are not well
maintained. In higher-income
areas, new green spaces are
prevalent but likely private,
making it even more difficult for
low-income people who do not
have AC to find cooling features
outdoors.

Although some minor
investments are made in
infrastructure, it continues to
degrade, further compromising
access to basic infrastructure
and services (such as energy
and cooling features) during
extreme heat, as it increases
risks of failures.

Public infrastructure degrades
quickly, as investments lack. Due
to the privatization trend,
infrastructure in low-income
neighborhoods is degrading and
unreliable, particularly during
heat waves, while higher-income
areas have more reliable access.

Globally medium to high,
mainly due to high inequalities
and unreliable transportation
systems, but mitigated to some
extent by an increased access
to AC.

Globally high, mainly due to the
high inequalities, lack of green
spaces, lack of access to
transportation and social
isolation of the elderly.

Inequalities
High

Medium

Infrastructure

Acess to AC
Low

Green spaces

Social isolation

Access to
transportation
SSP1

SSP2

SSP4

Figure 4. Challenges to adaptation (low, medium, or high) under the three neighborhood-level
extended SSPs, for each drivers of vulnerability to extreme heat.
13

5. Discussion and conclusion
In this study, we applied a three-step approach – made of scenario matching, experts’ elicitation, and
participatory processes – to extend the global SSPs to the City of Boston and two adjacent
neighborhoods. Both the city-wide and neighborhood-level extended SSPs are consistent with the
global SSPs, while being contextualized and relevant at the local scale. Taking advantage of the
participatory processes used to develop the neighborhood-level scenarios, we also identified key local
drivers of vulnerability to extreme heat and qualitatively assessed future heat vulnerability in the
neighborhood under the three contrasted extended SSPs. Such an application of the extended SSPs
sheds light on their usefulness at the local scale to inform vulnerability assessments.
Nevertheless, this research is associated with a number of caveats. First, matching the global SSPs with
local scenarios – as basis of their extension – requires the existence of scenario sets at the city-scale,
which may be challenging. In the case of the City of Boston, we were able to retrieve only two different
city-wide scenarios (MAPC 2014), which highly restricted the matching with the global SSPs. While the
number of socioeconomic and environmental scenarios is increasing (Hunt et al. 2012, Aerts et al.
2013), most of them are global or regional and not city-specific. Second, the scenario matching that
we performed was purely qualitative and did not rely on structured methods such as pairwise
comparisons (Rohat et al. 2018) or cross-impact balances (Schweizer and Kurniawan 2016). Third, we
were not able to quantify the extended SSPs. While the expert’s elicitation allowed to develop detailed
narratives of the city-wide SSPs, experts had difficulty providing quantified estimations simply based
on narratives, demonstrating the difficulty of quantifying scenarios using participatory approaches
(Birkmann et al. 2013). Moreover, as we focused on a relatively small group of experts, approaches to
quantify experts’ views – e.g. the fuzzy set theory (Rohat 2018) – were not applicable. Fourth, it proved
difficult to engage residents in discussing future trends, as the overwhelming majority of residents
involved in the participatory processes were uninterested in and unfamiliar with the scenario building
process and were much more interested in current issues. Similar difficulties are often reported in
scenario building studies, including studies extending the SSPs (Nilsson et al. 2017).
Overall, while we – and the experts – faced challenges in applying the global SSPs’ narratives at the
city-scale, we found the global SSPs to provide useful – and internally consistent – sets of boundary
conditions. Framing local scenario development within the SSP framework allows for cross-case study
comparison of the influence of socioeconomic pathways on future climate-related adaptation and
mitigation challenges. While there is currently only a few extended SSPs at the city-scale, we believe
that the easy-to-implement extension approach that we presented in this research could be taken on
board by the IAV community to develop extended SSPs in other cities, thus allowing for cross-case
studies comparison in the near future. Framing local scenarios within the SSP framework also enables
their subsequent combination with climate change scenarios (RCPs) to explore future climate risks
under socioeconomic and climatic uncertainty (Rohat et al. 2019). The increasing quantification of the
global SSPs at the sub-national scale (e.g. Hauer 2019), opens the door to urban scale assessments of
future climate risks based on the SSP*RCP framework. Such assessments would ultimately provide
local stakeholders with better estimates of future climate risks and a better understanding of the ways
in which both socioeconomic development and climate change shape future climate risks in urban
areas.

Acknowledgements
This research was partly funded by the State Secretariat for Education, Research, and Innovation (SERI,
Switzerland) within the framework of its program “Cotutelles de these”. G.R. acknowledges the
additional support of the Swiss National Science Foundation’s Doc Mobility scholarship. The authors
declare no known conflict of interest and wish to thank all the experts and residents who participated
in this research. NCAR is supported by the National Science Foundation.
14

References
Absar, SM and Preston BL (2015). Extending the shared socioeconomic pathways for sub-national
impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability studies. Global Environmental Change, 33, 83-96.
Aerts, JC, Feyen L, Hochrainer-Stigler S, Brenden J, Hudson P and Veldkamp TIE (2013). Inventory of
existing risk scenarios, ENHANCE EU Project.
Birkmann, J, Cutter SL, Rothman DS, Torsten W, Garschgen M, van Ruijven B, O'Neill B, Preston BL,
Kienberger S, Cardona OD, Siagian T, Hidayati D, Setiadi N, Binder CR, Hughes B and Pulwarty
R (2013). Scenarios for vulnerability: Opportunities and constraints in the context of climate
change and disaster risk. Climatic Change, 1, 53-68.
BPDA (2017). Boston's Economy Report, Boston Planning and Development Agency Research
Division.
BRC (2016). Boston's preliminary resilience assessment. The beginning of a shared journey to healing,
cnnections, and action, Mayor's Office of Resilience, Boston Resilience Collaborative group.
Busch, G (2006). Future European agricultural landscapes - What can we learn from existing
quantitative land use scenario studies? Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 114, 121-140.
City of Boston (2016). Vulnerability assessment, climate ready Boston, available at:
https://www.boston.gov/departments/environment/climate-ready-boston
Cooley, H, Moore E, Heberger M and Allen L (2012). Social vulnerability to climate change in
California, Pacific Institute.
Coutts, E, Ito K, Nardi C and Vuong T (2015). Planning urban heat island mitigation in Boston, The
Trust for Public Land.
Crespo Cuaresma, J (2017). Income projections for climate change research: A framework based on
human capital dynamics. Global Environmental Change, 42, 226-236.
de Sherbinin, A, Bukvic A, Rohat G, Gall M, McCusker B, Preston B, Apotsos A, Fish C, Kienberger S,
Muhonda P, Wilhelmi O, Macharia D, Shubert W, Sliuzas R, Tomaszewski B and Zhang S
(2019). Climate vulnerability mapping: A systematic review and future prospects. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.600.
de Sherbinin, A and Bardy G (2016). Social vulnerability to floods in two coastal megacities: New York
City and Mumbai. Vienna Yearbook of Population Research, 1, 131-165.
Douglas, E, Kirshen P, Hannigan R, Herst R and Palardy A (2016). Climate change and sea level rise
projections for Boston, Boston Research Advisory Group.
Ebi, KL (2013). Health in the new scenarios for climate change research. International Journal of
Environmental Research and Public Health, 11, 30-46.
Ebi, KL, Hess JJ ans Isaksen TB (2016). Using uncertain climate and development information in health
adaptation planning. Current Environmentql Health Reports, 3, 99-105.
Frame, B, Lawrence J, Ausseil A, Reisinger A and Daigneault A (2018). Adapting global shared
socioeconomic pathways for national and local scenarios. Climate Risk Management, 21, 3951.
Garschagen, M and Romero-Lankao P (2013). Exploring the relationships between urbanization
trends and climate change vulnerability. Climatic Change, 133, 37-52.
Guerreiro, SB, Dawson RJ, Kilsby C, Lewis E and Ford A (2018). Future heat-waves, droughts and
floods in 571 European cities. Environmental Research Letters, 13(3),
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/aaaad3.
Hasegawa, T, Fujimori S, Takahashi K and Masui T (2015). Scenarios for the risk of hunger in the
twenty first century using Shared Socioeconomic Pathways. Environmental Research Letters,
10(1), doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/1/014010
Hauer, ME (2019). Population projections for U.S. counties by age, sex, and race controlled to shared
socioeconomic pathway. Scientific Data, 6, https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2019.5.

15

Hunt, DVL, Lombardi DR, Atkinson S, Barber ARG, Barnes M, Boyko CT, Brown J, Bryson J, Butler D,
Caputo S, Caserio M, Coles R, Cooper RFD, Farmani R, Gaterell M, Hale J, Hales C, Hewitt CN,
Jankovic L, Jefferson I, Leach J, MacKenzie AR, Memon FA, Sadler JP, Weingaertner C, Whyatt
JD and Rogers CDF (2012). Scenario archetypes: Converging rather than diverging themes.
Sustainability, 4, 740-772.
Jiang, L and O’Neill BC (2017). Global urbanization projections for the shared socioeconomic
pathways. Global Environmental Change, 42, 193-199.
Jones, B and O’Neill BC (2016). Spatially explicit global population scenarios consistent with the
shared socioeconomic pathways. Environmental Research Letters, 11(8), doi: 10.1088/17489326/11/8/084003.
Kamei, M, Hanaki K and Kurisu K (2016). Tokyo’s long-term socioeconomic pathways: Towards a
sustainable future. Sustainable Cities and Society, 27, 73-82.
Kashem, SB, Wilson B and Van Zandt S (2016). Planning for climate adaptation: Evaluating the
changing patterns of social vulnerability and adaptation challenges in three coastal cities.
Journal of Planning Education and Research, 36, 304-318.
KC, S and Lutz W (2014). Demographic scenarios by age, sex and education corresponding to the SSP
narratives. Population and Environment, 35, 243-260.
Kemp-Benedict, E, de Jong W and Pacheco P (2014). Forest futures: Linking global paths to local
conditions. IUFRO World Series, 32, 539-553.
Knol, AB, Slottje P, van der Sluijs JP and Lebret E (2010). The use of expert elicitation in
environmental health impact assessment: A seven step procedure. Environmental Health,
9(19), doi: 10.1186/1476-069X-9-19.
Kok, K, Pedde S, Gramberger M, Harrison PA and Holman I (2019). New European socio-economic
scenarios for climate change research: Operationalising concepts to extended the shared
socioeconomic pathways. Regional Environmental Change, 19, 643-654.
Kok, K, Bärlund I, Flörke M, Holman I, Gramberger M, Sendzimir J, Stuch B and Zellmer K (2014).
European participatory scenario development: Strengthening the link between stories and
models. Climatic Change, 128, 187-200.
Kok, K, Gramberger M, Zellmer K, Simon KH, Jager J and Omann I (2013). Report on the new
methodology for scenario analysis and based on an analysis of past scenario exercises,
CLIMSAVE EU Project.
Kovats, RS and Hajat S (2008). Heat stress and public health: A critical review. Annual Review of Public
Health, 29, 41-55.
Kriegler, E, O’Neill BC, Hallegatte S, Kram T, Lempert RJ, Moss RH and Wilbanks T (2012). The need
for and use of socio-economic scenarios for climate change analysis: A new approach based
on shared socio-economic pathways. Global Environmental Change, 22, 807-822.
Li, X, Zhou Y, Eom J, Yu S and Asrar GR (2019). Projecting global urban area growth through 2100
based on historical time-series data and future shared socioeconomic pathways. Earth's
Future, 7, 351-362.
Maharjan, SK, Maharjan KL, Tiwari U and Sen NP (2017). Participatory vulnerability assessment of
climate vulnerabilities and impacts in Madi Valley of Chitwan district, Nepal. Cogent Food &
Agriculture, 3(1), http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/23311932.2017.1310078.
MAPC (2014). Population and housing demand projections for Metro Boston, Metropolitan Area
Planning Council, Boston, USA.
Maury, O, Campling L, Arrizabalaga H, Aumont O, Bopp L, Merino G, Squires D, Cheung W, Goujon M,
Guivarch C, Lefort S, Marsac F, Monteagudo P, Murtugudde R, Österblom H, Pulvenis JF, Ye Y
and van Ruijven BJ (2017). From shared socio-economic pathways (SSPs) to oceanic system
pathways (OSPs): Building policy-relevant scenarios for global oceanic ecosystems and
fisheries. Global Environmental Change, 45, 203-216.
Melaas, EK, Wang JA, Miller DL and Friedl MA (2016). Interactions between urban vegetation and
surface urban heat islands: A case study in the Boston metropolitan region. Environmental
Research Letters, 11(5), doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/5/054020.
16

Nilsson, AE, Bay-Larsen I, Carlsen H, van Oort B, Bjørkan M, Jylhä K, Klyuchnikova E, Masloboev V and
van der Watt L-M (2017). Towards extended shared socioeconomic pathways: A combined
participatory bottom-up and top-down methodology with results from the Barents region.
Global Environmental Change, 45, 124-132.
O’Neill, BC, Kriegler E, Riahi K, Ebi KL, Hallegatte S, Carter TR, Mathur R and van Vuuren DP (2014). A
new scenario framework for climate change research: The concept of shared socioeconomic
pathways. Climatic Change, 122, 387-400.
O’Neill, BC, Kriegler E, Ebi KL, Kemp-Benedict E, Riahi K, Rothman DS, van Ruijven BJ, van Vuuren DP,
Birkmann J, Kok K, Levy M and Solecki W (2017). The roads ahead: Narratives for shared
socioeconomic pathways describing world futures in the 21st century. Global Environmental
Change, 42, 169-180.
Palazzo, A, Vervoort JM, Mason-D’Croz D, Rutting L, Havlík P, Islam S, Bayala J, Valin H, Kadi Kadi HA,
Thornton P and Zougmore R (2017). Linking regional stakeholder scenarios and shared
socioeconomic pathways: Quantified West African food and climate futures in a global
context. Global Environmental Change, 45, 227-242.
Reckien, D (2014). Weather extremes and street life in India—Implications of fuzzy cognitive mapping
as a new tool for semi-quantitative impact assessment and ranking of adaptation measures.
Global Environmental Change, 26, 1-13.
Reimann, L, Merkens J-L and Vafeidis AT (2018). Regionalized shared socioeconomic pathways:
Narratives and spatial population projections for the Mediterranean coastal zone. Regional
Environmental Change, 18, 235-245.
Revi A, Satterthwaite DE, Aragon-Durand F, Corfee-Morlot J, Kiunsi RBR, Pelling M, Roberts D and
Solecki W (2014). Urban Areas. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation and
Vulnerability. Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Rohat, G, Wilhelmi O, Flacke J, Monaghan A, Gao J, Dao H and Van Maarseveen M. (in revision)
Characterizing the role of socioeconomic pathways in shaping future urban heat-related
challenges: The case of Greater Houston, Texas. To appear in Science of the Total
Environment.
Rohat, G, Flacke J, Dosio A, Pedde S, Dao H and van Maarseveen M (2019). Influence of changes in
socioeconomic and climatic conditions on future heat-related health challenges in Europe.
Global and Planetary Change, 172, 45-59.
Rohat, G (2018). Projecting drivers of human vulnerability under the shared socioeconomic
pathways. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 15(3),
doi:10.3390/ijerph15030554.
Rohat, G, Flacke J, Dao H and van Maarseveen M (2018). Co-use of existing scenario sets to extend
and quantify the shared socioeconomic pathways. Climatic Change, 151(3-4), 619-636.
Romero Lankao, P and Qin H (2011). Conceptualizing urban vulnerability to global climate and
environmental change. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 3(3), 142-149.
Schweizer, VJ and Kurniawan JH (2016). Systematically linking qualitative elements of scenarios
across levels, scales, and sectors. Environmental Modelling & Software, 79, 322-333.
Sellers, S and Ebi KL (2017). Climate change and health under the shared socioeconomic pathway
framework. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 15(1),
doi:10.3390/ijerph15010003.
Street, M, Reinhart C, Norford L and Ochsendorf J (2013). Urban heat island in Boston - An evaluation
of urbain air temperature models for predicting building energy use. In Proceedings of
Building Simulations. Chambery: France.
van Ruijven, BJ, Levy MA, Agrawal A, Biermann F, Birkmann J, Carter TR, Ebi KL, Garschagen M, Jones
B, Jones R, Kemp-Benedict E, Kok M, Kok K, Lemos MC, Lucas PL, Orlove B, Pachauri S, Parris
TM, Patwardhan A, Petersen A, Preston BL, Ribot J, Rothman DS and Schweizer VJ (2014).
Enhancing the relevance of shared socioeconomic pathways for climate change impacts,
adaptation and vulnerability research. Climatic Change, 122(3), 481-494.
17

van Vuuren, DP and Carter TR (2013). Climate and socio-economic scenarios for climate change
research and assessment: Reconciling the new with the old. Climatic Change, 122(3), 415429.
van Vuuren, DP, Edmonds J, Kainuma M, Riahi K, Thomson A, Hibbard K, Hurtt GC, Kram T, Krey V,
Lamarque J-F, Masui T, Meinshausen M, Nakicenovic N, Smith SJ and Rose SK (2011). The
representative concentration pathways: An overview. Climatic Change, 109, 5-31.
Wada, Y, Flörke M, Hanasaki N, Eisner S, Fischer G, Tramberend S, Satoh Y, van Vliet MTH, Yillia P,
Ringler C, Burek P and Wiberg D (2016). Modeling global water use for the 21st century: The
water futures and solutions (WFaS) initiative and its approaches. Geoscientific Model
Development, 9, 175-222.
Yao, M, Tramberend S, Kabat P, Hutjes RWA and Werners SE (2017). Building regional water-use
scenarios consistent with global shared socioeconomic pathways. Environmental Processes,
4(1), 15-31.
Zandersen, M, Hyytiäinen K, Meier HEM, Tomczak MT, Bauer B, Haapasaari PE, Olesen JE, Gustafsson
BG, Refsgaard JC, Fridell E, Pihlainen S, Le Tissier MDA, Kosenius A-K and Van Vuuren DP
(2019). Shared socio-economic pathways extended for the Baltic Sea: Exploring long-term
environmental problems. Regional Environmental Change, 19(4), 1073-1086.

18

