Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019 Chlef University International Conference Proceedings
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/Chief1.8

Pp. 86-96

Enhancing Students’ Effectiveness through Motivational Strategies
Haron BOURAS
Department of Foreign Languages
Souk-Ahras University, Algeria

Abstract
The present qualitative study aims to explore teachers’ and students’ perceptions of some teaching
motivational strategies impact on university students’ effectiveness based on Dörnyei & Csizér
(1998) landmark study. The research has involved individual in-depth semi-structured interviews
with six English Foreign Language (EFL) teachers and six students to further explore key issues
from their viewpoints. The main findings have unveiled that both teachers and students recognise
the motivating potential of all the examined scales. Many similarities and some dissimilarities
related to specific motivational themes have emerged. In terms of dissimilarity, students accorded
importance to group work scale, however teachers minimised its role by justifying that it needed
certain conditions. Another area of mismatch can be noticed in the way students and teachers
regarded tasks in motivating students. Teachers stressed on providing clear instruction and
explanation while students pointed to the content of tasks. Furthermore, another instance of
difference in participants’ views towards the same scale in terms of the motivational strategies to
be used was in teacher behaviour scale. Both participants agreed to place value on it, but students
appeared to emphasise on the social aspects as feeling relaxed and enjoying the class in order to
participate fully, while teachers stressed on academic achievement.
Keywords: Academic achievement, EFL teachers, group work, motivational strategies,
perceptions, students, tasks, teacher behavior
Cite as: BOURAS, H. (2019) Enhancing Students’ Effectiveness through Motivational
Strategies. Arab World English Journal, May 2019 Chlef University International Conference
Proceedings. 86-96. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/Chief1.8

86

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Enhancing Students’ Effectiveness through Motivational Strategies
BOURAS
Introduction
Motivation plays a crucial role in enhancing students’ motivation in English Foreign Language
(EFL) classrooms. It is considered asa prominent factor in language learning (Dörnyei, 2001a;
Oxford, 1994; Oxford & Shearin, 1994). More importantly, research on motivation in second (L2)
or foreign language (FL) learning has widened its scope and shifted emphasis from describing the
composition of students’ motivation to a detailed list of practical strategies to assisting teachers to
boost their students’ motivation (e.g., Cheng & Dörnyei, 2007; Dörnyei & Csizér, 1998; Dörnyei,
2001a; Williams & Burden, 1997).
LiteratureReview
There is a growing agreement among teachers and researchers that motivation plays a key role in
the success of the L2/FL learning process (Dörnyei, 1998). FL/L2 motivation is needed to help
learners expend and persist in their effort in a FL/L2 learning process which might extend over a
long study period of time. It is highlighted as well that “without motivation even the brightest
students who possess remarkable abilities cannot resist in the face of difficulties and attain any
really useful language” (Dörnyei, 2010, p.74).
As it is assumed in the present study, EFL teachers are more interested in finding ways of
increasing students’ involvement and engagement in learning activities in the FL classroom. A FL
classroom influenced by the teacher as a prime source of the new language has a major impact on
students’ motivation and attitude towards learning. Thus, teachers should be aware of motivational
strategies and how they are central to students’ motivation and interest in learning the English
language.
A look at the published literature unearthed that the previous research findings and even
the proposed motivational teaching strategies may not be adequate or valid for all EFL teaching
contexts and learning situations. In this context, it has been cited that “very little research has been
done to answer a crucial question: Are the proposed techniques actually effective in language
classrooms?” (Guilloteaux & Dörnyei, 2008, p.56). Yet, the study at hand endeavours to address
students’ motivation as a central issue so as to provide some insights into how university students
and teachers perceive the most important teacher motivational strategies that are derived from
Western educational contexts and evaluate their relevance to the Algerian EFL classroom context.
Aim of the Study
EFL teachers have always attempted to find new approaches or strategies that introduce practical
uses of English as a Foreign Language in the classroom. With this in mind, the primary concern
of the undertaken study is to foster more effective implementation of a set of motivational
strategies through a better understanding of their perceived importance of use in the FL classroom
from teachers’ and students’ perspectives and ultimately make students learn the English language.
Research Questions
The current study has addressed the following interrelated research questions:
a. Which motivational strategies do students and teachers identify as most important?
b. How do students’ and teachers’ beliefs compare?

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

87

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Enhancing Students’ Effectiveness through Motivational Strategies
BOURAS
Methodology
Participants
The participants were six EFL university teachers and six students from Souk-Ahras University,
Algeria. The students were enrolled in the first year Human Sciences. The technique used for
sampling was ‘convenience sampling’. That is our sample was conveniently selected. It is a nonrandom sampling method and is defined as “the selection of individuals who happen to be available
for study” (Mackey & Gass, 2005, p. 122).
Instruments
To collect qualitative data, semi-structured interviews were used to explore teachers’ and students’
experiences, perceptions, and views. Interviews may be conducted in various modes: face-to-face,
by telephone, videophone but face-to face is probably the best one. In our case, interviews were
conducted individually in the university; they were face-to-face, they were conducted in English
and recorded. Additionally, the interviewees were provided with a short summary about
motivational strategies that could also be used in the language classroom to make them voice out
their opinions around this specific area.
Data Analysis
Dörnyei & Csizér (1998) conceptualisation of motivational strategies was used as a framework
when analysing the motivational strategies which were discussed during the interviews. Thematic
analysis was used to analyse the qualitative data. In order to describe these ideas, codes are
generated from the data which are then classified into relevant themes. Dörnyei (2007b) suggests
several stages to be taken in order to interpret qualitative data. Generally, these stages include
transcribing the data, initial coding, grouping initial coding, searching for themes, defining and
naming themes, and writing the report. As a matter of fact, all the interviews were transcribed then
coded. Besides, the data were thematically analysed, and the themes related to the motivational
strategies used in the language classroom were grouped and then classified.
Results and Discussion
The main findings uncover that both teachers and students recognise the motivating potential of
all the examined scales. Many similarities and some dissimilarities in terms of their perceptions
related to specific motivational themes have emerged. In terms of dissimilarity, students accord
importance to group work scale; however, teachers minimise its role by justifying that it needs
certain conditions. Hereafter are some teachers’ and students’ quotations.
Teacher C said:
Group work needs more than a mere application, how are they [the students]
going to work? You [the teacher] have to set rules during group work activities.
Then, she added: I do not want to have chaos and disagreements that make the
group work goes wrong. (Teacher C)
Teacher B said:
A group is made up of different members who cannot get profit from one another
simply because we [the teachers] will have a kind of monopoly within the group.
He added: Different members form a small learner community, we [the teachers]
do not have the conditions or the means to make the members profit from one
another…always someone somehow is dominating. (Teacher B)
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

88

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Enhancing Students’ Effectiveness through Motivational Strategies
BOURAS
From the above quotes, we can clearly notice that the deficiency is not in the group work per se
but in the way how it is organised and according to which conditions. This leads us to think as well
that teachers themselves need to have a clear idea about setting group work norms in order to make
it successful and make learners get profit from one another. Teacher B’s perception conveys the
idea that group work does not have a positive effect and is not promoting cooperation among
learners during group work activities.
Teacher A stated clearly:
I do not include group work in my classes since they [the students] do not realise
the meaning of learning a foreign language …they do not realise the
responsibility of learning a foreign language in a group. (Teacher A)
Form her quotation, teacher A, is stressing two elements which are related to the students.
According to her, the students themselves ignore the positive and effective side of group work and
need to be responsible learners so as to promote their learning within a group.
Teacher D appears to agree with teacher A. She said:
Group work is not really important to me for the outcome is not interesting, group
learners are not always manageable and over years it proved to be not efficient
enough… at least for me! (Teacher D)
In fact, teacher (D) is playing down the role of group work because it is not that easy to be managed
and at the same time she makes a personal judgement about its inefficiency. It seems obvious,
form her quote that she attempted to operate with group work but it did not yield her the desired
outcome. But it is still useful to say that the problem is not in the group work but in how to set it.
Teacher E seemed to agree with all of them in minimising group work role and introduced a new
element which is associated with the use of the mother tongue among students to deviate from the
task assigned to them and start a discussion.
Teacher E placed too much emphasis on the teacher in organising group work to promote
learning. He stated:
In group work, most students are passive and only one or two students are speaking.
Sometimes students avoid the task assigned to them and start a discussion, using
the mother tongue, about their daily actions. (Teacher E)
Teacher (E) further added:
So, group work is not actually useful, it needs a lot of effort from teachers and
students seem to ignore its advantages. (Teacher E)
Teacher F did not give more details on group work. In her own words, she stated:
When programming group work, teachers help less advanced learners, encourage
their interests, and engage them. (Teacher F)
Teacher F spoke about teachers’ help and encouragement for less advanced learners’ interests and
engagement, but she did not include any information on how to afford this help to learners, or how
to encourage their interests, or engage them. In fact, her quote portrays the idea that organising
group work and managing it constitutes a difficult task for teachers.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

89

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Enhancing Students’ Effectiveness through Motivational Strategies
BOURAS
As we have seen, all the teachers talked about group work from different perspectives but
all of them agreed to down play its role in increasing learners’ effectiveness. Yet, the teachers
appear to hold group work in low regard, as they believe that it does not contribute to increasing
students’ effectiveness, but rather leads to the opposite impact causing disagreements and clashes
among the group members themselves.
Additionally, we have to recognise the fact they stated about its implementation which
requires more effort from the teacher and its organisation needs certain conditions to make it
achieve positive impacts in the students’ lives.
The attitudes of students towards creating group work were quite common. Most of them
seem to stress on the social aspect of getting to know each other. Students stated that working in a
group help them knit relationships and share the information. Exceptionally, only one student (L)
expressed her dissatisfaction. In her own words, she said:
Not a very good idea if we see the noise that students make. Students are always in
disagreement and even when we work in group, there is always one who is working
more than the others. (Student L)
Conversely, the other interviewed students talked about group work positively. For instance,
student G said:
…To have a good relationship between the learners because if there is no good
relationship between them they will face problems also to share the ideas. (Student
G)
Student K said:
…To share the information and the knowledge. Discover the other… Make the
students closer and strong relation between the students. …Creates a climate of
confidence and more than that solidarity. (Student K)
From her quotation, it seems that she is adding other benefits as a consequence of setting group
work. She stated that when students work within a group, there will be a climate of confidence and
solidarity. Students help each other and feel confident to express themselves. Indeed, some
students feel confident to express themselves in front of a limited number of their classmates.
In addition to sharing information and competition, other students are in favour of group
work and see it as an occasion to discuss and seek support from their fellow students and learn
from them something new in terms of ideas and information. These students appear to highlight
the social aspect of learning together and by ways of interaction.
Student I said:
It [Group work] is a good strategy, we share ideas to avoid the miss lead. A dynamic
member will push the other members. Group work creates more competition.
(Student I)
Student L said:
Group work helps to make a discussion in the group. (Student L)
Student H said:
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

90

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Enhancing Students’ Effectiveness through Motivational Strategies
BOURAS
Group work will give students the opportunity to share their information and learn
from the others and get new information. (Student H)
Another area of mismatch can be noticed in the way students and teachers regard tasks in
motivating students. Teachers stress on providing clear instruction and explanation while students
pointed to the content of tasks. They stated tasks should be interesting and varied. The teachers
and the students believe that strategies related to tasks have a key role in motivating students and
increasing their effectiveness. One student amongst the others appears to stress the importance of
breaking up the routine to prevent boredom and maintain student interest.
The result of this scale may also suggest an area of mismatch in the views of teachers and
students about the motivating factors of using tasks in enhancing students’ effectiveness. Students
go into more detail about how the tasks and their content can be motivating. In their views, tasks
should involve relevant topics to interaction and participation. It can reveal that students give much
more importance to the social aspects surrounding language learning. However, teachers accord
more importance to presenting tasks properly, providing clear instruction and including more
explanation. Teacher C said:
Tasks are in the heart of our job. If you [the teacher] do not explain to students,
they will not understand. So, they will not be motivated to do the task. (Teacher C)
Teacher B said:
Teachers must prepare before hand, you [the teacher] can’t ad-lib, make
instruction clear, make all students learn. (Teacher B)
Teacher A is raising another point about tasks. She said:
I [the teacher] hate assigning too much tasks to students, you [the teacher]
psychologically block them [the students]. They have to feel free. Too much tasks
make them [the students] bored and fed up. (Teacher A)
Her quotation portrays the idea that students’ effectiveness decreases because of the quantity of
tasks in the class. According to her, students feel rather bored and psychologically blocked and
consequently it would be preferable to assign them few tasks instead.
As for teacher F, presenting tasks properly is required with more emphasis on the oral ones.
Teacher F seems to give priority to oral tasks over the written ones without providing any
justification whatsoever.
She said:
Students like the teacher who presents tasks properly and who is fluent, who has
deep knowledge of the subject.
She added:
Teachers should give and present tasks in a motivating way.
Later, she came up with another precision saying:
They [the teachers] should give more oral tasks than written ones (Teacher F)
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

91

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Enhancing Students’ Effectiveness through Motivational Strategies
BOURAS
Teacher E agrees with teacher A in terms of presenting tasks properly without supplying any
further details.
He cited:
Presenting tasks properly is highly important and recommended to assure a better
response from your learners. (Teacher E)
Teacher A once again expressed:
I [the teacher] always stress on the responsibility to learn. There is something
missing in their [students] motivation there is a kind of lack! I [the teacher] stress
on intrinsic motivation. Even though you [the teacher] explain a task properly and
you expect them [the students] to work it they do not do it in a good way. There will
be always some kind of shortage! (Teacher A)
Albeit the teacher cited a very crucial element namely ‘Intrinsic Motivation’, she did not make any
linkages with the task. In fact, it is not only the way a task is presented that matters. Many factors
that none of the interviewed teachers hinted at as: variety, diversity, personal challenge, sense of
control over the process or the product, and students’ interest should be embedded in the structure
and design of the learning task itself in order to create an intrinsic motivation or purpose to
increase students’ effectiveness and yet their learning.
As for students, they appear to believe in the motivational effects of using strategies related
to tasks used in the FL class. They mainly spoke about three teaching practices: presenting tasks
in different ways to shackle off the classroom routine, including tasks and topics relating to
competition and involving students in the class to encourage participation.
Student I evoked the idea that teachers should vary the ways they deliver lessons and create
competition in order to avoid boredom. She also highlighted a central element that relates to the
practice of changing roles that differs from the old ‘show-and-tell’ practices where students sit as
bunch bound listeners and the teacher is lecturing as the main source of knowledge.
She said:
…Using a variety of ways to present lessons… create competition between students.
Get out of the classroom routine, change roles teacher and student. (Student I)
Student L appears to agree with student I on the element of using tasks that encourage students to
compete with one another and raise their curiosity to make them discover and learn by themselves.
She said:
…Tasks which encourage competition and challenge between students. Develop the
desire to study. Encourage students to discover, to know more. (Student L)
Student L seems to agree with student I in terms of variety and diversity of tasks and more
importantly she exemplified with task contents. She also valued interactive practices and lessons
in which students express themselves. She voiced:
The diversity of exercises is very important… phonetics, comprehension and written
expression. Asking students and hearing their opinions as a very good practice. The
lesson is more interesting when the lesson is about personal opinions. (Student L)
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

92

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Enhancing Students’ Effectiveness through Motivational Strategies
BOURAS
To the mind of student H, teachers are required to design tasks that rather facilitate the learning
and encourage students to participate in a stress free atmosphere. This may suggest that when
students find tasks difficult to do, they cannot participate and learn and yet they feel a sort of
stressful study atmosphere imposing itself on them and hinder their learning.
Student H said:
We need tasks to make the learning easy. Make all students participate in relaxed
atmosphere. (Student G)
Student G and K are no exception, they responded respectively:
To make the students understand the point and better understand the lesson and
push them to participate in the classroom and get the information from their inside.
(Student G)
Student K said:
Make students participate and create an atmosphere of competition. (Student K)
As has been mentioned previously, when addressing tasks, the students value a varied presentation
style suggesting that their classes are ordinary and could be boring. The task content was also an
important aspect for the students who state that the inclusion of useful and interesting topics is
important to maintain their interest and encourage participation. Participation also featured highly
in the views of the students who appear to view the motivation factors of presenting a task as the
process of learning.
This process of learning should allow students to be effective through interaction, speaking
and participating in the class, regardless of the task structure. In short, we can see that the students
will not feel motivated and effective by breaking up the routine only, but also need to be inspired
by relevant topics and fully involved in the class.
Additionally, another instance of difference in participants’ views towards the same scale
in terms of the motivational strategies to be used is in teacher behaviour scale. Both participants
agree to place value on it, but students appear to emphasise on the social aspects as feeling relaxed
and enjoying the class in order to participate fully, while teachers stress on academic achievement.
Teacher C said:
When you [the teacher] are fair! You communicate and behave the same way with
all of them [the students] according to the situation. This gives them [the students]
relaxation and safety! This [being fair] makes them [the students] motivated and
have the courage to work and get involved. (Teacher C)
Teacher B simply said:
You [the teacher] have to consider them [the students] all the same. He further
added: We [the teachers] try to provide them [the students] with the possibility to
learn especially shy learners and stir up latent knowledge embedded inside them.
(Teacher B)
Teacher C emphasised on the way the teacher behaves in the class and said:
They [the students] learn something other than information. They [the students]
like the way you [the teacher] work with them, they will be motivated. When you
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

93

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Enhancing Students’ Effectiveness through Motivational Strategies
BOURAS
work hard and set rules, this will help them improve and make them understand the
lesson. (Teacher C)
Students on their part voiced out the quotations that follow underneath.
Student I said:
The behaviour of the teacher reflects the personality of the teacher. For example,
when the teacher is strict, the students will respect him and become afraid of his
reactions so they will be strict but if the teacher is not strict the students also will
not be strict and he will lose the control on them. (Student I)
Her quote conveys the idea that ultimately students mirror their teacher in terms of behaviour.
Student L seems to slightly agree with student I when she indicates that the teacher’s behaviour as
being serious impacts the students’ lives in the classroom. However, student L stresses that the
impact can be either positive as making students lovethe language and yet accord it importance or
negative and result in making them hate to study it .
Student L said:
The behaviour of the teacher can make the student love or hate the language, to
give it importance. If teacher is good for example …serious, the students give
importance to the language. (Student L)
Student J as well recognises the importance of the teacher’s behaviour and considers the norms of
teacher tolerance and gentleness as motivational characteristics but within the limits and in the
right time. She underlines the fact that students may get advantage of the situation in the wrong
direction and yet they may end up with bothering the teacher.
Student J said:
The teacher behaviour is very important. The teacher must be gentle and tolerant
but not too much and all the time because there are always gentle students and
others not. (Student J)
Student K is of the opinion that students love the language owing to the teacher’s good treatment,
though she did not include any details on what or how could be this treatment in addition to varying
topics and encouraging student competition. In her opinion:
The teacher makes us love English by good treatment, doing activities to encourage
competition between students. Studying topics related to education, others to social
to make students free and not limited. (Student K)
The strategies mentioned by the students in relation to teacher behaviour involve the teacher
responding and caring about them as individuals and creating a good mood in the classroom, which
appears to contribute to the social aspect of the process of FL learning. They mention the teachers’
role in terms of enjoyment, tolerance, seriousness, and mood. It seems that the students are aware
of how the teacher is feeling and this affects them directly.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

94

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Enhancing Students’ Effectiveness through Motivational Strategies
BOURAS
Recommendations for Future Research
The undertaken study as it seems does not cover all possible researchable features regarding the
issue of motivational strategies since one of its limitations was its limited context. Yet, further
research could investigate the use of motivational strategies in a significant number of contexts
with participants from different educational contexts, for example primary, intermediate and
secondary, in order to obtain valid data which could contribute to our understanding of FL/L2
motivation. Future research could include additional institutions and larger numbers of students
and teachers. By expanding the number of participants, analyses could also take into consideration
variables such as language of instruction and language level.
Further investigations are needed as well to examine the motivational effects of using
strategies related to group work, task, and Learner autonomy from the perspectives of both EFL
teachers and students. In terms of group work, future study needs to examine whether group work
is considered, as was found in this study, less motivational for teachers and why this may be the
case. Future research could examine the discrepancy between teacher and student beliefs towards
the motivational power of using strategies related to task and Learner autonomy.
Conclusions
EFL teachers should have a balanced view about what motivates their students. They could adapt
the activities to create more interaction and promote participation whilst working towards the
learning outcome. Teacher should include a wide range of information on what motivates students
to learn, and how students learn languages through interaction.
In this global age, students are clearly focussing on social interaction, travel and the use of
English in real life situations of communication. Therefore, teachers should pay attention to how
this motivates students more than academic achievement and make them effective learners.
Teachers seem to deliver the course, focussing on their own behaviour and the organisation
within the classroom, but giving less thought to the idea of the students as individuals within a
social context with needs and preferences relating to learning process, interaction with their
teachers and other class members, and social interactions outside the classroom. The findings also
suggest that teachers need to be aware that their own views on what is motivating and effective for
the students are not necessarily the same as the students’ views.
In terms of ‘Group work’, teachers should be aware that simply grouping students together
to work on a given task does not necessarily promote the kind of interaction the students are
motivated by. They should first set up the ground rules for the group, give clear guidelines about
the roles of group members and train students in how to work together and collaborate. The task
itself should also be addressed so that teachers use group work with the outcomes being that of
social interaction through language use, as well as the completion of a learning based task.
About the author:
Dr. Haron BOURAS is a lecturer and a researcher at the Department of Foreign Languages, SoukAhras University. He previously taught English as a Foreign Language and Translation to first and
second year LMD French students. Currently, he is teaching Research Methodology and
Corrective and Articulatory Phonetics to first and second year LMD English students.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

95

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Enhancing Students’ Effectiveness through Motivational Strategies
BOURAS
Additionally, he is teaching ESP to third year LMD English Students. His research interests
include Applied Linguistics and TEFL. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8313-0016
References
Cheng, H. F., & Dörnyei, Z. (2007). The Use of Motivational Strategies in Language Instruction:
The Case of EFL Teaching in Taiwan. International Journal of Innovation in Language
Learning and Teaching, 1, (1), 153-174.
Dörnyei, Z. (2010). Researching Motivation: From Integrativeness to the Ideal L2 Self. In Hunston
& D. Oakey (eds.), Introducing Applied Linguistics: Concepts and Skills (pp.74-83). London:
Routledge.
Dörnyei, Z. (2007b). Research Methods in Applied Linguistics: Quantitative, Qualitative and
Mixed Methodologies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dörnyei, Z. (2001a). Motivational Strategies in the Language Classroom. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Dörnyei, Z. (1998). Motivation in Second and Foreign Language Learning.Language Teaching,
31, (03), 117-135.
Dörnyei, Z., & Csizér, K. (1998). Ten Commandments for Motivating Language Learners:
Results of an Empirical Study. Language Teaching Research, 2, (3), 203-229.
Guilloteaux, M. J., & Dörnyei, Z. (2008). Motivating Language Learners: A Classroom-Oriented
Investigation of the Effects of Motivational Strategies on Student Motivation. TESOL
Quarterly, 42, (1), 55 -77.
Mackey, A., & Gass, S. (2005). Second Language Research: Methodology and Design. Mahwah,
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Oxford, R. L., & Shearin, J. (1994). Language Learning Motivation: Expanding the Theoretical
Framework. The Modern Language Journal, 78, (1), 12-28.
Oxford, R. (1994). Language Learning Strategies: An Update. Available at:
http://www.cal.org/resources/digest/oxford01.html
Williams, M., & Burden, R. (1997). Psychology for Language Teachers.Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

96

