AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies, Volume3, Number3. August 2019
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no3.1

Pp. 3-19

When Translation Becomes a Question of Intervention

Wafaa Bedjaoui
Department of Translation, Faculty of Languages
Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Amina Tahraoui
Department of Translation, Faculty of Languages
Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

Abstract
This article attempts to highlight the social, political, and ethical challenges facing the translator
when dealing with religious and philosophical texts. Drawing on our experience in translating
books related to these fields from Arabic into French and vice versa, we pinpoint examples of
untranslatability of some religious and intellectual concepts due to constraints within the target
language. Moreover, the question of the translator as cross-cultural mediator capable of achieving
acculturation is addressed. The analysis is conducted following two fundamental concepts in the
field of translation studies, namely domestication and foreignization, in addition to another view
commonly used by the French philosopher Michel Foucault "authority or power of language"
which arises through the discourses that we produce, or that others produce. These ideas will give
insights into the translators’ choices, decisions, and even hesitations when handling terms or
expressions connected with religious or intellectual concepts.
Keywords: domestication, foreignization, ideology, religious concepts, untranslatability
Cites as: Bedjaoui, W., & Tahraoui, A. (2019). When Translation Becomes a Question of
Intervention. Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies, 3 (3) 3-19.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no3.1

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 |www.awej-tls.org

3

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
The Awakening of Female Consciousness in Kate Chopin’s

Alajlan

Introduction
The debate among translation theorists is still based on problematic issues that appear to be already
tackled. Plenty of questions are raised continuously about classical translation issues, such as
“faithfulness” that has ended in some dichotomies including foreignization and domestication.
These concepts are currently one of the most widely known and refer to those translation strategies,
where the translator either complies with the source text’s specific properties and brings them to
the target text and audience, or excludes them as much as possible and gets closer to the target
language.
This controversy between source text and target text’s proponents only reflects the "Self"
and "Other" polarity. As soon as we comprehend the translator’s position from each of them, we
recognize translation as a complex interactional intellectual process made up of choices, resulting
from several beliefs and opinions that build the translator’s personality.
Accordingly, the present paper attempts to highlight the social, political, and ethical
challenges facing the translator, through our experience in translating books from French into
Arabic and vice versa. We consider some examples where it might be impossible to translate the
concepts due to the target language limitedness. In the end, an attempt is made to provide an answer
to the question of whether the translator -as a cultural mediator – can achieve acculturation.
This contribution is the continuation of a reflection already started two years ago on the
translation of philosophical and religious texts from French into Arabic and vice versa. Bedjaoui
(2018) has stressed the relativity of the translating process when it comes to specialized concepts
in sensitive areas. Being especially careful when interpreting the terms related to the management
of human relations, and tolerance towards the Other is the greatest challenge that the translator
may face.
Theoretical Background
The topic addressed in the 4th Forum for Arab and International Relations1 is tightly linked to the
Arab Islamic identity with all its dimensions, and tackling such issues requires objectivity, because
talking about culture and acculturation leads to discussion about mutual influence between Arabs
and the Western World.
It is commonly agreed among translation theorists, professional translators or academics
that translation is a human communicative act which may hide mines, if realized for propaganda
or distorting purposes. Distorting translations are sometimes used for political speeches, such as
the speech of the ex-president ‘Mohamed Morsi’ that has been intentionally distorted by the
official Iranian channel interpreter in 20152.
To investigate the choices, decisions, and hesitations belonging to translators, two main
concepts in the field of translation science previously mentioned, constitute the basis of our
analysis, namely"foreignization and domestication." These terms have been introduced by Venuti
(1995/2003) when discussing the translator’s invisibility:
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

4

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
The Awakening of Female Consciousness in Kate Chopin’s

Alajlan

Invisibility is the term I will use to describe the translator’s situation and activity in
contemporary Anglo-American culture [….] A translated text, whether prose or poetry,
fiction or nonfiction, is judged acceptable by most publishers, reviewers, and readers when
it reads fluently, when the absence of any linguistic or stylistic peculiarities makes it seem
transparent, giving the appearance that it reflects the foreign writer’s personality or
intention or the essential meaning of the foreign text—the appearance, in other words, that
the translation is not, in fact, a translation, but the "original". (p.1)
The two concepts "foreignization "and "domestication "have received considerable attention from
translation scholars and researchers, particularly when it comes to conveying the meaning of
culture-bound terms and expressions, and could be associated to a certain extent with SL oriented
and TL oriented strategies. According to Venuti (1995/2003):
Foreignizing translation signifies the difference of the foreign text, yet only by disrupting
the cultural codes that prevail in the target language". At the same time, domestication
tends to create "the illusion of transparency, a fluent translation masquerades as true
semantic equivalence when it, in fact, inscribes the foreign text with a partial interpretation
[…] reducing if not simply excluding the very difference that translation is called on to
convey. (pp.20-21)
Furthermore, another concept of the French philosopher "Michel Foucault "is used, namely, the
power of language that arises from the discourses that we produce, or that others produce. In this
context, in a reformulation of Foucault’s idea about language power, Zouaoui (2002/2012) points
out that the discourse is a material authority, which possesses power and entails risks and fears, as
well as conflicts which may lead to victory or defeat, emancipation or enslavement. This authority
goes beyond the self and the institution, and establishes itself as an independent entity, which
terrifies the selves, the institutions, and the communities. For this reason, some communities,
especially the western one, strive to impose various forms of control over discourse and its power
3
.
However, the notion of language power will be used out of its philosophical context,
within a translational context, meaning the limits imposed by languages and discourses concerned
with translation. Consequently, the translator becomes a captive and is governed by specific
choices, especially in the field of human and social sciences, which deals with issues related to
individuals and communities, their cultures and customs.
Research Methodology and The Study Corpus
Taking account of the definition and perception explained in the previous section, we will consider
some translations we have accomplished with Algerian and Egyptian publishers (Ben Merabet
Library, Dar el Houda, International Echourouk Library, and Dar el Falah ). The strategies
applied to transfer our culture to others and other cultures to us will be exposed. It is worth
mentioning that translated extracts are taken from two corpora : ‫مقاالت جمعية العلماء المسلمين الجزائريين‬
(Essays of Algerian Muslim Scholars Association), which we have translated in 20154 , and Les
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

5

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
The Awakening of Female Consciousness in Kate Chopin’s

Alajlan

conditions de la renaissance (Conditions of Renaissance) the book of the Algerian thinker Malek
Bennabi where we translated some parts in 2016. This book was translated by the Egyptian Islamic
thinker Abdessabour Shaheen as well, and after reading his version, it could be suggested that what
he has accomplished is a rewriting of the original text. This leads us to make a comparison with
our translation to show that the translation work is subject to the translator’s conception, his
ideological, and intellectual beliefs, and his political orientations, and that translation is a doubleedged sword. In this regard, it seems that the most prominent problematic issues of acculturation
resulting from translation are related to Islamic Arab identity, such as religious concepts.
Having presented the theoretical framework and the corpus of our study, we provide a
detailed table of all the works that we have translated, to explain the circumstances surrounding
the translation process such as time and space.
Table 1. The Translated Works
Title of the book, author’s The
publishing
name, year of publication house that has
and publishing house
initiated
the
translation project
and
year
of
publication
‫مالمح المجتمع المسلم الذي ننشده‬
‫دار الفالح للنشر‬
،‫للعالمة يوسف القرضاوي‬
‫والترجمة والتوزيع‬
‫مؤسسة الرسالة للطباعة والنشر‬
110 ،2003 ،‫القاهرة‬
‫ دار الفرقان للنشر‬،‫والتوزيع‬
‫ص‬
،‫ ص‬440 - 2001 ,‫[ والتوزيع‬Dar El Falah for
‫ القاهرة‬Publishing,
[Features of the Muslim Translation and
Community that we Aspire Distribution,
for, of the erudite scholar Cairo,
2003,
Youcef El Qarathaoui, 110p]
Alrissala Publisher, Dar El
Forqan Publisher, 2001 440 p, Cairo]
‫دار الهدى للطباعة مقاالت علماء جمعية علماء‬
‫ دار‬،‫ مبارك الميلي‬،‫ المسلمين‬،‫والنشر و التوزيع‬
‫ عين‬،‫ص‬400 ،2011 ،‫ الهدى‬،‫ عين مليلة‬،2014
‫ الجزائر‬،‫الجزائر مليلة‬
[Essays of Scholars of [Dar El Houda
Muslim
Scholars Publisher, 2014
Association, Mbarek El Ain
M’lila
,
Mili , Dar El Houda 2011 Algeria]
400p, Ain M’lila, Algeria]

Remarks

The Purpose from Translation

Translation
of part eleven This is an attempt to clarify
only.
concepts connected with the
woman’s status in Islam, and to
change the Western World
conception about her unfortunate
situation in Arab and Islamic
societies, addressing them with
their language.

We
have
translated
three parts,
and
a
master’s
student has
translated the
fourth one.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

-Giving an accurate picture of
the Algerian society between
1930 and 1965.
-Providing other interpretations
to francophone historians to
show them history based on an
Algerian religious and cultural
reference from that period.

6

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
The Awakening of Female Consciousness in Kate Chopin’s

‫مقاالت علماء جمعية علماء‬
،‫ مقاالت الطيب العقبي‬،‫المسلمين‬
‫ عين‬،‫ص‬400 ،2011 ،‫دار الهدى‬
‫ الجزائر‬،‫مليلة‬
[Essays of Scholars of
Muslim
Scholars
Association, Essays of
Ettaib Elokbi, Dar El
Houda 2011, 400p Ain
M’lila Algeria].
‫مقاالت علماء جمعية علماء‬
،‫ مقاالت العربي التبسي‬،‫المسلمين‬
‫ عين‬،‫ص‬400 ،2011 ،‫دار الهدى‬
‫ الجزائر‬،‫مليلة‬
[Essays of Scholars of
Muslim
Scholars
Association
, Essays of Larbi Tebessi,
Dar El Houda 2011, 400p
Ain M’lila Algeria]

Alajlan

‫ دار الهدى للطباعة‬The
same The same remarks
،‫ والنشر و التوزيع‬remarks
،‫ عين مليلة‬،2014
‫الجزائر‬
[Dar El Houda
Publisher 2014,
Ain
M’lila,
Algeria]
‫ دار الهدى للطباعة‬The
same The same remarks
،‫والتوزيع‬
‫ والنشر‬remarks
،‫ عين مليلة‬،2014
‫الجزائر‬
[Dar El Houda
Publisher 2014,
Ain
M’lila,
Algeria]

The
Bible
and
‫الكتاب المقدس و‬
Colonialism: A Moral
‫ مكتبة‬،‫االستعمار‬
Critique,
Continuum ،2006،‫الشروق الدولية‬
International Publishing
‫القاهرة‬
Group, 1997
[The Bible and
Colonialism,
La Bible et le colonialisme, Echourouk
Paul
Jourez,
2003, International
L’Harmattan.
Library
2006, Cairo.]

This
book
was
published for
the first time
in English in
1997,
then
translated
into French in
2003 by Paul
Jourez, and
into Arabic in
2004 Ahmed
El
Djamel
and
Mona
Ziad,
Kodmous
Company for
Publishing
and
Distribution.
Our
translation is

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

Presentation of an extremely
significant study about how
Zionists have used a biased
interpretation of the Torah, to
deprive Palestinians of their
territories.

7

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
The Awakening of Female Consciousness in Kate Chopin’s

Alajlan

based on the
French
version of the
book.
Les conditions de la ‫دار بن مرابط للنشر‬
renaissance « Le problème [Dar Ben Merabet
de la femme »pp.123-128 Publisher]
Malek Bennabi, 2005,
ANEP
[Conditions
of
the
Renaissance “the woman’s
issue”pp.123-128]

Also
Revival of the intellectual
published by heritage of Malek Bennabi.
Syrian Dar El
Fikr in 1957
based on the
first edition
of 1948.

As seen from the table, The French version of Conditions de la renaissance (Conditions of
Renaissance) was issued for the first time in 1948, and translated in 1957 by the Syrian publishing
company “Dar el Fikr”. It is characterized by a philosophical language, as it addresses questions
related to civilization, society, and culture. The author, who sheds light on the causes of Muslims’
decline:
was a Muslim thinker, who was educated in the West and spent a long time trying to
understand Western civilization and culture. He believed that the decline of Muslims is not
because of Islam, but because of Muslims themselves. Belonging to a country (Algeria)
that had suffered for 130 years from one of the worst colonial rules in the world, Bennabi
looked deep into the essence of the problem to find out if it is mainly a problem of
civilization.5 Kirat (2014)
The texts written by the leaders of Muslim Scholars Association fall within intellectual,
religious texts with moderate, Islamic connotative charge, opposing the French Colonialism at that
time. They were written in the 1930s and have continued even after the independence. This
association has played a major role in shaping public opinion, and in raising public awareness.
The prose of these scholars has a complicated character that originates from the occurrence
of uncommon terms and expressions. This usually requires the use of monolingual dictionaries,
such as: ‫ يتحرك قضهم و قضيضهم‬and ‫ ( يحمي الذّمار‬Tebessi, 2011, p.1156) meaning respectively (They
all move together) and (He protects his family and his honor).
In this regard, it could be argued that Arabic language authority at the terminological level
imposes specific strategies that belong to foreignization mentioned by Venuti (1995/2003). To
apply these strategies, we usually use borrowing or cloning as Bani Amiri (2014) has pointed out7.
In the following example, we have borrowed the expression: ‫صفة‬
ّ ‫(أهل ال‬Ahl Assuffah) into French
language and added a clarifying translation. Consequently, even if we use foreignization in
borrowing, domestication also takes place through the explanation provided in French. This
methodical fluctuation in the translation process confirms the idea that translation is an overlap of
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

8

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
The Awakening of Female Consciousness in Kate Chopin’s

Alajlan

many strategies, according to what is required by the translation situation.
Intellectual texts with a religious character have certain specificities and require extensive
research before embarking on translation. In the case of the expression "‫صفة‬
ّ ‫("أهل ال‬Ahl Assuffah),
we first searched for the meaning in Arabic, because the explanation provided by Larbi Tebessi in
the extract below, is excessively concise and does not enable us to understand. Moreover, we
remained careful even after long search for this concept in religious websites written in French,
because many of them spread erroneous and biased information about Islam. Then comparisons
were drawn between our readings in specialized books in Arabic and those electronic websites.
Data Analysis
The first example is centered on the expression “Ahl Assuffah” and how it should be interpreted.
‫ وقد غلط من‬، ‫صفة كانت بمسجد المدينة‬
ّ ‫ ألن اآليتين مكيتان وال‬،" ‫صفة‬
ّ ‫و ليس المراد بالذين يدعون ربهم "أهل ال‬
ّ ، ‫ ويكفينا بيان رسول هللا صلى هللا عليه و سلم‬، ‫ظنهما فيهم نزلتا‬
‫ نعم ورد‬، ‫فإن هللا أنزل إليه القرآن ليبينه للناس‬
."‫"و تبتّل إليه تبتيال‬: ‫األمر باإلنقطاع في قوله تعالى‬
(Tebessi, 2011: p.908)
The author indicates that what is meant by those who pray to God is not “Ahl Assuffah”, because
the two verses were revealed in Makkah Al-Mukarramah, while ‘Asuffa ‘ was situated in the
Prophet’s Mosque of Al-Madinah Al-Munawwarah, and it is wrong to think otherwise. The
Prophet’s indication is sufficient evidence as the Quran was revealed to him by God to explain it
to people. Devotion to Allah is ordered in verse 8 of the Chapter of Al-Muzzammil (The Wrapped
in Garments) “devote yourself to Him with exclusive devotion.” 9The French translation that we
have provided for this is as follows:
Notons que ce verset ne désigne pas les soufis de l’époque qu’on appelait ‫ص َّف ِة‬
ُّ ‫[أَه ُل ال‬Ahl
Aṣṣuffah] « Les gens du banc », puisque il a été révélé à Makkah et non à Medine où se
trouvaient ces gens. Il est vrai qu’Allah a révélé le Coran au prophète que la paix et le salut
soit sur lui, pour le diffuser à son peuple, comme il est vrai qu’Allah nous a ordonné de
l’adorer conformément à ce verset « et consacre-toi totalement à Lui. » Selon plusieurs
théologiens islamiques « se consacrer à Allah » signifie : la loyauté. Dans les deux Sahihs,
le prophète -que la paix et le salut soit sur lui- avait interdit à Othmane Ibn Mardan de ne
s’adonner qu’aux pratiques religieuses.
This translation and explanation suggest that this verse does not refer to sophists of that period
who were called “Ahl Assuffah”, meaning “people of the porch”, because it was revealed in
Makkah and not in Al-Madinah where they were living. It is true that God has revealed the Quran
to the Prophet -peace and blessings be upon him- to disseminate it to his people, and that we have
been ordered by God to worship him in accordance with the verse “ Devote yourself completely
to him ”. According to many Islamic theologians, to devote oneself to Allah means loyalty. In the
two Sahihs (books of Hadith by Al-Bukhari and Moslem), the Prophet- peace be upon him- has
forbidden Othman Ibn Mardan to devote himself to something other than religious practices.
After the translation was accomplished, another explanation in French available on the web
was added, in the belief that addressing French speakers with a style that is common to them, can
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

9

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
The Awakening of Female Consciousness in Kate Chopin’s

Alajlan

be more efficient to confirm the reasoning and the explanation:
(le mot a donné « sofa » en français), en référence à ceux qui vivaient dans la Mosquée du
Prophète à Yathrib (Médine), et qui furent mentionnés dans le Coran comme « la compagnie
de ceux qui invoquent leur Seigneur matin et soir désirant Sa face» Al Kahf, verset 28, et
qu'on aurait désignés par le mot Suffiyya10.
It indicates that the word has produced ‘Sofa” in French, in reference to those who were living in
the Prophet’s Mosque in Al-Madinah, who were mentioned in The Holy Quran by “ with those
who call upon their Lord, morning and evening, seeking His pleasure” (Chapter of Al-Kahf (The
Cave): 28) 11, who would be then called Suffiyya.
In other words, this piece of information is contradictory with what the scholar has meant
to introduce. This is considered as a cognitive burden for the translator who finds himself lost
between controversial ideas, that require long search and careful scrutinizing to avoid this kind of
intellectual contradictions.
In this regard, the question of translatability versus untranslatability is raised, and it is for
the translator to adopt specific strategies to achieve his translation goal. Translation in this context
was almost unattainable, due to the new ideas included in this book, in comparison with what was
prevalent in religious environments in that period. Such terms necessitate research and
examination to such an extent that translating one single concept is time consuming. In fact, in
spite of the high number of translations, it is hard to find a comprehensive work such as a
specialized dictionary or a glossary which gives a detailed account of the terms used in the
complicated and delicate field of Islamic studies. Unlike other knowledge fields, Islamic concepts
entail meanings that were deeply rooted since the era of the Prophet Mohammad, peace be to him,
and are not affected with modern technological factors. To put it another way, these concepts do
not imply new meanings over time, at least within the Islamic context.
Another problem was encountered when translating this concept concerning whether it
should be linked to the idea of Sufism and its emergence. The author strives to show that the origin
of Sufism is not Arabic, because Ahl Assuffah in the Prophet Mohammad's era were not devoting
themselves to worship and invocation of God for a religious motive, but rather because they were
homeless and found themselves worshiping God in the Prophet’s Mosque, especially in this place.
In support of this argument, the author also remarks that the two verses are Makkan,
whereas ‘Suffa’ is related to the Prophet’s Mosque ‘Almasjed Annabawi’ situated in Al-Madinah.
One scientist has answered this scholar at that time, explaining that the origin of the word
“tassaouf” is from Latin and means wisdom, a piece of information which may be shocking for
specialists in Islamic studies, and about which one should be cautious.
Moreover, there are some problematic issues related to romanization12 connected with
writing Arabic words in foreign languages (Saadane, Semmar, & Bedjaoui, 2016). It is a term used
for the conversion of a word sounds to the writing system of Latin regardless of their
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

10

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
The Awakening of Female Consciousness in Kate Chopin’s

Alajlan

pronunciation.
Romanization, or Latin transliteration is witnessing a breakthrough due to the significant
use of many languages on the web, to cater for the needs for information search across languages,
and could be a handy tool in some translation situations especially in religious texts. Nevertheless,
it has been subjected to controversy among scholars and researchers. ElShiekh and Saleh (2011)
have examined the use of translation and transliteration in Islamic discourse in Western Countries,
and some religious terms were analyzed such as God versus Allah, alms-giving versus Zakat ; they
argue that it is highly encouraged to use translation even through a general term, for example
“praying” instead of Salat/Salaah, as this emphasizes the common elements between religions,
produces a positive effect on the target audience, and is connected with a tolerant religious
discourse that accepts the other.
According to them, transliteration is a helpful technique when the concept in question is not found
in the target culture, or when translating proper nouns. otherwise, they suggest that: " […]the use
of transliteration rather than translation of Islamic religious terms may be more common in the
Islamic discourse that adopts an anti-other attitude " (ElShiekh & Saleh, 2011, p.142).
Similarly, Hassan (2016, p.121) notes that one of the problems related to the transliteration
of Islamic religious terms is "that the transliterated form may give a sense of the exotic and cultural
difference." However, he mentions many advantages of transliteration, and argues that translation
of this type of terms into English is only appropriate when source language items and target
language items are cross-culturally equivalent, and have the same referents and connotations,
whereas transliteration is strongly recommended in all other situations where SL and TL items are
partially-equivalent or non-equivalent (Hassan,2016).
He considers transliteration as being appropriate in the case of proper nouns and culturebound terms with no equivalents, but he maintains that it is compulsory with some words that must
be learned by non-Arabic speakers from the Muslim community such as tasbīḥah, takbīrah,
taḥmīdah, tahlīlah, tashahhud (Hassan,2016).
As for the case of partially equivalent terms, and unlike the view suggested by ElShiekh
and Saleh (2011) mentioned above, he argues that transliteration enhanced by explanations within
footnotes is more appropriate than translation. The referents shared by (SL) and (TL) terms are
similar while the connotations are different, such as in Salaat /prayer, Alhajj /pilgrimage. Thus,
transliteration is believed to preserve accuracy and readability, and to avoid any loss in meaning,
and the transliterated forms introduced into the target language will be assimilated over time,
(Hassan,2016), although the target audience may not fully grasp their meanings immediately.
Another issue linked to the use of transliteration systems especially romanization, is the
declining standards in their application by some authors, like errors and inconsistencies appearing
in the use of symbols, for example the Arabic letter ayn (‘) and the hamzah (’) which lead to
confusion ( Gul, 2018). In order to reduce the amount of transliteration errors and maintain more
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

11

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
The Awakening of Female Consciousness in Kate Chopin’s

Alajlan

accuracy and consistency, Gul (2018, p.9) suggests the adoption of what he refers to as "generally
agreed-upon symbols "or using the transliterated system taken from a reliable dictionary. He
believes that transliteration plays a significant role in academic publications, shows the difference
between Arabic words which have the same spelling in the Latin script, and are dissimilar in their
diacritics such as Kha¯liq/Khalı¯q, as well as enables the author to preserve the meaning of a given
concept in a language other than Arabic (Gul, 2018).
In our opinion, this implies that with some Islamic concepts, translation may not be an
efficient tool to completely convey the meaning, whereas transliteration, which could be
considered as part of foreignization, has more capacity to render the meaning.
An undeniable example on inconsistency in the use of transliteration systems is available
when we examine the Roman script of the word ‘Assuffa’ stated above. Three different ways are
possible: « sofa», al-soufa, as-suffa. Such scripts may give rise to ambiguity for the translator who
wonders about how to select one of the forms produced by the transliteration mode. In such cases,
an explanatory translation, a paraphrase, or a footnote for the word that is alien to the target
language is usually provided.
Along with those strategies, we had also turned to the reductionist translation when hadith
chain of transmission was used. We have summarized by saying “according to many scholars”.
The adoption of this style is related to the nature of the target language, which is French, where
hadith transmission is inexistent. This leads us to resort to summarizing, because the focus is on
what is said and not who said it. This strategy could be included within what is called
domestication. It is an attempt to adapt the new text with the receiving culture.
In the same context, we have experienced the translation of what was translated before
such as Conditions de la renaissance (Conditions of Renaissance) of Bennabi. In fact, we were
invited by the Algerian publishing house ‘Ben Merabet’ to retranslate this book. This need has
emerged at the request of Algerian readers, who were seeking a new Arabic version after the one
produced in 1957 by the Syrian Publishing House, as mentioned above. This points to changes
witnessed by Arabic language over time in the Arab world, and its relationship with translation.
This is an important issue but goes beyond the scope of this study.
Translation and Rewriting
Before starting the translation, we have carried out an examination of the translations
accomplished by the Egyptian scholar A. Shaheen, but it was perplexing to see the significant
number of deviations from the source text. This may suggest that he was not translating but
rewriting it, using additions and omissions which may be related with what was described by Butt
(2009) as “a modern woman's confrontation with the […] perception of Islam, on the one hand,
and the idea of Islam as an absolute truth, on the other” (Butt, 2009, p. 168). Thus, many
hypotheses could be formulated. Firstly, Bennabi was the friend of Shaheen and was summarizing
his ideas to him, then Shaheen turns to rewrite them. Secondly, he has suggested to him what to
write, regarding the specificity of Arabic and the Arab community at that time, for fear of shocking
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

12

‫‪AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019‬‬
‫‪Alajlan‬‬

‫‪The Awakening of Female Consciousness in Kate Chopin’s‬‬

‫‪the Arab readers with his ideas. It is hard to confirm or refute these hypotheses owing to a lack of‬‬
‫‪research about the translations of Bennabi’s books. However, the following example may give a‬‬
‫‪clear picture. The ST is in French, the two translations to be discussed are in Arabic, and the‬‬
‫‪English version is added to ST, TT1, and TT2 by authors for the sake of clarification.‬‬
‫‪Table 2. Comparison between our Translation and Shaheen‘s Translation‬‬
‫‪The Source Text :‬‬
‫‪Our Translation‬‬
‫‪Shaheen’s Translation‬‬
‫)‪ ( mushkilat almar'a‬مشكلة المرأة ‪ (qadiat‬قضية المرأة ‪Le problème de la femme‬‬
‫)‪almar'a‬‬
‫]‪[The Woman’s Problem‬‬
‫‪[The‬‬
‫‪Woman’s‬‬
‫]‪Issue‬‬
‫‪Ce langage semble‬‬
‫و إذن فهذه المشكلة ينبغي أن تصفّى أوال من هذه النزعات ‪ ،‬على الرغم من أن هذا‬
‫يلوح إلى وجود ‪encore établir une sorte‬‬
‫ثم تحل حالّ يكون االعتبار األول فيه لمصلحة المجتمع‪،‬‬
‫الخطاب ّ‬
‫‪d'égalité‬‬
‫‪quantitative‬‬
‫يكونان الفرد في المجتمع ‪ :‬فهي شق الفرد نوع من المساواة بين‬
‫فالمرأة و الرجل ّ‬
‫‪ ،‬كما ّ‬
‫‪entre les deux individus‬‬
‫يكونان الجنس‬
‫فردين‬
‫هللا‬
‫صلى‬
‫فالرسول‬
‫غرو‬
‫ال‬
‫و‬
‫اآلخر‪.‬‬
‫شقه‬
‫أن الرجل‬
‫ّ‬
‫البشري‪ ،‬إال أنه ال وجود ‪constitutifs de l'espèce‬‬
‫عليه و سلم يقول ‪":‬النساء شقائق الرجال"‪ .‬و هللا تعالى‬
‫خلقهما من نفس واحدة و خلق منها زوجها ‪ ،‬و ّ‬
‫‪humaine. Mais il n'y a‬‬
‫لمساواة بين شيئين ال‬
‫بث منهما‬
‫‪pas d'égalité cependant‬‬
‫رجاال كثيرا ونساءا ‪ .‬فالمرأة و الرجل قطبا اإلنسانية ‪ ،‬و ال يمكن أن نستبدل أحدهما‬
‫‪entre deux éléments qui‬‬
‫باآلخر على المستوى‬
‫معنى ألحدهما بغير اآلخر‪.‬‬
‫‪ne sont interchangeables‬‬
‫البيولوجي و ال على‬
‫و إذا تساءلنا هل يجب نزع الحجاب ؟ أو هل يسوغ للمرأة‬
‫‪ni‬‬
‫‪dans‬‬
‫المستوى االجتماعي‪ .‬لقد ‪l'ordre‬‬
‫التدخين ؟ أو التصويت في االنتخابات ؟ أو هل يجب عليها‬
‫‪biologique, ni dans‬‬
‫أن تتعلم ؟ فينبغي أال يكون جوابنا عن هذه األسئلة بدافع من اخترع الرجل تحفا فنية‬
‫‪l'ordre sociologique.‬‬
‫مصلحة المرأة وحدها ‪،‬بل بدافع من حاجة المجتمع و تقدمه ليس بإمكان المرأة أن‬
‫‪L'homme a créé des‬‬
‫"تنجبها" ‪ ،‬لكنها أنجبت‬
‫الحضاري ‪،‬إذ ليست الغاية من البحث في اشتراكها في هذا‬
‫المجتمع إال اإلفادة منها في رفع مستوى المرأة ذاتها ‪،‬و إذن الرجل‪ .‬عندما نتحدث عن ‪chefs-d’œuvre que le‬‬
‫فليس من المفيد لنا أن ننظر إلى مشكلتها بغير هذا المنظار‪ .‬الرجل و المرأة ال نتحدث ‪génie féminin n'aurait pu‬‬
‫عن أمرين مختلفين‪ ،‬وإنما ‪enfanter. Mais la femme‬‬
‫ولقد نعلم أنه يضيق صدر بعض ذوي األذواق الرقيقة بما‬
‫نقول‪ .‬فيحتجون علينا ّ‬
‫‪a enfanté l'homme.‬‬
‫نتحدث عن كيان واحد ال‬
‫بأن مثل هذا الموقف يذيب المرأة في‬
‫المجتمع‪ ،‬و لكننا نقول لهم ‪ّ :‬‬
‫‪A vrai dire, quand on‬‬
‫ينبغي لنا أن نقول أن‬
‫إن إعطاء حقوق المرأة على‬
‫‪parle de la femme et de‬‬
‫طرفا من أطرافه "أقل"‬
‫حساب المجتمع معناه تدهور المجتمع و بالتالي تدهورها ‪،‬‬
‫أليست هي عضوا فيه ؟ فالقضية ليست قضية فرد‪ ،‬إنما هي أو "أفضل" أو "يساوي" ‪l'homme, on ne parle pas‬‬
‫‪de deux choses, mais‬‬
‫الطرف اآلخر‪.‬‬
‫قضية مجتمع ‪.‬‬
‫تريد المرأة خلع الحجاب؟ ‪d'une seule, d'une unité‬‬
‫لقد بدأت المرأة المسلمة التي كانت إلى زمن قريب تلبس‬
‫‪dans laquelle on n'a pas‬‬
‫و تريد التدخين؟ و تريد‬
‫(المالية) في إفراط ‪-‬تسلك في سيرها االجتماعي الطريق‬
‫الذي رسمته أوربا لنسائها ‪،‬متخيلة ّ‬
‫أن في ذلك حال لمشكلتها اإلقتراع؟ و تريد الذهاب ‪le droit de dire qu'une‬‬
‫إلى قاعات السينما؟ وتريد ‪partie est ''inférieure'',‬‬
‫االجتماعية ‪.‬‬
‫‪''supérieure'' ou ''égale'' à‬‬
‫‪ [Therefore, this problem should be first‬أن تتثقف؟‬
‫‪l'autre.‬‬
‫‪ cleared of these tendencies, then will be solved‬إال أنه ال يجب التعامل مع‬
‫‪Une‬‬
‫‪semblable‬‬
‫‪ in a way that gives priority to the society‬هذه المسائل على أنها‬
‫‪ benefit. Man and woman constitute the‬تخص المرأة فقط‪ ،‬و إنما ‪comparaison supposerait‬‬
‫‪non‬‬
‫‪seulement‬‬
‫‪la‬‬
‫‪ individual in society. She is one side and the‬التعامل معها على أنها‬
‫‪connaissance‬‬
‫‪d'un‬‬
‫‪ man is the other. This is not surprising, as the‬تخص الحضارة ككل‪.‬‬
‫‪dénominateur commun,‬‬
‫‪prophet Mohammad -peace be upon him- said‬‬
‫‪13‬‬

‫‪Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies‬‬
‫‪ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org‬‬

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
The Awakening of Female Consciousness in Kate Chopin’s

qu'on pourrait au besoin
nommer le ''couple'',
mais d'un numérateur
qu'on
ne
saurait
déterminer dans le cas
général.
Par
conséquent,
il
faudrait faire justice dans
notre esprit de toute la
littérature féministe, afin
de poser sainement ce
problème.
Celui-ci ne se pose pas
pour une catégorie, une
classe, un sexe, mais
pour la société humaine,
son
avenir
et
sa
civilisation.
La femme veut jeter le
voile? Elle veut fumer?
Voter? Elle veut aller au
cinéma ou s'instruire?
Il ne s'agit pas de poser
de telles questions ''pour''
la femme, mais ''pour'' la
civilisation.
[It seems that this
language still establishes
a kind of quantitative
equality
between the
two individuals who
constitute the society.
However, there is no
equality between two
components which are
interchangeable, neither
at the biological, nor at
the social levels. Men
have
created
masterpieces that the
genius of women could
not have conceived, but

[Although
this
discourse implies
the existence of a
kind of equality
between
two
individuals
who
constitute
the
human race, there is
no equality between
two things that are
interchangeable
neither
at
the
biological, nor at
the social levels.
Man has designed
masterpieces that
the woman cannot
create, but she gave
birth to man. When
we talk about man
and woman, we are
not speaking about
two different things
but rather one
entity. We should
not say that one of
its parts is inferior,
superior, or equal to
the other.
Do Women want to
take off the veil? to
smoke? to vote ? to
go to the cinema , to
receive education ?
Nonetheless,
we
should not deal with
these issues as
being
related
merely to women,
but to civilization as
a whole].

Alajlan

: “women are the sisters of men.”
God has created them from one soul and told
us about this by saying: O men! Fear your
Lord Who created you from a single being and
out of it created its mate; and out of the two
spread many men and women. Chapter of AnNisaa, verse 113.
Man and woman are the main components of
humanity; we cannot have one without the
other.
If we question whether the veil should be
removed, or can the woman be allowed to
smoke, or to vote ? or is she required to get
educated? the answer should be based on the
benefit of women as well as the society needs
and civilizational progress.
The endeavor to involve women in the society
aims to uplift women themselves; thus, it is
useless to view their problem differently.
This may upset some sensitive people. They
argue that this attitude melts women into the
society, but we think that giving rights to
women at the expense of society means its
decline, then the deterioration of woman’s
situation as it belongs to it. It is not an
individual’s issue but a social issue.
The Muslim woman who was until recently
overusing the ‘melaya ‘ (a long and large black
cloth which covers the whole body), has
started to follow the path set up by Europe for
its women, thinking that it will solve her social
problem].

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

14

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
The Awakening of Female Consciousness in Kate Chopin’s

Alajlan

women have given birth
to men.
Indeed, to talk about
woman and man is not to
deal with two different
things, but only one
unity. It is not allowed to
say that one part is
inferior, superior, or
equal to the other.
Such a comparison
would entail not only the
knowledge of a common
denominator,
which
could be called ‘couple’
when needed, but also of
a
numerator
which
cannot be identified in
the general case.
Therefore, we should
dispel all the feminist
literature
to
wisely
address this problem. It
is not linked to one
category,
class,
or
gender, but to human
society, its future, and
civilization.
Do women want to take
off the veil?
Do they want to smoke?
to vote? to go to the
cinema?
to
receive
education?
Such questions should
not be addressed to
women,
but
to
civilization].
The initial analysis and comparison of these translations reveal that the method used in
each case is totally different: Shaheen tends to use adaptation in his translation, for example, when
he added a koranic verse and a Prophetic Hadith to justify his opinion. It could be suggested that
he expresses not Bennabi’s point of view, but rather his own ideas as an Islamic intellectual with
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

15

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
The Awakening of Female Consciousness in Kate Chopin’s

Alajlan

a specific orientation. Moreover, because Bennabi is an engineer who uses mathematical equations
to transmit and justify his thoughts, the French (source) text is characterized by direct and clear
style, and solid arguments are put forward. An interrogative sentence where Bennabi wonders
about the status of the Algerian woman, compared to that of the European woman, is omitted from
Shaheen’s translation:
S'agit-il, en particulier, de faire de l'Algérienne la semblable de sa sœur européenne ?
(Bennabi, 1948/2005, p.124)
Is it a question of making the Algerian woman similar to her European sister?
(Our translation)
Shaheen has substituted the Algerian woman with the Muslim woman, has elaborated on this idea,
and changed the sentence form from interrogative to affirmative. Thus, he shifted the text to a
spiritual level supported by argumentative evidence from the Quran, Sunnah, and the intellectual
approach that he adopts as an Islamic thinker. It could be noticed from his translation that the
woman is under social pressure. An observer governs all her behaviors, either it is the man or the
society where she lives. Meanwhile, Bennabi describes her as having free rein to make decisions,
and as the source of equilibrium for the Muslim community.
What is more is Shaheen’s Arabic translation of the title which we consider as a firstdegree cultural problem. Although Bennabi has a froncophone culture, his Arab identity which
regards women as a barrier to social development, could be perceived, but is seen only from the
title which compares the woman to a problem. Shaheen has followed the same path which may
suggest that discussion about women is related to instinct, femininity, and emancipation, in a way
that goes beyond the source text. Thus, this may confirm and reinforce some representations which
portray women as the cause of social collapse.
We suggest using “issue” ‫( قضية‬Qadiyyah) or ‘question’ )‫(مسألة‬, instead of “problem” ‫مشكلة‬
(Mushkilah), as it reflects in our opinion the woman’s status in Arab societies. She faces negative
stereotypes every day and attempts to fight them with all her strength. Furthermore, the word
‘problem ‘refers to chaos which prevents women from claiming their rights and implies a
pejorative connotation. Instead, the word "issue" allows them to struggle for these rights.
Conclusion
This study aimed to explore the problematic issues related to the translation of intellectual and
religious texts, and the major difficulties that hamper the translator in doing his task. Translators
swing between domestication and foreignization, transliteration and adaptation, as well as
objectivity and subjectivity, to bring forth what is more or less close to the source text. In all that,
some uncontrollable external factors affect the translator’s conscious and unconscious choices. We
have discussed the language authority emerging from cultural and religious authority14 in the texts
of scholars who belong to the Association of Muslim Scholars. We have also raised the issue of
translators’ linguistic preferences, and how specific terminology is imposed by some institutions,
mainly when working with international organizations which adopt specialized glossaries. In spite
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

16

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
The Awakening of Female Consciousness in Kate Chopin’s

Alajlan

of this, it can be argued that using objectivity in rendering information that is crucial in shaping
the Arab community thought is of high importance, and the translator should attempt to use
invisibility that was mentioned by Venuti (1995/2003), for keeping the text free from any
ideological character.
While our results apply to a particular type of texts, namely intellectual and /or religious texts,
other areas in Arabic translation studies need to be further explored.
NOTES
1
Bedjaoui has attended this conference on December 13-14, 2017 by presenting a paper entitled
"‫["ترجمة المفاهيم الدينية الفكرية إلى اللغة الفرنسية بين القابلية و اإلستحالة‬The French Translation of Religious and
Intellectual Concepts: Translatability Vs. Untranslatability], which was published as part of the
conference proceedings ( 4 ‫[الترجمة و إشكاالت المثاقفة‬Translation and the Problematics of Crosscultural Understanding 4, Doha, December 13-14, 2017 ,The Forum for Arab and International
Relations.) Bedjaoui has also addressed the issue in a conference held by ESIT, France, in
November 2017 on the translator’s challenges.
2
This topic was the title of Dr.Imene Benmohamed’s presentation during the International
Conference, held by the High Arab Institute for Translation on December2016, Algeria .The
Iranian interpreter has conveyed his country’s ideology through his official position.
3
This is our translation of the following extract from an Arabic article of Zouaoui B. (2002/2012,
p.13):
ّ
‫ وتتضمن مخاطر ومخاوف وتحمل صراعات وما تسفر عنه من انتصارات‬،‫ تملك القوة والقدرة‬،‫"إن الخطاب سلطة مادية‬
‫ هذا الوجود الذي يخيف‬،‫ وتؤسس وجودها المستقل‬،‫ سلطة تعبر الذات والمؤسسة على السواء‬،‫ من تحرير واستعبادات‬،‫وهزائم‬
‫ كما يشير إلى ذلك فوكو إلى فرض أشكال‬،‫ وخاصة المجتمع الغربي‬،‫ لذا يسعى المجتمع‬،‫ والمجتمعات‬،‫ والمؤسسات‬،‫الذوات‬
."‫مختلفة لمراقبة الخطاب وسلطته‬
4
‘Essays of Algerian Muslim Scholars Association’ is our translation for the original name in
Arabic: ‫مقاالت جمعية العلماء المسلمين الجزائريين‬.
5
Kirat, M. (2014): Malek Bennabi on Question of Ideas. The Peninsula. (27 October2014)
https://search-proquest-com.sdl.idm.oclc.org/docview/1616394040?accountid=142908.
6
This example is taken from: 2011، ‫ الجزء الثالث‬،‫ العربي التبسي‬، ‫مقاالت جمعية العلماء المسلمين‬
[Tebessi, L. (2011). Essays of Muslim Scholars Association, Part 3].
7
A lecturer at the University of Algiers II, Algeria, who has recently suggested this term.
8
This extract is from 2011 ، ‫ الجزء الثالث‬، ‫ العربي التبسي‬، ‫مقاالت جمعية العلماء المسلمين‬
[ Tebessi, L. (2011). Essays of Muslim Scholars Association, Part 3].
9
The translation of the first part -verse 8, Chapter of Al-Muzammil is from:
http://www.islamicstudies.info/tafheem.php?sura=73
10
https://www.etudier.com/dissertations/Dissertation-Psychopedagogie/608406.html (accessed on
July 15, 2018).
11
The translation of
part one- verse 28, chapter of Al-Kahf is from
http://www.islamicstudies.info/tafheem.php?sura=18&verse=27&to=31
12
‫" استخدام الرومنة لتحسين الربط بين الكلمات في المدونات المتوازية" مجلة‬،‫ بجاوي وفاء‬، ‫ سمار نصر الدين‬،‫سعدان هدى‬
2016،‫عنابة‬،"‫["في الترجمة‬Saadane, H., Semmar, N., Bedjaoui, W. (2016) Using Romanization to
Improve Linking between Words in Parallel Corpora. Fittarjamah. Annaba.]
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

17

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
The Awakening of Female Consciousness in Kate Chopin’s

Alajlan

13

http://www.islamicstudies.info/tafheem.php?sura=4
Authority, as explained in a previous section, means the power of language that imposes specific
contextual choices.
14

About the authors
Wafaa Bedjaoui is currently an Associate Professor at Princess Nourah University in Saudi
Arabia. She is the author of several translations from French into Arabic such as \"The Bible and
Colonialism\" by Michael Prior, and has published different papers in the field of Translation
Studies and Sociolinguistics. She is also the coordinator of the Algerian journal devoted to
translation studies \"Cahiers de traduction\". ORCID ID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0660-8418
Amina Tahraoui is an Assistant Professor at Princess Nourah bint Abdulrahman University. Her
research interests include Translation and Interpretation Teaching Strategies, Curriculum
Development, Cognitive linguistics and Neurolinguistics. Her great focus is on research that
contributes to a deeper understanding of brain processes involved in learning, and how does this
affect the training of translators and interpreters. ORCID ID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4214987X
References
Bedjaoui, W. (2018) .‫ ترجمة المفاهيم الدينية الفكرية إلى اللغة الفرنسية بين القابلية و اإلستحالة‬.
:‫الدوحة‬.)67-55 ‫ الزواوي (ص‬.‫ تحرير ب‬.4 ‫مؤتمرالترجمة و إشكاالت المثاقفة‬
.‫منتدى العالقات العربية و الدولية‬
[The French Translation of Religious and Intellectual Concepts: Translatability Vs
Untranslatability. In B. Zouaoui (ed.), Translation and the Problematics of Cross-cultural
Understanding 4 (pp.55-67). Doha: The Forum for Arab and International Relations.
Bennabi, M. (1948/2005). Les conditions de la renaissance. Algiers: ANEP.
Bennabi, M. (1957). Shurut Al-Nahdah (in Arabic, translated from French by A. Shaheen).
Dimashq: Dar el Fiqr.
Butt, N. (2009). Negotiating Untranslatability and Islam in Leila Aboulela's the
Translator. Matatu, 36,167-179. Available at https://search-proquestcom.sdl.idm.oclc.org/docview/757071612?accountid=142908
ElShiekh, A. A. A. & Saleh, M. (2011). Translation versus Transliteration of Religious Terms in
Contemporary Islamic Discourse in Western Communities. International Journal of
English Linguistics, 1, (2), 141-147. https://doi:10.5539/ijel.v1n2p141.
Gul, A. (2018). The Declining Standards of Arabic-to-Roman Transliteration in Academic
Writing, Editing, and Publishing. Publishing Research Quarterly,34 ,(1)1-10.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12109-018-9566-3.
Hassan, S. (2016). Islamic Religious Terms in English – translation vs. transliteration in
Ezzeddin Ibrahim and Denys Johnson-Davies’ translation of An-Nawawī’s Forty
Ḥadīths. Translation & Interpreting, 8, (1) ,117-132.
DOI: 10.12807/ti.108201. 2016.a08.
Islamic Studies.info (2015): Tafheem.net. Towards Understanding the Quran, Available at http://
www.islamicstudies.info/tafheem.php. (accessed August 22, 2018).
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

18

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
The Awakening of Female Consciousness in Kate Chopin’s

Alajlan

Kirat, M. (2014, October 27). Malek Bennabi on Question of Ideas. The Peninsula, Available
athttps://search-proquest-com.sdl.idm.oclc.org/docview/1616394040?accountid=142908.
Saadane, H., Semmar, N., & Bedjaoui, W. (2016) ‫استخدام الرومنة لتحسين الربط بين الكلمات في المدونات‬
.‫ في الترجمة‬.‫المتوازية‬
[Using Romanization to improve linking between Words in Parallel Corpora].
[ fittarjamah]. Annaba. 3, (1) ,28-43. https://www.asjp.cerist.dz/en/article/5525
Tebessi, L. (2011). ‫ مقاالت العربي التبسي‬:‫مقاالت علماء جمعية العلماء المسلمين الجزائريين‬
[Larbi Tebessi Essays: Essays of Scholars of The Association of Algerian Muslim
Scholars]. Ain M’lila: Dar el Houda, part 3.
Venuti, L. (1995/2003): The Translator’s Invisibility ,Available at https://www-taylorfranciscom.sdl.idm.oclc.org/books/9781134820795
Zouaoui, B. (2002/2012) ‫ مقاربة فلسفية اجتماعية‬:‫[ بين اللغة و الخطاب و المجتمع‬Between Language,
Discourse, and Society: A Social Philosophical Approach]. Insaniyat, 17/18, 33-57.
Published online 30 September 2012, retrieved January 19, 2018 from
http://journals.openedition.org/insaniyat/8643; DOI: 10.4000/insaniyat.8643.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

19

