Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number 4. December 2018
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.14

Pp. 200-210

Integration processes in Successful University and Corporate Professional Training
in Foreign Languages

Natalya V. Dyorina
Foreign Languages in Engineering Department, Education in the Humanities Institute
Magnitogorsk, Russia
Lyudmila I. Antropova
Foreign Languages in Engineering Department, Education in the Humanities Institute
Nosov Magnitogorsk State Technical University
Magnitogorsk, Russia
Tatyana Yu. Zalavina
Foreign Languages in Engineering Department, Education in the Humanities Institute
Nosov Magnitogorsk State Technical University
Magnitogorsk, Russia

Abstract
This article considers the methods of teaching in the field of the language for general purposes and
the language for special purposes. The purpose of the article is to give a comparative analysis of
teaching general English and English for special purposes, to present arguments with respect to
approaches designed to organize and ensure the high efficiency of mastering English for special
purposes. The study focuses on comparative methods of studying different training programs in
order to set out the results of a success study of different students groups. The authors substantiated
the necessity of using the basic methodology of teaching a foreign language for special purposes
with a higher efficiency of the personality-oriented approach as a basis for teaching ESP. The
results of the research proved that the development of the program depends on the analysis of the
needs of the learning group and the actual situations of using the language for special purposes.
For teaching the EGP course, students have a common standard goal of learning English, which
does not always correspond to the language needs of the students. The line of demarcation between
the courses of EGP and ESP has become very important, but requires the further discussion. The
approaches described in our study combine the study of subject discipline and a foreign language
as a tool for mastering subject knowledge is the essence of European Union (EU) policy. The ESP
methodology differs from the EGP, as the training on the ESP course is more specific and personoriented.
Keywords: English for special purposes, everyday communication, professional activities,
professional standard, student personal needs
Cite as: Dyorina, N.V., Antropova, L.I., & Zalavina, T.Y. (2018). Integration processes in Successful
University and Corporate Professional Training in Foreign Languages. Arab World English Journal, 9
(4), 200-210. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.14
200

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Integration processes in Successful University

Dyorina, Antropova & Zalavina

Introduction
The English language has widely penetrated all spheres of human activity and is considered
as a common language of communication in engineering and technical disciplines, air navigation,
maritime navigation, commerce, sport, information technology. Modern technologies promote the
active exchange of scientific and professional achievements in all fields of science, technology
and production throughout the world. The value of English for the world community is great and
depends not only on the number of people using it in general speaking communications, but also
on the different purposes of its application in the professional field. (Khomutova, 2007) The need
for English for international use in science, technology, education and business has influenced the
growing demand for learning English for specific purposes. This direction in training has received
its characteristics of the language for special purposes related to the performance of specific
professional tasks, it is called ESP (English for Special Purposes), it is rapidly developing recently
and occupies a special position in the teaching of English (Nazarenko, 2000). Many professions
become international, and the requirements for proficiency are also standardized at the
international level and become common in certain fields: medicine, business, science, aviation,
maritime navigation, IT technologies. The language of the various professional communities
reflects the academic and professional practice of various English language models for specific
purposes, which is based on professional skills, as well as on the experience of teaching English
that combines disciplinary knowledge in the integrated areas of many disciplines. Therefore, there
is a need to develop common approaches to teaching English for Special Purposes (ESP), which
will provide opportunities for students to acquire skills of English professional language (ESP)
(Shaimova, 2013).
For communication at any stage of professional activity, a specific set of verbal language
skills must be developed, therefore training of specialists in the English language program for
special purposes is of great interest to the professional community (Linjova & Zalavina, 2013).
Training on special language models is associated with a broad scientific exchange and the
preparation of active competitive specialists. The development of approaches to teaching the
course "English for Specific Purposes" (ESP) is based on comparing it with the course "General
English" (EGP-English General Purpose). If in the course of EGP, the teacher uses English for
instrumental purposes with prepared specific curricula, programs and teaching standards, then
when teaching the ESP course the teacher acts as a co-author, designer, designer of training
programs, researcher, ally and knowledge evaluator. Training of students and specialists in special
professional programs was conducted both in the Soviet Union and in Russia as necessary. And
the term "English for special purposes" appeared in the 1960s and often did not meet the needs of
students in the relevant professional field, as it reflected the goals and objectives of the preparation
of line ministries and departments of the time in accordance with relevant standards.
At present, English language for special purposes teaching technologies involve mastering
the skills of full communication within the framework of professional and international
cooperation in all key areas of economics and production. (Belcher, 2006) But the teachers and
course managers faced the problem of creating a multitude of different programs and came to the
conclusion that it was impossible to create a single ideal program related to the training of
specialists for professional English for special purposes. Any course reflects the specific goals and
objectives of the course and a basic professional glossary with the most suitable vocabulary and a
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

201

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Integration processes in Successful University

Dyorina, Antropova & Zalavina

set of language tools and exercises. The key objective of any ESP course can be presented in two
ways: knowledge of the basics of grammar and the necessary professional lexical minimum, while
it should be born in mind that any professional knowledge is undergoing changes for several years,
and therefore a systematic change in the necessary teaching materials representing the current state
of science and techniques in this field (Moskalenko, 2017). For a successful learning process,
special attention should be paid to the selection of authentic teaching materials, preferably from
reliable sources of English and the adaptation of these sources to the specific needs of the trainees
associated with this target situation.
Methodologists D. Coyle, D. Marsh, F. Hood singled out the following principles:
- authenticity of the necessary set of materials and training situations, close to reality;
- multitasking, focused on several areas: understanding the subject content, obtaining
cognitive skills through the analysis of subject content, the development of speech and language
skills, creating an atmosphere of cooperation in the group work mode;
- the activity of training through the participation of students in the preparation of the project,
in the process and at the presentation stage; student participation in the development of
assessments and self-assessments; - one of the key factors of interaction between the teacher and
student;
- safety of the learning environment by creating an enabling environment for all participants
in the educational process;
- training support in the form of necessary educational language and speech support, which
are acquired during the educational joint actions and serve as a basis for the instructor's methodical
actions (Carver, 2003).
Thus, language is not a goal, but a means of forming a professional foreign-language
competence of students.
Research Questions
1. To give a comparative analysis of teaching general English and English for special
purposes, to present arguments with respect to approaches designed to organize and ensure the
high efficiency of mastering English for special purposes in accordance with the needs of trainees
(Tulupova et al., 2018);
2. To set out the results of a study of the success of different groups of students: students
studying General English (EGP), students studying English by ESP programs, specialists receiving
additional education in foreign language (ESP), specialists studying English as part of corporate
training (ESP).
Purpose of the Study
The purpose of the study is to consider and compare the characteristics of ESP and EGP, the
effectiveness of their implementation methods, as well as the role of procedural parameters and
the advantages of individual methods. In our work it is very important to demarcate the courses of
EGP and ESP, but this issue requires discussion.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

202

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Integration processes in Successful University

Dyorina, Antropova & Zalavina

Research Methods
The methodology of LSP in its most common version of the ESP was first presented in 1987
by T. Hutchinson and A. Waters in the book "English for Specific Purposes / A Learning Centred
Approach" / Approach centred on learning (Dudley-Evans, 1998). Linguodidactical concepts of
the approach centred on the training of ESP have been developed in the work of T. Dudley-Evans
and M.D. St. John "New in English for special purposes." "Interdisciplinary approach" (1998,
2011) (Jones, 1990), where the following main provisions of this direction are presented:
- ESP is considered by scientists as an approach in the learning process, and not a product,
which implies that the focus of the study is not linguistic, but linguodidactical aspects;
- the analysis of the needs of students is the basis for compiling programs, courses for
teaching professionally-oriented language (a foreign language in professional activity);
- ESP aims to generate grammatical skills for specific situational contexts;
- ESP - a sub-type of language, limited to professional field situations;
- The ESP course can be developed for corporate purposes in a narrow specialized field for
specific disciplines;
- ESP programs are developed for students of elementary level of education, intermediate
and advanced level of training, and for ready specialists in accordance with the requirements of
the corporate customer;
- ESP is based on the general methodology of teaching a foreign language and is a reflection
of the methodology that is characteristic for the teaching of specialized disciplines (Hutchinson &
Waters, 1987);
- in the process of teaching ESP, all methods and principles correspond to the education of
cooperation, where the teacher and the student interact with each other.
It is important to divide the approaches in the learning process for two categories of
listeners: a) students of universities and colleges studying in technical specialties and b) readymade specialists who are trained in English language courses for special purposes. (Astashova et
al., 2018) The training of ESP students, as experience has shown, is best to begin in parallel with
the study of specialized technical disciplines related to the future direction of special vocational
training, with the joint coordination of programs for teaching technical disciplines and close
interaction of teachers of these disciplines. In most universities, general English courses are
included in the curriculum of general subjects from the first year, and in the second year it is often
offered to study under the program "Foreign Language in Professional Activity", when the student
has no idea of the nature of his future professional specialization and studies his " blindly”.
Programs offered by universities to teach this course do not always correspond to the level
of professional training, so it is necessary to carry out special training of teachers to conduct such
courses. These teachers should master special training in the field of professional terms and
technologies for each specific specialty at the university.
The objectives of the ESP courses can be described as: cultural-educational, personal,
academic / professional. The first two ones focus on student self-esteem, predicting success in life,
optimism or professional pessimism in terms of mastering ESP. (Hirano, 2009) We can refer them
to the field of ESP, for analysing the needs of students who are studying English for professional
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

203

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Integration processes in Successful University

Dyorina, Antropova & Zalavina

work. English for academic purposes and for professional purposes is taught as a separate
discipline in more advanced stages of education and training and is used for listening and lecturing
in a foreign language, writing scientific articles and reports and communication at scientific
conferences for undergraduates, graduate students, teachers and trained specialists. (Petrashova,
2008).
The specific features of the ESP course are the specific features of the description of the
professional language, its goals and objectives, the level of its further application, the theme and
content, the definition of language skills in a given professional field. (Khomutova, 2008) The
planning and development of the learning strategy differs depending on the age of the students,
their level of preparation and motivation for instruction, and most importantly the satisfaction of
the student's needs at this stage of training, a specific goal and situation. (Ukhanova, 2014)
The selection of materials for ESP courses is determined by the study time, the volume of
the content program and the tasks of the customer. Since these courses can be practically called
special for each specific goal, the success of training depends on the teacher's personality and the
effectiveness of the methods that he uses in the teaching process.
Findings
In our case, we present a program for teaching students in parallel learning a foreign language
for special purposes and teaching special disciplines. The program includes the study of
professional vocabulary based on the professional lexical minimum, the necessary language and
lexical units, communication styles, familiarity with the design of technical documentation,
reading and translating technical and scientific literature, preparing reports and speeches at
scientific conferences and preparing and writing scientific articles. (Astashova et al., 2018)
Successful mastery of the program depends on the analysis of the needs of the learning group, the
actual situations of using the language for special purposes, the actual proportion of many
components of the professional course such as: the theoretical foundations of the language in the
field of professional knowledge, adaptation of prepared materials, including the main phases of
technology and production processes, character of the specialists, including thematic and didactic
support in the lessons in the form of video and audio materials, a number of ESP software
applications needed for effective learning (Jones, 1990).
We present the experience of teaching ESP at the Department of Foreign Languages in the
technical areas of Nosov Magnitogorsk State Technical University. The department of foreign
languages in engineering is one of those where the training of English in the framework of ESP is
represented by the program "Foreign Language in Professional Activity".
For technical students, the curriculum has changed significantly in the bachelor's program:
the amount of hours for this discipline has decreased. Students of the second year at the 4th
semester begin to learn professional foreign language communication, not yet mastering the
features of subject discipline in this direction. The discipline "Introduction to the specialty" begins
to be taught in parallel with the FL in PD (a foreign language in professional activity) from the 4th
semester. Therefore, often a teacher of a foreign language explains questions related to special
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

204

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Integration processes in Successful University

Dyorina, Antropova & Zalavina

technical disciplines, or independently develops an integrated course of ESP and special
disciplines.
The tasks of the 5th semester of studies are significantly changed, and the language material
is usually more complicated. Students learn skills in translating technical authentic non-adapted
texts, popular science articles, preparing reports for conferences, learning to extract educational
and professional materials from mass media sources and apply the knowledge gained in preparing
presentations on the activities of leading industry enterprises, innovative technologies in
production processes. Students perform assignments on the analysis of the content of original texts
and articles, prepare reports based on reviews of this production area, make technical literature
translations, mostly based on theoretical knowledge, on guesswork, but all this is not of high
quality, since they do not have sufficient professional experience and knowledge.
The target groups use the principles of ESP in learning English, which are used in specialized
programs. They are most fully implemented within the framework of the Presidential Program in
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Magnitogorsk Institute of Supplementary Education). Readymade specialists are offered a program of studying a foreign language at the rate of ESP.
The presidential program includes the following stages:
• Competitive selection of specialists.
• Training in a Russian educational institution.
• Internship in leading Russian or foreign organizations.
Foreign language. The program in volume of 180 acad. hours, gives listeners the
opportunity to move from the basics of language knowledge to a level that allows them to
successfully complete a foreign internship after graduation. The program includes the study of the
main course of the foreign language program, for example, "English for busy people" (in
accordance with the entry level of knowledge of the student's language) and an additional business
course "Language for Business Communication".
The principle of the integration of academic knowledge and practical experience works at
the basis of the ESP course at the Magnitogorsk Institute of Additional Education. Students of
these courses, being professionals in their field, are fundamentally different from university
students. During the training, students try to learn the basics of their profession through a foreign
language, focusing mainly on the application of various language phenomena in hypothetical
situations. Students of supplementary education programs, in contrast to students trained in
university programs, implement real practical situations in a foreign language and focus on
improving practical communication skills in this professional field, based on personal ambitions
and own experience. (Astashova et al., 2018)
These programs are divided into short-term programs: to perform tasks related to
communication of specialists in a narrowly focused field for a short period of time in relation to
the tasks set by the management, which provides study at these courses.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

205

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Integration processes in Successful University

Dyorina, Antropova & Zalavina

Therefore, distinctive strategies for different learning groups and at different stages of
training can successfully be applied to the courses if the following factors exist:
-when the time, objectives and objectives set for training are correctly set
- creating a positive atmosphere in class
- Identification of specific skills and abilities that students must master.
- singling out the speech and language aspects that will be most in demand.
- selection of materials for reorganization and functioning in the application of various
teaching methods.
-including authentic modern texts with the necessary terms, the names of instrumentation
equipment, knowledge of technological processes, etc. (Widodo & Pusporini, 2010)
-continuity in submitting previous information on other disciplines of this specialization and
their integration.
- a combination of all aspects of the language for deeper improvement of speech skills, based
on: reading, discussion, speaking, audio and video listening.
- involving students in practical research, analytical and scientific work based on the
knowledge gained.
- availability of feedback (interactive teaching methods).
- creating an atmosphere of motivation.
The main aspect of this strategy: pedagogy of cooperation and interaction of teachers, the
customer, students and teachers of special disciplines.
The interest of students cannot be limited only to practical goals in their professional field, it
also expands due to the knowledge of EGP (English for General Purposes), since in the compulsory
course of EGP there is always information about the peoples of English-speaking countries, their
traditions, customs, laws, history, etiquette and customs.
Therefore, students who have ESP can easily master common program subjects and use
ESP and EGP more effectively, and also easier to integrate into the future production environment.
Linguistic scholars tend to believe that ESP is more of an approach to the learning process than an
independent language subspecies, and is regarded as a specific product in which the methodology
is subordinated to specific learning objectives. (Yegorova, 2012)
As it turned out, ESP- is more effective in increasing the students' motivation, because it
directly relates to their specific professional career and satisfies their needs, and therefore it is
easier for students to adapt in their professional environment. (Novozhilova, 2005) For the
teaching of the EGP course, students have a common standard goal of learning English, which
does not always correspond to the language needs of students and reduces the effectiveness of
teaching. There is a problem in which sequence to teach EGP and ESP. The line of demarcation
between the course of EGP and ESP has become very important, but requires discussion.
Peculiarities of ESP course:
-the organization of the course consists in creating a separate course on the basis of a special
curriculum that includes various types of language and speech exercises, the preparation of modern
textual arrays and information materials in a certain professional field, the processing and
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

206

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Integration processes in Successful University

Dyorina, Antropova & Zalavina

adaptation of these materials, as well as the analysis of the effectiveness of the methods of
instruction applied set goals and objectives.
Specificity of training is characterized in the formulation of specific short-term and longterm specific goals and objectives of training in accordance with a given program and educational
situation.
During the development of programs, we should receive an answer to the question "what
study, to what extent, as far as is necessary for the future profession, what language skills and
speech skills will be in demand, etc.".
The role of an ESP teacher is much wider and deeper than that of an EGP teacher. He is most
likely considered a practitioner who trains, finds and processes materials, develops curricula,
programs, collaborates with teachers of departments in the main area of training, i.e. integrates
knowledge of all interdisciplinary subjects of the course and is engaged in analytical and research
work. An analysis of the quality of instruction and a proper evaluation of the methods of instruction
applied, their effectiveness and effectiveness of training deserves special attention (Yogman &
Kaylani, 1996).
The teacher acts as a conductor of knowledge about the language, genre and terminology,
not being a specialist in the field of subject discipline.
The key functions of the ESP practitioner are consistent with the functions of the practice
teacher, the designer, the researcher and the analyst. In ESP methodology, the teacher's function
is defined as "manager", "facilitator" (methodologist, curator), "consultant", "advisor" (counsellor,
expert). The teacher needs the ability to conduct consumer needs analysis, to have an idea of the
basic concepts of education and the content of the profile discipline. The function of the designer
of the three-dimensional design of training materials is to select and prepare targeted specific
information text and media arrays. The teacher is working on their adaptation with respect to this
group of students and the target situation.
Over the past years, there has been a wide discussion: is it true that an English teacher
conducts essentially professional courses, even with a certificate of retraining? The option of
teaching a teacher of special subjects to the English language ESP is offered. The contradiction
lies in the fact that the scientific, educational and professional communities did not come to a
common opinion on this issue: this means that the teacher of the English language EGP must pass
specialization in the methodology of vocational training, professional psychology, external and
internal factors of the professional environment, and also to study course Prospects for socioeconomic development of the industry, a course on finance, professional law and scientific and
methodological support (Kuznetsov, 2015).
The second option: the teacher of vocational training passes the English language courses
ESP and independently teaches this discipline. In this case, it should be certified in a number of
disciplines: English phonetics, theoretical and practical English grammar, English teaching
methods, psychology, pedagogy, androgyny.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

207

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Integration processes in Successful University

Dyorina, Antropova & Zalavina

We are inclined to the first version, since the university gives the basic knowledge bases
for all disciplines and the methods of their independent obtaining in the presence of a modern
media base. And, since knowledge requires constant updating, a modern competitive specialist can
independently supplement and improve both skills in English and professional skills in further
work.
Conclusion
These approaches, combining the study of subject discipline and a foreign language as a tool
for mastering subject knowledge, is the essence of EU policy on the basis of bilingual education
to convert students to European countries. (Bloor, 1998) The ESP methodology differs from the
EGP methodology, as the training on the ESP course is more specific and specific, and the teacher
is no longer the primary information carrier and the source of professional knowledge
(Chilingaryan, 2014). He acts in accordance with the basic principles of pedagogy cooperation: he
interacts with students, relying on their professional knowledge and small experience, selects
materials to create a real authentic integration of special professional disciplines. (Astashova et al.,
2018)
In this article, we analysed the most effective methods in teaching English for special
purposes both for students and specialists in the framework of corporate training. We touched upon
the problem of preparing students and specialists for English in the professional sphere. The study
revealed significant contradictions in the different approaches to ESP learning. The roles and
functions of the instructor at the present stage of training were examined, the need for the
correspondence of the goals and content of the learning process to the needs of the trainees,
oriented to the development of the student's personality and his competitiveness with the purpose
of his further prestigious employment was proved. The motivation of job descriptions and
prospects of high quality of knowledge at corporate courses in the professional field in English
with the purpose of further career growth is determined.
About the Authors:
Dyorina Natalya V., Ph. D. of Philological Sciences, Associate Professor, Foreign Languages in
Engineering Department, Education in the Humanities Institute, Nosov Magnitogorsk State
Technical University, Magnitogorsk, Russia. Research interests include the English language,
English and Russian literature, cognitive linguistics, semantics, discourse, etc. Author of about 70
publications, including 5 monographs, textbooks. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0613-0864
Antropova Lyudmila I., D. Sc. of Philology Sciences, Full Professor, Foreign Languages in
Engineering Department, Education in the Humanities Institute, Nosov Magnitogorsk State
Technical University, Magnitogorsk, Russia. Research interests include the English language, the
German language, cognitive linguistics, semantics, discourse, etc. Author of about 50 publications,
including 3 monographs, textbooks. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0496-139X
Zalavina Tatyana Yu., Ph. D. of Philological Sciences, Associate Professor, Foreign Languages
in Engineering Department, Education in the Humanities Institute, Nosov Magnitogorsk State
Technical University, Magnitogorsk, Russia. Research interests include the French language, the
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

208

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Integration processes in Successful University

Dyorina, Antropova & Zalavina

German language, cognitive linguistics, semantics, discourse, etc. Author of about 50 publications,
including 3 monographs, textbooks. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0210-7963
References
Astashova, G.V., Dyorina, N.V., Savinova, T.A., Zalavina, T.Ju. (2018). Integration processes in
foreign language training of a successful specialist. Bulletin of Chelyabinsk State
Pedagogical University. 2, 9-20.
Astashova, G.V., Dyorina, N.V., Savinova, T.A. (2018). Pilots' training in professional nglish in
foreign language retraining. Bulletin of Chelyabinsk State Pedagogical University. 1, 9-18.
Belcher, D.D. (2006). English for specific purposes: Teaching to perceived needs and imagined
futures in worlds of work, study, and everyday life. TESOL quarterly.40. (1), 133-156.
Bloor, M. (1998) English for specific purposes: The preservation of the species (some notes on a
recently evolved species and on the contribution of John Swales to its preservation and
protection).
English
for
Specific
Purposes.
17.
(1),
47-66.
URL:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0889490697000446 (6.02.2018). DOI:
10.1016/S0889-4906(97)00044-6
Carver, D. (1983). Some propositions about ESP. The ESP Journal. 2,131-137.
Chilingaryan, K.P. (2014) English for special (ESP) purposes in modern society. International
Journal of Experimental Education. 3-1, 145-150.
Dudley-Evans, T., St. John, M.J. (1998). Development in ESP. A multy-disciplinary approach.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hirano, E. (2009) Research article introductions in English for specific purposes: A comparison
between Brazilian Portuguese and English. English for specific purposes.28 (4), 240-250.
URL:http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0889490609000131
(6.02.2018). DOI: 10.1016/j.esp.2009.02.001
Hutchinson, T., Waters, A. (1987). English for Specific Purposes: A learner-centred approach.
Cambridge: CUP.
Jones, G. (1990) ESP textbooks: Do they really exist? English for Specific Purposes. 9, 89-93.
Khomutova, T. N. (2007) On the typology of functional styles. Actual problems of modern
university education: Materials of the X Russian-American Scientific and Practical
Conference May 14-16, St. Petersburg, 296—300.
Khomutova, T.N. (2008) Language for special purposes (LSP): linguistic aspect. Izv. RGPU by.
A.I. Herzen. 71, 96-117.
Kuznetsov, A.A. (2015) The essentials of English Language for Specific Purposes for PRmanagers and practical advices for successful public speech on English Language.
Philology and Literary Studies. 3, 21-27. http://philology.snauka.ru/2015/03/1313 [дата
обращения: 06.03.2018]
Linjova, A.S., Zalavina, T.Ju. (2013). The Inner Form of Phraseological Units and the Linguistic
Picture of the World Actual problems of modern science, technology and education. 2
(71), 132-134.
Moskalenko, P. I. (2017) On the question of the concept of "language for special purposes" and
the term that denotes it. Young Scientist. 19, 410-414.
Nazarenko, A.L. (2000). Problems of optimization of understanding and teaching of the language
for special purposes, Moscow: Izd-vo MGU.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

209

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Integration processes in Successful University

Dyorina, Antropova & Zalavina

Novozhilova, S.G. (2005) English for special purposes as a means of professional communication.
Bulletin of Nekrasov Kostroma State Universit.11, 142-144.
Petrashova, T. G. (2008) The language for special purposes in the context of the content of the
concepts "national language" and "literary language". Philol. science. Questions of theory
and practice.1, 90-93.
Shaimova, G. A. (2013) ESP (English for Specific Purpose - English for a specific purpose) or
professionally-oriented teaching of English. Young Scientist. 6, 748-749.
Tulupova, O.V., Lesher, O.V., Antropova, L.I. (2018). Formation of multicultural competence of
Technical University Students Problems of modern pedagogical education. 4 (58), 154156.
Ukhanova, Ye.V. (2014) English for special purposes. historical aspect. Gramot.4-1(34), 206-209.
Widodo, H.P. & Pusporini, R. (2010) Materials design: English for specific purposes (ESP). 147160.
Yegorova, L.A. (2012) English for special purposes: linguistic, pragmatic and didactic aspects.
Modern linguistics and intercultural communication. 1, 6-20.
Yogman, J., & Kaylani, C. (1996) ESP program design for mixed level students. English for
Specific Purposes.15, 311-24.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

210

