Title: Natural Resource Dependence and Rural American Economic Prosperity from 2000 to
2015
Author: J. Tom Mueller
Affiliation: Department of Sociology, Social Work, and Anthropology, Utah State University,
Logan UT, 84321
Abstract:
Research suggests dependence upon natural resource development leads to decreases in per
capita income, increases in inequality, and elevated poverty. Natural resource development
generally takes two forms, extractive (e.g. oil and gas, mining, timber) and non-extractive (e.g.
tourism, recreation, real estate). However, research has rarely examined both in-tandem.
Drawing on the concept of dependence (i.e. over-specialization), I test the hypothesis that
increasing levels of both forms of development was associated with diminishing returns to
economic prosperity— operationalized as per capita income, inequality, and poverty—in rural
America over the period of 2000 to 2015. Extractive development exhibited the expected
relationship in remote rural counties for all outcomes, while non-extractive development had a
generally negative relationship with per capita income, a positive relationship with poverty, and
no relationship with inequality. Support for the overall hypothesis was limited due to the returns
of non-extractive development being more negative than expected.
Key words: Natural resource dependence; Resource curse; Poverty; Dependency; Uneven
development; United States; Tourism; Rural tourism; Outdoor recreation
Acknowledgements: I would like to thank Ann R. Tickamyer, Brian Thiede, Kathryn Brasier,
and Alan R. Graefe for their feedback and guidance on this manuscript. This material is based
upon work supported by the National Science Foundation Under Grant No. 1903924: Effects of
Natural Resource Dependence. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Science Foundation.
Bio: J. Tom Mueller is an Assistant Professor of Sociology at Utah State University. His work
focuses on spatial inequality, well-being, and the environment, with a particular emphasis on the
rural regions of the United States.
This paper is now published in Economic Development Quarterly. Please visit
https://doi.org/10.1177/0891242420984512 for the version of record.

Natural Resource Dependence and Rural American Economic Prosperity from
2000-2015

Abstract
Research suggests dependence upon natural resource development leads to decreases in per capita
income, increases in inequality, and elevated poverty. Natural resource development generally
takes two forms, extractive (e.g. oil and gas, mining, timber) and non-extractive (e.g. tourism,
recreation, real estate). However, research has rarely examined both in-tandem. Drawing on the
concept of dependence (i.e. over-specialization), I test the hypothesis that increasing levels of both
forms of development was associated with diminishing returns to economic prosperity—
operationalized as per capita income, inequality, and poverty—in rural America over the period of
2000 to 2015. Extractive development exhibited the expected relationship in remote rural counties
for all outcomes, while non-extractive development had a generally negative relationship with per
capita income, a positive relationship with poverty, and no relationship with inequality. Support for
the overall hypothesis was limited due to the returns of non-extractive development being more
negative than expected.

Keywords: Natural resource dependence, Resource curse, Poverty, Dependency, Uneven
development, United States, Tourism, Rural tourism, Outdoor recreation

Preprint submitted to Economic Development Quarterly

October X, 2020

1. Introduction
Natural resource dependence—meaning the overspecialization of a local economy in the sector
of natural resources—is commonly believed to lead to anemic economic growth, increased poverty,
and higher levels of inequality (Freudenburg, 1992; Havranek et al., 2016; Krannich et al., 2014;
Perdue and Pavela, 2012). Previous longitudinal studies of the relationship between natural resource
development and economic production have found both negative (Douglas and Walker, 2017; James
and Aadland, 2011; Papyrakis and Gerlagh, 2004, 2007) and positive (Brooks and Kurtz, 2016;
Brown, 2014; Deller and Schreiber, 2012; Havranek et al., 2016) impacts. While negative economic
impacts, the so-called ‘resource curse’, have received significant attention internationally
(Papyrakis, 2017), tests of these relationships within the United States have been more limited.
Within the United States, extractive natural resource development, with perhaps the exception
of the recent fracking boom, has been on the decline since the 1920’s, with extraction’s labor
market share dropping by 70% from 1920 to 1990 (Freudenburg and Gramling, 1994), and remaining
generally flat since 2000 (Thiede and Slack, 2017). Although extraction now plays a smaller role in
the national economy of the United States, non-extractive forms of natural resource development
such as tourism, outdoor recreation, real estate, and amenity development have continued to grow
(English et al., 2000; Green, 2017; Thiede and Slack, 2017). For illustration, drawing on the data
I use in the following analysis of non-metropolitan United States counties from 2000 to 2015, the
average share of county employment in extractive natural resource development was 1.53% in
2000 and 1.90% in 2015. Meanwhile, the average share of county employment in non-extractive
development was 5.35% in 2000 and 5.81% in 2015. Highlighting that, on average, non-extractive
development represented at least three times as much of rural employment as extraction from the
beginning to the end of the 15-year period.
Rural America finds itself in an era where sustainable economic development is especially
needed. The time period of 2000 to 2015, the focus of this study, was one of dramatic economic
change for both urban and rural America. The period began with the 2001 recession following the
dot-com bubble and was immediately followed by the ‘jobless recovery’, where even though the
overall economy recovered, job growth was historically weak (Aaronson et al., 2004). Shortly after
this came the Great Recession from 2007 to 2009 which, up to that point in time, represented the
most significant financial contraction since the Great Depression. The recovery from the Great
2

Recession was slow for rural America, and poverty, labor force non-participation, and
underemployment remained elevated through 2015 (Brown and Schafft, 2019).
In-tandem with these broader economic upheavals, rural America experienced continued
industrial restructuring, originating in the 1970s, from 2000 to 2015 (Brown and Schafft, 2019;
Thiede and Slack, 2017). While extractive and non-extractive development increased their
employment share in rural America from 2000 to 2015, agriculture continued consolidating in
many regions and manufacturing declined significantly. Given the stability and growth of extractive and non-extractive natural resource development over this otherwise tumultuous period,
rigorous theoretical and empirical analyses of their relationship with economic prosperity is needed
to inform future economic development in rural America. In this paper, I address this need using
spatial fixed effects models to evaluate the county-level relationship between both extractive and
non-extractive natural resource development and three metrics of economic prosperity—per capita
income, income inequality, and poverty—in the rural counties of the contiguous United States of
America from 2000 to 2015.
2. Theoretical Framework
This analysis tests hypotheses suggested by the theoretical framework of dual-dependency
articulated by Mueller (2020). This integrative theoretical framework of rural natural resource
dependence argues the negative impacts of extractive and non-extractive development on
economic prosperity should be similar due to the location of the rural resource-rich community in
the global capitalist system. In doing so, it draws upon four main research traditions: (1) the
resource curse literature from resource economics, (2) the resource dependence literature from
rural sociology, (3) the literature on the impacts of rural tourism, (4) and the literature on spatially
uneven development, dependency theory, and world systems.
2.1. The Resource Curse
The resource curse, also known as the Dutch disease, is the unexpected finding that areas with
rich natural resources have lower and slower economic growth than neoclassical economic theory
would suggest (James and Aadland, 2011; Sachs and Warner, 1995). This body of work

3

is exclusively focused on natural resource extraction, whether that be in the form of mining, oil
and gas, or timber. Although far from agreed upon, numerous researchers have found an inverse
relationship between natural resource abundance and economic growth, especially when measured
at the national level (Douglas and Walker, 2017; Havranek et al., 2016; Gylfason, 2001; Papyrakis
and Gerlagh, 2004, 2007; Sachs and Warner, 1995). The pathways through which the resource curse
is expected to impact economic growth include the way investment in natural resource extraction
crowds out other sectors (Sachs and Warner, 1995; Tsvetkova and Partridge, 2017), the fact that
natural resource regions do not incur the same learning-by-doing effects as other economies
(Matsuyama, 1992), the low returns to education in a natural resource-dominant economy
(Gylfason, 2001; Sachs and Warner, 1995), the booms and busts of the extractive sectors (Frankel,
2012), and the rent-seeking and poor institutions hallmark of the industry (Frankel, 2012;
Havranek et al., 2016; Gylfason, 2001).
2.2. Natural Resource Dependence
While economists have generally relied on the resource curse framework, natural resource
dependence is the framework commonly used in sociology. Generally using measures such as
poverty and unemployment as their outcome variables, natural resource sociologists have
consistently demonstrated the negative impact that dependence on natural resource extraction has
on rural communities in the United States (Freudenburg and Wilson, 2002; Humphrey et al.,
1993; Krannich et al., 2014; Perdue and Pavela, 2012; Peluso et al., 1994). As noted by the
terminology, where the resource curse literature has focused on natural resource abundance, rural
sociology has generally focused on dependence. The term dependence intimates a threshold at
which an economy becomes overspecialized in the natural resource sector, meaning that small
degrees of specialization are not expected to have the same adverse effects as large degrees of
specialization.
Many reasons for the negative outcomes of resource dependence have been discussed in the
literature (see Freudenburg, 1992; Humphrey et al., 1993; Peluso et al., 1994; Krannich et al.,
2014; Mueller, 2020 for a full review). Those relevant to the theoretical framework of this paper
include the under-investment in human capital at the individual and community level that occurs
in resource dependent communities (Humphrey et al., 1993); the role of power, domination, and
natural resource bureaucracy in rural communities wherein decisions regarding how a local
4

resource base is used, and who profits off that use, are made by those who control the resource
base at a detriment to local residents (Humphrey et al., 1993; West, 1994); and theories of internal
colonialism (Peluso et al., 1994), dependency (Humphrey et al., 1993), and world systems (Bunker,
2003), which are central to the framework of dual-dependency presented by Mueller (2020) and
argue rural resource dependent communities in both the United States and abroad exist at the
periphery of a global economic system where core, or urban, communities under-develop the rural,
or peripheral, communities to facilitate cheap and easy access to goods and natural resources
(Bunker, 2003; Franke, 2007:1969; Humphrey et al., 1993; Wallerstein, 2015:1979).
2.3. Impacts of Rural Tourism
Notably absent from the perspectives of either the resource curse or natural resource dependence
is the non-extractive development of natural resources (e.g. tourism, recreation, real estate,
retirement, amenity development). However, as stated in the introduction, this form of
development represented a larger share, on average, of rural employment from 2000 to 2015.
Although it should be clear that these two activities are not mutually exclusive—many regions have
active extractive and non-extractive sectors—this form of development does represent a
competing, and sometimes alternative, use of the same resource base as extraction. Thus, a deeper
theoretical and empirical understanding of the differences and similarities between the two is
needed.
At present, research on the impacts of rural tourism in the United States remains contested.
One body of largely econometric research suggests that rural tourism and amenity development is
a possible vehicle for economic growth in rural America (Deller et al., 2001, 2008), or at least not
a net harm (Deller, 2010), while other research has suggested that once spatial clustering or cost
of living is controlled for, the impact of rural tourism on economic growth is insignificant (Kim et
al., 2005; Hunter et al., 2005). Beyond just the economic impacts, a growing body of research has
demonstrated the negative and divisive impacts—such as conflict between long-time residents and
new-arrivals, as well as between seasonal and long-term residents—that the change wrought by
rural amenity development can have on rural communities (Armstrong and Stedman, 2013; Smith
and Krannich, 2000; Sherman, 2018; Ulrich-Schad, 2018; Ulrich-Schad and Qin, 2018).

5

2.4. Dual Dependency
At present, a theoretical integration of the subnational impacts of extractive and non-extractive
development on rural communities and regions in United States does not exist. Therefore, Mueller
(2020), integrating the theoretical perspectives of the resource curse, natural resource dependence,
and critical perspectives of capitalism, developed and presented the integrative theoretical framework of dual dependency. The framework posits that rural natural resource dependence, meaning
the over-specialization of the rural economy in the natural resource sector, is characterized by the
formation of a dual dependency, first upon the national and global capitalist economy, and second
upon the resource rich local environment. This theoretical framework distinguishes between
natural resource dependence—meaning the general state of overspecialization in the natural
resource sectors—and dual dependency—which refers to the two dependency relationships which
develop as a result of over-specialization in natural resource sectors.
Foundational to the first form of dependency is the argument that capitalism within the United
States represents a microcosm of free markets, wherein its federalist orientation resembles some
degree of a macro-economy, but the constitutional ban on the regulation of interstate commerce
by states greatly amplifies the ability of capital to flow across both political boundaries and
distance. Thus, the uneven development brought on by capitalism (Harvey, 2018:1982), neoliberalism (Harvey, 2006), and the rise of the transnational capitalist class (Sklair, 2002), is
allowed to accelerate and rural areas have limited power, or legal authority, to determine their own
fate. Within this system, rural areas in the United States are geographically and structurally
positioned in a peripheral position relative to their urban, or core, counterparts (Wallerstein,
2015:1979). This placement fosters exploitation of the periphery, by the core, for their labor and
natural resources. This results in the extra-local interests of the core fostering underdevelopment
in rural areas and directing economic growth in a direction outside of local interest.
This exploitative structure, which exists for all of rural America, is exacerbated in the case of
natural resources due to the contradiction between the spatially fixed nature of natural resources
and the spatially unbound nature of capital. Capital fixed in space is subject to a falling rate of
profit due to improving labor conditions, agglomeration effects, and local crises of overaccumulation
(Harvey, 2018:1982; Smith, 1984). Thus, in order to maintain a high rate of profit capital must
constantly be in motion. Other industrial sectors keep capital in motion by regularly moving their
6

investment to a more profitable location as the rate of profit falls (Smith, 1984, 2011). This results
in the see-saw patterns of development discussed by Smith (1984), where capital leaves one place
due to falling rates of profit and does not return until the region degrades to a certain level of
underdevelopment. However, capitalists are unable to move the natural resource base in the same
way they might move a factory. This results in a contradiction between the need for capital to flow
freely across space, and the static nature of natural resources.
This contradiction creates additional friction for the movement of capital invested in natural
resources and results in investments remaining in place longer than they would in other industrial
sectors. The strategies required to keep the rate of profit high while remaining fixed in these
peripheral regions are what create the negative impacts of natural resource dependence.
Ultimately, unlike common perspectives of uneven development—which argue capitalists seek out
poor regions for high rates of profit (Harvey, 2006; Smith, 1984)—in the case of natural resources
capitalists ‘double-down’ on the location, and therefore pursue especially perverse strategies to
keep profits high. Importantly, natural resource interests could address the falling rate of profit
by fully disinvesting in the region or pursuing technological or regional substitutes to keep profits
high (Bunker, 2003). However, the dual dependency framework posits that in the United States it
is far easier for capital to pursue the strategies listed above and foster the negative local outcomes
hallmark of natural resource dependence.
Under this framework, high levels of both extractive and non-extractive forms of natural resource
development are expected to foster similarly negative outcomes, thus highlighting the importance
of considering both types of resource use in tandem. These mutually negative outcomes are due
to both forms of development sharing the contradiction between generating profit off of a static
resource base and the need for capital to be in motion to keep profits high. This alignment creates
a mutual interest between the sectors to keep the rural area generally the same—thus limiting
diverse and broad-based local economic growth—while using the resource base in exclusively one
manner. Both extractive and non-extractive interests have invested in the rural area, at least in
part, due to its current level of development. For example, non-extractive development in the form
of rural tourism often requires an area to have a specific character. Thus, diverse and broad-based
development can run counter to the preservation of the characteristics which make the location
ideal for non-extractive development in the first place. In line with this, both extractive and nonextractive interests will pursue strategies antithetical to diverse and broad-based economic growth
7

to maintain the local characteristics most favorable to their bottom line (Billings and Blee, 2000;
Duncan, 2014; Sherman, 2018; Ulrich-Schad, 2018). While the actual use of the resource base may
differ, the incentives to exploit and underdevelop the rural area are aligned between extractive and
non-extractive interests.
Importantly, this framework does not argue all levels of development in natural resources will
result in negative outcomes. The framework of dual dependency draws a distinction between
natural resource specialization—where positive economic outcomes occur due to the benefits of
regional economic specialization (Kemeny and Storper, 2015)—and natural resource dependence—
where negative economic outcomes occur due to over-specialization and the formation of the dual
dependencies discussed above. Where this exact level of over-specialization occurs will likely vary
due to unique county-level characteristics such as local history and political economy. However, we
should be able to expect, on average, that the negative impacts will begin to accrue as specialization
in the sector increases. This means that the relationships between natural resource development
and economic indicators are expected to be non-linear.
This non-linear view more appropriately grounds the testing of resource dependence within
its conceptual footing. What is meant by this is that if theory says natural resource dependence is
when over-specialization and negative outcomes occur, it does not make sense to assess the
impacts of resource dependence on economic outcomes; this would be tautological. Rather, we
should look across the range of development and see when or if this dependence develops. In the
following analysis I examine a core tenet of the framework of dual dependency by testing the global
hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1: The negative county-level relationship between high levels of natural
resource development and economic prosperity, as measured by per capita income, local
income inequality, and poverty, as well as the formation of natural resource dependence,
will be similar for both extractive and non-extractive natural resource development.
Although the ultimate cause of natural resource dependence suggested by (Mueller, 2020) is
the contradiction between static natural resources and free-flowing capital, there are a number of
proximate causal mechanisms expected to stem from this contradiction. Mueller (2020) outlined
how the formation of dual dependency is expected to negatively impact three indicators of local
8

economic prosperity: per capita income, local income inequality, and poverty. While the analysis
conducted in this paper only tests the direct relationships between natural resource development
and economic outcomes—not testing any of these specific mechanisms—they must be discussed to
ensure hypotheses regarding direct relationships are properly justified, formulated, and tested.
Beyond the ultimate cause of the spatial contradiction, seven proximate causal mechanisms
were identified as reasons why an area with high levels of natural resource development should
expect lower economic prosperity: (1) under-investment in human capital, (2) the crowding out
of growth in other sectors, (3) the undiverse and oligopsonistic nature of rural natural resource
dependent labor markets, wherein the rural economy, already prone to high levels of market
concentration, becomes even more concentrated due to the low level of market diversity in the
region, (4) the quality of the jobs in natural resources, which tend to be precarious and low-paying
in the non-extractive sector (Green, 2017) and highly subject to the ebbs and flows of global
commodity markets in the extractive sector (Freudenburg, 1992), (5) the actions of local elites,
wherein the power elite in a community will capture what economic growth does exist, resulting in
limited overall economic gain, (6) rural gentrification due to natural amenity migrants, (7) and
the gendered nature of employment within the natural resource sectors, where extractive labor is
masculinized and non-extractive labor is feminized (Sherman, 2009), resulting in limited
employment opportunities for half of the population when a community is dependent on just one
form of natural resource development.
These seven mechanisms are expected to relate, or not relate, to each of the three indicators of
economic prosperity in different ways. High levels of natural resource development are expected to
negatively impact per capita income due to the underinvestment in human capital, the crowding
out of other sectors, the undiverse and oligopsonistic labor market, the quality of jobs, and the
gendered nature of employment. Heightened inequality in the face of high levels of natural resource
development is expected due to the undiverse and oligopsonistic labor market, the action of local
elites, and rural gentrification effects. Finally, poverty is expected to increase at high levels of
natural resource development due to the underinvestment in human capital, the crowding out of
other sectors, the quality of the jobs, the actions of local elites, and the gendered nature of
employment. As stated, these mechanisms and their negative effects are not expected to develop at
low levels of specialization, but will instead emerge as specialization in the natural resource sectors
increases. Drawing from these mechanisms, the outcome-specific hypothesis is stated below:
9

Hypothesis 2: The county-level share of employment in extractive and non-extractive
natural resource industries had a non-linear relationship with per capita income, poverty,
and inequality in rural counties in the United States from 2000-2015, with higher levels
of specialization in either form of development resulting in diminishing, and ultimately
negative, returns.
3. Methods
3.1. Data
The data used for this analysis represents all counties in the contiguous United States for the
years of 2000, 2010, and 2015—the longest possible time period of analysis that can be conducted
while using unsuppressed industry employment data—and comes from five sources: the Decennial
United States Census, the American Community Survey (ACS)1, the Bureau of Economic Analysis

(BEA) Local Area Personal Income and Employment data2, Wholedata: Unsupressed County
Business Patterns Data from the Upjohn Institute3, and the USDA Economic Research Service

Rural-Urban Continuum Codes (RUCC) (Economic Research Service, 2020). Demographic
characteristics came from both the Decennial Census as well as the ACS five-year estimates for
2008-2012 and 2013-2017 and were extracted via the National Historic Geographic Information

System hosted by the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS-NHGIS; Manson et al.,
2017). BEA data were used to calculate both per capita income to residents and overall
employment totals. Wholedata was used to calculate industry-specific employment totals. The
RUCC codes, discussed in greater detail in Section 3.5, were used to determine metropolitan, nonmetropolitan metropolitan-adjacent, and non-metropolitan remote status. To ensure consistent
geographic units, counties that changed boundaries during the study period were collapsed into
larger time-consistent geographic areas in both the dataset and within a county-level shapefile
from IPUMS-NHGIS (Manson et al., 2017). A description of all county boundary adjustments is
provided in the Online Appendix.

10

3.2. Dependent Variables
Per capita income is a common outcome variable when analyzing natural resource development
and is used as one of the indicators of economic prosperity in this analysis (Havranek et al., 2016;
James and Aadland, 2011; Sachs and Warner, 1995). The hypotheses under examination pertain
to impacts to local residents, therefore, instead of using pure per capita income generated within a
county, I use the ‘earnings to residents’ values from the BEA (Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2019).
All income was adjusted for inflation and put into 2017 dollars using the Consumer Price Index
inflation calculator provided by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Per capita income was created by
dividing the BEA reported income to residents by the BEA reported total population for that
county for that year and is reported in thousands of dollars. Income inequality was operationalized
in this study as the local Gini Index, which is the conventional Gini coefficient scaled by multiplying
it by 100. This means that 0 represents perfect equality and 100 represents perfect inequality.4

The poverty rate used in this analysis is the portion of persons for whom poverty was determined
in a county, using the official United States poverty measure. The poverty rate was created by
dividing the number of persons for whom poverty was determined, as reported by NHGIS, by the
total county population and then multiplied by 100.
3.3. Independent Variables of Interest
Extractive and non-extractive natural resource related development was operationalized as the
share of total employees within a county working in either extractive or non-extractive industries.
Employment share is used as an indicator for the relative level of natural resource development
within a given county. Unlike outcome variables, these measures allow for workers to move across
county boundaries for work. This allowance means these measures provide a measure of the level
of development in each sector within a county, regardless of where those employees live.
The industries classified as extractive industries included forestry and logging (NAICS=113);
fishing, hunting, and trapping (NAICS=114); support activities for forestry (NAICS=1153); and
mining, quarrying, and oil and gas (NAICS=21). Only those industries directly involved in the
extraction of resources were included in this definition, meaning no processing, manufacturing,
or energy production was included. This decision was made to ensure conceptual clarity in the
industries considered. Extractive employment share was calculated by dividing the number of
11

employees in these extractive industries by the total number of employees within a county and
multiplying

by

100.

Non-extractive

natural

resource

related

development

included

accommodation and food services (NAICS=72); arts, entertainment, and recreation (NAICS=71);
real estate and rental and leasing (NAICS=531); and scenic sightseeing and transportation
(NAICS=487). Non-extractive employment share was calculated by dividing the number of
employees in these non-extractive industries by the total number of employees within a county
and multiplying by 100.
3.4. Time-variant Control Variables
Although the use of unit and period fixed effects in this study accounts for unobserved countylevel and year-specific heterogeneity, relevant variables that are time-variant within units are not
controlled for by this model specification. To ensure precise estimates, I adjust for the four
confounding variables suggested by the literature to have a causal relationship with both the
independent and dependent variables within rural America: population, portion of the population
over 65, portion of the population that is Black, and portion of the population that is Latinx (James
and Aadland, 2011; Lobao et al., 2016).
The rationale for this set of confounders is as follows: counties increasing in overall population
are likely to have lower levels of extractive development and higher levels of economic prosperity
(Johnson and Lichter, 2019); counties with an increasing proportion of elderly residents can confound the relationships of interest in two ways—population aging can lead to decreased economic
growth resulting in lower natural resource development and lower aggregate economic prosperity
(Thiede et al., 2017), and elderly migration into retirement communities can increase non-extractive
development and aggregate economic welfare for at least a portion of the population (Poudyal et al.,
2008); counties with increasing Black population proportions have historically faced higher levels
of resource extraction and environmental injustice, as well as lower economic prosperity due to
the deeply embedded racism in American society (Brulle and Pellow, 2006; Harvey, 2017; Duncan,
2014), and counties with increasing Latinx populations, due to the linked migration networks between natural amenity migrants and Latinx immigrants (Nelson et al., 2009), are more likely to
have higher levels of non-extractive development, as well as higher levels of inequality and poverty
(Lichter, 2012; Monnat and Chandler, 2017).
12

Notably absent from this list of controls, but which have been included in other studies on this
topic, are the dimensions of education, share of employment in manufacturing, cost of living, and
unemployment. These variables have been excluded to avoid over-adjusting the model by
conditioning on, or controlling for, downstream variables (Schisterman et al., 2009). What this
means is that it is not appropriate, or necessary, to control for variables which theory suggests are
post ‘treatment.’ As outlined in Section 2.4, the pathways along which natural resource dependence
is expected to influence economic prosperity include the under-investment in human capital (e.g.
education), the crowding out of manufacturing, rural gentrification effects (increases in cost of
living), and increase in overall unemployment. Therefore, including these variables would only
serve to suppress the true impact of natural resource development while also potentially opening
up the model to additional omitted confounding variables (Schisterman et al., 2009).
That said, additional attention is warranted related to manufacturing employment share,
unemployment, and cost of living. It is possible that the exit of manufacturing in a location could
lead to higher unemployment and decreased economic prosperity while raising the employment
share of natural resources by default due to the changing denominator in employment share.
Further, a secular increase in cost of living could occur and reduce the profitability of natural
resource development while changing economic welfare of residents. From this, it could be argued
that these three variables represent time-varying confounders. However, within the framework of
dual dependency guiding this study, these variables are expected to function as downstream
mechanisms. Thus, the role of manufacturing, cost of living, and unemployment could be argued
to play a dual role as a possible confounder and as a downstream mechanism, and this distinction
would occur at a temporal level of precision unavailable in this data. As such, they are not included
in the primary models, but are included—along with education—in a robustness check in Section
4.2.
3.5. Rural Indicator
The focus of this analysis is on rural outcomes. As such, the relationship between natural
resource development and outcomes is isolated using an interaction technique described in Section
3.6. Given that rurality is not simply a dichotomous trait, but a continuum, relationships were
estimated for two kinds of rural counties, those which are adjacent to metropolitan areas, and those
that are not. I divide these counties using the Rural-Urban Continuum Codes (RUCC) produced
13

by the USDA Economic Research Service, which divide the dichotomous OMB metropolitan/nonmetropolitan county classification into nine levels based upon both population size and adjacency
(Economic Research Service, 2020). For my purposes I combine all non-metropolitan counties
which are adjacent to metropolitan areas into one group (RUCC codes 4, 6, and 8), and all nonmetropolitan counties not adjacent to metropolitan areas into another (RUCC codes 5, 7, and 9).
I use a fixed definition anchored in the year 2000. For the sake of clarity, I will refer to these as
non-metropolitan metro-adjacent and non-metropolitan remote counties.
3.6. Analytic Approach
The use of a spatial econometric model was necessary due to the well-documented spatial
clustering of social phenomena across the United States (Brooks, 2019; Lobao et al., 2007; Thiede
et al., 2018), as well as the ease at which changes in one county can influence its neighbors due to
permeable boundaries (Chi and Zhu, 2019; Leicht and Jenkins, 2007). If an aspatial model were
used, the assumptions of independence between units built into that model would be violated,
producing incorrect estimates of model parameters (Chi and Zhu, 2019). Due to the complexity of
the models and the use of polynomial terms, I use a Spatial Lag of X (SLX) model, as opposed to
the more complicated model like the Spatial Durbin Model (SDM), to ensure interpretable results
(Gibbons and Overman, 2012; Vega and Elhorst, 2015).
The hypothesized non-linear effects were estimated by including both the first and second order
(i.e. linear and quadratic) terms of employment shares in the models. A quadratic non-linear
relationship was specified due to theory and prior work suggesting an expected threshold where we
see diminishing, and possibly negative, returns from increased specialization of either extractive or
non-extractive development (Freudenburg and Wilson, 2002; Stedman et al., 2005).
The desired results for this model were direct effect estimates for the two kinds of rural counties,
however, the use of spatial regression means that the exclusion of urban neighbors from the overall
model would have been inappropriate. Therefore, I estimated the models using a simple spatial
regime approach where a three-level categorical indicator, where the reference group was nonmetropolitan remote, was interacted with both extractive and non-extractive employment shares.

14

Ultimately, a spatial lag of X (SLX) fixed effects model with both unit and period fixed effects
was used to control for time-invariant unobserved county level heterogeneity, as well as any secular
trends occurring over the study period, while also controlling for spatial dependence and spillovers.
The full SLX model is presented in Equation 1, where yit is the outcome variable of interest, metro
represents the three-level metropolitan-status indicator, exit represents the share of local
employment in the sector of extractive natural resource development, nxit represents the share of
local employment in non-extractive natural resource development, β1 and β3 capture the first
order term of the within-county direct effect of extractive and non-extract employment share on yit,

respectively, β2 and β4 capture the second order, quadratic within-county direct effect of extractive

and non-extract employment share on yit, respectively, W is a row-standardized first-order queen’s
contiguity matrix, θ represents the spatially lagged coefficient for its corresponding β, X is a vector
of time-variant control variables, uit represents the error in the model which has the components

µi and ct representing the unit and period fixed effects, and εit represents stochastic error. The
interpretation of this model is straightforward, as β represents the average direct effect of a change
in Xit on yit and θ represents the average indirect effect of a change in average neighboring levels
of Xit on yit (Golgher and Voss, 2016; Vega and Elhorst, 2015). All models were estimated using
cluster robust standard errors at the county level due to the repeated observation of counties over
the study period (Angrist and Pischke, 2008; Cameron and Miller, 2015).

yit = metro ∗ [β1exit + β2ex2 ] + metro ∗ [β3nxit + β4nx2 ]
it

it

+ Wθ1exit + Wθ2 ex2 + Wθ3nxit + Wθ4 nx 2
it

+ β7Xit + Wθ7Xit + uit

it

(1)

uit = µi + ct + εit

3.7. Evaluation of Hypotheses
The global hypothesis regarding similar relationships between extractive and non-extractive
development and economic prosperity (Hypothesis 1) was assessed by considering all the results for
all three outcomes variables in-tandem and is discussed at the end of the results. The outcomespecific hypothesis (Hypothesis 2) was evaluated using marginal estimates of changes in the direct
15

effects for each outcome across a constrained range of each form of natural resource employment
share. Marginal effects and predicted means were estimated while holding all other model variables
constant at their means. Thus, by calculating and plotting the non-linear predicted marginal means
and marginal effects across a constrained range of each form of development, I assessed the shape
and significance of the non-linear relationships between extractive and non-extractive employment
shares and per capita income, inequality, and poverty. Given the considerable ambiguity regarding
what it means to have a ‘significant non-linear effect’, I do not focus on one omnibus test of effects
and instead assess the strength and significance of the direct effects as they vary across the selected
range of employment share. All tests of statistical significance were evaluated at p < .05. Finally,
given the complexity of the models due to the use of both interactions, polynomials, and direct and
indirect effects, I only present model results visually in the main body of this manuscript. Full
tables are available in the online appendix.
4. Results
Summary statistics for all variables included in the primary models by metropolitan status are
presented in Table 1. After county boundary adjustments there were a total of 3073 counties, with
961 classified as non-metropolitan remote, 1,049 classified as non-metropolitan metro-adjacent, and
1,063 counties classified as metropolitan. All counties had 3 observations (i.e. 2000, 2010, and 2015)
and there was no missing data.
Table 1 here.
4.1. Model Results
Results for both non-metropolitan adjacent and non-adjacent counties are presented in Figures
1 through 3. Each figure presents plots for both types of non-metropolitan counties’ predicted
marginal means and direct effects for a constrained range of extractive and non-extractive
employment share. Marginal predictions and effects of employment share were estimated for every
integer from 0 to 30 for all relationships. The range of 0 to 30 was selected as it contains the vast
majority of the observed values for each form of development. Each figure first presents the
marginal predicted means for the relevant combination of employment share variable and outcome
variable on the left, and then presents the corresponding marginal direct effects on the right.
16

4.1.1. Per Capita Income
In the case of per capita income to residents, extractive development had the expected
relationship for non-metropolitan remote counties only (Figure 1). In non-metropolitan remote
counties, increases in extractive employment share corresponded to larger increases in per capita
income at lower absolute levels of employment share than at higher levels. At high levels of
extractive employment share the effect tapered and ultimately became non-significant. In nonmetropolitan metro-adjacent counties the relationship was not statistically distinguishable from
zero across its range. Taken together, these models show support for the expected non-linear
relationship in non-metropolitan remote counties for extraction, but not in non-metropolitan
metro-adjacent counties. Although we see the expected non-linear relationships, the effects do not
become negative across the range of predicted values, instead, they simply diminish to zero.
The relationship for non-extractive development also varied between remote and metro-adjacent
counties. In non-metropolitan remote counties, low levels of non-extractive employment share were
associated with decreases in per capita income. As the absolute level of employment share grew,
this negative effect tapered toward zero. In metropolitan-adjacent counties the effect was far more
consistent, increases in non-extractive employment share were associated with decreases in per
capita income across the range of predicted values. Although there does appear to be a non-linear
effect, these relationships do not support the hypothesis as the effect either becomes less negative
(non-metro remote), or was a strictly negative relationship (non-metro metro-adjacent).
Taking all of this in tandem—the hypothesis regarding per capita income (Hypothesis 2) is
partially supported for extractive development and not supported for non-extractive development.
The hypothesized negative returns were present for non-extractive development, but counter to the
hypothesis, they were present across all predicted levels of employment share.
Figure 1 here.
4.1.2. Inequality
In the model of inequality, we again see the expected relationship for extractive development in
non-metropolitan remote areas—wherein there are decreases in inequality at low levels of
employment share and the effect tapers at high levels (Figure 2). For non-metropolitan metroadjacent counties, the relationship is more nuanced. The relationship between extractive
17

employment share and Gini Index is not significantly distinguishable from zero until a relatively
high level of extractive employment share, where we then see a positive relationship with increases
in extractive employment share corresponding to increases in inequality. Although there is nuance
in these findings, they broadly support the outcome-specific hypothesis. High levels of extractive
employment share were associated with negligible to negative returns for the reduction of
inequality.
In the case of non-extractive development, the relationship between employment share and
Gini Index is not statistically distinguishable from zero at any point along the range of predicted
values. Thus, the results do not support the hypothesis. Ultimately, the hypothesis regarding
inequality (Hypothesis 2) is supported for extractive development and unsupported in the case of
non-extractive development.
Figure 2 here.
4.1.3. Poverty
When examining the results for poverty, we again see the expected relationship for extraction
in non-metropolitan remote counties. Increases in extractive employment share corresponded to
decreases in poverty at low absolute levels of employment share, and this effect tapered to zero as
the absolute level of employment share grew. In non-metropolitan metro-adjacent areas, the
relationship between extractive employment share and poverty was not statistically distinguishable
from zero at any predicted value. Thus, the hypothesis of non-linearity and diminishing returns is
supported for non-metropolitan remote counties, but not metro-adjacent counties. Once again,
there were not negative returns at high levels of extractive employment share in remote counties,
poverty did not increase, but the effect did diminish to zero.
The results for non-extractive development in some ways mirror those for extraction in the case
of poverty. In non-metropolitan remote counties, there was no statistically significant effect across
the range of predicted values, leaving the hypothesis unsupported. However, in non-metropolitan
metro-adjacent counties, there was a significant effect. At low levels, increases in non-extractive
employment share resulted in increased poverty in metro-adjacent areas. As the absolute level of
non-extractive employment share increased, this effect tapered. While non-linear, this does not
support study hypotheses. Instead of the relationship becoming more severe across the range of
18

development, the relationship tapered—suggesting a ceiling where further increases in nonextractive development did not continue to correspond with increases in poverty.
Similar to per capita income, the hypothesis regarding poverty (Hypothesis 2) is partially
supported for extraction and not supported for non-extractive development. Although there is a
significant non-linear effect for non-extractive development in non-metropolitan metro-adjacent
counties, the relationship gets better, not worse, as absolute levels of employment share rise.
Figure 3 here.
4.1.4. Evaluation of the Global Hypotheses
To assess support for the global hypothesis proposed by the theoretical framework of dual
dependency—that the negative county-level relationship between high levels of natural resource
development and economic prosperity, as measured by per capita income, local income inequality,
and poverty, as well as the formation of natural resource dependence, will be similar for both
extractive and non-extractive natural resource development—requires assessing all three models
in-tandem. High levels of specialization in both forms of development were associated with adverse
outcomes for per capita income and poverty. However, the similarities end there.
Extractive development demonstrated the expected curve of diminishing returns for all three
outcome variables in non-metropolitan remote counties, but in metro-adjacent counties the
hypothesis was only supported for inequality. Further, only in the case of inequality were actual
negative effects observed, as opposed to simply diminishing returns. This indicated significant
support for the outcome-specific hypothesis in remote counties, and partial support in metropolitanadjacent counties. Non-extractive development did not support the outcome-specific hypothesis
in any model. The relationships between non-extractive employment share and per capita income
and poverty were far more severe than expected and the relationships did not take the expected
shape. Additionally, the lack of a significant relationship between non-extractive development and
inequality did not support the global hypothesis of similar outcomes and highlights the way these
forms of development relate to economic prosperity in different ways.
Taking these findings together, there is little support for the global hypothesis as-written. For
extraction, I find the expected curves, but the relationships do not become negative except in the
case of inequality. For non-extractive development I do find negative outcomes to per capita income
19

and poverty at high levels of development, but they are less severe, not more severe, than they
would be at lower levels.
4.2. Robustness Checks
Toassess model robustness to variables which could be viewed as either downstream mechanisms
or time-varying confounders, models were also estimated with the variables of percent without a
high school diploma, percent with at least a college degree, median owner-occupied housing value,
unemployment rate, and manufacturing employment share included. The findings were consistent
between the primary models and the models with these variables included. Figures and tables for
this robustness check are included in the online appendix. Additionally, models were estimated
using a row-standardized rooks first order contiguity matrix to ensure estimate stability. The
conclusions suggested by models were equivalent with the models using the pre-selected queen’s
contiguity matrix and results are provided in the online appendix.
5. Discussion
This article presents an investigation into the relationship between both extractive and nonextractive development and rural economic prosperity in the United States from 2000 to 2015. This
time period was one of significant economic upheaval and industrial restructuring in rural America.
As natural resource development, both extractive and non-extractive, showed considerable stability
and growth—as measured by employment share—during this otherwise difficult period, it was
important to understand how these forms of development related to rural economic outcomes.
While I do find support for the hypothesized non-linear relationships of overspecialization for
extraction in non-metropolitan remote counties, the results were not as evident in those rural
areas adjacent to metropolitan centers. Further, non-extractive development did not conform to
the theoretical hypotheses, with the relationships being less straight-forward than hypothesized
under the framework of dual dependency articulated by Mueller (2020).
Non-extractive forms of natural resource development have been suggested as a boon for
struggling rural economies (Deller et al., 2008; Deller, 2010). However, these results call into
question how effective these forms of development really are for rural America. These results
provide support for the qualitative findings of both Sherman (2018) and Ulrich-Schad (2018)
showing negative outcomes in the face of increased non-extractive development in rural areas, as
20

well as the quantitative findings of Deller (2010) showing a limited impact of non-extractive
development on poverty reduction. When controlling for relevant county characteristics, the share
of employment in non-extractive natural resource industries such as tourism, recreation,
accommodation, and real estate, generally decreased per capita income to residents, either had no
effect or raised poverty, and had no relationship with inequality. The reasons for this finding
remains an empirical question, and may stem from the generally low quality of jobs in the sector.
Regardless of reason, when considering these findings, it appears that rural natural amenity
development may not only be a poor panacea for rural America, but may be a direction to be
seriously avoided.
While the effects found for extractive forms of development were not as severe as those found
for non-extractive development, extractive natural resource employment was not strictly positive
for rural economic prosperity. These results support the notion that natural resource dependency
develops at high levels of extraction where we see diminishing returns to per capita income, inequality, and poverty. However, given the lack of actual negative returns—generally the effects
simply tapered toward zero—it appears remote rural counties are better off with some extraction
than none. Thus, while these results both support prior literature demonstrating the resource curse
within the United States (James and Aadland, 2011; Perdue and Pavela, 2012) and highlight the
possible negative socioeconomic outcomes of natural resource dependence, the use of non-linear
effects highlights the complexity of these relationships and the positive absolute outcomes
extraction can have for remote rural counties.
I find the relationship between natural resource development and economic prosperity varies
between non-metropolitan remote and non-metropolitan metro-adjacent counties. The framework
of dual dependency argues one of the primary reasons over-specialization develops is the peripheral
nature of rural communities. That I only find consistent support for study hypotheses for extraction
in the remote rural counties supports this element of the framework. The fact that non-extractive
development did not show a clear trend between the two types of rural counties highlights the work
left to do before we will fully understand the trajectory of non-extractive resource development in
the United States. Although Mueller (2020) may be correct in the prediction that both forms of
development ultimately result in negative dependent relationships for rural communities, it does
not appear as simple as simply assuming a similar trajectory between extractive and non-extractive
natural resource development.

21

5.1. Limitations
There remain two limitations to acknowledge. The use of the county as the spatial unit, although
common and ideal for subnational research (Hooks et al., 2004; Lobao and Kraybill, 2005), poses
limitations for this study due to the variability in size and structure of counties throughout the
United States. Counties have a large degree of internal heterogeneity. Treating them as a single unit
of analysis necessarily removes nuance from findings and assumes impacts will be shared equally.
For example, within a county which appears dependent on extraction you may have communities
which are, in fact, dominated by the sector and other communities with little or nothing to do with
extractive activities. Future work using restricted data will be needed to understand these effects
at a community level.
Finally, I elected to group industrial activities into either extractive or non-extractive categories.
This approach, while necessary for the analysis at hand, is rather coarse when considering the
intricacies of context and the varying trajectories of the component sectors over the time period.
It will be crucial for future work to explore each kind of extractive or non-extractive development
separately, while also looking at varying contextual and regional effects, if we are to fully understand
the benefits and drawbacks of these forms of economic development.

22

Notes
1

The ACS is a regularly occurring survey from the US Census Bureau which replaced the long-form version of the

decennial census after 2000 (United States Census Bureau, 2014). The ACS sampling structure covers every address in
the United States in five-year intervals. From these five-year samples the data is generalized into estimates of county
level variables over the five-year period (United States Census Bureau, 2014).
2

The BEA Local Area Personal Income and Employment data is produced at the county level by the BEA by

collating data from multiple federal agencies. The data provides accurate estimates of overall and sector-specific
income and employment at the county-level for the United States (Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2019).
3

A major limitation faced by sub-national research on rural development in the United States is the extent to

which industry-specific employment and income data are suppressed at the county level by the federal government.
Publicly available unsuppressed data at the county level is often aggregated at a very large scale (e.g. all types of service
industries aggregated into ‘services’), rendering appropriate inference impossible. I overcome this limitation using
Wholedata, developed and maintained by the Upjohn Institute. Wholedata utilizes the Isserman-Westervelt algorithm
to recover tight bounds and point estimates of suppressed employment statistics at the county level from the Census
Bureau’s County Business Patterns Data (Isserman and Westervelt, 2006).
The algorithm accomplishes this by exploiting the heirarchical nature of the data to identify the smallest possible
range of suppressed values and then iteratively estimating the point estimates by satisfying constraints imposed by other
values. Thus, although these are still estimates whose exact level of precision remains unknown, this results in
significantly reduced uncertainty (Isserman and Westervelt, 2006). Although these estimates are of a high precision
and represented the best available data the the time of the study, future work should replicate this analysis using
restricted data to validate these findings and the Wholedata product. Further, many jobs in both extractive and nonextractive natural resource development are seasonal. The use of annual estimates obviously misses this seasonality.
Data which can speak to this seasonality will be essential for future work in this area.
4

Population income for this study was only publicly available in categories, or ‘bins’. For the study period in

question, household income was reported in 16 income bins with a maximum of $200,000 or greater. I calculate the
local Gini coefficients from binned income using the Robust Pareto Midpoint Estimator developed by Von Hippel et
al. (2016).

References
Aaronson, D., Rissman, E. R., Sullivan, D. G., et al. (2004). Assessing the jobless recovery.
Economic Perspectives-Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 28:2–20
Angrist, J. D. and Pischke, J.-S. (2008). Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist’s companion.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Armstrong, A. and Stedman, R. C. (2013). Culture clash and second home ownership in the us
northern forest. Rural Sociology, 78(3):318–345.
23

Billings, D. B. and Blee, K. M. (2000). The road to poverty: The making of wealth and hardship in
Appalachia. Cambridge University Press.
Brooks, M. M. (2019). The advantages of comparative LISA techniques in spatial inequality research: Evidence from poverty change in the United States. Spatial Demography, 7(2-3):167–193.
Brooks, S. M. and Kurtz, M. J. (2016). Oil and democracy: Endogenous natural resources and the
political “resource curse”. International Organization, 70(2):279–311.
Brown, D. L. and Schafft, K. A. (2019). Rural people and communities in the 21st century: Resilience and transformation: Second Edition. Medford, MA: Polity.
Brown, J. P. (2014). Production of natural gas from shale in local economies: a resource blessing
or curse? Economic Review-Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Q1:5–33.
Brulle, R. J. and Pellow, D. N. (2006). Environmental justice: human health and environmental
inequalities. Annual Review of Public Health, 27:103–124.
Bunker, S. G. (2003). Matter, space, energy, and political economy: The Amazon in the worldsystem. Journal of World-Systems Research, 9(2):219–258.
Bureau of Economic Analysis (2019). Local area personal income methodology. Technical report.
Cameron, A. C. and Miller, D. L. (2015). A practitioner’s guide to cluster-robust inference. Journal
of Human Resources, 50(2):317–372.
Chi, G. and Zhu, J. (2019). Spatial regression models for the social sciences. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Deller, S. (2010). Rural poverty, tourism and spatial heterogeneity. Annals of Tourism Research,
37(1):180–205.
Deller, S. C., Lledo, V., and Marcouiller, D. W. (2008). Modeling regional economic growth with
a focus on amenities. Review of Urban & Regional Development Studies: Journal of the Applied
Regional Science Conference, 20(1):1–21.
Deller, S. C. and Schreiber, A. (2012). Mining and community economic growth. Review of Regional
Studies, 42(2).
24

Deller, S. C., Tsai, T.-H., Marcouiller, D. W., and English, D. B. (2001). The role of amenities and
quality of life in rural economic growth. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 83(2):352–
365.
Douglas, S. and Walker, A. (2017). Coal mining and the resource curse in the eastern United States.
Journal of Regional Science, 57(4):568–590.
Duncan, C. M. (2014). Worlds apart: Poverty and politics in rural America, Second Edition. New
Haven: Yale University Press.
Economic Research Service (2020). Documentation of rural urban continuum codes. Technical
report, United States Department of Agriculture.
English, D. B., Marcouiller, D. W., and Cordell, H. K. (2000). Tourism dependence in rural
America: Estimates and effects. Society & Natural Resources, 13(3):185–202.
Franke, A. G. (2007:1969). The development of underdevelopment. In Roberts, J. T. and Hite,
A. B., editors, The Globalization and Development Reader: Perspectives on Development and
Global Change, pages 76–85. Malden, MA: Basil Blackwell.
Frankel, J. A. (2012). The natural resource curse: A survey of diagnoses and some prescriptions.
NBER Working Paper No. 15836.
Freudenburg, W. R. (1992). Addictive economies: Extractive industries and vulnerable localities
in a changing world economy. Rural Sociology, 57(3):305–332.
Freudenburg, W. R. and Gramling, R. (1994). Natural resources and rural poverty: A closer look.
Society & Natural Resources, 7(1):5–22.
Freudenburg, W. R. and Wilson, L. J. (2002). Mining the data: Analyzing the economic implications
of mining for nonmetropolitan regions. Sociological Inquiry, 72(4):549–575.
Gibbons, S. and Overman, H. G. (2012). Mostly pointless spatial econometrics? Journal of Regional
Science, 52(2):172–191.
Golgher, A. B. and Voss, P. R. (2016). How to interpret the coefficients of spatial models: Spillovers,
direct and indirect effects. Spatial Demography, 4(3):175–205.
25

Green, G. (2017). The opportunities and limits of economic growth. In Tickamyer, A. R., Sherman, J., and Warlick, J., editors, Rural Poverty in the United States, pages 416–438. Columbia
University Press: New York, NY.
Gylfason, T. (2001). Natural resources, education, and economic development. European Economic
Review, 45(4-6):847–859.
Harvey, D. (2006). Spaces of Global Capitalism. New York, NY: Verso.
Harvey, D. (2018:1982). The Limits to Capital. New York, NY: Verso books.
Harvey, M. H. (2017). Racial inequalities and poverty in rural America. In Tickamyer, A. R., Sherman, J., and Warlick, J., editors, Rural Poverty in the United States, pages 141–167. Columbia
University Press: New York, NY.
Havranek, T., Horvath, R., and Zeynalov, A. (2016). Natural resources and economic growth: A
meta-analysis. World Development, 88:134–151.
Hooks, G., Mosher, C., Rotolo, T., and Lobao, L. (2004). The prison industry: Carceral expansion
and employment in US counties, 1969–1994. Social Science Quarterly, 85(1):37–57.
Humphrey, C. R., Berardi, G., Carroll, M. S., Fairfax, S., Fortmann, L., Geisler, C., Johnson,
T. G., Kusel, J., Lee, R. G., Macinko, S., et al. (1993). Theories in the study of natural resourcedependent communities and persistent rural poverty in the United States. In Summers, G.,
editor, Persistent Poverty in Rural America, pages 136–172. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Hunter, L. M., Boardman, J. D., and Onge, J. M. S. (2005). The association between natural
amenities, rural population growth, and long-term residents’ economic well-being. Rural Sociology, 70(4):452–469.
Isserman, A. M. and Westervelt, J. (2006). 1.5 million missing numbers: Overcoming employment
suppression in county business patterns data. International Regional Science Review, 29(3):311–
335.
James, A. and Aadland, D. (2011). The curse of natural resources: An empirical investigation of
us counties. Resource and Energy Economics, 33(2):440–453.
26

Johnson, K. M. and Lichter, D. T. (2019). Rural depopulation: Growth and decline processes over
the past century. Rural Sociology, 84(1):3–27.
Kemeny, T. and Storper, M. (2015). Is specialization good for regional economic development?
Regional Studies, 49(6):1003–1018.
Kim, K.-k., Marcouiller, D. W., and Deller, S. C. (2005). Natural amenities and rural development:understanding spatial and distributional attributes. Growth and Change, 36(2):273–297.
Krannich, R. S., Gentry, B., Luloff, A., and Robertson, P. (2014). Resource dependency in rural
america: Continuities and change. In Bailey, C., Jensen, L., and Ransom, E., editors, Rural
America in a Globalizing World, pages 208–225. West Virginia University Press.
Leicht, K. T. and Jenkins, J. C. (2007). New and unexplored opportunities: Developing a spatial
perspective for political sociology. In Lobao, L. M., Hooks, G., and Tickamyer, A. R., editors, The
Sociology of Spatial Inequality, pages 63–84. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Lichter, D. T. (2012). Immigration and the new racial diversity in rural America. Rural Sociology,
77(1):3–35.
Lobao, L. and Kraybill, D. S. (2005). The emerging roles of county governments in metropolitan
and nonmetropolitan areas: Findings from a national survey. Economic Development Quarterly,
19(3):245–259.
Lobao, L., Zhou, M., Partridge, M., and Betz, M. (2016). Poverty, place, and coal employment
across Appalachia and the United States in a new economic era. Rural Sociology, 81(3):343–386.
Lobao, L. M., Hooks, G., and Tickamyer, A. R. (2007). The sociology of spatial inequality. Albany,
NY: SUNY Press.
Manson, S., Schroeder, J., Van Riper, D., and Ruggles, S. (2017). IPUMS national historical
geographic information system: Version 12.0.
Matsuyama, K. (1992). Agricultural productivity, comparative advantage, and economic growth.
Journal of Economic Theory, 58(2):317–334.

27

Monnat, S. M. and Chandler, R. F. (2017). Immigration trends and immigrant poverty in rural
America. In Tickamyer, A. R., Sherman, J., and Warlick, J., editors, Rural Poverty in the United
States, pages 167–201. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Mueller, J. T. (2020). The Effect of Natural Resource Dependence on Economic Prosperity. PhD
Dissertation, Department of Agricultural Economics, Sociology, and Education, The
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA.
Nelson, P. B., Lee, A. W., and Nelson, L. (2009). Linking baby boomer and hispanic migration
streams into rural america–a multi-scaled approach. Population, Space and Place, 15(3):277–293.
Papyrakis, E. (2017). The resource curse-what have we learned from two decades of intensive
research: Introduction to the special issue. The Journal of Development Studies, 53(2):175–185.
Papyrakis, E. and Gerlagh, R. (2004). The resource curse hypothesis and its transmission channels.
Journal of Comparative Economics, 32(1):181–193.
Papyrakis, E. and Gerlagh, R. (2007). Resource abundance and economic growth in the united
states. European Economic Review, 51(4):1011–1039.
Peluso, N. L., Humphrey, C. R., and Fortmann, L. P. (1994). The rock, the beach, and the tidal
pool: People and poverty in natural resource-dependent areas. Society & Natural Resources,
7(1):23–38.
Perdue, R. T. and Pavela, G. (2012). Addictive economies and coal dependency: methods of extraction and socioeconomic outcomes in West Virginia, 1997-2009. Organization & Environment,
25(4):368–384.
Poudyal, N. C., Hodges, D. G., and Cordell, H. K. (2008). The role of natural resource amenities in
attracting retirees: Implications for economic growth policy. Ecological Economics, 68(1-2):240–
248.
Sachs, J. D. and Warner, A. M. (1995). Natural resource abundance and economic growth. Technical
report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Schisterman, E. F., Cole, S. R., and Platt, R. W. (2009). Overadjustment bias and unnecessary
adjustment in epidemiologic studies. Epidemiology, 20(4):488–495.
28

Sherman, J. (2009). Those who work, those who don’t: Poverty, morality, and family in rural
America. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Sherman, J. (2018). Not allowed to inherit my kingdom: Amenity development and social inequality
in the rural West. Rural Sociology, 83(1):174–207.
Sklair, L. (2002). Democracy and the transnational capitalist class. The Annals of the American
Academy of Political and Social Science, 581(1):144–157.
Smith, M. D. and Krannich, R. S. (2000). “Culture clash” revisited: Newcomer and longer-term
residents’ attitudes toward land use, development, and environmental issues in rural communities
in the Rocky Mountain West. Rural Sociology, 65(3):396–421.
Smith, N. (1984). Uneven development: Nature, capital, and the production of space. New York,
NY: Basil Blackwell.
Smith, N. (2011). Uneven development redux. New Political Economy, 16(2):261–265.
Stedman, R. C., Parkins, J. R., and Beckley, T. M. (2005). Forest dependence and community wellbeing in rural Canada: Variation by forest sector and region. Canadian Journal of Forest
Research, 35(1):215–220.
Thiede, B., Kim, H., and Valasik, M. (2018). The spatial concentration of America’s rural poor
population: A postrecession update. Rural Sociology, 83(1):109–144.
Thiede, B. and Slack, T. (2017). The old versus the new economies and their impacts. In Tickamyer,
A. R., Sherman, J., and Warlick, J., editors, Rural Poverty in the United States, pages 231–256.
New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Thiede, B. C., Brown, D. L., Sanders, S. R., Glasgow, N., and Kulcsar, L. J. (2017). A demo- graphic
deficit? Local population aging and access to services in rural america, 1990–2010. Rural
sociology, 82(1):44–74.
Tsvetkova, A., & Partridge, M. (2017). The shale revolution and entrepreneurship: an assessment
of the relationship between energy sector expansion and small business entrepreneurship in US
counties. Energy, 141, 423-434.
29

Ulrich-Schad, J. D. (2018). “We didn’t move here to move to Aspen”: Community making and community development in an emerging rural amenity destination. Journal of Rural and Community
Development, 13(4).
Ulrich-Schad, J. D. and Qin, H. (2018). Culture clash? predictors of views on amenity-led development and community involvement in rural recreation counties. Rural Sociology, 83(1):81–108.
United States Census Bureau (2014). American community survey design and methodology. Technical report.
Vega, S. H. and Elhorst, J. P. (2015). The SLX model. Journal of Regional Science, 55(3):339–363.
Von Hippel, P. T., Scarpino, S. V., and Holas, I. (2016). Robust estimation of inequality from
binned incomes. Sociological Methodology, 46(1):212–251.
Wallerstein, I. (2015:1979). The rise and future demise of the world capitalist system: Concepts for
comparative analysis. In Roberts, J. T., Hite, A. B., and Chorev, N., editors, The Globalization
and Development Reader: Perspectives on Development and Global Change, Second Edition,
pages 126–146. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
West, P. C. (1994). Natural resources and the persistence of rural poverty in America: A Weberian
perspective on the role of power, domination, and natural resource bureaucracy. Society &
Natural Resources, 7(5):415–427.

30

6. Tables

Table 1: Summary statistics for model variables by metropolitan and non-metropolitan across all years

Non-Metropolitan Non-Adjacent: N/county-years = 961/2883
Per Capita Income to Residents (thousands)
Local Gini Coefficient
Poverty Rate
Extractive Employment Share
Non-extractive Employment Share
Population (thousands)
Percent Over 65
Percent White
Percent Black
Percent Hispanic
Non-Metropolitan Adjacent: N/county-years = 1049/3147
Per Capita Income to Residents (thousands)
Local Gini Coefficient
Poverty Rate
Extractive Employment Share
Non-extractive Employment Share
Population (thousands)
Percent Over 65
Percent White
Percent Black
Percent Hispanic
Metropolitan: N/county-years = 1063/3189
Per Capita Income to Residents (thousands)
Local Gini Coefficient
Poverty Rate
Extractive Employment Share
Non-extractive Employment Share
Population (thousands)
Percent Over 65
Percent White
Percent Black
Percent Hispanic

31

Mean

SD

Min

Max

21.47
43.32
15.85
1.80
5.46
17.17
18.16
86.93
6.07
7.57

8.29
3.78
6.93
3.35
4.40
17.71
4.68
16.05
13.81
13.66

0.99
30.75
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.07
3.00
2.92
0.00
0.00

115.68
80.67
56.69
55.33
54.97
179.90
39.16
100.00
86.49
95.68

20.21
43.05
16.16
1.60
5.79
31.59
16.90
83.93
9.50
7.64

5.33
3.50
6.03
2.88
4.03
27.42
3.87
16.80
15.48
13.64

7.70
32.91
2.91
0.00
0.00
0.69
5.21
9.34
0.00
0.00

84.36
70.33
50.45
36.47
72.27
215.19
54.18
99.52
86.92
99.18

26.98
8.67 10.70
95.34
41.95
3.21 32.44
56.96
12.90
5.21
2.11
38.59
1.09
1.84
0.00
44.45
7.00
4.22
0.00
90.13
237.54 507.87 1.54 10123.25
13.94
3.64
1.80
38.30
81.28 15.26 17.10
99.43
10.89 13.69 0.00
81.48
8.47
12.11
0.02
95.74

7. Figures

Figure 1: Predicted means and marginal direct effects for per capita income to residents across constrained ranged
of natural resource employment share. Other variables held constant at means. Vertical bars represent 95% CI

32

Figure 2: Predicted means and marginal direct effects for Gini Index across constrained ranged of natural resource
employment share. Other variables held constant at means. Vertical bars represent 95% CI

33

Figure 3: Predicted means and marginal direct effects for poverty rate across constrained ranged of natural resource
employment share. Other variables held constant at means. Vertical bars represent 95% CI

34

Online Appendix
County Boundary Adjustments
Table A1: Counties Collapsed to Ensure Time-Consistent Geographic Units

State
Colorado
Connecticut
Florida
South Dakota
Virginia

3
Washington

Counties
Broomfield (8014) + Adams (8001) + Boulder (8013) + Weld (8123) + Jefferson (8059)
Barnstable (25001) + Dukes (25007) + Nantucket (25019)
Miami-Dade (12086) + Dade (12025)
Oglala (46102) + Shannon (46113)
Albermarle (51003) + Charlottesville City (51540)
Alleghany (51005) + Covington City (51580)
Augusta (51015) + Staunton City (51790) + Waynesboro City (51820)
Bedford (51019) + Bedford City (51515)
Campbell (51031) + Lynchburg City (51680)
Carrol (51035) + Galax City (51640)
Dinwiddie (51053) + Colonial Heights City (51570) + Petersburg (51730)
Fairfax (51059) + Fairfax City (51600) + Falls Church (51610)
Frederick (51069) + Winchester City (51840)
Greensville (51081) + Emporia City (51595)
Henry (51089) + Martinsville City (51690)
James City (51095) + Williamsburg City (51830)
Montgomery (51121) + Radford City (51750)
Pittsylvania (51143) + Danville City (51590)
Prince George (51149) + Hopewell City (51670)
Prince William (51153) + Manassas City (51683) + Manassas Park City (51685)
Roanoke (51161) + Salem (51775)
Rockbridge (51163) + Buena Vista City (51530) + Lexington City (51678)
Rockingham (51165) + Harrisonburg (51660)
Southampton (51175) + Franklin City (51620)
Spotsylvania (51177) + Fredericksburg City (51630)
Washington (51191) + Bristol City (51520)
Wise (51195) + Norton City (51720)
York (51199) + Poquoson (51735)
San Juan (53055) + Skagit (53057)

Primary Model Results
Table A2: Relationship between Natural Resource Development and Non-metropolitan Economic Prosperity from 2000-2015

40

Direct Effects
Non-Metropolitan Remote
Extractive Employment Share
Extractive Employment Squared
Non-extractive Employment Share
Non-extractive Employment Squared
Non-Metropolitan Metro-Adjacent
Extractive Employment Share
Extractive Employment Squared
Non-extractive Employment Share
Non-extractive Employment Squared
Metropolitan
Extractive Employment Share
Extractive Employment Squared
Non-extractive Employment Share
Non-extractive Employment Squared
Population (thousands)
Percent Over 65
Percent Black
Percent Hispanic
Year [2000 ref]
2010
2015
Indirect Effects
Extractive Employment Share
Extractive Employment Squared
Non-extractive Employment Share
Non-extractive Employment Squared
Population (thousands)
Percent Over 65
Percent Black
Percent Hispanic
Constant

Per Capita Income
Coef.
SE

Gini Index
Coef.
SE

Poverty Rate
Coef.
SE

0.4520∗∗∗
-0.0063∗∗
-0.3293∗
0.0060

0.1222 -0.2467∗∗∗ 0.0656
0.0023 0.0050∗∗∗ 0.0014
0.1494
0.0161
0.1162
0.0032 -0.0035 0.0021

-0.2106∗
0.0023
-0.0959
0.0016

0.0857
0.0019
0.1164
0.0021

-0.3500∗
0.0085
0.1818
-0.0066

0.1704
0.0061
0.1627
0.0036

0.1855
-0.0000
-0.0308
0.0032

0.0999
0.0029
0.1220
0.0021

0.1159
-0.0030
0.2685∗
-0.0038

0.1415
0.0061
0.1270
0.0023

-0.3744∗ 0.1651
0.0084∗∗ 0.0032
0.0642
0.1611
-0.0044 0.0033
-0.0037∗∗ 0.0014
-0.1510∗ 0.0764
-0.2027∗∗∗ 0.0407
-0.0628 0.0553

0.1469
-0.0058∗∗
0.0027
0.0055∗
0.0021∗∗∗
-0.0185
0.0770∗∗
-0.0344

0.0864
0.0021
0.1200
0.0022
0.0006
0.0349
0.0278
0.0309

0.2094
-0.0056∗
0.2066
-0.0010
0.0002
-0.0644
0.1043∗∗
0.0760∗

0.1161
0.0028
0.1256
0.0022
0.0007
0.0408
0.0395
0.0345

2.2625∗∗∗ 0.1865
5.9541∗∗∗ 0.3471

0.0573
0.3526∗

0.0968 1.6739∗∗∗
0.1741 1.0094∗∗∗

0.1213
0.2139

0.7427∗∗∗
-0.0284
-1.6272∗∗∗
0.0577∗∗∗
-0.0083∗∗
-0.7295∗∗∗
0.0322
0.2037∗
43.6971∗∗∗

0.1967
-0.1130
0.0191
0.0034
0.2168
-0.0459
0.0096
0.0013
0.0031
0.0017
0.0980
0.0401
0.0731 0.1499∗∗∗
0.0806
0.0231
1.7502 40.4603∗∗∗

Coef.= unstandardized regression coefficient; SE= cluster robust standard error;

∗

0.0794
0.0055
0.0958
0.0046
0.0014
0.0502
0.0398
0.0407
0.8393

-0.6123∗∗∗ 0.1229
0.0178
0.0112
∗∗∗
0.5336
0.1067
-0.0179∗∗∗ 0.0046
0.0026
0.0016
∗∗∗
0.2622
0.0551
0.0929
0.0510
-0.1052∗ 0.0441
7.0663∗∗∗ 1.0437

p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

Note: SLX unit and period fixed effects model using row standardized queens first order contiguity spatial weights matrix.

Robustness Check Results
Table A3a: Robustness Test of Relationship between Natural Resource Development and Rural Prosperity from 2000-2015 including Downstream Variables

41

Direct Effects
Non-Metropolitan Remote
Extractive Employment Share
Extractive Employment Squared
Non-extractive Employment Share
Non-extractive Employment Squared
Non-Metropolitan Metro-Adjacent
Extractive Employment Share
Extractive Employment Squared
Non-extractive Employment Share
Non-extractive Employment Squared
Metropolitan
Extractive Employment Share
Extractive Employment Squared
Non-extractive Employment Share
Non-extractive Employment Squared
Population (thousands)
Percent Over 65
Percent Black
Percent Hispanic
Percent without High School Diploma
Percent with at Least a College Degree
Manufacturing Employment Share
Unemployment Rate
Median Housing Value (thousands)
Year [2000 ref]
2010
2015

Per Capita Income
Coef.
SE

0.3921∗∗∗ 0.1116 -0.2396∗∗∗ 0.0648
-0.0054∗ 0.0022 0.0049∗∗∗ 0.0015
0.0403
0.1168
-0.3109∗ 0.1408
0.0057 0.0030 -0.0040 0.0021

Poverty Rate
Coef.
SE
-0.1767∗
0.0017
-0.0710
0.0010

0.0764
0.0018
0.1097
0.0020
0.1219
0.0051
0.1206
0.0021

-0.3127∗
0.0080
0.2561
-0.0076∗

0.1560
0.0056
0.1514
0.0032

0.1793
0.0007
-0.0638
0.0039

0.0982
0.0028
0.1233
0.0022

0.0758
-0.0011
0.1711
-0.0020

-0.3541∗
0.0063∗
0.1470
-0.0053
-0.0057∗∗∗
-0.1346
-0.1815∗∗∗
-0.0433
0.0071
0.1115∗
0.0639∗∗
-0.0894∗
0.0000∗∗∗

0.1486
0.0030
0.1484
0.0030
0.0014
0.0735
0.0333
0.0528
0.0476
0.0438
0.0199
0.0360
0.0000

0.1584
-0.0061∗∗
-0.0894
0.0065∗∗
0.0012∗
-0.0377
0.0582∗
-0.0619∗
0.1292∗∗∗
0.0580∗
-0.0227∗
0.0400
-0.0000

0.0833
0.0021
0.1215
0.0022
0.0005
0.0347
0.0273
0.0314
0.0289
0.0225
0.0094
0.0222
0.0000

0.2127∗ 0.1036
-0.0049 0.0027
0.0636
0.1147
0.0004 0.0020
0.0001
0.0006
-0.1045∗∗ 0.0378
0.0503 0.0371
-0.0106 0.0351
0.2248∗∗∗ 0.0331
-0.0959∗∗∗ 0.0252
-0.0699∗∗∗ 0.0111
0.1864∗∗∗ 0.0273
-0.0000∗∗ 0.0000

3.7183∗∗∗
5.3597∗∗∗

0.3071
0.4969

0.1215
0.5997∗

0.1896
0.2936

1.6377∗∗∗
2.4602∗∗∗

Coef.= unstandardized regression coefficient; SE= cluster robust standard error;
Table continued on next page

Gini Index
Coef.
SE

∗

p < 0.05,

∗∗

p < 0.01,

∗∗∗

p < 0.001

0.2120
0.3249

Table A3b: Robustness Test of Relationship between Natural Resource Development and Rural Prosperity from 2000-2015 including Downstream Variables
(Continued)

42

Per Capita Income
Gini Index
Poverty
Indirect Effects
Coef.
SE
Coef.
SE
Coef.
Extractive Employment Share
-0.0497 0.0800 -0.4456∗∗∗
0.5617∗∗ 0.1831
Extractive Employment Squared
-0.0229
0.0179
0.0025
0.0055
0.0150
-1.0409∗∗∗ 0.1930 -0.0720 0.0986
Non-extractive Employment Share
0.1758
Non-extractive Employment Squared 0.0351∗∗∗ 0.0080
0.0011
0.0047 -0.0054
-0.0108∗∗∗ 0.0029
Population (thousands)
0.0001
0.0013
0.0025
-0.5979∗∗∗ 0.0927
Percent Over 65
0.0127
0.0495 0.1288∗∗
Percent Black
0.0470
0.0586 0.1088∗∗ 0.0391
0.0295
∗
0.1591
Percent Hispanic
0.0777
0.0103
0.0406 -0.0983∗
Percent without High School Diploma -0.0467 0.0649 0.0768∗ 0.0350 0.1681∗∗∗
Percent with at least a College Degree
0.0729
0.0710 0.1052∗∗ 0.0380 0.1590∗∗∗
∗∗∗
0.2482
Manufacturing Employment Share
0.0277 -0.0366∗ 0.0183 -0.2056∗∗∗
-0.4935∗∗∗ 0.0476
Unemployment Rate
0.0029
0.0291 0.1138∗∗∗
Median Housing Value
0.0000
0.0000 -0.0000 0.0000 -0.0000∗∗∗
Constant
34.3179∗∗∗ 1.7115 38.6764∗∗∗ 1.1407 11.3453∗∗∗

Rate
SE
0.1084
0.0101
0.0974
0.0041
0.0015
0.0491
0.0447
0.0442
0.0409
0.0396
0.0208
0.0327
0.0000
1.1251

Coef.= unstandardized regression coefficient; SE = cluster robust standard error; ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001
Note: SLX unit and period fixed effects model using row standardized queens first order contiguity spatial weights matrix

Figure A1: Predicted means and marginal direct effects for per capita income to residents across constrained ranged
of natural resource employment share. Downstream variables included. Other variables held constant at means.
Vertical bars represent 95% CI

Figure A2: Predicted means and marginal direct effects for Gini Index across constrained ranged of natural resource
employment share. Downstream variables included. Other variables held constant at means. Vertical bars represent
95% CI

Figure A3: Predicted means and marginal direct effects for Gini Index across constrained ranged of natural resource
employment share. Downstream variables included. Other variables held constant at means. Vertical bars represent
95% CI

Table A4: Models Using Alternative Spatial Weights Matrix: Row-standardized Rooks First Order Contiguity Matrix

4

Direct Effects
Non-Metropolitan Remote
Extractive Employment Share
Extractive Employment Squared
Non-extractive Employment Share
Non-extractive Employment Squared
Non-Metropolitan Metro-Adjacent
Extractive Employment Share
Extractive Employment Squared
Non-extractive Employment Share
Non-extractive Employment Squared
Metropolitan
Extractive Employment Share
Extractive Employment Squared
Non-extractive Employment Share
Non-extractive Employment Squared
Population (thousands)
Percent Over 65
Percent Black
Percent Hispanic
Year [2000 ref]
2010
2015
Indirect Effects
Extractive Employment Share
Extractive Employment Squared
Non-extractive Employment Share
Non-extractive Employment Squared
Population (thousands)
Percent Over 65
Percent Black
Percent Hispanic
Constant

Per Capita Income
Coef.
SE

Gini Index
Coef.
SE

Poverty Rate
Coef.
SE

0.4553∗∗∗
-0.0064∗∗
-0.3379∗
0.0061

0.1235
0.0024
0.1497
0.0032

-0.2468∗∗∗
0.0050∗∗∗
0.0149
-0.0034

0.0655
0.0014
0.1163
0.0021

-0.2089∗ 0.0858
0.0022 0.0019
-0.0924 0.1168
0.0015 0.0021

-0.3419∗
0.0082
0.1824
-0.0067

0.1709
0.0061
0.1632
0.0037

0.1850
-0.0000
-0.0298
0.0032

0.0995
0.0028
0.1221
0.0021

0.1085
-0.0025
0.2685∗
-0.0037

0.1392
0.0059
0.1275
0.0023

-0.3752∗ 0.1658
0.0084∗∗ 0.0032
0.0731
0.1615
-0.0045 0.0033
-0.0035∗ 0.0014
-0.1566∗ 0.0765
-0.2028∗∗∗ 0.0406
-0.0617
0.0556

0.1468
-0.0058∗∗
0.0042
0.0055∗
0.0020∗∗∗
-0.0212
0.0780∗∗
-0.0329

0.0865
0.0020
0.1202
0.0022
0.0006
0.0349
0.0279
0.0310

0.2095
-0.0055∗
0.2039
-0.0009
0.0001
-0.0618
0.1052∗∗
0.0769∗

0.1159
0.0028
0.1259
0.0022
0.0007
0.0409
0.0397
0.0341

2.2425∗∗∗
5.9124∗∗∗

0.0667
0.3586∗

0.0960
0.1726

1.6796∗∗∗
1.0216∗∗∗

0.1216
0.2144

-0.1116
0.0037
-0.0621
0.0016
0.0021
0.0470
0.1412∗∗∗
0.0165
40.5478∗∗∗

0.0790
0.0053
0.0951
0.0046
0.0014
0.0494
0.0395
0.0406
0.8336

-0.5929∗∗∗
0.0150
0.5204∗∗∗
-0.0175∗∗∗
0.0028
0.2568∗∗∗
0.0891
-0.1061∗
7.1483∗∗∗

0.1186
0.0104
0.1042
0.0045
0.0016
0.0557
0.0510
0.0435
1.0499

0.1878
0.3499

0.7397∗∗∗ 0.1859
-0.0286 0.0176
-1.5953∗∗∗ 0.2149
0.0569∗∗∗ 0.0095
-0.0091∗∗ 0.0031
-0.7135∗∗∗ 0.0987
0.0335
0.0738
0.2055∗∗ 0.0796
43.4483∗∗∗ 1.7701

Coef.= unstandardized regression coefficient; SE= standard error; ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001
SLX unit and period fixed effects model using row standardized rooks first order contiguity spatial weights matrix

Figure A4: Predicted means and marginal direct effects for per capita income to residents across constrained ranged
of natural resource employment share. Alternative spatial weights matrix (Rook). Other variables held constant at
means. Vertical bars represent 95% CI

Figure A5: Predicted means and marginal direct effects for Gini Index across constrained ranged of natural resource
employment share. Alternative spatial weights matrix (Rook). Other variables held constant at means. Vertical bars
represent 95% CI

Figure A6: Predicted means and marginal direct effects for poverty rate across constrained ranged of natural resource
employment share. Alternative spatial weights matrix (Rook). Other variables held constant at means. Vertical bars
represent 95% CI

