PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
Understanding College “Burnout” from a Social Perspective:
Reigniting the Agency of Low-Income Racial Minority Strivers Towards Achievement
Dr. Anindya Kundu
(submitted and accepted by The Urban Review)

Abstract
Research indicates that health problems are becoming increasingly complex and prevalent
among college students, while largely going without recognition or treatment. Low-income racial
minority students may have additional personal and academic issues associated with demonstrating
grit and overcoming barriers to entry (i.e. institutional racism) over the course of their lives. When
the campus environment is not socially or culturally supportive of racial minority and firstgeneration college students, there is an added risk of mental health deterioration stemming from
isolation for these students. The struggle to persist in college, and do so alone, can lead many to
experience symptoms of impending “burnout,” or disengagement from academic settings. Drawing
from a sample of interviews with low-income racial minority strivers—students who were once
highly engaged—this paper offers insight into both causes and solutions for college burnout.
Findings suggest that it is important to understand how experiences of isolation manifest to better
support minority student populations and foster their academic reengagement to achieve at high
levels. This paper outlines recommendations for improving the college experiences of racial
minority and first-generation students, including examples of resources and recommendations to
improve the higher education landscape towards more inclusivity and equity.

1

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE

Introduction
“This is corny, but my happiness and health are most important—and family. Not so much
school, anymore. In high school, I did so much. I would wake up at 6 a.m., go to school, go
to work, and do programs. I would get home at 7 or 8 p.m. every day and then I had
homework. I was always overwhelmed. I was accepted to my number one college, but the
summer entering freshman year I didn’t want to go. I was just…I felt burnt out. I couldn’t tell
my mom that I wanted to take a year off. My sister didn’t do that, so that would have been
unheard of for me, the star student.”
– Camila, 20, former high school salutatorian who temporarily lost her scholarship and was
placed on academic probation at an elite college.

Amongst racial minority students from low-income backgrounds, the struggle to persist in
college could lead many to experience symptoms of looming burnout, especially in cases when
students are unable to locate and integrate into student support resources on campus. Research on
college retention has substantiated the idea that academic persistence requires an interplay between a
student’s ability to integrate both academically and socially within a postsecondary environment
(Tinto, 1987; Hartley, 2011). Camila’s story is becoming increasingly common within and
surrounding an ever-diversifying postsecondary landscape. Bright and once highly motivated students
often find themselves, for the first time, feeling isolated and helpless in college environments.
Academic priorities can fall to the wayside as these students struggle to retain and reconcile their

2

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
cultural identities against newly developing college student identities. During this juggling process, it
can become incredibly difficult to notice and cope effectively with mental struggles.
When the culture of the campus environment is not welcoming and supportive of racial
minority and first-generation students, the risk of deteriorating mental health can increase
substantially. Defined by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2018), mental health is
includes one’s “emotional, psychological and social well-being.” Feelings of inadequacy can arise
from lacking social and cultural supports, such as having access to a Diversity Center, which could be
integral to thriving on campus. This can be particularly true for nontraditional student populations,
such as first-generation college students who, according to a recent National Center for Education
Statistics (2015) report, make up 50% of college goers in the United States. College persistence
remains an issue for these groups, as only 27% of first-generation college goers complete Bachelor’s
degrees in four years.
Achievement aside, perhaps a more significant and dangerous issue in these cases is that they
can culminate into severe physiological complications in students. While suicide rates among
college students has been long identified as a serious mental health problem, typically, the mental
wellness of college students has been narrowly considered through the lens of how adaptable they
are to campus norms and leaving the home (Byrd & McKinney, 2012; Hartley, 2011). However,
there is much more to successfully navigating college, as students today manage coursework, social
activities, employment opportunities, maintaining a healthy lifestyle, social media, partying, and
relationships (Byrd & McKinney, 2012; Fried & Irwin, 2016; Hammer, Grigsby & Woods, 1998).
As such, mental health issues in college students are highly complex. Recent research has even
indicated strong correlations between the amount of stress one experiences in college, and adverse

3

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
immune system responses, sometimes related to long-term development of anxiety and depression
(Atkinson, Mitchell & Muir, 2008; Fried & Irwin, 2016).
Recent research on populations of “strivers,” those defined as “students high in
intellectualism and careerism who have strong motivation and a strong positive attitude about
college” (Kim, Sax, Lee, Hagedorn, 2010, p. 407), finds that these students can actually exhibit
much worse health outcomes than others due to higher stress to perform, even experiencing a faster
cellular aging process than their peers (Brody, Yu, Miller, Chen, 2016). Relevant to the investigation
at hand, low-income racial minority strivers, such as Camila, who were once incredibly driven to
attend colleges of their preference, can become disengaged if not supported adequately. These oncehigh achieving strivers may fail to stay on track for a variety of complex reasons that are not
necessarily apparent on the surface. Studies indicate that, despite these students displaying more grit
and other behaviors that lead to stable incomes and successful careers, the resilience is only “skindeep,” hiding latent health complications (Brody et al. 2016). There is a pressing need for new
research that looks more thoroughly, to examine how outcomes (i.e. ability to graduate on time)
result from a myriad of factors that go beyond individual-level characteristics.
The reasons that certain students get overexerted and burned-out at the college level are
complex and deserve to be informed by the voices of these students themselves. Research that
qualitatively informs this topic, from a sociological viewpoint, is quite slim. This paper addresses
this gap by including the perspectives of low-income racial minority strivers who experienced severe
setbacks to their academic trajectories due to stressors leading to burnout, but eventually were able
to get back on track. Learning from their perspectives on how to identify, address, and overcome
burnout, and which social and cultural supports can help, provides insight on how to make college
environments more equitable.

4

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE

Relevant Background Literature
Broadening the Scope of Grit and Individualism to Understand Achievement
The process of learning and achieving educational milestones requires persistence. The
persistence narratives, prominent in positive psychology and the study of human strengths, have
become increasingly popular topics in education (Ong, Bergeman, & Bisconti, 2006; Seligman &
Csikszentmihalyi, 2014). Specifically, “grit,” or “passion and perseverance for long term goals”
(Duckworth, 2016; Duckworth, Peterson, Matthews & Kelly, 2007), has emerged as an observable
characteristic and major determinant in a student’s likelihood of success through determination.
However, rarely has research asked if students could exhibit too much grit, and, if there were such a
thing, what might its adverse effects be.
Some more public conversations have taken the grit and resilience narrative further, focusing
on behavioral traits to claim that even the most disadvantaged students can succeed if they work hard
enough (Tough, 2013). However, education research consistently finds that low-income racial
minority youth find it more difficult to excel in educational settings regardless of their abilities to
meet official and modern standards of achievement due to educators’ implicit biases, tracking, and
persistent microaggressions (Delpit, 2012; Ransaw & Majors, 2016; Rist, 1970). Furthermore, racial
minority youth may find it more difficult to maintain their cultural identities in academic settings,
both K-12 and postsecondary, due to institutional racism and deficit framing of cultural attributes
which are associated with perceived subpar abilities (Boykin & Noguera, 2011; Carter, 2005;
Ransaw & Majors, 2016).
Some scholars, particularly sociologists, have argued that attributing achievement to
character traits alone (e.g. grit) can largely overlook the socioeconomic and demographic contexts of

5

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
students and their backgrounds (Kundu, 2016, 2017; Nathan, 2017). It seems essential to consider a
student’s social and cultural contexts—such as their class background, college generational status,
urban or suburban upbringing, and immigrant status—when determining how constructive the
concept of grit can be as a pedagogical focus that fosters achievement in postsecondary settings
(Kundu, 2016). College students who are underrepresented or first-generation must often overcome
various institutional barriers to entry, such as navigating the high cost of applications or the Free
Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA). These students also have significantly lower
persistence rates, once in college, than their comparatively affluent counterparts (Fruchter, Hester,
Mokhtar, & Shahn, 2012; Ransaw & Majors, 2016; Swail, 2003). As McGee & Stovall (2015) argue,
overemphasis on individual characteristics as the main determinant for success can be detrimental to
the health of racial minority college students.

Strivers and Heightened Pressures to Succeed
In particular, racial minority strivers, or those who have been heavily college and careerinclined since childhood (Kim, Sax, Lee, Hagedorn, 2010), may experience a phenomenon now
being referred to as “John Henryism,”—wherein they overburden themselves, through increased
grit and resilience, in competitive academic contexts. These students often have very high
expectations set for them to attend college from an early age, whether self-imposed or by others
close to them. For instance, research indicates that though academically successful, some racial
minority students prioritize their family members’ expectations of them and of their future
success over their own senses of self and purpose (Carey, 2016). Regrettably, over time, these
students can develop severe psychological and physical conditions, including anxiety,

6

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
depression, suicidal ideation, diabetes, and heart disease, in spite of what appears to be strong
academic performance (Brody et al. 2016; James, 1994; McGee & Stovall, 2015).
Understandably, low-income and first-generation racial minority strivers may feel additional
burdens associated with the pressures of breaking cycles of intergenerational poverty. The term
“John Henryism,” comes from an African-American folk tale in which John Henry wins a race to
construct a railroad against a steam-powered hammer, but dies from the stress on his heart. Though
this is an incredibly bleak metaphor to apply to college students, below the surface, there may be
analogous tolls. There is validity to the term “skin-deep resilience” in low-income racial minority
students, where outward indicators of success are accompanied with latent health problems that
manifest over time (Brody et al., 2016).
Recent scholarship on first-generation students reveals that these students can feel isolated
from vital networks for their entire postsecondary experience, including those that offer critical
career opportunities and networking experience (Maietta, 2016; McCabe, 2016). Isolation can occur
when students experience great difficulty integrating academically and socially within their college
campus environment often from lacking support from peers and/or faculty and from diminishing
sense of belonging (DeWitz, Woolsey & Walsh, 2009; Raley, 2007). Navigating scholastic
achievement despite feeling isolation, specifically racial isolation, is incredibly difficult for racial
minority college students, sometimes causing debilitating physical and mental conditions as well as a
variety of issues related to dampened confidence and competence (Fries-Britt & Turner, 2002;
Strayhorn, 2012). In maintaining performance without proper social support, racial minority strivers
may experience high levels of anxiety and stress that can become chronic. In such cases, the body’s
stress-response system remains in high alert; cortisol, the primary stress hormone, does not return to

7

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
normal levels, and thus places the individual at higher risk of developing clinical depression (Brody
et al. 2016; McGee & Stovall, 2015).
Culminating stresses can also lead students to “burn out” (defined in full in the following
section), whereby they effectively disengage and feel detached from college and other academic
pursuits due to exhaustion; such disengagement brings these students to also be less likely to access
to the various resources on campuses conducive to their mental health and wellbeing, such as
counseling services. Students may also actively reject or fail to confide in their peer networks, which
are among the most important relationships to cultivate for collegiate success (McCabe, 2016). This
failure to leverage one’s own agency and to improve one’s college experience is a serious
impediment to staying motivated and succeeding in the postsecondary pathway to opportunity.
Therefore, only connecting psychological traits such as perseverance or grit to achievement is
shortsighted as these qualities benefit from social supports to function at high and healthy levels.
Furthermore, research on character traits, such as grit, and achievement mechanisms, such as
student agency, must be supplemented with studies that consider the nuances of the college student
transition experience. By better understanding the varied experiences that young people have during
these transition phases it is possible to create a more robust discussion surrounding college access
and persistence. Applications which extend the grit narrative so far as to imply that students with
social and economic disadvantages can succeed if they apply enough grit (Tough, 2013) deserve
criticism for overlooking social contexts that affect learning and the motivation to learn. Other
research that evaluates grit and its merits largely have also failed to consider the possible unintended
consequences of students overworking themselves to the point that they no longer feel a deep
connection to long-term goals. Specifically, researchers may need to focus on social and institutional
resources that racial minority students can locate to successfully apply their character traits in

8

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
postsecondary educational settings (Kundu, 2017). Burnout often results from students trying to
sustain high academic performance without having access to an institutionalized support system or a
welcoming campus climate and certain deficit perspectives would fail to recognize these connections
by placing the onus of achievement solely on the individual and their amounts of effort applied in
school.

Premise and Application of the Preexisting Definition of Burnout
As per the recognized leading assessment tool for burnout for over 30 years, the Maslach
Burnout Inventory (MBI), and its prominent application in multiple studies of medical students and
early career physicians, this paper utilizes a definition of clinical “burnout” commonly referred to in
academic medicine: A syndrome “characterized by emotional exhaustion, feelings of cynicism and
detachment (depersonalization), and a low sense of personal accomplishment (Dyrbye, West, Satele,
Boone, Tan, Sloan & Shanafelt, 2014, p. 443; Maslach, Jackson, Leiter, Schaufeli & Schwab, 1986).
This phenomenon of burnout is most commonly studied in groups of various professions typically in
the human health services (including nurses, health aides, social workers, physicians, counselors,
therapists), but it has been applied to a certain but quite limited extent in student populations and
broad educational contexts.
Burnout has been prevalently applied as a concept in samples of medical students (Dyrbye et
al, 2014; Jennings, 2009), but it has also been observed in early career teachers (Halbesleben &
Buckley, 2004). However, in these studies, burnout has primarily been understood and interpreted
from a psychological perspective.1 There is a paucity of research on the burnout of younger adult

1

It should be noted that sociology also offers a “psychological perspective,” as the discipline
was established through one of the landmark studies on suicide by Émile Durkheim. In this
9

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
students, specifically those at the undergraduate levels, though this topic has appeared in narrow
facets, once again, in the medical field regarding undergraduate nursing students (Michalec,
Diefenbeck & Mahoney, 2013). These investigations almost always entail quantitative analyses
through survey instruments which do not address topics of race or class nor include particular
attention to the experiences of first-generation students from low-income backgrounds (Yang &
Farn, 2005; Pisarick, 2009).
Furthermore, to date, burnout has been largely understudied through sociological lenses,
which would insist upon the analysis of the social and cultural contexts of both the university and the
students’ home community. Educational research that focuses on the developmental phase of
emerging adulthood continues to show that working-class minority and first-generation college
students persist at lower rates at the college level when compared to white students from middleclass backgrounds (Carter, 2006; Somers, Woodhouse, and Coffer, 2004). Yet research shows that
college students are often expected to be resilient and demonstrate high levels of grit despite the
multifaceted institutional and racial barriers that only some students experience, both within the
confines of the college campus and in society (McGee & Stovall, 2015). Drawing from the college
burnout experiences of a set of emerging adults, this article constructs a sociological narrative about
how academic perseverance as exhibited by low-income racial minority strivers, may not necessarily
equate to academic success, social mobility, or wellbeing over the long-term. These strivers initially
experienced traditional academic success and were selected for participation along these qualifiers:
they were currently attending a selective 4-year college, or they completed graduation and were
currently working in a highly professional industry (i.e. law, finance), or attending graduate school.

investigation, burnout is also an issue of psychological importance and perspective, however,
this study is grounded upon a sociological analysis.
10

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
The data for this study derives from a larger study that examined the relationship between the
agency and grit of low-income racial minority strivers. Emirbayer and Mishe (1998) defined human
agency as a specific capacity of individuals that is oriented on the past, present and future, to
maintain identities and derive courses of action based on circumstances at hand. Participants were
asked to speak about challenges they faced in their lives in the pursuit of educational and
professional milestones as well as how they overcome certain obstacles they faced. An example
question included, “What have been some of the largest challenges you have faced?” To which a
substantial number of participants gave answers that were grouped and categorized as “feeling burntout,” based on the conditions for clinical diagnosis, and meeting criteria of self-perception of
exhaustion, detachment from goals, and/or feeling unaccomplished. Three students explicitly used
the words “burnt-out” or “burnt out” in college to explain these experiences, which initially piqued
interest in this concept. This paper uses the subgroup of students identified as, at some point, feeling
extremely burned out, which was further and separately analyzed to locate themes and
commonalities between participants who had burnout experiences.
One potential cause of feeling burnout is focusing heavily on achieving through
overburdening oneself, or facing challenges without social support, with little attention to one’s
genuine passions or purposes along the way. Continuously tapping into reservoirs of perseverance
and effort, or traits of grit, while closely associating one’s academic accomplishments with high selfesteem, can be common for strivers (Kim, Sax, Lee, Hagedorn, 2010). This disposition appears to
result from working too hard while also being unable to cultivate the types of resources and
relationships necessary to exceling at the postsecondary level. In sociology, psychological
tendencies of individuals are linked to social structures or institutional conditions; for example, in
the 19th century, while many believed suicide to result from inherent qualities of individuals,

11

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
Durkheim uncovered associations between suicide and lack of social cohesion and disconnection
from organized groups. In this fashion, sociological considerations can offer insights into the
foundational psychological question of nature versus nurture, showing that the two are not mutually
exclusive in their effects on human activity.
This paper presents and supports the thesis that, among racial minority students from lowincome backgrounds, those who at one point could be considered strivers, the struggle to persist in
college may lead many to experience symptoms of impending burnout, particularly in cases when
students are not able to integrate into or utilize student-support services on campus. When the
campus environment is not welcoming and supportive of racial minority and first-generation
students, the risk of deteriorating mental health can increase substantially. This paper indicates how
students can avoid these pitfalls through the same resources they neglected to leverage prior.

Guiding Questions
This paper accomplishes two ends: (1) Illuminates the characteristics that can lead college
students to burnout via isolation, by giving voice to individuals who have experienced these
dispositions firsthand, and (2) Provides a preliminary account of subsequent factors that individuals
cite as having been influential in being able to reconnect with and reengage in their postsecondary
pursuits.
Therefore, the two guiding questions of this research, also structured in this problem-solution
orientation are: (1) How do students who are low-income racial minority strivers, describe factors
that lead them to feeling “burnout” in college settings? (2) What strategies and influences do these
students explain as beneficial to their regaining academic and professional motivations?

12

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
Conceptual Framework: Relational Cultural Theory to Support the Gifts of Diverse Learners
In examining research on burnout and the context of achievement of similar populations, a
logical question may follow: If overburdening the self is the result of facing challenges without
necessary social support, is this the fault of the student for not seeking out help or the university for
not providing a better support system for certain student populations? Applying a Relational Cultural
Theory (RCT) perspective to this question, this paper asserts that though the word “fault” is perhaps
unnecessarily accusatory, there is a serious oversight on the part of colleges that can lead to these
student dispositions. Largely, institutions of higher education lack the realization that to conjointly
promote the well-being and achievement of diverse learners, it must provide and champion the use
of certain resources that rely on a cultural framework (e.g. a support center for racial minority
students, or those who are first-generation and from low-income families).
RCT has advanced in counseling fields as a manner to better address the varied, and largely
psychological, effects of discrimination. RCT is culturally responsive, with foundations in feminist
theory, emphasizing the corrective importance that relationships can play upon a person’s
developmental growth and ability to heal, recognizing also that disconnecting from others can cause
harm (Cholewa, Goodman, West-Olatunji & Amatea, 2014; Comstock, Hammer, Strenzsch,
Cannon, Parsons & Salazar, 2008; Duffey & Somody, 2011). This emphasis on social relationships
is key in understanding causes of impending burnout which has connections to isolation. When
students feel they are unable to connect to others due to their background, they may aim to reject
certain parts of their cultural identities to fit in, but as a result they may end up feeling shame,
unworthiness, and unconfident (Cholewa et al, 2014; Comstock et al, 2011).
For these reasons, RCT’s primary goal is to leverage relationships through relatively simple
interventions aimed at promoting healing through fostering self-worth (Cholewa et al, 2014;

13

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
Comstock et al, 2011). This focus on healing is key to reigniting the motivations of students who
have felt burnout because it acknowledges that these dispositions are real ailments brought on by
adverse circumstances and environmental conditions. In RCT, students’ backgrounds and identities
related to race and ethnicity are brought to the forefront as the basis for responsiveness to needs
(Cholewa et al, 2014; Duffey & Somody, 2011). Through supports and relationships which
emphasize these primary aspects of personhood, students can relearn self-worth, and feel increased
confidence in their goals and be empowered through genuine belonging. If institutions of higher
education are truly invested in the wellbeing and success of their diverse student populations, they
should be considerate of background and consult RCT to inform their practices and resources offered
(Quaye & Harper, 2014). The strength of these institutions is reflected in how they are able to serve
populations with unique needs and challenges, not those already expected to succeed based on
affordances they have experienced in their lives.

Data & Methods
Qualitative interview studies are appropriate for learning about the internal contexts and
rationales behind human behavior (Rubin & Rubin, 2011). These projects are based around
understanding the meanings people assign to their choices, and in this particular project, qualitative
framing helped identify how individuals think about new situations in and leading up to college. In
this paper, I elaborate upon and support the specific theory of “burnout” which arose in a larger,
qualitative sociological study I conducted on the success of postsecondary students of color who
grew up below the poverty line (n = 48). The data for this paper were collected as a part of that
larger study. Though traditionally grit has been studied through quantitative methods, these research

14

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
projects informed social and cultural supports that low-income racial minority strivers credit in
developing long-term goals.
Individuals with social disadvantages typically experience racial, ethnic, or cultural
prejudice. In this paper, I make an additional assertation that socially disadvantaged students are
those without access to strong social capital, which can connect them to higher education or
employment opportunities, in their immediate networks. Students who are economically
disadvantaged are defined by the standards regulated by Federal Poverty Guidelines, and who, under
the National School Lunch Program, qualify for free and reduced-price school meals (Schacter &
Bo, 2005). Every individual in the larger study met both of these social and economic disadvantages
qualifications.
Students were chosen to participate from the help of two after school programs that aim to
send New York high school students to college, through the aid of enrichment programs. Both
programs select students by the same need-based criteria described above. All participants graduated
from these programs, and at the time of their interview were either attending a Bachelor’s degree
granting institution, or, had graduated with a Bachelor’s degree and were working in a
professionalized field, or, were attending graduate level study. See Figure 1.1 for the list of
anonymized participants whose experiences inform this paper.
In initial email outreach, participants were told that this project sought individuals who have
faced a variety of challenges in their lives and aimed to learn about overcoming these obstacles and
achieving goals. In interviews, participants were asked broadly about challenges they faced and
continue to face, and without specific prompting, a significant number of them described multiple
instances that would be traditionally associated with burnout (Dyrbye et al., 2014). They described
experiencing physical and mental exhaustion, “dealing with depression and/or anxiety,” and “loss of

15

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
motivation” from goals previously described as important to them, most commonly at the college
level. Two participants (Camila and Nadira) offer a slightly different retrospective as they described
feeling characteristics of burnout right before attending college, though they both also described
their mental and physiological states worsening over time as college students.
Interviews typically lasted 70 minutes, generated from a semi-structured interview protocol
that would follow natural trends and progressions in dialogue (Rubin & Rubin, 2011). The interview
format allowed for flexibility with the direction the interview would take and elaborate on ideas in
the moment, though each interviewee was asked the same set of root questions (Underwood,
Satterthwait, & Bartlett, 2010). I transcribed all interview audio and also recorded analytic memos
after each interview to map and chart commonalities. I used Dedoose, a qualitative data analysis
software, to organize and code interviews.

Positionality
My positionality as the researcher in this study is important to note given the absence of
triangulating data with others. As Morrell (2004) suggests, it is impossible to be completely
removed from one’s subjects in qualitative work, whereby questions asked and conclusions
drawn are often partially the product of a researchers’ own social contexts; value neutrality
should not be necessarily be an objective need, though it should be considered how the
researcher plays even a slight role in supporting an argument (Morrell, 2004). My background
likely played a role in how I interpreted some of the meanings from this data, yet at the same
time, my lived experiences as a man of color seems to have allowed me a deeper level of
comfortability with the individuals I interviewed. While I refrained from interjecting myself and
my opinions into our conversations as much as reasonably possible, I likely signaled through

16

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
verbal and non-verbal cues that I understood what my participants meant. I also have
experienced racial prejudice in schools from peers and teachers while reconciling multiple
identities to fit in and project myself as academically competent and worthy of inclusion in a
predominantly White context.
I introduced myself to participants and described my stance: I wanted to learn about their
accomplishments and struggles so that we can hope to create better more equitable systems for
students who also experience marginalization. Perhaps as a result of this, the participants felt
freer to open up to me about their gravest fears, deepest traumas, and unguarded ambitions, for
which I am incredibly grateful. While this may have kept conversations from being as objective
as one might find in a highly structured interview, I do not believe I played any part in
these individuals overcoming their symptoms of burnout. At time of interview they were all
experiencing traditional success (having come back to college after a leave of absence or having
graduated and working in professionalized fields) based on my selection criteria, overcoming
many of these challenges by the time we met. I had not expected to learn about the phenomenon
of burnout and hearing about these specific challenges brought me to further investigate this
topic. If these individuals benefitted by avoiding similar pitfalls after our interviews, from having
reflected on their journeys and achievements, then I consider that a bonus value that I am happy I
was able to provide.

Classification of Burnout
Memos were checked against other memos and interviews, building a database of keywords
that supported or challenged initial findings in transcripts. During the coding process, memos were
particularly useful in helping locate emerging patterns through an inductive reasoning process. This

17

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
inductive process situated participants’ lived experiences in a wider context of strivers, while
building on and challenging existing theory (Ary, Jacobs, Irvine, & Walker, 2013; Griffee, 2005). In
particular, this method informed and nuanced the theory that grit and perseverance are inherently
desirable qualities in successful students by showing these traits can be accompanied by mental
health issues and burnout when students are not socially and culturally supported. Code cooccurrence charts in Dedoose showed for a very specific subset of individuals, burnout was
prevalent, most closely associated with their continued challenges, goals, college experiences, and
feelings of self-worth (or lack thereof).
From an initial sample of 48 individuals, 25% (n = 12) were identified as having experienced
some form of this serious burnout, typically right before college or during early stages of college.
For all of these students, feelings of burnout were reported worsening over time while being a
college student. The data from which this paper is derived consists of transcripts from twelve faceto-face, semi-structured interviews (~15 hours of audio) with a sample of emerging adult
participants, ages 18-27 (Arnett, 2004). This subset was analyzed separately after the emergence of
burnout as a key theme to learn more about common factors that lead to burnout and mitigate it.
Burnout was identified if students explicitly mentioned one or more of the following: feeling serious
cases of anxiety and/or depression during college; feeling unmotivated towards previously important
goals; feeling isolated in college and disinterested in participating in activities; feeling seriously
stressed and unsure of one’s life plans, directly leading up to attending college or during college. In a
few instances, participants used the words “feeling burnt-out,” which first brought my attention to
this specific terminology.
Each participant in this study was further recognized as experiencing “burnouts” if they also
faced real consequences which harmed their college trajectories; some participants failed college

18

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
courses, or in more extreme cases, some were placed on academic probation, and/or even dropped
out. Eventually, however, all of the individuals included in this research were able to in some sense
reframe their struggles in the context of their original motivations. This paper also reflects what
students describe are factors to potentially confront and overcome burnout to regain the motivation
to succeed at the college level.
Findings
The aforementioned larger study relied on an epistemological foundation between sociology
and psychology, uncovering relationships between individuals’ agency and grit. All students have
initial levels of agency (Emirbayer & Mische, 1998), that if supported and fostered through specific
social and cultural capital resources, can give way towards increased grit and accomplishment of
goals (Kundu, 2017). However, low-income racial minority strivers, who work incredibly hard to
make it to college, can also be susceptible to burnout if these supports are not offered or made
clearly available in new settings. Instead of feeling motivation, these students may be led towards
isolation and helplessness, which appear to be critically destructive emotions on the path of forming
and pursuing goals. The process and relationship between agency and grit is illustrated in Figure 2.1,
and the point of burnout is shown when social and cultural resources are missing.
Two major findings emerged from these interviews, around the research questions listed
above. First, for low-income racial minority strivers who experience high levels of success before
college, burnout can result from overburdening oneself to succeed without looking to social
resources (i.e. mentors, peers, counselors) for help at an early enough point to make an intervention.
Sometimes (and ironically), this overly independent attitude comes from a desire to fulfill others’
expectations, both societally and from one’s close relationships, at the expense of cultivating one’s
own wellness. Second, students can benefit from guided self-reflection, in which mentors, through

19

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
genuine attention to a mentee’s personhood (aligned to RCT), help young adult students understand
and cope with their feelings, manage stress, and remember the original motivations behind their
original goals.

Losing Sight of Purpose through Independent Attitudes and Desires to Fulfill Others’ Expectations
All participants mentioned that they took on more responsibilities than they believed to be
reasonable, often due to a developed mentality that no burden could be too heavy to handle. This
disposition came from dealing with many challenges and responsibilities from very young ages. For
example, Alicia, explained that from the age of six she helped her mother with a variety of tasks;
these ranged from helping to pay bills to directing repairmen around their apartment, since at the
time, her mother was not very literate in English. These types of experiences can cause individuals to
believe that they are overly resilient and can succeed without help, an idea illustrated in this quote
from Nadira:
I had acclimated to doing things of my own accord instead of
looking for help. That has been my downfall, because I need help.
That’s what my therapist has told me.
Nadira grew up in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, which was described as a tough
neighborhood. At the time of interview, she stated that her father continued to struggle with alcohol
abuse and she did not speak highly of him. Despite having peers who were less academically
successful than she, Nadira described working hard and caring about maintaining her good grades.
She went to a community college to pursue an Associate’s degree in liberal arts and joined the
Honors Program, which helped her get into an elite college in New York for her Bachelor’s. During
her junior year she described experiencing tremendous burnout, aligned to the clinical definition, and
mentioned that she was unable to perform academically or physically able to even show up to class.

20

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
When racial minority strivers forgo seeking outside help while continuing their upward
trajectories, it appears that they can start to lose sight of their initial motivations and rationales for
academic pursuits, which further manifests in mental and physical tolls, often characterized by
experiencing exhaustion and extreme fatigue by the Malsach Burnout Inventory. These ailments are
also associated with a diminished sense of purpose. Camila says:
But I honestly feel like part of me didn’t want to be in college. I was dragging
my body to do stuff that I knew that I had to do, but I didn’t really want to do.
And that was very counterproductive.
Camila describes the diminished energy during her first semester in college. Camila (whose
quote is used at the beginning of this paper) had started to experience an earlier onset of feeling
burned out at the end of high school. This manifested in what Camila illustrates as “dragging” her
body to class. Due to this lack of energy as well as motivation, she starting missing classes and not
turning in assignments for the first time in her life. From working tirelessly by herself up until this
point, she seemingly lost a sense of purpose which was explained as forgetting why college mattered
to her, even though she was attending her top-choice institution.
For this group of low-income racial minority strivers, feeling burnout is associated with a
deep desire to please by living up to the perceived standards of others. Camila wanted to take a break
before college, but ultimately decided not to because she did not want to disappoint her mother,
placing expectations that her family held for her above her own desires (Carey, 2016). This type of
appeasement has been described as being accompanied by heavy stress as well as attempts to work
harder immediately to complete tasks. Princess elaborates on this idea:
I had an anxiety attack on the train, which was completely new to
me. I was doing too much. My first semester, I took five classes,
and I didn’t know that was allowed. Second semester I said, “Let
me take four classes,” but they were intense. I did extracurricular
activities, and because I was doing so well, I got more

21

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
responsibilities. I was fulfilling other people’s expectations so
much. One day, I had an exam, a research paper, and an event.
Right before my class, I was on the train and I was crying. I
couldn’t breathe. I cope better with my anxiety now, but I still
struggle.
In these narratives, there is a common sense of hopelessness, rooted in attempting to do too
much by oneself, as well as a loss of purpose and inability to rationalize one’s efforts. Students will
likely feel further isolated and distraught if their college institution is not informed by a Relational
Cultural approach. Princess mentions taking on more and more, pushing the limits of her own
resilience, due to a type of self-worth closely associated with individual accomplishment and
pleasing her mentors. She may or may not have had anxiety prior to college and the buildup of these
stressors manifested into an anxiety attack which caused Princess to realize that she could be prone
to such outbursts.
Students who grow up amongst severe financial constraints and stressors may hold multiple
responsibilities, perhaps including after school jobs, or taking care of siblings at the expense of their
own interests, and this may manifest in dropping out of school (Rumberger, 2011). Over time,
inattention and lack of cultivating one’s genuine interests might lead to a broader absence of purpose
up until attending college or into one’s career. The concept of purpose is well documented in grit
research as a primary component to passion and, as such, in the subsequent formulation of grit. In
Grit, Duckworth (2016) says, “Interest is one source of passion. Purpose—the intention to contribute
to the well-being of others—is another. The mature passions of gritty people depend on both” (p.
143). Duckworth’s definition of purpose is compelling because purpose colloquially typically relates
to an individual’s desired objectives behind action. Duckworth has implied a social-minded aspect of
purpose and adding to her definition, I assert that while one’s purpose can be fueled by a desire to
help others, it can be equally reinforced through the help of others.

22

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
Low-income and racial minority college students, many of whom are first-generation, may
feel largely accustomed to accomplishing things on their own accord. If these students are not
supported by the adults who shape the cultural environment of their postsecondary institutions, their
college experiences are more likely to be unfruitful. Approaches informed by RCT are needed to
respect and find value in the diverse backgrounds of students so they can then develop the ability to
routinely realize their purposes for pursuing a college education and think critically about what
college offers them (Cholewa et al, 2014; Comstock et al, 2011). If students lack a sense of
belonging, then their self-confidence may diminish and burnout to the extremes of physical and
mental illness are more probable (Jacobs & Dodd, 2003). Attempting to cope with intense pressures,
along with the counterintuitive strategy to overexert oneself instead of seeking help, is common
among low-income racial minority strivers (McGee & Stovall, 2015), but can have gravely adverse
health-related effects over one’s life course (Gaydosh, Schorpp, Chen, Miller, Harris, 2017).

Guided Self-Reflection: Support to Realize One’s Passions and Regain Agency
The participants in this research, similar to the broader spectrum of racial minority students
from below-poverty households, experienced challenges such as homelessness, incarceration,
neglect, substance abuse, violence, or other traumas. Students who experience such extreme
struggles in their lives may develop weakened self-efficacy, or less of the belief in their own
abilities, over time losing sight of the long-term value of education for life outcomes, even if they
are already in a college environment (Bandura, 1986; Jacobs & Dodd, 2003; McGee & Stovall,
2015). Cultural disparities and unfavorable racial climates in college can increase feelings of
isolation and further diminish students’ self-confidence (Chavous, 2005; McCabe, 2016; Comstock
et al, 2011; Quaye & Harper, 2014).

23

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
Recent research on young adults’ cerebral development has revealed that when students can
think about their personal vision, particularly through forms of mentoring and coaching, they can
improve their cognitive functioning (Boyatzis, Jack, Cesaro, Passarelli, & Khawaja, 2010).
Furthermore, coaching related to academic and professional goals has been proven to lower cortisol
and stress levels, especially in first-generation students (Boyatzis et al, 2010; Creswell et al., 2005).
It stands to reason that if and when college students can be taught to remember their purposes for
forming certain academic goals in the first place, with the help of constructive mentorship that is
culturally respectful (Cholewa et al, 2014), they may be better able to tap into the types of successful
character traits, such as grit, which allowed them to initially succeed and also regain much needed
confidence (Kundu, 2017).
In particular, when college students are experiencing burnout, or are rapidly losing
motivation towards academic pursuits, one way to regain self-efficacy may be through “guided” selfreflection with the aid of mentors and role models. Positive affirmation from individuals akin to role
models helps to improve one’s self-efficacy, especially when these individuals act in accord with the
basic principles of Relational Cultural Theory. Just as racial minority students can lose a sense of
purpose by tirelessly working to win the approval and meet the expectations of others (Carey, 2016;
McGee & Stovall, 2015), they can regain purpose through the support of others (Kundu, 2017).
Participants described and credited forms of “guided self-reflection,” for helping them regain
academic and professional motivations. Guided self-reflection can be beneficial when it is directed
by a close mentor or family member, who values a student’s existing interests and goals, as well as
by an institutional agent such as a college wellness counselor, who has expertise on mental health
and familiarity within a postsecondary context (Quaye & Harper, 2014). The following quotes
highlight this thematic finding:

24

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE

Participant

Quote

Rose

At [Community College], I eventually told my mentor in the lab my story.
She tells me I can’t give up, and it makes me feel better. ‘You've come so
far.’ Sometimes you need a reminder. Sometimes I forget. I'm 24! You can’t
do it completely alone. Even if it’s verbal support from someone saying,
‘Hey, you’re smart, you've got this!’ I didn't realize that before. Before I
would have said, no one’s going to help you.

Princess

One of the things that my counselor told me was that it seemed like my selfesteem and my achievements depended on how well I did in school. That kind
of hit me.

J-Stud

Mentorship is huge. From my mentor from high school to my mentor in
[Professional Development Program] who I’m very much in contact with.
I’ve known this guy ten years. I’m always seeking out mentors trying to learn
something from somebody who is in a senior position, or to get a different
perspective, or words of encouragement. Being able to tell my story and have
people say, ‘J-Stud. You know what? It sounds like you’ve been through a
lot, but you’ve persevered. I like that about you and I want you to stay in
touch and let me know how I could help you.’
These quotes describe the positive influence that another person—a mentor, counselor, or

colleague—can have in improving a student’s sense of self. Rose, who experienced violently
traumatic experiences during childhood into young adulthood, needed the encouragement of her lab
mentor to see that she was in fact on the right track. The mentor’s recognition of Roses’ affinity
towards biology eventually allowed Rose to open up to her mentor about her difficult childhood.
Trust between the two developed over time, slowly built upon mutual interests in science, and
helped Rose feel accomplished and re-motivated. This is a form of cultural competency, which can
come from mentors simply paying genuine attention to student backgrounds and valuing students’
interests and various strengths (Comstock et al, 2011; Gorski, 2010).

25

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
For Princess, guided self-reflection helped her realize her self-esteem was connected to
academic achievement and pleasing others. Five other participants corroborated similar sentiments,
mentioning that what most helped them overcome burnout was overtly setting aside time to focus on
their wellbeing amidst responsibilities. Princess, who was helped by a school counselor, credits this
realization as being particularly useful in considering her own goals in life as well as managing her
anxiety. Seven participants, including Princess, cited counseling as a needed resource for improving
their mental wellness. J-Stud actively seeks out mentors in the workplace for positive words of
encouragement to stay motivated—a practice which was daunting at first, but one that he refined
over time. As one of the few Black men from an incredibly low-income household, currently
working in investment banking, he described feeling out of place from time to time. His example
shows that effective mentorship and guided reflection can foster individuals’ continued development
of help-seeking behavior, even beyond academic settings, by strengthening critical skills such as
networking.

Discussion
The empirical evidence presented in this paper informs existing theories on college
achievement and sheds light on types of environmental supports that are needed for students to
perform and persist. Though the problem-solution orientation and highlighted factors in this paper
are relatively simple, these collective approaches to achievement are important in combatting the
stigma around mental health issues which are more prevalent than commonly assumed. Though
burnout has been notably documented from a psychological and quantitative perspective, it has been
relatively absent in sociological studies, especially in qualitative work which samples students who
have grown up in low-income households. While the burnout of teachers and graduate students has

26

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
been studied in educational research, this phenomenon is much less prevalently observed in
populations of college students (Embich, 2001; Farber, 1991). I myself only learned about this topic
when probing the racial minority strivers in this research about challenges they face and experience
as students. Had I probed more specifically on challenges related to maintaining motivation and
mental wellness in college, I believe more individuals would have mentioned experiencing some
form of a similar burnout phenomenon.
Additionally, the current discourse around psychological traits for success, specifically in the
frame of positive psychology—or studies relating to the potential of individuals—tends to have
potential limitations from a sociological perspective by not addressing social and cultural contexts of
students. This may lead researchers to unintentionally advance societal beliefs around individualism
as sufficient for college success, without attention to the disparate levels of social support and
cultural understanding that some students have greater access to, but that all students need to thrive
at the postsecondary level. To support the continued upward trajectory of low-income racial minority
college students it is important to consider how they can attain both social capital (through formal
and informal networks and dependable relationships) and cultural capital (by leveraging their ability
to navigate institutional and social settings). Thinking more deeply about the varied experiences and
backgrounds of college students may work to offer resources that can strengthen the character traits
they already have, which are necessary for achievement.
Perhaps the most important implications from this study are around the benefit of mobilizing
institutional resources to better support student endurance. Campus initiatives which work to
destigmatize issues of mental health, specifically for lesser represented students such as those who
are first-generation, are investments into the health of students throughout their lifetime. As is well
understood, the achievement gap extends to life outcomes that manifest beyond years of formal

27

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
schooling, with less-privileged students persistently facing poorer life outcomes, including health
and income expectancy (Boykin & Noguera, 2011; Ladson-Billings, 2009; Ransaw & Majors, 2016;
Reardon, 2013). Despite these trends, there remains an appeal to fetishize students of color who are
successful, often to the effect of blaming those who fail, rather than addressing systemic policy and
practices that contribute to disparate outcomes along racial lines. “Exception” cases are often used to
justify the existence of an unrealistic working meritocratic system of equal opportunity and place the
onus of academic achievement entirely upon the individual (Henry, 2015; McWhorter, 2000; Tough,
2013). However, this research complicates those theories and validates evidence that even the most
accomplished strivers might deal with severe physiological ailments which may in fact be
preventable (Gaydosh et al, 2017).

Limitations
The scope and data of this research are limited and therefore so are the implications of it.
Foremost, this paper draws from a larger study on the academic success and challenges of lowincome racial minority strivers. In that study, burnout emerged as a significant theme to be further
investigated. For this reason, one limitation in this paper is that participants described experiencing
burnout at various vantage points that surrounded college. This research would benefit from a design
which probes at issues of wellbeing and persistence at a specific point in the college experience,
perhaps through a sample of college juniors or even those who are on a leave of absence. Also, while
the former study administered the Grit Scale (Duckworth et al, 2007) survey to triangulate data
sources and strengthen trustworthiness, this study does not include that data due to irrelevance with
the research questions. This study would benefit from similar triangulation, perhaps through the
form of conducting focus groups, allowing participants to share their stories with one another and

28

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
uncover more commonalities and differences in data. Currently, this paper serves to inform a topic
which has been studied in limited contexts and provide examples through student voices.

Significance & Implications
It is well documented that first-generation college goers, many of whom are racial minorities,
graduate at significantly lower rates than others (Ishitani, 2006). However, to influence practice,
research on college persistence must also consider the ways in which students’ goal formation is
assisted by asset-based pedagogy and culturally responsive teaching (Carter, 2005; Cholewa et al,
2014; Freire, 1968; Ladson-Billings, 2009; Lopez, 2017). When college students are supported by
the adults in their institutions to be able to routinely consider their own purposes for pursuing a
postsecondary education, and critically think about what college offers them, burnout to the
extremes of physical and mental illness is less likely (Jacobs & Dodd, 2003; McGee & Stovall,
2015).
Studying how low-income racial minority strivers overcome burnout and continue to achieve
academically offers valuable insights. Currently, the existing research on the transition phases of
young adult racial minority students can fail to acknowledge the varied experiences that might lead
to mental and physical exhaustion and demotivation. By learning how students can re-motivate and
reclaim healthy ownership of their educational pursuits, we can better understand another
contributing aspect of the achievement gap and better advise educators and institutions on how to
address this issue. Thinking above grit and perseverance is needed to create knowledge for
practitioners who aim to improve the postsecondary experiences of students from diverse
backgrounds. Though the data emphasis in this study is on postsecondary student agency and lack
thereof, it is important to note that for outcomes to change, any individual effort must also be

29

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
supported by other individuals, groups, and institutions at all levels in order to benefit the college
persistence of low-income racial minority and first-generation students.
Finally, it is important to understand that from a wellness perspective, college completion
and professional success should not necessarily be in and of itself a metric of accomplishment and
fulfillment. On the contrary, it has been found that the college completion of low-income racial
minority students is associated with greater stress over the life course, perhaps from pressure to
perform and resulting overwork (Gaydosh et al, 2017). This is a bleak reality and an understudied
health cost to social mobility. Scaffolding opportunities and support systems that allow students to
routinely monitor their own happiness and sense of purpose is important in order to ensure that
students are able to lead healthy lives as they strive towards meeting their goals.

30

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
Works Cited:
1. Arnett, J. J. (2004). Emerging adulthood: The winding road from the late teens through the
twenties. Oxford University Press.

2. Ary, D., Jacobs, L. C., Irvine, C. K. S., & Walker, D. (2013). Introduction to research in
education. Cengage Learning.

3. Bandura, A. (1986). The explanatory and predictive scope of self-efficacy theory. Journal of
social and clinical psychology, 4(3), 359.

4. Brody, G. H., Yu, T., Miller, G. E., & Chen, E. (2016). Resilience in adolescence, health, and
psychosocial outcomes. Pediatrics, e20161042.

5. Boykin, A. W., & Noguera, P. (2011). Creating the opportunity to learn: Moving from
research to practice to close the achievement gap. Ascd.

6. Boyatzis, R. E., Jack, A., Cesaro, R., Passarelli, A., & Khawaja, M. (2010). Coaching with
compassion: An fMRI study of coaching to the positive or negative emotional attractor.
In Annual Meeting of the Academy of Management, Montreal.

7. Byrd, D. R., & McKinney, K. J. (2012). Individual, interpersonal, and institutional level
factors associated with the mental health of college students. Journal of American College
Health, 60(3), 185-193.

31

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE

8. Carey, R. L. (2016). “Keep that in mind… You’re gonna go to college”: Family influence
on the college going processes of Black and Latino high school boys. The Urban
Review, 48(5), 718-742.

9. Carter, Prudence L. Keepin' it real: School success beyond Black and White. Oxford Press,
2005.

10. Carter, D. F. (2006). Key issues in the persistence of underrepresented minority
students. New directions for institutional research, 2006(130), 33-46.

11. Comstock, D. L., Hammer, T. R., Strentzsch, J., Cannon, K., Parsons, J., & Salazar, G.
(2008). Relational- cultural theory: A framework for bridging relational, multicultural,
and social justice competencies. Journal of Counseling & Development, 86, 279–287.

12. Chavous, T. M. (2005). An Intergroup Contact-Theory Framework for Evaluating Racial
Climate on Predominantly White College Campuses. American Journal of Community
Psychology, 36(3-4), 239-257.

13. Creswell, J. D., Welch, W. T., Taylor, S. E., Sherman, D. K., Gruenewald, T. L., & Mann, T.
(2005). Affirmation of personal values buffers neuroendocrine and psychological stress
responses. Psychological Science, 16(11), 846-851.

32

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
14. Delpit, Lisa D. " Multiplication is for White People": Raising Expectations for Other
People's Children. The New Press, 2012.

15. DeWitz, S. Joseph, M. Lynn Woolsey, and W. Bruce Walsh. "College student retention:
An exploration of the relationship between self-efficacy beliefs and purpose in life among
college students." Journal of College Student Development50, no. 1 (2009): 19-34.

16. Duckworth, A. (2016). Grit: The power of passion and perseverance. Simon and Schuster.

17. Duckworth, Angela L., Christopher Peterson, Michael D. Matthews, and Dennis R. Kelly.
"Grit: perseverance and passion for long-term goals." Journal of personality and social
psychology 92, no. 6 (2007): 1087.

18. Dyrbye, Liselotte N., Colin P. West, Daniel Satele, Sonja Boone, Litjen Tan, Jeff Sloan, and
Tait D. Shanafelt. "Burnout among US medical students, residents, and early career
physicians relative to the general US population." Academic Medicine 89, no. 3 (2014): 443451.

19. Embich, J. L. (2001). The relationship of secondary special education teachers' roles and
factors that lead to professional burnout. Teacher Education and Special Education, 24(1),
58-69.

33

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
20. Emirbayer, M., & Mische, A. (1998). What is agency?. American journal of
sociology, 103(4), 962-1023.

21. Farber, B. A. (1991). Crisis in education: Stress and burnout in the American teacher.
Jossey-Bass.

22. Freire, Paulo. "Pedagogy of the Oppressed, trans." Myra Bergman Ramos. New York:
Continuum (1968).

23. Fried, R. R., & Irwin, J. D. (2016). Calmly coping: A Motivational Interviewing Via CoActive Life Coaching (MI-VIA-CALC) pilot intervention for university students with
perceived levels of high stress. International Journal of Evidence Based Coaching and
Mentoring, 14(1), 16.

24. Fries-Britt, S., & Turner, B. (2002). Uneven stories: Successful Black collegians at a Black
and a White campus. The Review of Higher Education, 25(3), 315-330.

25. Gaydosh, L., Schorpp, K. M., Chen, E., Miller, G. E., & Harris, K. M. (2017). College
completion predicts lower depression but higher metabolic syndrome among disadvantaged
minorities in young adulthood. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
201714616.

34

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
26. Griffee, D. T. (2005). Research Tips: Interview Data Collection. Journal of Developmental
Education, 28(3), 36-37.

27. Gorski, P. C. (2011). Unlearning deficit ideology and the scornful gaze: Thoughts on
authenticating the class discourse in education. Counterpoints, 402, 152-173.

28. Hammer, L. B., Grigsby, T. D., & Woods, S. (1998). The conflicting demands of work,
family, and school among students at an urban university. The journal of Psychology, 132(2),
220-226.

29. Hartley, Michael T. "Examining the relationships between resilience, mental health, and
academic persistence in undergraduate college students." Journal of American College
Health 59, no. 7 (2011): 596-604.

30. Henry III, William A. In defense of elitism. Anchor, 2015.

31. Ishitani, T. T. (2006). Studying attrition and degree completion behavior among firstgeneration college students in the United States. The Journal of Higher Education, 77(5),
861-885.

32. Jacobs, S. R., & Dodd, D. (2003). Student burnout as a function of personality, social
support, and workload. Journal of college student development, 44(3), 291-303.

35

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
33. James, S. A. (1994). John Henryism and the health of African-Americans. Culture, medicine
and psychiatry, 18(2), 163-182.

34. Jennings, M. L. (2009). Medical student burnout: Interdisciplinary exploration and
analysis. Journal of Medical Humanities, 30(4), 253.

35. Kena, G., Musu-Gillette, L., Robinson, J., Wang, X., Rathbun, A., Zhang, J., ... & Velez, E.
D. V. (2015). The Condition of Education 2015. NCES 2015-144. National Center for
Education Statistics.

36. Kim, Karen A., Linda J. Sax, Jenny J. Lee, and Linda Serra Hagedorn. "Redefining
nontraditional students: Exploring the self-perceptions of community college
students." Community College Journal of Research and Practice 34, no. 5 (2010): 402422.

37. Kundu, A. (2016). “Roses in Concrete: A Perspective on how Agency and Grit can Foster the
Success of All Students Especially those Most Disadvantaged.” The Journal of School &
Society, 3 (2), 18-21.

38. Kundu, A. (2017). Grit and agency: A framework for helping students in poverty to achieve
academic greatness. National Youth-At-Risk Journal, 2(2), 69.

36

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
39. Ladson-Billings, G. (2009). The dreamkeepers: Successful teachers of African American
children. John Wiley & Sons.

40. Lopez, F. A. (2017, January). “Altering the trajectory of the self-fulfilling prophecy.”
Journal of Teacher Education, vol 68 (1) 1-20.

41. Ong, A. D., Bergeman, C. S., Bisconti, T. L., & Wallace, K. A. (2006). Psychological
resilience, positive emotions, and successful adaptation to stress in later life. Journal of
personality and social psychology, 91(4), 730.

42. Maslach, C., Jackson, S. E., Leiter, M. P., Schaufeli, W. B., & Schwab, R. L.
(1986). Maslach burnout inventory (Vol. 21, pp. 3463-3464). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting
Psychologists Press.

43. McCabe, J. M. (2016). Connecting in college: How friendship networks matter for academic
and social success. University of Chicago Press.

44. McGee, E. O., & Stovall, D. (2015). Reimagining critical race theory in education: Mental
health, healing, and the pathway to liberatory praxis. Educational Theory, 65(5), 491-511.

45. McWhorter, John H. Losing the race: Self-sabotage in Black America. Simon and Schuster,
2000.

37

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
46. Michalec, B., Diefenbeck, C., & Mahoney, M. (2013). The calm before the storm?
Burnout and compassion fatigue among undergraduate nursing students. Nurse Education
Today, 33(4), 314-320.

47. Morrell, E. (2004). Becoming critical researchers: Literacy and empowerment for urban
youth (Vol. 227). Peter Lang.

48. Nathan, L. F. (2017). When Grit Isn't Enough: A High School Principal Examines How
Poverty and Inequality Thwart the College-for-All Promise. Beacon Press.

49. Pisarik, C. T. (2009). Motivational Orientation and Burnout among Undergraduate College
Students. College Student Journal, 43(4).

50. Ransaw, T. S., & Majors, R. (Eds.). (2016). Closing the Education Achievement Gaps for
African American Males. MSU Press. Chicago.

51. Raley, Yvonne. "Why we quit." Scientific American Mind 18, no. 4 (2007): 74-79.

52. Reardon, S. F. (2013). The widening income achievement gap. Educational
Leadership, 70(8), 10-16.

53. Rist, R. (1970). Student social class and teacher expectations: The self-fulfilling prophecy in
ghetto education. Harvard educational review, 40(3), 411-451.

38

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE

54. Rumberger, R. W. (2011). Dropping out. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

55. Rubin, H. J., & Rubin, I. S. (2011). Qualitative interviewing: The art of hearing data. Sage.

56. Schacter, J., & Jo, B. (2005). Learning when school is not in session: a reading summer daycamp intervention to improve the achievement of exiting First-Grade students who are
economically disadvantaged. Journal of Research in Reading, 28(2), 158-169.

57. Somers, P., Woodhouse, S. R., & Cofer Sr, J. E. (2004). Pushing the boulder uphill: The
persistence of first-generation college students. Naspa Journal, 41(3), 418-435.

58. Seligman, M. E., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2014). Positive psychology: An introduction.
In Flow and the foundations of positive psychology (pp. 279-298). Springer Netherlands.

59. Strayhorn, T. L. (2012). College students' sense of belonging: A key to educational success
for all students. Routledge.

60. Swail, W. S. (2003). Retaining Minority Students in Higher Education: A Framework for
Success. ASHE-ERIC Higher Education Report. Jossey-Bass Higher and Adult Education
Series. Jossey-Bass, 989 Market Street, San Francisco, CA 94103-1741.

39

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
61. Tinto, Vincent. Leaving college: Rethinking the causes and cures of student attrition.
University of Chicago Press.

62. Tough, Paul. How children succeed. Random House, 2013.

63. Underwood, M., Satterthwait, L. D., & Bartlett, H. P. (2010). Reflexivity and minimization
of the impact of age-cohort differences between researcher and research
participants. Qualitative Health Research, 20(11), 1585-1595.

64. Quaye, S. J., & Harper, S. R. (Eds.). (2014). Student engagement in higher education:
Theoretical perspectives and practical approaches for diverse populations. Routledge.

40

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
Tables and Figures:
Figure 1.1 Participant Chart
Alias
Camila
Alicia
Joe
Mario
Princess
Rose
MP
Stephanie
J-Stud
Jonny
Nadira
Hector

Race
Latinx
Black
Latinx
Latinx
Latinx/Dominican
Latinx
Black
Latinx
Black
Latinx
Latinx and Asian
Latinx/Dominican

Age
20
20
20
21
22
25
25
25
26
26
26
27

Status
In College
In College
In College
In College
In College
In College
College Grad
College Grad
In College
College Grad
College Grad
Master’s Grad

41

PRE-PRINT: UNDERSTANDING COLLEGE BURNOUT FROM A SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
Figure 2.1: Agency to Grit Relationship, and Where Burnout Occurs

42

