"x"
"1" "Textbook cost burden  and  social work students"
"2" "Matthew P. DeCarlo, PhD MSW"
"3" "Kerry F. Vandergrift , PhD MSW"
"4" "Radford University School of Social Work"
"5" "Radford, VA"
"6" "Author Note:"
"7" "This work was financially supported by the Waldron College of Health and Human Services Research Award as well as the Open Education Group’s OER Research Fellowship.  Additionally, the  project would not have been possible without the generous support and guidance of the Virtual Library  of   Virginia  whose leadership on textbook affordability and open education has been instrumental in driving state-level change.  The authors would  also  like to acknowledge the invaluable contributions of the Radford University School of Social Work administrative staff, including Jim Quillen and Cindy Whitehead in their support of this project."
"8" "Correspondence should be directed to Matthew P. DeCarlo, PO Box 6958, Radford, VA 24142. Email: mdecarlo1@radford.edu."
"9" "Abstract"
"10" "This article examines the financial, social, and academic impacts of the increasing cost of textbooks and other required course materials.  In  an availability sample of 168 students at Virginia schools of social work,  students report ed  spending  between  $300-$500  per  year ,  with higher spending for  graduate students. To  afford  textbook s , 63% of students got a job, 52% took out loans, 28% did not visit family, and 25% skipped a meal.  O ver one-third  of the sample engaged in  copyright infringement   and  most students delayed purchasing the textbook until they were sure  it was  required to be successful in the course."
"11" "Keywords: social work education, textbook costs , access to higher education"
"12" "Textbook cost burden of undergraduate and graduate social work students"
"13" "Social work students are financially strained by the extraordinary cost of higher education. According to the Council on Social Work Education (CSWE , 2018)   Annual Survey of Social Work Programs , bachelor of social work (BSW) students report an average of $27,902 in student debt with 78% of students carrying loan debt at the time of graduation. Master of social work (MSW) students report higher debt, with an average of $44,296 in student debt and 77.7% of students graduating with student loan debt. Debt amplifies existing social  in equities. Students from historically underserved groups in higher education  are more likely to incur debt ,  and  independently paying students, Pell-eligible students, and non-white students experience the most debt-induced hardship ( deGayardon, Callender, Dean, & DesJardins, 2018 )."
"14" "Debt is mandatory and long-lasting"
"15" "The debt  required to graduate with a social work degree  is likely to follow graduates well into their future. Social workers  do not make a lot of money. Students  graduating  in 2017  with an MSW earn ed  a median  annual  income of  between  $4 0 , 000-$44,000, with BSW graduates earning $13,000 less  than MSW graduates , on average  (Salsberg et al., 201 8 ) .  According to the  United States D epartment of  E ducation, it will take students an average of 20 years to repay loans between $20,000-$40,000 and 25 years to repay loans between $40,000-$60,000  on a standard repayment plan  ( U.S.  Department of Education, n.d.). Although many social workers will be eligible for Public Service Loan Forgiveness (PSLF) after ten years, 99% of those who applied in their first year were rejected ( U.S. Government Accountability Office, 2019 ), and its future is in jeopardy in a selectively austere policy environment ( U.S. Executive Office of the President, 2019 ). Debt impacts student s  across the lifespan , and it is increasing ly  common to take on graduate student debt (Fry, 2012) and hold that debt past the age of 40 (Haughwount et  al., 2015)  A meta-analysis of students from low- and middle-income families found student debt was associated with great er  odds  in later adulthood  of material hardships  like  skipping a housing payment, skipping bills,  or  food insecurity, healthcare hardship s like  skipping medical care, dental care, or medications, and financial difficulties  like an  overdrawn account  or  declined credit card   (Despard et al., 2016)."
"16" "To afford a social work degree , 27% of BSW and MSW students reported financing  student debt with  credit cards (Yoon, 2010 ,  2012).  Moreover , two-thirds to three-quarters of BSW and MSW students, respectively, reported that a job is important for affording  higher  education.  Employment responsibilities compete for student attention with  part-time or full-time classwork as well as unpaid part-time or full-time  social work field practicums .  As a result of these and other economic pressures, 43% of students in  a survey of 496 social workers from a large university reported experiencing food insecurity during the past year, with greater impacts for non-white, female, and first-generation students   ( Miles, McBeath, Brockett, & Sorensen, 2017 ) . Going without food, accruing credit card  and student  debt, and seeking employment are survival strategies for students to pay the necessary tuition in order to gain employment as a social worker. Practitioners often must complete an undergraduate degree to begin direct social work practice ,  and a graduate degree is required to achieve greater autonomy and authority in practice, particularly in clinical social work."
"17" "College textbooks: A captive market"
"18" "The largest driver of student debt is tuition; however, faculty  have little power  to stop the  nine-billion-dollar disinvestment of  state  governments  in higher education  and the resultant rise in tuition  ( Mitchell, Leachman, & Masterson, 2017 ). Nor can faculty control broader macroeconomic structures and trends that push students into precarious and oppressive financial  arrangements. However, faculty can control part of the cost of education through the selection of textbooks and other required  course materials . The doctrine of academic freedom ensures that faculty and department administrators choose the required materials for each course. Textbook costs may seem a quixotic concern, given the primacy of tuition in the student debt crisis. Yet, these costs are routinely identified by students as impactful and concerning ( Senack & Donoghue, 2016 ).  Moreover,  over three billion dollars of financial aid  per year  is used to pay for textbooks."
"19" "For this reason,  selection of textbooks and other course materials has become an area of increasing legislative concern on the state  and federal  level (Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition  [SPARC] , n.d.). Nearly half of all states and  many universities  have enacted textbook cost  policies   that include  label ing  courses that use no-cost or low-cost resources in the course catalog,  funding  grant programs and initiatives for  the creation  and sharing  of  open educational resources (OER), and  establishing  zero textbook cost (ZTC) degree paths. Advocates of addressing textbook costs frame the issue as  making college more accessible and boosting student retention , particularly for  students from  economically and socially oppressed groups ."
"20" "Similar concerns were found in  survey of 4,000  university  faculty in which 89% of department chairpersons and 61% of faculty agreed or strongly agreed that “the cost of course materials is a serious problem for my students” (Seaman & Seaman, 201 8 , p. 19). Faculty demonstrated complex opinions about textbook costs in this study, as 69% believed that their department’s textbooks could be improved by making them less expensive — the most popular suggested improvement  to those textbooks by far — while 48% were satisfied or very satisfied with the cost of textbooks in their class es . Indeed, over 80% of faculty were either extremely or moderately satisfied with the textbooks in their class es .  While faculty may acknowledge  textbook cost burden as a problem in general, they may view the costs associated with their courses as  anodyne ."
"21" "The college textbook market is a “captive market” (Senack, Donoghue, Grant, & Steen, 2016, p. 17) . Professors   decide which textbooks are required . Then,  students purchase the  required  materials . This is   a classic principal-agent problem   as  incentives and preferences  differ  between faculty and students in terms of what they look for in a textbook , with cost often losing to other factors .   Exacerbating  this  dynamic is t he  oligopolistic  textbook  publishing  market,  comprised of  three  companies — Pearson ,  McGraw-Hill,  and  Cengage — the latter two  of which are attempting to merge  and create a duopoly with  the two remaining   companies  owning over  8 0% of the textbook market   (SPARC, 2019)  T hese companies have raised textbook prices 191% since 1998 , according to data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics  ( Kight, 2018 ) , a higher rate  of inflation  than housing, healthcare, or tuition .  Simultaneously , over  the past decade , student spending decreased from $701 in 2008 to $415 in 2018 (National Association of College Stores  [NACS] , 2019). The resulting shortfall in spending is  the result of two concurrent factors .  With the proliferation of online commerce, students often purchase textbooks from Amazon, Chegg, and other retailers that  sell textbook at a lower cost  tha n  the bookstore , including  used ,  older editions , and rentals .  The other explanation is more troubling ."
"22" "Students are  increasingly  strain ing   to pay for textbooks alongside  necessities like housing, food, and healthcare. A recent Cengage  (2018)  survey conducted by Morning Consult found that due to high textbook costs, 43% of students report skipping a meal, nearly 70% get a job, 43% take out a loan, and 31% take fewer classes .  These effects were disproportionately felt by female, African-American, and Hispanic students. Cengage’s promotional materials make no mention of their role in  creating textbook cost burden ; instead, the survey is designed to  coopt  the rhetoric of textbook affordability  for their preferred  affordability solution, a textbook rental and adaptive courseware platform called Cengage Unlimited. For one price, student s  rent temporary access to a library of Cengage textbooks,  analogous  to Netflix or Spotify  but with  content from  only one  film  studio or  music  label available . Publishers  and bookstores like Barnes & Noble and Follet  are  following suit by building their own library of rental textbooks and wraparound online courseware   using openly licensed courseware  (Vitez, 201 8 ) ."
"23" "Publishers and bookstores  are a dapting to the downward pressure to textbook costs, a formerly captive market  with reliably increasing profit margins , by creating a new  captive market   by locking students, faculty, departments, and universities into digital- only distribution  models  (Senack & Donoghue, 2016) .   Universities are targeted with inclusive access, or automatic billing, sales models in which students can rent the textbook at a reduced rate that publishers draw directly from a student’s university account.  Similarly, many departments negotiate directly with publishers for lower prices in exchange for requiring their textbooks in multiple courses ,  adopt   textbook  rental platforms  like Cengage Unlimited  to similar effect ,  contract with  publishers  to create  adaptive  courseware  available at an additional cost to students , or partially privatize programs by outsourcing  course design  to online program management companies .  Faculty are  targeted  with  free textbooks,  bespoke textbook editions ,  and adaptive courseware that makes course design and online instruction simple  and quick .  Lowest down are students, who  are steered towards digital platforms that  prohibit basic functions like  keeping a copy of the textbook,  copying and pasting   content  to take notes , selling used editions, and buying from  retailers other than the publisher or bookstore ."
"24" "As partial agents for social work students’ textbook purchasing decisions, faculty should be aware of  market  dynamics and incorporate them into  course design . In addition to the effects  on well-being mentioned earlier, there is a considerable literature that demonstrate the impact of textbook prices on academic success and student retention. In a study of twenty-one thousand students at Florida universities and colleges, high textbook costs caused students not to purchase a required textbook (64.2%), take fewer courses (42.8%), not register for a specific class (40.5%), earn a poor grade (35.6%), and drop a course (22.9%) (Florida Virtual Campus, 2019). When compared to students using free and openly licensed textbooks, students using commercial textbooks are more likely to withdraw from a course, according to a recent meta-analysis (Clinton  & Khan , 2019). In a study of ten thousand students at the University of Georgia, students using commercial textbooks performed worse in course than those using free resources (Colvard, Wilson, & Park, 2018). Non-white, Pell-eligible, and part-time students were affected the most by this relationship. Textbook prices are not the only factor that impact student access  to textbooks . A recent National Association of College Stores (2019) report  emphasizes  that more students delay purchasing textbooks because they are not sure professors  will use them, rather   for high cost . Nevertheless, the structuring effect of textbook costs on academic success is well-established in the  open education  literature, inspiring the social justice work of library sciences, instructional designers, and education policy advocates addressing textbook costs."
"25" "The extent and impact of textbook costs for  social work students are unknown.  Textbook spending declines as students enter upper-level coursework, indicating an increased adoption of cost-cutting strategies  over time . In the Florida survey, graduate and doctoral students reported lower costs than undergraduate and community college students (Florida Virtual Campus, 2019).  Because  social work education is comprised of mostly upper-level undergraduate and graduate coursework, social work students  could spend less on textbooks  than students in general . Researchers carried out an exploratory research project to better understand textbook cost  dynamics among social work students in Virginia schools, building from the empirical work across all disciplines in higher education. Researchers  addressed  five research questions:"
"26" "How much do undergraduate and graduate social work students spend on textbooks?"
"27" "How do social work students describe the burden associated with textbook costs, and how does this burden relate to student debt  and other issues ?"
"28" "What strategies do social work students use to minimize textbook cost burden?"
"29" "How does textbook cost burden impact social work students’  education , stress, and student life?"
"30" "How do the effects of textbook cost burden differ for social work students from historically underserved groups in higher education?"
"31" "Methods"
"32" "Participants"
"33" "A total of 168 students participated in the study across six BSW and MSW programs in Virginia.  Almost half of participants ( 48.8% )  were from one  university , which  offers both  traditional and hybrid MSW programs as well as a traditional and satellite campus BSW programs. Two other campuses  comprised  about 14%  of the sample  each ,  and another three  campuses comprised  6-9% each. The sample was  drawn  mostly   from   public   universities in  Virginia  including  a large research university, three BSW-only programs, one historically black university, four rural and two suburban campuses,  as well as  one fully-online  program  and one hybrid  online  program."
"34" "Procedure"
"35" "Researchers  gathered  the sample by first recruiting directors and chairs of BSW and MSW programs at Virginia universities.  I n the spring semester of 2019,  a researcher   facilitated  trainings on textbook costs and open educational resources at six campuses across Virginia in partnership with the Virtual Library of Virginia (VIVA). Following the presentation, departments were invited to  participate in  an online survey  created by the researchers.  Researchers provided  a recruitment email  which department chairs or administrative assistants forwarded verbatim to student  email addresses or  copied into  program  newsletters . Two rounds of advertising, each spaced between two and three weeks apart asked students to participate in the  study hosted in Qualtrics . Researchers also recruited administrators from one other campus through the email list of BSW program directors in Virginia. At the end of the study, students could elect to enter a lottery drawing for two $100 gift cards and ten $10 gift cards by  providing an email address  by clicking on a link to  a separately stored Qualtrics survey , to preserve anonymity . The Radford University IRB approved all materials  and procedures  for  this study."
"36" "Data analysis"
"37" "Survey items were largely ordinal, and researchers conducted chi-square analyses to determine significant differences between BSW and MSW students for each research question.  Research ers  did not feel there was sufficient information on social work students to establish hypotheses  for most research questions. However, researchers expected to find that textbook costs negatively impacted students based on  race, parent al  educational attainment, income , and other  identifiers from historically underserved groups ."
"38" "Results"
"39" "The majority of students in the sample were BSW  students  (n=98) followed by MSW  students  (n=57), with most taking courses in-person (n=126). Pre-BSW students (n=13), freshman and sophomores, were underrepresented in the sample. These students were excluded from subsequent analyses ,   bringing the final number of students included in the analyses below to 155 ."
"40" "Textbook costs"
"41" "Students responded to a variety of questions about textbook costs  in the survey . In the past semester, students  in the sample  purchased between two and four textbooks . Surprisingly, s tudents within the same cohort reported purchasing a different number of textbooks, indicating that students interpreted the survey question phrasing “required to purchase” in different ways."
"42" "As indicated in Figure 1, significant differences were found across  class level  in number of books purchased (x=17.486, p=0.015) . A ll MSW students reported purchasing at least one textbook (10.9%) in the past semester, with most students reporting purchasing two (30.9%), three (16.4%), or four (20.0%) textbooks the past semester. Over 20% of MSW students reported purchasing five or more textbooks.  Among  BSW students ,  16.8% reported not purchasing a textbook in the past semester, with a flatter distribution of students purchasing one textbook (10.5%), two textbooks (14.7%), three textbooks (20.0%), four textbooks (18.9%), and five or more textbooks (19.0%)."
"43" "Significant differences were also noted in the number of expensive textbooks required (x=20.945, p=0.002). Nearly one-third of BSW students reported  purchasing  no  textbooks over $75  in the past semester, while only 12.3% of MSW students  did not purchase expensive textbooks . However, more BSW students (18.5%) reported having to purchase four or more  expensive  textbooks in  the past  semester. BSW students also reported greater exposure to low- cost textbooks (under $30), with 56.8% of BSW students having used two or more no-cost or low-cost materials in their degree program compared to  just  22.2% of MSW students."
"44" "Dollar estimates of textbook purchases also varied by graduate status, with MSW students reporting slightly higher textbook costs over the  past  academic year (x=24.499, p=0.04), as indicated in Figure 3. The mod e  for BSW students was between $300-$400 while the mode for the MSW students was between $400-$500 per academic year. Notably, about 10% of both BSW and MSW students reported spending over $1,000 per academic year on textbooks."
"45" "There was no significant difference between BSW and MSW students in total projected spending across the span of students’ current degree program, so Figure 4 collapses  these groups  into a view of all BSW and MSW students in the sample. The distribution appears tri-modal, with clusters of students paying between $400-$800, $1000-$1600, and $2000-$2200 over the course of their  undergraduate or graduate  degree program for textbooks. It should be noted that these figures represent four years of textbook purchases for BSW students and only two years of  textbook purchases for MSW students, indicating greater costs for graduate textbooks   similar to those  in the annual cost  figures  represented in Figure 3 ."
"46" "Textbook cost burden and student debt"
"47" "On average, students reported $26,336 in current student loan debt, with a projected average debt of $35,113 at the time of graduate across the sample. MSW students projected an average of $42,807 in debt by the end of their program of study, including any undergraduate debt, while BSW students projected $30,135 in debt by the end of their undergraduate degree program. A one-way ANOVA revealed significant differences in current (F(1, 140)= 12.706, p=0.0001) and project future loan debt (F(1, 140)= 5.204, p=0.024) across class level."
"48" "No significant differences were noted across class level in terms of the impact of textbooks on student debt and importance  of textbook costs   to life as a student . A majority   of both BSW and MSW students   (56.3%)   reported that textbook costs impacted their student debt  “ to some extent ”  or  “ somewhat, ”  with few stating it has “a great deal” of impact.  At the same time,  71.6% of MSW and BSW students rated textbook costs as important or very important to their life as a student, indicating these effects were somewhat related to debt and somewhat related to other aspects of perceived burden. When compared with other stressors, 43.2% of the sample reported that textbook costs were their number two (20.6%) or number three (22.6%) concern.  The most common number one concern  was t uition ( 46.5% )  followed by grades (23.9%) , and only one student rat ed  textbook costs as their  highest  source of stress ."
"49" "Students also reported that financial aid did not meaningfully address textbook costs. Among students in the sample who received financial aid  (63.9%), 42.4% of  them  said financial aid covered less than  a quarter  of their textbook costs while only 18.1% said it covered the entire cost of required textbooks. For students who elaborated on their answer in a provided textbox,  some  reported that financial aid only covers tuition or  that their refund did not  cover all of  the  required textbooks in a semester. Refund checks also did not arrive until after a few weeks into the semester, preventing students from purchasing textbooks during the first few weeks  of class ."
"50" "The psychological impact of textbook costs  was  expanded upon by students in their open-ended responses, corroborating and extending the quantitative results. Students offered that although  the  “financial burden of textbooks, next to tuition costs, is minimal,” they are nevertheless strongly negatively impacted by them. Nearly all responses indicated students felt textbooks were too expensive, compounding the impact of tuition that they could “barely pay for” already. Expensive books were seen as “extra costs,” paid “out of pocket” on top of tuition and not addressed by financial aid. For this reason, they compete with “student fees and parking fees,” “groceries,” savings, fixing a broken computer, or other necessities. As one student relates:"
"51" "“In this past week, I couldn’t fill my car up with gas or buy groceries because I spent $500+ in textbooks ,  and I still have one more I can’t buy yet because I don’t get [paid] till Friday...The social work books are wonderful and VERY useful but I can’t afford food right now because of them.”"
"52" "Cost-cutting strategies such as buying from online retailers or renting textbooks were  helpful to somewhat mitigate textbook cost burden, but were  rarely reported to be enough  for students . Adjusting to these costs force d  students to plan to drain their bank account, “up front,” at the beginning of each semester. Many student responses echoed the theme of “wasted money” because professors restate much of the content “on PowerPoint”  or only use the textbook a few times during the semester.   As a result, students do not trust faculty’s  designation  of “required  textbook , ”  and they spend the first few weeks of class figuring out whether purchasing the book is truly necessary to be successful in the class , or if they can rely on class lectures  or other resources to succeed .   When a required textbook is both necessary to purchase and expensive,  “you don’t have a choice but to do what you can to get it regardless of cost, because you will fail your class.”  At the same time , s tudents  expressed a willingness  to pay for textbooks that are used in the class and would be useful in the future."
"53" "Wasted money was  mentioned alongside  frustration as an emotional response. Other students described guilt in asking relatives for help  pay  for books. However,  the most common emotional response students reported was stress . For this reason, we conceptualize textbook cost burden as the stress resulting from  (a) the high cost of textbooks; (b)  th at they are due “up front” and all-at-once at the beginning of each  semester; (c)  the cumulative effect of textbook costs across courses;  (d)  competing needs such as groceries and rent; ( e ) the time and effort required to minimize  and afford  textbook costs ; ( f )  the  lack of knowledge on whether required textbooks  will be used enough to justify their cost;  and  ( g )  the  potential  grade penalty   of forgoing the  purchas e of  an expensive textbook .   There was a strong polarization in student responses on whether  textbook cost burden was better, worse, or identical in social work versus other disciplines.  No clear consensus or majority/minority viewpoints emerged  in the qualitative data ."
"54" "Strategies for reducing textbook cost burden"
"55" "The most common strategy for mitigating textbook cost burden was purchasing from vendors other than the campus bookstore. Nearly three-quarters of the sample (71.6%) reported using this strategy very frequently, with another 11% reporting doing so frequently. This strategy was much more common in MSW students (x=13.707, p=0.008), with  almost all  of the  sub sample very frequently (86.0%)   or  frequently (10.5%)  purchasing from vendors other than the bookstore versus 74.5% of BSW students."
"56" "Other conventional cost-cutting strategies were used somewhat often in the sample. Students  reported they  ( frequently  or very frequently )   purchased  older editions (37.4%), rent ed  textbooks (30.3%),  and  shar ed  textbooks with classmates (25.8%) to reduce textbook costs. MSW students reported renting textbooks far less frequently than BSW students (x=12.497, p=0.014), with 50.9% of MSW students  stating  they never rented a textbook compared to 27.6% of BSW students. Sharing textbooks was more commonly reported (x=9.478, p=0.05) among BSW students (32.7%) than MSW students (14.0%). Library reserves were the least commonly used cost-cutting strategy with only 12.9% of students reporting using it frequently or very frequently . Nearly all  MSW students  had never used  library reserves compared  with  55.7% of BSW students  who had  used them  (x=15.399, p=0.009)."
"57" "Despite the significant investment students make in textbooks, the majority of BSW and MSW students report not using at least one textbook they purchased. Most students (47.0%)  reported not using between two and four textbooks purchased during their current program, though 20.6% of students reported using all of their textbooks and 18.7%  did not use  more than six textbooks. No statistically significant differences were noted by class  level .   M ore BSW students reported using all of their social work textbooks (42.9%) versus books in all courses (19.4%) and far fewer reported not using over six social work textbooks (3.1%) versus books in all courses (23.5%). Similar patterns were found in MSW students comparing social work and other disciplines, though it is unclear whether students are comparing  textbooks from  their  current MSW program  to textbooks purchased during undergraduate studies, elective courses,  or  previous graduate degrees."
"58" "Because students reported “wasting money” on unused books in the past, they commonly delayed the purchase required textbooks until they were sure professors would use them, a theme also present in the  qualitative  data. A majority of students (50.3%)  waited  past the first week  to purchase the textbook  very frequently or frequently (16.8%) while  a sizable minority  disclosed occasionally (12.3%), rarely (7.1%), or never (12.9%) using this strategy to reduce textbook cost burden. No significant differences were noted between BSW and MSW students. Instead, the majority of the sample  did  not purchase textbooks  during the first week of class , and  instead waited  to see if the professor truly use d  the textbook before purchasing. About one-quarter (27.7%) of students frequently or very frequently did not buy required textbooks due to high cost. Only 22.6% of students report never forgoing the purchase of an expensive textbook."
"59" "As a result of textbook costs, students  also  engage d  in violations of copyright law.  The  third-most commonly used strategy was taking pictures of another student’s textbook, with 37.7% of students reporting frequently or very frequently doing so to reduce textbook costs. This strategy was much more common among BSW students, with 49.1% of MSW students reporting  never taking pictures of another student’s book and 36.8% of BSW students doing so frequently or very frequently (x=13.428, p=0.009). This is piracy, as students do not have the permissions to make and share copies of a copyrighted textbook. More traditional piracy, downloading free copies of the book off of the internet, was less commonly used with only 21.3% of students reporting frequently or very frequently doing so. Illegal downloads did not vary significantly by class level."
"60" "Impact of textbook cost burden on student life"
"61" "Academic impacts.  Overall, there seemed to be minimal impact on course registration  and retention , particularly among MSW students. A strong majority of  all  students reported never dropping a class (85.8%), withdrawing from a class (89.0%), or not registering for a specific class (83.9%) due to high textbook costs. Over 90% of the sample never  failed  a course due to textbook costs. Significantly (x=8.253, p=0.016),   12.2% of BSW students reported failing at least one course due to textbook costs while no MSW students  failed for this reason ."
"62" "Instead, the more common impact reported impact across the sample was lower grades, with 25.2% of students reporting textbook costs affected their grade negatively in one class. However,  lower grades were  still uncommon among students, as 66.5% never experienced  this  as a result of textbook costs . BSW students  experienced it  more (x=14.546, p=0.002), as 43.9% earned a lower grade due to textbook costs in at least one course. In social work classes, 16.3% of all students reported receiving a lower grade due to textbook costs in at least one class.  Overall , textbook costs appeared to have a small impact on  students’  academic performance in undergraduate education, with little impact on retention, and fewer impacts in social work classes."
"63" "Financial  impacts.  While students were modestly affected academically, students’ personal lives were significantly affected by high textbook costs. In order to afford textbooks, 63.9% of students report getting a full-time or part-time job, 51.0% take out a loan, 25.8% do not visit family over academic breaks, and 22.6% skip a meal.  No significant differences were found across class level."
"64" "Negative  thoughts .  As a result of high textbook costs, 43.5% of students usually or always have negative thoughts about the higher education as a whole, 46.8% sometimes have negative thoughts about the course, and about a third of students sometimes have negative thoughts about the university, department,  or  degree program. MSW students  shared  significantly greater negative  ideation  for the  degree program (x=20.769, p=0.0001), department (x=29.219, p=0.0001), and professor (x=18.362, p=0.001)  as a result of high textbook costs . Relatively few students (22.7%) reported any negative impact on their feelings about the profession  of social work."
"65" "Textbook cost burden and social equity"
"66" "A second group of more personal demographic questions  was  placed at the end of the survey. Researchers did not make these questions mandatory, as the desire for privacy and anonymity  was reasonable in  the small community of Virginia social work education. Close to half of students did not complete personal demographic questions, which impacts the generalizability  and accuracy  of the conclusions  in this  section .  With this caveat in mind, r esearchers investigated relationships between  students’  personal characteristics and each of the previous analyses. Researchers hypothesized that textbook costs, much like other access barriers to a college education, are inequitably felt by groups who are historically underrepresented in higher education. Researchers analyzed the impact of textbook costs on students who disclosed  Pell grant eligibility, parental educational attainment, and race. The sample was predominantly women under 35 years old, so these  identifiers  were omitted from social equity analyses due to lack of variability. While scholarship status and independent financial status  were also collected , Pell-eligibility was used as a proxy for income as it is  more  commonly used in textbook cost studies (e.g., Colvard, Wilson, & Park, 2019). Information for  the  variables included are represented in Table 1."
"67" "Table 1: Personal demographic information of students"
"68" "Characteristic"
"69" "Answer"
"70" "N"
"71" "%"
"72" "Pell-eligible"
"73" "No"
"74" "51"
"75" "30.4%"
"76" "Yes"
"77" "41"
"78" "24.4%"
"79" "No answer"
"80" "76"
"81" "45.2%"
"82" "First-gen eration  student"
"83" "No"
"84" "48"
"85" "28.6%"
"86" "Yes"
"87" "40"
"88" "23.8%"
"89" "No answer"
"90" "80"
"91" "47.6%"
"92" "Race"
"93" "African-American"
"94" "33"
"95" "19.6%"
"96" "White"
"97" "56"
"98" "33.3%"
"99" "Other"
"100" "4"
"101" "2.4%"
"102" "No answer"
"103" "75"
"104" "44.6%"
"105" "Textbook costs were largely the same across all subgroups, except for African-American students. Almost one-third of African-American students reported spending under $300, while only 12.8% of white students did (x=47.522, p=0.03). No significant relationships were found with regard to the importance of textbooks  costs on student life, their  importance  relative to other financial  stressors ,  and  their  impact on student debt."
"106" "Purchasing patterns demonstrated some differences between African-American and white students, as 40.7% of African-American students reported using all of their textbooks while only  14.8% of whites used all of  the  books  they purchased  (x=22.847, p=0.029). Contrastingly, first-generation students were significantly more likely (36.1% vs. 13.6%; x=21.668, p=0.041) to have six or more unused textbooks. Social work textbooks showed no differences across any subgroups.   Cost-cutting strategies also varied across groups.  More A frican-American students never or rarely shop ped for textbooks outside  the bookstore (32.2%) in contrast to  the  5.4% of white students  who did not use this strategy   (x=18.277, p=0.019). On the opposite end, 79.6% of Pell-eligible students very frequently shopped at stores other than the bookstore, compared to 61.1%  of those  not eligible for Pell grants."
"107" "African-American students also noted differential impacts of textbook costs on student life. Half of African-American students in the sample received a lower grade due to textbook costs at least once, versus just 24.6% of white students (x=17.333, p=0.008). However, textbook costs had less impact on African-Americans’ negative perceptions of the course (x=28.639, p=0.047) and professor (x=15.693, p=0.047), when compared to white students."
"108" "Discussion"
"109" "Estimates of student spending in this study are  similar than those from large-scale studies, which estimate spending at about $415 (NACS, 2019)  or between $300-$800 (Florida Virtual Campus, 2019) .  Social work students, contrary to the extant literature, report spending more money on textbooks as they proceed further in their education. Graduate students projected spending an equivalent amount in two years that undergraduate student s would spend  in four. These dynamics may be partially explained by the purchasing patterns of students. MSW students may have  conceptualized textbooks  as an investment, on the assumption they will use  them  in  the future . This was  indicated  by their preference against renting, sharing, borrowing from the library, or taking pictures of textbooks . Instead, MSW students preferred to shop on  online retailers for cheaper textbooks they can own .  On average, students save about 58% by buying a used copy online rather than buying a new copy from a bookstore (Vitez, 201 8 ) ."
"110" "MSW students also  disclosed   more  negative emotions towards the degree program, department, and professor for the high cost of required textbooks. This suggests that textbook purchasing decisions have higher stakes for graduate students. As graduate students participate in unpaid fieldwork during both years of social work education, versus only one year for undergraduate students, it may be the case that the financial strain  of social work burden  makes it more difficult to balance textbook costs and other necessities.  Moreover, the majority of MSW students are over 35 years old , which may introduce greater family responsibilities, health concerns, and other  financial stressors   (Salsberg  et al. , 2018) .  As a result , textbook cost burden  may increase for  social work students as they move from undergraduate to graduate  study ."
"111" "Unlike previous  studies  (e.g., Florida Virtual Campus, 2019 ; Senack & Donoghue, 2016 ) , textbook costs were not associated with retention or academic performance issues in social work courses.  It may be the case that because the sample was composed of declared social work majors and graduate students, that  textbook costs have different impacts on these students . At minimum,  students cannot avoid enrolling in courses with expensive textbooks , as there are  limited  pathways to degree completion within a major of graduate program.  While students reported modest impact s  on student debt and academic performance,  the burden of textbook costs on  student life  remains  deeply concerning. Textbook  costs   were a deciding factor for  two-thirds of students in the sample to take on  employment and  one-half of students   to take out loans , similar to effects found previous studies ( Cengage , 2018).  As Senack and Donoghue (2016) highlight, students paying for a $150 textbook  with  loans add an additional $34.72 in interest to the sticker price; moreover, it  takes  about  28 hours at a minimum wage job to pay for a $200  textbook.  Although  textbook costs  may seem like  a minor issue in college access in comparison to tuition costs, student perspectives underscore that spending two months of groceries or half a rent check on textbooks  has  a significant impact on  their lives .  Textbook costs are immediate.  Student debt   from tuition  is long-term."
"112" "Across all class levels, textbook costs were the number two or three concern for nearly half of the sample, though this was lower than in previous studies of undergraduate students ( Cengage , 2018). This concern was  exacerbated  by professors who required textbooks  that ended up being “wasted purchases” for students , driving the widespread strategy of waiting until after the first week of class to purchase required materials. Within the sample, this strategy was more associated with cost than in previous national studies (NACS, 2019). On net, social work courses had fewer unused textbooks at the undergraduate level than other disciplines, though students varied considerably in whether they viewed the amount spent on social work textbooks as greater, less than, or equivalent to textbooks in other disciplines.  However , graduate students reported not using 2-4 textbooks across their degree program , which is composed of social work courses  alone.  Because  graduate textbooks  tended to be more expensive, the drive towards cost-cutting was more pronounced among MSW students in the sample."
"113" "The impacts of textbook costs on historically underserved groups should be interpreted with caution, given the lack of data on close to half of the sample. Although there were differences  in  textbook  cost mitigation   strategies  across race and first-generation status, textbook costs did not appear to impact academic retention or debt for any historically underserved group. While some high-power studies find that textbook costs are associated with outcomes for historically underserved groups  (Colvard, Wilson & Park, 2018) , meta-analyses of impacts note no significant impact on final grades for courses that use commercial or free textbooks (Hilton,  2019). The impact of textbook costs on African-Americans’ grades is concerning, though  students reported it was mostly present in other disciplines . African-Americans also may be more effective at  discovering  which textbooks are truly needed, as they report using more of their books while also spending less money on them  overall . By contrast, first-generation   college  students may have less facility with th ese  skills, as they report the greatest number of unused textbooks of any demographic group.  Further investigation of the impact of textbook costs on social work students from historically underserved using a nationally representative probability sample would provide better information for inform faculty decision-making ."
"114" "Limitations and  i mplications"
"115" "The results of this study should be contextualized within the limitations of the availability sampling approach, its sampling frame of Virginia schools of social work, and the limited number of students who  disclosed  personal demographic information . Furthermore, the reliance on self-report and recollection of  retrospective  purchas es from the past year  may  have  influence d  the data to be more reflective of biases and subjective perceptions of textbook costs and less reflective of true  spending . Researchers acknowledge these limitations, and offer conclusions tentatively, as appropriate for an exploratory study."
"116" "T he  aim  of this study is to inform action behalf of professor and program administrators in social work , addressing the principal-agent problem  in the captive market of  college  textbook .  Faculty and administrators  can  embrace their role as purchasing agent by centering  textbook cost burden.  During the normal process of refreshing and redesigning courses , faculty can reevaluate how well textbooks match learning objectives and whether they justify their cost to students.  Even if  a commercial  textbook is used extensively during the semester, listing any differences between previous editions and the current edition or  putting copies  of the textbook  on reserve at  the library  can mitigate cost concerns . Since many students may not be able or willing to purchase the textbook during the first few weeks of class, providing chapter readings for the first two weeks in the LMS may help students who need to wait for a student loan refund check or a used book to ship from an online retailer.  Faculty can also negotiate directly with publishers for lower costs to students.  Commercial textbooks are often excellent learning resources, which students in this study indicated, but consciousness of the market that produces and sells them helps faculty countermand existing inequities, rather than exacerbating them for students."
"117" "If  a  commercial textbook does not justify its cost, another option  is to  redesign  the course to use journal articles,  other library resources,  free textbooks, or open educational resources. Although course redesign is  work -intensive,  resources are increasingly available  on the university and state level for faculty who want to make their course materials less expensive  (DeCarlo, 2019) . Because this work is likely to be done at multiple campuses across the country, the adoption of open educational practices that  enable the sharing and collaborative creation of  OER  and no-cost  course  preparations  across campuses would make more efficient use of scarce redesign resources, reduce duplicative work, and  scale up informal resource sharing among faculty .  By diffusing the cost-focused innovations across the  institutions ,  faculty  can collectively address textbook cost burden.  Ultimately, t he  choice to require an expensive textbook should be intentional . It should not be the result of inertia ,  path dependency , or  indifference ."
"118" "References"
"119" "Cengage (2018).  Today’s learner: Student views 2018 . Retrieved from:  https://news.cengage.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/CengageMC-Affordability-Survey-letter.pdf"
"120" "Clinton, V., & Khan, S. (2019). Efficacy of open textbook adoption on learning performance and course withdrawal rates: a meta-analysis.  AERA Open ,  5 (3), 2332858419872212."
"121" "Colvard, N. B., Watson, C. E., & Park, H. (2018). The impact of open educational resources on various student success metrics.  International Journal of Teaching and Learning in Higher Education ,  30 (2), 262-276."
"122" "Council on Social Work Education (2018).  2017 statistics on social work education in the United States.  Retrieved from:  https://www.cswe.org/CMSPages/GetFile.aspx?guid=44f2c1de-65bc-41fb-be38-f05a5abae96d"
"123" "Cullier, C. (n.d.). Inclusive access: Who, what, when, where, how, and why? In  The evolution of affordable content efforts in the higher education environment: Programs, case studies, and examples . Retrieved from:  https://open.lib.umn.edu/affordablecontent/chapter/inclusive-access-who-what-when-where-how-and-why/"
"124" "de Gayardon, A., Callender, C., Dean, K.C., & DesJardins, S. (2018).  Graduate indebtedness: Its perceived effects on behaviour and life choices—A literature review . Center for Global Higher Education working paper. Retrieved from:  https://www.researchcghe.org/publications/working-paper/graduate-indebtedness-its-perceived-effects-on-behaviour-and-life-choices-a-literature-review/"
"125" "DeCarlo, M. P. (2019, November 7).  Teaching note: Creating open textbooks for social work education .  https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/qf3t5"
"126" "Despard, M. R., Perantie, D., Taylor, S., Grinstein-Weiss, M., Friedline, T., & Raghavan, R. (2016). Student debt and hardship: Evidence from a large sample of low-and moderate-income households.  Children and Youth Services Review ,  70 , 8-18."
"127" "Florida Virtual Campus (2019, March 8).  2018 student textbook and course materials survey: Results and findings.  Retrieved from:  https://dlss.flvc.org/documents/210036/1314923/2018+Student+Textbook+and+Course+Materials+Survey+Report+--+FINAL+VERSION+--+20190308.pdf/07478d85-89c2-3742-209a-9cc5df8cd7ea"
"128" "Fry, R. (2012).  A record one-in-five households now owe student loan debt . Washington, DC: Pew Research Center, Social & Demographic Trends. Retrieved from:  http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2012/09/26/a-record-one-infive-households-now-owe-student-loan-debt/2/"
"129" "Haughwout, A., Lee, D., Scally, J., & van der Klaauw, W. (2015).  Student loan borrowing and repayment trends, 2015 . Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Retrieved from:  https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/newsevents/mediaadvisory/2015/Student-Loan-Press-Briefing-Presentation.pdf"
"130" "Hilton, J. (2019). Open educational resources, student efficacy, and user perceptions: a synthesis of research published between 2015 and 2018.  Educational Technology Research and Development , 1-24."
"131" "Kight, S. W. (2018, September 1).  College students are skipping meals to pay for textbooks . Axios. Retrieved from:  https://www.axios.com/college-textbooks-expensive-overpriced-students-poll-469a89fc-f80f-4595-98cb-2a33170ba235.html"
"132" "Meinke, B. (2018, March 26).  Signing students up for surveillance: Textbook publisher terms of use for data . Retrieved from:  http://billymeinke.com/2018/03/26/signing-students-up-for-surveillance/"
"133" "Miles, R., McBeath, B., Brockett, S., & Sorenson, P. (2017). Prevalence and predictors of social work student food insecurity.  Journal of Social Work Education ,  53 (4), 651-663."
"134" "Mitchell, M., Leachman, M., & Masterson, K. (2017).  A lost decade in higher education funding state cuts have driven up tuition and reduced quality . Center for Budget and Policy Priorities. Retrieved from:  https://vtechworks.lib.vt.edu/bitstream/handle/10919/83618/TuitionReducedQuality.pdf"
"135" "National Association of College Stores (2019).  Student watch: Attitudes and behaviors toward course materials ,  2018-2019.  Oberlin, OH."
"136" "Salsberg, E., Quigley, L., Mehfoud, N., Acquaviva, K., Wyche, K., & Silwa, S. (2018).   Results of the nationwide survey of 2017 social work graduates: The national social work workforce study .  Washington, DC: George Washington University Health Workforce Institute.  Retrieved from:  https://www.socialworkers.org/LinkClick.aspx?fileticket=C0r5P1zkMbQ%3d&portalid=0"
"137" "Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition  (n.d.).  State policy tracker . Retrieved from:  https://sparcopen.org/our-work/state-policy-tracking/"
"138" "Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resource Coalition (2019).  SPARC is working to prevent a duopoly over college textbooks .  Retrieved fr o m:  https://sparcopen.org/our-work/oppose-cengage-mcgraw-hill-merger/"
"139" "Seaman, J. E. & Seaman, J. (2018).  Freeing the textbook: Educational resources in higher education, 2018 . Babson Survey Research Group. Retrieved from:  https://www.onlinelearningsurvey.com/reports/freeingthetextbook2018.pdf"
"140" "Senack, E. & Donoghue, R. (2016, February).  Covering the cost: Why we can no longer afford to ignore high textbook prices . Student Public Interest Research Groups. Retrieved from:  https://studentpirgs.org/assets/uploads/archive/sites/student/files/reports/National%20-%20COVERING%20THE%20COST.pdf"
"141" "Senack, E., Donoghue, R., Grant, K. O., & Steen, K. (2016, September).  Access denied: The new face of the textbook monopoly . Student Public Interest Research Groups. Retrieved from:  https://studentpirgs.org/assets/uploads/archive/sites/student/files/reports/Access%20Denied%20-%20Final%20Report.pdf"
"142" "U.S. Department of Education (n.d.)  Standard plan . Retrieved from:  https://studentaid.gov/manage-loans/repayment/plans/standard#monthly-payments-consolidation"
"143" "U.S. Executive Office of the President (2019, March).  A budget for a better America: Promises kept. Taxpayers first . Retrieved from:  https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/budget-fy2020.pdf"
"144" "U.S. Government Accountability Office (2019, September).  Public service loan forgiveness: Improving the temporary expanded process could help reduce borrower confusion  Publication No. GAO-19-595). Retrieved from:  https://www.gao.gov/assets/710/701157.pdf"
"145" "Vitez, K. (2018 , January 25 ) .  Open 101: An action plan for affordable textbooks .  Student Public Interest Research Groups. Retrieved from:   https://studentpirgs.org/assets/uploads/archive/sites/student/files/reports/Open%20101%20-%20An%20Action%20Plan%20for%20Affordable%20Textbooks.pdf"
"146" "Yoon, I. (2010). Debt burdens among BSW graduates: A national cross-sectional study.  Journal of Baccalaureate Social Work ,  15 (2), 61-79."
"147" "Yoon, I. (2012). Debt burdens among MSW graduates: A national cross-sectional study.  Journal of Social Work Education ,  48 (1), 105-125."
