Islamic State group grievance mobilization
Jared Edgerton1 *
1 Department of Political Science, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA
* E-mail: edgerton.37@osu.edu (JFE)

Abstract
Recent studies of terrorist and civil war combatant mobilization have yielded contradictory results, regarding whether combatants are motivated by economic incentives or group
grievances. To understand this phenomenon, this paper uses novel data consisting of 4,101
individual foreign fighter data of Islamic State volunteers fighting in Iraq and Syria. Islamic State fighters are better educated and have similar rates of unemployment compared
to males in their home countries. Further, Islamic State fighters also come from areas with
better economic conditions and regions with politically marginalized and ethnically excluded
groups. The effect of economic activity and group exclusion are statistically significant and
positive across several sensitivity checks. These analyses suggest that Islamic State fighters
are motivated by group grievances, in the form of relative ethnic group ranking, as opposed
to economic incentives.

Introduction
Foreign combatants in extrastate conflicts pose a serious threat to noncombatants in both
their home state and the country in which they are fighting [1, 2]. In addition to providing
military support, foreign combatants help terrorist and rebel organizations through access to
financial resources, lobbying their home governments to enact favorable policies, and helping
terrorist and rebel organizations use their respective states as safe havens [3, 4]. In turn,
terrorist and rebel organizations with external support are especially resilient in the face of
military intervention, which poses a significant problem for states combating transnational
terrorist and rebel organizations, such as al Qaeda, Colombian paramilitaries, and the Islamic State [5].
Despite increasing recognition in national security and policy circles that foreign combatants pose a threat, we know surprisingly little about why people join modern insurgent
groups. Extant studies of foreign combatant mobilization primarily rely on qualitative interview data or aggregate the count of combatants to the state level. Although both approaches
offer insights into motivation of combatants, these approaches introduce potential biases. If
researchers use state level variables to predict the count of combatants, they may miss crucial subnational dynamics which are actually driving mobilization. For example, the Islamic
State draws recruits heavily from the Caucasus region of Russia, but fewer combatants from
other populated cities in the country (see Fig 1). Within Russia, the Caucasus region has
idiosyncratic cultural and historical characteristics compared to other parts of the country.
If a researcher uses the count of volunteers from Russia as a unit of analysis, they may miss
the important local dynamics which are actually causing foreign fighter mobilization.
To shed light on the question of the motivations of foreign fighters, this paper leverages a unique dataset of Islamic State job applications that were leaked to Western news
media and intelligence agencies by a former Islamic State soldier [6]. The leaked documents
included over four thousand job applications of mostly foreign fighters who had traveled to
Syria to join the Islamic State between 2010 and 2015. These documents include the fight1

Figure 1: Heat map of the log count number of Islamic State volunteers from
Russia. Most volunteers within Russia are from the Northern Caucasus; particularly North
Ossetia–Alania, Ingushetia, Chechnya, and the Republic of Dagestan. Within Russia, these
regions have faced higher rates of violence and poverty, compared to the median region.
Further, these regions are also culturally distinct from other parts of Russia, with a majority
of citizens identifying as Sunni Muslim.
ers’ home states and cities, date of birth, educational attainment, and previous occupation
before joining the Islamic State [7]. A journalist who writes on the Islamic State provided us
with the documents for analysis. Crucially, the journalist was able to verify the authenticity
of the documents by calling the relatives of the volunteers. Several researchers have also
used a similar corpus of Islamic State documents for their research [8, 9]. Further, several
organizations, including the United States Military Academy West Point, have published
descriptive reports with the data [10, 11].
The data presented in this paper is distinct from the first treatment of the documents
in two ways. First, the data is aggregated to the 0.5 geospatial subnational units (approximately 50 by 50 kilometer regions), instead of aggregating to the state level. Using the 0.5
geospatial unit as our observational unit helps us gain deeper insights into the micro-processes
that drive mobilization. And second, this paper presents an individual level analysis for the
fighters against the populations of their home states [9].
The Islamic State offers a compelling case study for understanding the motivations of

2

Figure 2: Network of Islamic State fighters and their home countries. The orange
points are proportional to the log of the number of volunteers from a respective home city.
The Islamic State foreign fighters are predominantly from the Gulf States, North Africa,
Turkey and Russia; however, there are also foreign fighters from the United States, Canada,
Germany, France, and the United Kingdom.
foreign combatants for two reasons. First, the Islamic State has been incredibly successful
in recruiting foreign fighters. Between 2010 and 2015, the Islamic State drew recruits from
over 60 countries; including China, France, Russia, Saudi Arabia, and the United States (see
Fig 2). Second, the Islamic State poses a significantly larger threat to civilians than other
terrorist and rebel organizations. During that time period, the Islamic State carried out
almost 3,500 attacks, totaling 22,462 fatalities, making it the deadliest terrorist and rebel
organization over the last five years [12].
Central to our argument is that foreign combatants are motivated by group marginalization and exclusion. Specifically, Islamic State foreign fighters are mobilized by changes in
the relative importance and social rank of their in-group versus an out-group, as opposed to
economic incentives (i.e. grievance versus greed). Researchers in the economic greed camp
argue that combatants lack economic opportunities (i.e. have lower levels of education and
higher rates of unemployment). Combatants therefore participate in civil war and terrorism
to better their economic situation [13, 14, 15, 16, 9]. Researchers in the group grievance
camp argue that combatants are motivated by group identity issues – including the religion,
ethnicity, and political affiliation of combatants – rather than economic conditions [17, 18].
Under this theoretical framework, an individual’s self-worth is influenced by a comparison
of their in-group to other out-groups; particularly, if their in-group is subjugated by other

3

out-groups, shares power within a coalition, or dominates the society. In the case of the
Islamic State, the cleavages in group rank are between Sunni and Shi’a Muslims. In several
states dominated by Sunni leaders, Shi’a Muslims are subjugated by Sunni leaders and vice
versa. Changes in the rank status of groups can lead to conflict [19]. Consistent with this
theory, researchers have found that combatants motivated by group grievances have higher
rates of education because they are motivated by political and cultural issues, which requires
an understanding of larger social dynamics within a state or the world [20, 21, 22].
We use two analytic approaches to assess the claim that foreign combatants are mobilized
by group grievances. First, we compare the level of education and rate of unemployment for
Islamic State fighters compared to the male populations of their home countries. Second,
we aggregate count data for the Islamic State fighters to 0.5 geospatial regions and test the
effect of group marginalization and nighttime lights (i.e. economic activity) on mobilization. If Islamic State fighters are mobilized by group grievances we expect for them to have
higher levels of education and to come from regions with politically marginalized or excluded
groups [23, 24, 19]. Conversely, we expect for Islamic State fighters to have similar rates of
unemployment and the effect of nighttime lights on the rate of volunteers from a geospatial
region to be null.
We find strong evidence that Islamic State soldiers are driven by ideational rather than
material motives. These results are distinct from several recent studies. First, we find strong
evidence that Islamic State foreign fighters are motivated by group grievances, as opposed
to macro-statewide economic conditions. Second, we find that at an individual level, Islamic
State fighters have a similar, or lower, rates of unemployment than males in their home countries conditioned on age. Further, at a subnational level, Islamic State fighters come from
regions with higher levels of nighttime lights (i.e. greater economic activity). The remainder
of the paper is divided into the following sections: (i) theory and mechanism, (ii) materials
and methods, (iii) results, (iv) sensitivity analysis, (v) discussion, and (vi) conclusion.

4

Theory and mechanism
Theory
In ethnically hierarchical states, changes in political and social power of subordinate groups
can precipitate inter-group violence. Between group cleavages are especially pronounced in
states which have centralized political power for specific ethnic groups, such as Iraq, Syria,
Russia, and China [19]. Within the aforementioned states, various ethnic groups are prevented from accessing political and social power and tend to be more impoverished than
other groups within the society [25, 26, 27, 28]. In the case of the Syrian Civil War, the rival
rebel, government, and insurgent group can be understood as extensions of in- and out-group
cleavages, particularly religious divisions between Shi’a and Sunni Muslims.
Over the course of the Islamic State’s military campaigns, they have drawn fighters from
over 60 states, including Chechen, Turkmen, and Uyghur recruits. These recruits are notable because they associated with oppressed Sunni Muslim populations within their states.
Conversely, anti-Islamic State military forces primarily draw recruits from Shi’a Muslim populations; particularly Iranian volunteers. After the Islamic State captured several regions of
Iraq, Iran intervened on behalf of the Iraqi government using the People’s Mobilization Committee (PMC) as a proxy organization to fight in Iraq and Syria. The PMC is an umbrella
organization composed of over 60 Shi’a groups, with three distinct factions: (i) groups loyal
to Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran’s supreme leader; (ii) groups loyal to Muqtada al-Sadr, an
Iraqi Shi’a religious leader; and (iii) groups loyal to Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, an Iraqi
Shi’a religious scholar [29]. Both the Sunni combatants for the Islamic State and Shi’a combatants for the PMC are mobilized by regional changes in their respective in-group rankings;
particularly, recent gains in political power by Shi’a Muslims within the Iraqi government
and Sunni Muslims in several north African states [19].
In addition to the recruitment populations, several political and religious leaders have
framed the Syrian Civil War as competition between Sunni and Shi’a Muslims. Most notably,

5

Egyptian Cleric Qaradawi called on all able bodied Sunni Muslims to join the Islamic State’s
military campaign in Syria [30]. In addition to Qaradawi’s comments, political leaders have
also warned that conflicts in the Middle East could produce asymmetric political power between Sunni and Shi’a states. In 2005, Jordanian King Abdullah II bin Al Hussein warned
the Iraq War may produce an Iran-Iraq alliance which would shift the balance toward Shi’a
states in the Middle East [31]. These religious appeals are consistent with a group ranking
based understanding of ethnic violence [19].
The Islamic State also directly invokes out-group animus to generate support for the war
and mobilize new fighters. In a May 2015 issue of the Islamic State propaganda magazine,
Dabiq, they describe the military campaign as a fight between Sunni and Shi’a regional
interests.
The West and its allies have, once again, been caught completely by surprise as
they now find themselves fighting not just one enemy in Iraq and Sham, but now
an international army of mujahidin numbering hundreds of thousands in different
countries, whole continents apart. It’s taken the coalition the best part of a year
to put together a campaign against the Islamic State that is only now seeing a
Shi’a mob supported by coalition aircraft make moves against Tikrit, but that’s
old news before it’s even begun. Why focus on Tikrit when the Middle East,
Africa, and Asia are now on fire [32]?
Across 28 issues of the Islamic State’s propaganda magazines, approximately 10 percent of
all the content was related to religion. Conversely, the magazine rarely discussed economic
issues, with less than 1 percent of magazine content about poverty, money, income, or government wealth (see Fig 3 for the word counts in the magazine). This is particularly notable
because between 2014 to 2015 the Islamic State was generating $81 million in monthly revenue through natural resource wealth and taxes [33].

6

Figure 3: The most frequently used words in Dabiq and Rumiyah Islamic State
magazines.

7

Mechanism
To test the relationship between group ranking (e.g. group grievances) on mobilization we
analyze both individual and environmental causes for mobilization. For the individual analysis, we compare the mean years of education for Islamic State fighters against the male
populations of their home countries using one-sample t-tests. Better educated individuals
are more aware of regional and global events which affect their relative group ranking. Further, the opportunity cost of joining a rebel movement is higher for educated individuals
because it is easier for them to find different or more lucrative employment. Thus, if Islamic
State combatants are motivated by group grievances, we would expect for fighters to be
better educated compared to males in their home country.
Our primary mechanism for mobilization at the 0.5 geospatial level is the group exclusion variable. The group exclusion variable indicates if there is an ethnic group within a
geospatial area blocked from political power, or discriminated against by dominant ethnic
groups within the region between 2009 to 2013. The group exclusion mechanism is a close
approximation of group ranking grievances because it captures in- and out-group tension.
In addition to the group grievance analyses, we also test the effect of economic incentives
on mobilization. First, we compare the unemployment rate of Islamic State combatants
against the proportion of males unemployed in their home states using one-sample z-tests.
If Islamic State combatants are mobilized because of high unemployment (as previous research has suggested), we would expect for the Islamic State fighters to have higher rates of
unemployment than males in their home country [9]. Second, we test the effect of nighttime
lights and the national unemployment rate on Islamic State combatant mobilization at the
0.5 geospatial level. The use of nighttime light data as a measure for economic activity is
well established in existing literature, with higher levels of nighttime lights associated with
greater economic activity [34, 35, 36]. Thus, if Islamic State recruits are mobilized by economic incentives, we would expect for higher levels of nighttime lights to reduce the rate of
volunteers, while, higher rates of unemployment to increase mobilization at the subnational
8

level.

Materials and methods
The data was provided to the research team by a journalist who writes on the Islamic State.
Before the analysis, the research team worked with their university institutional review
board to address issues related to the combatants’ privacy. To help ensure the protection
and privacy of the combatants’ information, the applications were anonymized with each
combatant given a code number instead of their name and all team members completing
appropriate ethics training to work on the project. A team of Arabic coders translated and
coded the Islamic State job application data, with each team member validating a subset
of the other translators’ work. For the analysis, we are primarily interested in the level
of education, previous occupation, home city and state, and date of birth entries listed in
the Islamic State job applications. Of the 4,101 applications, 21 percent of applications
are missing the educational attainment, 11 percent of applications are missing the previous
occupation, 8 percent of applications are missing the home cities of the foreign fighters, and
2 percent of applications are missing the date of birth. Fig 4 displays the count of volunteers
by previous occupation and education by region.

Education
The open response entries on the Islamic State job application for level of education were
recoded to: (i) middle school or less, (ii) some high school, (iii) high school degree, (iv) some
college, (v) college degree of greater, and (vi) vocational and religious training. To estimate
the mean years of education for Islamic State foreign fighters, we coded middle school or less
as 8 years of education, some high school as 10 years of education, high school as 12 years
of education, some college as 14 years of education, college degree of greater as 16 years of
education, and vocational and religious training as 12 years of education. We then performed

9

Figure 4: Counts of previous occupations and education levels of Islamic State
combatants by region. In total, 65 percent of volunteers had a blue collar occupation,
18 percent were students, 8 percent had a white collar occupation, and 7 percent were
unemployed before joining the Islamic State.
one-sample t-tests for each country where there are 20 or more Islamic State foreign fighters
against the Human Development Index estimates for mean years of education for males per
country averaged over 2010 to 2012 [37]. Our hypothesis follows:

H0 : x̄i = µi
H1 : x̄i 6= µi

where µi is the mean years of education for males by country and x̄i is the mean years of
education for Islamic State fighters by country. In total, there are 24 states with over 20
volunteers. To adjust for multiple comparisons, we use a Bonferroni correction so the experimentwise error rate is 0.05.

10

Unemployment
The open response entries on the Islamic State job application for previous employment
were recoded to: (i) student, (ii) blue collar occupation, (iii) white collar occupation, (iv)
Jihadist, (v) previously incarcerated or black market profession, (vi) military, (vii) religionoriented work, and (viii) unemployed. The proportion of unemployed Islamic State fighters
was determined by adding the number of volunteers who identified as Jihadist, previously
incarcerated or black market profession, and unemployed divided by all volunteers minus
the students. To evaluate the difference in proportion unemployed, we use one-sample ztests for the proportion of unemployed Islamic State combatants against the proportion of
unemployed males in their home country for all states which had 20 or more volunteers [38].
Our hypothesis follows:

H0 : p̄i = πi
H1 : p̄i 6= πi

where πi is the proportion of unemployed males by country and pi is the proportion of unemployed Islamic State combatants by state. We use a Bonferroni correction to adjust for
multiple comparisons so the experimentwise error rate is 0.05.

Group exclusion
For the subnational analysis, the home cities of Islamic State volunteers were aggregated
to the 0.5 geospatial region (approximately 50 by 50 kilometers). All geospatial regions
within a country are included in the analysis if there was at least one volunteer from the
country. In total, 46,805 geospatial regions are included from 64 countries. Only 2 percent
of the geospatial regions within the data have one or more fighters during the time period.
Further, the count of Islamic State combatants from a region is highly overdispersed (see Fig
11

5). We address the overdispersed count outcome in two ways. First, we use a zero-inflated
negative binomial model (ZINB). The ZINB model is useful because it models both the count
process and zero stage of the data generating process. Namely, our data has both structural
and sampling zeros. For example, there are several culturally distinct and underpopulated
regions, such as rural regions of North Dakota in United States, within the data. These
underpopulated and culturally distinct regions are structural zeroes in that they will only
produce zeros in the model. Conversely, there are regions within the data that experience
sampling zeros in the count stage of model. These regions could have produced Islamic State
foreign fighters but have a zero outcome. In the first stage of our model, we predict which
regions produce Islamic State recruits. In the second stage of the model, we measure what
increases the rate of Islamic State recruits within the region. The model follows:

P (yi = j)




πi + (1 − πj )g(yi = 0), if j = 0


(1 − πi )g(yi ),

if j > 0

with πi representing a logistic function and g(yi ) representing the negative binomial distribution. Second, for our main model we bootstrap the outcome. This helps address statistical
inference issues related to outlier counts in the observed data.
To better estimate the treatment effect of group exclusion on mobilization, in the first
model we control for the log of population and nighttime lights in the first (i.e. logistic
model) and second (negative binominal) stages of the model. We also include country fixed
effects in the second stage of the model. In the second model, we use the same control
variables and mechanism, but cluster the data by geospatial site in the second stage of the
model. In the last model, we use the unemployment rate of males in the first stage of the
model instead of nighttime lights as a measure for economic activity within a geospatial
region.

12

Figure 5: Cumulative distributions for the count of Islamic State recruits by
geospatial region. The count of fighters is highly overdispersed, but not scale free.

Results
Education
Fig 6a displays the confidence intervals for the difference in mean years of education adjusted
for multiple comparisons. Islamic State foreign fighters from 18 out of the 24 countries in
the analysis have higher mean years of education than the male population of their home
countries. This is consistent with a group ranking understanding of combatant mobilization.

Unemployment
Figure 6b displays the confidence intervals for the differences in proportion unemployed for
Islamic State fighters compared to males in their home countries. Foreign fighters from 8 out
of 23 countries have lower proportions of unemployment, with 14 out of the 15 remaining
states having a confidence interval which overlaps zero. For each country comparison the
probability of a type one error is approximately 0.002. Thus, the probability that we would
randomly observe that Islamic State recruits from eight states having a lower proportion
of unemployment compared to their home countries is >0.001. This suggests that overall,
Islamic State foreign fighters had lower rates of unemployment before joining the Islamic
13

Figure 6: The t-test confidence intervals for difference in mean years and z-test
confidence intervals for difference in proportion unemployed. The mean years of education for Islamic State fighters is compared to the Human Development Index estimations
for mean years of education for males in their home countries. The proportion of unemployed Islamic State fighters is compared to World Bank estimates for unemployed males in
a country. The experiment is adjusted for multiple comparisons so both experiments have a
0.05 error rate.
State compared to males in their home countries.

Group exclusion
Table 1 displays the ZINB regression on the count of Islamic State recruits from a geospatial
region. Notably, across all three models we find evidence that Islamic State combatants are
mobilized by group ranking grievances, compared to material incentives. In all models, the
group exclusion mechanism is statistically significant and positive. Further, all bootstrap
estimates for the group exclusion variable in the first model are positive, with group exclusion
increasing the count rate of Islamic State recruits by an estimated 6.90 times (see Fig 7a).
This suggests that group ranking grievances increases the count of Islamic State recruits
from a geospatial region.
Fig 7b displays the nighttime lights estimates for the first and second stage of the

14

Table 1: Bootstrapped and MLE estimates for the effect of group exclusion on mobilization.
Group exclusion and nighttime lights are statistically significant and positive in the count
stages of all three models.

Second stage

Bootstrap estimates
ZINB

Count of Islamic State combatants
Maximum likelihood
Maximum likelihood
ZINB
ZINB

Group exclusion

1.932
(0.364)

1.975
(0.180)

0.598
(0.169)

Nighttime lights

0.448
(0.065)

0.440
(0.050)

0.460
(0.056)

log(population)

1.371
(0.472)

1.359
(0.254)

1.693
(0.284)

Constant

−5.156
(3.479)

−4.382
(0.980)

6.897
(0.714)

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Country fixed effects
cluster(gid)
First stage
Nighttime lights

−5.663
(1.435)

−5.680
(0.597)

log(population)

−0.888
(0.554)

−0.854
(0.361)

−0.143
(0.077)

Unemployment rate

Constant

Observations
RMSE
Simulations

−3.248
(0.280)

−1.774
(0.775)

−1.763
(0.405)

3.915
(0.320)

46,805
3.953
2,500

46,805
2.698

42,436
5.467

Note: Bolded values are statistically significant at 0.05 level and standard errors are in parentheses.

15

Figure 7: Bootstrap coefficient estimates for the group exclusion mechanism and
nighttime lights. All second stage estimates for group exclusion and nighttime lights are
statistically significant and positive. This suggests that the presence of excluded group and
greater economic activity increases the rate of Islamic State fighters from a region. Likewise,
the first stage estimates of nighttime lights suggest that areas with higher economic activity
are more likely to produce fighters.
bootstrapped ZINB model. In the second stage of the model, nighttime lights is statistically
significant and positive, while statistically significant and negative in the first stage of the
model. This suggests that increases in the level of nighttime lights increases the count rate of
Islamic State recruits from a geospatial region by 1.565 times and makes it more likely that
a spatial region will produce recruits by 0.003. This finding is supported by the first stage
estimate of nighttime lights in the second and third model, and the second stage estimate of
nighttime lights in the second model [39]. Last, in the third model, we find that in the first
stage of the model, the effect of the unemployment rate of males within a country is negative,
but not statistically significant at the 0.05 level [40]. Thus, higher rates of unemployment
have an indeterminate effect on Islamic State combatant mobilization.
In total, these findings support a group grievance based understanding of combatant
mobilization. Specifically, in the first and second model the effect size of group exclusion
on the rate of combatant mobilization is larger than both nighttime lights and the log of

16

population. Moreover, better economic conditions appear to increase the rate of volunteers
from a region, while the effect of higher unemployment in the first stage of the model is
null. These findings are supported by the individual level education and unemployment
tests, which found that combatants were better educated and had lower, or similar, rates of
unemployment to males from their home countries before joining the Islamic State.

Sensitivity Analysis
To validate the model results, we performed a series of sensitivity analyses, including: (i)
t-tests on the mean years of education conditioned on age, (ii) z-test on the proportion of unemployed Islamic State fighters conditioned on age, and (iii) conduct difference in mean and
mean rank tests on the count of Islamic State recruits on matched geospatial data [41, 38].
For the mean years of education sensitivity analyses, we subset the Islamic State combatants
by those who are 15 and 25 years older. We then conduct one-sample t-tests for the combatant mean years of education against males from their home countries in those age ranges
for every state that had at least 20 recruits. For the unemployment proportion sensitivity
analysis, we subset the number of Islamic State combatants to volunteers between the ages
of 15 and 25 and then compare the proportion of unemployed fighters to the proportion of
unemployed males in their home countries in the same age range for every state with 20
or more volunteers. Last, we match the geospatial data on the group exclusion mechanism
using the polity of the state, rate of unemployed males, political stability, religious cleavages
within the state, nighttime lights, the log of population, number of terrorist fighters from
the region, and country fixed effects [42, 40, 43, 39, 12]. We then run a t-test and a Wilcoxon
rank sum test to evaluate difference in the count of Islamic State recruits from regions with
and without excluded groups. The Wilcoxon rank test is a non-parametric test for differences between groups, which helps address potential issues with non-normal data generating
processes.

17

Figure 8: Sensitivity analysis for the mean years of education for Islamic State
fighters against their home countries conditioned on age. Islamic State fighters
form most states have higher mean years of education conditioned on age. All states were
included in the experiment if there were 20 or more Islamic State recruits within that age
range from a state. The confidence intervals are adjusted for multiple comparisons, so the
experimentwise error rate is 0.05.

Education
Fig 8 displays the confidence intervals for the one-sample t-tests for the mean years of
education for Islamic State combatants 15 years and older and 25 years and older compared
to males in the same age group from their home countries. For the first experiment, we
removed all Islamic State combatants who were younger than 15 and estimated the difference
in mean years. We find that Islamic State foreign fighters who are 15 years and older from
all states have higher mean years of education compared to their respective home countries;
except for Germany, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan, which have confidence intervals overlapping
zero. Similarly, when the Islamic State data is subset so that it only includes volunteers that
are 25 years and older and compared to the mean years of education for their home countries,
all states have higher mean years of education except for Germany, which has a confidence
interval overlapping zero.

18

Figure 9: Sensitivity analysis for the proportion of Islamic State fighters unemployed against their home countries conditioned on age. All states have a confidence
interval below or overlapping zero, which suggests that the proportion of Islamic State volunteers is lower than the male populations in their home countries conditioned on age. All
states were included in the experiment if there were 20 or more Islamic State recruits within
that age range from a state. The confidence intervals are adjusted for multiple comparisons,
so the experimentwise error rate is 0.05.

Unemployment
Fig 9 displays the confidence intervals for difference in proportion of unemployed Islamic
State combatants between 15 and 25 years compared to males in that age range from their
home countries. Seven out of the thirteen states have confidence intervals that are less than
zero, which suggests the rate of unemployment for Islamic State fighters is lower than the
male population between 15 and 24 in those states.

19

Figure 10: Sensitivity analysis for the difference in mean and mean rank counts
of Islamic State fighters.

Group exclusion
Fig 10 displays the log-log plot for the count of Islamic State recruits from the sites for
the matched geospatial data. We use two statistical tests to identify the treatment effect
of group exclusion on combatant mobilization: (i) t-test for difference in mean number of
recruits, and (ii) Wilcoxon rank sum test for a difference in the mean rank of recruits. In
both models, we find that regions with excluded group have a higher mean and mean ranks
of recruits at the 0.05 level.

Discussion
This analysis has important implications for United States and its allies’ counterterrorism
policies. Although the Islamic State is in the process of being pushed out of parts of Iraq and
Syria, new organizations will likely replace it, and the region will continue to have rebel and
terrorist problems. This paper provides a framework through which better counterterrorism

20

policies can be crafted. Specifically, contrary to previous research, counterterrorism policies
which seek to increase the economic opportunity of potential volunteers may be ineffective.
Instead, counterterrorism policies should encourage states to integrate marginalized groups
into their respective state’s political systems and social communities.

Conclusion
This paper offers three contributions to research on terrorist recruitment and combatant
mobilization. First, it offers a novel subnational analysis of Islamic State volunteers across
countries. Second, it provides evidence that group rankings (i.e. group grievance) is the
primary mechanism for Islamic State foreign fighter mobilization. Particularly, the political
exclusion and social marginalization of populations produces greater group grievances, which
increases the rate of combatant mobilization. And third, Islamic State combatants are
not motivated by material incentives, as previous research has suggested. These findings
are demonstrated through subnational analyses and individual comparisons for the years
of education and proportion of unemployed Islamic State combatants against their home
countries.

Acknowledgments
Thank you to professors Bear Braumoeller, Skyler Cranmer, Brad Holland, and Ore Koren for
their comments on paper drafts. The research was supported by The Ohio State University
Mershon Center.

21

References
[1] Boutin B, Chauzal G, Dorsey J, Jegerings M, Paulussen C, Pohl J, et al. The Foreign
Fighters Phenomenon in the European Union. ICCT Research Paper. 2016; p. 3–4.
[2] Didier B, Guild E. The EU Counter-Terrorism Policy Responses to the Attacks in Paris.
Towards an EU Security and Liberty Agenda. Brussel: CEPS; 2015.
[3] Weinstein JM. Resources and the information problem in rebel recruitment. Journal of
Conflict Resolution. 2005;49(4):598–624.
[4] Fearon JD, Laitin DD. Ethnicity, insurgency, and civil war. American Political Science
Review. 2003;97(1):75–90.
[5] Salehyan I. Transnational rebels: Neighboring states as sanctuary for rebel groups.
World Politics. 2007;59(2):217–242.
[6] Chuluv M. Islamic State document leak could offer up vignettes but not key secrets;
2016. The Gaurdian. Available from: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/
mar/10/isis-document-leak-could-offer-up-vignettes-but-not-key-secrets.
[7] MacAskill E. ISIS document leak reportedly reveals identities of 22,000 recruits; 2016.
The Gaurdian. Available from: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/09/
isis-document-leak-reportedly-reveals-identities-syria-22000-fighters.
[8] Johnston PB, Shapiro JN, Shatz HJ, Bahney B, Jung DF, Ryan PK, et al. Foundations of the Islamic State: management, money, and terror in Iraq, 2005-2010. Rand
Corporation; 2016.
[9] Abdel-Jelil M, Bhatia K, Brockmeyer A, Do QT, Joubert C. Unemployment and violent extremism: Evidence from Daesh foreign recruits. World Bank: Policy Research
Working Paper. 2015;13.

22

[10] Sterman D. The Islamic State’s veterans: Contrasting the cohorts with jihadi experience
in Libya and Afghanistan. West Point: Combating Terrorism Center; June 2018.
[11] bin Khaled Al-Saud A. Saudi foreign fighters: Analysis of leaked Islamic State entry
documents. King’s College London: King Faisal Center for Research and Islamic Studies;
2019.
[12] National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism (START).
Global Terrorism Database [Data file] Retrieved from https://wwwstartumdedu/gtd.
2018;.
[13] Ross ML. What do we know about natural resources and civil war? Journal of Peace
Research. 2004;41(3):337–356.
[14] Collier P, Hoeffler A. On the incidence of civil war in Africa. Journal of Conflict
Resolution. 2002;46(1):13–28.
[15] Collier P, Hoeffler A. Greed and grievance in civil war. Oxford Economic Papers.
2004;56(4):563–595.
[16] Blattman C, Miguel E. Civil war. Journal of Economic literature. 2010;48(1):3–57.
[17] Koren O, Sarbahi AK. State Capacity, insurgency, and civil war: A disaggregated
analysis. International Studies Quarterly. 2018;62(2):274–288.
[18] Vreeland JR. The effect of political regime on civil war: Unpacking anocracy. Journal
of Conflict Resolution. 2008;52(3):401–425.
[19] Horowitz DL. Ethnic groups in conflict, updated edition with a new preface. University
of California Press; 2001.
[20] Berrebi C. Evidence about the link between education, poverty and terrorism among
Palestinians. Peace Economics, Peace Science and Public Policy. 2007;13(1).
23

[21] Bergen P, Pandey S. The madrassa scapegoat. Washington Quarterly. 2006;29(2):115–
125.
[22] Lee A. Who becomes a terrorist? Poverty, education, and the origins of political
violence. World Politics. 2011;63(2):203–245.
[23] Noricks DM.

The root causes of terrorism.

Social Science for Counterterrorism.

2009;74(06-C):11.
[24] Azam JP. Why suicide-terrorists get educated, and what to do about it. Public Choice.
2012;153(3-4):357–373.
[25] Holland M. Chechnya’s internally displaced and the role of Russia’s non-governmental
organizations. Journal of Refugee Studies. 2004;17(3):334–346.
[26] Bou Nassif H. ‘Second-Class’: The Grievances of Sunni officers in the Syrian armed
forces. Journal of Strategic Studies. 2015;38(5):626–649.
[27] Haddad F. Sectarian relations and Sunni identity in post-civil war Iraq. Sectarian
Politics in the Persian gulf. 2014; p. 67–115.
[28] Wu X, Song X. Ethnic stratification amid China’s economic transition: Evidence from
the Xinjiang Uyghur autonomous region. Social Science Research. 2014;44:158–172.
[29] Najjar F. Iraq’s second army:
Al

Jazeera.

Available

from:

Who are they, what do they want?;

2017.

https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2017/10/

iraq-army-171031063012795.html.
[30] Hegghammer T, Zelin AY. How Syria’s civil war became a holy crusade; 2013. Foreign
Affairs. Available from: https://www.google.com/search?q=How+Syria%27s+civil+
war+became+a+holy+crusade&rlz=1C1CHBF_enUS705US705&oq=How+Syria%27s+
civil+war+became+a+holy+crusade&aqs=chrome..69i57j69i65j69i60.794j0j4&
sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8.
24

[31] Middle
the

East

West

Quarterly.

against

from:

Iran,

King
Vol;

Abdullah
2005.

II:

Iraq

Washington

is

the

battleground–

Institute.

Available

https://www.washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/view/

king-abdullah-ii-iraq-is-the-battlegroundthe-west-against-iran.
[32] Spier TE. Extremist propaganda and Qur’anic scripture: A ‘radical’corpus-based study
of the Dabiq. Discourse & Society. 2018;29(5):553–567.
[33] Francis D. Islamic State Revenues Down 80 Percent from 2015; 2017.
eign

Policy.

Available

from:

For-

https://foreignpolicy.com/2017/06/29/

islamic-state-revenues-down-80-percent-from-2015/.
[34] Zhang Q, Seto KC. Mapping urbanization dynamics at regional and global scales using
multi-temporal DMSP/OLS nighttime light data. Remote Sensing of Environment.
2011;115(9):2320–2329.
[35] Chen X, Nordhaus WD. Using luminosity data as a proxy for economic statistics.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. March 2018;108(21):8589–8594.
[36] Doll CN, Muller JP, Morley JG. Mapping regional economic activity from night-time
light satellite imagery. Ecological Economics. 2006;57(1):75–92.
[37] United Nations Development Program. Human development report 2016. 2017;.
[38] Kaufmann D, Kraay A, Mastruzzi M. The worldwide governance indicators: methodology and analytical issues. Hague Journal on the Rule of Law. 2011;3(2):220–246.
[39] Tollefsen AF, Strand H, Buhaug H. PRIO-GRID: A unified spatial data structure.
Journal of Peace Research. 2012;49(2):363–374.
[40] Kaufmann D, Aarat K. The Worldwide Governance Indicators Project. 2019;.
[41] Barro RJ, Lee JW. A new data set of educational attainment in the world, 1950–2010.
Journal of Development Economics. 2013;104:184–198.
25

[42] Marshall MG, Jaggers K, Gurr TR. Polity IV project, political regime characteristics
and transitions, 1800-2017; 2018. Center for Systemic Peace. Available from: https:
//www.systemicpeace.org/polity/polity4x.htm.
[43] Lindberg JE. Running on Faith? A Quantitative Analysis of the Effect of Religious
Cleavages on the Intensity and Duration of Internal Conflicts. Peace Research Institute
of Oslo. 2008;.

26

