"x"
"1" "Making Good News:"
"2" "Institutional Mediation   and  the Quality of Coverage"
"3" "of  the 1960s Civil Rights Movement *"
"4" "Edwin Amenta"
"5" "University of California, Irvine"
"6" "Thomas Alan Elliott"
"7" "Github"
"8" "Nicole Shortt"
"9" "University of California, Irvine"
"10" "Amber C .  Tierney"
"11" "University of Maine"
"12" "Didem  Türkoğlu"
"13" "University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill"
"14" "Burrel Vann Jr."
"15" "San Diego State  University"
"16" "* Forthcoming:  Mobilization  (2019).   This research was supported by an NSF grants  (SES-1023863  and SES- 1657872 )  and a grant from the UCI Jack W. Peltason Center for the Study of Democracy.  We thank Jack Hammond, Alex Hanna, Francesca Polletta, Charles Ragin   anonymous reviewers, and  Mobilization  editor Neal Caren for helpful comments and suggestions on a previous version.  We thank Rachel Ahrens and Harrison Greenspan for research assistance and comments.  Please send correspondence to Edwin Amenta at ea3@uci.edu."
"17" "Making Good News:"
"18" "Institutional Mediation  and the Quality of Coverage of  the 1960s  Civ il Rights Movement"
"19" "When social movement organizations receive extensive newspaper coverage, why is it sometimes substantive ?  S cholars agree that the  news  media are key to movement organizations’ influence,  help ing them  alter public discourse a nd effect political change,  but  often find that protest is covered non-substantively .  Employing insights from   literatures on  historical institutionalism, the social organization of the news, and the consequences of movements,  we elaborate  an  “ institution al  mediation ”  model  that  identifies  the interactive effects  on coverage  of news institutions ’ operating procedures,  movement organizations ’ characteristics and action , and political contexts .   Although  movement actors suffer compound legitimacy deficits  with  journalists , the institution al  mediation  model identifies the openings  news institutions   provide ,   the  movement  organizational characteristics  and collective action  likely to induce substantive  news treatment, and the political contexts that will amplify  or dampen  these effects .  We derive  four  interactive  hypothese s from this model  addressing  organizational identities , collective action, and  politi cal contexts  on news outcomes .  We appraise the hypotheses  with  comparative  and quali tative comparative analyses  of more than 1000  individually coded articles  d iscussing the five most-cov ered organizations of the 1960s  U.S.  civil rights movement across four national  newspapers .  W e find  support for each hypothesi s , and discuss the implications for other movement organizations  and the current  media  context ."
"20" "Micha el Lipsky (1968) argued  th at relatively powerless groups  often  e mploy protest to gain  influence , but also that protest  is a flawed tool . Base d on symbolic displays, p rotest  relies  o n the news media to transmit a   group ’ s demands and issues  to more powerful  third parties; however,  even when  news organizations  cover protest ,   they   often do not  cover it  substantively  ( Gitlin 1980; McCarthy, McPhail and Smith 1996;   McLeod 2007;  Sobieraj 2011;  r eviews in Earl et al. 2004; Ortiz et al. 2005) .   M ovement organizations often  have been newsworthy for significant  periods of time   ( Amenta et al.  2009;  Boydstun 2013;  Seguin 2016), including   recent  actors in  the  Occu py,  Tea Party,  Black Lives Matter , and  alt-right/ white supremacy movements .  B ut only s ometimes  are  movement  organization s  able to  get  substantive coverage, including having  their  demands  and   issues discussed  in  the news (Amenta et al. 2012; Ferree et al. 2002;  Gaby and Caren 2016;  Koopmans 2004;  Roh linger 2007;  Snow  et al.  2007 ).   So  we ask these  questions:  Wh en  movement organizations receive extensive  newspaper coverage,  w hy are they  sometimes able to transmit their dem ands and issues in news stories  and sometimes not?  More generally, under which c onditions can movements  alter institutional  practices  and outcomes that benefit power holders (Pierson and Skocpol 2002; Schneiberg and Lounsbury 2017)?"
"21" "W e  propose an institutional  mediation model that explains when  movement  organizations   will  gain substantive news  coverage , w orking  from literatures on the consequences of movements (Amenta et al. 2010; Uba 2009) and   the  social organization of the news (Gans 1979; Schudson  2011;  McCarthy et al. 1996 ).     As with political mediation models (Amenta 2006; Giugni 2007; King 2008), we see the influence of movement organization and action  on news outcomes as being mediated by institutions .  The first component  of the model  concerns the structure and procedures of news  institutions.   From the  literature on the social organization of the news, we see news  institutions as being  organized in specific ways with rules about what constitutes political news .  These rules  marginal ize  movements , which suffer compounded  legitimacy deficits  in the view of journalists  and  usually  produce non-substantive,  “ protest paradigm ”  coverage (McLeod 2007).     However , news  institutions   also  provide openi ngs for movement organizations  to  break through this paradigm .  The second component concerns the characteristics and actions of movement organizations.  T o the e xtent that movement actors  resemble and act like institutional political actors,  while maintaining their movement form,  we argue,  the more likely they will be able to exploit these openings to  achieve substantive new s  coverage.  They can do so  notably in action that goes beyond protest , including  a ssertiv e political action  and  boycotts  that will r educe   movement organizations ’  legitimacy  deficits   with journalists   and  activate  news processes that will bring substantive treatment.  Less moderate organizations  in goals and strategies  will have better chances of substantive coverage by acting jointly with more moderate ones.   Third, we  argue that favorable political contexts will amplify the influence of legitimacy-increasing action. However, b eing  acted upon or repressed by state authorities   will  aggravate  movement actors’  legitimacy deficits and  forestall  substantive  news  treatment ."
"22" "We  appraise hypotheses generated from the model   using the same case as   Lipsky — the 1960s  U.S. civil rights movement— on  which many theories  of social movements are based (Andrews 2004;  Luders 2011; McAdam 19 82 ; Polletta 2002), Specifically, we analyze  the extensive runs of coverag e of five promin ent organizations:  the  “ Big Four ” —the N ational Association for the A d vancement of Colored People (NAACP) , Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC),  and  Student Nonviolent  Coordinating Committee (SNCC) —and the Black Panther Party (Bloom and Martin 2013; Davenport 2010 ; Seguin 2016 ).   These  five   were by far the  movement’s  high est-profile organizations, accounting  for over 80 percent  of  movement  organization coverage  in this period .  But  t his   coverage  varied  considerably  in terms of substance, across  both  organizations and in articles .  T he Black Panther Party was rarely discussed substantively, whereas the NAACP and SCLC  mostly were , though  even these more moderate  organizations were treated non-substantively in many articles."
"23" "Specifically, we  appraise  the  model  with data from the Political Organizations in the News (PONs) project ,  which encompasses  the complete  coverage of  national U.S.  movement organization s  in  the  most prominent national newspapers: the   New York Times ,   Washington Post ,  Los Angeles Times , and  Wall Street Journal .  This  coverage includes  discussions  of  organizations  when   they  engaged in  contentious  collective action and  when  they did  not .  We  analyze  large-volume  “ runs ”  of  coverage — when   organizations   remained contin uously in the news for a significant  period .  Analyzing  these  runs  allows us  to focus on coverage’s substance  rather  than  its amount .   We employ two  main crit eria of substance:   w hether the article published movement actors’  demands or frames  (Ferree et al. 2002; Snow and Benford 1988)  and   whether the coverage was mainly issue-oriented (Iyengar 1991; Wouters 2015) , addressing , for instance,  c ivil or voting rights .    Each is key in movements’ bids to influence the public sphere (Koopmans 2004).   We  employ comparative and historical  analyses across the organizations  and qualitative comparative analyses (QCA ) on articles.   QCA  is appropriate  as  w e  hypothesize   multi- causal pathways to substantive coverag e   (Ragin 2008; Schneider and Wagemann 2013) .     W e find support for each hypothesis , and discuss the implications  for the current context ."
"24" "INSTITUTIONAL MEDIATION: NEWS INSTITUTIONS,"
"25" "MOVEMENT ORGANIZATION AND ACTION, AND POLITICAL CONTEXTS"
"26" "Scholarship  shows that institutions are difficult to change and ten d to reproduce themselves  and power disparities ,  but also indicates institutional  practices and outcomes can  be altered   to  reduce  these  disparities  ( Pierson  and Skocpol 2002 ;  Schneiberg and Lounsbury 2017 ).    And s ocial movements  frequently  prompt  such  change ,  but  research shows that they  ca n exert influence  only under certain  cond itions ( Amenta et al. 2010;  McAdam and Su 2002; Giugni 2007;  King 2008;  Luders 2010 ) .   Scholars have  analyzed openings  for movement influence  provided by political ins titutions (Amenta  2006; Giugni 2007; McAdam and Su  2002; Soule and Olzak 2004),  corporations ( King 2008; Soule 2009 ) , universities (Arthur 2011; Moore 2009), and increasingly the news media ( Ferree et al. 2002 ;  Roh linger 2007;  Snow , Vliegenthart, and Corrigall-Brown  2007 ).    Often movement  influence comes  through i nnovative action  that addresses the  specific  opening s presented by institutional contexts  (Amenta 2006 ;  Arthur 2011;  King 2008 ).  Yet   each  institution  ha s its own procedures  of   operation and  provide s   different  potential openings .  In short,  the  influence of movement action is institutionally mediated , but  the processes  differ  from institution to institution ."
"27" "N ews  coverage  is  a potent ial cultural consequenc e of movement actors  (Earl 2004) , as they seek  to intervene in pu blic debates, but   decisions about  whether and  what  to report are made   by journalists in news  organizations .   And m ovements   cannot influence political  debates,  powerful  third parties ,   and reference publics  without  substantive  news  coverage, which w e  view   as having two major components.   The first is  whether an article presents an organization’s demand, a central frame element  often  known as a “prescription” (Snow and Benford  1988)  or a “claim” (Tilly 1999),  aimed at a target deemed appropriate to grant concessions. Transmitting demands is  crucial  to contests over meaning and  often  conveys the  movement actor’s orientation toward a  policy issue  ( Amenta et al. 2012;  Ferree et al. 2002; Rohlinger 2007). Even if an article downplays a demand, when published ,  this  frame element “resonates” or is amplified in the public sphere (Koopmans 2004). Second, we examine whether the article is mainly concerned with an issue relevant to a movement organization, which is similar to “thematic” coverage (Iyengar 1991, 2011: 75-76; Wouters 2015) , and associates the organization with an issue ."
"28" "The  institutional mediation model   is designed to explain such  substantive  coverage and  has three main components.   It first addresses the ways news institutions are structur ed and operate, identifying how they  typically cover politics and movements, and thus the  constraints and opportunities they hold for movement influence over coverage .   The second component includes  the movement actor characteristics and action that can  best  capitalize on opportunities  for substantive coverage , or might forestall them .  The third component comprises  political conte xts that amplify or reduce the  influence  of movement action on substantive news coverage ."
"29" "News Institutions  Usually Marginalize Movements, But  Provide Openings for Influence"
"30" "We start with  how news institutions are structured and operate , given that these institutions make the final decisions on what counts as news,  and how they typically address movement actors.   We rely  on  the literature s  regarding  the social organization of the news ( Sigal 1973; Tuchman 1980; Gans 1979;  Schudson 2011) and   how  news media select  collective action  and movement organization s  for coverage (McCarthy et al. 1996; Oliver and Maney 2000; Earl  et al. 2004; Ortiz et al. 2005 ).  T he social organization of  the news (Schudson 2002, 2011) concerns  professional news organizations' form s , practices, and thinking concern ing what counts as valuable  “ news ”  to their audiences . U.S. news  organizations are typically commercial entities connected to political institutions through their professional missions and business models (Schudson 2011)— which center on  report ing  key political action and hold ing  accountable political officials.  E ditors and reporters see  as new sworthy events  that are timely,  with potential impact ,  novel,  close in proximity to readers,  exhibit  conflict, or  include prominent people .   Although journalists  act as gatekeepers (Ferree et  al. 2002), in writing articles journalists  view themselves as objective  referees in coverage,  “ balancing ”  the  two  main sides of debates   ( Gamson and Wolfsfeld ;   Gans  1979; T uchman 1980 ) .  However,   sometimes they also  participate in debates themselves (Hallin 1984) .  They  dec ide  which actors and view s get covered  by way of  conventions regarding  what constitutes  news and how to write specific sorts of articles."
"31" "In  nationally oriented  newspapers,  p olitical coverage dominates the news .  I t centers on the activities of institutional political officials , who exercise legitimate  authority over the polity (Da hl 1971) and make influential policy decisions, doubling their newsworthiness, and typically control political issues and public debates about  them  through the news media   (Benn ett 2007; Fishman 1980; Gamson and  Wolfsfeld  1993; Gans 1979; Oli ver & Maney 2000; Tuchman 1980) .  T he parameters of these debates are usually taken for granted, especially in situations of policy monopoly (Baumgartner and Jones 1993 ) .   If there is contention over an issue,  the two main sides being balanced are usually those of major political parties."
"32" "For parallel reasons , t he news arena is slanted against movement actors (F erree et al. 2002; Hallin 1984) .  Unlik e institutional political officials, movement organization s  are not  elec ted  or certifi ed through political processes, and  thus do not exercise any legitimate political authority in the Weberian sense.   T heir claimed  constituency (McCarthy and Zald  1977) is  usually  far more extensive than their members hip (Skocpol 2003).  Moreover, movement actors   typically  express  views at odds with  the mainstream of current political discourse (Benford and Snow 2000)  and often  engage in behavior outside the bounds of institutional politics (McAdam 1982).  Finally, movement organizations  are usually not politically influential (Giugni 2007),  further reducing the news value of their views .  For all these reasons,  j ournalists  only sometimes  find movement  actor s  newsworthy  and   when they do  often  fa il to cover them substantively  ( Gamson  and Wolfsfeld 1993;  Sobieraj 2011)  and instead often feature them  in crime-related reporting that focuses  on  threats to public order  posed by protest ( Gitlin 1980; Oliver and Maney 2000 ;  Bennett 2007; Sobieraj 201 1) . That journalists typically treat  protest as analogous to crime   is  the  key insight of the protest paradigm   in media studies  (McLeod 2007 ) ."
"33" "However, s ome o penings for movement influence  and substantive coverage  appear in  the news values and routines of media organizations.  These openings  derive  from news institutions’  focus on politics , interest in novelty  and conflict ,  and concern for balanc e .   Movement actors can  exploit these institutional openings to gain substantive coverage.   The second part of the model focuses on movement organizations, their characteristics and lines of action ( Andrews and Caren 2010; Rohlinger 2015 ) that can help to reduce legitimacy deficits, but with a specific concern regarding how these characteristics and actions fit with news values and routines ."
"34" "Movement Characteristics, Action, and Legitimacy Deficits with News Organizations"
"35" "Gaining legitimacy   is a key goal of  organizations  seeking political influence for  groups with little power (McAdam 1982; Skocpol 2003) , and  we argue that  movement  actors need to reduce the ir  compounded  legitimacy deficits  with  journalists  to gain substantive  treatment .  They can do so by way of forms and actions that will play on openings in news institutions provided by news rules and values , and that  often depends on  movement actors  mimick ing institutional political  actors ,  seeking to preempt their functions , or targeting other  actors that are less legitimate than elected officials .   M ovement  organization s take different forms and engage in a wide variety of political actions  beyond protest .  T he substance in their coverage will depend  importantly  on  how well  the ir   forms and  action s   fit  with the organizational forms and practices of news institutions , as we outline below ."
"36" "W e  argue  first  that the more closely  movement actors resemble institutional political actors  in form , the more likely they are to be covered substantively  ( Andrews and Caren 2010; Elliott, Amenta,  and Caren 2016; Rohlinger, Kail, Taylor, and Conn  2012) .  D evising c ollective action profiles that involve close engagement with institutiona l poli tics  notably  helps reduce  legitimacy  deficits  with journalists, and  e ngagement with  poli tical processes, ranging from  school board elections  to  ru nning candidates for  office ,  signals  po litical seriousness .  In addition,   s cholars have found that ideologies, frames, and strategic profiles that resonate with social norms are more appealing to the news media  (Benford and Snow 2000) .  In contrast,  espousing goals outside of mainstream values or violent tactics will marginalize an  organization   (Gamson and Wolfsfeld 1993; Lipsky 1968) . Therefore ,  movement organizations with  commitments to the political process, moderate ideologies,  and nonviolence will have better chances at  substantive coverage  and fit better into news routines concerning politics . Moreover ,  extensive  membership (Skocpol 2003) and  organizatio nal resourc es (McCarthy and Zald  1977 ), such as   a  large bu dget,  formal org anization,  national office, and me dia department, increase   the possibilities  of substantive  coverage (Andrews and Caren 2010; Elliott et al. 2016;  Rohlinger et al. 2012 ; Staggenborg 1988 ). T hese characteristics  reduce the  legitimacy deficits  of these organizations as political actors ."
"37" "But even these organizations will have  to engage in  specific types of  action consistently to gain substantive coverage, mainly  through engaging the political process  directly  or employing sanctions that go beyond symbolic protest , or both  (Amenta et al. 2012; Luders 2010) .    One prominent type of  such  action is  assertive  political action ,   which is  d eemed the most  politically  i nfluential  for movement organizations  according to  the  political media tion model  (Amenta 2006 ) .  Assertive action directly  engages politics by  contest ing  the prerogatives of  institutional political actor s ,  typ ically  policymaking ,   and employing  sanctions  to do so .    It  includes the fight for passage of movement-sponsored legislation and initiatives  (Martin 2008),  electioneering , such as r unning candidates for office or  seeking to defeat  political  enemi es  and support friends ,  mass political meetings  and conventions  t o devise policy   (Amenta 2006) ,  law-challenging   litigation  (McCammon and McGrath 2015) , and  direct actio ns that test  the enforcement of  law s  (Piven and Cloward 1977) .  A ssertive collective action is typically institutional,  but  most institutional collective action  is too mild to qualify as  asse rtive . For example, l etter   writing, petitioning,  and  behind-the-scenes  lobbying  are   not assertive  (Sampson et al. 2005) , as they do not typically challenge  or sanction  institutional actors .  We argue that  the coverage  of  a ssertive  action   w ill  usual ly  treat  movement actors as  a legitimate and relevant side of an issue , as it directly  and seriously  engages politics .  It is diff icult for journalists to  a void discussing a movement organization ’s demands  or issues  in articles about  their  legislation ,  litig ation,  candidates ,  endorsement s, or   conventions ."
"38" "A second  likely  route   to substantive coverage  through movement action  involves   boycotts  and strikes .  Lik e assertive action  and unlike protest , as Lipsky (1968) notes ,   boycotts  and strikes  involve applying sanctions  directly,  though  often to non-political targets  ( King  2008;  Luders 2011 ) .  Such action plays on the  balancing norms of journalism  (Schudson 2011 ) ,  as  the grievances and demands  of movement  organizations   ar e almost always  going to constitute  a side   of the story  in such action.  Also, i n such disputes, the movement organization's opponents are unlikely to be  top state official s, which reduces the legitimacy defic its .    In addition, businesses  may be more vulnerable to  boycotts  due to potential losses  of income  (Luders 2011)   or  reputation  (King 2011 ) ."
"39" "Third, we  argue that non- disruptive  public relations , informational,  or community- relations  action ,  such as press conferences , meetings with officials,  or teach-ins ,  will be tre ated substantively —when they are covered .     These sorts of activities mimic activities of institutional political actors ,  who often seek to transmit messages through the n ews in this manner (Cook 1998) .     However, we suspect  these actions will be covered   only rarely  and  this  ma y depend on  the organization’s status as  being  newsworthy  (Seguin 2016) ."
"40" "Because less moderate  movement  organizations face greater legitimacy deficits,  however,  even these  legitimacy-increasing  actions may not be enough to  produce substantive coverage.  W e argue  that collective action  will have a better chance to produce substantive articles  for non-moderate organizations  when  other s , including  larger and  more moderate organization s ,  also engage  in it, following r esearch finding  that  protest  is   more  likely to be covered whe n  larger organization s  are   involved ( Earl et al. 2004; Ortiz et al. 2005 ) .  These organizations  will t ypically increase the  legitimacy of the action  and will improve the chances for substantive coverage  for all  organizations involved .   As for protest proper,  because it is largely symbolic  and involves no real sanctions (Lipsky 1968), we do not expect that it will improves chances for substantive coverage.   However,  it similarly may be most productive of substantive coverage when undertaken by moderate organizations or, when not, through joint action ."
"41" "However ,  we argue that  some types of coverage  will increase legitimacy deficits and  lead to non-substantive coverage.   Specifically , w e expect no substance in articles in which  movement  organizations or members  are  being  acted upon .  These  sorts of  articles are  typically  initiated by state sanctions on movement actors  and  often involve  coe rcive and overt repression ( Earl 2011 ) .   When major s ocial movement  organizations and  actors  are the target of legislative investigations or trials, they will  often  appear  extensively  in the news .  Organizations  such as  the Ku  Klux Klan (Cunningham 2 013)  and  the Townse nd Plan (Amenta 2006) have  been subject ed  to c ongressional investigation,  and  many movement  organizations and  actors have  suffered repression, direct and indirect   ( Earl 2011 ) ,  and sometimes commit  crimes .  For all these reasons, we argue that a ccounts of  state repression ,  trials, arrests, and investigations   will  place movement actors on the defensive and  discussions of  the  charges against them   wi ll prevent substantive coverage ."
"42" "How Political Contexts Influence Relationships Between Movements and the News"
"43" "Final ly, we argue that  political contexts  will influence the relationships  between  movement  organizations and  their  action and   the news .  One of the key insights of political mediation models (Amenta 2006; Giugni 2007; King 2008) is that favorable political contexts will augment the  political  influence of the collective action  of movement organizations.  Following these leads, we argue that such contexts will also amp lify the influence of legitimacy-increasing  collective action  of movement organization  on the ir  substantive co verage by news organizations .  Political contexts are processed by news organizations,  and during times when a party backing a movement is in control , journalists  will be alert  to the possibility of movement- influenced  political change .  That is turn will enhance the news benefits of political action by movement organizations .   There is some support for this  claim  in the literature, as Amenta et al. (2012) found that the Townsend Plan  consistently  received demands in coverage when engaged in assertive action during favorable political contexts."
"44" "Work ing from  the institutional mediation model , we provide a seri es of hypotheses regarding  substantive coverage .  Because movement organizations face legitimacy deficits with news organization s, most of the hypotheses  concern how these organizations can reduce these deficits ,  by  play ing  to openings provided by news institutions , and therebvy gaining substantive coverage, though political influence is also addressed .     The hypotheses are interactive and indicate multiple routes to consistent substantive coverage."
"45" "Hypothesis 1 :   M oderate , politically engaged, and  better-resourced  organization s will have better chances  at substantive coverage .  B ut  they  will also  typically  need to engage in  hypothesized  political   legitimacy-increasing  action , including  assertive political action,  boycott s ,   or  public relations , to gain that sort of coverage  consistently .   These actions play to news institutions interest in politics or activate balance norms, or both."
"46" "H ypothesis 2 :  Le ss moderate groups  will have  a more difficult time to gain substantive coverage and will need to engage  in  both  legitimacy-increasing  action  and  in   joint action  with other movement organizations  to gain substantive coverage consistently."
"47" "Hypothesis 3 :  A rticles in which movement organization s are  being   acted upon  will almost always produce  a story without substance  because news organizations will treat movement  actors as being part of crime rather than political stories .    This implies that n ot being acted on is a necessary condition for substantive  coverage."
"48" "Hypothesis 4:   Favorable p artisan p olitical contexts  will amplify the influence of  movement organizations’ legitimacy-increasing action on substantive coverage, because news organizations will be more alert to the possibility of political and policy change backed by movements ."
"49" "DATA AND METHODS"
"50" "To ass ess the  institutional mediation  theory and  the four  hypotheses , we examine the  newspaper  coverage of U.S.  movement organization s  from the Political Organizations in the News (PONs) project, which includes  articles in the  New York  Times ,  Washington Post ,  Los Angeles Times , and  Wall Street Journal .    There are  approximately 1500  qualifying movement organizations ,  with   approximately one million article mentions across the newspapers .  Here  we  seek not to  measure  some other underlying phenomenon ,  such as  contentious  collective action  ( reviews in Earl et al. 2004; Ortiz et al. 2005) ,   but directly focus  on discourse s urrounding  movement organizations  that appear  in  the news ,  and have a complete population of these data .   We focus on   large “runs” of  newspaper  coverage , and a n organization  is credited with one  when it i s covered with no more than four  days between mentions  and  with a volume of coverage —total article mentions— greater than or  equal to 180, or  about half a year  of daily attention.  Altogether , 322 runs of coverage across  the  four newsp apers were identified ."
"51" "We  strategically selected  six runs of   the  five  most-covered  civil rights  organizations  in the 1960s  and examine  the ir   front- page coverage in  the four newspapers ,  for several reasons .  The NAACP, Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), and Black Panther  Party  we re each extensively covered.    (For capsule histories, see online a ppendix A.)  It aids comparability that they were from the same movement  at  around the same time.   Moreover, f rom 1960 through 1970, the five organizations  were the only ones in the movement that received runs  of coverage  and  accounted for 82 percent  of this movement’s organizational coverage .  F ocus ing  on these runs  partly  control s   for the amount of coverage   each organization gained  and helps us address  why movement  organization s that receive extensive coverage only sometimes receive substantive coverage , which is our focus.   Simply randomly sampling all civil rights organizations w ould include many that did  r eceive d  little  coverage and  thus  would not provide leverage on  our question or   on   other organizations that were extensively covered.    Although t he 1960s  constitutes  a relatively brief period,  during it political contex ts varied dramatically.  They  became increasingly   Democratic dominated by  the mid dle of the decade, before bringing  reduced Democratic maj orities  in Congress  and  then  a Republican  Whit e House at the end .   Because the NAACP appeared  in  three runs that almost entirely span the 1960s, we examine all its front-page coverage from  its  middle 1960s  run  and sample its front-page coverage for the rest of the decade , making  it possible  to appraise   the influence of  political  contexts , as  in H ypothesis 4 .  SCLC  and SNCC  had  two  runs  each ,  and  we examine the first of each .  Although  CORE  had  four runs ,  the first two , beginning in 1963,  and the second two , beginning in 1966,  were  separated only by  a few  weeks . We  combine   the first two into an early 1960s run and the second two into a later  1960s run; we analyze  each   of these combined runs  because CORE’s ideology and tactical approach changed  between them ,  giving us greater purchase on H ypothesis 2 .   T he Black Panthers had one   run ,  beginning late in the decade,  which we analyze .  (See Table 1.)"
"52" "[Table 1 about here.]"
"53" "O ur analyses are of  substantive coverage in  national newspapers ,  given their greater influence (review in Earl et al. 2004),  rather than  local or partisan newspapers (Davenport 2010; Rohlinger et al. 2012) .   The analyses  are based  on detailed  coding of  all front-page articles  mentioning these organizations  during  the ir  runs  in all four newspapers .  We dropped articles that were not significantly about  the organization,  inaccurately  mentioned it , or were fewer than five paragraphs , yield ing  1112   front-page  articles .  The  outcome or dependent measure of substantive coverage relies on two aspects of its quality: whether the article presents an organization’s demand (Snow and Benford 1988; Tilly 1999; Koopmans 2004) and whether the article is mainly concer ned with an issue relevant to the  organization (Iyengar 1991, 2011: 75-76; Wouters 2015) .   To count as mainl y issue-related, most of  the article had to address an issue the  organization considered key  to its mission .    For most of the organizations of the movement, central issues were civil or  voting rights, and   any sort of racial discrimination.  For SNCC after 1966, the issues also included the Vietnam war and African American self-determination. The Black Panther Party  had a  10-point program.  (For details, see online Appendix A.)  Each coder had a list of issues for each organization and t here was almost complete  agreement on the coding  of them  (see below).  If  an  article includes a demand or mainly discusses issues relevant to the organization,  we refer to the coverage as  “ substantive. ”"
"54" "As for potential causal influences, w e first address whether a movement organization was  moderate and  nonviolent  from monographs about them .   (See online  Appendix A . )   Among the ci vil rights organizations, we cod ed the NAACP and SCLC as moderate and  nonviolent  during their runs of coverage , and CORE  as moderate and  nonviolent during its first  run .    SNCC  during its run  and CORE in its second run adopted a more radical ideology and disavowed nonviol ence, though largely remained nonviolent , and code  them  as not moderate  for the QCA , though also examine them as being partly moderate.   Unlike CORE or SNCC, t he Black Panther Party  began without any commitment to non-violence or  a  moderate ideology . W e code  it  as not moderate ."
"55" "We then  identified and  coded several categories of  contentious  movement organizational action , including  assertive political action, boycotts,  public relations,  and protest , including  legal protest and civil disobedience ( for details,  see online Appendix B) .  These  categories  a re mutually exclusive, addressing  the main action , if any,   taken by the  sampled organizations  as described in the article .    Although research indicates that newspapers do not cover most movement collective action, when  coverage occurs it is  broadly accurate in describing  that  action (Earl et al. 2004).    It should be noted that one third of the articles do not include contentious collective action by the organization covered  ( for details  on these articles , see online Appendix  C.)    Also, only about one quarter include protest ,  meaning that most action  is of other types .    We also coded for whether multiple organizations engaged   in joint collective action , which could be any type .    In addition, we  coded whether  movement organization s or state  actors initiated an article , and a rticles init iated by state actors were  coded for whether the organization or its  members were being acted upon. We expect that these articles, mainly involving  trials or investigati ons,  would deflect  substantive  coverage , as indicated in Hypothesis 3 .    We coded  also  for the number of paragraphs in an article .  The authors, with the help of two  students, coded the articles, and the Krippendorf’s alpha was  well  above  .80 for all measures ."
"56" "We engage in  two main   types  of analyses .  F irst, we compare substantive  coverage across  the five  organizations ,  providing a basic appraisa l of  the  hypotheses .  We  then turn to  article-level  qualitative comparative analyses (QCA ), which can address multiple  combinations of causes leading to outcomes  (Ragin 2 008;  Schneider and Wagemann 2013 )  and appraise the four hypotheses directly .   In this we follow  in a tradition of scholars hip   on  the consequences of movements,  using QCA address to  simu ltaneously the influence of  aspects of movements and the contexts in which they contend  ( Amenta et al. 2009;  Amenta et al. 2012 ;  Bartley and Child 2014;  Cress and Snow 2000;  Giugni  and Yamasaki 2009 ;  McAdam and Boudet 2012 ) ."
"57" "COMPARATIVE  ANALYSES"
"58" "In  analyzing  coverage  across the  five  African American  rights  organizations  in the 1960s , we  seek to answer the following  questions .  Did extensive coverage necessarily me an substantive coverage ?   Did  some  organizations receive  more  substantive coverage  than  others ?  Is  substance in coverage  associated with the  ideological and strate gic orientations of the   organizations  or  with the action  they engaged in , as expected by the hypotheses ?"
"59" "[Table 2 about here.]"
"60" "To answer the first question ,  the main civil rights organizations   received fairly extensive  substan tive coverage during their  runs of attention, at l east on the front page.  (See Table 2.)  More than a third  of the coverage in which a movement organization was mentioned  mainly discussed  a relevant  issue and almost a third  carr ied a demand .   All told, slightly more  than  half  of the  front- page coverage  in our analytical sample  scored one on our indicator of substantive coverage, by including   an  extensive  issue discussion or  a demand, or  both .   Se cond ,   some  organizations received far  more substantive coverage  than others .  T he  SCLC   and NAACP are at the  top in terms of demands  with 44   and 43  percent ,  respectively,  far more than  for the  Black Panther Party,  at the bottom with only 6.6  percent .  The disparity  is similar for  attention to the organization’s issues.  (See Table 2.)  T he  SCLC  is the  overall  leader in substantive coverage , with 82  percent of its coverage inclu ding  at least  one of the two forms , followed by  the  NAA CP ,  then  the first and second  CORE runs,  and  SNCC .  T he Black Panthers  trail  with  11 percent ."
"61" "Overall ,  the m ore moderate organizations received more substantive coverage , as Table 2  also  indicates .  M oderate  organizations  receive  substantive coverage  in 64  percent of front-page coverage during their high-profile years,  significantly more than  the organizations  th at started moderate and changed—SNCC and CORE during its second run — average 54.4  percent .  T he Black Panthers, which  began non- moderate, are  far below  at 11 .3  percent."
"62" "[Table 3  about here.]"
"63" "Next, we address the types of action in which organizations were covered .    In Table 3, we divid e the coverage in to three  types of movement action— assertive political action,  boycotts,  and public relations and press conferences, each of which we expect will  be given substantive treatment  when covered , a s per H ypotheses 1 and 2 .   By contrast, w e expect a lack of substance in articles in which movement actors are acted upon,   as per H ypothesis 3.   The final column summarizes substantive coverage. The organizations are arrayed in descending order according to  their  amount of assertive action,  boycotts,  and public relations ,  the mos t reliable sources  of substantive coverage, according to  our arguments .  At the top   of Table 3 is t he NAACP, which was covered in the context of  assertive action about 31   percent of the time .    It has the second most subs tantive coverage .   Next is  CORE’s second run, which has 23  percent of its coverage in the assertive category   and 28 percent of its coverage  in public relations .  We suspect  it offset potential losses to substantive coverage due to  its more radical identity  with a  more  legitimacy-increasing  action profile .  Next is the SCLC, with  12  percent of  its coverage in the  assertive category ,  about  nine  percent in boycotts, and  14 percent in public relations and  the most substantive coverage .  Finally , the Black Panthers had  the least favorable profile of action coverage and the least substantive coverage ."
"64" "QUALITATIVE COMPARATIVE  ANALYSES AND DISCUSSION"
"65" "We turn  to QCA,  which  can  appraise the combinational hypotheses  at  the article level .    W e expect that  Moderate  organizations will have easier routes to  substantive coverage, in that they will not have to engage in joint ac tion , but will typica lly need to engage in one of three types of  legitimacy-increasing actions , as indicated in Hypothesis 1 .    This  measure  scores one for the NAACP, SCLC, the first run of CORE, and zero f or the Black Panther Party, as well as for  SNCC and the second run of CORE.  (For details  and robustness checks , see  online A ppendix B . )     Assertive/Boycott /PR  is a combined measure scoring  one if an article report s mainly on assertive action,  a boycott ,  or  public relations .  We combine them because they are expected to work in causally similar ways and doing so reduces  the number of causal conditions  (Ragin 200 8; Schneider and Wagemann 2013).  E ach  action  component   is expected to  increase legitimacy and in combination with other measures  produce subs tantive coverage.     Joint Action  scores  one for when the article is both about the sampled organization’s action and at least one other movement organization’s action ; the measure  cuts across types of action .  Similarly, non-moderate groups are expected t o be more likely to need  j oint action  to gain substantive coverage through assertive political action, boycotts, or public relations , as specified by Hypothesis 2 .    By contrast  Acted on ,  which scores one for articles in which the organization is acted on,  is  expected to deflect substantive coverage , according to Hypothesis 3 ."
"66" "Here we report the “intermediate”  QCA  results, which solve   for “easy” counterfactuals—counting missing rows as associated or not with the outcome—by using theoretical criteria  (Ragin 2008) .    We  follow standard procedure by identifying  major break s  in the truth tables   close to the  conventional  .80 standard  of consistency ,  to identify positive rows , though  without  ever dropping below .75  (Ragin 2008; Schneider and Wagemann 2013 ) .   (For the truth tables  and  the  breaks in them , see online A ppendix B.)   In our results, we report  consistency ,   which  indicates  the degree to which cases with a given combination of causal conditions constitute a subset of the cases with the outcome , and addresses goodness of fit .  We also report  “c overage , ”  which indicates  the degree of overlap between the cases with the  causal combination and those  with the  outcome, constituting the percent of the  outcome  accounted for  or explained by the combination   (Ragin 2008).   For the initial results, we count rows as present if there are four or more cases in them.   We employ the R package for QCA  (Thiem and Dusa 2014) .   In preliminary r egression analyses, each causal measure  has a significant coefficient in the expected direction (Amenta et al. 2016)."
"67" "[Table 4  about here.]"
"68" "The  four-measure QCA  results  provide two  solution  term s   (or causal routes)  that largely support  Hypotheses 1, 2, and 3 .    Each  solution  term  include s  the measure of Assertive, Boycott, or Public Relations action,   supporting Hypothesis 1,  though this condition is  not strictly speaking necessary   (see online Appendix B) .    The first solution  term also includes  Moderate, covers 44  p ercent of the outcome, and is 83  percent consistent with it.   T his  causal  route  does not require Joint action,  suggesting  that  moderate organizations face  one less hurdle to  gain  substantive coverage , as  anticipated by  Hypothesis 1 .  The second  solution  term includes Joint and covers 18 percent of the outcome at  an 88  percent leve l of  consistency. This  causal route   does not include M oder ate, supporting Hypothesis 2 by  indicating  that  non- Moderate organizations require Joint activity to be fairly assured of substantive coverage .  Each term  i ncludes the absence of Acted On,   providing some  support for  the contention in  Hypothesis 3 that it deflects substantive coverag e, though the absence of this measure  is also not found to be strictly  necessary   (see online Appendix  B ) .   Together the solutions cover 48 percent  of the outcome at a level of 82  percent consistency   (see Table 4 ).  In short, moderate organizations received substantive treatment through  the three  hypothesized  types of action,  and non-moderate organizations  also  had to  act  joint ly  in  order to  be  treated similarly.    T he second solution  term  of course  includes moderate organizations, but they also have the first , individual  causal  route to substantive coverage."
"69" "We next added meas ures of  Protest ,  including  Legal Protest  and  Civil Disobedience .   We  do not consider  protest  as  likely to lead to substantive coverage  as the other forms of action ,  gi ven protest’s  remote connection to institutional politics  and  its  lack of sanctions   ( Lipsky  1968), but speculate above that  protest   may  similarly  produce  substantive coverage when undertaken by mode rate organizations or  through joint action.   Because protest is so prominent in the literature, we explore this possibility  by entering individually  overall protest,  and  then  its components,  legal protest, and civil disobedience .  But o nly the latter  impro ved the explanation (see Table 4 ). The  solution  replicate s  two  of the  solution  term s from the previous QCA, but add s  a third term that involves the simultaneous presence o f Civil Disobedience and Joint ( as well as the absence of Acted On ).  This  causal route  covers about three percent of the positive cases, increasing the  overall coverage to 51 percent , at the same level of  consistency.  This r esult indicates that civil disobedience  produces substance in coverage best during the involvement of multiple organizations,  moderate and  non -moderate  alike .   U nder certain conditions  civil diso bedience   can break through the  protest paradigm  and be treated substantively ."
"70" "[Figures 1 and 2  about here.]"
"71" "The  interactive influence s can be more easily  seen by way of Venn diagrams.   In the  initial  four-measure results, three areas of overlap indicate the combinations of causes that reliably yield substantive coverage: where Assertive/Boycott/PR overlaps with Moderat e and with Joint.  (See Figure 1 .)    Moreover, any intersection of the sets wi th Acted On yields spaces with  no  substantive c overage.  When  we add Ci vil Disobedience  ( while dropping Acted O n  for a clearer picture ) , t he diagram shows that  the intersection between the set of Civil Disobedience  and Joint also yields substantive  coverage consistently, for   moderate a nd not moderate organizations.  (See Figure 2 .)"
"72" "QCA   can  also  examine infl uences that are not symmetrical— that  the determinants of the presence of an outcome will  not necessarily  parallel those regarding  its absence  (Ragin 2008).  Hypothesis 3 expects  Acted On  to be  almost always  disqualifying  to substantive coverage , and this  contention  can  be appraised further through these  absence  analyses .  For the four-measure truth table, t here were  five   rows  with sufficient cases in them  that  consistently   i n cluded no substance .   (See Online Appendix B.)  Reducing them  pro vide s  two solution  term s that cover 41  percent of the outcom e, at the  81   percent l evel of consistency .  One solution includes the simultaneous   absence  of  Moderate ,  Joint  action, and  Assertive/Boycott/Public Relations  action.   T his indicates that the  joint absence of specific action types that tend to promote substance will also routinely  lead to a lack of substance.   The other  includes  simply  the presence of  Acted On , which by itself  constitutes a causal route to a lack of substantive coverage .   This provides additional   support for  Hypothesis 3 ."
"73" "[Table 5  about here.]"
"74" "We next  address  Hypothesis 4 , which holds  that favorable political contexts can amplify the influence of movement actors  and actions on substantive coverage , by analyzing  the  NAACP.  Unlike the other  organizations, it  received extensive press attention  across the entire decade , during a variety of different political contexts.   The QCA relies on  different measures.   We drop Moderate, which does not vary, and Acted On, which only rarely applied to the NAACP.  We enter individually Assertive Action, Boycotts, and Public Relations for a sharper identification of their influences, along with Civil Disobedience.  Each of the four measures are mutually exclusive. We also include the measure Joint.    After running the analyses with these measures, w e  test the hypothesis by adding  the measure  Democratic  dominance,   which  scores one for the period after the election of  the Democrat  Lyndon Johnson in 1964 and when northern Democrats dominated Congress, through  1966 ,  when they suffered major losses in midterm elections .   (See Appendix B.)"
"75" "The  result s largely support Hypothesis 4 .  The  analysis of the NAACP  without  the  Democratic  measure  provides   results  similar to that for  all the organizations, with each  action  measure  appe aring in a  solution term  (see  Table 5 ).   Assertiv e and Boycott appear in  solution  terms individually , whereas Public Relations and Civil Disobedience combine with Joint.  Assertive action by itself accounts 41 percent of the outcome, with the group as a whole covering 55 percent of the outcome as at a 90 percent level of consistency.  Adding Democ ratic improves the coverage to 65  percent, at a similar,   88 percent , level of consistency.  The  presence  of the Democratic measure  appears in two solution  term s,  combining with Public Relations  and Joint Action.  (The results are similar  when the Democratic measure is calibrated as a fuzzy set — see online A ppendix B .)    Though limited  to one organization , the results suggest that during highly favorable regimes , additional  causal  routes to  substantive coverage   appear ."
"76" "All in all, t he QCA pr ovides  key  support for  each of  the four hypotheses.  For moderate organizations,  hypothesized  legitimacy-increasing action  through political engagement and/or sanctions  led to substantive coverage, supporting Hypothesis 1.  For non-moderate organizations, the only consistent path to substantive coverage was  through joint action in the context of  legitimacy-increasing action, supporting Hypothesis 2.   The absence of being acted on appears in all solutions for substantive coverage , and  for  the  absence of substantive coverage being  acted on  is a sufficient condition .  Both results lend  support to Hypothesis 3.   Finally, although our appraisal  of Hypothesis 4 is limited to one moderate organization, a D emocratic-dominated regime amplified  the influence  on substantive coverage  of two   t ype s  of  legitimacy-increasing action."
"77" "DISCUSSION AND  CONCLUSION"
"78" "Movement actors seek to transform political debates through the news, but  even the most covered organizations only sometimes are able to gain  substantive coverage, airing their demands and issues (Amenta et al. 2012; Ferree et al. 2002; Gaby and Caren 2016; Koopmans 2004;  Roh linger 2007;  Snow  et al.  2007 ).   Our institutional mediation model seeks to explain  when they receive  substantive coverage.  It starts with the institutional features of the news media, which make all coverage decisions, in interaction with movement characteristics and  collective  action, and the political contexts in which they act.   I nstitutional  features of the news media  make journalists  routinely deflect t he views   of movement organizations .  M ovement actors   suffer compounded  political  legitimacy deficits , as they  are  not  elected through state political processes,  have views th at tend to diverge from  those of  the  main parties,  and often  engage in non-institutional action .  Also, they   are not routine ly influenti al in politics. However, we also identify aspects of   the standard practices of  news institutions,  including  their concerns with  politics, novelty and conflict, and balance,  which   provide openings for movement actors  to influence the substance of the news ."
"79" "We  argue that movement organizations can become more  legitimate political actors  in the eyes of journalists   through organizational  characteristics .     Organizations more moderate  in  ideologies, claims, and action profiles  will have greater chances at substantive coverage when in the news.  Moreover, s ome  types of action  play well into  news rou tines  and will lead to movement actors being treated as a legitimate side of story , when covered .    These types include  assertive political action, in which movement actors engage and contest political pro cesses, boycotts, which employ legitimate sanctions against specific targets, and public relations events like press conferences, which mimic institutional action.   Less moderate organizations may have to engage in joint action to get views across  reliably .    By contrast,  when  movement organizations  are  being acted upon, as by trials and investigations,  that  will  undermine  their chances  for substantive treatment.   We argue, finally,  that favorable political contexts  influence the relationship between movement action and substantive coverage, by improving  the c hances that legitimacy-increasing  actions will  lead to substantive coverage."
"80" "We  develop four hypotheses from this model and appraise them  by way of analyzing  long strings of 1960s coverage on  the Big Four civil rights organizations (the NAACP, SCLC, CORE, and SNCC) and the Black Panther Party —which  accounted for   the vast majority of civil rights organizational coverage— in  four major newspapers . We  qualitative ly  code   front-page   articles  from these runs  and find that t he se  organizations placed a demand or saw one of i ts issues addressed in about  half of their front-page coverage across the four newspapers .  B ut substantive coverage also varied greatly  across organizations and articles .   We address both  why some organizations  were treated better than others  and  why  some articles were more substantive.  C omparative analyses  generally  s upport our hypotheses  about organizations and action .   Moreover, i n the  QCA   w e found  that  m oderate organizations  be nefi ted especially in  articles  that inclu ded  assertive political action,  boycotts , or public relations .  The routes  to reliable substantive coverage  were more difficult for the non-moderate organizations , as expected, and  we found  that  for them  joint movemen t action was a key component .    B eing acted on  in coverage was enough by itself to lead to the  absence of substantive coverage.   A more favorable political climate  improved the productivity of  some legitimacy-increasing   lines of  action undertaken by the NAACP.    G enerally, the results support the arguments of Lipsky (1968) that protest may not be a rel iable way to transmit demands and messages .  However, we identify  other  action —assertive political action, boycotts, and public relations— that  work s  better."
"81" "The  news media have been transformed in the last two decades, with the rise of 24-hour cab le news channels, Fox News and right-wing radio , and the ubiquit y of the Internet and other  electronic means of communication .  The concomitant  decline in ad revenue for the print news media has killed m any newspapers and altered the  delivery of news, such as the Web transformations of  Newsweek  and  U.S. News  (Pew  2015).  The decline in journalists mean that more articles are simply initiated by politic al institutional press releases  (Pew  2010).   Social media is a key gatekeeper to news (Schudson 2011).   And the balance norm,  which movements can manipulate, has been increasingly subject to  question b y journalists (Sullivan 2017).  All that said, the national newspapers remain the central institutions of newsgathering  ( Pew 2010 )  and re tain great legitimacy , and the folding of  regional  newspapers heightens t he importance of the remaining news organizations  (Schudson 2011) .  The  prestige press including the   New York Times  and  Washington Post  still set s  the agenda for other news outlets,  and m ainstream news organizations constitute the top digital new s entities (Pew  2015).  N ewspaper coverage has been shown to influence recent European political agendas (Vliegenthart et al. 2016) , and  aided the mobilization of the Tea Party (Banerjee 2013) and mediated the discursive influence of Occupy (Gaby and Caren 2016) , each  of which  appeared in the news  intensively.  The current  mainstream  news environment may provide more opportunities for sub stantive  coverage f or movements, including through f eatures and news analyses ,  on which  news organizations  increasingly focus   (Schudson 2011)."
"82" "Though addressing events from half a century ago ,  our  results  have some  current applications .  This sort of explosive  (Boydstun 2013)  or  path-dependent (Seguin 2016) coverage is not uncommon ,  as there were more  than 300 runs of  such  coverage  for movement organizations  in  the twentieth century .  R ecent years have seen  the  extensive coverage of organizations associated with the Tea Party  (Banerjee 2013)  and Occupy ( Gaby and Caren 2016) , and more recently with  Black Live s Matter and  the so-called alt right .   M ost  movements are represented  in the news  by only a handful of organizations at any given time (Amenta et al. 2009).   And a lthough there a re  now  many mo re opportunities  for movements to get attention ,  through the I nternet and social media,  m ovement ac tors continue to seek  mainstream  and  especially  prestige   press  coverage ,  given its wide circulation among elites , its amplification properties, and its legitimacy- conferring advantages  (Koopmans 2004) .   Some lessons from  the most prominent civil  rights movement organizations  in th eir heyday  should be applicable to contemporary and past   movement  organizations that  similarly  find themselves  repeatedly  in  the news and  which  seek to  transmit demand s and  insert new  views of issues into the public sphere.   I t is  almost impossible for movement actors  to get across messages while being acted on  or repressed . Prot est may gain attention, but after that  it m ay be valuable to act jointly and launch  targeted boycotts .  In periods  when  political  allies  are  ascendant, it may be productive to  st age press conferences and  high-profile  meetings.  A nd most of all ,  to insert new demands and issues into the public sphere,  movement actors should  engage politically  and tes t the prerogatives of  institutional actors  in all aspects of the political and policymaking processes ."
"83" "REFERENCES"
"84" "Amenta, Edwin. 2006.  When Movements Matter: The Townsend Plan and the Rise of  Social"
"85" "Security . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press."
"86" "Amenta, Edwin,  Neal Caren, E lizabeth Chiarello, and Yang Su. 2010.  “The Political"
"87" "Con sequences of Social Movements.”   Annual Review of Sociology  (2010)  36:14.1-14.21."
"88" "Amenta, Edwin, Neal Caren, Sheera Joy Olasky, and James E. Stobaugh. 2009."
"89" "“All the Movements Fit to Print: Who, What, When, Where, and Why SMOs Appeared in the  New York Times  in the Twentieth Century.”  American Sociological Review  74 (4): 636-656."
"90" "Amenta, Edwin,  Thomas Alan Elliott, Nicole Shortt, Amber C. Tierney, Didem  Türkoğlu,"
"91" "and Burrel J. Vann.  2016 .  “What Explains the Quality of the News Coverage of the Civil Ri ghts Movement in Its Heyday.”   Annual Meeting of the  ASA , Seattle ."
"92" "Amenta, Edwin, Thomas Alan Elliott, Nicole Shortt, Amber C. Tierney, Didem Türkoğlu,"
"93" "and Burrel J. Vann.  2017 . “From Bias to Coverage: What Explains How News Organizations Treat Social Movements.”  Sociology Compass  11  (3) : 10.1111/soc4.12460."
"94" "Amenta, Edwin, Beth Gharrity Gardner, Amber Celina Tierney, Anaid Yerena, and Thomas"
"95" "Alan Elliott. 2012. “A Story-Centered Approach to the Coverage of High-Profile SMOs.”   Research in Social Movements, Conflicts and Change  33: 83-107."
"96" "Andrews, Kenneth T. 2004.  Freedom is a Constant Struggle: the Mississippi Civil Rights   Movement and its Legacy . Chicago : University of Chicago Press."
"97" "Andrews, Kenneth T. and Neal Caren. 2010. “ Making the News: Movement"
"98" "Organizations, Media Attention, and the Public Agenda . ”    American Sociological Review  75 (6): 841-866."
"99" "Arthur, Mikaila Mariel Lemonik.  2011.   Student Activism and Curricular Change in Higher"
"100" "Education.    Surrey, UK:  Ashgate."
"101" "Banerjee, Tarun. 2013. “ Media, Movements, and Mobil ization: Tea Party Protests in  the"
"102" "United States, 2009–2010.”   Research in S ocial Movements, Conflicts and  Change  36: 39-75."
"103" "Bartley , Tim, and Curtis Child. 2014. “ Shaming the Corporation:  t he  Social  Production of"
"104" "Targets a nd the Anti-Sweatshop Movement.”   American Sociological Review  79  ( 4 ) : 653-679."
"105" "Baumgartner, Frank R., and Bryan D. Jones. 1993.  Agenda and Instability in American  Politics . Chicago: University of Chicago Press."
"106" "Benford, Robert D., and David A. Snow. 2000. \"Framing Processes and Social  Movements: An Overview and Assessment.\"  Annual Review of Sociology  26 :  611-"
"107" "639."
"108" "Bennett, Lance W. 2007.  News: The Politics of Illusion . New York: Pearson Longman."
"109" "Bloom, Joshua and Waldo Martin. 2013.  Black Against Empire: The History and Politics"
"110" "of the Black Panther Party . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press."
"111" "Boystun, Amber. 2013.  Making the News: Politics, Media, and Agenda Setting ."
"112" "Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press."
"113" "Cook, Timothy E. 1998.  Governing with the News . Chicago: University of Chicago Press."
"114" "Cress, Daniel M. and David A. Snow. 2000. “ The Outcomes of Homeless Mobilization:"
"115" "The Influence of Organization, Disruption, Political Mediation, and Framing.”  American Journal of Sociology  105 (4): 1063-110."
"116" "Cunningham, David. 2013.  Klansville, U.S.A.: The Rise and Fall of the Civil Rights-Era"
"117" "Ku Klux Klan . New York: Oxford University Press."
"118" "Dahl, Robert A.1971.  Polyarchy: Participation and Opposition . New Haven: Yale  University Press."
"119" "Davenport, Christian. 2010.  Media Bias, Perspective, and State Repression: The Black"
"120" "Panther Party . New York: Cambridge University Press."
"121" "Earl, Jennifer. 2004. “Cultural Consequences of Social Movements.” Pp. 508-530 in  The  Blackwell Companion to Social Movements , edited by David A. Snow, Sarah A.  Soule, and Hanspeter Kriesi. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing."
"122" "Earl, Jennifer. 2011. “Political Repression: Iron Fists, Velvet Gloves, and Diffuse"
"123" "Control.”   Annual Review of Sociology  37: 261-284."
"124" "Earl, Jennifer, Andrew Martin, John D. McCarthy, and Sarah A. Soule. 2004. “The Use  of Newspaper Data in the Study of Collective Action.”  Annual Review of  Sociology  30: 65-80."
"125" "Elliott, Thomas Alan, Edwin Amenta, and Neal Caren. 2016. “Recipes for Attention:"
"126" "Policy Reforms, Crises, Organizational Characteristics, and the Newspaper Coverage of the LGBT Movement, 1969-2009.”  Sociological Forum  31 (4): 926-947."
"127" "Ferree, Myra Marx, William Anthony Gamson, Jürg en Gerhards, and Dieter Rucht.   2002."
"128" "Shaping Abortion Discourse: Demo cracy and the Public Sphere in  Germany and the United States . New York: Cambridge University Press."
"129" "Fishman, Mark. 1980.  Manufacturing the News.  Austin, TX: University of Texas Press."
"130" "Gaby, Sarah, and Neal Caren. 2016. \"The Rise of Inequality: How Social Movements  Shape Discursive Fields.\"  Mobilization  21 (4): 413- 429."
"131" "Gamson, William A. and Gadi Wolfsfeld. 1993. “Movements and Media as Interacting  Systems.”  Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science  528:  114-125."
"132" "Gitlin, Todd. 1980.  The Whole World is Watching: Mass Media in the Making and  Unmaking of the New Left . Berkeley , CA : University of California Press."
"133" "Giugni, Marco. 2007. “Useless Protest? A Time-Series Analysis of the Policy Outcomes"
"134" "of Ecology, Antinuclear, and Peace Moveme nts in the United States, 1977- 1995.”  Mobilization  12 (1): 53-77."
"135" "Giugni, Ma rco and Sakura Yamasaki. 2009. “ The Policy Impact of Social Movements: a"
"136" "Replication through Qu alitative Comparative Analysis.”   Mobilization  14: 467-484."
"137" "Gottfried, Jef frey, and Elisa Shearer. 2016. “ News Use acros s Social Media Platforms  2016.”   Pew Research Center  26."
"138" "Hallin, Daniel C. 1984. “ The Media, the War in Vietnam, and Political Support: A Critique of"
"139" "the T hesis of an Oppositional Media.”   The Journal of Politics  46  () :  2- 24."
"140" "Iyengar, Shanto. 1991.  Is Anyone Responsible? How Television Frames Political Issues.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press."
"141" "Iyengar, Shanto. 2011.  Media Politics: A Citizen’s Guide . New York: W.W. Norton."
"142" "King, Brayden G.  2008. “A Political Mediation Model of Corporate Response to Social"
"143" "Movement Activism.” Administrative Science Quarterly 53  ( 3 ) : 395-421."
"144" "King, Brayden G.    2011. “The Tactical Disruptiveness of Social Movements: Sources of"
"145" "Market and Mediated Disruption in Corporate Boycotts.”   Social Problems  58 (4): 491-517."
"146" "Koopmans, Ruud. 2004. “Movements and Media: Selection Processes and Evolutionary  Dynamics in the Public Sphere.”  Theory and Society  33 (3-4): 367-391."
"147" "Kriesi, Hanspeter, Ruud Koopmans, Jan Willem Duyvendak, and Marco G. Giugni. 1992.  \"New Social Movements and Political Opportunities in Western Europe.\"  European Journal of Political Research  22 (2): 219-244."
"148" "Lipsky, Michael. 1968. “Protest as a Political Resource.”  The American Political"
"149" "Science Review  62 (4): 1144-1158."
"150" "Luders, Joseph E. 2011.  The Civil Rights Movement and the Logic of Social Change ."
"151" "New York: Cambridge University Press."
"152" "McAdam, Doug. 1982.  Political Process and the Development of Black Insurgency .  Chicago : University of Chicago Press."
"153" "McAdam, Doug, and Hilary Boudet. 2012.  Putting Social Movements in their Place:"
"154" "Explaining Opposition to Energy Projects in the United States, 2000–2005 .  New York: Cambridge University Press."
"155" "McAdam, Doug and Yang Su. 2002. “The War at Home: Antiwar Protests and"
"156" "Congre ssional  Voting, 1965 to 1973.”  American Sociological Review  67 (5):696-721."
"157" "McCammon, Holly J.  and Allison R. McGrath. 2 015. “Litigating Change? Social   Movements and the Court System.”  Sociology  Compass  9 (2): 128-39."
"158" "McCarthy, John D., and Maye r N. Zald. 1977. “ Resource Mobilization and Socia l  Movements: A Partial Theory.”   American Journal of Sociology  82 (6): 1212-1241."
"159" "McCarthy, John D., Clark McPhail and Jackie Smith. 1996. “Images of Protest:  Estimating Selection Bias in Media Coverage of Washington Demonstrations,  1982, 1991.”  American Sociological Review  61 (2): 478-499."
"160" "McLeod, Douglas M.  2007. “ Ne ws Coverage and Social Protest:  How  the Media's Protest"
"161" "Paradigm   Exacerbates Social Conflict .”  Journal of Dispute Resolution  2007 (1):  186-94."
"162" "Martin, Isaac William. 2008.  The Permanent Tax Revolt: How the Property Tax  Transformed American Politics . Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press."
"163" "Mencher, Melvin. 2008.  News Reporting and Writing . 11 th  Ed. Boston: McGraw-Hill."
"164" "Molotch, Harvey, and Marilyn Lester. 1975.  “ Accidental News: The Great Oil Spill as"
"165" "Local Occurrence and National Event. ”    American Journal of Sociology  81 (2) :  235-260."
"166" "Moore, Kelly. 2009 .  Disrupting Science: Social Movements, American Scientists, and the"
"167" "Politics of the Military, 1945-1975 . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press."
"168" "Oliver, Pamela E. and Daniel J. Myers. 1999. ‘‘How Events Enter the Public Sphere:  Conflict, Location, and Sponsorship in Local Newspaper Coverage of Public  Events.’’  American Journal of Sociology  105 (1): 38–87."
"169" "Olzak, Su san, and Sarah A. Soule. 2009. “ Cross-Cutting Influences of Environmental  Protest and Legislation.”   Social Forces  88 (1): 201-225."
"170" "Ortiz, David G., Daniel J. Myers, N. Eugene Walls,  and Maria Elena D. Diaz. 2005. “ Where"
"171" "D o We Stand with Newspaper Data?”   Mobilization  10 (3): 397-419."
"172" "Pew Research Center .  2010 . “The S tudy of  the News Ecosystem of One American C ity. ”   Pew"
"173" "Research Center’s News Project.   Retrieved  August 2017 from"
"174" "http://www.journalism.org/analysis_report/ how_news_happens/"
"175" "Pew Research Center.  2015.   “State of the News Media 2015.”  Pew Research Center’s"
"176" "News Project.  Retrieved  August 2017 from"
"177" "http://www.journalism.org/2015/04/29/state-of-the-news-media-2015-full-pdf-download/"
"178" "Pierson,  Paul, and Theda Skocpol. 2002. “ Historical Institutionalism in Contemporary  Political Science. ”   Pp. 693-721 in  P olitical S cience: The State of the Discipline ,"
"179" "edited by Ira Katznelson and  Helen V. Milner. New York : W.W. Norton."
"180" "Piven Frances Fox, and Richard A. Cloward. 1977.  Poor People’s Movements: Why They  Succeed, How They Fail . New York: Random House."
"181" "Polletta, Francesca. 2002.  Freedom Is an Endless Meeting .  Chicago: University of Chicago"
"182" "Press."
"183" "Ragin, Charles C. 2008.  Redesigning Social Inquiry: Fuzzy Sets and Beyond . Chicago :"
"184" "University of Chicago Press."
"185" "Rohlinger, Deana A. 2007 .  “ American Media and Del iberative Democratic Processes.” Sociological Theory  25 (2) :122-148."
"186" "--------------.  2015.  Abortion Politics, Mass Media, and Social Movements in"
"187" "America . New York: Cambridge."
"188" "Rohlinger, Deana A., Ben Kail, Miles Taylor, and Sarrah Conn. 2012. \"Outside the"
"189" "Mainstream: Social Movement Media Cover age in Mainstream and Partisan  News Outlets.\"  Research in Social Movements, Conflict, and Change  33:51-80."
"190" "Sampson, Robert J., Doug McAdam, Heather MacIndoe, and Simon Weffer-Elizondo."
"191" "2005. “Civil Society Reconsidered: The Durable Nature and Community Structure of Collective Civic Action.”  American Journal of Sociology  111: 673-714."
"192" "Schneiberg, Marc and Michael Lounsbury.  2017. “Social Movements and the Dynamics of"
"193" "Institutions and Organizations.”  Pp.  281-310  in  The Sage Handbook of  Organizational Institutionalism,  edited by  Royston Greenwood, Christine Oliver,  Roy Suddaby, and Kerstin Sahlin.   Los Angeles: Sage."
"194" "Schneider, Carsten Q. and Claudius Wagemann. 2013.  Set-Theoretical Methods for the"
"195" "Social Sciences.  New York: Cambridge University Press."
"196" "Schudson, Michael. 2002. “The News Media as Political Institutions.”   Annual Review of  Political Science  5: 249-269."
"197" "------------------.2011.  The Sociology of the News, 2 nd  Edition . New York: Norton."
"198" "Seguin, Charles.  2016. “Cascades of Coverage: Dynamics of Media Attention to Social"
"199" "Movement Organizations.”   Social Forces  94 (3): 997-1020."
"200" "Sigal Leon. V. 1973.  Reporters and Officials . Lexington, MA: Lexington Books."
"201" "Skocpol, Theda. 2003.  Diminshed Democracy: From Membership to Management in  American Civic Life . Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press."
"202" "Smith, Jackie, John D. McCarthy, Clark McPhail, and Augustyn Boguslaw. 2001. “From"
"203" "Protest to Agenda Building: Description Bia s in Media Coverage of Protest  Events in Washington, DC.”  Social Forces  79 (4):   1397-1423."
"204" "Snow, David A., and Robert D. Benford. 1988. “Ideology, Frame Resonance, and"
"205" "Participant Mobilization.”  International Social Movement Research  1 (1): 197-217."
"206" "Snow, David A., Rens Vliegenthart, and Catherine Corrigall-Brown. 2007. “Framing the"
"207" "French ‘Rio ts:’   A Comparative Study of Frame Variation.”  Social Forces  86 (2): 385-415."
"208" "Sobieraj, Sarah. 2011.  Soundbitten: The Perils of Media-Centered Political Activism ."
"209" "New York, NY: New York University Press."
"210" "Soule, Sarah  A. 2009.  Contention and C orporate  Social R esponsibility . New York, NY:"
"211" "Cambridge University Press."
"212" "Soule, Sarah A., and Susan  Olzak .  2 004 \"When do m ov ements matter? the politics of"
"213" "contingency and the equal rights a mendment.\"   American Sociological Review  69  (4) : 473-497."
"214" "Staggenborg, Suzanne. 1988. \"The Consequences of Professionalization and  Formalization in the Pro-Choice Movement.\"  American Sociological Review  53  (4): 585-605."
"215" "Sullivan, Margaret.  2017. “This Week Should Put the Nail in the Coffin for ‘Both Sides’"
"216" "Journalism.”   Washington Post , August 16."
"217" "Thiem, Alrik and Adrian Du ș a. 2014. \"QCA: A Package for Qualitative Comparative  Analysis.\"  The R Journal  5: 87-97"
"218" "Tilly, Charles. 1999. “From Interactions to Outcomes in Social Movements.”  P p. 253- 271  i n"
"219" "How Social Movements Matter.   Edited by Marco  Guigni, Doug McAdam, and   Charles Tilly . Minne apolis, MN : University of Minnesota Press."
"220" "Tuchman, Gaye. 1980.  Making News: A Study in the Construction of Reality . New  York: The"
"221" "Free Press."
"222" "Vliegenthart, Rens, Dirk Oegem a, and Bert Klandermans. 2005. “ Media Coverage and"
"223" "Organizational Support in th e Dutch Environmental Movement.”   Mobilization  10 (3): 365-381."
"224" "Vliegenthart, Rens, Stefaan Walgrave, Ruud Wouters, Swen Hutter, Will Jennings, Roy  Gava, Anke Tresch, Frederic Varone, Emiliano Grossman, Christian Breunig,  Sylvain Brouard, and  Laura Chaques-Bonafont. 2016. “ The Media as a Dual  Mediator of the Political Agenda-Setting Effect of Protest. A Longitudinal Study  in  Six Western European Countries.”   Social Forces  95 (2): 837-859."
"225" "Walgrave, Stefaa n and Rens Vliegenthart. 2012. “ The Complex Agenda-Setting Power of  Protest: Demonstrations, Media, Parliament, Government, and Legi slation in  Belgium, 1993-2000.”   Mobilization  17 (2): 129-56."
"226" "Wolfe, Michelle, Bryan D. Jones, a nd Frank R. Baumgartner. 2013. “ A Failure to"
"227" "Communicate: Agenda Setting in Media and Policy St udies.”   Political Communication  30 (2): 175-192."
"228" "Wouters, Ruud. 2015. “ Reporting Demonstrations: On Episodic and Thematic"
"229" "Coverage of Protest Events in Belgian Television News.”   Political Communication  32 (3): 475-496."
"230" "Figure 1: Venn Diagram of Four Measure QCA Results for Substantive Coverage:"
"231" "Moderate, Assertive/Boycott/PR, Joint Action, and Acted On"
"232" "Note : Areas demarcated by dotted lines indicate substantive coverage with high consistency (with the consistency percentages in parentheses)."
"233" "Figure 2: Venn Diagram of Five Measure QCA Results for Substantive Coverage:"
"234" "Moderate, Assertive/Boycott/PR, Joint Action, Civil Disobedience, and Acted On"
"235" "Note : Areas demarcated by dotted lines indicate substantive coverage with high consistency (with the consistency percentages in parentheses).  Acted On does not appear in the figure, but all areas indicated include the absence of Acted On."
"236" "Table 1.  New York Times  Runs of Coverage for Five Civil Rights Organizations and Three Civil Rights-Related  Organizations"
"237" "SMO"
"238" "1960s Runs"
"239" "Run Starts"
"240" "Run Ends"
"241" "Run Articles"
"242" "Front Page Articles in Sample"
"243" "NAACP"
"244" "3"
"245" "01/05/63"
"246" "09/18/65"
"247" "2033"
"248" "350"
"249" "CORE (1963)"
"250" "4"
"251" "04/01/63"
"252" "09/16/65"
"253" "1276"
"254" "290"
"255" "SCLC"
"256" "2"
"257" "10/30/64"
"258" "09/15/65"
"259" "203"
"260" "66"
"261" "SNCC"
"262" "2"
"263" "12/17/65"
"264" "01/16/67"
"265" "293"
"266" "102"
"267" "CORE (1966)"
"268" "4"
"269" "04/12/66"
"270" "11/25/67"
"271" "449"
"272" "91"
"273" "Black Panthers"
"274" "1"
"275" "05/12/68"
"276" "12/15/70"
"277" "1790"
"278" "213"
"279" "Total Civil Rights"
"280" "12"
"281" "10452"
"282" "1112"
"283" "Table 2.   Percent  of Front-Page Coverage Featuring Demands,  High Issue Attention , or Either,  by Organization al Characteristics"
"284" "Organization"
"285" "Demands"
"286" "High Issue Attention"
"287" "Demands or High Issue Attention"
"288" "NAACP"
"289" "42.6"
"290" "54.3"
"291" "66.6"
"292" "SCLC"
"293" "43.9"
"294" "74.2"
"295" "81.8"
"296" "CORE (1963)"
"297" "39.7"
"298" "31.4"
"299" "56.9"
"300" "Moderate"
"301" "41.5"
"302" "46.7"
"303" "64.0"
"304" "CORE (1966)"
"305" "38.5"
"306" "34.1"
"307" "56.0"
"308" "SNCC"
"309" "25.5"
"310" "40.2"
"311" "55.9"
"312" "Intermediate"
"313" "31.6"
"314" "37.8"
"315" "54.4"
"316" "Black Panthers"
"317" "6.6"
"318" "5.6"
"319" "11.3"
"320" "Not Moderate"
"321" "6.6"
"322" "5.6"
"323" "11.3"
"324" "Total"
"325" "33.1"
"326" "37.3"
"327" "52.2"
"328" "Table 3.   Percentage of Cove rage of Organizations Featuring   Selected  Collective Actio n or B eing Acted  On  and Substantive Coverage"
"329" "SMO"
"330" "Assertive Action"
"331" "Boycott/"
"332" "Strike"
"333" "Public Relations"
"334" "Acted On"
"335" "Substantive Coverage"
"336" "NAACP"
"337" "31.1"
"338" "5.4"
"339" "17.7"
"340" "1.1"
"341" "66.6"
"342" "CORE (1966-1967)"
"343" "23.1"
"344" "0.0"
"345" "27.5"
"346" "0.0"
"347" "56.0"
"348" "SCLC"
"349" "12.1"
"350" "9.1"
"351" "13.6"
"352" "4.5"
"353" "81.8"
"354" "CORE (1963-1965)"
"355" "13.4"
"356" "5.5"
"357" "15.2"
"358" "3.1"
"359" "56.9"
"360" "SNCC"
"361" "13.7"
"362" "5.9"
"363" "6.9"
"364" "9.8"
"365" "52.9"
"366" "Black Panthers"
"367" "2.8"
"368" "0.0"
"369" "5.2"
"370" "23.9"
"371" "11.3"
"372" "Overall"
"373" "17.7"
"374" "4.2"
"375" "14.2"
"376" "6.9"
"377" "52.2"
"378" "Table 4. Intermediate QCA Solutions for Substantive Coverage, Five Civil Rights Organizations"
"379" "Four Measure Analysis*"
"380" "Recipe"
"381" "Consistency"
"382" "Coverage"
"383" "Unique Coverage"
"384" "MODERATE*ASSERTIVE/BOYCOTT/PR"
"385" "0.826"
"386" "0.442"
"387" "0.296"
"388" "ASSERTIVE/BOYCOTT/PR*JOINT"
"389" "0.876"
"390" "0.182"
"391" "0.036"
"392" "T otal"
"393" "0.822"
"394" "0.478"
"395" "Five Measure Analysis*"
"396" "MODERATE*ASSERTIVE/BOYCOTT/PR"
"397" "0.826"
"398" "0.442"
"399" "0.296"
"400" "ASSERTIVE/BOYCOTT/PR*JOINT"
"401" "0.876"
"402" "0.182"
"403" "0.036"
"404" "CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE*JOINT"
"405" "0.850"
"406" "0.029"
"407" "0.029"
"408" "Total"
"409" "0.824"
"410" "0.508"
"411" "Five Measure Analysis for Absence of Substantive Coverage"
"412" "moderate*assertive/boycott/pr*joint"
"413" "0.802"
"414" "0.397"
"415" "0.305"
"416" "ACTED ON"
"417" "0.870"
"418" "0.126"
"419" "0.034"
"420" "Total"
"421" "0.801"
"422" "0.431"
"423" "*Each term also includes the absence of Acted On."
"424" "Table 5: Intermediate QCA Solutions for Substantive Coverage, NAACP"
"425" "Five Measure Analysis"
"426" "Recipe"
"427" "Consistency"
"428" "Coverage"
"429" "Unique Coverage"
"430" "ASSERTIVE"
"431" "0.899"
"432" "0.421"
"433" "0.421"
"434" "BOYCOTT*joint"
"435" "0.818"
"436" "0.039"
"437" "0.039"
"438" "CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE*JOINT"
"439" "1.000"
"440" "0.013"
"441" "0.013"
"442" "PR*JOINT"
"443" "0.947"
"444" "0.077"
"445" "0.077"
"446" "T otal"
"447" "0.901"
"448" "0.549"
"449" "Six Measure Analysis"
"450" "ASSERTIVE"
"451" "0.899"
"452" "0.421"
"453" "0.421"
"454" "BOYCOTT*democratic"
"455" "0.900"
"456" "0.039"
"457" "0.039"
"458" "CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE*JOINT"
"459" "1.000"
"460" "0.013"
"461" "0.013"
"462" "PR*JOINT"
"463" "0.947"
"464" "0.077"
"465" "0.030"
"466" "PR*DEMOCRATIC"
"467" "0.829"
"468" "0.124"
"469" "0.077"
"470" "boycott*JOINT*DEMOCRATIC"
"471" "0.931"
"472" "0.116"
"473" "0.021"
"474" "Total"
"475" "0.883"
"476" "0.648"
"477" "Online Appendices"
"478" "The following includes four appendices to supplement  “ Institutional Mediation , News Institutions, and the Coverage of Civil Rights Movement Organizations.”   Online Appendix A supplies capsule summaries of the five organizations.   Appendix B   provides  additional information about the measures, the regression analyses, and the QCA, as well as a series of robustness checks  on these analyses.   Appendix C addresses in more detail our analyses of contentious collective action and the many articles that include significant discussions of movement organizations, but without such action appearing.   Appendix D provides complete references to the newspaper articles mentioned in the detailed analyses of specific cases identified by the QCA."
"479" "Appendix A"
"480" "Here  we provide capsule histories of the five civil rights organizations, with a focus on their circumstances during the analyzed runs of coverage in the 1960s.  Relying mainly on secondary sources, these accounts discuss the origins and characteristics of the organizations, as well as their main goals and strategic orientations  and any change s in them.   These accounts also indicate the issues these organizations sought to influence.   Finally, we summarize some of the key events covered during their run of attention and indicate the degree to which their coverage was substantive and the sorts of action appearing in their coverage."
"481" "The NAACP, May 1963- August 1965, and throughout the 1960s"
"482" "The National Organization for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) was established on February 12, 1909 as a bi-racial membership organization.  Its charter emphasized the eradication of racial prejudice, the advancement of the interests of minority populations, securing suffra ge, securing  justice in the courts, education for children, employment, and achieving equality before the law. Early campaigns constituted almost exclusively of institutional oriented collective action and revolved around anti-lynching campaigns and overturning  Jim Crow  racial segregation in the South.  This pattern of contention continued through the mid-1930s when the NAACP created a legal defense fund (NAACP-LDF) (Hooks 1979).   The NAACP  was a large membership organization, with  approximately 1100 branches with more than 300,000 members in the early 1960s and approximately 1270 branches with 330,000 members in 1969 (Gregory 2016)."
"483" "Under the direction of Thurgood Marshall and Charles Hamilton Houston, the  NAACP and its  frequent use of civil suits to press for large-scale changes in desegregation came to represent the larger repertoire of contention that defined the  early part of the civil rights movement .  Following the  Brown v. Board  (1954) decision, the NAACP pressed for full desegregation throughout the South ,  and notable movement leaders such as E.D. Nixon and Rosa Parks assisted in the anti-segregation bus boycott in Montgomery, AL (1955-1956).  However, their winning decision in  NAACP vs. Alabama  (1958) resulted in the organization being barred from practicing business in the state; other civil rights organizations filled the vacuum, abandoning the NAACP’s strategy of litigation in favor of more direct, if non-violent, collective action (Jenkins and Eckert 1986).  In the meantime, t he NAACP used litigation via the Supreme Court to seek to integrate higher education and also pressed for civil rights legislation."
"484" "The predominant strategic approach and larger identity of the movement became somewhat bifurcated late in  the 1950s when a much smaller and less professionalized  dissident contingency sought to align with the direct action being undertaken by Martin Luther King’s  Southern Christian Leadership Conference. Within the NAACP, factions of dissident student activists and some adult chapter leaders became more vocal around the time of the 1968 convention and complained about the constraints of the litigation-focused approach (Jenkins and Eckert 1986; Rudwick and Meier 1970). This internal tension and public admonishments from other civil rights leaders led to the resignation of dissident staff members of the NAACP-LDF."
"485" "Although the NAACP is typically seen as ceding the stage to more  direct action  organizations in the movement in the 1960s, it was almost constantly in the news in that decade. It had one  run of coverage in the  New York Times  that  began in 1959 and ended in 1962.  It had the run of coverage closely analyzed here, beginning in the middle of 1963 and ending two years later.  And  it started another run of coverage in the  New York Times  at the end of 1965 that would last into 1973.  The mid-1960s run  included  a series of highlights of the movement  and indicated the variety of actions the  NAACP engage d  in , many of which went well beyond litigation :  the  1963  March on Washington  that the NAACP president Roy Wilkins helped plan, numerous clashes with school boards over school desegregation, potential boycotts, voter drives, and fundraising. The NAACP str ongly disavowed violent  tactics and publicly embraced and practiced the non-violent resistance ethic. The NAACP remains a central civil rights organization today."
"486" "Throughout the decade, the NAACP received largely substantive coverage.  It received high issue attention in more than half of its front-page coverage a nd either that or a demand in 66  percent of its coverage.  It was also heavily covered in the context of assertive action, mainly  but not exclusively  litigat ion, which appeared in 30.5  percent of its coded  front-page  coverage .  However, there was  anot her 5.6  perc ent in boycotts and 18.2 percent in public relations.  It  wa s being acted on in only 1.4  percent of its coverage.   (See Tables 2 and 3.)"
"487" "Congress of Racial Equality: April 1963-September 1965; April 1966-November 1967"
"488" "The Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) was the second of the Big Four to be founded, in 1942 in Chicago, and initially consisted of a mixed gender and interracial group of 30.  CORE was an explicitly nonviolent group that broke off from the pacifist Fellowship of Reconciliation.   It sought voting rights, opposed segregation and discrimination in the South, and addressed discrimination in employment and housing and segregation in schooling in the North.   Its most notable early collective action was the 1947 Journey of Reconciliation that sought to end segregation in interstate travel (Rustin and Houser 1947; Rustin and Woodward 1971), which led to many arrests, earned the group significant publicity, and laid the groundwork for the mass movement to develop.  Although it called for both political and direct action, it mainly engaged in the latter.  CORE had a federal structure with autonomous local chapters and members (Meier and Rudwick 1973, chapters 1-3)."
"489" "CORE was involved in many of central protests of the early 1960s and helped to change the emphasis in the movement from NAACP-style litigation to direct non-violent action. Led by its charismatic Director, James Farmer, CORE was active in assisting 1960 sit-in actions and inaugurated the Freedom Rides of 1961, which were modeled on the Journey of Reconciliation and similarly sought to desegregate bus terminals in interstate commerce.  Although CORE expanded its activities in the South during this period, it remained active in the North.  Notably, it engaged in a series of protests against segregation in Chicago schools, including both sit-ins (West 1962, 1963 in Danns 2003) and addressing Board of Education meetings (West 1965 in Danns 2003).  CORE also staged picket s at Woolworth’s and other dime  stores in the North addressing employment discrimination.  By the end of 1961 CORE had expanded greatly across the country with 65 chapters and a wide variety of programs (Meier and Rudwick 1973, chapters 4-5).  Between 1963 and 1965, the organization’s chapters mor e than doubled, from 68  to 144,  but with membership in chapters deliberately kept low, the largest including around 100 members (Meier and Rudwick 1973, pp. 150-1, 226, 357).   Throughout the first run, CORE maintained a commitment to nonviolent action, stemming from  it  pacifist roots, and employed interracial efforts to attain racial equality and full integration of Black Americans (Meier and Rudwick 1973). For these reasons, we categorize CORE in 1963 as both moderate and nonviolent."
"490" "CORE’s run of coverage beginning in 1963 also came during the heyday of the civil rights movement, but focused significantly on direct action in the North, especially New York City, as well as continuing activism in the South (Meier and Rudwick 1973, chapters 6-7).  In New York, pickets addressed employment discrimination in Harlem and the Bronx, and a school boycott was launched to protest de facto school segregation.  CORE was instrumental in the August 1963 March on Washington, and the 1964 World’s Fair was also a significant target of protest.  The end of the first run was focused on Freedom Summer, in which CORE worked with the  Mississippi branches of the other members of the Big Four in  the  short-lived  Council of Federated Organizations to bring northern student volunteers to t he South.   CORE’s main  connection to the news soon  was centered on the brutal murders of three of its activists in June 1964, the search for their bodies, and the hunt for their killers."
"491" "In its first run, from 1963 to 1965, CORE’s front-page coverage  was highly substantive, and 57  percent  of articles  featured demands or issues .   The coverage of CORE included assertive action in 1 3. 4 percent of the time in that newspaper , with another 5.5  percent featuring boycotts  and 15.2 percent featuring public relations.  The organization was act ed on by the state in about three  percent of its coverage.  (See Tables 2 and 3.)"
"492" "Although during its second run of coverage CORE continued to call for desegregation in the South and employment, housing, and school change in the North, the organization had undergone significant  ideological change, and a tactical change at least in theory . In January 1966, Farmer was replaced as Director by Floyd McKissick, and along with the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, CORE changed its emphasis from integrationist civil rights to a more separatist, black power outlook and dropped its emphasis on nonviolence , though did not greatly change its repertoire of action in practice  (Meier and Rudwick 1973, chapter 12). CORE’s income, chapters, and membership dropped precipitously in this period, to only a “handful of active chapters,” along with its ability to carry out projects (Meier and Rudwick 1973, epilogue)."
"493" "Despite the change in organizational goals and tactics and decline in members, CORE’s second run of coverage remained largely substantive. In  56  percent of its front-page coverage across the newspapers, it received either a demand or issue-oriented treatment or both.  Also, its collective action profile, as covered, did not chan ge greatly, and indeed tipped more toward assertive political action, which appeared in 23  percent of its coverage . Another 27.5 percent involved public relations .   Moreover, despite the renunciation of non-violence, the organization was not covered in the context of being acted upon. (See Tables 2 and 3.)"
"494" "The Southern Christian Leadership Conference, October 1964-September 1965"
"495" "The Southern Christian Leadership Conference was inaugura ted in the wake of the 1955  boycott of Montgomery buses (Killian 1984: 772).  Montgomery’s black leaders founded the Montgomery Improvement Association (MIA) to oversee a plan to continue the actions on a larger scale, elected as its chairman Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., and won a victory in December 1956,  when a federal court  found bus segregation to be unconstitutional.  Soon afterward King inspired the draft of a memo on the possibilities of a “Southern Leadership Conference on Transportation” (Garrow 1986: 85-7) and suggested two types of action: voting power and mass  non-violent direct action.  Early in 1957, King invited 60 black ministers and leaders to attend meetings that founded the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), which expanded its goals to encompass the end of segregation.   The initial idea was to have an office in Atlanta and a budget of $200,000 for this collective action (Garrow 1986: 97)."
"496" "The SCLC was focused on gaining voting, transportation, educational, and economic rights for black Americans. The organization was committed to non-viol ence despite devising  confrontations that might induce violence (Haines 1984: 34).  It engaged in campaigns in Albany, Georgia, in 1961, and much more successfully in Birmingham in 1963.  There King penned his famous manifesto “Letter from Birmingham Jail,” and marching school children were met with water cannons, police dogs, and the horrified reactions of the U.S. public.  The organization gained considerable attention when King followed up these efforts and met with leaders of CORE, SNCC, the NAACP, and the Urban League to plan a march for August 1963 in Washington DC, in which 200,000 to 300,000 people participated, culminating in King’s “I Have a Dream” speech.  The following year, the SCLC led protests in St. Augustine, Florida.   It remained a sm all staff organization, focused on gaining  contributions to King, with revenues of more than $600,000 in 1963-64 (Garrow 1986: 353)."
"497" "Although the SCLC had been in the news in these well-known events, its  run of coverage  did not begin until King was awarded  the Nobel Peace Prize in October 1964 .  The period  encompassed the many events in the run up to the 1965 Voting Rights Act, notably protests in Selma, Alabama.  At about the same time that King was honored, Claude Sitton, formerly a southe rn, race-relations  beat reporter, was elevated to the national news editor at the  Times  and instituted a  rule that King would be followed  whenever in the South on civil rights business (Roberts and Klibanoff 2006: 378).    In the New Year, the SCLC, SNCC, and Dallas County Voters League (DCLV) organized the Selma voting rights campaign.  Blacks seeking to vote were met by White Citizens’ Council economic retaliation, threatened KKK violence, and discriminatory literacy tests.  Nonviolent marchers filled the county jail cells, including King and  the  Reverend Ralph Abernathy (Garrow 1986). Eventually, a Federal judge allowed the march to Montgomery and on March 25, an estimated 25,000 proteste rs proceeded  up to the steps of the Alabama capitol.  During the run  of coverage,  the SCLC focused on integration, did not base its actions on a radical ideology ,  and was non-violent  and is scored as moderate ."
"498" "Afterward the focus of the SCLC shifted from civil  and voting  rights to economic justice, including discrimination in employment and housing, and often took action in the North,  notably during  the 1966 Chicago Freedom Movement campaign , which did not lead to sustained coverage, however.   I n 1968, the organization planned  the Poor People’s Campaign, an encampment in the capital to raise awareness  to poverty.   When, on April 4, Dr. King was assassinated in Memphis, the nation erupted in protests, and leadership was tra nsferred to Reverend Abernathy.  He  carried out the Washington encampment, which was a mixed success (Garrow 1986: chapter 11) .  Abernathy  led the organization until 1977 and was replaced by Joseph Lowery, who led the organization until 1997.  It has since had many  leadership  s hifts and has lost  prominence but remains in existence."
"499" "During its run of attention, the SCLC was treated to highly subst antive coverage, with almost 82  percent of its coverage including demands or high attention to one  of its issues . It was covered in the co ntext of assertive political action in about 12 percent of its front-page coverage, boycotts in about nine percent, with another about 14 percent involving public relations .  Unsurprisingly, the SCLC was not covered in the context of any violent activity, but was  acted on by the state in 4.5  percent of its coverage.  (See Tables 2 and 3.)"
"500" "The Student  Nonv iolent Coordinating Committee, December 1965 to January 1967"
"501" "The Student Nonv iolent Coordinating Committee was founded in 1960 in the wake of student  lunch-counter sit-ins  and as a result of a conference s ponsored by the SCLC and the NAACP’s Ella Baker in Raleigh. The new  organization focused on youth-led, non-violent, direct action campaigns and grassroots organizing to promote civil and voting rights  ( Carson 1981; Forman 1997; Carmichael and Thelwell 2003; Polletta 2002). Marion Barry chaired SNCC, followed by Chuck McDew and John Lew is, with executive secretary James  Forman also playing a key role. This biracial group was initially known for its participatory democratic procedures and having many women leaders. Along with CORE, SNCC was a main participant in freedom rides to desegregate bus stations in the South in 1961.  In 1962, SNCC was a key player in the so-called Albany (Georgia) movement, which promoted desegregation and voting rights, and formed a coalition, the Council of Federated Organizations (COFO), with other civil rights organizations.  SNCC then turned its focus to voter registration drives in the Deep South, led by Bob Moses.  At the end of 1963, SNCC developed the Mississippi Summer Project, also known as Freedom Summer, to induce the participation of northern white college students in southern black voter registration drives.  The organization also sought to develop indigenous leaders throughout the South, and reached its apex in both  staffing and funding in 1964.  It had an income of about $300,000 in 1963, with 12 office workers, 60 field secretaries, and 121 fulltime volunteers, increasing to a staff o f about 180 by the end of 1964  (Carson 1981: 71, 140)."
"502" "The Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party, an offshoot of SNCC, elected, but failed to seat a delegation a s the state’s representatives to  the 1964 Democratic National Convention in Atlantic City. Estranged from most of the movement, SNCC went its own way in protests in Selma, Alabama, in 1965.  Its crossing the Edmund Pettis Bridge resulted in  a violent police  beat down,  notably of its leader Lewis,  but  that event  is often regarded as central in gaining support for the Voting Rights Act.  Stokely Carmichael rose to the chairmanship  later  that year, with his catchy, if ambiguous, slogan “Black Power,” which focused on African Americans gaining leadership positions and defining their goals collectively .   This turn was viewed as also not integrationist and thus more radical than the organization’s goals to end segregation and discrimination and promote voting rights.  Also, the organization dropped its commitment to non-violence."
"503" "Although SNCC was central to many of the best-known collective action events of the early 1960s, it did not receive a run of coverage until the end of 1965, with the controversy surrounding black power.  This run  was  also  characterized by internal conflicts  and organizational problems  and anti-Vietnam War activism, which became a central focus of SNCC. Gene Roberts (1966) of the  New York Times  reported that  in early 1966  SNCC was running a $100,000 deficit.   At that time,  Julian Bond was ousted from the Georgia state legislature for supporting the SNCC position opposing U.S. policy in Vietnam —leading to a series of events that were closely followed by the press . At the end of the year, SNCC vo ted to ask white members to leave  the organization. Other events during the run included a Washington encampment, elections in Alabama and the founding of the Lowndes County Freedom Democratic Organization, a SNCC  offshoot and alternative party , the Meredith march, the jailing and conviction of Carmichael, a housing bill, a Head Start controversy, a desegregation “swim-in,” a local battle over a white principal in Harlem, riots in Cincinnati and East St. Louis, a race rift at City College (New York), and controversy surrounding Israel.  By 1967, the organization was in decline, with all of its former white and many black activists beginning to participate in other movement organizations, including the Black Panther Party .  I n early 1967 the organization had only 65 civil rights workers in the South as compared to over 300 the year before  (Roberts 1967) .  Carmichael stepped down in May 1967, and was replaced by Hubert Gerold “H. Rap” Brown, who fa iled to reverse SNCC’s fortunes, as it lost almost all its staff by 1970."
"504" "Although it had changed its ideology and  the tone of its  strategic orientation during this period, SNCC’s front-page coverage was mainly substantive , with about 53  percent of its coverage including a demand or high attention to one of its issues, or both.   About 14  percent of its coverage was in the context of assertive action , another six percent in boycotts, and seven percent in public relations .  It was  acted on in another seven  percent.  (See Tables 2 and 3.)"
"505" "The Black Panther Party, March 1969 to December 1970"
"506" "In 1966, Bobby Seale and Huey Newton formed the Black Panther Party, which stemmed from their activity on college campuses in the Bay Area  and  their  h aving been part of the Revolutionary Action Movement (RAM), a small, Leninist, clandestine organization focused on black nationalism (Harris 2000) .  The new organization  was started as a community patrol in Oakland dedicated to raising black youth awareness of legal rights and providing armed protection against police brutality .  It later  expanded its purview to include free health, food and education services in black communities. In the first few years, the Black Panther Party was influential only in the Bay Area, but by 1968, the organization had opened chapters in New York, Chicago, Seattle, Philadelphia and Detroit among other cities. By the end of the following year, the group had 38 chapters and possibly as many as 5,000 members across the United States, displacing SNCC."
"507" "The Black Panther Party sought economic, social and political benefits beyond civil, voting, and schooling rights, which were enshrined in the organization’s “Ten Point Plan” of action.  These  points  included many  radical and abstract reforms, along with some  moderate and specific ones: freedom, full employment, decent housing, education, exemption from military for black men, end to police brutality, release from jail and prison, trial in court by juries of blacks, bread, clothing, and justice (Bloom and Martin 2013).   From the start, t he Black Panthers advocated the use of arms for community protection, setting themselves apart from civil rights organizations committed to non-violence."
"508" "During its  1969-1970 run s of news attention , the Black Panther Party received coverage mainly in the context of various trials .   The trial of the “Panth er 21” was a major focus . Occasionally, the Panthers were asked to comment on the war in Vietnam or an election, but the vast majority of Black Panther coverage was related to one trial or another of prominent members and was almost always unconnected to the organization’s program.  A majority of the time and money spent by the organization was used to help in the legal defense of its members (Davenport 2010). When Huey Newton was released from custody, the Black Panther Party faced internal dissention as he reclaimed his leadership role.  By 1972, the Black Panther Party became a local Oakland organization again (Bloom and Martin 2013: 372-380), and although Newton returned in 1977 to take over the Panthers, it officially disbanded in 1982."
"509" "Although the organization was covered extensively, and had a peak of coverage that was greater than any of those of the Big Four, the  run of coverage for the Black Panthers was largely devoid of substance. On ly 11  percent of coded coverage featured demands or high issue attention.  It was covered in the context of assertive  only about three  percent of the time  and public relations about five percent of the time .  However, the organization was covered in context of being acted  upon in 24 percent  of the articles mentioning it.   (See Tables 2 and 3.)"
"510" "References"
"511" "Bloom, Joshua and Waldo Martin. 2013.  Black Against Empire : The History and Politics"
"512" "of the Black Panther Party . Berkeley, CA:  University of California Press."
"513" "Carmichael, Stokely with Ekwueme Michael Thelwell. 2003.  Ready for Revolution:  The Life and Struggles of Stokely Carmichael . New York: Scribner Press."
"514" "Carson, Claybourne. 1981.  In Struggle, SNCC and the Black Awakening of the 1960s .   Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press."
"515" "Danns, Dionne. 2003.  Something Better for Our Children: Black Organizing in Chicago Public Schools, 1963-1971 . New York, NY. Routledge Press."
"516" "Davenport, Christian. 2010.  Media Bias, Perspective, and State Repression: The Black"
"517" "Panther Party . New York: Cambridge University Press."
"518" "Forman, James. 1997.  The Making of Black Revolutionaries . Seattle, WA: University of  Washington Press."
"519" "Garrow, David J. 1986.  Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Southern  Christian Leadership Conference . New York, NY: William Morrow Press."
"520" "Gregory, James N. \"Mapping NAACP Chapters 1912-1977.\"  Mapping American Social Movements Through the 20th Century.  Retrieved 10/7/2016 from  http://depts.washington.edu/moves/NAACP_map-basic.shtml . Hooks, Benjamin L. 1979. “Birth and Separation of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund.”  Crisis  86(6): 218–20."
"521" "Haines, Herbert H. 1984. \"Black Radicalization an d the Funding of Civil Rights:  1957-1970.\"  Social Problems  32(1): 31-43."
"522" "Harris, Jessica Christina. 2000. \"Revolutionary Black Nationalism: The Black Panther Party.\"  The Journal of Negro History  85(3): 162-174."
"523" "Jenkins, J. Craig and Craig M. Eckert   . 1986. “Channeling Black Insurgency: Elite"
"524" "Patronage and Professional Social  Movement Organizations in the  Development        of the Black Movement   .”  American Sociological Review  51(6):  812-829."
"525" "Killian, Lewis M. 1984. \"Organization, Rationality and Spontaneity in the Civil Rights  Movement.\"  American Sociological Review  49(6): 770-783."
"526" "Meier, August and Elliott Rudwick. 1973 .    CORE: A Study in the Civil Rights"
"527" "Movement, 1942-1968 .   New York: Oxford"
"528" "Mother Jones . 2005. \"Put a Tiger in Your Thinktank\".  Mother Jones , May 2005. Retrieved March 24, 2016 (http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2005/05/put-tiger-your-think-tank)"
"529" "Polletta, Francesca. 2002.  Freedom is an Endless Meeting: Democracy in American Social"
"530" "Movements .  Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press."
"531" "Roberts, Gene. 1966. \"The Story of Snick: from Freedom High to Black Power.\"  The New York"
"532" "Time s , September 25, p. 242."
"533" "-------------. 1967. \"The New S.N.C.C.: weaker, fierier:  the  Student Committee Shrinks in Size.\""
"534" "The New York Times , August 20, p. 45."
"535" "Roberts, Gene and Hank Klibanoff. 2006.   The Race Beat . New York, NY: Knopf  Doubleday Publishing Group."
"536" "Rudwick, Elliott, and August Meier. 1970. \"Organizational Structure and Goal Succession: A"
"537" "Comparative Analysis of the NAACP and CORE, 1964-1968.\"  Social Science Quarterly  51(1) : 9-24."
"538" "Rustin, Bayard and George Houser. 1947.  We Challenged Jim Crow.  Fellowship of  Reconciliation a nd the Congress of Racial Equality."
"539" "Rustin, Bayard, and C. Vann Woodward. 1971.  Down the Line:  the  Collected Writings of Bayard Rustin . Chicago, IL: Quadrangle Books."
"540" "West, Paul 1963. “City School Board Hears Bias Protest: CORE Group Holds Sit-in.”  Chicago Tribune , July 11, p.1-2."
"541" "-------------. 1963. “School Sit-ins Vow to Last Weekend.”  Chicago Tribune , July  12,  p. 1-2."
"542" "-------------.1965. “Sit-in Leaders Huddle  With  School Chief: Officials of CORE Outline Demands.”  Chicago   Tribune , July 13, p.5."
"543" "Appendix B"
"544" "In this appendix, we define measures further and provide additional information about the measures and the QCA, as well as a series of robustness checks.  First, we address in more detail the coding of Moderate and the collective action measures.  Second, we discuss the ANOVA analysis. Next, we provide necessity tests for the QCA results, some truth tables, absence analyses, and robustness checks."
"545" "Measures"
"546" "Moderate"
"547" "We construct a measure of  Moderate , which addresses the degree to which an  organization pursu ed non-radical  goals in non-violent ways. We score the NAACP, the SCLC and early CORE as mo derate. In the case of CORE, it s 1963 run is scored as moderate, but  by 1966, CORE, like SNCC, had adopted a  Black power  and non-integrationist  stance on civil rights issues  and dropped its ostensible commitment to non-violence, though neither organization dramatically changed its tactics .    As a result, we code CORE’s 19 66 run, as well as SNCC, as 0 .  Additionally, we code the Black Panther Party 0 on moderate, indicating it s decidedly no t  moderate stance.  (See Online Appendix A.)  Below there are QCA robustness checks for an alternative calibration of moderate, which score CORE’s second run and SNCC’s run as 0.49 on the fuzzy set for technical reasons . This indicates that both these organizations were , in terms of set language, are ambiguous in terms of moderation ."
"548" "As a result, we code CORE’s 19 66 run, as well as SNCC, as 0 on the fuzzy set for technical reasons . This indicates that both these organizations were , in terms of set language, are ambiguous in terms of moderation ."
"549" "Collective Action Measures"
"550" "An article scores one for  any  Collective Action  if it discusses  contentious collective action in which the organization is participating , and about 66 percent of articles do so.  (For a discussion of the content of articles without contentious collective action, see online Appendix C.) There are five  main action types , each addressing the most prominent action in the article, and thus the types are mutually exclusive .    The first three are hypothesized to be legitimacy increasing and thus associated with substantive coverage.    Assertive  political action  seeks to influence or challenge the prerogatives of institutional political actors and include s  the following:   proto political conventions and contentious meetings; electioneering, including nominations of  candidates, endorsing or opposing candidates; legislative action, such as placing a bill for consideration by Congress; testimony before legislatures on substantive issues; initiatives, referendums, or propositions, and lawsuits, litigation by SMOs over an issue of interest.   About 17 percent of articles mainly contained this sort of action.  A second type includes  Boycotts  and strikes.  This is  action that includes  direct  constraints on targets.  A boycott is an organized refusal to buy or use a product or service  that seeks support from bystanders in applying sanctions .    A strike involves  the withholding of labor power.   About four percent of articles discussed boycotts primarily, but there was no strike coverage.   Public Relations  includes  mainly  insti tutional and persuasive actions , such as  press conferences,  lobbying ,  distributing information,  and teach-ins, and is the primary action by a sampled organization in about 14 percent of articles .    "
"551" "Other types are more commonly associated with social movements and are not especially expected to lead to substantive coverage.   Protest  includes   two different measures: First, there is  Legal Protest , which are legal  displays of support designed to gain the attention of the media and influence bystanders and include s   non-violent   marches, rallies,  demonstrations,  motorcades, symbolic  and dramaturgical  displays, and vigils.   Protest also includes  Civil Disobedience :  displays th at are illegal, but non-violent,  co ntesting laws or  police demands , or both,   such  that symbolic arrest s are designed to be provoked.   Protest is the primary action by a sampled organization in about 27 percent of articles .   Violent  collective a ction includes   an y attack, clash, riot, melee, or  mob violence, in which an individual or individuals acting on behalf of  an organization were  at least in part instigators , and was the dominant form of action in only about three percent of articles .   It is expected not to lead to substantive coverage."
"552" "Finally,  J oint   collective action  scores one if the article is mainly about action by the sampled movement organization and  at least one  another organization equally involved in it.   It cuts across types of action and appears in 22 percent of articles.   In addition, although this measure does not involve a type of movement organization action, a civil rights organization is  Acted On  in about seven percent of articles in the sample."
"553" "Further QCA"
"554" "In this section we provide necessity tests for the QCA, indicate the truth tables for the analyses, and show some additional results that help to describe the results better, as well as some robustness checks on the results."
"555" "Necessary Condition Analyses"
"556" "While the analyses in our paper focus on probabilistic sufficiency of combinations of causal conditions to explain the outcome, it is also prudent to perform necessity tests. The researcher is especially interested in whether any one causal condition is a necessary condition for the outcome. A general rule of thumb for cutoffs to identify necessary conditions is a consistency of 0.9 or greater and a coverage of 0.5 or greater (Ragin 2008; Schneider and Wagemann 2013).   The only causal conditions that meets this standard is the absence of Acted On, and the absence  of Civil Disobedience.   However, neither pass a Relevance of Necessity test (Schneider and Wagemann 2013, p. 235-37)."
"557" "Table B1.  Necessity Tests for Substantive Coverage"
"558" "Causal Sets"
"559" "Consistency"
"560" "RoN"
"561" "Coverage"
"562" "MODERATE"
"563" "0.867"
"564" "0.512"
"565" "0.629"
"566" "acted on"
"567" "0. 983"
"568" "0.142"
"569" "0.552"
"570" "civil disobedience"
"571" "0.919"
"572" "0.142"
"573" "0.518"
"574" "Truth Tables and Different Forms of Solution"
"575" "The results in the text are the intermediate results, with the assumption that the presence of the different sorts of collective action will be likely to be positively associated with the outcome of substantive coverage, whereas the absence of Acted On will be associated with the outcome.   It should be noted, however, that the “intermediate” solutions, which apply these assumptions, are no different from the complex solutions, except in one instance.  The action types are mutually exclusive and so the presence of one type implies the absence of another type.  However, we treated these absence terms as definitional and trivial and do not include them in the solutions.  Below are the truth tables for the four- and five-measure QCA."
"576" "Table B2: Four Measure Truth Table of Substantive Coverage of Civil Rights Organizations"
"577" "MODERATE"
"578" "ASSERTIVE/"
"579" "BOYCOTT/PR"
"580" "JOINT"
"581" "ACTED ON"
"582" "OUTCOME"
"583" "N"
"584" "Consist."
"585" "1"
"586" "1"
"587" "1"
"588" "0"
"589" "1"
"590" "94"
"591" "0.904"
"592" "1"
"593" "1"
"594" "0"
"595" "0"
"596" "1"
"597" "217"
"598" "0.793"
"599" "0"
"600" "1"
"601" "1"
"602" "0"
"603" "1"
"604" "27"
"605" "0.778"
"606" "1"
"607" "0"
"608" "1"
"609" "0"
"610" "0"
"611" "65"
"612" "0.646"
"613" "0"
"614" "0"
"615" "1"
"616" "0"
"617" "0"
"618" "50"
"619" "0.520"
"620" "1"
"621" "0"
"622" "1"
"623" "1"
"624" "0"
"625" "2"
"626" "0.500"
"627" "1"
"628" "0"
"629" "0"
"630" "0"
"631" "0"
"632" "314"
"633" "0.478"
"634" "0"
"635" "1"
"636" "0"
"637" "0"
"638" "0"
"639" "59"
"640" "0.475"
"641" "0"
"642" "0"
"643" "1"
"644" "1"
"645" "0"
"646" "3"
"647" "0.333"
"648" "0"
"649" "1"
"650" "0"
"651" "1"
"652" "0"
"653" "4"
"654" "0.250"
"655" "0"
"656" "0"
"657" "0"
"658" "0"
"659" "0"
"660" "209"
"661" "0.225"
"662" "1"
"663" "0"
"664" "0"
"665" "1"
"666" "0"
"667" "13"
"668" "0.154"
"669" "0"
"670" "0"
"671" "0"
"672" "1"
"673" "0"
"674" "54"
"675" "0.093"
"676" "1"
"677" "1"
"678" "1"
"679" "1"
"680" "0"
"681" "1"
"682" "0.000"
"683" "Table B3: Five-Measure Truth Table for Substantive Coverage of Five Civil Rights Organizations."
"684" "MODERATE"
"685" "ASSERTIVE /"
"686" "BOYCOTT /PR"
"687" "JOINT"
"688" "CIVIL"
"689" "DISOBEDIENCE"
"690" "ACTED ON"
"691" "OUTCOME"
"692" "N"
"693" "Consist."
"694" "0"
"695" "0"
"696" "1"
"697" "1"
"698" "0"
"699" "1"
"700" "5"
"701" "1.000"
"702" "1"
"703" "1"
"704" "1"
"705" "0"
"706" "0"
"707" "1"
"708" "94"
"709" "0.904"
"710" "1"
"711" "0"
"712" "1"
"713" "1"
"714" "0"
"715" "1"
"716" "15"
"717" "0.800"
"718" "1"
"719" "1"
"720" "0"
"721" "0"
"722" "0"
"723" "1"
"724" "217"
"725" "0.793"
"726" "0"
"727" "1"
"728" "1"
"729" "0"
"730" "0"
"731" "1"
"732" "27"
"733" "0.778"
"734" "0"
"735" "0"
"736" "0"
"737" "1"
"738" "1"
"739" "0"
"740" "3"
"741" "0.667"
"742" "1"
"743" "0"
"744" "1"
"745" "0"
"746" "0"
"747" "0"
"748" "50"
"749" "0.600"
"750" "1"
"751" "0"
"752" "0"
"753" "1"
"754" "0"
"755" "0"
"756" "50"
"757" "0.540"
"758" "0"
"759" "0"
"760" "1"
"761" "0"
"762" "1"
"763" "?"
"764" "2"
"765" "0.500"
"766" "1"
"767" "0"
"768" "1"
"769" "1"
"770" "1"
"771" "?"
"772" "2"
"773" "0.500"
"774" "0"
"775" "1"
"776" "0"
"777" "0"
"778" "0"
"779" "0"
"780" "59"
"781" "0.475"
"782" "0"
"783" "0"
"784" "1"
"785" "0"
"786" "0"
"787" "0"
"788" "45"
"789" "0.467"
"790" "1"
"791" "0"
"792" "0"
"793" "0"
"794" "0"
"795" "0"
"796" "264"
"797" "0.466"
"798" "0"
"799" "1"
"800" "0"
"801" "0"
"802" "1"
"803" "0"
"804" "4"
"805" "0.250"
"806" "0"
"807" "0"
"808" "0"
"809" "0"
"810" "0"
"811" "0"
"812" "205"
"813" "0.229"
"814" "1"
"815" "0"
"816" "0"
"817" "0"
"818" "1"
"819" "0"
"820" "11"
"821" "0.182"
"822" "0"
"823" "0"
"824" "0"
"825" "0"
"826" "1"
"827" "0"
"828" "51"
"829" "0.059"
"830" "0"
"831" "0"
"832" "0"
"833" "1"
"834" "0"
"835" "0"
"836" "4"
"837" "0.000"
"838" "0"
"839" "0"
"840" "1"
"841" "1"
"842" "1"
"843" "?"
"844" "1"
"845" "0.000"
"846" "1"
"847" "0"
"848" "0"
"849" "1"
"850" "1"
"851" "?"
"852" "2"
"853" "0.000"
"854" "1"
"855" "1"
"856" "1"
"857" "0"
"858" "1"
"859" "?"
"860" "1"
"861" "0.000"
"862" "Note :  Positive outcomes rows are in bold , whereas  negative rows are in italics ."
"863" "Table B4: Five-Measure Truth Table for Substantive Coverage of the NAACP"
"864" "ASSERTIVE"
"865" "BOYCOTT"
"866" "CIVIL"
"867" "DISOBEDIENCE"
"868" "JOINT"
"869" "PR"
"870" "OUTCOME"
"871" "N"
"872" "Consist."
"873" "0"
"874" "0"
"875" "1"
"876" "1"
"877" "0"
"878" "1"
"879" "3"
"880" "1.000"
"881" "1"
"882" "0"
"883" "0"
"884" "1"
"885" "0"
"886" "1"
"887" "23"
"888" "0.957"
"889" "0"
"890" "0"
"891" "0"
"892" "1"
"893" "1"
"894" "1"
"895" "19"
"896" "0.947"
"897" "1"
"898" "0"
"899" "0"
"900" "0"
"901" "0"
"902" "1"
"903" "86"
"904" "0.884"
"905" "0"
"906" "1"
"907" "0"
"908" "0"
"909" "0"
"910" "1"
"911" "11"
"912" "0.818"
"913" "0"
"914" "0"
"915" "0"
"916" "0"
"917" "1"
"918" "0"
"919" "43"
"920" "0.721"
"921" "0"
"922" "0"
"923" "0"
"924" "1"
"925" "0"
"926" "0"
"927" "16"
"928" "0.625"
"929" "0"
"930" "1"
"931" "0"
"932" "1"
"933" "0"
"934" "0"
"935" "8"
"936" "0.625"
"937" "0"
"938" "0"
"939" "0"
"940" "0"
"941" "0"
"942" "0"
"943" "139"
"944" "0.424"
"945" "0"
"946" "0"
"947" "1"
"948" "0"
"949" "0"
"950" "0"
"951" "2"
"952" "0.000"
"953" "Table B5: Six-Measure Truth Table for Substantive Coverage of NAACP"
"954" "ASSERTIVE"
"955" "BOYCOTT"
"956" "CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE"
"957" "JOINT"
"958" "PR"
"959" "D EMOCRAT"
"960" "OUTCOME"
"961" "N"
"962" "Consist."
"963" "0"
"964" "0"
"965" "0"
"966" "1"
"967" "1"
"968" "1"
"969" "1"
"970" "11"
"971" "1.000"
"972" "0"
"973" "0"
"974" "1"
"975" "1"
"976" "0"
"977" "0"
"978" "1"
"979" "2"
"980" "1.000"
"981" "0"
"982" "0"
"983" "1"
"984" "1"
"985" "0"
"986" "1"
"987" "1"
"988" "1"
"989" "1.000"
"990" "0"
"991" "1"
"992" "0"
"993" "0"
"994" "0"
"995" "0"
"996" "1"
"997" "5"
"998" "1.000"
"999" "1"
"1000" "0"
"1001" "0"
"1002" "1"
"1003" "0"
"1004" "0"
"1005" "1"
"1006" "12"
"1007" "1.000"
"1008" "1"
"1009" "0"
"1010" "0"
"1011" "1"
"1012" "0"
"1013" "1"
"1014" "1"
"1015" "11"
"1016" "0.909"
"1017" "1"
"1018" "0"
"1019" "0"
"1020" "0"
"1021" "0"
"1022" "0"
"1023" "1"
"1024" "46"
"1025" "0.891"
"1026" "0"
"1027" "0"
"1028" "0"
"1029" "1"
"1030" "1"
"1031" "0"
"1032" "1"
"1033" "8"
"1034" "0.875"
"1035" "1"
"1036" "0"
"1037" "0"
"1038" "0"
"1039" "0"
"1040" "1"
"1041" "1"
"1042" "40"
"1043" "0.875"
"1044" "0"
"1045" "0"
"1046" "0"
"1047" "1"
"1048" "0"
"1049" "1"
"1050" "1"
"1051" "6"
"1052" "0.833"
"1053" "0"
"1054" "1"
"1055" "0"
"1056" "1"
"1057" "0"
"1058" "0"
"1059" "1"
"1060" "5"
"1061" "0.800"
"1062" "0"
"1063" "0"
"1064" "0"
"1065" "0"
"1066" "1"
"1067" "1"
"1068" "1"
"1069" "24"
"1070" "0.750"
"1071" "0"
"1072" "0"
"1073" "0"
"1074" "0"
"1075" "1"
"1076" "0"
"1077" "0"
"1078" "19"
"1079" "0.684"
"1080" "0"
"1081" "1"
"1082" "0"
"1083" "0"
"1084" "0"
"1085" "1"
"1086" "0"
"1087" "6"
"1088" "0.667"
"1089" "0"
"1090" "0"
"1091" "0"
"1092" "1"
"1093" "0"
"1094" "0"
"1095" "0"
"1096" "10"
"1097" "0.500"
"1098" "0"
"1099" "0"
"1100" "0"
"1101" "0"
"1102" "0"
"1103" "1"
"1104" "0"
"1105" "79"
"1106" "0.443"
"1107" "0"
"1108" "0"
"1109" "0"
"1110" "0"
"1111" "0"
"1112" "0"
"1113" "0"
"1114" "60"
"1115" "0.400"
"1116" "0"
"1117" "1"
"1118" "0"
"1119" "1"
"1120" "0"
"1121" "1"
"1122" "0"
"1123" "3"
"1124" "0.333"
"1125" "0"
"1126" "0"
"1127" "1"
"1128" "0"
"1129" "0"
"1130" "0"
"1131" "0"
"1132" "1"
"1133" "0.000"
"1134" "0"
"1135" "0"
"1136" "1"
"1137" "0"
"1138" "0"
"1139" "1"
"1140" "0"
"1141" "1"
"1142" "0.000"
"1143" "Alternative Calibration of Moderate"
"1144" "Below we use an alternative calibration of moderate, in which the later run of CORE and the run of SNCC are scored as .49.  The first two recipes are the same as those presented in the paper. The last recipe also appears in the paper, but here the presence of moderate is also included. Overall, these results are very similar to those presented in the paper, and do not change the substance of our findings."
"1145" "Table B6: Intermediate Solutions for Alternative Calibration of Moderate"
"1146" "Five Measure Anal ysis"
"1147" "Recipe"
"1148" "Consistency"
"1149" "Coverage"
"1150" "Unique Coverage"
"1151" "MODERATE*ASSERTIVE/BOYCOTT/PR * acted on"
"1152" "0.810"
"1153" "0.482"
"1154" "0.319"
"1155" "ASSERTIVE/BOYCOTT/PR*JOINT* acted on"
"1156" "0.876"
"1157" "0.182"
"1158" "0.019"
"1159" "CIVIL   DIS OBEDIENCE *JOINT *MODERATE* acted on"
"1160" "0.823"
"1161" "0.024"
"1162" "0.024"
"1163" "Total"
"1164" "0.806"
"1165" "0.525"
"1166" "Separate Assertive, Boycott and Public Relations"
"1167" "Next, we separated Public Relations, Assertive action and Boycotts in their own sets. This allows us to better see how Joint and Moderate combine with specific forms of action. In the results below (see Table B6), Civil Disobedience and Public Relations both separately combine with Joint to create substantive coverage. Assertive combines with Moderate to produce substantive coverage, while Boycotts are able to produce substantive coverage on their own."
"1168" "Table B7: Intermediate Solutions for Separate Assertive, Boycott and Public Relations"
"1169" "Four Measure Analysis"
"1170" "Recipe"
"1171" "Consistency"
"1172" "Coverage"
"1173" "Unique Coverage"
"1174" "BOYCOTT"
"1175" "0.851"
"1176" "0.069"
"1177" "0.069"
"1178" "CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE*JOINT"
"1179" "0.783"
"1180" "0.031"
"1181" "0.031"
"1182" "PR*JOINT"
"1183" "0.878"
"1184" "0.074"
"1185" "0.074"
"1186" "MODERATE*ASSERTIVE"
"1187" "0.871"
"1188" "0.259"
"1189" "0.259"
"1190" "TOTAL"
"1191" "0.862"
"1192" "0.433"
"1193" "FS QCA of NAACP with Northern Democrats Measure"
"1194" "We also ran a QCA on the NAACP coverage using a fuzzy measure based on the proportion of Northern Democrats in Congress. The variable is the average of the percent of Northern Democrats in the House and in the Senate. This variable is calibrated into a fuzzy set measure, with a lower threshold of 0.35, and upper threshold of 0.5, and a crossover point of 0.42. This measure is set to 0 in the years 1960, 1969, and 1970, when a Republican was President. The results are similar to the results including the measure Democrat, though it is missing the sixth recipe."
"1195" "Table B8: Six-Measure QCA for Substantive Coverage of NAACP, with Northern Democrats"
"1196" "Six Measure Analysis"
"1197" "ASSERTIVE"
"1198" "0.899"
"1199" "0.421"
"1200" "0.421"
"1201" "BOYCOTT*northern democrats"
"1202" "0.853"
"1203" "0.041"
"1204" "0.041"
"1205" "CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE*JOINT"
"1206" "1.000"
"1207" "0.013"
"1208" "0.013"
"1209" "PR*JOINT"
"1210" "0.947"
"1211" "0.077"
"1212" "0.046"
"1213" "PR*NORTHERN DEMOCRATS"
"1214" "0.823"
"1215" "0.089"
"1216" "0.058"
"1217" "TOTAL"
"1218" "0.889"
"1219" "0.609"
"1220" "NAACP with Combined Assertive and Boycott"
"1221" "We ran an analysis of substantive coverage of the NAACP combining the Assertive and Boycott measures into one, taking the value of 1 if the NAACP was reported on engaging either assertive action or boycotts. The separate recipes of assertive and boycott are combined into one, where the presence of assertive/boycott is the only required measure. The recipe that combined the presence of joint action, the presence of Northern Democrats, and the absence of a boycott does not appear in these results in any modified form. However, the remaining three recipes remain the same as those presented in the paper. Again, these combined results do not substantively change our conclusions."
"1222" "Table B9: Intermediate Solutions for Combined Assertive and Boycott on NAACP"
"1223" "Five Measure Analysis"
"1224" "Recipe"
"1225" "Consistency"
"1226" "Coverage"
"1227" "Unique Coverage"
"1228" "ASSERTIVE/BOYCOTT"
"1229" "0.875"
"1230" "0.481"
"1231" "0.481"
"1232" "CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE*JOINT"
"1233" "1.000"
"1234" "0.013"
"1235" "0.013"
"1236" "PR*JOINT"
"1237" "0.947"
"1238" "0.077"
"1239" "0.046"
"1240" "PR*NORTHERN DEMOCRATS"
"1241" "0.823"
"1242" "0.089"
"1243" "0.058"
"1244" "Total"
"1245" "0.874"
"1246" "0.628"
"1247" "References"
"1248" "Ragin, Charles C. 2008.  Redesigning Social Inquiry: Fuzzy Sets and Beyond . Chicago,  IL:"
"1249" "University of Chicago Press."
"1250" "Schneider, Carsten Q. and Claudius Wagemann. 2013.  Set-Theoretical Methods for the"
"1251" "Social Sciences.   New York , NY : Cambridge University Press."
"1252" "Appendix C"
"1253" "Articles Without Contentious Collective Action by a Sampled Movement Organization"
"1254" "More than one third of the articles in the analytical sample significantly addressed a social movement organ ization , but not through any significant engagement in contentious action.  How is th at possible?  F or an article to count  here  as  including an organization’s  contentious colle ctive action ,   such action  has to be  undertaken or participated in by the organiz ation or its identified members   and occur  near in time to the article’s publication. Although “contentious collective action” is defined broadly for movement organizations and includes activity such as press conferences, distributing information, and public meetings with political officials, as well as protest, rallies, demonstrations, clashes, litigation, and so on, not all actions by organizations and their representatives are contentious.  The action has to have a political, economic, or social purpose and be aimed a target that can act on a claim , at least indirectly .  Moreover, an article may discuss contentious action, but for it to count  the organization in the run also has  to be involved in it. In addition, the action needs to be current for it to count."
"1255" "An organization often appeared in the news in several ways without contentious  collective action  in the article .   Often leaders, such as Martin Luther King, James Farmer, Roy Wilkins, Stokely Carmichael, and Eldridge Cleaver ,  were treated as quasi celebrities and sometimes simply their appearing in public counted as news during their organizations’ runs of coverage .  Such leaders were sometimes  asked to comment on or react to some external event in the news, including legislation being considered, poll results, or some other non-movement action; sometimes reporters added the previous views of an organization to a discussion of legislation  or other subjects . Treatments of internal politics, such as leadership shifts or verbal attacks on leaders or members, funding  successes or woes, or tactic changes, do not count as contentious action, unless  they occurred, for instance,  in the context o f a contentious meeting.  Sometimes  leaders we re featured in internal political  discussions, such as when they criticized rivals in the organization or in the broader movement."
"1256" "Articles may be about collective contentious action and still not count, notably when that action is not  attributed to an organization discussed significantly in the article.  For  instance, if an article were to report  on a clash between citizens of a community a nd the police and quote  a leader  of a civil rights organization, the article would  not count as contentious collective action for the org anization unless its members were   also  identified as  participating  in the action. Action may be described in an article, moreover, but it would not count as action by an organization unless it were current. Feature stories about the history of a community or an issue, for instance, might include some mention of contentious collective action  in the past ,  for instance,  the anniversary of a protest or riot, that would not count .   A news analysis that discussed one or more  previous events would not count either.   The same goes for articles that discuss the result of a court case that involved some past protest (though the current action in court might count as contentious collective action if it were an appeal by an organization challenging a law  or if there were protest surrounding the case ).   It is quite possible for this group of  articles to have a substantive discussion in them."
"1257" "On the other hand, often  organization s or their personnel  were objects of action by others.  The vast majority of the articles coded as an organization being acted upon by state authorities do not include contemporaneous contentious action by movement organizations.   In these acted- on articles, we also expect that the discussion will not l ikely include a demand or focus on  issues relevant to a movement organization.  Note that t estifying in a court case in which the members of the organization are on trial for crimes does not count as contentious collective action —nor does b eing murdered while engaging in routine organizing, driving in a car, or residing in one ’s home ."
"1258" "All of these sorts of articles would bring movement organizations and their leaders into the news, but not in the context of some specific contentious action recently undertaken.  Some headlines of articles illustrate these different types:"
"1259" "Action, but Not Contentious  Collective Action"
"1260" "“Carmichael Says He Won’t Go If Drafted.”  [Celebrity story, not official view of SNCC.]"
"1261" "“Cleaver Wants to Leave Algiers.”  [Panther celebrity leader discussed.]"
"1262" "“Cleaver Is Found in Havana Working on a Book.”  [Where’s Eldridge?]"
"1263" "“A Panther Admits He Killed Another.”  [Not contentious collective action.]"
"1264" "“Fistfight Breaks Out  At  Panther Hearing.”  [Ditto.]"
"1265" "“Wilkins Hits Rival Negro Rights Units.”  [Internal movement politics.]"
"1266" "“Farmer to Quit as CORE Leader.”  [Internal organizational politics.]"
"1267" "“Carmichael Quits the Black Panthers.”  [Celebrity movement person action/internal politics.]"
"1268" "“Meredith in Tears, Scores Bigotry Among Negroes.” [Responses solicited to Meredith’s statement  (Mereditih being a civil rights icon but not connected to an organization) .]"
"1269" "“Rights Bill Wins 2 Tests in Senate.”  [Discussion of legislation including solicited comments from organization leaders.]"
"1270" "“Rights Bill Impact; Many Dixie Businesses Comply  With  New Law.”  [NAACP representative asked to comment on implementation.]"
"1271" "“President Orders the F.B.I. to Hunt Pattern in Riots.”  [NAACP official replies to reporter’s question.]"
"1272" "“Poll Shows Whites in City Resent Civil Rights Drive.”  [NAACP answers reporter again.]"
"1273" "Contentious  Collective  Action , But S ampled  O rganization  Not Involved"
"1274" "“Columbia Valedictorian Booed for Deploring Student Protests.”  [Contentious possibly, but not organized or participated in by the sampled organization.]"
"1275" "“S.D.S. Leaders Oust Members of Progressive Labor Faction.”  [Some Black Panthers attended this S.D.S. meeting and were discussed briefly.]"
"1276" "“BROOKLYN SNIPER KILLS NEGRO BOY IN RACE DISORDER.”  [ CORE not involved in street battle, but is discussed in the context of a previous event with an anti-civil rights group.]"
"1277" "No Current Action: Features or News Analyses"
"1278" "“Black Nationalists Gain More Attention in Harlem.”  [Feature on politics in Harlem.]"
"1279" "“Uneasy Calm Prevails in Harlem Year After Riots.”  [Anniversary feature story.]"
"1280" "“Black Studies Off to a Shaky Start.”  [Feature on Black Studies departments, not including the contentious action that helped to establish them.]"
"1281" "“Sharecropping Doomed.”  [Feature story, with discussion of SNCC in it.]"
"1282" "“New Rights Leaders Emerging in City.”  [Feature story again.]"
"1283" "“FUND LAG PLAGUES RIGHTS MOVEMENT.” [Story especially about SNCC being underfunded.]"
"1284" "“Meet the Leonards; Negro Real Estate Man in Dixie Finds His Race Affects Job.” [Dog bites man feature.]"
"1285" "Movement Organizational Actors Being Acted On"
"1286" "“3 in Rights Drive Reported Missing.”  [Police case opens on “missing” CORE workers.]"
"1287" "“MISSISSIPPI DRAGS RIVER IN SEARCH FOR RIGHTS AIDES.” [Etc.]"
"1288" "“Confession Gives Details of Three Rights Killings.”  [Etc.]"
"1289" "“NAACP LEADER SLAIN IN MISS.; Shot in Back at His Home.”  [ Medgar  Evers assassination.]"
"1290" "“Woman Is Shot to Death  On  Lowndes County Road.” [ Viola Liuzzo murder .]"
"1291" "“POLICE IN CHICAGO SLAY 2 PANTHERS.” [Chicago Police murder Fred Hampton and Mark Clark.]"
"1292" "“F.B.I. Seizes Angela Da vis in Motel Here.”  [Arrest of Angela  Davis.]"
"1293" "“CORE LEADER GETS A YEAR IN PRISON.” [Acted on, repression . ]"
"1294" "“KENNEDY CLASHES WITH CORE CHIEF.” [Robert Kennedy criticizes Floyd McKissick.]"
