"x"
"1" "Buying into the Meritocracy :"
"2" "Taiwanese Students and the Market for College Admissions Services"
"3" "Kenneth Han Chen"
"4" "University at Albany-SUNY"
"5" "Elizabeth Popp Berman"
"6" "University of Michigan"
"7" "Abstract"
"8" "The meritocratic ideal prescribes that college admission should be based on students’ individual worthiness—their academic ability and hard work. Yet as admission to selective colleges has become increasingly competitive, a market for services to help students succeed in the application process has rapidly expanded. When is participation in this market understood to be morally legitimate? Research on moral markets has examined  how   participants  distinguish legitimate from illegitimate markets, and how relational strategies can hide or purify illegitimate transactions. Less attention has been paid to  why  groups define a market as legitimate, particularly when its existence conflicts with other group values. Drawing on digital ethnography of an online forum for current and prospective Taiwanese international students and interviews with forum participants, we find that participants define the purchase of college admissions services as moral when it is compensating for collective disadvantage, yet reject its morality in other contexts. Paying to beat a “meritocratic” system becomes legitimate when one recognizes one’s systematic disadvantage in that system. Yet recognizing group disadvantage along one dimension does not imply awareness of individual (dis)advantage along other dimensions, nor does it undermine a broader faith that the system is meritocratic."
"9" "K eywords:  economic sociology, higher education, internationalization, moral markets, meritocracy, worth"
"10" "When it is okay to pay to win in a meritocratic system? College applicants can purchase a range of services to improve their odds of admission to competitive universities: at the low end, buying a test prep book; at the high end, donating a building. Few people would question the morality of the former,  but as recent news demonstrates  (Medina et al., 2019) , actual purchase of admission is highly scandalous. Where is the line between markets that are legitimate and markets that are not?"
"11" "We draw on the moral markets literature  (Zelizer, 1978) , which explores the conditions under which market exchange is (il)legitimate, to answer this question. Much of this literature focuses on the creation of “difficult” markets around sacred objects and processes, like body parts  (Healy, 2006; Anteby, 2010) , reproduction  (Almeling, 2011) , and death  (Livne, 2019) . We suggest that meritocracy can similarly be understood as a sacred process in contemporary capitalism, and that purchasing services meant to intervene in its workings can usefully be understood through a similar lens."
"12" "This paper draws on digital ethnography of an online forum for current and prospective Taiwanese international students, as well as interviews with a sample of active forum users, to show how one community distinguishes legitimate from illegitimate market transactions in the sacred meritocratic process of admission to competitive universities, primarily (but not exclusively) at the graduate level. Students in this community believe strongly in the meritocratic system, and see the use of “education agents”—consultants who provide information about the admissions process, help students identify colleges and craft applications, and facilitate the paperwork around international moves—as illegitimate and shameful. Yet they also recognize their collective disadvantage in the process as nonnative speakers of English. Because they understand this disadvantage as unfair—that is, unmeritocratic—they see paying for services that compensate for that disadvantage (tutoring, translating, and editing) as completely legitimate, even though those  services may be quite extensive. Recognizing the unfairness of a system that expects them to compete with native English speakers does not lead them to challenge the fairness of the system more generally, however, and other, closely related markets  in admissions services  remain illegitimate."
"13" "This case suggests that unpacking what elements of  meritocracy  are seen as legitimate can help us understand what kinds of  markets  are seen as legitimate. Extra test-taking time for students with disabilities is understood as leveling the playing field, for example; thus the market for private psychological testing to identify such disabilities is understood as legitimate, although diagnoses may be generous and wealthy students are greatly advantaged  (Goldstein and Patel, 2019) . Understanding meritocracy as a sacred process also suggests that a proliferation of markets to game it may reflect a broader loss of faith in the system. On the flip side, our evidence also draws attention to the resilience of belief in meritocracy, as identifying one aspect of it as unfair (i.e. its favoring of native speakers of English) does not lead to more general skepticism. Finally, this case also extends the moral markets literature, pointing to processes reflecting sacred  values  as another type of case where we might expect markets to be similarly difficult."
"14" "Moral Markets and Selective College Admissions"
"15" "Direct payment for admission to college is an illegitimate transaction, but there is a very legitimate market in test prep services. In between, a variety of markets in admissions services flourish, from the taken-for-granted (application fees) to the sometimes questioned (bespoke admissions consulting) to large “gifts” (major donations) that obfuscate  (Rossman, 2014)  the fact that a transaction is taking place. While there is clearly variation in both the size of such transactions and  in what they promise to deliver, it is less obvious why some are seen as legitimate while others are not."
"16" "As part of the growing literature taking a cultural approach to economic sociology  (e.g. Fourcade and Healy, 2007; Bandelj, 2009; Bandelj, 2012) , the  literature on moral markets has explored the conditions under which market exchange is understood to be legitimate. Much of it focuses on how markets once seen as morally questionable become accepted  (Zelizer, 1994; Quinn, 2008; Chan, 2009) , although some work has also looked at pushback to market expansion  (Turco, 2012; Yue et al., 2019) . Typically, the markets examined are those that emerge around sacred objects or processes, such as body parts  (Healy, 2006; Almeling, 2011; Anteby, 2010)  or death  (Quinn, 2008; Chan, 2009; Anteby, 2010; Livne, 2014) , as these are particularly susceptible to moral challenges. It has shown how cultural categories such as gender  (Almeling, 2007)  or organizational models  (Reich, 2014)  affect the legitimization of such markets, identified how participants draw boundaries between acceptable and unacceptable markets  (Anteby, 2010) , and shown the cultural and political work that goes into extending those boundaries  (Quinn, 2008; Chan, 2009; Dioun, 2018) . It has also highlighted a range of strategies that individuals and organizations use to obfuscate exchange that may be perceived as illegitimate  (Healy, 2006; Lainer-Vos, 2013; Rossman, 2014; Fridman and Luscombe, 2017; Schilke and Rossman, 2018) ."
"17" "The sizable literature on selective college admissions, by contrast, has hardly addressed markets in admissions services at all. The largest strand has focused on identifying demographic factors—primarily class and race—that affect likelihood of application and acceptance  (Espenshade et al., 2004; Alon and Tienda, 2007; Deil-Amen and Lopez, 2007; Alon, 2009; Espenshade and Radford, 2013; An, 2010; Grodsky and Riegle-Crumb, 2010; Posselt et al., 2012; Radford, 2013; Brown et al., 2016) . Another strand, with a more political-organizational  orientation, looks at the processes through which selective admissions decisions are made, and how meritocratic criteria are used to achieve outcomes that serve schools’ interests in other ways  (Karen, 1990; Karen, 1991; Karabel, 2006; Stevens, 2009; Killgore, 2009; Posselt, 2016) . T hough different in their a pproaches, both of these strands are motivated by the question of how elite institutions reproduce themselves and a stratified race and class system, even as they allow enough upward mobility to retain their legitimacy in an officially meritocratic system  (Liu, 2011; Stevens et al., 2012; Warikoo, 2016) . Some limited attention has been given to the effects of “shadow schooling”—paid services like test prep and tutoring—on selective admissions to U.S. schools  (Buchmann et al., 2010; Byun and Park, 2012) , but has focused on estimating its effects, rather than understanding its legitimacy."
"18" "In recent decades, however,  competition  has becoming increasingly important in a globalizing field of higher education — between institutions  (Musselin, 2018) , but also among applicants seeking   to attend elite  universities,  particularly at the graduate level . In conjunction with this change,  services purporting to help students get into competitive schools have proliferated. In the U.S., this has been seen most visibly in the expanding “independent education consultant” industry, which has more than tripled in the last five years, according to a trade association  (IECA 2019) . In countries that send significant numbers of students to the U.S., particularly East Asian countries like Taiwan, South Korea, and China  (Park et al., 2011; Byun and Park, 2012; Park et al., 2016; see Bray, 2017 for an overview) , an associated market in shadow education has long been established . As admission to selective U.S. institutions has become both increasingly globally desirable and increasingly competitive , a related market for advice on and assistance with the application process itself has also sprung up in these (and other) countries. One of the first such  markets to emerge was in Taiwan, where such services have been available for the last twenty years and are quite familiar to potential international students."
"19" "Though some admissions-related services are widely accepted as a necessary part of the college preparation process, questions have been raised about them as well. These include concerns that they contribute to the reproduction of social inequality  (e.g. Bray, 2017)  and, particularly from colleges themselves, that they undermine the integrity of the admissions process  (Altbach, 2013; The Observatory 2014) .  Sociologists have just begun to explore the symbolic distinctions that elite students make between different schools  (Binder and Abel, 2019) , and between more and less prestigious career paths  (Binder et al., 2016) .  But what  symbolic distinctions do they make between markets? What  distinguishes between legitimate  admissions-related  services—ones that are widely seen as acceptable, and whose use is understood to reflect seriousness about the application process—and illegitimate ones that represent a moral challenge to the supposedly meritocratic process of college education? The moral line between paying to practice test-taking skills and paying someone to draft one’s admission essay may seem clear, but practices like paying for private disability testing in the hope of receiving extra time on exams, or application “editing” services that are more like rewriting services, reveal a blurrier line."
"20" "To answer these questions, we bring a moral markets approach to the study of college admissions services. We see the ostensibly meritocratic process of college admissions as sacred—in the U.S. and increasingly the global context—in a way analogous to body parts or death-related services. Thus markets for admissions-related services must manage moral challenges as do other “difficult” markets that sociologists have studied. Paying directly for admission clearly violates the sacredness of meritocracy, while paying for a test prep class does not, despite the fact that the economic and cultural capital that are a prerequisite for doing so are not evenly distributed."
"21" "We ask why and how potential participants in the market for admissions services define some paid services as legitimate and others as illegitimate. In doing so, we provide a new way of thinking about the proliferation of admissions-related services in an increasingly competitive and global university landscape. We also extend the moral markets literature by showing how markets can be introduced and seen as fully legitimate in one part of a sacred process without challenging, and indeed possibly reinforcing, the sacredness of that process more generally."
"22" "The STUDYABROAD Forum and Competitive International Admissions"
"23" "To accomplish this, we look at how such boundaries are drawn in one specific community: a popular online forum for actual and potential Taiwanese international students, STUDYABROAD. Drawing on digital ethnography of the site starting in the summer of 2014 and continuing with 47 interviews of site users—both students and non-students—between 2015 and 2018, the data were inductively coded to identify emergent themes using qualitative data analysis software. The theme of “meritocracy” became relevant early on, as did the distinctions users made between forms of admissions assistance that were legitimate and illegitimate to purchase. As the argument developed, fieldnotes, excerpts from online posts, and interview transcriptions were revisited to identify the kinds of arguments users made about these distinctions."
"24" "The STUDYABROAD community is an excellent site for studying boundary-making in markets for admissions services aimed at competitive U.S. universities. Historically, U.S. colleges have been the most popular destination for Taiwanese students studying abroad at both the undergraduate and graduate level. Discussions of pathways to studying in the U.S. dominate the Taiwanese international student community. For Taiwanese students and families, attending a prestigious school in the U.S. is both a testament of individual ability and academic merit, as well  as a guarantee of a successful career. The STUDYABROAD forum is both a primary information hub and also a means of socialization into an international social mobility project."
"25" "STUDYABROAD is an online bulletin board, one of thousands of forum sections under its parent site PTT, a nonprofit social network site in Taiwan. The forum uses a discussion thread structure, where users can post a topic or question, and other users participate by posting their responses or starting another conversation. STUDYABROAD was founded by a group of international student alumni in 2005 and, as of May 16, 2019, contained over 6,815 threads with over 14,000 entries and comments about international student issues. Today, STUDYABROAD is one of the main sites prospective Taiwanese international students consult during the admissions and migration process."
"26" "The STUDYABROAD community, despite providing open and public information, is a selective group. First, STUDYABROAD participants are more likely to be elite students from top universities in Taiwan  (Chang, 2009; Lu et al., 2010) . Discussion of U.S. graduate schools dominates the forum, although conversations about other destinations and levels of postsecondary education can also be found. Second, the STUDYABROAD forum is organized as an “expertise sharing community” or “Internet discussion group”  (Ngai, 2019; Matzat, 2009) , in which members’ posts and comments are valued differently depending on their perceived expertise and status within the community. Community experts include both student and non-student members; education agents can also be found, although their participation is a community taboo."
"27" "Informed by the literature on expertise networks  (Matzat, 2009) , the study began with a focus on the “favorite posts” section to help identify high-status participants and important conversations in the community. These posts were hand-coded with a focus on students’ understanding of the community in general, and of market and nonmarket forms of admissions  assistance. Using five keywords generated from the process, “ 代辦   (agents) ”, “ 值得  ( worth) ”, “ 有效  (merit)”,  “ 補習班  ( cram school/language   institution) ”, and “ 編修  ( editing/editor) ”, the first author then selected and coded 324 posts on these topics by high-status participants in the forum. In addition, he used an ethnographic approach to conduct “thick description” of participant experience on the forum more generally  (Gatson and Zweerink, 2004) ."
"28" "Ethnographic research on online practices and communications has become increasingly common in recent years with the internet’s growing influence on people’s lives. Digital ethnography approaches online behavior and text-based interactions as social behavior similar to that which might occur in any field site, and which can be studied using similar methods  (Golder and Macy, 2014) .  Following the conventional approach to studying online communities,  the first author  became a “lurker” to get to know the site without disturbing community interactions  (Gatson and Zweerink, 2004; Gatson, 2011) . Participation began in the summer of 2014, when he began to study the social lives of Taiwanese international students. The “researcher-lurker” identity of his account was recognized by most veteran users of the forum, although not all users were directly informed that he was performing scholarly research on the site. Participation, communication, and reciprocal exchange of information about studying abroad continued, even when he was not studying the site, mirroring a conventional offline ethnographer’s dual life as both local and distant observer  (Hallett and Barber, 2014) ."
"29" "This digital ethnography was supplemented with face-to-face interviews with participants in the forum. The first author conducted interviews with 14 Taiwanese international students from December 2015 to January 2017, and  subsequently  interviewed 33 other non-student users, including educational agents, language instructors and freelance editors in Taiwan.  Student participants were recruited through a voluntary survey conducted in the forum. Non-student users  were more purposefully selected to include members who have high visibility in the forum and agents who are “lurkers” in the forum. After identifying the list of potential participants, both groups— students and non-students—were then directly contacted by the first author for face-to-face interviews.  Question s  were asked about participants’ experience interacting with others in the forum, their perceptions of different commercial admission services, their personal study-abroad experience, and their understanding of “meritocracy” in the U.S. higher education system. All interviews were conducted in Mandarin and translated into English."
"30" "This ethnographic and interview-based approach is useful for understanding how people in a community make meaning around the admissions process. The study does not purport to be representative of the larger population of Taiwanese applicants, domestic or international, nor does it indicate whether people are willing to participate in markets they see as illegitimate. But for understanding how a specific community draws moral boundaries around markets in the context of faith in a larger meritocratic system, it is useful. We do not expect other communities to draw the same boundaries. But we expect that the mechanism identified here—in which a community identifies itself as having a collective disadvantage in a meritocratic system, and defines the purchase of assistance to counteract that disadvantage as legitimate while other forms of assistance are not—as one that is likely to have analogs in other contexts."
"31" "Market Morality in a Meritocracy"
"32" "Participants in the STUDYABROAD forum have well-articulated opinions about what kinds of markets in admissions-related services are legitimate and what kinds are illegitimate. As a whole, they are strong believers that competitive admissions is a meritocratic process that does, and should, reward talent and hard work. They see themselves—Taiwanese applicants to (mostly) U.S.  programs—as part of a common group, and their forum as providing resources to help other members of that group. They also understand themselves as having a shared disadvantage in the admissions process, however, as nonnative speakers of English in an English-only admissions process."
"33" "Because they understand this disadvantage as unfair, they see services meant to counteract it—that is, English-language tutoring, translating, and editing—as legitimate, even though such services can involve extensive intervention in students’ applications. Yet at the same time, they see the use of “education agents”—consultants who help students navigate the admissions process, identify schools and craft applications, and facilitate paperwork related to international admission—as illegitimate and shameful. Hiring an education agent is seen as undermining the meritocratic process of admission, while paying for English services is instead a means of leveling the playing field. Students made this distinction despite the fact that admissions success reflected not only talent and effort, but the varying amounts of cultural, economic, and social capital that they brought to the process. Recognizing their collective disadvantage along one dimension did not lead to a broader recognition of individual (dis)advantages along other dimensions, nor to challenging the fairness of the meritocracy more generally."
"34" "Becoming a Taiwanese International Student"
"35" "The number of Taiwanese students studying abroad has increased from 216 in 1950 to 41,090 in 2018  (Ministry of Education, 2019) . For the past two decades, more than 30,000 Taiwanese students—3% of the total college-age population in 2018—have pursued overseas postsecondary degrees each year  (Dai and Chan, 2006) . Historically, U.S. colleges and universities have been the most popular international destination for Taiwanese students, with 31% traveling to the U.S. in  2018, compared to 15% studying in Australia and 13% in Japan, the second- and third-most-popular destinations  (Ministry of Education, 2019) ."
"36" "As the higher education system has become increasingly global, the number of international applicants to U.S. institutions has shot up (until recently) at both the undergraduate and graduate levels  (Institute of International Education, 2017) . For Taiwanese students facing increased competition for U.S. slots, the demand for admissions assistance—both formal and informal—has risen. Against this backdrop, Taiwan was one of the first countries to see an “educational consulting industry”—designed to provide assistance with gaining admission to a competitive college—spring up. As in the U.S., this industry is accepted as necessary but seen as only somewhat legitimate, and its participants do considerable work to demonstrate that they are legitimate market actors and sometimes to obfuscate (Rossman 2014) the market nature of the transaction."
"37" "Students apply to schools in the U.S. because U.S. degrees are seen as a pathway to upward mobility  (Kim, 2010; Xiang and Shen, 2009) . Not only do students acquire a credential that is highl y desirable in the labor market,  but their educational opportunities allow them to distinguish themselves from their peers with domestic degrees  (Waters 2009; Waters and Leung 2013; Xiang and Shen 2009) . Yet making the transition to studying abroad is difficult, both socially and culturally. Prospective students must become familiar with the rules of a different system of higher education that values an unfamiliar performance of self, master difficult standardized tests, and prepare themselves to study in another language. Applicants to U.S. schools are expected to jump through various hurdles in the application process, during which they also learn to adapt to the values and norms of mainstream U.S. society, including meritocracy."
"38" "Over the last fifteen years,  online sharing of information  has become a key source of  knowledge about the application process  for many students  (Ngai, 2019; Matzat, 2009) . Moreover, as college admissions has become increasingly competitive and schools increasingly rely on individual merit to distinguish applicants, international students are forced to find new ways to distinguish themselves as well as demonstrating their excellence. Against this backdrop, Taiwanese students learn about international admissions through a variety of sources, including personal social networks, professors, and peers. The STUDYABROAD forum is widely consulted by potential applicants, and involves a great deal of information sharing and exchange between current applicants and students who have successfully navigated the process of becoming international students."
"39" "Collective Disadvantage in a Meritocratic System"
"40" "Participants in the STUDYABROAD forum largely buy into the idea that competitive college admissions is a meritocratic process: one that rewards a combination of native talent and, especially, hard work and commitment to mastering the arcane demands of college admissions offices. They understand embarking on the process of applying to competitive U.S. graduate schools as almost a heroic quest that one commits to: applicants “want to check and see if they can pass the challenge of getting accepted to top schools” (LebronKing ,  2012). This struggle has costs, but also intrinsic rewards: “For those who can endure the painful process, it is a testament to their resilience” (j031020 ,  2010)."
"41" "Success at this difficult endeavor requires ability but, above all, persistence. User Gnilnip, who called their two-year process of applying to graduate schools a “war”, emphasized that “Those who seemed like geniuses [because they received a Harvard fellowship in their first year] were  just as hardworking [as Gnilnip was], with most of their efforts buried under their success stories.”  Gnilnip continued,"
"42" "To be honest, behind every admission to prestigious schools was a sacrifice not everyone was willing to make. While others are already touring the world, I might be touring the library. While others are driving a famous car, drinking whiskey, getting married, and enjoying their success; I’m riding my bicycle, devouring pain killers, and writing my paper. This is probably going to be my life long after I graduate, or until I retire. Therefore, on some level, I would not say people who have admission to foreign prestigious school have a privilege. Instead, I might say “he or she really earned it.” ( Gnilni , 2012)"
"43" "This sense that competitive admission was something that was “earned” as a result of individual struggle was widely shared on the forum."
"44" "Yet while they understood the general process of admission as basically meritocratic, forum users also saw themselves—and Taiwanese applicants to competitive international universities more generally—as part of a common group with a shared identity. The forum was a place for participants to help one another through that process on the basis of that shared identity. Veterans of the process offered to help those at its beginning as a way to repay the assistance they had, in the past, received. As user henry77ha wrote in a post, “I was helped by so many people here [on the forum] and really want to pay it forward to other people…Please send an IM [internal message]. Free of charge. Please help three more Taiwanese in the future if you did receive my help” (henry77ha , 2015 )."
"45" "The competitive nature of the process could make this common interest initially hard to recognize, but going through it (and participating in the forum) helped applicants to recognize its existence. As longtime user L shared, “I’ve been participating in this site for over a decade….Applying to a foreign school is a lot of hard work, emotionally and academically. You come to realize that you are not competing with your peers [Taiwanese], but helping each other to overcome difficulties”   ( user L,  2018) ."
"46" "Part of this common identity was based simply on the common experience of navigating the complex admissions process. Another part, however, was based on a particular challenge shared by nearly all forum participants: applying as nonnative speakers of English. U.S. schools expected English applications, good performance on the TOEFL (Test of English as a Foreign Language), and high scores on other English-language exams, like the GRE, as well. For forum participants, rising to meet this challenge demonstrated merit in itself. As user j031020 wrote, “the learning process is quite difficult for the non-native speaker. Those who chose to study abroad are willing to face the obstacles of the language barrier. This alone should be worthy”(j031020 ,  2010)."
"47" "User Chucheng, returning to the language of war, similarly reflected, “Preparing for TOEFL and GRE was a lonely battle. It is not just about learning the right content and the format of the exam. It is also about learning to be resilient. Both exams take more than four hours to complete. Hundreds and thousands of hours to prepare for. Sometimes you have to be able to make instant judgments in exams, for which no amount of language instruction would aid you enough” (Chucheng  ,  2008). Part of the common identity of forum participants was based on sharing this particular disadvantage, which members of the community all had to overcome if they were to succeed in their quest to attend a U.S. university."
"48" "Disdain for the Use of Education Agents"
"49" "As is perhaps not surprising in a community of users who believed in the meritocracy of admissions and saw themselves as being on a heroic quest, STUDYABROAD users were disdainful both of education agents themselves and of the people who used them. “Education agents”—sometimes referred to as “education brokers”, with negative overtones, or as “education consultants”, the agents’ preferred term—offer a variety of services. Much like admissions consultants in the U.S., they might provide information about schools, help to identify good matches, strategize about how to prepare for the admissions process, assist with self-presentation in the application itself, and work on the crafting of a personal statement. In addition, education agents often assist with the paperwork particular to international admissions, like visa applications and travel arrangements. In Taiwan, such consultants are commonly graduates of selective U.S. institutions, and now help others to achieve the same."
"50" "Forum participants, however, understood education agents to be acting out of opportunism, and agents’ visible participation in discussion threads was a community taboo. The community was disdainful of their qualifications: “This may sound harsh, but I think nobody’s career goal was to be an education agent prior to studying abroad” (Ggggggg ,  2014). This was, actually, an evaluation agents themselves agreed with: “If you level it clearly, it is not a very prestigious job” ( user T,  2018). Agents were denigrated as motivated solely by money, and as making unreasonably high pay: “Agents are incredibly profitable….[it’s] an occupation with no initial cost and able to charge a tremendously high fee. They do not have to be on call, they can deal with their clients after work on a part-time basis. Each case is worth about $1000 to $3000. You have to do serious work to earn that money otherwise” (deacon ,  2014)."
"51" "Similarly, it was taboo for students to ask for information about education agents on the forum, and users who demonstrated interest in such topics were at risk of alienating themselves from other members. One student found this puzzling: “This is peculiar to me. Why can’t I ask questions about agents? Every time someone posts something about the agents the immediate reaction from everyone is ‘Please do it yourself’ and ‘As a candidate for international study, you should be ashamed of relying on others’” (student7 ,  2011)."
"52" "Other users explained that there was simply no need for students to use agents, especially given the resources the forum provided: “If you work hard enough, you can just post a thread here, and the netizens will give all kinds of opinions. Combine all of our experience together, and we know more than your agent” (ndr ,  2010). Given access to such knowledge, turning to agents demonstrated an abdication of personal responsibility: “To be honest, if you are preparing to study abroad, shouldn’t you be more responsible for your own application process?” (Nakatsu ,  2014). User ahyang commented on the same thread that agents’ only potentially legitimate function was to provide information on specific programs, but students could (and should) find that themselves, if they were willing to do just a little legwork: “If you are certain about what you want, such as programs and research areas, you don’t have to look at every school. You merely skim through some of the information on the website, probably less than five minutes per school. Prepare your file, which is like a half-hour of work. That takes no more than a weekend” (ahyang ,  2014)."
"53" "Even community members who had paid for the services of agents felt that doing so had tainted their admission. One student who successfully enrolled in a selective U.S. university after hiring an agent recalled,"
"54" "Back then, I just wanted to reduce some of the pressure. So I got lazy. I’m not regretful—because I’m here. Nobody can take that away from me. But sometimes,  I do feel that I failed to manage my own path, and I am essentially buying my way into graduate school. They [forum users] were somewhat right in saying that I could not take care of myself, and it made me feel inferior to others.…I think that getting through the application process signifies that you are one of a kind and competent in crafting the opportunity for yourself. I don’t want to tell others about the agent [that I worked with] because I don’t want to be thought of as incompetent ( User  F ,  2016)."
"55" "Thus members of the STUDYABROAD community shared a perception that purchasing the services of education agents was illegitimate, and enforced a ban not only on the (visible) participation of such agents in the forum, but even on discussing the use of such services. This cultural rule was taught to new members, and internalized among community participants so that even those who had used such agents successfully felt ashamed that they had done so, and did not want others to know about their participation in this market."
"56" "Justification for the Use of English-Language Services"
"57" "In sharp contrast to the disdain and shame associated with the use of education agents in the application process, the STUDYABROAD community saw another market for admissions-related services as completely legitimate: paying for English-language help. Students took classes to help them score better on the TOEFL and paid tutors to help them improve their English-language skills. They hired English-language editors to help them polish language to sound smarter and express themselves better in the all-important “SOP”—Statement of Purpose. These services could be intensive, and involve a great deal of intervention in students’ writing and self-expression. Yet  unlike hiring education agents, which was widely denounced as shameful, paying for English-language services was universally accepted in the forum, and hiring an independent editor, in particular, was encouraged and seen as a smart move."
"58" "Community members could not always articulate why English-language services were acceptable to use when education agents were not. User T, an education agent who frequently visited the forum, reflected on this in an interview: “Many student netizens don’t mind sharing about [i.e. being associated with] professional tutors and translators. The editors and tutors also work for pay [like education agents], so I don’t know. Maybe they are more expensive, so people find them more legitimate? I don’t know.”   (User T, 2018).  Here, a participant acknowledged that the differences between the two markets that made them morally distinct were not self-evident."
"59" "When pressed, however, students distinguished between improving one’s ability to play the game and paying someone else to play it for you: “Hiring an editor requires a lot of individualized work and self-learning. You need to be mindful of what you want to do and what you need. We are like players who hire a professional coach to help train to be better competitors. But we are the ones fighting the battle. Hiring a commercial agent is letting the agent do the work for you” ( User  N ,  2016). The value of the quest to be admitted to a selective institution lay in carrying it out on one’s own. Improving one’s capacity to do so through one’s own hard work (even with paid assistance) was understood as legitimate. Circumventing the process, on the other hand, was not."
"60" "Yet making the distinction between education agents and English-language services on these grounds seems arbitrary. It is true that paying a tutor to help improve one’s English skills still required individual effort to actually carry out the learning. Nor was working with an English-language editor to improve one’s Statement of Purpose typically a passive process. But working  with an education agent required effort as well. Education agents understood their job as providing information and advice so a student could find programs that would be an excellent fit and craft themselves into the strongest applicant possible for those programs. This did not inherently involve less work on the part of the applicant."
"61" "A more compelling explanation students gave for why English-related services were legitimate, while education agents were not, rested on the fact that such services helped with English, specifically. Community members recognized their collective disadvantage as nonnative speakers of English in a system that expected native fluency. Other elements of the admissions process—even arcane ones, like the American demand for self-expression in applications essays—were understood as legitimate meritocratic criteria worthy of personal mastery. But the expectation of very high levels of English-language performance, while universally acknowledged, was not understood as integral to the meritocratic process in the same way."
"62" "This sense that the expectation of fluent English was not a fair meritocratic standard, and thus that paying for services that could compensate for a lack of such fluency was perfectly legitimate, was widespread. In an interview, one community member, who firmly believed that people who hire education agents are “lazy”, paradoxically had no qualms about employing an independent editor himself while applying to international universities: “I think it’s a regular practice. Everyone does it one way or another. We cannot write English as well as Americans and British applicants do, you know what I mean? So I think hiring an editor gives us an equal chance” ( User  N ,  2016)."
"63" "Similarly, another user pointed to English fluency not as part of demonstrating merit, but as a prerequisite to being able to do so—a tool for overcoming global disadvantage:"
"64" "English is not just an international language. It is a form of empowerment. The tool that wins you access to all the information needed….Only when you have gained the advantage of acquiring all the information can you negotiate with Western society about “fairness” and “merit”….English brings you freedom, and that represents the freedom to fight back [against the West] for what you deserve. (fuffy, 2015)"
"65" "The legitimacy of the market for English-language services lay in a deeper level of sense of collective disadvantage, one that English speakers failed to even recognize. User cottonball succinctly captured this sentiment:"
"66" "I remember reading an article from the  New York Times  many years ago about a ‘Crazy English Camp’ in China. I was shocked, both by the devotion of [mainland] Chinese students and by how the West views people who struggle with English. For people around the world—the West, especially the U.S.—to see you exist, you need to speak perfect English. Language brings you the ultimate power, because language decides whether you exist at all. Resistance might be possible. But you risk marginalizing yourself forever (cottonball ,  2008)."
"67" "The English fluency that is expected in the admissions process is not understood as a form of meritocracy, but as a reflection of Western power. Pushing back against the hegemony of English by paying for English-language services was thus not only legitimate, but even noble."
"68" "Circumventing or Reinforcing the Sacred Meritocracy?"
"69" "While forum participants drew a bright line between education agents and English-language services, it was not the case that the former necessarily provided a more intensive form of intervention into the application process than the latter, nor did their use necessarily require less active effort on the part of students. Instead, what distinguished English-language services was that they addressed a specific, collective disadvantage that forum participants shared: their status as nonnative speakers of English in a global higher education system in which English was hegemonic. Community members believed in the meritocracy of the system and valued the struggle to become a successful applicant. Paying for services to circumvent that process was looked down upon. Yet they did not understand English fluency as a skill that similarly needed to be achieved without paid assistance. Instead, paying for help with English was a smart move that could overcome collective disadvantage."
"70" "These students recognized the essential unfairness of the meritocratic system along one specific dimension—that by virtue of being born in Taiwan, rather than the U.S., they were not native speakers of the expected language. Yet recognizing the system’s unfairness along one dimension did not lead them to challenge it along other dimensions, nor did it cause them to doubt the value of meritocracy in general. Instead, outside this single dimension of language, their accounts of success and failure remained individualistic rather than structural. Native ability and, especially, hard work were key to success in the admissions game."
"71" "This belief in the meritocratic system as rewarding individual ability and effort remained despite wide variation within the community—itself already a group of would-be elites—in how much economic, cultural, and social capital its members brought to the admissions process. Students’ preexisting knowledge of how international admissions worked, their networks of friends and family who had gone through the process firsthand, and their ability to pay for  expensive tutoring and editing services (not to mention the cost of study) all affected their capacity to successfully negotiate the process, independent of any individual ability or their level of effort. While forum participants were able to identify their collective disadvantage, and their beliefs about market morality reflected that recognition, this did not raise awareness of their own widely varying capacities to “play the game” more generally."
"72" "Moral Markets in a Meritocracy"
"73" "As elite college admission has become increasingly competitive, the market for services to help applicants navigate the process has dramatically expanded. Yet while paying for some kinds of assistance is viewed as a normal, even routine, part of the process, other services are seen as illegitimate, and as undermining a nominally meritocratic process. Why do students define some markets in admissions-related services as morally legitimate, while others are morally questionable?"
"74" "We draw on the moral markets literature to argue that admissions services can be usefully thought of as “difficult” markets because they intervene in a sacred meritocratic process. Our sample of participants in a Taiwanese online admissions forum believed strongly that the admissions process was fundamentally meritocratic, and would reward dedication and hard work. They disdained people who paid education agents to facilitate the admissions process, because paying for such help undermined the meritocratic process through laziness and dependency ."
"75" "Yet while participants believed in meritocracy, they also recognized their collective disadvantage as Mandarin-speakers in a system that rewarded English. Unlike hiring education agents, paying for English-language services—even though that could involve significant intervention into students’ applications—was seen as completely legitimate, and to be expected. This was not understood as undermining the meritocracy, but as compensating for collective  disadvantage, and thus rendering the playing field more even. By defining one set of services as outside the sacred meritocratic game, they could justify paying for them. This did not erode faith in the game itself, nor did it draw attention to the fact that some of them, by virtue of their social position, started in a better position to play that game than others."
"76" "Understanding admissions services as moral markets helps us think through the way people draw boundaries between legitimate and illegitimate markets in the context of competitive college admissions, and under what conditions they begin to challenge sacred meritocratic assumptions. Among Taiwanese applicants, it was recognition of a shared, unfair disadvantage that made certain services—ones that directly compensated for that disadvantage—morally permissible to buy. That is, paying to counteract disadvantages that are understood to unfairly impinge on meritocratic processes is seen as legitimate. Thus it is not surprising that parents may see paying for a private psychological evaluation that is likely to result in a disability diagnosis that will give students extra test-taking time as legitimate, since extra time can be seen as leveling the playing field. Paying for someone to write a child’s admissions essays, by contrast, is less morally defensible."
"77" "This perspective also raises questions about the persistence of faith in meritocracy and the conditions under which it erodes. It was Taiwanese students’ shared recognition of disadvantage, and a sense that that disadvantage was unfair, that made the market for English-language services morally distinct from the market for education agents. Yet recognizing that disadvantage did not prompt rejection of meritocracy more generally—only acceptance of ways to counter that specific disadvantage."
"78" "Similarly, we see other communities, often organized along identity lines (e.g. race/ethnicity, nationality, gender, first-generation status), recognize collective disadvantage in  a putatively meritocratic process and  develop strategies to combat it , whether political (advocating  for affirmative action) or individual (trading tips on how to succeed as a member of a disadvantaged group) . Typically, it is not possible to purchase services that directly compensate for other types of collective disadvantage, as English-language help does for Taiwanese students. Regardless of whether these strategies involve market action, however, such responses often fail to lead to challenges to the system as a whole, instead manifesting as efforts to make it more “truly” meritocratic by leveling the playing field in one way or another."
"79" "Understanding admissions services as moral markets around a sacred process also provides insights into how such markets may be legitimated. Existing research suggest that the markets themselves may be sacralized  (Zelizer, 1978) , professionals may define practices that demonstrate the legitimacy of particular parts of the market  (Anteby, 2010) , participants may do cultural work to produce new, more acceptable conceptions of the market  (Quinn, 2008; Chan, 2009) , or frames around what markets are permissible may gradually be extended  (Dioun, 2018) . Such efforts are already taking place among education agents. In the United States, for example, a trade association CEO writes, “Independent Educational Consultants (IECs) help level the playing field by supporting working- and middle-class students who go to public school, by allowing families of more modest means to gain similar expert help and advice at an hourly rate that is affordable for most ”   (Sklarow, 2019) . The market for education agents will be understood as more morally acceptable if it, too, is a means of leveling the playing field, rather than circumventing the meritocracy."
"80" "Finally, considering the space around a particular sacred value—meritocracy—as one where market morality is often contested suggests other sites where similar dynamics are likely to play out, and to highlight why (i.e. their sacred status) such issues are likely to arise in the first place —not because of some intrinsic character of the markets, but because of social processes that  imbue them with such characteristics . Much of the moral markets literature looks at markets associated with bodies, death, or reproduction. While research has also looked at markets around religious sites  (Yue et al., 2019)  and illegal drugs  (Dioun, 2018) , for example, as sites of moral work, thinking of meritocracy as a similarly sacred value suggests other dynamics we might expect to see. For example, dynamics of obfuscation  (Rossman, 2014; Schilke and Rossman, 2018)  and purification  (Fridman and Luscombe, 2017)  that are visible around other forms of disreputable exchange seem likely to arise around meritocracy as well. The broad moral markets approach can be usefully applied beyond its core topics to a range of societally or locally sacred beliefs that are challenged by encounters with the market. Given the proliferation of “markets in everything”, this seems like fertile ground to plow."
"81" "References"
"82" "Almeling, R. (2007) ‘Selling Genes, Selling Gender: Egg Agencies, Sperm Banks, and the Medical Market in Genetic Material’,  American Sociological Review ,  72 , 319–340."
"83" "Almeling, R. (2011)  Sex Cells: The Medical Market for Eggs and Sperm , University of California Press."
"84" "Alon, S. (2009) ‘The Evolution of Class Inequality in Higher Education: Competition, Exclusion, and Adaptation’,  American Sociological Review ,  74 , 731–755."
"85" "Alon, S. and Tienda, M. (2007) ‘Diversity, Opportunity, and the Shifting Meritocracy in Higher Education’,  American Sociological Review ,  72 , 487–511."
"86" "Altbach, P. G. (2013) ‘Agents and Third-Party Recruiters in International Higher Education’. In  The International Imperative in Higher Education , Springer, pp. 129–133."
"87" "An, B. P. (2010) ‘The Relations between Race, Family Characteristics, and Where Students Apply to College’,  Social Science Research ,  39 , 310–323."
"88" "Anteby, M. (2010) ‘Markets, Morals, and Practices of Trade: Jurisdictional Disputes in the U.S. Commerce in Cadavers’,  Administrative Science Quarterly ,  55 , 606–638."
"89" "Bandelj, N. (2009) ‘Emotions in Economic Action and Interaction’,  Theory and Society ,  38 , 347–366."
"90" "Bandelj, N. (2012) ‘Relational Work and Economic Sociology’,  Politics & Society ,  40 , 175–201."
"91" "Binder, A. J. and Abel, A. R. (2019) ‘Symbolically Maintained Inequality: How Harvard and Stanford Students Construct Boundaries among Elite Universities’,  Sociology of Education ,  92 , 41–58."
"92" "Binder, A. J., Davis, D. B. and Bloom, N. (2016) ‘Career Funneling: How Elite Students Learn to Define and Desire “‘Prestigious’” Jobs’,  Sociology of Education ,  89 , 20–39."
"93" "Bray, M. (2017) ‘Schooling and Its Supplements: Changing Global Patterns and Implications for Comparative Education’,  Comparative Education Review ,  61 , 469–491."
"94" "Brown, P., Power, S., Tholen, G. and Allouch, A. (2016) ‘Credentials, Talent and Cultural Capital: A Comparative Study of Educational Elites in England and France’,  British Journal of Sociology of Education ,  37 , 191–211."
"95" "Buchmann, C., Condron, D. J. and Roscigno, V. J. (2010) ‘Shadow Education, American Style: Test Preparation, the SAT and College Enrollment’,  Social Forces ,  89 , 435–461."
"96" "Byun, S. and Park, H. (2012) ‘The Academic Success of East Asian American Youth: The Role of Shadow Education’,  Sociology of Education ,  85 , 40–60."
"97" "Chan, C. S. (2009) ‘Creating a Market in the Presence of Cultural Resistance: The Case of Life Insurance in China’,  Theory and Society ,  38 , 271–305."
"98" "Chang, H.-J. (2009) ‘Online Supportive Interactions: Using a Network Approach to Examine Communication Patterns within a Psychosis Social Support Group in Taiwan’,  Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology ,  60 , 1504–1517."
"99" "Dai, C. and Chan, Z. (2006)  Public Response and the Issue of Decreasing Number of Students Going Abroad , Taipei, Research, Development and Evaluation Commsion, Executive Yuan."
"100" "Deil-Amen, R. and Lopez, R. N. T. (2007) ‘A Review of the Transition to College Literature in Sociology’,  Teachers College Record ,  109 , 2324–2366."
"101" "Dioun, C. (2018) ‘Negotiating Moral Boundaries: Social Movements and the Strategic (Re)Definition of the Medical in Cannabis Markets’, accessed at https://www.emerald.com/insight/content/doi/10.1108/S0733-558X20180000056004/full/html on September 12, 2019."
"102" "Espenshade, T. J., Chung, C. Y. and Walling, J. L. (2004) ‘Admission Preferences for Minority Students, Athletes, and Legacies at Elite Universities*’,  Social Science Quarterly ,  85 , 1422–1446."
"103" "Espenshade, T. J. and Radford, A. W. (2013)  No Longer Separate, Not Yet Equal: Race and Class in Elite College Admission and Campus Life , Princeton University Press."
"104" "Fourcade, M. and Healy, K. (2007) ‘Moral Views of Market Society’,  Annual Review of Sociology ,  33 , 285–311."
"105" "Fridman, D. and Luscombe, A. (2017) ‘Gift-Giving, Disreputable Exchange, and the Management of Donations in a Police Department’,  Social Forces ,  96 , 507–528."
"106" "Gatson, S. N. (2011) ‘The Methods, Politics, and Ethics of Representation in Online Ethnography’,  Collecting and Interpreting Qualitative Materials ,  4 , 245–275."
"107" "Gatson, S. N. and Zweerink, A. (2004) ‘Ethnography Online: “Natives” Practising and Inscribing Community’,  Qualitative Research ,  4 , 179–200."
"108" "Golder, S. A. and Macy, M. W. (2014) ‘Digital Footprints: Opportunities and Challenges for Online Social Research’,  Annual Review of Sociology ,  40 , 129–152."
"109" "Goldstein, D. and Patel, J. K. (2019) ‘Need Extra Time on Tests? It Helps to Have Cash’,  The New York Times  ( 30 July 2019)."
"110" "Grodsky, E. and Riegle-Crumb, C. (2010) ‘Those Who Choose and Those Who Don’t: Social Background and College Orientation’,  The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science ,  627 , 14–35."
"111" "Hallett, R. E. and Barber, K. (2014) ‘Ethnographic Research in a Cyber Era’,  Journal of Contemporary Ethnography ,  43 , 306–330."
"112" "Healy, K. (2006)  Last Best Gifts: Altruism and the Market for Human Blood and Organs , University of Chicago Press."
"113" "Independent Educational Consultants Association (2019) ‘FAQs About the Independent Educational Consulting Profession –’, accessed at https://www.iecaonline.com/quick-links/ieca-news-center/press/background-information-on-independent-educational-consulting/ on September 13, 2019."
"114" "Institute of International Education (2017)  Open Doors , New York, Institute of International Education."
"115" "Karabel, J. (2006)  The Chosen: The Hidden History of Admission and Exclusion at Harvard, Yale, and Princeton , Houghton Mifflin Harcourt."
"116" "Karen, D. (1990) ‘Toward a Political-Organizational Model of Gatekeeping: The Case of Elite Colleges’,  Sociology of Education ,  63 , 227–240."
"117" "Karen, D. (1991) ‘“Achievement” and “Ascription” in Admission to an Elite College: A Political-Organizational Analysis’,  Sociological Forum ,  6 , 349–380."
"118" "Killgore, L. (2009) ‘Merit and Competition in Selective College Admissions’,  The Review of Higher Education ,  32 , 469–488."
"119" "Kim, T. (2010) ‘Transnational Academic Mobility, Knowledge, and Identity Capital’,  Discourse: Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education ,  31 , 577–591."
"120" "Lainer-Vos, D. (2013) ‘The Practical Organization of Moral Transactions: Gift Giving, Market Exchange, Credit, and the Making of Diaspora Bonds’,  Sociological Theory ,  31 , 145–167."
"121" "Liu, A. (2011) ‘Unraveling the Myth of Meritocracy within the Context of US Higher Education’,  Higher Education ,  62 , 383–397."
"122" "Livne, R. (2014) ‘Economies of Dying: The Moralization of Economic Scarcity in U.S. Hospice Care’,  American Sociological Review ,  79 , 888–911."
"123" "Livne, R. (2019)  Values at the End of Life: The Logic of Palliative Care , Harvard University Press."
"124" "Lu, H.-P., Lin, J. C.-C., Hsiao, K.-L. and Cheng, L.-T. (2010) ‘Information Sharing Behaviour on Blogs in Taiwan: Effects of Interactivities and Gender Differences’,  Journal of Information Science ,  36 , 401–416."
"125" "Matzat, U. (2009) ‘The Embeddedness of Academic Online Groups in Offline Social Networks: Reputation Gain as a Stimulus for Online Discussion Participation?’,  International Sociology ,  24 , 63–92."
"126" "Medina, J., Benner, K. and Taylor, K. (2019) ‘Actresses, Business Leaders and Other Wealthy Parents Charged in U.S. College Entry Fraud’,  The New York Times  ( 12 March 2019)."
"127" "Ministry of Education (2019)  The distribution of Taiwanese international students around the world,  Taipei, Taiwan, Department of International and Cross-strait Education."
"128" "Musselin, C. (2018) ‘New Forms of Competition in Higher Education’,  Socio-Economic Review ,  16 , 657–683."
"129" "Ngai, P. B.-Y. (2019) ‘Online Social Networking and Transnational- Competence Development Among International Students from Japan’,  Journal of International Students ,  9 , 432–459."
"130" "Park, H., Buchmann, C., Choi, J. and Merry, J. J. (2016) ‘Learning Beyond the School Walls: Trends and Implications’,  Annual Review of Sociology ,  42 , 231–252."
"131" "Park, H., Byun, S. and Kim, K. (2011) ‘Parental Involvement and Students’ Cognitive Outcomes in Korea: Focusing on Private Tutoring’,  Sociology of Education ,  84 , 3–22."
"132" "Posselt, J. R. (2016)  Inside Graduate Admissions: Merit, Diversity, and Faculty Gatekeeping , Harvard University Press."
"133" "Posselt, J. R., Jaquette, O., Bielby, R. and Bastedo, M. N. (2012) ‘Access Without Equity: Longitudinal Analyses of Institutional Stratification by Race and Ethnicity, 1972–2004’,  American Educational Research Journal ,  49 , 1074–1111."
"134" "Quinn, S. (2008) ‘The Transformation of Morals in Markets: Death, Benefits, and the Exchange of Life Insurance Policies’,  American Journal of Sociology ,  114 , 738–780."
"135" "Radford, A. W. (2013)  Top Student, Top School?: How Social Class Shapes Where Valedictorians Go to College , University of Chicago Press."
"136" "Reich, A. D. (2014) ‘Contradictions in the Commodification of Hospital Care’,  American Journal of Sociology ,  119 , 1576–1628."
"137" "Rossman, G. (2014) ‘Obfuscatory Relational Work and Disreputable Exchange’,  Sociological Theory ,  32 , 43–63."
"138" "Schilke, O. and Rossman, G. (2018) ‘It’s Only Wrong If It’s Transactional: Moral Perceptions of Obfuscated Exchange’,  American Sociological Review ,  83 , 1079–1107."
"139" "Sklarow, M. H. (2019) ‘How IECs Help Level the Playing Field in College Admissions’, accessed at https://www.iecaonline.com/how-iecs-help-level-the-playing-field-in-college-admissions/ on September 19, 2019."
"140" "Stevens, M. L. (2009)  Creating a Class , Harvard University Press."
"141" "Stevens, M. L., Roksa, J. and Roksa, J. (2012) ‘The Diversity Imperative in Elite Admissions’,  Diversity in American Higher Education , accessed at https://www.taylorfrancis.com/ on September 13, 2019."
"142" "The Observatory on Borderless Higher Education (2014)  The Agent Question: Insight from Students, Universities and Agents , The Observatory on Borderless Higher Education."
"143" "Turco, C. (2012) ‘Difficult Decoupling: Employee Resistance to the Commercialization of Personal Settings’,  American Journal of Sociology ,  118 , 380–419."
"144" "Warikoo, N. K. (2016)  The Diversity Bargain: And Other Dilemmas of Race, Admissions, and Meritocracy at Elite Universities , University of Chicago Press."
"145" "Waters, J. L. (2009) ‘Transnational Geographies of Academic Distinction: The Role of Social Capital in the Recognition and Evaluation of “Overseas” Credentials’,  Globalisation, Societies and Education ,  7 , 113–129."
"146" "Waters, J. and Leung, M. (2013) ‘Immobile Transnationalisms? Young People and Their in-Situ Experiences of “International” Education in Hong Kong’,  Urban Studies ,  50 , 606–620."
"147" "Xiang, B. and Shen, W. (2009) ‘International Student Migration and Social Stratification in China’,  International Journal of Educational Development ,  29 , 513–522."
"148" "Yue, L. Q., Wang, J. and Yang, B. (2019) ‘Contesting Commercialization: Political Influence, Responsive Authoritarianism, and Cultural Resistance’,  Administrative Science Quarterly ,  64 , 435–465."
"149" "Zelizer, V. A. (1978) ‘Human Values and the Market: The Case of Life Insurance and Death in 19th-Century America’,  American Journal of Sociology ,  84 , 591–610."
"150" "Zelizer, V. A. (1994)  Pricing the Priceless Child: The Changing Social Value of Children , Princeton University Press."
