"x"
"1" "Eco-Moms and Climate Change:"
"2" "The Moderating Effects of Fertility in Explaining Gender Differences in Concern"
"3" "Carmel  E.  Price *"
"4" "University of Michigan-Dearborn"
"5" "Stephanie A. Bohon"
"6" "University of Tennessee"
"7" "*Please direct all correspondence to  Dr.  Carmel Price,  Department of Behavioral Sciences , University of Michigan-Dearborn, 4901 Evergreen Road, Dearborn, MI 48128,  carmelp@umich.edu , 313-593-5085."
"8" "Eco-Mom s and Climate Change :"
"9" "The Moderating Effects of  Fertility   in Explaining Gender Differences  in Concern"
"10" "Abstract"
"11" "W omen  typically report greater  concern  for the environment , including climate change,  than men .  The e co-mom  theory —the  belief that women have greater environmental concern than men because mothers primarily care about the health and safety of their children, while fathers primarily care about the economic support of the ir  household—is  often  proffered as an explanation for  this  differe nce.  R esearchers who  have  previously  test ed   the  eco-mom  theory have  narrowly   operationalized  parenthood ; we are skeptical of this theory and believe it needs additional testing .  We look at fertility in relation to concern for climate change   using   the  2010 General Social Survey .  M odeling parenthood  like previous studies , we find no differences in concern for climate change between women who have children and those who do not. Modeling fertility, we find that having more children is associated with less concern for climate change for women but not men.  Additionally,  we find  no  gender  difference in concern  for  climate change  for those with many children , but t hese findings  are complicated by education.  Overall, we  refute  the eco-mom  theory  and  call  for  new climate change survey data that  better capture gender roles and identity  as well as  more  qualitative  inquiries  into  public  concern for climate change."
"12" "Keywords:  environmental concern, climate change, eco-mom  theory , social role s  theory , gender"
"13" "Eco-Moms and Climate Change:"
"14" "The Moderating Effects of Fertility in Explaining Gender Differences  in Concern"
"15" "Women  are  on the front lines of environmental justice movements ,  and their activism is frequently tied to their roles as mothers and grandmothers  ( Culley and Angelique 2003; Logsdon-Conradsen and Allred 2010; Hunter 2011; Bell 2013 ) .  In  ethnographic  studies of environmental activism , women’s  caretaking  roles are  emphasized   as they  express concerns about localized pollution  and  the health and well-being of their families.  For example,  Bell and Braun (2010) find that women use motherhood  as  a  justification for their  engagement in environmental justice issues regarding  coal mining in Appalachia ."
"16" "Researchers who analyze p ublic opinion  data measuring concern for climate change typically report  that women express greater concern than men ( e.g.,   Stern, Dietz, and Kalof 1993; Davidson and Freudenburg 1996; McCright et al. 2016).  Those who attempt to explain  these  gender  difference s  often  use the motherhood narrative from the frontlines of environmental justice  movements  in their explanation s  (e.g., Logsdon-Conradsen and Allred 2010) . That is,  they employ  social roles theory and, specifically, the  eco-mom   theory   that  states that   women have higher levels of environmental concern than men because they are mothers.   However,  the motherhood narrative in environmental justice — a narrative that  is predominately  focused  on health — typically   translate s   poorly  into an explanation for women’s greater concern for climate change , since l ocal environmental activism is distinct from global environmental concern, including concern for climate change.   W e  also  conten d  that  using parenthood ( having a child or not ) rather than fertility (number of children) to test   the eco-mom  theory  as others have done  ( Blocker and Eckberg 1997; McCright 2010; Xiao and McCright 2012 )   does not  capture the gender role differences assumed to be at the heart of  the  eco-mom  theory . T he  purpose of  our work  is to  examine the role of fertility in explaining gender differences in concern for climate change."
"17" "Using the 2010 General Social Survey  (GSS) , we  test models examining  the eco-mom theory that look  at parenthood as well as  more nuanced models that examine  fertility and how these factors may or may not explain gender differences in concern for climate change. Our models take into account  the complicating effects of  labor force participation and  education on these relationships , as ferti lity, work, and  e ducation are closely linked ( Boyd 1994;  Musick et al. 2009;  Finlay and Lee 2018;  Nitsche and Brückner 2018 ) .  Our  findings  call into question how the  eco-mom  theory   has been operationalized to explain  gender difference s  in  concern for climate change  and suggest that environmental scholars need to develop better  theoretical and statistical  models to  explain  gender differences  in  climate change concern .  Specifically, we argue that environmental concern scholars need to l ook more closely at  gender identity and  traditional family orientations as they  design messages about  the critical importance of reversing climate change."
"18" "The Eco-Mom Theory"
"19" "A  commonly  proffered  theory about why women express greater concern for the environment than men in public   opinion polls  is   social role s  theory  (McCright 2010; Davidson and Haan 2012). Social role s  theory suggests that women and men have different attitudes because they occupy different social spaces ;  women are active in the  home and engage in mothering activities while men spend most of their time at work, outside of the home and away from their children (Greenbaum 1995). Because of these role differences, women are concerned about the quality of their environment as it affects the health and safety of their children and families. By contrast, men are concerned about the economy, which is  often (and  erroneously )  considered incommensurate with concern about the environment (Greenbaum 1995; Davidson and Freudenburg 1996).  T he  eco-mom theory ,  which focuses specifically on women as mothers as it relates to their elevated concern for the environment ,   is a subset of social role s  theory ."
"20" "In 1996, Davidson and Freudenburg published a seminal piece that summarized existing literature on the demographic predictors of environmental concern and made general conclusions about the current state of knowledge (at that time) regarding gender as a predictor of concern.  T hey established  that  women tend to express greater levels of concern for the environment than men.  Specifically, they found that  women are more concerned about the environment  than men  when the risk involves health or safety ( see  Brody 1984 ).  They   also  found that the results of studies testing men’s parental roles produced varied results; however, studies up to that time examining women’s parental roles found  that  mothers exhibit ed  a greater concern for environmental risk than both fathers and women without children ( see  Blocker and Eckberg 1989).   Davidson and Freudenb u rg  (1996)  invoked  the  eco-mom  theory  to explain th e s e   modest but consistent  finding s ."
"21" "We contend that if men’s and women’s different concerns for the environ ment are explained by mothering ,   then  the eco-mom effect should be particularly salient with  regard to  concern for the effects of global climate change. Unlike other environmental concerns  such as  industrial pollution  that  is specific to  geographic locale s , the impact of climate change is more ubiquitous , although the impacts are  often  unequally  distributed across communities  (Harlan et al. 2015) .  Additionally, the impacts will  accumulate  over time, so the negative consequences  will be most severe for  children and grandchildren. If environmental concern is intrinsically linked to motherhood, what could motivate environmental concern more than a phenomenon that will have  a limited  impact  on a  woman , but will have a profound effect on her children and grandchildren?"
"22" "Three studies have tested aspects of the eco-mom theory as it relates to  environmental concern . Blocker and Eckberg (1997) used data from the 1993 GSS to test family roles on levels of  environmental concern  and found little evidence to suggest that family roles influence women’s  environmental perspectives . In fact, they found that women who report being homemakers express ed  lower levels of  environmental concern  than women in the   labor force. They also found no differences in levels of  environmental concern  between men and women who have children under the age of six in the house and those who do not. Instead, Blocker and Eckberg (1997) suggest that family roles operate through other variables such as political orientation, social  status, and religion.   C ontemporary scholarship ( see McCright et al. 2016 ) has explored these  additional  variables, yet gender differences in  environmental  concern remain unexplained."
"23" "More recently ,  Xia o  and McCright (2012) and McCright (2010)  look ed  at social role s  theory, including the role of parenting,  as  an explanation for gender differences in  concern for  climate change and found no effect. P arenthood, as well as parenthood and  gender interaction terms,  were  non-significant in  models  predicting levels of  concern for climate change .  These authors   reject  social role s  theory  as an   explanation  of   gender differences in  concern for  climate change. However,  the models they use are limited  for  fully testing the eco-mom theory, because they measured parenting dichotomously as either having a child living in the home or  not , such that one could be a parent and be categorized as “no” on this parenthood variable.  If the act of being a mother makes you more environmentally concerned, concerns for your children do not end when  your children leave home ."
"24" "There  are several  obvious  problem s  with social role s  theory , particularly as it has been operationalized in environmental concerns studies . First,  gendered social roles in the United States are continually evolving; women increasingly occupy economic spaces, and men are becoming more engaged fathers (Chesley 2011).  The eco-mom theory reduces women and feminine identity to motherhood which then minimizes the other roles and identities women occupy (Gillespie 2003).  Second,  being a mom might actually reduce one’s biographic availability to participate in environmental social movements. Xiao and McCright (2014) looked at the social roles of women (i.e. caretaking roles) as possible barriers to participation in public environmental behaviors. They found that being a parent of a young child and living with another adult reduces women’s (but not men’s) participation in public environmental behaviors.  Third ,  the eco-mom theory  is propelled by research narratives  about  mothers on the front lines of  environmental justice, which is conceptually distinct from  women expressing  general environmental concern, as we discuss in the following section."
"25" "However, despite our skepticism about  the  eco-mom theory, we are not completely convinced that  parenthood  is unrelated to concern for climate change ; we believe it more likely operates through fertility (number of children) rather than parenthood (presence of at least one child), as it is the former that is strongly linked  to gender roles.  R esearchers have long established that gender roles are intrinsically linked to  how many  children a couple has (Van de Kaa 1987;  Rindfuss and Brewster 1996; Rindfuss, Brewster, and Kavee 1996 ).  Some of these role differences are explained by  women’s education —a  factor directly linked to  concern for climate change  ( McCright et al. 2016 )— and labor force participation ,  but these factors  do not explain all  fertility differences .  F ertility also likely reflect s   difficult to measure  gender role differences such as the household division of labor and women’s empowerment ( Rindfuss and Brewster 1996;  Mills 2010). Thus, to better  test the eco-mom theory as an explanation of  gender differences in environmental concern,  an exploration of  fertility   and parents’ relationship to environmental concern  is required."
"26" "Women, Motherhood, and Environmental Justice"
"27" "In 2015,  LeeAnne Walters helped to discover  a  lead-contaminated tap water  crisis  in Flint, Michigan  after her tap water changed color and she later saw changes in her children’s health .   Her story is similar to other  concerned mother s   and grandmothers  fighting for  their  children against environmental toxins  in their communities  (see Culley and Angelique 2003; Logsdon-Conradsen and Allred 2010; Hunter 2011; Bell 2013) . These stories create  powerful narrative s  that evoke the impression of a fierce mama bear protecting her cub .   As Kaplan (1997) ex plained,   Lois Gibbs and other mothers protesting  pollution in the Love Canal  neighborhood in New York  began to  underst and  their power as mothers   when they  “learned that presenting themselves as outraged mothers—identities they really assumed—made them interesting to the news media and hard for government officials to attack” (p. 28)."
"28" "S imilarly, many activists on the frontlines of environmental justice movements highlight health concerns (Culley and Angelique 2003) or moral and ethical concerns (Price and Maples 2018) instead of framing their movements as environmental. Some of these framing decisions are strategic, others might stem from the social location of the activists (Krauss 1993) ,  since marginalized communities are disproportionally exposed to environmental hazards ( Harlan et al.  2015).  For example , Price and Maples (2018) describe an African American community in Ohio fighting against hydraulic fracking underneath a historic African American cemetery, however, they are not using environmental frames  but relying instead on a moral and ethical discourse and community beautification efforts.  Furthermore, deliberately minimizing environmentalism  and using other frames such as health or motherhood might be  an effective social movement strategy, as Bell (2013) explains:"
"29" "P rotest activities that mothers undertake on behalf of their children are often viewed apolitically and simply as extensions of a mother’s role to protect, clothe, shelter, and feed her children. Framing women’s activism as a result of mothering “instincts,” rather than a conscious decision, affords women a level of cultural protection and legitimation for their protest activities. (p. 170-171)"
"30" "In addition, the environmental justice literature has noted that women and children might disproportionately experience environmental harm. For example, Carson (1962) famously noted that embryos and infants receive small dos e s of toxic chemicals transferred to them through the womb and breast-milk.  At Love Canal, toxic exposure resulted in high rates of miscarriages and births to lo w weight and deformed children  (Kaplan 1997). As women disproportiona tel y experience these health effects and the care work associated with sick children,  it  provides  motivat ion for  environmental activism and a claim to expert knowledge and authority over their  experiences   (Brown and Ferguson 1995; Kaplan 1997).  As  Brown and Ferguson (1995) note, the negative impact  of pollutants  on  women’s  reproductive health has been a pillar of women’s environmental activism, as “problems in women’s own reproductive lives—miscarriages, still births, and birth defects—are often among the women’s first clues to toxic health effects” (p. 162). Brown and Ferguson (1995) highlight the impact of toxic pollution on women by arguing that “The centrality of women’s power as the creators of human life is thus injured.”"
"31" "Yet, it is important to distinguished between local environmental activism and general (or global) environmentalism for three reasons. First, local environmental activism tends to be organized around specific environmental problems (often industrial pollution that threatens the health and well-being of local community members), whereas environmentalism is far-reaching, acknowledges anthropogenic climate change, and is concerned about protecting and sustaining ecosystems so that all human and non-human species can thrive (Shwom et al. 2015). Second, those fighting environmental injustice in their communities tend to be working-class and/or people of color, yet mainstream  environmentalism has historically lacked diversity and attracts members who are white and relatively wealthy (see Jones 1998; Jones 2002). Third, health risks from localized pollution is often contextualized as urgent; however, risks posed by climate change are not typically considered urgent and are often minimized due to  a disconnection  between cause and effect (Dunlap and Brulle 2015)."
"32" "Furthermore , as several scholars of environmental justice and gender note, “social movement analyses of mother activism must not essentialize motherhood as a static and universal variable, but instead must situate it within relevant political and cultural conditions” (Shriver, Adams, and Einwohner 2013, p. 271 ; also see Krauss 1993 ). Some women may be politically, socially, or culturally attracted to the eco-mom identity (Stets and Biga 2003). However, as Neuhouser (1998) notes, working-class women have few options for positive, activist identities outside of motherhood ,  and so motherhood might be used as an organizing identity by default.  It is for reasons such as these that  we explore  how many children someone has  rather  than  whether they have a child, since fertility reflect s  “relevant political and cultural conditions” (ibid) and women’s gender role s and  identity (Mills 2010)."
"33" "Fertility and Environmental Concern"
"34" "R esearchers have employed survey data to test the eco-mom theory by using an indicator of whether or not a respondent is a parent (or has a child living at home) to predict environmental concern.  T hey found evidence for  the  eco-mom theory in older studies ( Blocker and Eckberg 1989; Davidson and Freudenburg 1996)  but not recently ( McCright 2010; Xiao and McCright 2012) .  However ,  it appears that  researchers  have  inadvertently conflated environmentalism and environmental justice activism when employing the eco-mom argument in the environmental concern literature.  The work on  environmental justi ce activism shows that  motherhood is a powerful narrative   ( Culley and Angelique 2003; Logsdon-Conradsen and Allred 2010; Hunter 2011; Bell 2013 ),  as women tap into their motherhood  identity   to fight against environmental hazards in their communities. However,  when  the  eco-mom theory is employed in explaining  gender differences in  environmental concern,  then  motherhood (versus not)  becomes  a proxy for  motherhood identity  and  gender roles .  C ontemporary researchers find no support for  the eco-mom theory , perhaps because they are using a bad proxy.  At the same time, to the extent that parenting is a proxy for  motherhood identity  and  gender roles, as the  previous models testing the  eco-mom theory would suggest, it makes more sense to examine fertility, rather than a dichotomous measure of parenthood, to capture gender role differences."
"35" "Demographers hav e long demonstrated that nation s ’  fertility rates reflect the position of women in a society ( Becker 1981;  Presser 1997; McDonald 2000 ), and women’s individual fertility often reflects gender roles ( Cooke 2004; Mills 2010 ) .  To date, most of the work linking gender roles to fertility examines how increased education and labor force participation has induced women to have fewer children. However, education and labor force participation only explain a portion of differences in the number of children women bear, and researchers generally believe that the unexplained differences in fertility probably reflect unmeasured gender role differences such as social  and political empowerment and the household division of labor ; lower fertility is typically associated more egalitarian gender roles (Mills 2010)."
"36" "So,  although   the  eco-mom theory has been employed (unsuccessfully of late) to attempt to explain why women care more about climate change than men, it is possible that women who have more children will express less concern about climate change than women with fewer children. A simple explanation is that women who care deeply about the environment may consciously limit their fertility .  Ray (2011) notes: “The average American mother is the quintessential environmental sinner for two reasons: she consumes and she reproduces. And, if human consumption and reproduction are the two greatest threats to planetary health, then mothers are a danger to the earth” (p. 81).  Thus, it might be expected  that  wom e n who are concerned about  the environment (or by extension  their  identit ies  as environmentalist s ) might choose not to have biological children, or to have fewer children, to keep reproduction at or below replacement levels.  It is important to note that  Ray’s (2011)  environmental sinner scenario is also applicable to fathers as participants in reproduction and consumption .  Yet , women are more visible in their roles as reproducers and consumers . For this reason, c orporations and marketing firms have actively participated in the construction and proliferation of the eco-mom persona by pushing environmentally friendly products to keep mothers consuming without guilt (Atkinson 2014)."
"37" "Unfortunately, available data that allow for a generalizable exploration of gender differences in environmental concern (including concern for climate change) do not allow researchers to closely examine gender roles or identities in explaining these differences.   For example, the General Social Survey sometimes measures concern for the environment, sometimes measures gender roles, and sometimes measures masculinity and femininity, but never in the same survey. However, we believe that we can come closer than previous researchers to understanding how role differences operate in explaining gender differences in concern for climate change by looking at fertility, rather than parenthood."
"38" "Our study examines three questions.  First, are there differences in  concern about global climate change between  women  with children and those without, as the eco-mom  theory would suggest, and does labor force participation mediate those differences?   Second, do men and women express different levels of concern for climate change, on average , when  fertility is taken into account? Third, to what extend does  education complicate  the role of fertility differences in  explain ing  differences in men’s and women’s environmental concern ?"
"39" "Because we are interested in fertility, our models are shaped by labor force participation and education, since these two factors have long been noted as the biggest predictors of fertility differences ( Rindfuss and Brewster 1996; Mills 2010 ). W omen with higher levels of education tend to have  fewer children than other women  (see Monte and Ellis 2014) , and women who work full-time tend to have fewer children than those who do not . Education is also correlated with environmental concern ;  many  studies show a positive  association  between  the two factors : those with higher levels of education tend to have slightly greater levels of environmental concern than those with lower levels of  education (Van Liere and Dunlap 1980; Jones and Dunlap 1992; Franzen and Meyer 2010; Cleary and Rhead 2013 ; McCright et al. 2016 )."
"40" "Data,  Methods , and Hypotheses"
"41" "D ata for this study  are  taken  from the General Social Survey (GSS) 2010 Environment III questionnaire , a nationally representative study of Americans’ attitudes .  The GSS is  frequently  used by environmental  concern  scholars ( see Jones and Dunlap 1992; Jones and Carter 1994; Jones 1998;  Xiao and McCright 201 4 ) as it provides  a  representative national snapshot of  environment al concern ."
"42" "Our dependent variable is a standardized scale (z-score) measuring respondents’ concern about the effects of climate change. The scale combines responses from five questions preceded with the prompt: “Scientists predict that global warming  may soon have big effects on the Polar Regions. I will describe some of these possible effects and, for each one, please say whether it would bother you a great deal, some, a little, or not at all if it actually happened.” The five statements are: (1) “Arctic penguins may be threatened”; (2) “Sea level may rise by more than 20 feet, flooding coastal areas”; (3) “By 2020, polar bears may become extinct”; (4) “Inuit and other native peoples may no longer be able to follow their traditional way of life”; and (5) “The northern ice cap may completely melt.” Each item was reverse coded so that larger numbers indicated greater concern, and the reliability estimate is α=.88."
"43" "Our first research question is whether there are differences in concern about climate change between women with children and those without, as the eco-mom theory would suggest, and  if  labor force participation mediates those differences.  The first part  of our research question is mostly a check against previous studies, although we used a broader conceptualization of parenthood  [ whether someone is a parent or not, instead of whether someone has a child at home, as  used by  Blocker and Eckberg  ( 1997 ) , McCright  ( 2010 ) , and Xiao and McCright  ( 2012 ) ] .  Thus, we hypothesize:"
"44" "H 1 . Controlling for other factors, women with children will report higher"
"45" "levels of concern for global climate change than women without children."
"46" "H 2 .  Controlling for other factors, women who have children and are not working"
"47" "full-time will report greater concern for climate change than other women."
"48" "To test these hypotheses, we use a subset of the GSS limited  only to women respondents. For  H 1 , we measure whether a respondent has children (coded 1 for one or more child) or not (coded 0). For H 2 , we measure whether the respondent has children and is not in the full-time labor force (coded 1) or  otherwise  (coded 1). We refer to those in the 1 category as stay-at-home moms, but we acknowledge that we have no way of knowing how women who are not working full-time spend their time, and children could be living away from the home."
"49" "Given that  the  eco-mom theory is based on the salience of traditional gender roles, and  given that fertility has long been linked to gender roles ( see Mills 2010 ),  having more children should  impact women’s concern for climate change .  Environmentally concerned men are likely to have fewer children, but their concern may not reflect gender roles associated with fertility, so the relationship between fertility and concern for climate change will be less strong.  We hypothesize:"
"50" "H 3 . Controlling for other factors,  the slope predicting  women ’s fertility and"
"51" "concern for climate change   will be steeper for women than for men."
"52" "To test this hypothesis , we  create multiplicative interaction terms combining the gender of the respondent (1=men; 0=women) and a continuous measure of the number of children a respondent has (which can include 0). Number of children is derived from a direct question, top-coded at 8. We  do not know if the children  are biological, adopted, or step-children, and we do not believe this matters. We also do not know the ages of the children or whether they live at home. In our analyses, we mean center the number of children so that 0 represents the average number of children  (around 2) . We also  test slope differences  and predictive  margin s ."
"53" "Our third research question is whether our findings are complicated by education. Education has been linked to concern for the environment (Franzen and Meyer 2010; Cleary and Rhead 2013), especially concern for global climate change (Lee et al. 2015). Additionally, fertility patterns are different  among  those with different levels of education (Monte and Ellis 2014). Overall, we expect that, if there is  a gender role  effect  reflected in fertility , it will be shown more dramatically when those with different levels of education are modeled separately. If the eco-mom theory reflects reality, we expect that men and women with lower levels of education  will  show an eco-mom effect more"
"54" "strongly.  We hypothesize:"
"55" "H 4 . Slope differences between men and women using fertility to predict concern"
"56" "for climate change will be greater for those with twelve years of education or less"
"57" "than for the more highly educated."
"58" "To test this, we split our sample and replicate  the tests of H 3  examining the moderating effect of number of children on gender as it predicts concern for global climate change. Our educational dividing point  assumes  that those with twelve years of education or less  completed their education with, at most, a high school diploma. In results not show, we compared those with less  than average education vers us average or greater education  and we did not get substantially different results."
"59" "In all our models, we control for factors that are shown to predict environmental concern.  These controls include  age in years ranging from 18 to 64, mean centered (Jones and Dunlap 1992; Dietz, Fitzgerald and Schwom 2005); race  measured  as  the  respondent is white (=1) or not (=0; Jones and Carter 1994; Mohai and Bryant 1998; Jones 1998; Jones 2002; Mohai 2003); self-reported class status measured as reporting lower and working class status (=1) or not (=0; Van Liere and Dunlap 1980; Finucane et al. 2000); whether (=1) or not (=0) the respondent is a Republican (Dunlap and McCright 2008); whether (=1) or not (=0) the respondent was living in an urban area at age 16 (Jones et al. 2003); whether (=1) or not (=0) the respondent is currently married (Blocker and Eckberg 1997); whether (=1) or not (=0) the resp ondent is affiliated with a f undamentalist Christian church (Blocker and Eckberg 1997; Dunlap and McCright 2008; Hamilton 2011 ; see Price 2011 for classifications ); and the frequency by which the respondent attends religious services (Deemer and Lobao 2011)."
"60" "All models tested in our analyses were examined to ensure that they met Gauss-Markov assumptions. We were especially concerned about the possibility of multicollinearity, given  that  education , labor force participation,   and fertility  might be  highly correlated. Tests of tolerance yielded variance inflation factors of no greater than 1.51, well below levels of concern for multicollinearity (c.f. Chatterjee and Hadi 2006)."
"61" "Our descriptive statistics are shown in Table 1. To  aid readers , we report an unstandardized measure of concern for climate change, although we use a standardized measure (mean=0; standard deviation=1) in our analyses.  Table 1 also shows  uncentered measures of number of children, years of education completed, age, and religious service attendance, although these measures are mean centered (mean=0) in our analyses to make the interaction results easier to interpret."
"62" "Table 1 reveals  that, overall, reported concern for the effects of climate change are generally high, with all samples reporting a mean of greater than 3 on a scale of 1 to 4. About 78 percent of the women in the sample have children, while about 48 percent are stay-at-home moms. GSS respondents’ average number of children is 1.89,  but this varies by educational level . It is notable that while 42 percent of respondents are men, 74 percent of all respondents work full-time. Table 1 does not report the percent of full-time workers in the women-only models, because  including this indicator  would distort the error terms associated with our stay-at-home mom variable. However, 38 percent of the women with children in our sample reported working full-time."
"63" "Results"
"64" "Table 2 shows the results of  OLS regression  model s   of  women’s  concerns about  climate change . Model 1 is the control-only model which provides a baseline , and t he results  are  consistent with other studies of environmental concern (Jones and Dunlap 1992; Davidson and Freudenberg 1996; Dunlap and  McCright 2008). E ducation, being  married, and whiteness  are  positively associated with concern for climate change, while age and being a Republican are negatively associated. Model 2 compares women with children with women without children ; t he results provide no evidence for a difference  in concern for climate  change.  Thus, the model provides no support for the eco-mom theory , similar to  findings by  McCright (2010) and Xiao and McCright (2012) ."
"65" "In Model 3, we compare  women who work full - time (with and without children) to those who have children and do not work full - time. Model 3 show s  that  ( potential )  stay-at-home mothers have concern for global climate change not significantly different from those in the reference category. This model also fails to sup port  the eco-mom theory. We have no evidence to support our first and second hypotheses."
"66" "Table 3 shows results for the full sample, which includes men  and a control for working full time .  Models 1 and 2  tests the link between fertility and  concern for climate  change.  Model 1 examines the impact of gender, number of children, and educational attainment on environmental concern. As expected, the men in the sample demonstrated less concern about the environment than women (p<.001), and respondents with more education had, on average, greater concern (p<.001). Number of children was only marginally significant (p<.10)  and  negative."
"67" "Model 2  offers a test of H 3 : is the negative relationship between fertility and concern for climate change stronger for women than for men?  It is worthwhile to  test  this question, even in the presence of no significant main effect  in Model 1,  because  the  cross ing of gender slopes will  suppress a main effect , making it appear non-significant . In Model 2, we examine the interaction of gender and number of children. The findings  show that gender significantly moderates the impact of number of children on concern for climate change (p<.05) with women’s concern decreasing precipitously (slope = -.06) and men’s concern appearing to increase slightly (slope = .006) as the number of children increases. The slope modeling the relationship between number of children and concern for climate change is negative and significant for women (p<.01),  suggesting  that traditional social roles associated with having more children are associated with less concern for climate change (or those with more environmental concern limit fertility) . At the same time, the slope modeling the relationship between  fertility  and climate change for men is not significantly different from zero (p=.77).  In sum, the slope predicting fertility and climate change concern is steeper for women than men,  supporting  H 3 ,  but the men’s slope is flat."
"68" "We test average marginal effects to see if the slopes for  men and women are different at d ifferent numbers of children. These findings are visually represented in Figure 1 . The  confiden ce  intervals (shown as the shaded areas)  around predicted points on the slope  increase at higher numbers of children, so slope differences after  more than three children  are non-significant, and the cross-over (the effect that is suppressing a significant main effect in  Model 1 ) occurs at four  children . In other words, men’s and women’s average concern about global climate change is significantly different when neither have children (p<.001), with childless men having  less  concern than women. However, we cannot assert with 95% certainty that the slope for men and the slope for women are different  at four or more children . Hence, the slopes are different for men and women  with children  only when they  have  fewer than four."
"69" "Models 3-6 address our third research question: does education complicate parental roles as an explanation for differences in men’s and women’s environmental concern?  Models 3 and 4 are for those with  twelve  or fewer  years  of completed education ,  and Models 5 and 6 are  those who have thirteen  or more  years of education .   In Model 3, men report  less concern about the effects of climate change,  on average, than women ( p<.05), but the number of children a respondent has  is  not significantly associated with concerns for climate change ."
"70" "In Model 4, g ender significantly moderates the impact of  fertility  on concern for climate change (p<.01) . Again, the significant interaction in the presence of a non-significant main effect indicates a cross-over, which is shown in Figure 2. Figure 2 shows that women’s concern decreases   with additional children (slope = -.08; p<.01), but the slope for men  (slope = .033)  is not significant . Figure 2  also  shows that  t he slopes are significantly different for men and women for those having zero (p<.001) to two (p<.05) children. For those with three or more children,  we cannot  assert that adding another child is associated with  different  concern in the  high fertility  population ."
"71" "Model 5 shows that, f or respondents who have completed more than 12 years of education, women demonstrate higher levels of concern about the impact of climate change, on average, than men (p<.001), and that number of children is marginally significant, with additional children corresponding to lower levels of concern (p<.10).  However, unlike with the  other models , we see no significant difference in the slopes estimating the relationship between number of children and environmental concern for  men and women.  That is, for the more educated, if there is a relationship between fertility and concern for climate change, the impact is the same for men and women."
"72" "Discussion"
"73" "According to the eco-mom theory, women  are   more  environmental ly  concern ed  than men because they are mothers.  We find no support for this; i f motherhood explains gender differences in environmental concern, b y extension, wom en without children should be less concerned about climate change  than those with children.   They are not."
"74" "Our results are consistent with  Xiao and McCright (2012) and McCright (2010)   despite the fact that  we operatio nalized motherhood more broadly  to reflect the fact that mothers’ concerns for the health and safety of their children does not  end  when children become adults and leave home.   Even with our broader definition, we find no evidence to support the idea that women are motivated to care about global climate change because they have children, as the eco-mom theory asserts.  We examined this further by separating working mothers from those that we  call  stay-at-home mothers, and we found no differences there, either , although our indicators are imperfect .  Essentially,   we find no evidence that  women’s  concern for global climate change can be explained by the  idea  that motherhood conveys a greater propensity toward environmentalism . Certainly ,  motherhood is linked to environmental justice activism, but environmentalism and environmental justice activism are conceptually different, so observations gleaned from studying one concept do es  not necessarily ap ply to the other."
"75" "That being said,  the  eco-mom theory derives from social role s  theory, and the social roles of men and women (such as time spent in housework) differ. These  differences may be better reflected in fertility rather than a dichotomous measure of parenthood.  Our findings  regarding   fertility  are complex.  In the aggregate, we do not find evidence of a relationship between fertility and concern for climate change, but that is because the relationship between these variables is different for men and women, and the crossing of the slopes suppresses an observation of the effect unless a gender-moderating variable is added."
"76" "Men’s concern for  climate change   does not vary , regardless of the number of children they have.  Thus,  to the extent that men are concerned about global climate change, that concern does not appear to be motivated by  their role as fathers.  Women do demonstrate  a relationship between concern for global climate change and number of children, and that relationship is negative.  Although we can reasonably assume that those concerned about climate change may limit their fertility, this relationship should not produce gender differences. A more reasonable explanation for our finding is that having more children represents greater salience of traditional gender roles for women .  In other words, having children (and more of them) potentially changes gender roles for women more than for men, and these roles are reflected in women’s declining concern for climate change."
"77" "It is interesting to note  that men’s and women’s concern for climate change is not different for those having  more than  three children  for the whole sample and more than two children for the subsample of those with less than a college education .  This may suggest that those with many children—regardless of gender—are different from those who have fewer children, and those (unmeasured) differences are reflected in  different  concern s  for climate change.  A possible explanation  for this is  traditional  gender role  orientations associated with conservatism . People with above average fertility (two children is average in the United States ; Monte and Ellis 2014)  may be  more  traditional; certainly ,   those who hold conservative values tend to deny  anthropogenic  climate change  (Goemmine 2012). Other researchers (Dunlap and McCright 2008; Hamilton 2011; Jones and Dunlap 1992) have shown that fundamentalist Christians and Republicans tend to have lower average environmental concern.  However, w e control for Republican Party affiliation, fundamentalist Christian religious values, and frequency of religious attendance  in our models . Thus,  there  may be  other  dimensions of conservatism  that   environmental scholars have yet  to  identif y  in their models ."
"78" "Another  implication of our findings is related to the fact that women who have zero  to  two children have greater concern for global climate change (although average concern is lower with the addition of each child) than men  with equal parity . Given the many studies that find women expressing more environmental concern than men, we wonder how much that effect , overall,  is driven by those with few or no children. In the United States, about 14 percent of women never have children, while 22 percent have one child, and 41 percent have two (Livingston 2015).   Given that more than three quarters of women have replacement or below fertility, gender differences in environmental concern documented in cross-sectional survey data  may be  capturing the environmentalist orientations of relatively lower fertility  women relative to lower fertility men ."
"79" "For  relatively more educated respondents,  however,  women have more concern about global climate change than men  and neither the main effect nor the interaction with  fertility is significant .  We cannot add to the scientific knowledge about gender differences in environmental concern with respect to this group, but we find no evidence that parenthood—either being a parent of having more children—is related to concern for climate change for the relatively well educated."
"80" "Conclusion"
"81" "Climate change is arguably the most pressing environmental issue facing modern society, and climate scientists are urging Americans to act now to avoid calamity in the future ( Dunlap and Brulle 2015 ).  Yet e fforts to enact the kinds of policies and behavioral changes that will make a real difference are stymied by those  in power  who deny  anthropomorphic  climate change or are unconcerned about the impact.  Now is the critical time to determine which Americans are unconcerned about climate change and to forge messages that will breach the barriers that create this lack of concern."
"82" "Although not our intention, o ur findings provide more insight into the role of conservatism in depressing concern for climate change. Political ideology has been well-documented as the strongest predictor of environmental concern (Dunlap, Xiao, and McCright 2001; Dunlap and McCright 2008), but the fact that our models show relatively lower levels of concern for climate change among those with larger families even when political party, religious ideology, and religiosity are controlled, suggests that unmeasured traditional family orientations associated with conservatism may also be depressing climate change concern.  From a policy standpoint, this suggests that efforts to garner more support for ways to ameliorate climate change may require changing the narrative so that protecting the environment is shaped as a traditional orientation. This  may be already happening slowly with the creation of conservative think tanks like the Niskanen Center pushing for climate change policy  and some right-leaning politicians publicly admitting that climate change is a real threat, such as Representative Michael McCaul (R-TX), Senator Lisa Murkowski (R-AK), Senator Lamar Alexander (R-TN), and Governor Ron DeSantis (R-FL). "
"83" "Our findings ,  that women report greater concern for global climate change than men ,  echo scores of previous studies of environmental  concern (see Stern, Dietz, and Kalof 1993; Davidson and Freudenburg 1996; McCright 2010; Xiao and McCright 2012; McCright et al. 2016). However, when looking at a popular explanation for this difference—the eco-mom theory—we find no support for the notion that motherhood , in an d  of itself,  explains women’s higher levels of concern, even when using a measure of parenthood that is more encompassing than previous studies.  Yet , w hen examining  fertility,  we find that t he number of children a parent has is associated with  decreased  concern for global climate change for women (but not for men ), and that the relationship between climate change concerns and fertility are evident for those with more normative fertility ( zero to three children) . This suggests the possibility that unmeasured gender role differences that explain fertility are likely driving gender differences in environmental concern.  In sum, parenting  may be   associated with climate change concern, but that association is more complicated than the eco-mom theory suggests."
"84" "The eco-mom theory relies heavily on a largely fictitious notion of men as breadwinners and women as homemakers. Although the mothering narrative provides a compelling and sanctioned way for women to participate in environmental justice  activism (Bell and Braun 2010), it is problematic to reduce women’s concern for global climate change to motherhood status.  But  if motherhood does not hold up as an explanation for women’s greater concern for climate change than men’s in public opinion polls ,  then what might account for these gender differences? Research on gender differences in environmentalism has overwhelming been focused on why women express greater concern for the environment than men. Instead, what if we ask the question  differently : why aren’t men expressing the same level of concern for the environment as women? What if we  more carefully scrutinize  men  and  masculinity?"
"85" "Previous studies find that conservative white men express less concern for climate change than other demographic groups (Finucane et al. 2000; McCright and Dunlap 2013). This raises interesting questions about how masculinity is expressed among non-conservative and/or non-white men as it relates to concern for climate change. Exploring the limitations of domina nt  masculine paradigms (and the possibilities of alternative masculine identities) as explanations of gender differences in environmental concern is crucial to solving our environmental problems."
"86" "Masculinity has not been well explored in the literature on public opinion s  of climate change. Bell and Braun (2010) and Bell and York (2010) use  qualitative  research to speak to the role of hegemonic masculinity in shaping ideologies and limiting the involvement of men in environmental activism.  These authors make a valuable contribution  to the literature on gender and localized environmental  activism ,  but these findings may have limited  application to  general concerns  about climate change.  We need more ethnographic work that explores gender differences in environmental  concern .   Indeed, our findings stress that environmental activism and concern are conceptually distinct."
"87" "Our  findings  also  stress the need for survey data that capture gender role differences,  gender identities , and concern for the environment.   We need more than a dichotomous measure of gender to fully understand the important differences in concern for climate change.  The GSS  has, in some waves, provided some measures of  femininity and masculinity , but not in the same surveys as their environment waves ; at minimum, these variables should be included in the next wave of surveys on  environment al concern.   Overall, surveys that  capture climate change concern should include measures of hegemonic masculinity, as well.  Of course, some may argue that our findings suggest that environmental concern should not be measured with survey data  at all . We contend that studies like ours underscore how survey data can be problematic; not only do typical gender measures obscure role  differences, but we also  see  that findings  of average gender differences in concern  are largely influ enced by lower fertility people  who constitute the largest group of Americans.  However , researchers must acknowledge that different types of methods provide distinct information, and we should seek a breadth of knowledge in order to tackle important issues such as ameliorating the impacts of climate change. Thus, we do not call for an end to collecting and analyzing survey data to study environmental concern ; we simply call for more caution and better measures ."
"88" "References"
"89" "Atkinson, Lucy. 2014. “Green Moms: The Social Construction of a Green Mothering"
"90" "Identity  via  Environmental Advertising Appeals.”   Consumption Markets & Culture  17(6):553-572."
"91" "Becker, Gary S. 1981.  A Treatise on the Family.  Cambridge, MA:  Harvard University"
"92" "Press."
"93" "Bell, Shannon E. 2013.  Our Roots Run Deep as Ironweed: Appalachian Women and the"
"94" "Fight for Environmental Justice.  Urbana, IL:  University of Illinois Press."
"95" "Bell, Shannon E. and Yvonne A. Braun. 2010. “Coal, Identity, and the Gendering of"
"96" "Environmental Justice Activism in Central Appalachia.”  Gender & Society  24(6):794-813 ."
"97" "Bell, Shannon E. and Richard York. 2010. “Community Economic Identity: The Coal"
"98" "Industry and Ideology Construction in West Virginia.”  Rural Sociology  75(1):111-143."
"99" "Blocker, T. Jean and Douglas L. Eckberg. 1989. “Environmental Issues as Women’s"
"100" "Issues: General Concern and Local Hazards.”  Social Science Quarterly  70(3):586-593."
"101" "Bl ocker, T. Jean and Douglas L. Eckberg.  1997.  “Gender and E nvironmentalism: Results"
"102" "from the 1993 General Social Survey. ”   Social Science Quarterly  78(4) : 841-858."
"103" "Brody, Charles. J. 1984. “Difference by Sex in Support for Nuclear Power.”  Social"
"104" "Forces  63(1):209-228."
"105" "Brown, Phil and Faith I. T. Ferguson. 1995. ““Making a Big Stink”: Women’s Work,"
"106" "Women’s Relationships, and Toxic Waste Activism.”  Gender and Society  9(2):145-172."
"107" "Boyd, Robert.  1994.  “Educational mobility and the fertility of black and white women.”"
"108" "Population Research and Policy Review  13:275-281."
"109" "Carson, R. (1962).  Silent spring . Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin."
"110" "Chatterjee, Samprit and Ali S. Hadi. 2006.  Regression Analysis by Example.  New York:"
"111" "Wiley."
"112" "Chesley, Noelle. 2011. “Stay-at-Home Fathers and Breadwinning Mothers: Gender,"
"113" "Couple Dynamics, and Social Change.”  Gender & Society  25(5): 642-664."
"114" "Cleary, Elizabeth and Rebecca Rhead. 2013. “Education and Attitudes toward the"
"115" "Environment.” Education for All Global Monitoring Report. United Nations"
"116" "Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization."
"117" "Cooke, Lynn Prince. 2004. “The Gendered Division of Labor and Family Outcomes in"
"118" "Germany.”  Journal of Marriage and Family  66(5):1246-1259."
"119" "Culley, Marci R. and Holly L. Angelique. 2003. “Women’s Gendered Experiences as"
"120" "Long-Term Three-Mile Island Activists.”  Gender & Society  17 (3) :445-461."
"121" "Davidson, D ebra  J.  and Wiluam R.  Freudenburg. 1996.  “Gender and Environmental R isk"
"122" "C oncerns : A R eview and  Analysis of Available R esearch.  Environment and Behavior  28(3):302-339."
"123" "Davidson, Debra J. and Michael Haan. 2012. “Gender, Political Ideology, and Climate"
"124" "Change Beliefs in an Extractive Industry Community.”  Population and Environment  34(2):217-234."
"125" "Deemer, Danielle R. and Linda M. Lobao. 2011 .  “Public Concern with Farm-A nimal"
"126" "W elfare:  Religion, Politics, and Human D isadva ntage in the Food S ector. ”   Rural Sociology  76(2):167-196."
"127" "Dietz, T homas ,  Amy  Fitzgerald,  and Rachael  Shwom. 2005.  “Environmental V alues. ”"
"128" "Annual Review of Environmental Resources  30: 335-372."
"129" "Dunlap, Riley E. and Robert J. Brulle, eds.   2015 . Climate Change and Society:"
"130" "Sociological Perspectives . New York: Oxford University Press."
"131" "Dunlap, R iley  E.  and   Aaron M.  McCright .  2008.  “A Widening G ap: Republican and"
"132" "Democratic Views on Climate C hange. ”   Environment  Magazine  50 (5): 26-35."
"133" "Dunlap, R iley  E.,  Chenyang  Xiao,  and Aaron M.  McCright. 2001 . Politics and"
"134" "E nvironment in  America: Partisan and Ideological Cleavages in Public S upport for  E nvironmentalism.  Environmental Politics  10(4) : 23-48."
"135" "Finlay, Jocelyn E. and Marlene A. Lee.  2018.  “Identifying Causal Effects of"
"136" "Reproductive Health Improvements on Women’s Economic Empowerment"
"137" "through the Population Poverty Research Initiative.”   The Milbank Quarterly"
"138" "96(2):300-322."
"139" "Finucane, M elissa  L.,  Paul  Slovic,  C. K.  Mertz,  James  Flynn, and  Theresa A.  Satterfield ."
"140" "2000.  “Gender, Race, and P erce ived Risk: The 'White Male' E ffect. ”   Health, Risk &  Society   2(2): 159-172."
"141" "Franzen, A. and  R. Meyer.  2010.  “Environmental Attitudes in Cross-National"
"142" "Perspective: A Multilevel A na lysis of the ISSP 1993 and 2000.”  European"
"143" "Sociological Review  26(2):219-234 ."
"144" "Gillespie, Rosemary. 2003. “Childfree and Feminine: Understanding the Gender Identity"
"145" "of Voluntarily Childless Women.”  Gender & Society   17(1):122-136."
"146" "Goemmine, Gert. 2012. “Lost in Translation: Climate Denial and the Return of the"
"147" "Political.”  Global Environmental Politics  12(2):1-8."
"148" "Greenbaum, Allan. 1995. “Taking Stock of Two Decades of Research on the Social"
"149" "Bases of Environmental Concern.” Pp. 125-152 in  Environmental Sociology: Theory and Practice , edited by M.  D. Mehta  and   E . Ouellet .  North York, Ontario, Canada: Captus Press."
"150" "Hamilton, Lawrence C. 2011. “Education, Politics, and Opinions about Climate Change:"
"151" "Evidence for Interaction Effects.”  Climate Change  104(2):231-242."
"152" "Harlan, Sharon L., David N. Pellow, J. Timmons Roberts, Shannon Elizabeth Bell,"
"153" "William G. Holt, and Joane Nagel. 2015. “Climate Justice and Inequality.” Pp.  127-163 in  Climate Change and Society: Sociological Perspectives , edited by R. E. Dunlap and R. J. Brulle.  New York: Oxford University Press."
"154" "Hunter, Heidi. 2011. “The Birth of an Eco-Mom: Cancer, Feminism and the"
"155" "Environment.”  Journal of the Motherhood Initiative  2(1):37-51."
"156" "Jones, Robert E. 1998. “Black Concern for the Environment: Myth versus Reality.”"
"157" "Society & Natural Resources  11(2):1-20."
"158" "Jones, Robert E. 2002. “Blacks Just Don't Care: Unmasking Popular Misconceptions"
"159" "about Concern for the Environmental among African-Americans.”  International Journal of Public Administration  25(2)."
"160" "Jones, Robert E. and L. F. Carter. 1994. “Concern for the Environment among Black"
"161" "Americans: An Assessment of Common Assumptions.”  Social Science Quarterly  75(3):560-579."
"162" "Jones, Robert. E. and Riley E. Dunlap. 1992. “The Social Bases of Environmental"
"163" "Concern: Have They Changed Over Time? ”   Rural Sociology  57(1):28-47."
"164" "Jones, Robert E.,  J. Mark  Fly,  James  Talley,  and H. Ken Cordell. 2003.   “ Green  M igration"
"165" "into  Rural America: The New Frontier of E nvironmentalism. ”   Society & Natural  Resources   16(3): 221-228."
"166" "Kaplan, Temma. 1997.  Crazy for Democracy: Women in Grassroots Movements . New"
"167" "York: Routledge."
"168" "Krauss, Celene. 1993. “Women and Toxic Waste Protests: Race, Class, and Gender as"
"169" "Resources of Resistance.”  Qualitative Sociology  16(3):247-262."
"170" "Lee, Tien Ming, Ezra M. Markowitz, Peter D. Howe, Chia-Ying Ko, and Anthony A."
"171" "Leiserowitz. 2015. “Predictors of Public Climate Change Awareness and Risk"
"172" "Perception around the World.”  Nature Climate Change  5:1014-1020."
"173" "Livingston, Gretchen. 2015. Family Size among Mothers. Washington, DC:  Pew"
"174" "Research Center. Available online :   www.pewsocialtrends.org/2015/05/07/family-size-among -mothers/ dowloaded 8-22-2018 ."
"175" "Logsdon-Conradsen, Susan C. and Sarah L. Allred. 2010. “Motherhood and"
"176" "Environmental Activism: A Developmental Framework.”  Ecopsychology  2(3):141-146."
"177" "MacGregor, Sherilyn. 2006.  Beyond Mothering Earth: Ecological Citizenship and the"
"178" "Politics of Care . Vancouver, BC: UBC Press."
"179" "McCright, Aaron M. 2010. “The Effects of Gender on Climate Change Knowledge and"
"180" "Concern in the American Public.”  Population and Environment  32(1):66-87."
"181" "McCright, Aaron M. and Riley E. Dunlap. 2013. “Bringing Ideology in: The"
"182" "Conservative White Male Effect on Worry about Environmental Problems in the USA.”  Journal of Risk Research  16(2):211-226."
"183" "McCright, Aaron M., Sandra T. Marquart-Py att, Rachael L. Shwom, Steven R. Brechin,"
"184" "and Summer Allen. 2016. “Ideology, Capitalism, and Climate: Explaining Public Views about Climate Change in the United States.”  Energy Research & Social Science  21:180-189."
"185" "McDonald, Peter. 2000. “Gender Equity in Theories of Fertility Transition.”   Population"
"186" "and Development Review  26(3): 427-439."
"187" "Merchant, Carolyn. 1980.  The Death of Nature: Women, Ecology, and the Scientific"
"188" "Revolution.  New York: Harper Collins Publishers."
"189" "Mies, Maria and Vandana Shiva. 1993.  Ecofeminism . New York: Zed Books."
"190" "Mills, Melinda. 2010. “Gender Roles, Gender (In) equality and Fertility: An Empirical"
"191" "Test of Five Gender Equity Indices.”   Canadian Studies in Population  37(3-4):"
"192" "445-474."
"193" "Mohai, P aul and   Bunyan  Bryant. 1998.  “Is There a “Race” Effect on C oncern for"
"194" "E nvironmental  Q uality? ”   The Public Opinion Quarterly   62(4): 475-505."
"195" "Monte, Lindsay M. and Renee R. Ellis.  2014.  Fertility of Women in the United States:"
"196" "2012.  A report of the US Census Bureau.  Washing ton, DC."
"197" "Musick, Kelly, Paula England, Sarah Edgington, and Nicole Kangas.  2009.  “Education"
"198" "differences in intended and unintended fertility.”   Social Forces  88(2):543-572."
"199" "Neuhouser, Kevin. 1995. ““ Worse than Men”” An Analysis of Gendered Mobilization in"
"200" "an Urban Brazilian Squatter Settlement, 1971-1991.”  Gender and Society  9(1):38-59."
"201" "Nitsche, Natalie and Hannah Brückner.  2018.  “High and Higher:  Fertility of Black and"
"202" "White Women with College and Postgraduate Education in the United States.”"
"203" "Vienna Institute of Demography Working Paper.  Austrian Academy of Sciences."
"204" "Presser, Harriet B.  1997.  “Demography, Feminism and the Science-Policy Nexus.”"
"205" "Population and Development Review  23(2):295-331."
"206" "Price, Carmel. 2011.  Women and the Environment: Mediating and Moderating Effects"
"207" "of Gender and Demographic Characteris tics of Environmental Concern .  Doctoral  dissertation, Department of Sociology, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN."
"208" "Price, Carmel E. and James N. Maples . 2018. “Disturbing the Dead: Community"
"209" "Concerns over Fracking below a Cemetery in the Utica Shale Region.” Pp.85-106 in  Fractured Communities: Risk, Impacts, and Protest against Hydraulic Fracking in U.S. Shale Regions , edited by A .  E. Ladd. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press."
"210" "Ray, Sarah J. 2011. “How Many Mothers Does It Take to Change All the Light Bulbs?"
"211" "The Myth of Green Motherhood.”  Journal of Motherhood Initiative  2(1):81-101."
"212" "Rindfuss, Ronald R. and Karin L. Brewster. 1996. “Childbearing and Fertility.”"
"213" "Population and Development Review  22(Supplement:  Fertility in the United"
"214" "States—New Patterns, New Theories):  258-289."
"215" "Rindfuss, Ronald R., Karin L. Brewster, and Andrew L. Kavee. 1996. “Women, Work"
"216" "and Children:  Behavioural and Attitudinal Change in the United States.”   Population and Development Review  22(3):457-482."
"217" "Shriver, Thomas E., Alison E. Adams, and Rachel L. Einwohner. 2013. “Motherhood and"
"218" "Opportunities for Activism Before and After the Czech Velvet Revolution.”  Mobilization: An International Quarterly  18(3):267-288."
"219" "Stern, Paul C., Thomas Dietz, and Linda Kalof. 1993.   “Value Orientations, G ender and"
"220" "Environmental C oncern. ”   Pp. 188-206 i n  The Earthscan Reader in Environmental Values , edited by  L. Kalof  and T. Satterfield.  London: Earthscan."
"221" "Stets, Jan E. and Chris F. Biga. 2003. “Bringing Identity Theory into Environmental"
"222" "Sociology.”  Sociological Theory  21(4):398-423."
"223" "Van de Kaa, Dirk J. 1987. “Europe’s second demographic transition.”   Population"
"224" "Bulletin  42(1):  1-59"
"225" "Van Liere, Kent. D. and Riley E. Dunlap. 1980. “The Social Bases of Environmental"
"226" "Concern: A Review of Hypotheses, Explanations and Empirical Evidence.”  Public Opinion Quarterly  44(2):181-197."
"227" "Warren, Karen J. 2000.  Ecofeminist Philosophy: A Western Perspective o n What It Is and"
"228" "Why I t Matters .  Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc."
"229" "Xiao, Chenyang and Aaron M. McCright. 2012. “Explaining Gender Differences in"
"230" "Concern about Environmental Problems in the United States.”  Society & Natural Resources: An International Journa l 25(11):1067-1084."
"231" "Xiao, Chenyang and Aaron M. McCright. 2014. “A Test of the Biographical"
"232" "Availability Argument for Gender Differences in Environmental Behaviors.”  Environment and Behavior  46(2):241-263"
"233" "Table 1.  Descriptive Statistics"
"234" "Full model"
"235" "Women-only  sample"
"236" "Low education sample"
"237" "High education sample"
"238" "Concern for  climate change"
"239" "3.29"
"240" "(0.77)"
"241" "3.39"
"242" "(0.72)"
"243" "3.17"
"244" "(0.83)"
"245" "3.39"
"246" "(0.69)"
"247" "Has a child"
"248" "0.78"
"249" "(0.41)"
"250" "Stay-at-home mom"
"251" "0.48"
"252" "(0.50)"
"253" "Men"
"254" "0.42"
"255" "(0.49)"
"256" "0.42"
"257" "(0.49)"
"258" "0.43"
"259" "(0.50)"
"260" "Number of children"
"261" "1.89"
"262" "(1.71)"
"263" "2.28"
"264" "(1.85)"
"265" "1.58"
"266" "(1.51)"
"267" "Years of education"
"268" "13.65"
"269" "(3.06)"
"270" "13.60"
"271" "(2.97)"
"272" "11.00"
"273" "(2.01)"
"274" "15.72"
"275" "(1.93)"
"276" "Age"
"277" "48.55"
"278" "(16.98)"
"279" "48.90"
"280" "(17.44)"
"281" "50.85"
"282" "(18.50)"
"283" "46.75"
"284" "(15.46)"
"285" "White"
"286" "0.78"
"287" "(0.41)"
"288" "0.79"
"289" "(0.41)"
"290" "0.76"
"291" "(0.42)"
"292" "0.80"
"293" "(.040)"
"294" "Lower  and working  class"
"295" "0.56"
"296" "(0.50)"
"297" "0.56"
"298" "(0.50)"
"299" "0.69"
"300" "(0.46)"
"301" ".045"
"302" "(.50)"
"303" "Republican"
"304" "0.25"
"305" "(0.44)"
"306" "0.25"
"307" "(0.43)"
"308" "0.21"
"309" "(0.41)"
"310" "0.29"
"311" "(0.45)"
"312" "Urban residence"
"313" "0.55"
"314" "(0.50)"
"315" "0.53"
"316" "(0.50)"
"317" "0.63"
"318" "(0.48)"
"319" "0.49"
"320" "(0.50)"
"321" "Married"
"322" "0.77"
"323" "(0.42)"
"324" "0.80"
"325" "(0.40)"
"326" "0.80"
"327" "(0.42)"
"328" "0.077"
"329" "(0.42)"
"330" "Fundamentalist"
"331" "0.32"
"332" "(0.47)"
"333" "0.37"
"334" "(0.48)"
"335" "0.47"
"336" "(0.50)"
"337" "0.20"
"338" "(0.40)"
"339" "West"
"340" "0.23"
"341" "(0.42)"
"342" "0.22"
"343" "(0.41)"
"344" "0.22"
"345" "(0.41)"
"346" "0.23"
"347" "(0.42)"
"348" "Works full - time"
"349" "0.74"
"350" "(0.50)"
"351" "Frequency of religious attendance"
"352" "3.63"
"353" "(2.81)"
"354" "4.07"
"355" "(2.84)"
"356" "3.54"
"357" "(2.83)"
"358" "3.70"
"359" "(2.79)"
"360" "n"
"361" "1369"
"362" "792"
"363" "602"
"364" "767"
"365" "NOTE:  Descriptive statistics are for uncentered variables; the dependent variable is standardized in the regression models.  Means or proportions shown (standard errors in parentheses) ."
"366" "Table 2.  Impact of children and working on women’s concern for climate change"
"367" "Model 1"
"368" "Model 2"
"369" "Model 3"
"370" "Has a child"
"371" "-.076"
"372" "(0.07)"
"373" "Stay-at-home mom"
"374" "-.071"
"375" "(0.06)"
"376" "Years of education"
"377" ".036***"
"378" "(0.01)"
"379" ".034**"
"380" "(0.01)"
"381" ".032**"
"382" "(.01)"
"383" "Age"
"384" "-.004*"
"385" "(0.00)"
"386" "-.004*"
"387" "(0.00)"
"388" "-.003 †"
"389" "(0.00)"
"390" "White"
"391" ".244**"
"392" "(0.07)"
"393" ".238**"
"394" "(0.07)"
"395" ".246***"
"396" "(0.07)"
"397" "Lower and working class"
"398" "-.020"
"399" "(0.06)"
"400" "-.018"
"401" "(0.06)"
"402" "-.025"
"403" "(0.06)"
"404" "Republican"
"405" "-.267***"
"406" "(0.07)"
"407" "-.267***"
"408" "(0.07)"
"409" "-.270***"
"410" "(0.07)"
"411" "Urban residence"
"412" "-.087"
"413" "(0.05)"
"414" "-.084"
"415" "(0.06)"
"416" "-.084*"
"417" "(0.06)"
"418" "Married"
"419" ".176*"
"420" "(0.07)"
"421" ".206**"
"422" "(0.08)"
"423" ".183*"
"424" "(0.07)"
"425" "Fundamentalist"
"426" "-.084"
"427" "(0.06)"
"428" "-.085"
"429" "(0.06)"
"430" "-.089"
"431" "(0.06)"
"432" "West"
"433" ".045"
"434" "(0.07)"
"435" ".049"
"436" "(0.07)"
"437" ".046"
"438" "(0.07)"
"439" "Frequency of religious attendance"
"440" "-.008"
"441" "(0.01)"
"442" "-.007"
"443" "(0.01)"
"444" "-.006"
"445" "(0.01)"
"446" "Constant"
"447" "-.0036"
"448" "(0.09)"
"449" "-.046"
"450" "(0.10)"
"451" "-.053"
"452" "(0.10)"
"453" "n"
"454" "792"
"455" "792"
"456" "792"
"457" "F"
"458" "6.69***"
"459" "6.18***"
"460" "6.21***"
"461" "R-squared"
"462" ".079"
"463" ".080"
"464" ".081"
"465" "NOTES:  Unstandardized regression coefficients shown (standard errors in parentheses). Concern for global warming is standardized."
"466" "*p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001"
"467" "Table 3.  Impact of gender, number of children, and education on concern for climate change"
"468" "Model 1"
"469" "Model 2"
"470" "Model 3"
"471" "Model 4"
"472" "Model 5"
"473" "Model 6"
"474" "Full sample"
"475" "12 or fewer years of education"
"476" "13 or more years of education"
"477" "Men"
"478" "-0.24***"
"479" "(0.04)"
"480" "-0.24***"
"481" "(0.05)"
"482" "-0.17*"
"483" "(0.08)"
"484" "-0.20**"
"485" "(0.08)"
"486" "-0.28***"
"487" "(0.06)"
"488" "-0.27***"
"489" "(0.06)"
"490" "Number of children"
"491" "-0.03†"
"492" "(0.02)"
"493" "-0.06**"
"494" "(0.02)"
"495" "-0.03"
"496" "(0.02)"
"497" "-0.08**"
"498" "(0.03)"
"499" "-0.04†"
"500" "(0.02)"
"501" "-0.04"
"502" "(0.03)"
"503" "Years of education"
"504" "0.03***"
"505" "(0.01)"
"506" "0.03***"
"507" "(0.01)"
"508" "Age"
"509" "-0.00"
"510" "(0.00)"
"511" "-0.00"
"512" "(0.00)"
"513" "-0.00"
"514" "(0.00)"
"515" "-0.00"
"516" "(0.00)"
"517" "-0.00"
"518" "(0.00)"
"519" "-0.00"
"520" "(0.00)"
"521" "White"
"522" "0.11†"
"523" "(0.06)"
"524" "0.11*"
"525" "(0.06)"
"526" "0.18†"
"527" "(0.10)"
"528" "0.21*"
"529" "(0.10)"
"530" "0.03"
"531" "(0.07)"
"532" "0.03"
"533" "(0.07)"
"534" "Lower and working class"
"535" "0.01"
"536" "(0.05)"
"537" "0.01"
"538" "(0.05)"
"539" "-0.00"
"540" "(0.08)"
"541" "-0.01"
"542" "(0.08)"
"543" "-0.02"
"544" "(0.05)"
"545" "-0.02"
"546" "(0.05)"
"547" "Republican"
"548" "-0.24***"
"549" "(0.05)"
"550" "-0.24***"
"551" "(0.05)"
"552" "-0.23*"
"553" "(0.09)"
"554" "-0.22*"
"555" "(0.09)"
"556" "-0.24***"
"557" "(0.06)"
"558" "-0.24***"
"559" "(0.06)"
"560" "Urban residence"
"561" "-0.08†"
"562" "(0.04)"
"563" "-0.08†"
"564" "(0.04)"
"565" "0.02"
"566" "(0.02)"
"567" "0.02"
"568" "(0.02)"
"569" "0.05**"
"570" "(0.02)"
"571" "0.05**"
"572" "(0.05)"
"573" "Married"
"574" "0.20**"
"575" "(0.06)"
"576" "0.19**"
"577" "(0.06)"
"578" "0.36***"
"579" "(0.10)"
"580" "0.33**"
"581" "(0.10)"
"582" "0.10"
"583" "(0.07)"
"584" "0.10"
"585" "(0.07)"
"586" "Fundamentalist"
"587" "-0.11*"
"588" "(0.05)"
"589" "-0.11*"
"590" "(0.05)"
"591" "-0.03"
"592" "(0.08)"
"593" "-0.04"
"594" "(0.08)"
"595" "-0.22**"
"596" "(0.07)"
"597" "-0.22**"
"598" "(0.07)"
"599" "West"
"600" "0.06"
"601" "(0.05)"
"602" "0.07"
"603" "(0.05)"
"604" "0.10"
"605" "(0.09)"
"606" "0.10"
"607" "(0.09)"
"608" "0.04"
"609" "(0.06)"
"610" "0.04"
"611" "(0.06)"
"612" "Works full-time"
"613" "0.00"
"614" "(0.05)"
"615" "-.001"
"616" "(0.05)"
"617" "0.02"
"618" "(0.08)"
"619" "0.01"
"620" "(0.08)"
"621" "-0.02"
"622" "(0.05)"
"623" "-0.02"
"624" "(0.06)"
"625" "Frequency of religious attendance"
"626" "-0.00"
"627" "(0.01)"
"628" "-.000"
"629" "(0.01)"
"630" "-0.01"
"631" "(0.01)"
"632" "-0.00"
"633" "(0.01)"
"634" "0.00"
"635" "(0.01)"
"636" "0.00"
"637" "(0.01)"
"638" "Male x number of children"
"639" "0.06*"
"640" "(0.03)"
"641" "0.11**"
"642" "(0.04)"
"643" "0.01"
"644" "(0.03)"
"645" "Constant"
"646" "0.04"
"647" "-0.02"
"648" "-0.31*"
"649" "-0.26†"
"650" "0.05"
"651" "0.05"
"652" "n"
"653" "1369"
"654" "1369"
"655" "602"
"656" "602"
"657" "768"
"658" "768"
"659" "F"
"660" "9.33***"
"661" "9.34***"
"662" "2.89***"
"663" "3.27***"
"664" "6.85***"
"665" "6.32***"
"666" "R-squared"
"667" "0.08"
"668" "0.09"
"669" "0.06"
"670" "0.07"
"671" "0.10"
"672" "0.10"
"673" "NOTES:  Unstandardized regression coefficients shown (standard errors in parentheses). Concern for global warming is standardized. Number of children, education, age, and religious attendance are mean centered."
"674" "†p<.10; *p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001"
"675" "Figure 1.  Effects of gender and number of children on concern for global warming with 95% confidence interval, full model"
"676" "Figure 2.  Effects of gender and number of children on concern for global warming with 95% confidence interval, respondents with 12 or fewer years of education"
"677" "End notes"
