How citizens evaluate participatory processes:
A conjoint analysis

Henrik Serup Christensen
Samforsk, Department of Political Science
Åbo Akademi University
Henrik.christensen@abo.fi

Manuscript accepted for publication in European Political Science Review
Published by Cambridge University Press
Final version may differ slightly

Abstract
This study examines how characteristics of participatory processes affect citizens'
evaluations of such processes and thereby establish what kind of participatory process
citizens demand. The literature on democratic innovations has proposed different criteria
for evaluating participatory innovations. What remains unclear, however, is how citizens
evaluate these participatory mechanisms. This is here examined in a conjoint analysis
embedded in a representative survey of the Finnish population (n=1050). The conjoint
examines the impact of inclusiveness, popular control, considered judgement,
transparency, efficiency, and transferability on citizens’ evaluations of participatory
processes. Furthermore, it is examined whether the evaluations differ by policy issue and
process preference of the respondents. The results show that people want transparent
participatory processes with face-to-face interaction among participants and expert
advice to deal with complicated issues. The participatory processes should also be
advisory and not include too many meetings. These effects appear to be uniform across
policy issues and do no depend on the process preferences of citizens.

Introduction
The introduction of democratic or participatory innovations is a popular method for enhancing
democratic credentials (Smith 2009; Geissel and Newton 2012; Geissel and Joas 2013; Grönlund,
Bächtiger, and Setälä 2014; Kuyper and Wolkenstein 2019). However, while it seems clear that citizens
demand more involvement, it remains unclear exactly how they want to be involved.
Previous studies have examined similar issues from different perspectives. Some assess the merits of
participatory mechanisms by assessing their pros and cons (Fung 2003; 2006; Smith 2009; Geissel
2013; Rowe and Frewer 2000; Caluwaerts and Reuchamps 2016). This approach provides us with
insights into what democratic benefits a participatory mechanism can provide but fails to consider
how citizens evaluate these mechanisms and their characteristics. Other studies examine popular
attitudes towards specific types of participatory mechanisms (Goldberg, Wyss, and Bächtiger 2019;
Jacquet 2018; Christensen and von Schoultz 2019), or differences in process preferences, i.e. how
political decision should be made (Bengtsson and Christensen 2016; Gherghina and Geissel 2017; Font,
Wojcieszak, and Navarro 2015). While these studies provide important insights, they do not show
what participatory mechanisms citizens want or how specific design features of these mechanisms
affect citizens’ evaluations of them. Appreciating what participatory features appeal to citizens is
important for knowing what processes are likely to succeed in broadening popular involvement in
political decision-making.
This study examines how features of participatory mechanisms affect their popularity with a conjoint
analysis that makes it possible to test multidimensional causal effects of several treatment
components simultaneously (Knudsen and Johannesson 2018; Hainmueller, Hopkins, and Yamamoto
2014). The study relies on a representative sample of the Finnish population (n=1050) to examine the
effects of seven central attributes of participatory innovations that are likely to affect whether citizens
would like to see them introduced: 1) Inclusiveness, 2) Popular control, 3) Considered judgement, 4)
Transparency, 5) Efficiency, 6) Transferability, and 7) Policy issue. It is also examined whether the
effects of the features differ across policy issue or depending on whether respondents prefer citizens
or representatives as decision-makers.
The results show that the attributes affect how citizens evaluate participatory procedures. People
generally prefer transparent participatory processes that include face-to-face interaction among
participants and expert advice to deal with complicated issues. At the same time the participatory
processes should be advisory and not include too many meetings. These effects appear to be uniform
across policy issues and do no depend on the process preferences of citizens.
The article proceeds as follows. In the following section, it is explained why the participatory features
of democratic innovations are likely to affect citizens’ attitudes towards their introduction and
hypotheses on causal relationships are outlined. The following section explains how these hypotheses
are tested with a conjoint experiment, before moving on to the empirical analyses. The final section
discusses the results and their implications for the study of participatory mechanisms.

What participatory mechanisms do people want?
Democratic innovations, or ‘institutions specifically designed to increase and deepen citizen
participation in the political decision-making process’ (Smith 2009, 1), have been implemented at
1

different political levels all over the world. The common idea is that increasing citizen involvement in
political decision-making ensures that policy outcomes reflect the will of citizens, or that at the very
least participants feel that decision-makers have demonstrated a will to listen to their demands.
Despite these commonalities, there are also important differences between the democratic
innovations that reflect adherence to the fulfilment of different democratic ideals. Even when
different normative conceptions see participation as beneficial, there can be important differences in
what democratic goods they aim to achieve (Chambers, 2003; Mutz, 2006; LeDuc, 2015). According to
Chambers (2003, p. 308) vote-centric democratic theory sees democracy as an arena where fixed
interests and preferences compete via fair mechanisms of aggregation of votes to ensure that all
decisions are backed by the majority of citizens. Talk-centric theories focus on the communicative
processes of opinion and will-formation that precede voting. This perspective incorporates different
versions of deliberative democracy whereby participation should aim to ensure the quality of
decisions by changing preferences through a process of deliberation (Bengtsson and Christensen 2016;
Setälä 2017; Kuyper and Wolkenstein 2019; Jacquet 2018).
This distinction has direct consequences for how democratic innovations work (Rojon, Rijkens and
Klandermans 2019). Direct-democratic mechanisms are moulded on a vote-centric conception of
democracy and give citizens the right to make decisions directly (Altman 2011; Qvortrup 2013). Talkcentric deliberative mechanisms rarely make citizens formal decision-makers, but help citizens discuss
the issues and thereby achieve enlightened understanding of the underlying problems (Grönlund,
Bächtiger, and Setälä 2014; Setälä 2017; Kuyper and Wolkenstein 2019). While both goals are laudable
from a democratic perspective, implementing participatory mechanisms entail trade-offs as they are
rarely able to achieve all goals simultaneously (LeDuc 2015). For example, making citizens the final
decision-makers may undermine their willingness to be respectful and engage in genuine dialogue
when they are not forced to defend their position in public (Smith 2012, 129-130). However, it remains
unclear what goals citizens would prefer participatory processes to achieve. Do they want decisive
vote-centric institutions where citizens can make decisions as they see fit, or are they willing to engage
in more demanding talk-centric mechanisms where the emphasis is on developing a better
understanding of the issues at hand?
It has been difficult to ask ordinary citizens how they feel about democratic innovations since most
citizens are unfamiliar with the participatory mechanisms on offer. For example, it makes little sense
to simply ask people whether they would like to see more deliberative mini-publics without carefully
explaining what they entail (Goldberg, Wyss, and Bächtiger 2019). Previous studies relying on surveys
have asked more generally whether a respondent supported the use of public discussions in
connection to decision-making (Christensen, Himmelroos, and Grönlund 2017; Christensen and von
Schoultz 2019). However, this at best provides a crude assessment of support for the use of minipublics since these also involve other feature such as rules or expectations for how participants
conduct themselves during discussions (Grönlund, Bächtiger, and Setälä 2014).
The approach suggested here instead entails to examine how features of participatory processes
affect citizens’ evaluations of them. Although differences exist in the proposed evaluation criteria
(Geissel 2013), previous research on democratic innovations have established sets of criteria for
evaluating the functioning of participatory innovations (Fung 2003; 2006; Smith 2009; Geissel 2013;
Rowe and Frewer 2000; Caluwaerts and Reuchamps 2016). All participatory processes constitute a
2

bundle of different participatory features, or central design characteristics that determine what they
can achieve. These features provide a basis for identifying what people want since they shape citizens’
evaluations of democratic innovations.
It may be countered that it is irrelevant what kind of participation people want since normative
democratic goods should not be evaluated by their popularity. However, even when a specific
participatory innovation could potentially deliver every imaginable democratic good, it would still
need citizens’ support to be able to fulfil this potential. Not only are people less likely to support its
introduction in the first place, they are also less likely to take advantage of the possibility to take part
once in place (Gherghina and Geissel 2017; Bengtsson and Christensen 2016; Christensen and von
Schoultz 2019). Hence, although popularity does not alter the proposed advantages of a participatory
mechanism, it affects the possibility to bring the hypothetical advantages to fruition.
This study therefore study relies on a conjoint experiment to assess what aspects of participatory
practices are valuable from a citizen perspective. The aim is to examine how citizens’ evaluations of
participatory mechanisms are shaped by central design features. The study is inspired by the scheme
developed by Smith (2009), which arguably constitutes the starting point for empirical evaluations of
democratic innovations and has influenced subsequent work in the field.1 While this framework does
not on all accounts allow for a one-to-one comparison between talk-centric and vote-centric designs,
it nonetheless on most accounts highlights important differences between these two perspectives. In
his work, Smith (2009) relies on six criteria for evaluating democratic innovations:
1) Inclusiveness: who can take part?
2) Popular control: how much influence over policy outcomes?
3) Considered judgement: Do participants decide independently or interact with each other or
experts?
4) Transparency: is decision-making open to public scrutiny?
5) Efficiency: what are the costs of participation?
6) Transferability: how easy is it to take part?
According to Smith (2009, 12), the first four items are explicit democratic goods, whereas the last two
are institutional goods that consider the feasibility of participatory innovations. This calls attention to
the fact that it is also important to consider the practical implications of introducing of introducing
novel participatory mechanisms. The intention is not to test how well this framework captures popular
attitudes since it is considerably more nuanced than what can be accommodated here. Instead, it
makes it possible to identify key aspects that are likely to affect how citizens evaluate participatory
mechanisms.
The following outlines what aspects are particularly relevant for each criterion and outlines
hypotheses on the effects on the favourability of participatory procedures.

1

Most frameworks include similar features with some exceptions (Geissel 2013, 16). Some, including Geissel (2013), include
criteria such as legitimacy and political support, but this is inappropriate for the present purposes since it constitutes a
(possible) consequence of introducing a democratic innovation rather than a build-in feature. Agenda-setting is also included
by some (Caluwaerts and Reuchamps 2016). However, since people in general are likely to always prefer an open agenda, it
was less relevant to include here where the emphasis is on criteria where all alternatives may be considered preferable to
some.

3

Inclusiveness concerns a fundamental choice with down-stream repercussions for the whole process.
This aspect is often highlighted since it is debated whether participatory innovations can help alleviate
or will further exacerbate existing participatory inequalities (Young 2000, 35). Participatory
mechanisms can be placed on a continuum ranging from arrangements open to all wanting to take
part on one end to more exclusive arrangements where only selected stakeholders can take part on
the other end (Fung 2006, 67–68). Vote-centric instruments such as referendums stress the formal
equality of all citizens to take part, but although this may appear to be the most inclusive, this is not
the case when equality of usage is lacking (Dalton, Cain, and Scarrow 2006). It can therefore be more
inclusive to purposefully select participants to ensure the inclusion of groups otherwise unlikely to
attend, as is often highlighted by talk-centric deliberative mechanisms. This can be secured through
random selection of participants to ensure descriptive representation of all segments of society (Gastil
and Wright 2019). Nevertheless, considering the intuitive appeal of open arrangements, H1a is that
more inclusive procedures increase favourability compared to exclusive procedures.2
For popular control, vote-centric instruments of direct democracy where citizens become final
decision-makers constitute one extreme (Altman 2011; Qvortrup 2013). Involvement is sometimes
not enough to ensure legitimacy, since it is imperative to ensure that participants can actually have a
say over decision-making outcomes (Ulbig 2008). However, most participatory instruments that are
introduced today give citizens the chance to provide input but leaves the final decision-making powers
in the hands of elected representatives (Geissel and Newton 2012). It is again debated what
arrangements are preferable for democratic legitimacy. Some chide advisory participatory processes
for being nothing more than windows dressing that give an appearance of popular influence, but in
the end are of no consequence at all (Blaug 2002). However, even when we trust the capabilities of
citizens to take part, some issues are so complex that people prefer not to let them be decided by
ordinary citizens without the necessary expertise (Bengtsson and Christensen 2016). Moreover, there
is a potential problem with accountability when there are no elected representatives to hold
accountable (Setälä 2006). People may prefer a more advisory role while leaving the final decision in
the hands of accountable representatives with access to the necessary expertise. Nevertheless, the
hypothesis is that people will intuitively prefer more decisive arrangement, meaning H1b is that
procedures where participants make final decision increase favourability compared to advisory
procedures.
When it comes to considered judgement, a basic distinction exists between voting based on existing
preferences and taking decisions based on deliberation to form enlightened opinions. The former
principle is in line with vote-centric democratic theory and. While electoral campaigns provide some
information, it is believed that people can process this information independently and cast their vote
based on this (LeDuc, 2015). The talk-centric perspective emphasizes support for developing
preferences. While different accounts exist, Fishkin (2009) incorporates the central elements in
stating that a high-quality deliberative process includes information, balanced opinions, diversity, and
equal consideration of the merits of arguments regardless of who offers them. This principle then
highlights the value of neutral information and exchange of arguments as necessary in political
decision making. This makes it possible for citizens to form enlightened opinions that do not

2

This study was preregistered at OSF: https://osf.io/tjac8. The numbering and phrasing of some hypotheses were altered
compared to the plan to ease interpretation, but the causal expectations are identical. When other deviations occur from
the preregistered plan, these are explained in the text.

4

necessarily correspond to their opinion before the deliberative process started. Based on previous
studies of process preferences in Finland (Bengtsson and Christensen 2016; Christensen and von
Schoultz 2019), H1c is that procedures where participants can rely on dialogue and expert before
making decisions increase favourability compared to procedures where participants rely on own
judgements.
Transparency is usually considered beneficial from both vote-centric and talk-centric perspectives
since it is assumed that participatory processes should be open to public scrutiny for the general
population to trust them (Smith 2009, 25–26; Fung 2013; Woolley and Gardner 2017). However, some
argue that secrecy and closed doors enhance the effectiveness of decision-making (Thompson 1999;
Stasavage 2004) and may enhance deliberative quality (Chambers, 2007). In a similar vein, Naurin
(2007) finds that publicity does not necessarily enhance deliberative quality, while de Fine Licht (2011)
finds that transparency does not necessarily lead to greater public acceptance and trust (de Fine Licht
2011). Hence, people may recognise that there is a trade-off between transparency and effectiveness
when it comes to participatory innovations and therefore be willing to accept discussions that take
place behind closed doors. Nevertheless, H1d is that procedures enhancing openness increases
favourability compared to less transparent procedures.
The following two criteria are of a more practical nature and do not address the talk-centric or votecentric division. For efficiency, Smith (2009) focuses on administrative costs and the demands they
place on citizens. For the current purposes, the demands they place on citizens are especially relevant
since they are likely to shape attitudes towards their usage, whereas it is difficult to establish anything
more than a vague order of costliness of different procedures (Rowe and Frewer 2000, 17). What is
likely to affect the evaluations is the time participants are expected to invest in the proceedings since
this is easy to assess for the respondents and has been frequently debated in the literature (Verba,
Schlozman, and Brady 1995). When assessing the merits of a specific participatory process, time
requirements is an easily understandable feature that can be used as a proxy for the inconveniences
that the introduction causes for fellow citizens. There are considerable differences between different
types of participatory mechanisms in how much time they require from participants. Some
mechanisms such as referendums only require participants to provide input at a single event. Other
mechanisms, including some versions of deliberative mini-publics (Grönlund, Bächtiger, and Setälä
2014), require that participants invest considerable time over a longer period. Nonetheless, H1e is
that procedures with more meetings decreases favourability compared to procedures with a single
meeting.
For transferability, Smith (2009) focuses on the question of scale and whether participatory
mechanism can operate effectively at larger scale. The emphasis is here on examining the differences
between online and offline participation since it has been contended that digital information and
communication technologies (ICTs) can help resolve the problems size offers for democracy (Smith
2009). Online versions of participatory mechanisms may be able to transcend previous restrictions
and make it possible to introduce them at a larger scale (Smith, 2009, pp. 143-144). While Smith
(2009) is sceptical towards the promises of e-democracy, much has happened since the publication of
this work. The advent of social media and smart phones has made the Internet and ICTs omnipresent
in all spheres of life, including the political, and it is now difficult to imagine participatory reforms
without taking advantage of the possibilities that technology offers (Coleman and Moss 2012; Carrara
2012; Neblo, Esterling, and Lazer 2018; Fung 2015). It therefore seems likely that whether a process
5

take place online or face-to-face will affect its popularity. Considering the apparent popularity of
online possibilities, H1f is that online procedures increase favourability compared to face-to-face
procedures.
In addition to the criteria of Smith (2009), it is important to assesses whether citizens’ evaluations
differ depending on policy issue since previous studies show that this can affect preferences for
participatory practices (Wojcieszak 2014; de Fine Licht 2014). Carmines & Stimson (2006) makes a
distinction between easy and hard political issues. These labels are somewhat misleading since easy
issues are not necessarily easier to resolve with a straightforward solution. On the contrary, they
involve symbolic issues that are likely to be longstanding issues of conflict and deal with policy ends
rather than means. However, they are easy in the sense that they do not require people to think
deeply about them, allowing gut responses answers from both ill-informed and well-informed
respondents since they can rely on established heuristics to decide their opinions. Hard issues on the
other hand are difficult because they involve more technical issues where people are less likely to
decide based on gut responses. Her they are forced to reflect on the issues and make rational and
calculated decisions based on existing evidence and information (Carmines and Stimson 2006, 80).
Based on the idea that people are more likely to favour involvement when issues are less technical
and more straightforward, H1g is that procedures involving easy issues increase favourability
compared to procedures involving hard issues.
But these effects are not necessarily evenly distributed across all groups. Studies show that citizens’
preferences for participatory practices differ across issues (Wojcieszak 2014; de Fine Licht 2014).
Wojcieszak (2014) suggests that the effects of the features will be stronger for easy issues, where
people will demand popular influence, whereas people are more willing to let representatives and
expert make decisions for hard issues that require careful consideration. This is reflected in the
hypothesis H2, which states that the effects of participatory features are stronger for procedures
involving easy issues compared to procedures involving hard issues.
The characteristics of the respondents may also affect what kind of participatory mechanisms they
prefer. While several attributes can be of importance, the present study focuses on attitudes towards
participation as a way of making political decisions and how this attitude shapes the effect of the
participatory features. Previous studies show that people hold persistent preferences for how political
decisions should be made and what actors should be involved (Bengtsson and Christensen 2016;
Gherghina and Geissel 2017; Font, Wojcieszak, and Navarro 2015). A central question is whether
ordinary citizens or elected representative should make the final decision on important political
decisions (Wojcieszak 2014; Gherghina and Geissel 2019). The process preference of respondents may
moderate the effects of the participatory features on favourability given that the issue is particularly
salient for those who demand more involvement of ordinary citizens. This is explored in H3: The
effects of participatory features are stronger for people who support citizen involvement in decisionmaking compared to people who prefer elected representatives to make decisions.

Data, variables and methods
A conjoint experiment is used to test the hypotheses in Finland, which constitutes an optimal case for
the current purposes. Studies have demonstrated that Finns have consistent preferences when it
comes to process preferences and that there is a demand for more participation (Bengtsson and
6

Christensen 2016). Furthermore, various democratic innovations are used at both national and local
levels, meaning that the issue of participatory mechanisms is familiar to many (Christensen et al. 2017;
Jäske 2017; 2019). The respondents come from an online panel recruited through Qualtrics selected
to be representative of the Finnish population with respect to age, gender and place of living
(n=1050).3 More information on sample size and the representativeness of the survey is in the
supplementary file.
Conjoint analysis makes it possible to examine multidimensional causal effects of several treatment
components simultaneously through relatively simple statistical analyses without unnecessary
assumptions (Knudsen and Johannesson 2018; Hainmueller, Hopkins, and Yamamoto 2014). While
conjoint analysis also has certain limitations (see for example Leeper, Hobolt and Tilley, 2019), the
main advantage for the present purposes is that a conjoint experiment makes it possible to discern
how characteristics of participatory mechanisms affect how citizens evaluate them. Furthermore, this
choice does not depend on respondents being familiar with specific mechanisms such as deliberative
mini-publics since it is not necessary to present actually existing alternatives. Finally, the answers are
not affected by social desirability bias, which may otherwise bias the results when respondents feel
pressured to select a certain type of process.
The choice-based conjoint analysis used here presents respondents with two alternative participatory
processes that randomly vary the levels of the attributes. The attributes are the characteristics
assumed to affect evaluations and the levels are discrete categories describing theoretically relevant
values of the attribute in question. Each respondent evaluates five comparisons where they are asked
to indicate what alternative they prefer, which is in line with the recommendations of Aguinis & Bradly
(2014, 363).4 The dependent variable is whether a specific process is chosen or not and the analyses
examine the impact of the seven attributes on this choice: the six participatory features identified by
Smith (2009) and policy issues. Table 1 summarises the attributes included in the conjoint experiment
and the corresponding levels.5

3

In the analyses, the unit of analysis is profiles evaluated rather than respondents, meaning n is 10500 since each respondent
(1050) makes 5 comparisons of two alternatives (1050x5x2=10500).
4
Bansak et al. (2018) show that treatment effects remain stable even with a large number of comparisons and attributes,
meaning there is in practice rarely a specific upper limit to the number of comparisons.
5
The ordering differed in the actual presentations in Qualtrics to make the alternatives more intuitive.

7

Table 1. Attributes and levels
Attribute

Levels (RF=Reference category)

H1a. Inclusiveness

The participants are…

a. All citizens willing to take part RF
b. A group of citizens selected to reflect the general population
c. Key stakeholders with an interest in the topic

H1b. Popular control

After reaching a decision, the outcome a. be implemented directly RF
will…
b. serve as advice to elected officials who make the final decision

H1c. Considered
judgement

Participants make up their minds a. Their own judgement and preferences RF
based on…
b. Credible information from independent experts before deciding
c. a moderated exchange of arguments between participants

H1d. Transparency

All gatherings in the process…

H1e. Efficiency

The process involves the following a. A single instance RF
number of gatherings
b. 2-5 instances
c. 6-10 instances

H1f. Transferability

All gatherings take place…

a. online via official government platform RF
b. in a public building

H1g. Policy issue

The decision concerns…

d.
e.
f.
g.

a. take place behind closed doors to allow for sensitive discussions RF
b. are open to the public to allow for public scrutiny

Vegan food in schools (Easy) RF
Wolf protection (Easy)
Regional government reforms (Hard)
Measures to ensure long-term sustainable economic growth (Hard)

For inclusiveness, three levels capture what Fung (2006) considers the extremes of participatory
inclusiveness (open to all-only key stakeholders) and an intermediate position (a selected group). The
two levels for popular control consider whether the decision is implemented directly to approximate
direct control or serves as advice to elected representatives who make the final decision to describe
the advisory role. There are three levels for considered judgement, the first describes participants
deciding based on their own judgement and preferences, the two others include more deliberative
elements and include either credible expert advice or a moderated exchange of arguments before
deciding (Grönlund, Bächtiger, and Setälä 2014; Fishkin 2009). For transparency, the two levels vary
the extent of openness to the public. Since presenting a process where all meetings take place behind
closed doors could negatively bias estimations, it is emphasised that this is done to allow sensitive
discussions, whereas doors are open to allow for public scrutiny. To gauge the impact of efficiency and
the number of times participants meet, the first level only involves a single gathering, while the two
other levels gradually increases the number of gatherings to either 2-5 or 5-10. Since it is not the
intention to examine the effect of more gatherings as such, it is chosen to limit the number of
gatherings to under 10 still present plausible participatory processes. For transferability, gatherings
are either described as taking place online on an official government platform or in a government
building. It is emphasised that the online meetings are on an official platform to emphasise that the
gatherings are still official meetings on par with meeting face-to-face in a government building. The
conjoint includes four different policy issues that were newsworthy in Finland at the time of data
collection to give the experiment more relevance to the real world and thereby improve external
validity (Aguinis and Bradley 2014, 361). Two are considered hard issues that make it necessary to
make rational decisions based on careful considerations. The first concerns measures to ensure longterm sustainable economic growth, which is topical and involves complicated economic and
environmental issues that are typically categorized as a hard issue (Wojcieszak 2014). The other hard
issue concerns regional government reform, which was debated at the time and with little agreement
on the specific benefits and costs. Two other issues are considered easy issues in the sense of being
largely symbolic and therefore likely to illicit gut responses. The first concerns wolf protection, which
is an issue that is often regarded in symbolic terms with people being more likely to defer to gut
8

responses. The other easy issue is the provision of vegan food in schools, which is also a largely
symbolic issues where people are unlikely to rely on rational calculations of nutrition values for
deciding.
In conjoint analysis, some combinations of attribute levels may be impossible or highly implausible
(Hainmueller, Hopkins, and Yamamoto 2014). In such situations, it is necessary to restrict the variation
and exclude certain combinations from occurring. Although participatory practices also encounter
such problems, none of the combinations are logically impossible and therefore no restrictions were
added to the randomization, as is recommended (Hainmueller, Hopkins, and Yamamoto 2014, 20).6
Testing H3 makes it necessary to measure the extent to which people prefer citizens or elected
representatives as principal decision makers (Bengtsson and Christensen 2016; Font, Wojcieszak, and
Navarro 2015; Gherghina and Geissel 2017). This is here measured with a single item where
respondents are asked whether they prefer ordinary citizens or elected representatives to make
decisions on a scale from 0-10, where 10 indicates a preference for elected representatives
(Wojcieszak 2014). For the moderation analyses, this is recoded into a categorical variable where all
respondents scoring 0-3 are coded as preferring citizens (17% of respondents), 4-6 are considered
intermediate (35% of respondents) and those scoring 7-10 are coded as preferring elected
representatives (49% of respondents).7
The data is analysed using linear regression with standard errors clustered at the individual level to
consider that each respondent makes five comparisons. Based on assumptions concerning the stability
of observed effects and their independence from ordering and presentation, the causal effects of
treatment components can be estimated using OLS regression (Hainmueller et al., 2014, p. 14-16) .8
The estimated coefficients indicate the Average Marginal Component Effect (AMCE), or the average
change in the probability that an alternative will win support when it includes the listed attribute value
instead of the baseline attribute value. The AMCE was introduced by Hainmueller et al. (2014) and
represents the marginal causal effect of an attribute averaged over the joint distribution of the
remaining attributes. It is also possible to examine whether the causal effects of attributes are
interdependent by including interaction effects between the attributes of interest to obtain the
average component interaction effect (ACIE). This makes it possible to examine causal effects across
subgroups, whereas the AMCE constitutes the average effect across the whole population. As (Leeper,
Hobolt, and Tilley 2019) note, it is important to be careful when selecting the reference category for
examining group differences with interaction effects. For this reason, the marginal means were also
estimated. These did not lead to substantively different conclusions but are shown in the
supplementary file and referred to in the analyses.
The survey also included measures on how interested the respondents are in the policy issues at hand
and socio-demographic variables to ensure that the sample is representative: age, gender, and place
of living. A few measures of various political orientations were collected to ensure that there are no
systematic differences in this regard between attribute levels: left/right ideology, political interest,
6

For example, it is in practice difficult to construct a highly deliberative process that is not both time consuming and place
high demands on the participants. Nevertheless, while some of the combinations offered in this conjoint are less likely to be
offered in practice, the phrasing means they are not logically impossible nor even unlikely to occur.
7
This was supposed to be a dummy variable in the preregistered plan, but a more nuanced categorisation was chosen to
ensure that the intermediate category did not differ. A dummy coding does not alter the substantive conclusions.
8
For a formal presentation and evidence of the presented properties, see (Hainmueller, Hopkins, and Yamamoto 2014).

9

satisfaction with democracy and internal political efficacy. To examine this, ANOVA analyses was
conducted to analyse mean scores across attribute levels for these attitudinal variables as well as age,
gender and education (shown in supplementary file). Since all analyses show no differences in mean
scores, the randomization succeeded and the potential confounders can be left out of all analyses, as
is usually the case for this type of experiments (Mutz 2011; Hainmueller, Hopkins, and Yamamoto
2014).
The analysis proceeds in three steps. The first step involves testing H1a-H1g on how the attributes
affect evaluations of participatory mechanisms with a linear regression analysis where respondents’
choices are included as the dependent variable (coded profile chosen yes/no) and the attributes are
included as categorical variables with the refence categories outlined above. All results are presented
using coefficient plots, as recommended by (Hainmueller, Hopkins, and Yamamoto 2014). The second
step concerns H2 on differences across policy issue, and here interaction effects are included to see
whether the effects differ depending on the type of issue.9 The final step concerns H3 and how the
effects are shaped by whether respondents prefer citizens or representatives to make political
decisions. This is examined by including interaction effects between the attributes and the categorical
variable for process preferences explained above.

Analysis
The first step is examining H1a-H1g on the direct effects of the participatory features. Figure 1 shows
the AMCEs of all attributes.

Figure 1. Average Marginal Component Effects (AMCEs) on preference for participatory process.

9

The preregistered plan involves an interaction analysis with a dummy variable for easy and hard issues instead, including
only all policy issues as a robustness test. However, since the results are unambiguous the results presented include all policy
issues instead.

10

Contrary to the expectations of H1a, inclusiveness is irrelevant for how people evaluate participatory
procedures since the effects for both processes with participants selected from a representative
sample (β =0.007) and those that include key stakeholders (β =-0.014) do not alter the favourability
compared to the reference category of processes where all can take part.
Advisory processes entail a boost in favourability of 9.3 percentage points compared to arrangements
were participants can decide the outcome directly, which contradicts H1b by showing that advisory
mechanism boost favourability rather than those with more decisive decision-making powers.
For considered judgement, the results support H1c since processes where participants decide based
on expert information entail an increase in favourability of 5 percentage points while processes with
moderated discussions among participants increase favourability by 11.5 percentage points.
Transparency also matters as suggested by H1d since processes with closed doors entail a 9.3
percentage points reduction in favourability compared to more transparent processes.
For the number of meetings, there is some evidence to support H1e, even if the effect is not
particularly strong. Having 2-5 meetings has no discernible impact on favourability compared to
meeting a single time (B=-0.004), but processes where participants meet 6-10 instances entail a five
percentage-points reduction in the favourability of participatory processes compared to meeting a
single time.
For transferability and the question of online versus face-to-face meetings, offline processes entail a
3.3 percentage points increase in favourability, which contradicts H1f since it entails that face-to-face
meetings enhance the popularity of participatory processes compared to online meetings.
Finally, when it comes to policy issues, the coefficient for vegan meals in schools is small and
insignificant, which shows that this does not affect favourability compared to the reference category
protection of wolves. However, the effects for the hard issues are significant: regional government
reform entails a 14 percentage points increase in favourability while economic growth leads to an 11
percentage points increase in favourability compared to vegan meals. While the effects are
substantial, the direction of the effects run counter to H1g since people prefer participation for the
hard issues while they are less interested when it comes to easy issues.
The second step involves examining whether there are differences in effects across policy issues and
Figure 2 shows the ACIEs for the four policy issues. For simplicity, reference categories are excluded
in figures 2 and 3.

11

Figure 2. Average Component Interaction Effects (ACIES) on preference for participatory
process across four policy issues

The effects are similar across policy issues, and when differences occur, they are generally of minor
importance.10 The coefficients for inclusiveness all remain insignificant across issues. For popular
control, advisory processes have an even stronger effect on favourability when the issue concerns
economic growth, but the effect remains in the same direction and magnitude. For considered
judgement, processes involving moderated discussions are preferred to participants deciding
independently for all issues. The results for expert advice are less clear-cut, but despite differences in
significance, none of the interaction effects are statistically significant and the effects are of a similar
magnitude and direction. Open processes are preferred over those behind closed doors regardless of
issue. For efficiency, the negative effect of more meetings is only significant for the two hard issues,
while the differences are less pronounced for easy issues. For transferability, offline meetings also
only have significant effects for hard issues.
While these last two findings seem to indicate some differences, it is noteworthy that the marginal
means (see supplementary file) show that hard issues (regional government reform and economic
growth) have higher mean scores compared to the easy issues (wolf protection and vegan meals) for
all attribute levels. This is, however, testimony to the strong direct effects of the policy issue rather
than differences in effects among policy issues. On most accounts, the effects appear similar across
policy issue and since there is no uniform trend for effects to be stronger for the easy issues as H2
suggests, this hypothesis is rejected.
The final step involves H3 and differences in effects depending on the extent to which respondents
prefer citizens or elected representatives as decision-makers. The results in Figure 3 demonstrate that
the effects again are similar on most accounts.

10

One interaction effect was significant at p<0.05-threshold (advisory powers#economic growth) while three others
achieved p>0.10 (Moderated discussion#regional government reforms, 6-10 instances#regional government reform,
representative sample#protection of wolves).

12

Figure 3. Average Component Interaction Effects (ACIES) on preference for participatory
process across process preferences.

Two significant interaction effects indicate differences in effects across process preferences. For
popular control, the preference for advisory powers is weaker among those who prefer citizens as
decision-makers (p=0.050). This difference is hardly surprising, and the most remarkable is that even
for those who prefer citizens as decision makers there is no positive effect of directly implemented
decisions. For transferability, the interaction effect for the intermediate category (p=0.039) entails
that it is only for the intermediate category that offline processes have a positive effect on
favourability, whereas the effects are negligible when people have clearer process preferences. The
results otherwise resemble the general findings, and the marginal means lead to similar conclusions.
Although some differences occur, H3 is rejected since there is again no uniform trend for stronger
effects among those who support citizens as decision makers.

Discussion of results
These results have important implications for the use of participatory mechanisms. The following
discussion highlights the most important results and their implications for future research.
First and foremost, the results highlight that the design features of participatory mechanisms shape
citizens’ evaluations of them. Furthermore, the effects were similar across policy issues and process
preferences, suggesting that the effects are a relatively stable in society. The results are therefore able
to give new insights into what type of participatory mechanisms ordinary citizens want to see
introduced on a more detailed level compared to previous research that have examined either broad
process preferences (Bengtsson and Christensen 2016; Gherghina and Geissel 2017; Font, Wojcieszak,
and Navarro 2015) or attitudes to specific mechanisms (Goldberg, Wyss, and Bächtiger 2019; Jacquet
2018; Christensen and von Schoultz 2019).
Furthermore, the evaluations may well differ between scholars and ordinary citizens. A great deal of
scholarly attention has focused on inclusiveness and how to ensure that all groups in society are
13

included (Young 2000; Dalton 2017; Gastil and Wright 2019). However, this aspect seems to be of little
importance for ordinary citizens since it made little difference who could take part in the processes.
While this result by no means entails that the scholarly preoccupation has been misguided, it is
nonetheless noteworthy that people are not to a similar extent concerned about who are able to take
part in participatory mechanisms. This may partly be because respondents failed to appreciate the
differences between the choices offered in the conjoint analysis. But it may also be that people care
more about chances to provide input into political decision-making, less about exactly who provides
it.
Several results showed that people demand possibilities for participation in political decision-making,
also when the involvement may be demanding. For example, processes involving hard policy issues
were favoured over those involving easy issues (Wojcieszak 2014; de Fine Licht 2014). While the hard
issues on offer here also have more important implications for society, it clearly shows that people
want possibilities to take part for issues that matter to society rather than for symbolic issues where
involvement may be windows-dressings (Blaug 2002). Furthermore, people expressed a preference
for processes that involve more deliberative elements such as expert advice and discussions (Fishkin,
(2009) over processes where participants decide independently.
However, other results also show that there are limits to how involved people want to be. Participation
should not be too time-consuming since people rebuffed processes involving more than five meetings.
And perhaps most surprising results was that people prefer advisory processes over those were
participants make the final decision (Qvortrup 2013; Altman 2011). What people demand is
possibilities for interaction with decision-makers, not necessarily for citizens to make decisions. Even
for people who explicitly stated that they prefer citizens as decision-makers there was no discernible
positive effect of directly implemented procedures when deciding between processes. In other words,
the preferences revealed in the conjoint differed from the stated preferences when asking
respondents directly. This highlights the difficulties involved in examining whether and how citizens
want to participate. While the result could be problematic for the literature on process preferences,
it should be acknowledged that the process preference was measured in a rather crude manner
compared to the instruments used in previous studies (Bengtsson and Christensen 2016; Font,
Wojcieszak, and Navarro 2015). Nevertheless, it is worth iterating that a demand for more
participation does not necessarily entail a wish to become the final decision makers.
Overall, features associated with talk-centric innovations tend to boost favourability, which indicates
that people prefer more talk-centric procedures over vote-centric direct-democratic procedures
(Chambers, 2003; LeDuc, 2015). This contradicts the conclusions of Rojon et al. (2019), although they
also find a positive effect from advisory meetings on support for participatory reforms. The results
here suggest that people prefer procedures that give possibilities to develop preferences rather than
decisive direct-democratic procedures that allow people to make decisions. This suggests that people
recognise the need for reflection on the issues at hand rather than only wanting participatory
mechanisms as a way to take power away from political elites. Hence, the demand for participatory
mechanisms is in this case not primarily driven by dissatisfaction with the current political system, but
is more likely to be a result of cognitive mobilization, i.e. citizens being willing and able to take an
active role in decision-making (Dalton, Burklin, and Drummond 2001). Also, while this does not
necessarily mean that people will also take part, it is clearly too early to dismiss the willingness of
ordinary citizens to engage in more demanding forms of participation.
14

It is still necessary to ascertain whether similar effects can be found in other countries since the Finnish
experience with advisory mechanisms could make them disposed to prefer these over more decisive
processes (Christensen et al. 2017; Jäske 2017). Other countries such as Germany lack experiences
with participatory mechanisms at the national level or as Switzerland has mainly experiences with
more decisive direct-democratic procedures. Future studies should aim for comparisons across
political systems to determine the extent to which participatory preferences are shaped by previous
experiences with participatory instruments. The current study also only examines effects on what
forms of participatory processes people want to see introduced, but this does not necessarily entail
that they are willing to take part. A next step would therefore be to examine whether similar results
are found when asking people what participatory processes they would like to participate in.
While it still must be examined whether the conclusions of this study are valid outside of Finland, or if
other criteria play a more prominent role in shaping evaluations of participatory mechanisms, the
results show that using conjoint analysis to examine preferences for participatory processes can
provide valuable new insights into how citizens evaluate these mechanisms.

References
Aguinis, Herman, and Kyle J. Bradley. 2014. ‘Best Practice Recommendations for Designing and
Implementing Experimental Vignette Methodology Studies’. Organizational Research
Methods 17 (4): 351–71. https://doi.org/10.1177/1094428114547952.
Altman, David. 2011. Direct Democracy Worldwide. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bansak, Kirk, Jens Hainmueller, Daniel J. Hopkins, and Teppei Yamamoto. 2018. ‘The Number of Choice
Tasks and Survey Satisficing in Conjoint Experiments’. Political Analysis 26 (1): 112–19.
https://doi.org/10.1017/pan.2017.40.
Bengtsson, Åsa, and Henrik Serup Christensen. 2016. ‘Ideals and Actions: Do Citizens’ Patterns of
Political Participation Correspond to Their Conceptions of Democracy?’ Government and
Opposition 51 (02): 234–60. https://doi.org/10.1017/gov.2014.29.
Blaug, Ricardo. 2002. ‘Engineering Democracy’. Political Studies 50 (1): 102–16.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9248.00361.
Caluwaerts, Didier, and Min Reuchamps. 2016. ‘Generating Democratic Legitimacy through
Deliberative Innovations: The Role of Embeddedness and Disruptiveness’. Representation 52
(1): 13–27. https://doi.org/10.1080/00344893.2016.1244111.
Carmines, Edward G., and James A. Stimson. 2006. ‘The Two Faces of Issue Voting’. American Political
Science Review 74 (01): 78–91. https://doi.org/10.2307/1955648.
Carrara, Stephane. 2012. ‘Towards E-ECIs? European Participation by Online Pan-European
Mobilization’. Perspectives on European Politics and Society 13 (3): 352–69.
https://doi.org/10.1080/15705854.2012.702578.
Christensen, Henrik Serup, Staffan Himmelroos, and Kimmo Grönlund. 2017. ‘Does Deliberation Breed
an Appetite for Discursive Participation? Assessing the Impact of First-Hand Experience’.
Political Studies 65 (1_suppl): 64–83. https://doi.org/10.1177/0032321715617771.
Christensen, Henrik Serup, Maija Jäske, Maija Setälä, and Elias Laitinen. 2017. ‘The Finnish Citizens’
Initiative: Towards Inclusive Agenda-Setting?’ Scandinavian Political Studies 40 (4): 411–33.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9477.12096.
Christensen, Henrik Serup, and Åsa von Schoultz. 2019. ‘Ideology and Deliberation: An Analysis of
Public Support for Deliberative Practices in Finland’. International Journal of Public Opinion
Research 31 (1): 178–94. https://doi.org/10.1093/ijpor/edx022.
Coleman, Stephen, and Giles Moss. 2012. ‘Under Construction: The Field of Online Deliberation
Research’. Journal of Information Technology & Politics 9 (1): 1–15.
https://doi.org/10.1080/19331681.2011.635957.
15

Dalton, Russell J. 2017. The Participation Gap: Social Status and Political Inequality. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Dalton, Russell J., Wilhelm P. Burklin, and Andrew Drummond. 2001. ‘Public Opinion and Direct
Democracy’. Journal of Democracy 12 (4): 141–53. https://doi.org/10.1353/jod.2001.0066.
Dalton, Russell J., Bruce Cain, and Susan E. Scarrow. 2006. ‘Democratic Publics and Democratic
Institutions’. In The Erosion of Political Support in Advanced Industrial Democracies, edited by
Bruce Cain, Russell J. Dalton, and Susan E Scarrow, 250–75. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fine Licht, Jenny de. 2011. ‘Do We Really Want to Know? The Potentially Negative Effect of
Transparency in Decision Making on Perceived Legitimacy’. Scandinavian Political Studies 34
(3): 183–201. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9477.2011.00268.x.
———. 2014. ‘Policy Area as a Potential Moderator of Transparency Effects: An Experiment’. Public
Administration Review 74 (3): 361–71. https://doi.org/10.1111/puar.12194.
Fishkin, James. 2009. When the People Speak: Deliberative Democracy and Public Consultation.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Font, Joan, Magdalena Wojcieszak, and Clemente J. Navarro. 2015. ‘Participation, Representation and
Expertise: Citizen Preferences for Political Decision-Making Processes’. Political Studies 63
(S1): 153–72. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9248.12191.
Fung, Archon. 2003. ‘Survey Article: Recipes for Public Spheres: Eight Institutional Design Choices and
Their
Consequences’.
Journal
of
Political
Philosophy
11
(3):
338–67.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9760.00181.
———. 2006. ‘Varieties of Participation in Complex Governance’. Public Administration Review.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6210.2006.00667.x.
———. 2013. ‘Infotopia: Unleashing the Democratic Power of Transparency’. Politics and Society 41
(2): 183–212. https://doi.org/10.1177/0032329213483107.
———. 2015. ‘Putting the Public Back into Governance: The Challenges of Citizen Participation and Its
Future’. Public Administration Review 75 (4): 513–22. https://doi.org/10.1111/puar.12361.
Gastil, John, and Erik Olin Wright. 2019. Legislature by Lot - Transformative Designs for Deliberative
Governance. Edited by John Gastil and Erik Olin Wright. London: Verso.
Geissel, Brigitte. 2013. ‘Introduction: On the Evaluation of Participatory Innovations’. In Participatory
Democratic Innovations in Europe - Improving the Quality of Democracy?, edited by Brigitte
Geissel and Marko Joas, 9–32. Toronto: Barbara Budrich Publishers.
Geissel, Brigitte, and Marko Joas. 2013. Participatory Democratic Innovations in Europe : Improving
the Quality of Democracy? Edited by Brigitte Geissel and Marko Joas. Opladen, Berlin &
Toronto: Barbara Budrich Publishers.
Geissel, Brigitte, and Kenneth Newton. 2012. Evaluating Democratic Innovations : Curing the
Democratic Malaise? Edited by Brigitte Geissel and Kenneth Newton. London: Routledge.
Gherghina, Sergiu, and Brigitte Geissel. 2017. ‘Linking Democratic Preferences and Political
Participation: Evidence from Germany’. Political Studies 65 (1_suppl): 24–42.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0032321716672224.
———. 2019. ‘An Alternative to Representation: Explaining Preferences for Citizens as Political
Decision-Makers’.
Political
Studies
Review
17
(3):
224–38.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1478929918807713.
Goldberg, Saskia, Dominik Wyss, and André Bächtiger. 2019. ‘Deliberating or Thinking (Twice) About
Democratic Preferences: What German Citizens Want From Democracy’. Political Studies
Online (first). https://doi.org/10.1177/0032321719843967.
Grönlund, Kimmo, André Bächtiger, and Maija Setälä. 2014. Deliberative Mini-Publics: Involving
Citizens in the Democratic Process. Edited by Kimmo Grönlund, Andre Bächtiger, and Maija
Setälä. Colchester: ECPR Press.
Hainmueller, Jens, Daniel J. Hopkins, and Teppei Yamamoto. 2014. ‘Causal Inference in Conjoint
Analysis: Understanding Multidimensional Choices via Stated Preference Experiments’.
Political Analysis 22 (1): 1–30. https://doi.org/10.1093/pan/mpt024.
16

Jacquet, Vincent. 2018. ‘The Role and the Future of Deliberative Mini-Publics: A Citizen Perspective’.
Political Studies Online (first). https://doi.org/10.1177/0032321718794358.
Jäske, Maija. 2017. ‘“Soft” Forms of Direct Democracy: Explaining the Occurrence of Referendum
Motions and Advisory Referendums in Finnish Local Government’. Swiss Political Science
Review 23 (1): 50–76. https://doi.org/10.1111/spsr.12238.
———. 2019. ‘Participatory Innovations and Maxi-Publics: The Influence of Participation Possibilities
on Perceived Legitimacy at the Local Level in Finland’. European Journal of Political Research
58 (2): 603–30. https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6765.12304.
Knudsen, Erik, and Mikael Poul Johannesson. 2018. ‘Beyond the Limits of Survey Experiments: How
Conjoint Designs Advance Causal Inference in Political Communication Research’. Political
Communication 36 (2): 259–71. https://doi.org/10.1080/10584609.2018.1493009.
Kuyper, Jonathan W., and Fabio Wolkenstein. 2019. ‘Complementing and Correcting Representative
Institutions: When and How to Use Mini-Publics’. European Journal of Political Research 58
(2): 656–75. https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6765.12306.
Leeper, Thomas J., Sara B. Hobolt, and James Tilley. 2019. ‘Measuring Subgroup Preferences in
Conjoint Experiments’. Political Analysis. https://doi.org/10.1017/pan.2019.30.
Mutz, Diana C. 2011. Population-Based Survey Experiments. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton
University Press.
Neblo, Michael A., Kevin M. Esterling, and David Lazer. 2018. Politics with the People: Building a
Directly Representative Democracy. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Qvortrup, Matt. 2013. Direct Democracy: A Comparative Study of the Theory and Practice of
Government by the People. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Rowe, Gene, and Lynn J. Frewer. 2000. ‘Public Participation Methods: A Framework for Evaluation’.
Science
Technology
and
Human
Values
25
(1):
3–29.
https://doi.org/10.1177/016224390002500101.
Setälä, Maija. 2006. ‘On the Problems of Responsibility and Accountability in Referendums’. European
Journal of Political Research 45 (4): 699–721. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.14756765.2006.00630.x.
———. 2017. ‘Connecting Deliberative Mini-Publics to Representative Decision Making’. European
Journal of Political Research 56 (4): 846–63. https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6765.12207.
Smith, Graham. 2009. Democratic Innovations: Designing Institutions for Citizen Participation.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stasavage, David. 2004. ‘Open-Door or Closed-Door? Transparency in Domestic and International
Bargaining’. International Organization. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818304040214.
Thompson, Dennis F. 1999. ‘Democratic Secrecy’. Political Science Quarterly 114 (2): 181–93.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2657736.
Ulbig, Stacy G. 2008. ‘Voice Is Not Enough’. Public Opinion Quarterly 72 (3): 523–39.
https://doi.org/10.1093/poq/nfn030.
Verba, Sidney., Kay Lehman Schlozman, and Henry E. Brady. 1995. Voice and Equality: Civic
Voluntarism in American Politics. Cambridge, MA, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wojcieszak, Magdalena. 2014. ‘Preferences for Political Decision-Making Processes and Issue Publics’.
Public Opinion Quarterly 78 (4): 917–39. https://doi.org/10.1093/poq/nfu039.
Woolley, John T., and Joseph Gardner. 2017. ‘The Effect of “Sunshine” on Policy Deliberation: The Case
of the Federal Open Market Committee’. Social Science Journal 54 (1): 13–29.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soscij.2016.09.006.
Young, Iris Marion. 2000. Inclusion and Democracy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

17

Supplementary file
Sample size and characteristics
Conjoint analysis does not require large sample sizes to yield reliable estimates since the number of
observations can be increased by enlarging the number of comparisons each respondent makes
(Orme, 2010; Aguinis and Bradley, 2014). Orme (Orme, 2010, p. 64) recommends determining the
number of respondents with the formula: (nta)/c>=500, where n is number of respondents, t is
number of comparisons (here 5), a is number of alternatives to choose from (here 2) and c is the
largest number of levels for any attribute (here 12 since analyses include a 3x4 interaction). According
to this, the required number of respondents is 600. However, this is a minimum requirement that
should not justify too small sample sizes (Orme, 2010, p. 65). Another rule-of-thumb is to include at
least 200 respondents in each group when making comparisons across groups. Here the inclusion of
interaction effects between policy issues and other attributes split respondents into four groups,
which means there should be 800 respondents. It is also necessary to consider generalisability to the
population of interest (Aguinis and Bradley, 2014). To ensure a representative sample of the Finnish
population, the target sample size was 1000 individuals, which is sufficiently large to achieve credible
and generalisable results without wasting resources or creating risks for Type I errors or false positives.
In the end, 1050 respondents completed the survey and were included in the final sample. Table SF1
compares age, gender and place of living for the Finnish population and the sample.11
Table SF1. Characteristics of the population and sample
Characteristic
Age
18-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
Total
Gender (population aged 18–69)
Male
Female
Total
Region
Usimaa (incl. Helsinki area)
Western Finland
Ostrobothnia
Central Finland
South Finland
East Finland
Lapland
Total
Source: Statistics Finland 2017

% in population

% in sample (n=1050)

3.3
18.8
19.3
18.2
20.2
20.3
100.0

4.0
19.0
19.4
17.8
19.9
19.9
100.0

50.0
50.0
100.0

50.1
49.9
100.0

30.0
13.0
14.0
15.0
10.0
14.0
4.0
100.0

32.9
21.0
8.0
12.5
9.0
13.3
3.3
100.0

The sample resembles the Finnish population well when it comes to age and gender, but Western
Finland is overrepresented while Ostrobothnia is underrepresented. Nonetheless, all analyses are
carried out without weighting data since there is no reason to expect this to bias the results.

11

Regions were in the preregistered plan divided into four NUTS-2 regions, but since this division is not commonly known, a
different categorisation was chosen to make it easier for respondents to pick the correct place of living.

18

Distribution of respondents’ characteristics across attributes
Table SF2. ANOVA tests of differences in mean scores across attributes
Variable

Age
(2-7)

Attribute
Level

Inclusion
Mean

SE

Popular control
Mean

SE

Considered
judgement
Mean

SE

Transparency
Mean

SE

Efficiency

Transferability
SE

Mean

SE

Mean

1

4.903 0.026 4.908

0.021

4.895 0.026 4.908 0.021

4.910

0.026

4.908

0.021 4.898

0.030

2

4.905 0.026 4.908

0.021

4.908 0.026 4.908 0.021

4.911

0.026

4.908

0.021 4.925

0.030

3

4.915 0.026

4.919 0.026

4.902

0.026

4.890

0.030

4.918

0.030

4
ANOVA
(Prob > F)
Gender
(0 Female
/1 Male)

0.943

1.000

0.808

1.000

0.962

1.000

0.007

1.500 0.008 1.500 0.007

1.502

0.008

1.500

0.007 1.500

0.010

1.503 0.008 1.500

0.007

1.497 0.008 1.500 0.007

1.502

0.008

1.500

0.007 1.502

0.010

3

1.498 0.008

1.503 0.008

1.496

0.008

1.502

0.010

1.496

0.010

0.925

1.000

0.887

1.000

0.875

1.000

4.669 0.031 4.676

0.025

4.677 0.030 4.676 0.025

4.668

0.030

4.676

0.025 4.668

0.035

2

4.678 0.030 4.676

0.025

4.673 0.030 4.676 0.025

4.679

0.031

4.676

0.025 4.690

0.035

3

4.682 0.030

4.678 0.031

4.681

0.031

4.682

0.035

4.665

0.035

0.948

1.000

0.994

1.000

0.943

1.000

2.733 0.015 2.728

0.012

2.723 0.015 2.728 0.012

2.723

0.015

2.728

0.012 2.734

0.017

2

2.722 0.015 2.728

0.012

2.729 0.015 2.728 0.012

2.728

0.015

2.728

0.012 2.725

0.017

3

2.728 0.015

2.731 0.015

2.732

0.015

2.730

0.017

2.721

0.017

ANOVA
(Prob > F)

0.877

1.000

0.936

1.000

0.920

1.000

0.949

1

5.192 0.037 5.183

0.031

5.188 0.037 5.183 0.031

5.195

0.037

5.183

0.031 5.177

0.043

2

5.173 0.037 5.183

0.031

5.190 0.037 5.183 0.031

5.167

0.038

5.183

0.031 5.202

0.043

3

5.183 0.037

5.171 0.038

5.186

0.037

5.157

0.043

5.195

0.043

4
ANOVA
(Prob > F)

0.941

1.000

0.922

1.000

0.866

1.000

0.884

1

5.273 0.039 5.273

0.032

5.287 0.039 5.273 0.032

5.275

0.039

5.273

0.032 5.290

0.045

2

5.274 0.039 5.273

0.032

5.272 0.039 5.273 0.032

5.268

0.039

5.273

0.032 5.285

0.045

3

5.273 0.039

5.261 0.039

5.276

0.039

5.276

0.045

5.241

0.045

4
ANOVA
(Prob > F)

ANOVA
(Prob > F)

0.956

1

4

Internal
political
efficacy
(0-8)

0.955

1

ANOVA
(Prob > F)

Satsf.
Democracy
(0-10)

0.816

1.499 0.008 1.500

4

Left/right
(0-10)

SE

2

ANOVA
(Prob > F)

Political
interest
(1-4)

Mean

1

4

Education
(1-9)

Policy issue

0.999

1.000

0.894

1.000

0.988

1.000

0.870

1

4.067 0.031 4.064 0.0253 4.051 0.031 4.064 0.025

4.063

0.031

4.064

0.025 4.061

0.035

2

4.054 0.031 4.064 0.0253 4.068 0.031 4.064 0.025

4.062

0.031

4.064

0.025 4.073

0.036

3

4.070 0.031

4.066

0.031

4.061

0.036

4.060

0.036

4.072 0.031

4
0.924

1.000

0.878

19

1.000

0.995

1.000

0.993

Correlation matrix
Table SF3. Correlation Matrix
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[1] Inclusiveness: Representative sample

1.00

[2] Inclusiveness: Key stakeholders

0.49 1.00

[3] Popular control: Advisory role

-0.01 0.02

1.00

[4] Considered judgement: Expert advice

0.03 0.02

0.04

1.00

[5]
Considered
discussions

0.00 0.04

0.02

0.51 1.00

judgement:

Moderated

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[6] Transparency: Open to public

-0.02 -0.07 -0.01 0.00 -0.01 1.00

[7] Efficiency: 2-5 instances

-0.03 -0.03 -0.02 0.04 0.01

0.06

1.00

[8] Efficiency: 5-10 instances

-0.01 -0.02 -0.01 0.03 -0.01 0.01

0.51

[9] Transferability: Offline

-0.04 -0.06 0.01

0.02 0.01

0.03 -0.02 -0.02 1.00

[10] Policy issue: Wolf protection

-0.04 -0.01 0.02

0.02 0.00

0.01

[11] Policy issue: Regional reform

-0.04 0.01 -0.05 -0.03 -0.06 -0.01 -0.03 0.03

[12] Policy issue: Economic growth

-0.06 0.00

[13] Constant

-0.28 -0.32 -0.32 -0.38 -0.34 -0.28 -0.36 -0.35 -0.26 -0.41 -0.41 -0.42 1.00

1.00

0.01 -0.03 -0.03 1.00
0.00

0.48 1.00

0.04 -0.02 -0.03 -0.04 -0.03 0.00 -0.01 0.47 0.61

20

1.00

Regression results
Table SF4. Regression of all attributes
β

SE

P

95% CI

Representative sample

0.007

0.012

0.553

-0.016

0.031

Key stakeholders

-0.014

0.013

0.257

-0.039

0.010

0.093

0.011

0.000

0.071

0.114

Expert advice

0.049

0.012

0.000

0.025

0.073

Moderated discussions

0.115

0.012

0.000

0.091

0.139

0.093

0.010

0.000

0.073

0.113

2-5 instances

-0.004

0.013

0.756

-0.030

0.022

5-10 instances

-0.050

0.013

0.000

-0.075

-0.025

0.033

0.010

0.001

0.014

0.053

Wolf protection

0.001

0.015

0.970

-0.029

0.030

Regional gov. reform

0.140

0.016

0.000

0.109

0.172

Ec. growth

0.112

0.016

0.000

0.082

0.143

0.293

0.018

0.000

0.258

0.328

Inclusiveness (ref. all interested)

Popular control (ref. directly implemented)
Advisory role
Considered judgement (ref. own judgement)

Transparency (ref. Behind closed doors)
Open to public
Efficiency (ref. 1 instance)

Transferability (Ref. Online)
Offline
Policy issue (ref Vegan food)

Constant
N

10500

Note: Entries are regression coefficients (β) from a linear regression analysis with clustered standard errors (SE), P-values (P) and 95%
confidence intervals (95% CI). The R2 is not reported since model fit is irrelevant for the current purposes.

21

Table SF5. Including interaction with policy issue
β

SE

P

95% CI

Wolf protection

0.019

0.042

0.653

-0.064

0.101

Regional gov. reform

0.126

0.041

0.002

0.046

0.206

Ec. Growth

0.060

0.042

0.157

-0.023

0.143

Representative sample

0.026

0.023

0.269

-0.020

0.071

Key stakeholders

-0.038

0.023

0.092

-0.083

0.006

Representative sample # Wolf protection

-0.062

0.033

0.064

-0.127

0.004

Representative sample # Regional gov. reform

-0.004

0.032

0.893

-0.067

0.059

Representative sample # Ec. Growth

-0.007

0.032

0.835

-0.069

0.056

Key stakeholders # Wolf protection

0.027

0.032

0.403

-0.036

0.089

Key stakeholders # Regional gov. reform

0.032

0.032

0.314

-0.031

0.096

Key stakeholders # Ec. Growth

0.038

0.031

0.224

-0.023

0.098

Policy issue (ref Vegan food)

Inclusiveness (ref. all interested)

Popular control (ref. directly implemented)
0.064

0.019

0.001

0.027

0.102

Advisory role # Wolf protection

Advisory role

0.040

0.026

0.119

-0.010

0.091

Advisory role # Regional gov. reform

0.008

0.025

0.755

-0.041

0.057

Advisory role # Ec. Growth

0.064

0.025

0.012

0.014

0.113

Expert advice

0.067

0.023

0.003

0.023

0.111

Moderated discussions

0.075

0.024

0.002

0.028

0.122

Expert advice # Wolf protection

-0.028

0.032

0.380

-0.090

0.034

Expert advice # Regional gov. reform

-0.033

0.031

0.295

-0.093

0.028

Expert advice # Ec. Growth

-0.014

0.032

0.673

-0.077

0.050

Moderated discussions # Wolf protection

0.049

0.034

0.145

-0.017

0.115

Moderated discussions # Regional gov. reform

0.058

0.031

0.067

-0.004

0.119

Moderated discussions # Ec. Growth

0.052

0.033

0.117

-0.013

0.117

Considered judgement (ref. own judgement)

Transparency (ref. Behind closed doors)
0.117

0.019

0.000

0.079

0.154

Open to public # Wolf protection

Open to public

-0.037

0.026

0.162

-0.089

0.015

Open to public # Regional gov. reform

-0.037

0.026

0.157

-0.088

0.014

Open to public # Ec. Growth

-0.019

0.026

0.455

-0.070

0.032

2-5 instances

-0.015

0.024

0.537

-0.061

0.032

5-10 instances

-0.027

0.025

0.271

-0.075

0.021

2-5 instances # Wolf protection

-0.015

0.032

0.643

-0.077

0.047

2-5 instances # Regional gov. reform

0.031

0.031

0.331

-0.031

0.092

2-5 instances # Ec. Growth

0.025

0.032

0.425

-0.037

0.088

5-10 instances # Wolf protection

-0.002

0.033

0.944

-0.067

0.062

5-10 instances # Regional gov. reform

-0.055

0.033

0.097

-0.119

0.010

5-10 instances # Ec. Growth

-0.038

0.033

0.254

-0.103

0.027

Efficiency (ref. 1 instance)

Transferability (Ref. Online)
0.022

0.019

0.237

-0.014

0.058

Offline # Wolf protection

Offline

-0.018

0.026

0.478

-0.069

0.032

Offline # Regional gov. reform

0.039

0.026

0.143

-0.013

0.091

Offline # Ec. Growth

0.024

0.026

0.362

-0.028

0.076

Constant

0.306

0.029

0.000

0.248

0.364

N

10500

Note: Entries are regression coefficients (β) from a linear regression analysis with clustered standard errors (SE), P-values (P) and 95%
confidence intervals (95% CI). The R2 is not reported since model fit is irrelevant for the current purposes.

22

Table SF6. Including interactions with process preferences
Process preference (ref citizens)
Intermediate
Elected representatives
Inclusiveness (ref. all interested)
Representative sample
Key stakeholders
Representative sample#Intermediate
Representative sample#Elected representatives
Key stakeholders#Intermediate
Key stakeholders #Elected representatives
Popular control (ref. directly implemented)
Advisory role
Advisory role#Intermediate
Advisory role#Elected representatives
Considered judgement (ref. own judgement)
Expert advice
Moderated discussions
Expert advice #Intermediate
Expert advice #Elected representatives
Moderated discussions #Intermediate
Moderated discussions #Elected representatives
Transparency (ref. Behind closed doors)
Open to public
Open to public#Intermediate
Open to public#Elected representatives
Efficiency (ref. 1 instance)
2-5 instances
5-10 instances
2-5 instances#Intermediate
2-5 instances#Elected representatives
5-10 instances#Intermediate
5-10 instances#Elected representatives
Transferability (Ref. Online)
Offline
Offline#Intermediate
Offline#Elected representatives
Policy issue (ref Vegan food)
Wolf protection
Regional gov. reform
Ec. Growth
Wolf protection#Intermediate
Wolf protection#Elected representatives
Regional gov. reform#Intermediate
Regional gov. reform#Elected representatives
Ec. Growth#Intermediate
Ec. Growth#Elected representatives
Constant
N

β

SE

P

95% CI

-0.024
-0.072

0.053
0.049

0.652
0.138

-0.127
-0.168

0.079
0.023

0.019
-0.044
-0.022
-0.006
0.004
0.059

0.028
0.032
0.035
0.033
0.039
0.037

0.510
0.178
0.522
0.850
0.925
0.114

-0.037
-0.108
-0.091
-0.071
-0.073
-0.014

0.074
0.020
0.046
0.059
0.080
0.131

0.053
0.025
0.064

0.029
0.034
0.033

0.066
0.464
0.050

-0.004
-0.042
0.000

0.110
0.092
0.128

0.036
0.103
0.013
0.016
0.004
0.021

0.029
0.030
0.035
0.034
0.037
0.035

0.212
0.001
0.714
0.629
0.917
0.548

-0.021
0.045
-0.056
-0.050
-0.068
-0.047

0.092
0.162
0.082
0.083
0.075
0.089

0.071
0.025
0.028

0.025
0.031
0.029

0.005
0.431
0.336

0.021
-0.037
-0.029

0.121
0.086
0.085

-0.002
-0.062
-0.004
0.001
-0.001
0.025

0.032
0.034
0.040
0.037
0.040
0.038

0.939
0.068
0.928
0.986
0.975
0.510

-0.064
-0.129
-0.081
-0.071
-0.079
-0.050

0.059
0.005
0.074
0.072
0.077
0.101

-0.002
0.061
0.026

0.024
0.030
0.028

0.936
0.039
0.357

-0.049
0.003
-0.029

0.046
0.119
0.081

0.044
0.175
0.124
-0.056
-0.049
-0.033
-0.046
-0.030
-0.002
0.337

0.038
0.039
0.038
0.046
0.044
0.048
0.045
0.046
0.044
0.042

0.246
0.000
0.001
0.223
0.258
0.491
0.311
0.519
0.955
0.000
10500

-0.031
0.098
0.050
-0.147
-0.135
-0.128
-0.134
-0.119
-0.089
0.255

0.119
0.251
0.198
0.034
0.036
0.061
0.043
0.060
0.084
0.419

Note: Entries are regression coefficients (β) from a linear regression analysis with clustered standard errors (SE), P-values (P) and 95%
confidence intervals (95% CI). The R2 is not reported since model fit is irrelevant for the current purposes.

23

Marginal means
Figure SF1. Marginal means for all attributes

Figure SF2. Marginal means across policy issue

24

Figure SF3. Marginal means across process preferences

25

