Nurturing cross-disciplinary research: Institutional logics, hybrid Spaces and metaorganization at a research university

Peter L. Freeman1*†, Isobel H. Marr2, Andrew J. Millar3, Fumi Kitagawa4.

Running title: Nurturing cross-disciplinary research
1

Roslin Institute, University of Edinburgh, Easter Bush, EH25 9RG, UK.

2 Research

Support Office, University of Edinburgh, 5 Roxburgh St, Edinburgh, EH8 9TA, UK

3 SynthSys

and School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, EH9 3BF, UK.

4 University

of Edinburgh Business School, Edinburgh, EH8 9JS, UK

* Corresponding Author. +44 131 651 9259
† Present Address: Innogen Institute, Old Surgeons' Hall, Edinburgh, EH1 1LZ, UK
All authors’ ORCID, e-mail:
Peter L. Freeman, 0000-0002-1496-9969, peterfreeman46@gmail.com
Andrew Millar, 0000-0003-1756-3654, Andrew.millar@ed.ac.uk
Isobel Marr, 0000-0002-0378-8580, Isobel.Marr@ed.ac.uk
Fumi Kitagawa, 0000-0003-0013-372X, Fumi.kitagawa@ed.ac.uk

Keywords: interdisciplinary research; university missions; organizational studies; research
on research; research management.

1 Introduction

The emergence of “big research” has given rise to a variety of organizational environments
(e.g. powerful research “labs”, projects and centres) that complement and transcend the
traditional departmental structures of universities. Success in building and sustaining these
“organized research units” (Geiger, 1990), and in reconciling their competing interests, is
central to the mission of a “research university”.
In this preliminary study, we focus on individual experiences of working in cross-disciplinary
research projects and centres within a large research university. Through interviewing key

1

Nurturing cross-disciplinary research
individuals (project leaders, academic and non-academic staff) engaged in running large
research projects and/or centres, we aim to unpack the diversity and dynamics of different
institutional logics at work at different stages of the organized research unit (ORU) life cycle.
We seek to draw general conclusions in terms of managing and reconciling the research
missions of ORUs, the university, and its external stakeholders (government, industry and
society in general).

The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides a review of literature introducing the
conceptual frameworks that inform our study. Section 3 explains the research methods and
the contexts of the study. Section 4 presents the findings, which are discussed in Section 5,
followed by concluding remarks in Section 6.

2 Conceptual Frameworks

2.1 Organized Research Units (ORU)

The term “organized research unit” (ORU) was first employed after the World War II at the
University of California (Geiger, 1990). The ORUs provide both disciplinary and
interdisciplinary structure that can respond to social demands for relevant knowledge and
provide access to a larger pool of resources for the “research enterprise” (Geiger, 1990).
Etzkowitz (2003) has described university research groups as ORUs (which he calls ‘quasifirms’) that flourish “especially under conditions in which research funding is awarded on a
competitive basis”. The ORU to which competitive awards are directed is the research
project, usually a temporary organisation which ceases to exist once its objectives have
been reached or its sources of support have been exhausted (Ratcheva and Simpson, 2011).
Although research projects are often overlooked as organisational entities (Freeman and
Millar, 2017), larger projects share the ORU characteristics of university-based research
centres, which exist “principally to serve a research mission, beyond the departmental
organization and includes researchers from more than one department” (Bozeman and
Boardman, 2003). A critical recognition here is that the research missions of its ORUs place
organizational demands on the university that may not be fully met by the “professional
bureaucracies”(Mintzberg, 1979, as cited in Musselin, 2006) of its academic colleges,
2

Nurturing cross-disciplinary research
schools and departments. The relative autonomy of ORUs (for example, large projects or
centres with their own budget, accounting structures and boards of directors) is a source of
organizational tension within the university.

2.2 Meta-organization
An ORU constitutes an “entity” nested within other ORUs (for example, research groups
within projects or projects within centres) as well as within the academic departmental
structures and those of the university as a whole. The nesting of ORUs within other
organizational structures suggests that the concept of “meta-organizations” (Ahrne and
Brunsson, 2005; Gulati et al., 2012) as a useful conceptual framework for our study.
According to Ahrne and Brunsson (2005), meta-organizations are organizations whose
members are other organizations, rather than individuals, while Gulati et al. (2012) include
individuals in their definition of meta-organizations as “networks of firms or individuals not
bound by authority based on employment relationships but characterized by a system-level
goal”. The meta-organization framework should help explain some of the tensions inherent
in sustaining ORUs in the university environment, in which academic staff are relatively
“loosely bound” to the organizational authority of their university employer (Musselin,
2006)

2.3 Institutional Logics

The institutional logics perspective highlights the heterogeneity within an institution, where
multiple logics provide the dynamics for potential change in both organisations and
societies (Thornton et al., 2012). The concept of hybrid logics is another promising
framework for understanding how universities (or their constituent ORUs) “can and do
manage and exploit tensions” (Upton and Warshaw, 2017, p. 100). In a similar vein, recent
organisational studies of higher education show the emergence of “hybrid spaces” in which
ORUs might manage such different logics and demands (Perkmann et al., 2018).

The concept of “ambidexterity” provides further theoretical guidance on how conventional
organizations, such as firms, create “dual” structures and systems for managing conflicting
demands in their environments (Ambos et al., 2008). Separate units are created to have
3

Nurturing cross-disciplinary research
lateral processes linking different demands together. The principle of dual structures allows
individuals in each unit to work on one set of demands while the challenge of reconciling
the conflicting demands is left to “a small group of senior executives” (Ambos et al., 2008).

According to Ambos et al (2008), the tensions of managing different demands within a
university are found to be more explicit at the individual level than the organisational level.
Nevertheless, we know little about how individuals negotiate different roles and identifies
within the organisational structures. In the light of this, we explore the roles and practices
of individuals within university-based ORUs, including multiple roles (e.g. academic
department and ORU commitments) which lead to “role strain” (Boardman and Bozeman,
2007). ORU staff profiles differ from those of the broader universities, for example
including program managers and executive directors as “boundary spanners”, alongside
academic-career-track professionals (Perkmann et al., 2018).

2.4 Research Infrastructures

Mindful that many ORUs follow a defined life cycle in seeking, using and exhausting timelimited research funds and other resources, we chose to frame our interview questions
around the concept of research infrastructures, broadly understood as encompassing not
only generic physical resources and technologies, but also the combination of ideas, money,
people and organizations that enable the research process. Framing our questions around
infrastructures also provides a contextual link to studies of knowledge infrastructures, open
access and the information commons (e.g., Benkler, 2016). We used the Royal Society’s
“Research Infrastructure Key Stages” (Royal Society, 2018, p. 13) as a guide in explaining our
approach to interviewees in our study.

3 Research methodology and contexts of the study

This study attempts to uncover institutional logics, as they intertwine with individual
identities and organisational practices. This is done by two steps: first, by collecting
individual responses and perspectives of actors from interviews; secondly, by identifying
and extracting institutional statements (informed by Watkins and Westfahl, 2016) based on
4

Nurturing cross-disciplinary research
these responses. In this exploratory study, we focus on key individuals in ORUs at the
University of Edinburgh, one of the largest research universities in the UK. The most recent
Research Excellence Framework, a research ranking used by the UK government to
determine future research funding, ranked Edinburgh 4th in the UK for research power. The
University’s research income for 2017/18 was £280m.

The study used a qualitative research approach (semi-structured interviews) to answer the
main research question: How do academic and non-academic participants involved in large
(> 5m award value) collaborative research projects and centres perceive:


Their role(s) at different stages in the life cycle of their exemplar initiative(s)



Their identity and sense “belonging” in the various organisational units (“layers”)
involved in the initiative



The support needed, and received, from the relevant “professional bureaucracies”
across the university



The management of “membership”, and of access to resources, within the initiative

A purposive approach was employed to select a balanced interviewee panel in terms of (a)
gender, (b) academic discipline, (c) affiliation (academic college/school or central university)
and (d) roles (senior academics / PIs, early career researchers and management and
administrative professionals). Approval was obtained from the relevant Departmental Ethics
Committee. 35 participants were contacted and data was collected from 27 participants
over a period of four months. Each participant provided written consent to participate in
the interviews and to recording (with one exception), transcription and analysis of the
interview content. All data collected from participants were anonymised in the discussion
of results. Interviews were transcribed and analysed to extract potential institutional
statements and associate these with our research questions.

4 Findings

4.1 Dominant Logics

5

Nurturing cross-disciplinary research
Arguably, two distinct dominant logics – “academic” and “professional services” – have
informed today’s university organizational environment. The academic (or “collegial”) logic
informs the identities and positioning of discipline-based scholars whose individual teaching
and research missions are to advance knowledge in their chosen fields, while the
professional services (otherwise “bureaucratic” or “administrative”) logic informs those of
“other” staff whose collective mission is to support the efforts of their academic colleagues.
While about two thirds of the collected institutional statements in our study appeared to be
informed by either an academic or bureaucratic logic (with an even split between these two
categories), fully one third - notably from senior researchers and research managers
engaged in large interdisciplinary “STEM” projects, appeared to be driven by a more
“entrepreneurial” logic that recalls Etzkowitz’s (2003) description of the “entrepreneurial
university”. Etkowitz posits the expansion the university’s mission beyond teaching and
research, to include an entrepreneurial focus on economic and social development
(Etzkowitz, 2003). The entrepreneurial logic is evident in statements in which respondents
identify more strongly with the goals and aspirations of their ORU than with the traditionally
“disinterested motives” of academic research (Geiger, 1990).

4.2 Life Cycle of Research Infrastructures

4.2.1 Planning and Preparation

Our findings suggest that, as the scale and scope of research initiatives increases, the
traditional organizational model of the individual academic, supported by the bureaucratic
structures of their schools, colleges and university, comes under strain. This is particularly
evident at the planning and preparation stage, where the ideas and interests of multiple
research groups and other stakeholders need to be assembled in a coherent and credible
coalition, capable of bidding successfully for the money and authority to undertake its
emerging, collective mission.

4.2.2 Construction and Operation
Study participants that we classified as expressing academic or bureaucratic dominant logics
tended to see these post-award phases as “business as usual”. Individual academics
6

Nurturing cross-disciplinary research
performed their agreed tasks, with bureaucratic attention focused on financial
accountability to funders. In contrast, those expressing an entrepreneurial logic were
concerned with assembling and sustaining an effective ORU, capable not only of delivering
on current project goals but also of building capacity to undertake future initiatives.

4.2.3 Decommissioning

Irrespective of their underlying dominant logic(s), study participants expressed regret or
frustration at the loss of resources, especially the skills embodied in temporary staff such as
early career researchers and management professionals employed on external, fixed-term
grants. Other than a sense that the university might provide “bridging” of such staff
between projects, there was no consensus on the best mechanism to protect and sustain
these resources. Again, those expressing an entrepreneurial logic tended to plan more
actively for sustainability of their ORU from an early stage.

5 Discussion

The “big research” challenge arises, because a university system that is equipped for
supporting individual academics’ pursuit of “disinterested” research in the context of formal
academic disciplines, must simultaneously build capacity for doing something quite
different, namely nurturing research enterprises (operational research units, ORUs) that are
focused on achieving collective rather than individual goals, taking into account the
expectations of external sponsors and diverse stakeholders, in addition to those of
disciplinary academics and their peers.

Universities and their constituent ORUs are not simply required to switch from the one
activity to the other but to develop the simultaneous capacity for both activities, and more
besides (see Ambos et al., 2008). Our interviewees were selected for their involvement in
well-funded (>£5M), cross-disciplinary ORUs. Effects of cross-disciplinary versus singledisciplinary research were not observed, as we selected against single-disciplinary
participants. Interviewees were typically enthusiastic about cross-disciplinary research or at
least comfortable with its challenges. It was natural to find some interviewees in this group
7

Nurturing cross-disciplinary research
with a dominant entrepreneurial logic, who identified more strongly with the ORU than with
an academic discipline. They had roles from contract researchers to directors. Staff in roles
classified as ‘professional services’ could share this logic and participate in their ORU’s
leadership team, breaking the earlier dichotomy between individual ‘academic’ and
collective ‘support’ roles. Universities seeking to nurture ORUs might therefore avoid a
dichotomy in the terms of employment of the ORU’s staff.

Notwithstanding our selected set of interviewees, the academic and professional services
logics remained common. Many of these staff were therefore conducting research in ORUs
where an entrepreneurial logic might be beneficial. More strikingly, we observed few
individuals who spanned different logics, even among this selected set. This result suggests
that few staff will perform uniformly well, if the requirement to switch between types of
research activity is passed down from the university to the level of individual staff, ignoring
the organizational contexts, missions and dominant logics of different ORUs in which they
perform those activities.

Here, the University might usefully take the position of a “meta-organization” (Ahrne and
Brunsson, 2005; Gulati et al., 2012), whose members are ORUs such as externally-funded
projects and centres, and whose research mission is seen more in terms of “orchestrating”
its portfolio of ORUs than of managing its individual employees. Part of that orchestration
would be to invest in cross-disciplinary research centres as “hybrid spaces” (Perkmann et al.,
2018) in which new research ideas and broadly interdisciplinary coalitions can evolve. Youtie
et al (2006), for example, show how multidisciplinary research centers represent an
institutional link in the “epistemic evolutionary chain” from informal nascent networks and
knowledge value collectives into new scientific fields and disciplines – and presumably also
into successful ORUs.

6 Concluding remarks
We have taken the position of reflective practitioners (Schön, 1983) in seeking to test the
salience of organized research units (ORUs) and their governance and management as part
of the university’s “big research” mission. Our initial study explored the dominant logics of
ORU participants across the life cycle of their exemplar initiatives, presented to them as
8

Nurturing cross-disciplinary research
research infrastructures. Our findings suggest that the university could usefully act as a
meta-organization that recognises and supports ORUs in ways that complement and
transcend traditional academic departmental structures, including the creation of hybrid
spaces to encourage “mixed logic” coalitions. Further work is planned in which we will test
our emerging hypotheses in case studies of selected ORUs, and the prospects for
management actions such as staff training.

Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge funding from the Wellcome Institutional Strategic Support Fund
(204804/Z/16/Z), the Schools of Chemistry and of Biological Sciences, and the Research
Support Office at the University of Edinburgh, and the input of our colleagues across the
University through interviews or insightful discussion.

Author contributions
Conceived project and funding: AJM;
Designed research: PLF, IHM, AJM;
Performed research: PLF, IHM;
Analysed results: PLF, FK;
Wrote the paper: PLF, AJM, FK.

References

Ahrne, G. and Brunsson, N. (2005). Organizations and meta-organizations. Scand. J. Mgmt.,
21, 429–449

Ambos, T. C., Mäkelä, K., Birkinshaw, J. and D'Este, P. (2008). When does university research
get commercialized? Creating ambidexterity in research institutions. Journal of
Management Studies, 45, 1424–1447

Benkler, Y. (2017). Open access and information commons. In F. Parisi (Ed.). The Oxford
Handbook of Law and Economics: Volume 2: Private and Commercial Law. Oxford: Oxford
University Press. Retrieved from
9

Nurturing cross-disciplinary research
http://www.benkler.org/Open Access Commons Oxford Handbook Prepub.pdf

Boardman, C. and Bozeman, B. (2007) Role strain in university research centers. The Journal
of Higher Education 78(4) 430-463

Bozeman, B., & Boardman, C. (2003). Managing the new multipurpose, multidiscipline
university research center: Institutional innovation in the academic community. Washington, DC: IBM Endowment for the Business of Government

Etzkowitz, H. (2003). Research groups as ‘quasi-firms’: The invention of the entrepreneurial
university. Research Policy, 32, pp. 109–121.
Freeman, P.L. and Millar, A.J. (2017). Valuing the project: A knowledge-action response to
network governance in collaborative research. Public Money and Management, 37(1).
https:doi.org/10.1080/09540962.2016.1241577
Geiger, R.L. (1990). Organized research units: Their role in the development of university
research. The Journal of Higher Education, 61(1), 1-19

Gulati, R., Puranam, P. and Tushman, M. (2012). Meta‐organization design: Rethinking
design in interorganizational and community contexts. Strategic Management, 33(6), 571586
Musselin, C. (2006). Are universities specific organizations? In G. Krücken, A. Kosmützky and
M. Torka (Eds.). Towards a Multiversity? Universities between Global Trends and National
Traditions (pp. 63-84). Bielefeld: Transcript

Perkmann, M., McKelvey, M., Phillips, N.W., (2018). Protecting scientists from Gordon
Gekko: How organizations use hybrid spaces to engage with multiple institutional logics.
Organization Science (forthcoming). Retrieved from https://ssrn.com/abstract=3153426
Ratcheva, V. and Simpson, M. (2011). Temporary organizations: Implications for knowledge
work. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1853546

10

Nurturing cross-disciplinary research
Royal Society. (2018). A snapshot of UK research infrastructures. Retrieved from
https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/publications/2018/research-infrastructures-uksnapshot/

Schön, D.A. (1983). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action. New York,
NY: Basic Books

Thornton, P., Ocasio, W. and Lounsbury M. (2012). The institutional logics perspective: A
new approach to culture, structure and process. Oxford: Oxford University Press

Upton, S. and Warshaw, J.B. (2017) Evidence of hybrid institutional logics in the US public
research university. Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management, 39(1), 89-103

Watkins, C. and Westphal, L.M. (2016). People don’t talk in institutional statements: A
methodological case study of the Institutional Analysis and Development Framework. The
Policy Studies Journal, 44(S1), S98-S122

Youtie, J., Libaers, D., Bozeman, B. (2006). Institutionalization of university research centers:
the case of the National Cooperative Program in Infertility Research. Technovation 26 (9),
1055–1063

11

