"x"
"1" "PhD thesis summary"
"2" "Claire Deligny"
"3" "“ The Borderlands of Insanity ”: i nsanity and poverty in the Lancaster, Prestwich and Rainhill lunatic asylums, 1845-1914"
"4" "Université Paris Diderot / LARCA, 11 March 2016"
"5" "( minor  corrections / Mention très honorable avec les félicitations du jury)"
"6" "Prof. Myriam BOUSSAHBA-BRAVARD"
"7" "Université Paris Diderot, France"
"8" "Thesis   supervisor"
"9" "Prof. Michel PRUM"
"10" "Université Paris Diderot"
"11" "Chair"
"12" "Dr. Catherine COX"
"13" "Associate Professor, University College Dublin, Ireland"
"14" "Examiner"
"15" "Prof. Emmanuelle DE CHAMPS"
"16" "Université   Cergy-Pontoise , France"
"17" "Examiner"
"18" "Prof. John MULLEN"
"19" "Université  de Rouen, France"
"20" "Examiner"
"21" "(Please contact author for more   details)"
"22" "Introduction"
"23" "In 187 4, Andrew Wynter, a physician from Bristol, tried  to delineate insanity according to its borderlands:"
"24" "I have  endeavoured  to show how fine is the line that separates Sanity from Insanity, and how large is the group of persons dwelling in the neutral territory. But slight occasions are sufficient to take them over the frontier; the necessity of watchfulness, ere the line of demarcation is passed, and an individual finds himself deprived of his civil life, is, therefore, apparent, and needs no apology for being dwelt upon ."
"25" "By approaching insanity in those terms, Wynter underlined the paradox lying between the difficulty, or indeed impossibility, of delineating what would constitute a territory of insanity and the  necessity of such a definition to determine confinement. It is precisely within that gap that this thesis  endeavours  to study  the three Lancashire  institutions  of  Lancaster, Prestwich (near Manchester) and Rainhill (near Liverpool)  from 1845 to 1914 ."
"26" "Wynter’s quotation enables us to grasp the complexities of the interpretations of insanity which can determine  treatment and confinement. At the end of the 18 th  century, the emergence of a series of  nosological  classifications which aimed at de lineating insanity and its etiology is traditionally designated as the beginnings of psychiatry, which left the theory of  humours  and developed alongside neurology . This process, often designated as the “medicalization of insanity” , is however to be understood as medicine had an unstable meaning and ambiguous position in the shifting definitions of science at the end of the 18 th  century and indeed throughout the 19 th  century .  The coexisting physical and mental  aetiologies  of insanity  led to perceptions  of a possible cure  that in turn dramatically altered the  meaning of confinement. In  traditional historiography , these new definitions of confinement as treatment  were promoted in England by the  Tukes , a Quaker family from York who set up the Retreat  in 1796 , a private institution adopting the newly-called “moral treatment”  which f ocused  on the moral and physical environment of the insane .  In the 1830s, the principles of moral treatment were integrated to the cause  of the non-restraint movement which promoted the abolition of violent mode s  of treatment .  Although these episodes constitute the fundamental elements of any history of psychiatric institutions, this linearity must be taken with precaution and undoubtedly coincided with the teleological rhetoric of the reformers. The  Tukes ’  Retreat , in particular, was treated throughout the 19 th  century as a founding myth, close to the progressive image of  Pinel  unchaining the insane at  Bicêtre . This rhetoric   has to be understood as  running  alongside old stigmas associated with the mad. As Scull demonstrates when dealing with Charles Bell’s illustration of the mad in a book that was reprinted throughout the 19 th  century, the perceptions of the mad  were also  undoubtedly characterized by a permanent stigma, associating the mad with bestiality. Even researchers seem to have been influenced by old representations of the mad and their treatment. The conditions of treatment at  Bethlem , for instance, were only re-examined in the 1980s despite the opening of the archives in 1967 . Our study, therefore, attempts to deconstruct those super imposed  discourses."
"27" "19 th -century Britain is  equally characterized as  a period of institutionalization of insanity which coincided more generally with an increasing form of state intervention in social matters .  In 1845, two laws m ad e it compulsory for the counties and the boroughs to build their own asylums after a first permissive law in 1808 had  made it possible   for the local  authorities to levy the sum on the local rates .  The Lancaster asylum, opened in 1816, was therefore considered one of the first public institutions in the country. Further South, the asylums at Rainhil l  and Prestwich, however, opened in 1851, in the wake of the 1845 legislation. As such, the lunatic asylums came to gradually integrate and become part of the local Victorian institutional landscape, alongside the workhouses which were themselves reformed after the 1834 New Poor Law ."
"28" "This thesis aims at  examining how these institutions were both set up and reformed throughout the long nineteenth-century and until the 1913 law on mental deficiency. The latter  is often considered the climax of the influence of eugenics in Britain. It also corresponds to an extension of the definition of insanity and its inclusive borderlands an d therefore represents a  displacement of the problematics related with insanity .  The study of the three Lancashire asylums aims at understanding the complex contradictory and complementary definitions of confinement, between exclusion, treatment or preventive confinement. It also aims at grasping the meanings and dynamics of the insertion of the lunatic institutions in the context of the development of politics of public health. The relation between poverty and insanity, or rather its supposed ideological and institutional congruence, is therefore at the core of our study. In other word s,  and to borrow Wynter’s spatial metaphor, our aim is to study the problematic  shared ground between  poverty and insanity."
"29" "Methodology"
"30" "The term of  “ ma dness” has  been chosen  here  as part of the medical terminology of the time but the  areas  it covers seem larger than the term of insanity. As Elaine Showalter shows when studying hysteria,  madness and hysteria  have become concepts beyond their mere  denomination as mental illnesses .  A study of madness can as  such cover psychiatric practices but also their perceptions. In other words, madness can be treated as the discourse of insanity. This conceptualization, however, can turn out to be a double-edged sword if one considers the criticisms that were aimed at Michel Foucault in his fundamental study,  Madness and  Civilisation . In the first preface to the book, Jacques Derrida actually commented that it was not a book on  the history of psychiatry, but “a history of madness itself” . What both constitutes the originality and weaknesses of Foucault’s study is therefore based on his apparent confusion between the discourses on madness and the psychiatric institution .  In contrast, this thesis explores the discourses on madness to deconstruct the concept whilst being grounded on the administrative and political nature of the lunatic institution. The quantitative approach adopted here is however not incompatible with our approach of madness as a discourse .  Our approach is first and foremost that of an institutional history."
"31" "A work of this kind  could perhaps lead to   the possibility of  a Whiggish history of the asylum , which would show its development as progress or, on the contrary, as a form of decline .   Since Scull’s seminal  Museums of Madness , the history of asylums has taken place according to a limited framework.   As  Peter Bartlett  shows, the revisionist accounts of the  asylums  as well as the first studies produced in the 1960s have addressed the subject along similar structures :"
"32" "Either way, the narrative takes the form of a classic tragedy, with the asylum in the role of hero: a rise to prominence, full of promise, a tragic flaw, and the inevitable failure.  The debate is on the nature of the flaw ."
"33" "To a certain extent, this thesis  is also to be understood within this framework but it is fundamental to  stress  that it underlines the failure of a certain type of discourse which regarded the psychiatric institution as being part of the contemporary definition of public health, rather than a failure which  could  be  analysed  according to  current  criteria.  For some h istoria ns, this narrative can only be avoided by moving away from institutional history .  This thesis contends, on the contrary, that  institutional history can escape any teleological discourse if it is understood as part of its insertion within the local, regional and national contexts in which the institution is inserted. This methodology aims at removing the asylum from its apparent isolation.  Recent historiography has precisely tried to work its integration and relation with other institutions or actors involved in the processes of confinement, suc h as the patients’ families .  In very much the same way, this thesis aims at comprehending the public lunatic asylum as one  type of response to pauperism.  The broader term of “pover t y” used here in the title is aimed at suggesting that the definition of poverty and pauperism was not necessarily the same in the workhouses and the asylums. In practice therefore, the definitions of madness as well as poverty were constantly negotiated."
"34" "Historiography"
"35" "Interestingly enough this t opic has often been termed a « F rench topic » by academics abroad, a sign, no doubt, of Foucault’s lasting influence and of the  multidisciplinary  approach  originally  adopted by the  Ecole des Annales  compared with Anglo-American historiography .  As such,  dealing with the history of psychiatry  involves  using  Foucault who becomes, at the very least, a « traveling companion » as Chris Philo puts it .  Michel Foucault’s  Madness and  Civilisation  undoubtedly received many criticisms for its numerous historical inaccuracies.  The classic example of the  Narrenschiff , a  boat on which the insane were supposedly left  to drift on the Rhine, is often taken to show his confus ion between historical facts and representations .  In the same way, his defini tion of a Great Confinement which  would have taken place in the second half of the 17 th  century based upon the concept of unreason has led to various  revisions .   Foucault compares the model of the general hospital with workhouse as they both serve  to confine a diverse population .  In very much the same way, Foucault sees moral treatment through  Pinel , who s upposedly freed the insane, and the  Tuke  at the Retreat as another form of repressive confinement .  F oucault’s definition of confinement remains a very interesting angle to tackle the issue of confinement.   Andrew Scull’s  Museums of Madness   is another major point of reference in our work. A sociologist, he proposed to insert the history of the asylum in the field of  social history, focusing on the  19 th  century which he regards  as the era  of institutionalization of insanity .     In a way, Scull transferred the idea of a Foucauldian Great Confinement to the 19 th  as the er a of  asylumdom , a notion on which our work shall rely as well, although we will revise some of his arguments, including the line according to which the lunatic asylums would be simply dumping grounds for the insane. Despite all these revisions, Scull is very right to underline that his work, just like Foucault ’s , served as an invitation or indeed provocation to research the subject .  O ur work , however, also  draws heavily on the historiographical trend that has been trying since the 1980s to deconstruct systematic perspectives on the lunatic asylums by examining their inclusion and the negotiations around the issues of insanity between a variety of social actors.  This school saw the emergence of numerous micro-historical studies  which analyzed the workings of the asylums and  their  dependence  to  local workhouses. Recently however, the scale of those studies ha s  undergone a change whilst contributing to what is now frequently referred to as the “spatial turn” ."
"36" "The choice of Wynter’s title of  the Borderlands of Insanity signifies our firm spatial grounding.  In a second edition of the book reviewed by alienist Mortimer Granville,  extra chapters were added to further define territories which might be integrated  to the definition of insanity, “ Mazeland ”, “ Dazeland ” and “ Drifland ” .  For the historians just for the con temporaries,  metaphors of space have  proved a useful tool to delineate what Roy Porter designated as a  “ geography of anguish ” .  Our approach is not based, however, on the mere use of the lexical field of space but is rather grounded on the spatial turn which has enriched  numerous studies of health and medicine,  through , in particular, the notion of “ healthscapes ” .  These approaches, developing alongside structuralism, have sometimes been attacked for their rigidity, whereby the multiplication of spatial references could be seen as the sign of a form of  dehistoricisation , based on a  territorialisation  of history which would supposedly result in systematic and deterministic conclusions .  This thesis, however, moves away from an understanding of space as a fixed entity, to follow the  dichotomy introduced by Michel de  Certeau  between “place” and “space” whereby the stable concept of a place would contrast with a space designed by various dynamics .  Space, therefore, for de  Certeau , would be defined as a “ lieu  pratiqué ” ,  delineated by social practices .  The asylums at Lancaster, Rainhill and Prestwich can therefore be conceived as various  interacting spaces, physical,  insititutional  and more generally spaces defined by social practice."
"37" "As such this thesis seeks to delineate the new spaces opened up with the building of these asylums, local and regional  healthscapes  which raise the question of their  interactions, but also more generally of their insertion in the institutional and ideological landscapes of Victorian England. As one contributor to  The Builder  remarked, by the end of the 19 th  century, the lunatic asylum had become part of the Victorian counties:"
"38" "From any of the great main lines of railway which run through the shires, a  traveller  will be sure to spy, in some comparatively secluded position, a great group of buildings, which by their modern air and their tall  chimney stacks, and possibly their bulky water-tower, seem to belong rather to the busy towns than to country seclusion. If he inquires, he will probably learn that this is the County Lunatic Asylum ."
"39" "The analysis of the insertion of the institution therefore implies the use of the two levels of analysis  which Chris Philo uses in his def inition of historical geography, aerial differentiation which, on the one hand, enables one to accentuate the differences between various places and , on the other hand,  spatial relations which build and complexify spaces ."
"40" "Scale therefore constitutes a fundamental tool  to avoid what Andrew Scull was fearing  when examining the revisionist studies  which emerged in the 1970s:"
"41" "I hope it will not be taken amiss if I hoist a caution flag. We need to be careful lest our fascination with the details we find ourselves retreating back into a sort of neo- solipcism , a narrow and constricted vision that flattens and distorts our sense of perspective, and leaves in obscurity aspects of historical reality that acquire meaning only when placed in a larger contextual frame ."
"42" "Micro-histories of the asylums at Lancaster, P restwich and Rainhill could therefore problematically point at the “tyranny of the discrete” .  In contrast, this thesis aims at going beyond micro-histories by constantly putting them into perspective.  Scull’s remark does not actually deny the necessity of a reduction of a scale of analysis which would underline  the multiplicity of voices and points of view, thereb y destroying a normative model .  Microhistories, therefore, enable  us  to refine analyses and do not necessarily lead to  fragmentation. Thus, although Scull’s remark is still valid, Giovanni Levi’s argument, according to which the dichotomy between micro-history and macro-history does not necessarily correspond  to that between the general and the particular seems quite convincing.   Playing with the scales enables us to move beyond this."
"43" "The regional scale is part icularly relevant for our study. The region here is understood not only as an a dministrative unit –the county- but as space composed by cultural, social or political geographies .  19 th -century Lancashire which saw the rise of industrialization, major emigration and immigration movements, can t hu s be divided in various regional spaces that  can be superimposed  and  are angles through which to read the region. As such the aim of this thesis is to examine the complex role of place in the elaboration of asylum practice.  It also aims at showing how the politics of space, and in particular the reforms on local government, actually  altered this practice and its perception.  The cases of Lancaster, Prestwich and Rainhill therefore allow us to examine the influence of the interactions between the local, regional and national scales in the construction of a new institution, the public asylum."
"44" "A brief overview of the chapters"
"45" "PART I  -  Spaces and definitions of insanity  in 19th-century Britain  (chaps 1-3)"
"46" "This first part  consists of three chapters and  is meant to define three frameworks  which are essential  to our study. First, the contemporary definitions on insanity are examined,  followed with  the develop ment of institutions until 1845,  which constitutes the starting-point of this work. The third chapter aims at  defining  the regional spaces of Lancashire.  Th e se three chapters aim at grounding our work in the  spatial framework of our study."
"47" "PART II  -  Situating the  asylum :  local and regional geographies of the  Lancaster, Prestwich and Rainhill institutions, 1845-1888  (chaps 4-6)"
"48" "The second part of our work seeks to “situate” the asylum,  i . e.  grasp the main characteristics of each institution individually but also  trace  the different roles they played in the region until the 1888 local government act. This implies studying the very structure of the asylums, but also their integration in the local and regional spaces of Lancashire by analyzing the origins of  th e patients admitted to these institutions . Their problematic integration to the Poor Law system and the complex etiological relations between insanity and poverty are also finally examined in chapter 9."
"49" "Chapter 4 first consists  of  an examination of the therapeutic spaces  within the architectural structures of Lancaster, Prestwich and Rainhill. Browne’s often quoted work on the ideal asylum leads us to a wider reflection on the concept of model, which in Browne’s words seem to  correspond to a prototype as well as a  projection. This work is based upon the notion of a “ modèle   générateur ” or dynamic model which arise s from the interactions  between  action and structure .  As such, the asylum model is perceived in its pragmatic application on our three institutions, and is also understood as partaking in a wider institutional model based upon a supposed congruence between environmentalism and moralism ."
"50" "The next chapter is dedicated to  the integration of the asylums in their local landscapes. The chapter looks at the 1844 Report of the Metropolitan Commissioners which, from the very start, defined the asylum as a local institution as the pauper insane were supposed to be sent to the institution closest to their place of settlement. Examining American alienist Edward Jarvis’s law, this chapter  seeks to determine the role of distance in asylum practice and the differen ces between the asylums."
"51" "Chapter 6 focuses on the ideological and institutional link s between poverty and insanity which leads to a disputed definition of a public institution. The first section of this chapter tackles the role of poverty in the etiology of insanity. Whilst Dr Rogers i nsisted  on the links between insanity and pauperism, the tables showing the supposed causes of insanity rarely stress this notion directly. However, most of the etiologies do point  to  the supposed moral and physical dimensions of poverty: idleness and immoral   b ehaviour  together with unsanitary living conditions are confusedly pointed at as direct causes and aggravating factors of insanity.  The annual reports for the three asylums  also  show us that the side-effects of industrialization and urbanization have a perceived impact on the etiologies of insanity, but also its curability and the delineation of such illnesses as general paralysis or dipsomania which are addressed in more detail.  The second half of the chapter addresses the institutional continuum between insanity and poverty. The asylums at Lancaster, Prestwich and Rainhill  and their tense relations with the workhouse authorities , in particular, are taken as  proving the complementarity and rivalry of workhouses and asylums.  This  chapter  allows us , in particular,  to discuss Bartlett’s argument of the asylum’s dependence to the New Poor Law system as its major failure. More fundamentally, the asylum authorities and the medical superintendents in particular seem to claim  the right to belong to the contemporary redefinition of public health as state medicine."
"52" "PART III  -  REVISING THE ASYLUM MODEL 1888-1914  (chaps 7-9)"
"53" "The third part of this thesis examines the questioning and revision of the asylum model from the 1888 Local Government Act to the 1913-4 law on mental deficiency. It first analyses the debates which deal with a possible increase of insanity in Lancashire just like in the rest of the country. It also determines the impact of the 1888 local government act on asylum politics and present s  the redefinition of  local government  as a major factor for what is usually broadly presented as a disillusion stemming from the failure of the asylums as a curative model. The last chapter explores the ways in which the three asylums and other local authorities seek to determine a new, sometimes experimental, model and its inclusion in a more general attempt to redefine public health."
"54" "Chapter 7 seeks to examine the debates surrounding the possibility of an increase of insanity in the context of growing fears of racial degeneration. Alongside the theories of Herbert Spencer and what has been (wrongly) called Social Darwinism, the  rhetorics  of epidemics seem to have extended to mental illnesses. The first section of the chapter examines the statistics of insanity, their development but also their growingly systematic use through the data collected by the Census and the Commissioners in Lunacy. The various factors which tend to confirm the validity of the nosocomial argument are explored through the comments found in the annual reports and the various readings of the data in the  Journal of Mental  Science . The chapter also examines the weight of legislation on the rising number of persons registered as insane, and focuses in particular on the 1874 4 shilling-grant allocated to the Poor Law authorities to facilitate the transfer of the patients to the local asylums. It focuses on the reactions brought about by this decision, which, while not completely verified by the figures, lamented the use of asylums as the receptacles for the unwanted and the more systematic registration of the pauper insane which made the normal pauper, in Henry Maudsley’s words, an “extinct race” . More importantly, the reaction shows that the law was part of an overall plan to reduce the local taxes rather than a targeted public health policy. The chapter goes on  to  exploring changes in the definitions of insanity and the gradual extension of its borderlands as explored by Mark Jackson . The second section of the chapter therefore explores the fears of degeneracy which fed sensationalist accounts in the local and national press, but were also reflected by growing concerns on hereditary etiologies of insanity, which gave more visibility to such cases as women or more generally cases of alcoholism who might spread mental deficiency."
"55" "Chapter 8 shows how the 1888 Local Government Act coincides with th e se growing concerns about the way to tackle the growing number of registered insane. The first section of the chapter covers the attempts at coordination between the three asylums, which then came to include a fourth asylum at Whittingham (1873) and a fifth at  Winwick  (1902). Despit e the almost sacred autonomy of  local governments in the Victorian era, the Committees of Visitors for the three original asylums  which  con vened in the 1850s  tried to establish m in imum forms of coordination which rapidly failed. This helps to understand Barry M. Doyle’s designation  of these interactions  as “a form of regional politics on an ad-hoc basis at this stage” .   This limited form of cooperation was extended after the passing of the 1888 Local Government Board w hich  first , however,  gave rise to a patchwork of authorities and introduced a difference between county and municipal boroughs. The section examines the formation of the  Lunatic Asylums Committee of the County Council   (1889), quickly followed by the more representative  Lancashire Asylums Board  (1891) which includes the boroughs. The section goes on  to  e xamine  the tenets of a common regional asylum authority now transferred to the county."
"56" "Chapter 9 examines the ways in which the asylum model came to be re-examined and redefined in a variety of ways in Lancashire. The chapter looks at the attempts, financed by the Lancashire Asylums Board, to redefine the model when it financed the inspection of various Continental institutions in Germany, Belgium and France in 1900.  The conclusions of the Committee in charge, T. H. Jenkins (LAB),  D. M. Cassidy (Lancaster) and  J. Wiglesworth (Rainhill)  are carefully studied as the latter advocate the construction of a sixth asylum in the county built along the lines of the villa-type observed at  Alt- Scherbitz  (Leipzig) . The comments on the  G h eel  colony in Belgium and on the Scottish system are examined as well as the continuity in the rhetoric of moral treatment, which placed a domestic atmosphere and individuality at the core of asylum practice. The search for a new institutional model, however,  wa s not restricted to the LAB and the next section comments on similar local initiatives, in particular the  Chorlton  and Manchester Joint Asylum Committee which even initiated a very similar Continental inspection in 1897  to deal with  the epileptics."
"57" "The next section of the chapter examines the influence of the rise of eugenics. The description of female patients is examined and the definition of their responsibility as mothers  is  seen  in light of the fear of propagation through the suspected increase of insanity .  Sterilisation   wa s envisaged by the LAB as well as nationally by the  Royal Commission on the Care and Control of the Feeble Minded  1904- 1908 . After a series of debates, the option of sterilization  wa s dropped by the LAB, a decision which  wa s notably welcomed by Dr Perceval at Prestwich. In the end, the overall influence of eugenics might have been mainly rhetorical but it is argued that it most certainly precipitated the discussions around the integration of psychiatry in discourses of public health by giving it a tone of emergency. In the end, the 1913 legislation also demonstrated that the eugenic ideals promoted by Dr Wiglesworth at Rainhill in particular resulted in a law which responded to their complaints about the individual liberties of the insane but also somehow displaced the question, from insanity to feeble-mindedness."
