Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Pp. 56-63

DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no1.5
Incorporating Professional Initiatives in EFL Classrooms: A Way to
Treat Pedagogical Solitude

El-Alia Wafaâ ZAGHAR
Department of English
Faculty of Foreign Languages
University of Oran 2- Mohamed BEN AHMEDOran, Algeria

Abstract
In this climate of the expansion of globalization, in today’s classrooms, encouraging student
investment in writing is paramount. Due to the complicatedness of this skill, many teachers find it
difficult to make their learners aware of the divergent phases of writing so they produce better
compositions. Thus, the professionalism of teachers is inevitably essential in shaping the learners’
writing ability (assisting students as they develop a piece of writing, and boosting their engagement
with writing), and learners can achieve successful learning outcomes if they grasp how best to
improve their work. To make language learning more effective, there is a need for pursuing
professional growth and providing conditions where teachers cooperate to attain higher levels of
learning among their students. Indeed, professional development for a teacher is about acquiring
new skills, creating a potent learning atmosphere, surmounting the barriers, rectifying the failures
and moving forward. It provides ongoing opportunities for educators to continue to identify
teaching/learning problems, develop solutions, raise their performance, address students’ needs
and up their achievements. The present paper sets out to take a closer look at how teachers work
with writing among the first year English as foreign language (EFL) students. It tends to offer an
instruction based on a set of professional development methods that provide practitioners with
several avenues to implement them in classroom practice. To this end, findings of the research
indicate that the proposed strategies can lead to a virtuous bond between the teaching/learning
process of written expression that may generate beneficial knowledge, valuable teaching, and
constructive learning results.
Keywords: EFL students, professional development, writing, written expression
Cite as: ZAGHAR, E. W. (2019). Incorporating Professional Initiatives in EFL Classrooms: A
Way to Treat Pedagogical Solitude. Arab World English Journal, 10 (1) 56-63.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no1.5

56

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Incorporating Professional Initiatives in EFL Classrooms

ZAGHAR

Introduction
Within information technology age, and in an ever-changing world of education, English
under the flux of innovations is the nowadays tool for international organizations. In this way, it
is the window to new opportunities, connections, and growth. It is a commodity that assists
students in improving their literacy skills, expanding their own cultural awareness, and increasing
the possibility of a better grasp and appreciation of alien cultures. According to many studies,
English has become the dominant foreign language used around the globe and has been
appropriated by its speakers in diverse ways. Consequently, both the needs of learners and the aims
and objectives of English Language Teaching (ELT) have changed.
Being a recursive and dynamic process, where learners plan, organize, check, edit, and
produce, writing is seen as a challenging aspect. It is one of the basic macro skills which has given
a significant contribution to alien culture learning and also considered as a thinking process that
demands intellectual effort to promote the progress of language proficiency. Writing entails more
than adhering to writing conventions, it encompasses creative aspiration, problem-solving,
reflection, and revision. Being a demanding process, in Sasaki’s (2000) view, it consists of eight
writing strategies namely: planning, retrieving, generating ideas, verbalizing, translating,
rereading, evaluating, and others. (as displayed in table 1).
Table 1. Key Writing Strategies and Sub Strategies
Writing Strategies
Planning

Retrieving

Generating ideas
Verbalizing

Sub Strategies
Global planning
Thematic planning
Local planning
Organizing
Conclusion planning
Plan retrieving
Information retrieving
Naturally generated
Description generated
Verbalizing a proposition
Rhetorical refining
Mechanical refining

Translating
Rereading
Evaluating

Others

Sense of readers
Translating
Rereading
L2 proficiency evaluation
Local text evaluation
General text evaluation
Resting
Questioning
Impossible to categorize

Definition
Detailed planning of overall organization
Less detailed planning of overall organization
Planning to write next
Organizing the generated ideas
Planning the conclusion
Retrieving the already constructed plan
Retrieving appropriate information from long-term
memory
Generating an idea without any stimulus
Generating an idea related to the previous description
Verbalizing the content the writer intends to write
Refining the rhetorical aspects of an expression
Refining the mechanical or (L1/L2) grammatical aspects
of an expression
Adjusting expressions to the readers
Translating the generated idea into L2
Rereading the already produced sentence
Evaluating one’s own L2 proficiency
Evaluating part of generated text
Evaluating the generated text in general
Resting
Asking the researcher a question
Impossible to categorize

Source: (Sasaki, 2000, pp. 289-291)

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

57

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Incorporating Professional Initiatives in EFL Classrooms

ZAGHAR

In highlighting the importance of writing professionally, Bolton and Delderfield (2018)
declare that this type of writing is: “the key that can unlock the reflective imagination” (p. xvi).
Writers should vary and employ different strategies; the main purpose of writing is to aid students
to learn and produce quality-efficient discourse. In order to create an inviting climate for students
as well as teachers, Fu and Townsend (1998) expounds:
To help diverse students become competent and confident writers we must help them
become bilingual and bicultural learners. The process may be slow and often
frustrating for both students and instructors. And, at best, this process will not be one
of accommodation or assimilation, simply replacing or adding on another language,
another set of values. Rather, it should involve both students and teachers in the
process of mutual transformation, so that each becomes an entirely new type of
language user (p. 132).
In an attempt to build up a meaningful and successful educational context, there are two elements
to consider: the learners and the teachers. The former should be encouraged to become autonomous
and have the willingness to take greater responsibility for their own learning, the latter being major
catalysts for change should possess an active teaching practice via an unending round of
professional development strategies to keep the currency of their knowledge updated.
Accentuating learner’s autonomy is pivotal. Teachers should encourage learners to learn
autonomously, collaboratively, and ceaselessly. Vanijdee (2003) in explaining the meaning of
autonomy writes that it is “a capacity -a construct of attitudes and abilities- which allows learners
to take more responsibility for their own learning” (p.76). Therefore, students should see their
learning process as a personal discovery. Learning to write helps students improve aptitudes for
the negotiation of differences, develop their own worldviews, and respond to unfamiliar or
changing settings. Further, thanks to the availability of technological means these students have
plenty of possibilities to ameliorate their learning such as exposure to knowledge about various
topics and issues arising from real-world scenarios.
The role of teachers has grown immensely. In the current times, they go through a vast array
of practices from being the major source of knowledge, leaders, managers and educators to
supporters and facilitators; they are expected to be tech-savvy, computer literate and at the cutting
edge of education. Their task is to cope with the 21st –century learners; they should have a
repertoire and reservoir of instructional techniques, effective teaching methodologies, and robust
directional capabilities in such a way that they can foster their students’ interest and creativity, and
elevate their motivation. Accordingly, instructors need to take on new roles in order to face
numerous changes emerging from their internal and external environment to confront the
modifications in curriculum and learners’ needs that are met in present-time ELT.
Theoretical Foundation: Professional Development
Becoming an instructor is unique and there is no single path or direct map to follow. This
journey involves being open to new experiences and capable of reflecting on one’s own skills and
abilities. In the fast changing globe of the early 21st century, teachers are urged to ensure best
learning outcomes for their students, help them become independent, and provide them with
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

58

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Incorporating Professional Initiatives in EFL Classrooms

ZAGHAR

motivation and interest for lifelong learning. So to handle ongoing changes and strengthen the
quality of education, teachers should be equipped with the needed strategies to make real
transformations in their day-to-day surroundings.

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Major Merits of Professional Development
Continuing ongoing education opportunities can help teachers:
keep abreast of the most recent developments and innovations in teaching in general and the
world of ELT in particular
select more appropriate teaching resources
develop materials required to match the future needs of the learners
become reflective practitioners
create a safe, supportive learning atmosphere
teach their learners how their own culture aids them to understand other alien cultures
offer multiple opportunities to their students to better their linguistic output
elevate their learners’ intercultural awareness to interact effectively in diverse multicultural
encounters
teach their students how to actively engage in a variety of language learning opportunities with
manifold audiences
take appropriate decisions and actions to correct students’ misbehaviours that do not meet
classroom expectations
modify and readdress the teaching and learning experiences and stay well-informed of the
current practices in language education

The Suggested Types of Professional Development Procedures to be Implemented
Two kinds of methods were conducted Teaching portfolios and Analysing critical incidents:
•

Teaching Portfolios:
A teaching portfolio-also termed a dossier or profile, is regarded as an effective way for
teachers to reflect on, select, organize, portray, and document their teaching philosophy, objectives
and accomplishments. Evans (1995) typifies the nature of a portfolio:
A professional portfolio is an evolving collection of carefully selected or composed
professional thoughts, goals, and experiences that are threaded with reflection and selfassessment. It represents who you are, what you do, why you do it, where you have
been, where you are, where you want to go, and how you plan on getting there (p. 11).
The eminence of reflective practice in educational circles is widely recognized as a means of
extending, evidencing and supporting professional growth, and this may offer prospects for more
innovative teaching resolutions. Numerous educators make the point that the portfolio serves some
purposes (either formative i.e. developmental or summative i.e. evaluative), which can be to:
• facilitate quality teaching
• help set goals for further development or improvement
• demonstrate individual capabilities and achievements
• aid in refreshing skills and updating one’s depth of knowledge
• support reflection and self-evaluation
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

59

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Incorporating Professional Initiatives in EFL Classrooms

ZAGHAR

• encourage collaboration with colleagues
Therefore, it appears that by using a portfolio, written expression teachers will maintain individual
actions and find out a kind of a framework of reference for continuous learning and deep reflection.
•

Analyzing Critical Incidents:
The concept of ‘critical incidents’ is variously interpreted by researchers and practitioners; in
the educational context, the useful technique used for self-reflection is critical incident analysis, it
is seen as an empowering and supportive process that deals with problems or challenges that
educators encounter in day-to-day practice. Critical incidents are instruments for boosting one’s
awareness and comprehension of human behaviors, attitudes, expectations, and interactions. For
Flanagan (1954): “The critical incident technique consists of a set of procedures for collecting
direct observations of human behavior in such a way as to facilitate their potential usefulness in
solving practical problems and developing broad psychological principles” (p. 327).
This technique helps teachers know how they operate, question their own practice, and then
explain and provide a solution. Many scholars take the view that examining and uncovering critical
incidents can have a number of merits, it can:
• promote self-directed professional growth
• create a heightened sense of self-awareness
• allow for building collegiality, sharing expertise, and identifying a possible resolution
• aid teachers to fine-tune their instructional repertoire
• serve as a valuable resource for both novice teachers and expert ones
• give teachers support to pose critical questions about many aspects of teaching
• assist in raising the instructors’ deeper level of reflective thinking
Valuing the importance of analyzing critical incidents as a profitable professional way, written
expression teachers are recommended to use it in order to capture plenty of different events that
take place on the terrain, and to record the learners’ attitudes and misconducts. As a result, the
instructors can gain useful insights into how:
• to improve their methodologies and practices
• to correct the misbehaviors and help their students develop positive attitudes towards their
learning experience
• to produce possible transformations and readjustments
The Study in Context
This research took place at the University of Oran 2 in Algeria. It was undertaken with first
year students majoring in EFL. This population was made up of 127 learners (male and female).
Two teachers covering the module of Written Expression took part in this study.
Results and Discussion
Students were given assignments, homework and subjected to many tests throughout one
academic year; the objectives were to provide each participant with an opportunity to learn from
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

60

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Incorporating Professional Initiatives in EFL Classrooms

ZAGHAR

writing mistakes made on each previous task, edit those errors on the next work and consequently
improve the student’s writing skills. The majority of learners do not possess the skills necessary
to effectively communicate in a written format that will help them become successful writers in
the real world of work. The data revealed that 62.20% of the students showed a significant progress
in their writing skills throughout the year. What is more, the results indicated that the inclusion of
the cited strategies led to a change in the instructor’s pedagogical beliefs and practices,
respectively.
This research aims to address the following question:
• How is it possible to enhance the writing skills among first year EFL learners?
For a better investigation of this teaching, a case study approach is utilised in this research to
gain an insightful account of the situation before suggesting any changes. It gives opportunity for
more scientific aspects that make probably the yielded data to be realistic. Be it descriptive or
explanatory or exploratory, the case study provides the investigator with an instrument to conduct
comprehensive, intensive, qualitative as well as quantitative research. Creswell (2007) depicts:
Case study research is a qualitative approach in which the investigator explores a
bound system (a case) or multiple bound systems (cases) over time through detailed,
in-depth data collection involving multiple sources of information (observation,
interview, audiovisual method, documents etc.) and reports a case description or casebased themes (p. 73).
This study, then, comprises a vast array of tools of thorough check involving questionnaires,
interviews, and classroom observation procedures. A questionnaire was given to first year EFL
students (male and female). This instrument aims to gather complete and valid data; it is made for
the purpose of understanding, analyzing and interpreting the views, attitudes, and experiences of
a given group of people from a target population. The researcher has utilised the questionnaire as
an effective mechanism for efficient collection of specific data from a large group of students in
addition to other useful information obtained from teachers. Confidentiality being highly
respected, the questionnaire allows for a reliable method of analysis as all respondents are asked
the same standardised questions.
Described as a discussion that has a structure and a purpose, interviewing is a way to assemble
information as well as to gain knowledge from individuals; it is a thoughtful questioning and
listening method with the aim of having an in-depth description of a particular subject. An
interview is conducted with written expression teachers to investigate issues deeply and to capture
the instructor’s attitudes and personal opinions. It was first recorded and later transcribed for
analysis. It provided an insightful idea about possible suggestions for enhancing the situation of
teaching/learning writing.
In order to gain an understanding of some aspects of teaching, learning, or classroom
interaction, classroom observation is used. The main purpose behind this self-report method is to
allow a room for getting feedback about one’s strengths and weaknesses, and it is a way of
developing self-awareness on one’s own teaching and obtaining suggestions for further
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

61

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Incorporating Professional Initiatives in EFL Classrooms

ZAGHAR

improvements. Additionally, this useful process can help determine professional learning, support
collegiality among peers, and provide opportunities to discuss challenges and concerns. As a
powerful research strategy, it helps to record the teacher’s practices and the
students’ actions and offers detailed and precise evidence about several aspects of the class than
other data sources. It has also allowed having comprehensive knowledge and a close examination
of the subject under study, and to view the target group (first year students) in its natural
circumstances.
As an elemental answer to the problematic, some major themes emerged from the examination of
obtained findings:
1- A Noticeable Increase in Good Academic Writing and a Reduction in Classroom-related Stress:
The findings indicated the emergence of greater interest towards the task of writing and a
considerable enthusiasm among the classmates. Responding to a question, one of the participants
opines:
“The great amount of exercises and homework we were given has really
motivated us, and we were taking pleasure in doing it”
Moreover, through the implementation of the professional approach, the researcher has observed
that the students taking part in this study were able to shape their ideas and to challenge new
thoughts. They became more familiar with the process of writing and obeyed its steps which has
led them to produce coherent and meaningful paragraphs and essays. The proposed strategies have
demonstrated that the researcher has established some key elements that permit to lessen anxiety
and stress through offering a conducive and relaxing atmosphere and to discover and record the
learners’ weak areas, attitudes and misbehaviours. Thus, the teacher can gain a thorough analysis
and can later refine his/her teaching methodology.
As an illustrative response of the teachers’ interview, the following can be cited:
“I was carefully monitoring and following up what occurred through the
learning experience”
2- Gain of Basic Instructions To Be Respected when Producing a Piece of Writing:
The results pictured that the students have utilized more complex expressions and appropriate
content. That is, this experience fostered their writing abilities. It was remarked that incorporating
the professional approach has contributed to the refinement of learners’ writing capacities through
a selection of more complex expressions, the use of the convenient substance and the acquisition
of useful vocabulary.
3- A Constructive Awareness about Examining and Developing One’s Own Practices through:
•
•
•

Discovering the students’ strengths and downsides
Posing significant queries then exploring them
Trying to find out specific areas of teaching practices that need to be improved
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

62

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Incorporating Professional Initiatives in EFL Classrooms

ZAGHAR

Therefore, these techniques have demonstrated that they enable the teachers to gain key reflections
on their own instruction and on their learners’ interactions and conducts throughout time.
Concluding Reflections
As concluding thoughts, promoting the quality of instruction has always been the subject of
salient discussion in teacher education; thus, aiding teachers to reshape their classroom practice is
key to their success. Ameliorating teachers’ professional growth is seen as a prerequisite for
addressing a continuous stream of changes in their environments. Further, ongoing professional
advancement does not only allow teachers to learn new approaches, but also enables them to
grapple with divergent issues and refine the pedagogies required to support students to increase
the knowledge, skills, and competencies they need to thrive in the 21st century. Our findings make
a case for future scholarship exploring the extent to which teachers readjust and revise their
specific existing practices.
About the Author:
Dr. El-Alia Wafaâ ZAGHAR is a senior lecturer at the University of Oran 2 in Algeria. She
received her PhD in Didactics from the University of Tlemcen, Algeria. Her main areas of
teaching, research and interests comprise Cultural Studies, English for Specific Purposes (ESP),
Linguistics, Research Methodology, Teaching English as a Foreign Language (TEFL) and Teacher
Education. ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8185-3958.
References:
Bell, B., & Gilbert, J. (1994). Teacher Development as Professional, Personal, and Social
Development. Teaching & Teacher Education, 10 (5), 483-497.
Bolton, G. & Delderfield, R. (2018). Reflective Practice – Writing and Professional Development.
London: Sage Publications Ltd.
Creswell, J. (2007). Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design: choosing among five approaches.
2nd edition. London: Sage.
Evans, S.M. (1995). Professional Portfolios: documenting and presenting performance
excellence. Virginia Beach, VA: Teacher’s Little Secret.
Flanagan, J.C. (1954). The Critical Incident Technique. Psychological Bulletin, 51 (4), 327-58.
Fu, D., & Townsend, J.S. (1998). Cross-cultural Dilemmas in Writing: need for transformations
in teaching and learning. College Teaching, 46 (4), 128-133.
Sasaki, M. (2000). Toward An Empirical Model of EFL Writing Processes: an exploratory study.
Journal of 2nd language writing, 9 (3), 259-291.
Vanijdee, A. (2003). Thai Distance English Learners and Learner Autonomy. Open Learning, 18
(1), 75-84.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

63

