Counting Everyone: A Model for Electoral
Reform in Canada
Brendan Osberg

Abstract:
Declining voter participation,
strategic-voting campaigns, public opinion polls[1],
and myriad other signals highlight the need to
improve Canada’s current first-past-the-post (FPP)
system. How the system ought to be changed
is much less clear. This paper briefly reviews
candidate models for electoral reform (ER) based on
systems in other nations, before putting forward the
‘parsimonious mixed-member’ (PMM) model. PMM
is inspired by the mixed-member (MM) proportional
representation (PR) system currently used in, for
example, Germany, but is ‘parsimonious’ in the sense
that the number of additional MPs brought into
parliament to reach proportionality is minimized.
Like traditional MM, PMM preserves the individual
relationship between every voter and an MP, and it
eliminates under-representation of parties. Unlike
traditional MM, however, it preserves the incentive
for parties to win local races, it avoids unnecessary
‘dilution’ of constituency representatives, and it
avoids misattribution of spoiled ballots to major
parties, by preserving voters’ rights to vote for
no party. As such, it can be thought of as an
optimization of MM. A key feature of this model is
conservatism -it modifies our existing FPP system
with the minimal set of changes necessary to resolve
its most obvious problems, without creating new
ones. PMM fixes only what is broken.

1 Background and Motivation
Assessing the performance of any electoral system
requires first clarifying what it is intended to achieve.
While referenda establish unambiguous levels of support for options ‘yes’ and ‘no’, general elections involve various overlapping preferences that are impossible to disentangle with a single ballot mark.
The mechanics of Canada’s FPP system suggest that

the question posed to voters during elections is as
follows:
Q1: ‘Which local candidate do you wish to
represent your riding?’
In practice, however, there are clearly many other
considerations on voters’ minds. Such considerations
might include: ‘Which national party do you support?’, or ‘Which national leader do you wish to be
prime minister?’, or ‘Which viable local candidate(s)
might you be satisfied with?’ (particularly relevant
for ‘strategic’1 voters).
In the current system, each riding’s member of
parliament (MP) is selected so as to maximize the
number of voters whose Q1 preference is satisfied,
while all others are simply discarded. Governments
are then formed based on which party has the most
MPs. In translating popular will to electoral mandate, there is clearly information loss in this process.
While it is unclear what priority voters attach to
each of the above questions during elections, historically, Q1 may have better described the formation
of government when geography and limited communications left ridings more isolated. Advances in
telecommunications, for example, have since made
national politics more widely accessible.
More importantly, under the modern FPP system,
citizens of nearly every political persuasion have at
some point felt underrepresented -albeit at different
times. It is unlikely that the ‘joy’ of being overrepresented in certain periods offsets the frustration
of under-representation later, and national unity can
hardly be aided by such stark divisions and periodic
resentment, even if a kind of de facto proportionality
is established on long-term averages.
The benefits of changing such systems can be seen
1

A ‘strategic’ consideration is defined here as one based on
the anticipation of other voters’ behaviour.

Page 1 of 7

in studies that ‘clearly identify’ higher voter turnout
rates in voting systems with some form of PR[3]
across many nations. In a particularly relevant case
study, New Zealand was found to have succeeded in
‘fostering more positive attitudes about the efficacy
of voting’ [4].
There are some risks, however. It was shown in
Germany that some systems of PR can have unintended consequences when it was inconveniently
revealed that their PR system allowed negative vote
weights in some rare circumstances[5] This pathological case led to the system being ruled unconstitutional before the formula was corrected. Clearly,
it is important to avoid such issues in a Canadian
system, however this serves to highlight a potential
peril. Voting systems are complex, involving millions
of participants, and the current system, while imperfect, has worked at least well enough to maintain
our democracy for over a century. The more tinkering that is done, the greater the potential for harm.
Indeed, while a recent Canadian poll[1] showed overwhelming support for at least some change to the
political system, about half of respondents were wary
of too much change -evidently preferring a system
that has been tried and tested. For these reasons,
keeping change to a minimum while resolving specific
problems in our existing system will be a principle
theme in the following sections.

2 Defining the Goal
Here, a list of desirable characteristics in an electoral
system are enumerated to serve as guiding principles
of the model that will be proposed in Sec. 4.
1. Accountability must be maintained between
all citizens and an MP whose role is to represent
them specifically. Without this, governments
become impersonal and estranged.
2. Every vote must count productively. Scenarios in which citizens are discouraged from voting
by thinking that their vote will not matter (or,
much worse, that it might actively work against
their interests) must be precluded.
3. Proportionality of national support for major groups -either political parties, or national
leaders- must be reasonably approximated.2
2

An exact mirror of popular support would generally require as many MPs as voters, which is clearly impractical.
Rounding, at a minimum, is necessary.

4. Simplicity. The ballot must be sufficiently easy
to understand to avoid any widespread difficulty
in filling it out.
5. The significance of local races should be
preserved. Parties should have an incentive to
run credible candidates in each riding, and these
direct representatives should control as much of
parliament as possible.
6. Conservatism. While imperfect, our current
democratic system has many advantages (and already fulfils items 1, 4 and 5 above). We should
change our existing system only as much as is
necessary to satisfy the remaining objectives,
and no more. Changes that are proposed to our
existing system should have some evidence of
success in an existing democracy.

3 Prospective Models
With the list in Sec. 2, we can consider some of the
current electoral systems elsewhere in the world and
how well they meet our criteria. For example, the list
system, as used in Israel, produces party representation in proportion to the popular vote; it is easily
understood, and it ensures that every vote counts
–satisfying requirements 2, 3, and 4. The ranking
of the party lists, however, is generally determined
within the party, leaving candidates no signal as to
their individual popularity in any particular riding.
Moreover, without separate electoral districts, the
connection of voters to a specific MP is eliminated.
For a geographically concentrated country, perhaps
this is not so great a problem, but for Canada there
are sure to be many regions, far-removed from Ottawa where citizens feel estranged by system that
offers them no clear answer to the question ‘who
speaks for me?’. Similar criticisms have been made
by scholars as Enid Lakeman[6].
The single transferable vote (STV) –as used in
Ireland, for example[9] – allows voters to rank their
preferences and if a voter’s first choice fails to be
elected (or receives such support that additional votes
would be superfluous), their vote is transferred to
the voter’s second preference in a constituency, and
so on. Satisfying requirement 1 above would require
maintaining single-seat constituencies, making STV
equivalent to a ranked ballot (RB). The system would
then satisfy requirements 1, 4, 5, (and arguably 6).
This, however, is not a form of PR. Rather than allocate fair proportions of seats to voters’ ideal choice,
RBs explicitly incorporates voters’ willingness to

Page 2 of 7

compromise into their ballot, and maximizes the
number of voters with a satisfactory representative.
Altering our voting system in this way would be akin
to supplementing question (Q1) from Sec. 1 above
with the following:
‘. . . and if your ideal candidate cannot be
elected, whom then?’.
Part of the appeal of RBs is conservatism -it is
merely a matter of gathering additional information
from the voters for possible contingencies, and no
structural changes to parliament are required. Candidates can also review their tally of votes to ascertain
the enthusiasm of their supporters, and the degree
of overlap with other candidates.
It has been argued[7] that RBs would benefit the
currently governing Liberal party, as ‘centrist’ parties
are more likely to accumulate second-place votes
than parties on either end of the political spectrum.
Whether such an advantage would be fair or not
(i.e., should we consider only voters’ pure beliefs, or
also their willingness to compromise?) is a value
judgment that will not be addressed here. Rather,
does such an advantage exist at all?
While the precise rate of strategic voting remains
unclear, voters who currently vote for mainstream
candidates may be more likely to support an underdog if they know that their vote has a kind of
‘insurance policy’ in place. A sufficient shift in firstchoice ballots from these risk-averse voters may result
in surprise upsets with currently centrist seats being
won by other parties who were superficially thought
to have no chance of winning. Given the uncertainty
in the influence of strategic considerations, it remains
unclear which political party will benefit most from
ranked preferences.
This latter consideration, however, underscores a
problem with RBs: there is no obvious mechanism for
filtering out small parties to prevent parliament from
becoming fragmented. As such, RBs could lead to
the proliferation of many small parties (unlike both
the list system and mixed-member models which
generally impose a minimum threshold in popular
support for proportional seating of ‘major’ parties).
Moreover, the RB system also falls short of our criteria in two important ways. First: not all votes will
‘count’ in this system. Suppose a voter lives in a
riding where a single candidate has such overwhelming support as to virtually guarantee victory; or the
voter only feels comfortable giving their support to
one or two candidates, none of whom have a chance
of winning. In either of these cases, the rationale

to stay home and not bother voting is weakened
(compared to FPP) but not eliminated entirely.
Secondly, this system still will not ensure proportionality: RBs, like FPP ballots, allow for scenarios
in which a single party receives widespread support
across the country, and yet still insufficient support
in any particular ridings to be awarded many seats.
Such a party will at least have a better chance of
winning local races, compared to FPP, but the core
problem of disparity between the cumulative national
popular vote, and parliamentary representation is
not fully resolved with RBs.
That being said, criticism of RBs should not be
overstated here; there is no criteria by which the RB
system performs worse than the current FPP, and
several areas where it would provide significant improvement. In the following, however, we will explore
models that provide even greater improvement.

3.1 The Mixed-Member Solution
The mixed-member (MM) model is another common
alternative, a well-known example of which is seen
in Germany.
Today German citizens are presented with two
votes: the first ballot selects a representative for
their constituency, and these representatives fill up
half of the Bundestag. The second ballot is used
to establish proportionality between the parties using candidates from a party list established prior to
the vote (for clarity, we will refer to the former as
‘constituent’ MPs and the latter as ‘supplementary’
MPs). To prevent government paralysis through the
proliferation of many small parties, a party must win
more than 5% of the popular vote to be entitled to
any supplementary seats.
There are many subtle benefits this system could
offer Canada. First, this form of PR maintains the
individual connection of every voter with a single MP
who is accountable to their constituency. Second,
every vote counts; even if a voter is in a region that’s
already a lock for an opposing candidate, they may
still express their support for their preferred party,
leading to large-scale proportionality. Moreover, the
twin ballots of this system allow voters to distinguish
their vote between local candidates and their parties.
Constituent MPs can then gauge their mandate: an
MP who wins a seat in a riding where their party
did poorly on the second ballot can claim to have
been elected on individual merits rather than party
label (and perhaps take some liberty in voting their
conscience in the legislature). Conversely, an MP
who narrowly won in a strong riding for their party

Page 3 of 7

4 Parsimonious Mixed-Member
Consider a hypothetical election under MM with
three parties: X, Y , and Z. Suppose that after
comparing each party’s share of constituency seats
to its share of the popular vote, party X is underrepresented in parliament, party Y is represented
appropriately, while party Z is over-represented.
A standard algorithm for allocating seats proportionally is the D’Hondt method, which relies on defining a series of Quotients for each party m:
Qm,j =

Vm
.
j

(1)

Quotients 2019, Major Parties
BLQ
CON
GRN
LIB
NDP

106

Qj

should feel greater pressure to toe the party line. Finally, as with RB, while the counting may have some
additional complexity, the voting is simple enough
for all to understand, requiring only an additional
mark -which provides additional information. Traditional MM satisfies requirements 1, 2, 3, and 4 from
Sec. 2.
However, what if a voter wishes to support only
their local candidate, and no party? Since traditional
MM fills up available seats by priority of major parties, each major party’s share of seats is determined
by its proportion of votes among major parties, not
among votes overall. As such, there is a (relatively
small) share of the population whose share of seats is
misattributed to a party for whom they expressed no
support (see Supplement Sec. ?? for more details.)
Moreover, once in the elected body, supplementary
MPs are equal in number to constituent MPs, and
occupy half of the Bundestag. The voting power of
constituent MPs is then significantly reduced, and
voters who rely on their representative to act on their
behalf may feel less empowered.
This begs the question: is it really necessary to
double the size of parliament? Doing so in Canada
would represent a rather drastic change to the system, and would dilute the mandate of constituent
MPs significantly. There are other democracies with
smaller fractions of their elected body assigned to
supplemental MPs, and yet they too are fixed in size.
To phrase the question more generally: ‘How many
supplementary MPs are needed to satisfy proportionality?’ This question has a mathematically unambiguous answer for any given election that will be
shown in the following section. If indeed the purpose
of supplementary MPs is to establish proportionality, then any MPs beyond this are superfluous -and
detrimental to constituent-based representation.

105

0

25

50

75

100

j

125

150

175

200

Figure 1: Quotient projections (using Eq. 1) from the
2019 Canadian federal election, for each party.
A proportional legislature can be defined by
drawing a horizontal line anywhere on this
graph, separating quotients that are awarded
seats (above) from ones that are discarded (below). The grey transparent line, for example,
separates the largest 338 quotient values and
could, in principle, determine a proportional
legislature. Ridings are addressed in the following Fig. 2.

Here, Vm is the total number of votes given to party
m, and j is the list index (see Supplement). Thus,
the quotients enumerate party m’s vote total divided
into halves, and then thirds, quarters, . . . etc. The
utility of these quotients is that a single threshold
on these values can be used to define a proportional
body; a graphical illustration is shown in Fig. 1.
The above method provides a natural prioritization for seat allocation. The party with the largest
quotient not yet assigned to a seat, at any given
time, is the most underrepresented (relative to its
popular support), and has priority claim to the next
seat assignment, should one be available. It is for
this reason that the mixed-member systems in Wales
and Scotland are referred to as Additional Member
Systems (AMS).
With this system, in our hypothetical scenario,
party X will be the first in line to receive additional
seats. As seats are assigned, and parliament grows,
at some point, party Y will begin to receive seats
as well, since its relative share of parliament is decreasing. Towards the end of this process, seats are
assigned to parties X, Y , and Z in an uneven rotation, with each addition counteracting the effects of
the previous. The original need for supplementary
seats (i.e., proportionality) has been satisfied, but

Page 4 of 7

Quotients 2019, Ordered
BLQ
CON
GRN
LIB
NDP

Qi

106

105

0

100

200

300

i

400

500

600

Figure 2: In PMM, we order all the quotients from Fig. 1
into two groups, giving priority to constituency
seats (to the left). The lowest-quotient from
this group then defines the lower limit for parties to be granted supplementary seats (to the
right of the ‘jump’ in the data). Any quotient
below this threshold can be ignored

the process continues until all empty seats of the
fixed-size assembly are filled.
This is where parsimonious mixed-member (PMM)
departs from existing MM/AMS systems, by adding
supplementary seats only until proportionality is
established. To illustrate this graphically, we can
re-order the list of quotients from Eq. 1 for all parties by magnitude, but giving priority to seats that
were already assigned by constituency races, as in
Fig. 2. Here, the smallest quotient associated with a
constituency seat defines a threshold for supplementary seats. By assigning supplementary seats only
until this point, we ensure that proportionality is
established with the minimum possible number of
supplementary seats.
While this method can ensure that no party
is under-represented, parties that were overrepresented, based on FPP results, can retain a small
degree of that advantage, since there is generally a
small fraction of votes that cannot be assigned to
any major party. These ballots default towards the
prior FPP results by inhibiting the addition of any
supplemental MPs. This is another difference from
many other MM systems, where the significance of
the first ballot is eclipsed by the second. In PMM,
the first ballot still matters, and voters can choose
‘no party’ (see Supplement Sec. ?? for more details).
As to who should fill these supplemental seats for
each party, this can be decided on by a number of

criteria. In the German case, Strattmann notes[8],
“The ranking on the list is determined, in part, by
the party members’ prominence, seniority, interest
group approval of the nomination, and evidence of
longstanding prior party activities”. For regional
representation, most existing MM systems have a
fixed parliament size, with a corresponding number
of supplemental seats for each region of the country.
In PMM, the same broad representation can be
achieved if each party’s list of supplemental candidates is ranked, internally, according to a rotating
scheme that distributes representation across the
different regions and provinces of the country. Explicitly regional parties -such as the Bloc Quebecois,
for example- might opt-out of such a formula, and
draw only from a particular region. Otherwise, giving parties an opportunity to introduce some MPs
from regions where they normally win fewer seats
may serve to partially erode sharp regional political
divisions.

5 Projections Based on Previous
Results
It is impossible to say with certainty what results
previous elections would have produced with this
system, since historical voting data already contain
the effects of strategic voting, low turnout from disaffected voters, and other influences. Changing the
voting system will likely affect the behaviour of some
voters.
Nevertheless, we can make approximate projections. Let us assume that in 2019, if this system had
been in place, the same citizens would have shown
up at their polling stations and that their regional
(i.e., first) ballot would be unchanged. Let us further
assume that all voters’ second ballot vote would go
to the party of their preferred first-ballot candidate.
Under these assumptions, Fig. 3 shows the breakdown of seats that was actually observed in 2019
alongside the total seat count that would be allotted
to each party in the PMM system. Likewise, Fig. 4
shows the same calculation for the 2011 election (for
the 2015 election, please see supplement).
Note that in each case, while no party is underrepresented, only the initially over-represented party
(Conservative in 2011, Liberal in 2015 and 2019)
remains slightly over-represented (see Supplement).
As discussed in the previous section, this advantage
serves to motivate parties to win constituency races.
There is nothing about this system that inherently
prevents majority governments -indeed, a party’s

Page 5 of 7

Projection, 2019

6 Discussion and Conclusion

200

Majority

Seats

150

100

50

0

Other

Figure 3: Projected seat distribution following the 2011
federal election, using actual results (left)
alongside projected results of this model from
the same electorate in transparency (right).
The bar defining majority control is shown in
grey transparency for both cases, while a finer
black line for each party shows the number of
seats that would correspond to their share of
the popular vote.

Projection, 2011
175
150

Majority

Seats

125
100
75
50
25
0

Other

Figure 4: Seat distribution following the 2011 federal
election, using the same conventions as in
Fig. 3.

lead could be increased into a majority with the
second-ballot results. However, in practice, most
governments with some form of PR have shown a
tendency towards coalitions. Germany, for example,
has established coalition governments as the norm
in recent decades.

While there is much discussion about the need for
electoral reform in Canada, there remains a lack
of detailed discussion as to what type of reforms
should be made, and what their implications would
be. Making the right choice depends on defining the
criteria for success, as Sec. 2 is intended to do. The
STV/ranked ballot satisfies enough of these criteria
to merit serious consideration, and yet the mixedmember model comes even closer. The latter can be
further improved by limiting supplementary MPs to
the minimum number necessary for proportionality,
thus preserving the incentive for parties to win firstballot races, and allowing voters the option to eschew
party labels entirely.
While MM has worked well in many countries, a
known vulnerability to abuse exists via decoy lists.
Through this tactic, candidates run as ostensibly
independent (or affiliated with an obscure ‘decoy’
party) while in practice having the tacit support
of a major party. The party’s supporters are then
encouraged to cast split ballots and elect this de
facto party member in addition to a supplementary
seat for the same party, perverting the compensatory
intention of supplementary seats.
Various measures can, and have, been employed to
prevent this -direct exclusion under certain criteria
being generally the most effective. For example,
2nd ballots can be excluded if they are attached
to a first ballot cast for a victorious independent
candidate (this is, in fact, a major reason why the
ballots are not separated in Germany.) There are
many other MM systems with effective restrictions
to prevent decoy-list-tactics while still allowing goodfaith voters to choose between both candidate and
party. The problem is by no means insurmountable;
nevertheless, it must be emphasized that it would be
a grave mistake to overlook this problem entirely.
With that caveat in mind, PMM satisfies all of the
requirements listed in Sec. 2: A personal connection
between every voter and a representative is maintained, citizens of all ridings will know that their vote
will count towards the final result, and that their vote
will not be misattributed to a larger party, should
they support an independent candidate. The ballots
are simple and the end result of proportionality of
parliamentary seats, based on popular vote, is intuitive. Likewise, from the perspective of candidates,
this two-bit communication, sends a clearer message
to policy-makers as to what their constituents were
actually voting for. Once these representatives take
office, their power is diluted as little as possible, while

Page 6 of 7

ensuring no party is underrepresented, and they will
have been chosen from the best of their parties, as
their parties still have incentive to win local races.
For all these reasons, Canada should adopt PMM.

References
[1] David Coletto and Maciej Czop, Canadian Electoral Reform, Public Opinion on Possible Alternatives , December 2015
[2] Environics, ‘13 Swing Riding Polls - Wave One’,
August 19, 2015
[3] Andre Blais and Kenneth Carty, ‘Does
Proportional Representation Foster Voter
Turnout?’ European Journal of Political Research 18(2):167-181, (1990)
[4] Jeffrey A. Karp and Susan A. Banducci ‘The Impact of Proportional Representation on Turnout:
Evidence from New Zealand.’, Australian Journal of Political Science , 34,3,363-377 (1999)
[5] ‘Viele Farben, keine Wahl’, Die Zeit , September 22, 2005
[6] E. Lakeman, Power to Elect , Suffolk, U.K.:
The Electoral Reform Society (1982) pp 59-63.
[7] Michael Taube Liberals electoral reform would
stack the deck in their favour , Waterloo Region
Record, May 27, 2016
[8] Thomas Strattman Party-Line Voting and Committee Assignments in the German Mixed Member System Department of Economics, George
Mason University
[9] Department of the Environment, Community
and Local Government, Ireland Guide to Ireland’s PR-STV Electoral System

Page 7 of 7

