Self-Control in Cyberspace: Applying Dual Systems
Theory to a Review of Digital Self-Control Tools
Kai Lukoff
kai1@uw.edu
Human Centered Design &
Engineering,
University of Washington
Seattle, USA

Petr Slovak∗
p.slovak@ucl.ac.uk
Department of Informatics,
King’s College London
London, United Kingdom

Reuben Binns
Adam Slack
reuben.binns@cs.ox.ac.uk
AdamSlack@outlook.com
Department of Computer Science,
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom

Michael Inzlicht
michael.inzlicht@utoronto.ca
Department of Psychology,
University of Toronto
Toronto, Canada

Max Van Kleek
Nigel Shadbolt
max.van.kleek@cs.ox.ac.uk
nigel.shadbolt@cs.ox.ac.uk
Department of Computer Science,
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom

pr
in

ABSTRACT

t

Ulrik Lyngs
ulrik.lyngs@cs.ox.ac.uk
Department of Computer Science,
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom

KEYWORDS

Attention; self-control; self-regulation; distraction; ICT nonuse; addiction; focus; interruptions
ACM Reference Format:
Ulrik Lyngs, Kai Lukoff, Petr Slovak, Reuben Binns, Adam Slack,
Michael Inzlicht, Max Van Kleek, and Nigel Shadbolt. 2019. SelfControl in Cyberspace: Applying Dual Systems Theory to a Review
of Digital Self-Control Tools. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems Proceedings (CHI 2019), May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow,
Scotland UK. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 18 pages. https://doi.org/
10.1145/3290605.3300361

pr
e-

Many people struggle to control their use of digital devices.
However, our understanding of the design mechanisms that
support user self-control remains limited. In this paper, we
make two contributions to HCI research in this space: first,
we analyse 367 apps and browser extensions from the Google
Play, Chrome Web, and Apple App stores to identify common
core design features and intervention strategies afforded by
current tools for digital self-control. Second, we adapt and
apply an integrative dual systems model of self-regulation
as a framework for organising and evaluating the design
features found. Our analysis aims to help the design of better
tools in two ways: (i) by identifying how, through a wellestablished model of self-regulation, current tools overlap
and differ in how they support self-control; and (ii) by using
the model to reveal underexplored cognitive mechanisms
that could aid the design of new tools.
CCS CONCEPTS

• Human-centered computing → HCI theory, concepts
and models; Empirical studies in HCI.
∗ Also

with UCL Interaction Centre, University College London.

CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland UK
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
This is the author’s version of the work. It is posted here for your personal
use. Not for redistribution. The definitive Version of Record was published
in CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Proceedings (CHI
2019), May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland UK, https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.
3300361.

INTRODUCTION

Smartphones and laptops give their users access to an astonishing range of tasks anywhere, anytime. While this provides
innumerable benefits, a growing amount of public discussion and research attention focuses on a perhaps unexpected
downside [7, 19, 62, 102, 108, 121, 187, 201]: Having immense
amounts of functionality available instantly and permanently
often makes it difficult for users to focus on their current
task and avoid being overly distracted by notifications or
habitual check-ins [48, 117, 181, 185]. This challenge is compounded by the business models of many tech companies,
which incentivise design that nudges people into using services frequently and extensively in order to optimise advertising revenue (cf. the ‘attention economy’ [50, 56, 75, 201]).
In response, a recent movement in HCI has called for more
research into intentional ‘non-use’ of information and communication technologies (ICTs) [19, 78, 158]. Initial work
looked into why some users quit, or take breaks from Facebook [19], Twitter [159], or other social networking sites, and
a substantial body of related research has now established

1

RELATED WORK

Evidence on Self-Control Challenges

t

It has long been known that digital device use for some subset of users can become associated with severe breakdowns
of self-regulation, causing distress or impaired functioning
in important life domains [36]. Thus, for more than two
decades, the concept of ‘addiction’ has been applied by some
researchers to such instances, originally in terms of ‘internet addiction’ [204], and more recently ‘social media’ and
‘Facebook addiction’ [10, 113, 114, 156, 173], as well as ‘cell
phone’ and ‘smartphone addiction’ [36, 157].
The current surge of public discussion around self-control
struggles and unwanted distraction - as well as related initiatives by some of the tech giants [11, 67, 68] - has a broader focus, namely daily self-control struggles experienced by most
users [cf. 35, 199]. Here, an accumulating body of evidence
suggests that a majority of people experience difficulties
with self-control over device use [78, 93, 94, 101, 108, 195].
For example, in a survey by Ko et al. [94], a majority of
smartphone users felt they were overusing their devices
(64%) and wanted to change their usage habits (60%). The
patterns respondents wished to change clustered around
two themes: too frequent short usage, where incoming notifications or urges to e.g. check the news derailed focus
from tasks they wished to complete; and excessive long usage, where e.g. habitually checking devices before bedtime
‘sucked them in’. Most users also reported that their strategies for changing this behaviour most often failed, especially
when relying on ‘willpower’, because good intentions to
limit use tended to be overridden by momentary impulses
[57, 94; cf. 80, 104, 152]. In addition to a growing amount of
evidence from such surveys [78, 93], the wealth of articles
and opinion pieces that in recent years have appeared on
the topic in major news outlets, viral blog posts, and popular science books [e.g. 7, 62, 75, 91, 147, 201], as well as the
fact that Apple, Google, and Facebook perceive a sufficiently
large demand for features supporting user self-control to
respond [11, 68, 153], suggest that day-to-day struggles with
self-regulation over device use are very common.

pr
e-

pr
in

that a majority of users feel conflicted about the time they
spend with internet-connected digital technologies and struggle with effective self-control [8, 63, 93, 94, 101, 108, 148, 173].
Researchers within this space have started to design, implement and test novel tools for supporting self-control over
device use, using interventions such as gamification and social sharing of total time spent on one’s smartphone (with
rewards for reducing use) [94] or visualisation of laptop use
[195]. Meanwhile, an entire market niche has appeared on
the Android and Apple app stores, as well as on browser
extension ‘web stores’, wherein hundreds upon hundreds
of apps and extensions cater to people struggling with selfcontrol over device use, and provide interventions claimed
to help users. Some of these ‘digital self-control tools’ — such
as Forest [163], which gamifies self-control through growing
of virtual trees – have gathered millions of users [69].
Yet, while the challenge of supporting self-control over use
of always-connected digital devices has become widely discussed, our understanding of how best to approach it remains
limited [cf. 45, 115, 116, 195]. While a growing number of
studies have developed and evaluated novel design interventions, no systematic reviews have mapped design features in
the hundreds of digital self-control tools that currently exist
on the app and web stores [cf. 190]. Moreover, new design
interventions developed by HCI researchers have mostly
been informed by user interviews and intuitions of interface
designers [78, 105, 195], or by theories including cognitive
load theory [37], Social Cognitive Theory [94] and nudge
theory [90, 136]. Meanwhile, the dual systems and valuebased models prominent in current cognitive neuroscience
research on self-regulation1 [22, 28, 165, 168, 191, 200] have
yet to be applied [cf. 45, 145].
In this paper, we review 367 apps and browser extensions
for digital self-control from the Google Play, Chrome Web,
and Apple App stores, and identify common design features
and strategies. As a theoretical lens to organise and evaluate
these tools and provide a deeper understanding of the selfcontrol challenges they seek to address, we adapt and apply
an integrative dual systems model drawn from established
work within the cognitive neuroscience of self-regulation.
Extending recent attempts at applying dual systems theory
to digital behaviour change interventions [145], our formulation of the model incorporates recent research on the ‘expected value of control’ [167] as mediator of the strength
of conscious self-control. This, we argue, demystifies the
concept of self-control and helps clarify how specific design
features may work to scaffold successful self-control.
1 In

cognitive psychology, Self-regulation is commonly used as an umbrella
term for all regulatory processes in the service of goal-directed behaviour,
including automatic habits, and self-control more restrictively about conscious, deliberate attempts at overriding immediate impulses that conflict
with one’s goals [18, 53, 73, 128].

Theory Applied in Related Research

Digital Self-Control Tools. To understand the theory use in
prior relevant HCI work, we identified 17 HCI papers which
have either built novel design intervention or evaluated existing interventions to support self-control over digital device
use – see Table 1. For each of these, we examined which selfregulation theories were applied to guide tool development
(if designing new interventions) and/or to evaluate effects
on user behaviour and perceptions. These papers were a
subset of a large body of literature on self-control in relation
to digital device use, spanning psychology, neuroscience,

pr
in

t

behavioural economics, philosophy, and HCI, continuously
collected over a period of two years (500+ papers altogether).
While the literature included here aimed at comprehensively
summarising current work in this area of HCI, we note that
they were not collected through a formal systematic review
process.
In 7 out of 17 papers, no underlying self-regulation theory was specified, with tool development and/or assessment
informed only by user-centered design methods such as surveys and interviews with target users and/or design experts.
The 10 remaining papers all referred to distinct theoretical
models from psychology (Social Cognitive Theory, classical
conditioning, strength model of self-control), cognitive neuroscience (attentional resource theory, cognitive load theory,
multitasking and inhibitory brain function), (behavioural)
economics (nudge theory, framing effects, rational choice),
behaviour change, and addiction research. For the purposes
of the present paper, we note that none of the papers reviewed relied on dual systems models of self-regulation [cf.
45, 145].

Figure 1: An extended dual systems model of self-regulation,
developed from Shea et al. [165] and Norman & Shallice
[134]. System 1 control is rapid and non-conscious, whereas
System 2 control is slower, conscious, and capacity-limited.
The strength of System 2 control is mediated by the expected
value of control.

pr
e-

Digital Behaviour Change Interventions. A large body of HCI
work exists on how digital tools can assist behaviour change
in general [38, 59, 87, 103, 160, 203]. A main focus within
such research on ‘Digital Behaviour Change Interventions’
(DBCIs, [145]) is health, for example in relation to how digital interventions may help users exercise more [38], quit
smoking [1, 76], eat more healthily [43, 137], cope with stress
[65, 95], or manage chronic conditions [193].
Since digital self-control tools can be seen as a subset of
DBCIs, understanding how self-regulation theory has been
applied within this research area is relevant for the present
paper. One recent review of 85 DBCI studies [140] found
the Transtheoretical Model (or Stages of Change) [151] to
be the most commonly referenced (13/85 papers), followed
by Goal Setting Theory [106] (5/85) and Social Conformity
Theory [13, 58] (3/85). 60% (51/85) did not specify any theoretical basis [cf. 160, 196], and none specified dual systems
theory [cf. 145]. The review also found that among studies
which did specify underlying theories, most only mentioned
them without explaining how the theoretical constructs informed the design and/or evaluation of actual intervention
components [140].
Another recent comprehensive review [145] noted that
most theories applied in DBCI studies assume a rational, deliberative process as a key determinant of behaviour (e.g. the
Transtheoretical Model [151] or the Theory of Planned Behaviour [6]). The authors further argued (after extensive
review and discussion) that dual systems theory could be
well placed to guide DBCIs research focusing on long-term
behaviour change through breaking and forming habitual
behaviour [145, 178, 200; cf. 194].

2

AN INTEGRATIVE DUAL SYSTEMS APPROACH
TO DIGITAL SELF-CONTROL

In the rest of the paper, we draw on dual systems theory
and argue how it can be used to systematise and classify
digital self-control tools. We start by outlining the basics
of the underlying psychological research. In doing so, we
extend current applications of dual system theories in DBCIs [2, 45, 145, 146] with the concept of ‘expected value of
control’, which the neuroscience literature considers central in explaining why success at self-control fluctuates over
time and with emotional state [28, 77, 82, 156, 167, 186]. An
overview of the resulting model is shown in Figure 1.
Subsequently, we review current digital self-control tools
on the Chrome Web, Google Play, and Apple App stores, and
apply the model to organise and explain common design features, before pointing out gaps and opportunities for future
work.
System 1 and System 2
The core of dual systems theories is a major distinction between swift, parallel and non-conscious ‘System 1’ processes,

Table 1: Theories applied in existing work on digital self-control tools.
Paper

Summary

Self-regulation theory

Lottridge et
al. 2012 [107]
Löchtefeld et
al. 2013 [105]
Collins et al.
2014 [37]
Lee et al. 2014
[100]
Ko et al. 2015
[94]
Andone et al.
2016 [9]
Hiniker et al.
2016 [78]
Kim et al.
2016 [90]
Ko et al. 2016
[93]
Ruan et al.
2016 [154]
Whittaker et
al. 2016 [195]
Kim et al.
2017 [88]
Kim et al.
2017 [89]
Marotta et al.
2017 [117]
Kovacs et al.
2018 [97]

Firefox extension which classifies URLs as work or non-work, then makes
non-work tabs less prominent and displays time spent
AppDetox, an Android app which let users voluntarily create rules intended to
keep them from certain apps
RescueTime, a commercial Windows/Mac application which provides visualisations of how much time is spent in different applications
SAMS, an Android app for tracking smartphone usage and setting time limits
for app use
NUGU, a smartphone app which let users set goals for limiting usage, then
share performance with friends and receive encouragement
Menthal, a smartphone app displaying the ’MScore’, a single number summarising overall phone usage, as well as a series of main usage measures
MyTime, an Android app showing time spent in apps (and whether a daily limit
was hit) plus a daily prompt asking what the user wished to achieve
TimeAware, an ambient Windows and Mac widget which presents time spent
in ’distracting’ or ’productive’ applications
Lock n’ LoL, a smartphone app which lets users as a group set their phones in a
lock mode in which notifications are muted and usage restricted
PreventDark, an Android app which detects phone use in the dark and notifies
the user that they should put it away
MeTime, a computer application providing a floating visualisation of time spent
in different applications within the last 30 mins
Let’s FOCUS, an Android and iOS app letting users enter a ’virtual room’ where
notifications and apps are blocked; links to location or time
PomodoLock, a PC and Android application plus Chrome extension which blocks
distracting apps and websites during 25 minute focus sessions
Freedom, a commercial Windows/Mac/Android/iOS app which blocks access to
distracting parts of the web or the internet altogether
HabitLab, a Chrome extension in which the user sets time limit goals for specific
sites, then tries a range of interventions to reach the goal

Multitasking, inhibitory brain function
[64]
None

t

Relapse prevention model [70, 198], clinical guidelines for internet addiction [205]
Social Cognitive Theory [15]
None

pr
in

pr
e-

Mark et al. Freedom, described above
2018 [115]
Okeke et al. Android app nudging users to close Facebook when a usage limit has been hit,
2018 [136]
using pulsing vibrations that stop when the user leaves the site

and slower, capacity-limited and conscious ‘System 2’ processes [41, 85, 124, 125, 165, 170, 174].2
According to this model, System 1 control is driven by
environmental inputs and internal states along with cognitive pathways that map the current situation to well-learned
habits or instinctive responses [125]. Behaviour driven by
System 1 is often called ‘automatic’, as it allows tasks to
be initiated or performed without conscious awareness and
with little interference with other tasks [134]. Instinctive responses like scratching mosquito bites, or frequent patterns
of digital device use like picking up one’s smartphone to
2 The

Cognitive Load theory [26]

related ‘Nudge theory’ [183] draws upon dual systems theories to
describe how to exploit System 1 and sometimes System 2 processes to
guide people towards a desired action [cf. 2].

None

Framing effects [118]
None
None
None
None

Strength model of self-control [18]
Rational choice, ’self-commitment’ [31]

Numerous, including goal setting theory
[106], operant conditioning [16], and selfconsistency theory [169]
Attentional resources [197], Big 5 [120]
Nudge theory [183], negative reinforcement [84]

check for notifications, can happen automatically via System
1 control [cf. 28, 141, 189].
System 2 control is driven by goals, intentions, and rules
held in conscious working memory [14, 124]. From these central representations, signals are sent to cognitive systems that
process sensory input, memory retrieval, emotional processing, and behavioural output, to guide responses accordingly
[125]. System 2 control is necessary when a goal requires
planning or decision-making, or overcoming of habitual responses or temptations [134], for example if one has a goal of
not scratching mosquito bites or not checking a smartphone
notification.

Self-control limitations and the Expected Value of
Control

pr
in

From a neuroscience perspective, the building blocks of behaviour are hierarchical action schemas, that is, control units
for partially ordered sequences of action that achieve some
goal when performed in the appropriate order [40, 134]. Action schemas exist at varying levels of complexity, from simple single-action motor schemas for grasping and twisting,
to higher level schemas for e.g. preparing tea by filling and
boiling a kettle [29, 164]. The schemas compete for control
over behaviour in a ‘competitive selection’ process in which
schemas act like nodes in a network, each with a continuous
activation value [164], and the ‘winner’ is the node with the
strongest activation [92, 145]. Schema nodes are activated
by a number of sources, including sensory input via System
1 processes (‘bottom-up’), ‘parental’ influence from superordinate schemas in the hierarchy, and top-down influence
from System 2 control [40, 164].

response strong enough to gain automatic access to working memory even while we have our minds on other things
[55, 83]. For example, clickbait uses headlines and imagery
with properties that makes bottom-up attention filters put
its information on a fast track to conscious working memory
or trigger click-throughs via System 1 control [cf. 27].
Conscious System 2 control can also direct attention towards particular internal or external sources of information
(e.g. focusing on a distorted voice in one’s cellphone on a
crowded train), which increases the signal strength of those
sources and makes the information they carry more likely
to enter working memory [42, 92, 132, 171].

t

Action schema competition

Self-regulation and self-control

Capacity limitations. The amount of information that can
be held in working memory and guide System 2 control,
is limited (classically ‘seven, plus or minus two’ chunks of
meaningful information [44, 126]). Therefore, self-control
can fail if the relevant goals are simply not represented in
working memory at the time of action [96]. This is one explanation for why people often struggle to manage use of
e.g. Facebook or email - one opens the application with a
particular goal in mind, but information from the news feed
or inbox hijacks attention and crowds out the initial goal.

pr
e-

Following others, we use self-regulation as an umbrella term
for regulatory processes in the service of goal-directed behaviour, including automatic System 1 habits, and self-control
more restrictively for conscious and deliberate System 2 control in situations where immediate impulses conflict with
enduringly valued goals [18, 53, 73, 128]. For example, if a
person wishes to be less distracted by her smartphone in social situations, and through repetition has acquired a habit of
turning the phone face-down to the point that she now does
it without conscious attention, this counts as self-regulation.
If in a given moment she feels an urge to flip it over and check
for notifications, but consciously suppresses this impulse and
does not act on it, this counts as self-control.
Self-regulation and self-control are mediated by feedback
functions for monitoring the state of oneself and the environment, comparing this state to goals and standards [cf. 165],
and acting to modify the situation accordingly [17, 34, 81;
cf. cybernetic models of behaviour control, 33, 149].

A central puzzle is why people often fail to act in accordance
with their own valued goals, even when they are aware of the
mismatch [54]. According to current research on cognitive
control, the two key factors to answer this question are (i)
limitations on System 2 control in relation to capacity; and
(ii) fluctuations due to emotional state and fatigue [28].

Attentional filtering

For goals, rules, or intentions to guide System 2 control, they
must first enter working memory [14, 124]. Entry of information from the external world, internal states, or memory
stores into working memory is itself a competitive process,
in which the signals with the highest activation values are
given access by attentional filters [39, 92, 125].
Automatic bottom-up filters look out for stimulus properties that are likely to be important, either through innate
sensitivities (e.g. sudden or looming noises) or learned associations (e.g. a smartphone notification) and boost their
signal strength [92]. In this way, some stimuli may evoke a

Fluctuations due to emotional state and fatigue. System 2
control often suffers from fatigue effects if exerted continuously [25, 49, 73, 79] and also fluctuates with emotional state
[186]. For example, negative mood is a strong predictor of
relapse of behaviour people attempt to avoid [77, 127, 186],
and studies of Facebook use have found that users are worse
at regulating the time they spend on the platform when in a
bad mood [156, cf. 130].
The emerging consensus explanation of these fluctuations
is that the strength of System 2 control is mediated by a costbenefit analysis of the outcome that exercising self-control
might bring about [28] i.e., the expected value of control
(EVC) [167]3 . The research suggests that EVC is influenced
by at least three major factors:
3 The

alternative and influential ‘ego-depletion’ explanation [18] suggests
that System 2 control relies on a limited resource that could be depleted,
and which has a ‘refraction period’ before optimal self-control can again
be exercised [73]. This model has intuitive appeal but has not withstood
scrutiny [109], as original studies have failed to replicate [72, 202], depletion
effects have shown to be reversible by increasing the rewards for sustained

A practical example

might not be present in his working memory, in which case
no System 2 control was initiated to override the checking
habit.
After having opened Facebook, he might remember that
he should be working on the essay, but attention-grabbing
content from the newsfeed enters his capacity-limited working memory and crowd out this goal, leading him to spend
more time on Facebook than intended.
3

A REVIEW AND ANALYSIS OF CURRENT
DIGITAL SELF-CONTROL TOOLS

t

To explore how this model may be useful in mapping digital
self-control interventions, we conducted a systematic review
and analysis of apps on the Google Play and Apple App
stores, as well as browser extensions on the Chrome Web
store. We identified apps and browser extensions described
as helping users exercise self-control / avoid distraction /
manage addiction in relation to digital device use, coded
their design features, and mapped them to the components
of our dual systems model4 .

pr
in

First, EVC increases the more reward people perceive they
could obtain (or the greater the loss that could be avoided)
through successful self-control [3, 28, 142, 143]. To illustrate,
consider ‘phone stack’, in which a group dine at a restaurant
and begin by stacking up their phones on the table. The first
person to take out his phone from the stack to check it, has to
pay the entire bill [71, 184]. This game aids self-control over
device use by introducing a financial (and reputational) cost
which adjusts the overall expected value of control (cf. also
Ko et al.’s tool NUGU [94]).
Second, EVC increases the greater expectancy, or perceived likelihood, that one will be able to bring a given
outcome about through self-control [23, 180, 192; cf. ‘selfefficacy’ in Social Cognitive Theory, 15]. In the phone stack
example, people may try harder to suppress an urge to check
their phone, the more confidence they have in their ability
to control themselves in the first place.
Third, EVC decreases the longer the delay before the outcome that self-control might bring about (cf. ‘future discounting’ [4, 5, 12, 46, 60, 119, 135]). In phone stack, we should
expect people to be worse at suppressing an impulse to check
their phone if the rules were changed so that the loser would
pay the bill for a meal in 10 years’ time.

Initial Keyword Search and Data Clean Up. For the Google
Play and Apple App store, we used pre-existing scripts [138,
139] to download search results for the terms ‘distraction’,
‘smartphone distraction’, ‘addiction’, ‘smartphone addiction’,
‘motivation’, ‘smartphone motivation’, ‘self-control’ and ‘smartphone self-control’. For the Chrome Web store, we developed
our own scraper [172] and downloaded search results for the
same key terms, but with the prefix ‘smartphone’ changed
to ‘laptop’ as well as ‘internet’ (e.g. ‘laptop distraction’ and
‘internet distraction’). We separately scraped apps and extensions on the US and UK stores, between 22nd and 27th
August 2018. After excluding duplicate results returned by
multiple search terms and/or by both the US and UK stores,
this resulted in 4890 distinct apps and extensions (1571 from
Google Play, 2341 from the App Store, and 978 from the
Chrome Web store).

pr
e-

As an illustration of the model and the benefits of including
EVC, consider a student who opens his laptop to work on
an essay. However, he instead checks Facebook and spends
an inordinate amount of time scrolling the news feed, experiencing feelings of regret having done so when he finally
returns to the essay. This is not the first time it happened,
even though his reflective goal is always to do solid work
on the essay as the first thing, and to only allow himself to
check Facebook briefly during breaks.
Our model suggests that we think about this situation in
terms of the perceptual cues in the context, automatic System
1 behaviour control, System 2’s consciously held goals and
self-monitoring, and System 2’s expected value of control:
If the student normally checks Facebook when opening
his laptop, this context may trigger a habitual check-in via
System 1 control. His goal of working first thing might be
present in his working memory, but he might fail to override
his checking habit due to his expected value of control being
low. This might be because he did not get any reward from
inhibiting the impulse to check Facebook; because he had
little confidence in his own ability to suppress this urge (low
expectancy); or because the rewards from working on his
essay were delayed because it was only due in two months.
Alternatively, his goal of working on the essay first thing

Methods

performance [73, 133], and the purported physical resource underlying the
effect failed to be discovered [99, 129].

Identifying Potentially Relevant Apps and Extensions. Following similar reviews [166, 179], we then manually screened
the titles and short descriptions (if available; otherwise the
first paragraphs of the full description). We included apps and
extensions explicitly designed to help people self-regulate
their digital device use, while excluding tools intended for
general productivity, self-regulation in other domains than
digital device use, or which were not available in English
(for detailed exclusion criteria, see osf.io/zyj4h).
4 Data and scripts for reproducing our analyses (as well as this paper written

in R Markdown [cf. 111]) are available on osf.io/zyj4h.

t
pr
in

Figure 2: Flowchart of the search and exclusion/inclusion
procedure

Figure 3: Functionality of digital self-control tools (N = 367)

This resulted in 731 potentially relevant apps and extensions (219 from Google Play, 140 from the App Store, and
372 from the Chrome Web store).

pr
e-

Identifying Apps and Extensions to Analyse. We reviewed the
remaining tools in more detail by reading their full descriptions. If it remained unclear whether an app or extension
should be excluded, we also reviewed its screenshots. If an
app existed in both the Apple App store and the Google Play
store, we dropped the version from the Apple App store.5
After this step, we were left with 380 apps and extensions
to analyse (96 from Google Play, 60 from the App Store, and
224 from the Chrome Web store).

before comparing and discussing the feature categories identified and create the first iteration of the coding sheet. Using
this coding sheet, two authors independently reviewed 60 additional apps and browser extensions each and a third author
these 120 tools, as well as all remaining. After comparing
and discussing the results, a final codebook was developed,
on the basis of which the first author revisited and recoded
the features in all tools. In addition to the granular feature
coding, we noted which main feature cluster(s) represented
a tool’s ‘core’ design, according to the guideline that 25%
or more of the tool’s functionality related to that cluster (a
single tool could belong to multiple clusters).6
During the coding process, we excluded a further 13 tools
- 3 duplicates, e.g. where ‘pro’ and ‘lite’ versions had no
difference in described functionality, 7 that had become inaccessible after the initial search, and 3 that lacked sufficiently
well-described functionality to be coded. This left 367 tools
in the final dataset.

Feature coding. Following similar reviews, we coded functionality based on the descriptions, screenshots, and videos
available on a tool’s store page [cf. 166, 177–179]. We iteratively developed a coding sheet of feature categories [cf.
20, 140], with the prior expectation that the relevant features would be usefully classified as subcategories of the
main feature clusters ‘block/removal’, ‘self-tracking’, ‘goal
advancement’ and ‘reward/punishment’ (drawing on our
previous work in this area [110]).
Initially, three of the authors independently reviewed and
classified features in 10 apps and 10 browser extensions (for
a total of 30 unique apps and 30 unique browser extensions)
5 Apple’s

iOS places more restrictions on developer access to operating
system permissions than does Google’s Android, with the consequence that
the iOS version of a digital self-control app is often much more limited than
its Android counterpart [131]. Because the purpose of our review was to
investigate which areas of the design space these tools have been explored
(rather than differences between iOS and Android ecosystems per se), we
excluded the iOS version when an app was available in both stores.

Results
Feature prevalence. A summary of the prevalence of features
is shown in Figure 3. The most frequent feature cluster related to blocking or removing distractions, some variation
of which was present in 74% of tools. 44% (163) enabled the
user to put obstacles in the way of distracting functionality
by either blocking access entirely (132 tools), or by setting
limits on how much time could be spent (23 tools) or how
many times distracting functionality could be launched (3
tools) before being blocked, or by adding a time lag before
6 For

further detail, see osf.io/zyj4h.

t

The fourth most prevalent feature cluster, present in 22%
of tools (80), related to reward/punishment, i.e. providing some rewards or punishments for the way in which a
device is used. Some of these features were gamification
interventions such as collecting points/streaks (41 tools),
leaderboards or social sharing (27), or unlocking of achievements (21). In 20 tools, points were represented as some
lifeform (e.g. an animated goat or a growing tree) which
might be harmed if the user spent too much time on certain
websites or used their phone during specific times. 10 tools
added real-world rewards or punishments, e.g. making the
user lose money if they spend more than 1 hour on Facebook
in a day (Timewaste Timer [150]), allowing virtual points to
be exchanged to free coffee or shopping discounts (MILK
[123]) or even let the user administer herself electrical shocks
when accessing blacklisted websites (!) (PAVLOK [144]).
Finally, 35% of tools (129) gave the user control over what
counted as ‘distraction’, e.g. by letting the user customise
which apps or which websites to restrict access to. Among
tools implementing blocking functionality, 101 tools implemented blacklists (i.e. blocking specific apps or sites, allowing everything else), while 22 tools implemented whitelists
(i.e. allowing only specified apps or sites while blocking everything else).

pr
in

distracting functionality would load (5 tools). 14% of tools
(50) also added friction if the user attempted to remove the
blocking, including disallowing a blocking session from being stopped (25 tools), requiring the user to first complete
an irrelevant effortful task or type in a password (23 tools),
tinkering with administrator permissions to prevent the tool
from being uninstalled (9 tools), or adding a time lag before
the user could override blocking or change settings (9 tools).
For example, the Focusly Chrome extension [188] blocks sites
on a blacklist; if the user wishes to override the blocking,
she must type in correctly a series of 46 arrow keys (e.g.
→↑↓→←→...) correctly to enter the blocked site.
Rather than blocking content per se, an alternative approach, taken by 38% of tools (139), was to reduce the user’s
exposure to distracting options in the first place. This approach was dominated by browser extensions (121 of these
tools were from the Chrome Web store) typically in the form
of removing elements from specific sites (67 tools; e.g. removing newsfeeds from social media sites or hiding an email
inbox). The sites most frequently targeted were Facebook (26
tools), YouTube (17), Twitter (11) and Gmail (7). Also popular
were general ‘reader’ extensions for removing distracting
content when browsing the web (27 tools) or when opening new tabs (24). Other notable examples were ‘minimalwriting’ tools (22 tools) which remove functionality irrelevant to, or distracting from, the task of writing. Finally, a few
Android apps (4 tools) limited the amount of functionality
available on devices’ home screen.
The second most prevalent feature cluster related to selftracking, some variation of which was present in 38% of
tools (139). Out of these, 105 tools recorded the user’s history, 73 provided visualisations of the captured data, and 72
displayed a timer or countdown. In 42 tools, the self-tracking
features included focused on the time during which the user
managed to not use their digital devices, such as the iOS app
Checkout of your phone [162].
The third most prevalent feature cluster related to goal
advancement, some variation of which was present in 35%
of tools (130). 58 tools implemented reminders of a concrete
time goal or task the user tried to complete (e.g. displaying
pop-ups when a set amount of time has been spent on a
distracting site or by replacing the content of newsfeeds or
new tabs with todo-lists) and 52 tools provided reminders
of more general goals or personal values (e.g. in the form of
motivational quotes). 58 tools asked the user to set explicit
goals, either for how much time they wanted to spend using
their devices in total or in specific apps or websites (39 tools),
or for the tasks they wanted to focus on during use (19 tools).
15 tools allowed the user to compare their actual behaviour
against the goals they set.

pr
e-

Feature combinations. 65% of tools had only one feature
cluster at the core of their design, the most frequent of
which was blocking/removing distractions (53%). 32% (117
tools) combined two main feature clusters, most frequently
block/removal in combination with goal-advancement (40
tools; e.g. replacing the Facebook newsfeed with a todo list,
or replacing distracting websites with a reminder of the
task to be achieved) or self-tracking in combination with
reward/punishment features (30 tools; e.g. a gamified pomodoro timer in which an animated creature dies if the user
leaves the app before the timer runs out). Block/removal core
designs were also commonly combined with self-tracking
(24 tools; e.g. blocking distracting websites while a timer
counts down, or recording and displaying how many times
during a block session the user tried to access blacklisted
apps). Only two tools (Flipd [61] and HabitLab [176]) combined all four feature clusters in their core design, with the
Chrome extension HabitLab (developed by the Stanford HCI
Group) cycling through different types of interventions to
learn which best help the user align internet use with their
stated goals [cf. 97].
Store comparison. Figure 4 summarises the prevalence of features, comparing the three stores. The differences between
the stores appear to mirror the granularity of system control
available to developers: Feature minimisation, in the form of
removing particular aspects of the user interface, is common
in browser extensions, presumably because developers here

t
pr
in

Figure 4: Functionality of digital self-control tools on
Chrome Web (n = 223), Google Play (n = 86) and Apple App
Store (n = 58)

pr
e-

can wield precise control over the elements displayed on
HTML pages by injecting client-side CSS and JavaScript. On
mobile devices, however, developers have little control over
how another app is displayed, leaving blocking or restricting
access as the only viable strategies. The differences between
the Android and iOS ecosystems are apparent, as the permissions necessary to implement e.g. scheduled blocking of apps
are not available to iOS developers. These differences across
stores suggest that if mobile operating systems granted more
permissions (as some developers of popular anti-distraction
tools have petitioned Apple to do [51]), developers would
respond by creating tools that offer more granular control of
the mobile user interface, similar to those that already exist
for the Chrome web browser.

Mapping identified tool features to theory. Figure 4 shows a
matrix of how the design features corresponds to the main
components of the integrative dual systems model, in terms
of the cognitive components they have the most immediate
potential to influence: Non-conscious habits are influenced
by features that block the targets of habitual action or the
user interface elements that trigger them, thereby preventing
unwanted habits from being activated. Non-conscious habits
are also influenced by features which enforce limits on daily
use, or redirect user activity, thereby scaffolding formation
of new habits. Conscious goals & self-monitoring is influenced
by explicit goal setting and reminders, as well as by timing,
recording, and visualising usage and comparing it with one’s
goals. The reward component of the expected value of control
is influenced by reward/punishment features that add incentives for exercising self-control, as well as by value/general

Figure 5: Mapping of design features to an integrative dual
systems model of self-regulation

goal reminders and motivational quotes which encourage
the user to reappraise the value of immediate device use in
light of what matters in their life; the delay component is
influenced by time lags or timers; and expectancy is similarly
influenced by timers (‘I should be able to manage to control
myself for just 20 minutes!’) as well as motivational quotes.
Finally, the action schema competition, which ultimately controls behaviour, is most directly affected by blocking/removal
functionality that hinders unwanted responses from being
expressed by simply making them unavailable.
Given this mapping, the percentages of tools in which at
least one design feature maps to a given cognitive component
is shown in Figure 6. Similarly to DBCI reviews [145, 178], we
find the lowest prevalence of features that scaffold formation
of non-conscious habits (18%), followed by features that influence the delay component of the expected value of control
(23%). The current landscape of digital self-control tools is
dominated by features which prevent activation of unwanted

Research opportunities prompted by widely used or
theoretically interesting design features

Nonconscious habits (scaffold)
Conscious goals & self-monitoring
EVC: Reward
EVC: Expectancy
EVC: Delay
Action schema competition
0

20

40

60

% Tools

pr
in

Figure 6: Percentage of tools which include at least one design feature targeting a given cognitive component of the
dual systems model of self-regulation.

non-conscious habits (73%) and thereby stop undesirable responses from winning out in action schema competition by
making them unavailable.
4

DISCUSSION

The market for digital self-control effectively amounts to
hundreds of natural experiments in supporting self-control,
meaning that successful tools may reveal design approaches
with wider applicability. These approaches present low-hanging
fruit for research studies, especially as many are so far lacking evaluation in terms of their efficacy and the transferability of their underlying design mechanisms. As an example,
we highlight three such instances:
Responsibility for a virtual creature: Forest [163] ties device
use to the well-being of a virtual tree. Numerous variations
and clones of this approach exist among the tools reviewed,
but Forest is the most popular with over 5 million users
on Android alone. It presents a novel use of ‘virtual pets’
that requires the user to abstain from action (resist using
their phone) rather than take action to ‘feed’ the pet, and is
a seemingly successful example of influencing the reward
component of expected value of control.
Redirection of activity: Timewarp [182] reroutes the user
to a website aligned with their productivity goals when navigating to a distracting site (e.g. from Reddit to Trello), and
numerous tools implement similar functionality. Such apps
seem to be automating ‘implementation intentions’ (if-when
rules for linking a context to a desired response [66]), an
intervention which digital behaviour change researchers
have highlighted as a promising way to scaffold transfer
of conscious System 2 goals to automatic System 1 habits
[145, 178].
Friction to override past preference: A significant number of
tools not only allow the user to restrict access to digital distractions, but also add a second layer of commitment, e.g. by
making blocking difficult to override, as in the browser extension Focusly [188], which requires a laborious combination
of keystrokes to be turned off. This raises important design
and ethical questions about how far a digital tool should
go to hold users accountable for their past preferences [cf.
31, 112].

t

Nonconscious habits (prevent)

pr
e-

This study set out to map the landspace of current digital selfcontrol tools and relate them to an integrative dual systems
model of self-regulation. Our review of 367 apps and browser
extensions found that blocking distractions or removing user
interface features were the most common approaches to
digital self-control. Grouping design features into clusters,
the prevalence ranking was block/removal > self-tracking >
goal advancement > reward/punishment. Out of these, 65%
of tools focused on only one cluster in their core design;
and most others (32%) on two. The frequencies of design
features differed between the Chrome Web Store, Play Store,
and Apple App store, which likely reflects differences in
developer permissions. When mapping design features to our
dual systems model, the least commonly targeted cognitive
component was unconscious habit scaffolding, followed by
the delay and expectancy elements of the expected value of
control.
We now turn to discuss how these empirical observations
can inform future research by pointing to: i) widely used
and/or theoretically interesting design features in current
digital self-control tools that are underexplored in HCI research; ii) feature gaps identified by our application of the
dual systems model, showing neglected areas that could be
relevant to researchers and designers, and iii) how the model
may be used directly to guide research and intervention
design. We then outline limitations and future work.

Gaps identified by the dual systems model
By applying our model, we also identified three cognitive
mechanisms that appear underexplored by current digital
self-control tools. We argue that focusing on these mechanisms could lead to new powerful models for digital selfcontrol:
Scaffolding habits. Similar to the situation in general DBCIs [cf. 145, 178], the least frequently targeted cognitive
component relates to scaffolding of new, desirable unconscious
habits (as opposed to preventing undesired ones from being
triggered via blocking or feature removal). Habit formation
is crucial for long-time behaviour change, and in the context

pr
in

Delay. The delay component of expected value of control
is also less commonly targeted: the number of tools including
functionality targeting delay drops to 4% if we exclude the
display of a timer (which raises time awareness rather than
affecting actual delays). This is surprising from a theoretical
perspective, because the effects on behaviour of sensitivity
to delay are strong, reliable, and—at least to behavioural
economists—at the core of self-control difficulties [12, 52].
Even if rewards introduced by gamification features may
have the side effect of reducing delay before self-control
is rewarded, it remains surprising that only two of 367 reviewed tools directly focused on using delays to scaffold
successful self-control (Space [30] increases launch times for
distracting apps on iOS; Pipe Clogger [47] does the same for
websites). As previous research has found people to be especially sensitive to delays in online contexts [98], we expect
interventions that leverage delays to scaffold self-control in
digital environments to be highly effective.

system. Whereas many other theories and frameworks are
on offer for this purpose, one advantage of the dual systems
model is that it provides HCI researchers with clear connections to wider psychological research on basic mechanisms
of self-regulation, which can be utilised in design.
As such, the model may be used as a starting point for
design consideration that is aligned with the cognitive mechanisms involved in self-regulation; its components can be
readily expanded if inspiration from more theoretical details
and predictions is required. For example, the ‘reward’ component readily expands into more specific models explaining
the types of stimuli that may be processed as rewards; how
timing of rewards impact their influence; how the impact of
gains differ from losses; and so on [24, 32, 86, 161].
Two recent examples in HCI research illustrate such possible use of psychological theory in the design process: In
the design and development of TimeAware, Kim et al. were
guided by work on differential sensitivity to gains vs losses,
and found that their visualisation tool more effectively supported productivity when displaying time spent engaging
with distracting rather than productive activities [90]. Similarly, based on dual systems theory, Adams et al. [2] trialed
ways of applying visual and auditory perception biases in
design interventions to influence food choice and voice pitch.
We hope our model may inspire designs that are similarly
informed by psychological theory.

t

of DBCIs, Pinder et al. [145] suggested implementation intentions and automation of self-control as good candidate
strategies for habit targeting. We note that some such design
interventions are already being explored amongst current
digital self-control tools: Apart from the tools mentioned
above that redirect activity, we highlight that four tools allow blocking functionality to be linked to the user’s location
(e.g. AppBlock [175] and Bashful [155]). We expect this to be a
powerful way of automatically triggering a target behaviour
in a desired context.

Limitations and future work

Our review has some limitations. First, due to space restrictions, and because information about numbers of users are
not available on the Apple App Store, our tool analysis has
focused on functionality analysis, while leaving consideration of numbers of installs or content of user reviews to
future work. We note that this is similar to the approach
taken by other reviews in related areas [177, 178].
Second, the integrative dual systems model we have applied points to directions of future research, but its highlevel formulation leaves its cognitive design space underspecified. How precisely one should be able to anchor details of specific interventions directly in causal theories is
a point of longstanding debate [6, 74, 122]. A main benefit
of dual systems theory, however, is that while concise, it
remains directly grounded in well-established basic research
on self-regulation. As mentioned above, this means that each
component of the model has substantial literature behind it,
so that more detailed specifications and predictions can be
found in lower-level theories on demand.
Turning to the future, self-control in relation to digital device use involves unique challenges and opportunities compared to general behaviour change research. On the one hand,
portable, powerful, internet-connected devices present an
unprecedented self-regulation challenge: Never before have

pr
eExpectancy. The expectancy component (i.e. how likely
a user think it is that she will be able to reach her goal
through self-control exertion) was also less frequently targeted, and mainly through timers limiting the duration where
the user tried to exert self-control. Given the crucial role of
self-efficacy in Bandura’s influential work on self-regulation
[15], this may also represent an important underexplored
area. One interesting approach to explore is found in Wormhole Escaper [21] which lets the user administer words of
encouragement to themselves when they manage to suppress an urge to visit a distracting website. In so far as this
is effective, it may be by boosting the user’s confidence in
their ability to exert self-control.
Using the model directly to guide intervention
research and design
The abstracted nature of the model enables it to be utilised
on different levels of analysis to inspire new avenues for
research as well as drive specific design:
For researchers, the model may be used to organise existing work on design interventions by the cognitive components targeted, as well as a roadmap for future studies
that focus on different components of the self-regulatory

5

CONCLUSION

t

//doi.org/10.1016/0749-5978(91)90020-T
[7] Adam Alter. 2017. Irresistible: The Rise of Addictive Technology and
the Business of Keeping Us Hooked. Penguin Press.
[8] Mg Ames. 2013. Managing mobile multitasking: the culture of iPhones
on stanford campus. Computer Supported Cooperative Work (2013),
1487–1498. https://doi.org/10.1145/2441776.2441945
[9] Ionut Andone, Konrad Blaszkiewicz, Mark Eibes, Boris Trendafilov,
Christian Montag, and Alexander Markowetz. 2016. Menthal: Quantifying Smartphone Usage. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing:
Adjunct (UbiComp ’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 559–564. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2968219.2968321
[10] Cecilie Schou Andreassen, Joël Billieux, Mark D. Griffiths, Daria J.
Kuss, Zsolt Demetrovics, Elvis Mazzoni, and Ståle Pallesen. 2016.
The relationship between addictive use of social media and video
games and symptoms of psychiatric disorders: A large-scale crosssectional study. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors 30, 2 (2016), 252–
262. https://doi.org/10.1037/adb0000160
iOS 12 introduces new features to re[11] Apple. 2018.
duce interruptions and manage Screen Time.
https:
//www.apple.com/uk/newsroom/2018/06/ios-12-introducesnew-features-to-reduce-interruptions-and-manage-screen-time/
[12] Dan Ariely and Klaus Wertenbroch. 2002. Procrastination, deadlines,
and performance: self-control by precommitment. Psychological science 2000 (2002), 219–224. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9280.00441
[13] S. E. Asch. 1951. Opinions and Social Pressure. Scientific American.
Scientific American 193 (1951), 31–35.
[14] Alan Baddeley. 2003. Working Memory: Looking Back and Looking
Forward. Nature reviews. Neuroscience 4, October (2003), 829–839.
[15] Albert Bandura. 1991. Social Cognitive Theory of Self-Regulation.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 50, 2 (1991),
248–287. https://doi.org/10.1016/0749-5978(91)90022-L
[16] Alan Baron, M. Perone, and M. Galizio. 1991. Analyzing the reinforcement process at the human level: Can application and behavioristic
interpretation replace laboratory research? The Behavior Analyst 14,
2 (1991), 95–105. https://doi.org/10.1111/1462-2920.12203
[17] Roy F. Baumeister and Julie Juola Exline. 2000. Self-control, Morality,
and Human Strength. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology 19, 1
(2000), 29–42.
[18] Roy F. Baumeister, Kathleen D Vohs, and Dianne M Tice. 2007. The
Strength Model of Self-Control. Current Directions in Psychological
Science 16, 6 (2007), 351–355. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8721.
2007.00534.x
[19] Eric Baumer and Phil Adams. 2013. Limiting, leaving, and (re) lapsing:
an exploration of facebook non-use practices and experiences. Chi
2013 (2013), 3257–3266. https://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2466446
[20] Jacqueline Lorene Bender, Rossini Ying Kwan Yue, Matthew Jason
To, Laetitia Deacken, and Alejandro R Jadad. 2013. A Lot of Action,
But Not in the Right Direction: Systematic Review and Content Analysis of Smartphone Applications for the Prevention, Detection, and
Management of Cancer. J Med Internet Res 15, 12 (dec 2013), e287.
https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.2661
Wormhole Escaper.
https:
[21] Riley Bennett. 2018.
//chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/wormhole-escaper/
jadgefoemafhcdkbhmeadkmodmpnfcak?hl=gb
[22] Elliot T Berkman, Cendri A Hutcherson, Jordan L Livingston, Lauren E Kahn, and Michael Inzlicht. 2017. Self-Control as Value-Based
Choice. Current Directions in Psychological Science 26, 5 (2017), 422–
428. https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721417704394
[23] D. Bernoulli. 1954. Exposition of a new theory of the measurement
of risk. Econometrica 22 (1954), 23–36.

pr
in

so many behavioural options, information about nearly everything, engaging games, and communication with friends,
family, and strangers, been instantly available. On the other
hand, this very challenge presents a unique research opportunity. Precisely because digital devices afford so much
functionality, they allow us to test design interventions with
greater precision, flexibility, and dramatically lower cost
than changing the physical environment. Moreover, context
detection, a constant challenge in DBCI research for administering meaningful and well-timed interventions [145], is
more manageable in relation to device use, because a large
amount of relevant activity can be easily measured.
The research on digital self-control tools should therefore
be of wide interest as a test bed for interventions that optimise self-control in an environment where most factors can
be changed at minimal cost.

pr
e-

The challenge of designing powerful, always-connected digital devices that support self-control over their use, is important to address. This paper contributes to such efforts on two
levels: (i) by providing the first comprehensive functionality
analysis of current apps and browser extensions for digital
self-control on the Google Play, Chrome Web, and Apple
App stores, and (ii) by applying a well-established model of
self-regulation to evaluate their design features and provide
a mechanistic understanding of the problem they address.
The future to hope for is one in which users develop beneficial habits of technology use and are resilient against predatorial nudging by clickbait advertisers and data harvesters.
We hope our review of 367 apps and browser extensions
representing natural experiments in designing for digital
self-control, and our formulation of a dual systems model to
understand them, will help us realise this future.
REFERENCES

[1] Lorien C. Abroms, Nalini Padmanabhan, Lalida Thaweethai, and
Todd Phillips. 2011. iPhone apps for smoking cessation: A content
analysis. American Journal of Preventive Medicine 40, 3 (2011), 279–285.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2010.10.032
[2] Alexander T. Adams, Jean Costa, Malte F. Jung, and Tanzeem Choudhury. 2015. Mindless Computing: Designing Technologies to Subtly
Influence Behavior. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Joint
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing. ACM, 719–730.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2805843
[3] R. Alison Adcock, Arul Thangavel, Susan Whitfield-Gabrieli, Brian
Knutson, and John D.E. Gabrieli. 2006. Reward-Motivated Learning:
Mesolimbic Activation Precedes Memory Formation. Neuron 50, 3
(2006), 507–517. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2006.03.036
[4] G. Ainslie. 2001. Breakdown of Will. Cambridge University Press.
[5] G. Ainslie. 2010. Procrastination: The Basic Impulse. In The Thief of
Time: Philosophical Essays on Procrastination, Andreou Chrisoula and
Mark D. White (Eds.). Oxford University Press, New York, 11–27.
[6] Icek Ajzen. 1991. The theory of planned behavior. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes 50, 2 (1991), 179–211. https:

[43]

[44]

t

[45]

of shape, color, and speed: functional anatomy by positron emission
tomography. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the
Society for Neuroscience 11, 8 (1991), 2383–402. http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/pubmed/1869921
Steven S Coughlin, Mary Whitehead, Joyce Q Sheats, Jeff Mastromonico, Dale Hardy, and Selina A Smith. 2015. Smartphone
Applications for Promoting Healthy Diet and Nutrition: A Literature Review. Jacobs journal of food and nutrition 2, 3 (2015), 021.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13736.Tyrosine
Nelson Cowan. 2010. The Magical Mystery Four: How is Working
Memory Capacity Limited, and Why? Curr Dir Psychol Sci 19, 1 (2010),
51–57. https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721409359277
Anna L Cox, Sandy J J Gould, Marta E Cecchinato, Ioanna Iacovides,
and Ian Renfree. 2016. Design Frictions for Mindful Interactions: The
Case for Microboundaries. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA
’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1389–1397. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2851581.2892410
T S Critchfield and S H Kollins. 2001. Temporal discounting: basic
research and the analysis of socially important behavior. Journal of
applied behavior analysis 34, 1 (2001), 101–122. https://doi.org/10.
1901/jaba.2001.34-101
Croshan. 2018. Pipe Clogger. https://chrome.google.com/webstore/
detail/pipe-clogger/hlaegcjcddgappcehdfoakpjnfpoaebl?hl=gb
Laura Dabbish, Gloria Mark, and Víctor M. González. 2011. Why do i
keep interrupting myself? Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference
on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’11 (2011), 3127. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979405
Hengchen Dai, Katherine L. Milkman, David A. Hofmann, and
Bradley R. Staats. 2015. The impact of time at work and time off
from work on rule compliance: The case of hand hygiene in health
care. Journal of Applied Psychology 100, 3 (may 2015), 846–862.
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0038067
T. H. Davenport and J. C. Beck. 2001. The Attention Economy: Understanding the New Currency of Business. Harvard Business School
Press.
Digital Wellness Warriors. 2018. Apple: let developers help iPhone
users with mental wellbeing. https://www.change.org/p/appleallow-digital-wellness-developers-to-help-ios-users
Paul Dolan, Antony Elliott, Robert Metcalfe, and Ivo Vlaev. 2012.
Influencing Financial Behavior: From Changing Minds to Changing
Contexts. Journal of Behavioral Finance 13, 2 (2012), 126–142. https:
//doi.org/10.1080/15427560.2012.680995
Angela L. Duckworth, Tamar Szabó Gendler, and James J. Gross. 2014.
Self Control in School Age Children. Educational Psychologist 49, 3
(2014), 199–217. https://doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2014.926225
A. L. Duckworth, T. S. Gendler, and J. J. Gross. 2016. Situational
Strategies for Self-Control. Perspectives on Psychological Science 11, 1
(2016). https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691615623247
H E Egeth and S Yantis. 1997. Visual attention: control, representation,
and time course. Annual review of psychology 48 (1997), 269–297.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.48.1.269
Mara Einstein. 2016. Black Ops Advertising. OR Books, New York.
Jon D. Elhai, Jason C. Levine, Robert D. Dvorak, and Brian J. Hall.
2016. Fear of missing out, need for touch, anxiety and depression are
related to problematic smartphone use. Computers in Human Behavior
63 (2016), 509–516. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2016.05.079
Nicholas Epley and Thomas Gilovich. 1999. Just Going Along:
Nonconscious Priming and Conformity to Social Pressure. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 35 (1999), 578–589. https:
//doi.org/10.1006/jesp.1999.1390

pr
in

[24] Kent C. Berridge and Morten L. Kringelbach. 2015. Pleasure Systems
in the Brain. Neuron 86, 3 (2015), 646–664. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neuron.2015.02.018
[25] Bastien Blain, Guillaume Hollard, and Mathias Pessiglione. 2016. Neural mechanisms underlying the impact of daylong cognitive work on
economic decisions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
113, 25 (2016), 6967–6972. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1520527113
[26] Richard A. Block, P. A. Hancock, and Dan Zakay. 2010. How cognitive load affects duration judgments: A meta-analytic review. Acta
Psychologica 134 (2010), 330–343. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.
2010.03.006
[27] Jonas Nygaard Blom and Kenneth Reinecke Hansen. 2015. Click
bait: Forward-reference as lure in online news headlines. Journal of
Pragmatics 76 (2015), 87–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pragma.2014.
11.010
[28] Matthew Botvinick and Todd S Braver. 2015. Motivation and cognitive
control: From behavior to neural mechanism. Annual Review of
Psychology 66 (2015), 83–113. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych010814-015044
[29] Matthew M Botvinick. 2008. Hierarchical models of behaviors and
prefrontal function. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 12, 5 (2008), 201–208.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2008.02.009
[30] Boundless Mind Inc. 2018.
Space - You Need a Breather.
https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/space-you-need-a-breather/
id1187106675?mt=8&ign-mpt=uo%3D4
[31] Gharad Bryan, Dean S. Karlan, and Scott Nelson. 2010. Commitment
Devices. Annual Review of Economics 2 (2010), 671–698. https:
//doi.org/10.1146/annurev.economics.102308.124324
[32] Thomas Caraco, Steven Martindale, and Thomas S. Whittam. 1980.
An empirical demonstration of risk-sensitive foraging preferences.
Animal Behaviour 28, 3 (aug 1980), 820–830. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0003-3472(80)80142-4
[33] C. S. Carver and M. F. Scheier. 1981. Attention and self-regulation:
A control-theory approach to human behavior. Springer-Verlag, New
York.
[34] C. S. Carver and M. F. Scheier. 1998. On the self-regulation of behavior.
Cambridge University Press, New York.
[35] Josh Centers. 2018. Tim Cook Uses His iPhone Too Much. https:
//tidbits.com/2018/06/07/tim-cook-uses-his-iphone-too-much/
[36] Kaustav Chakraborty, Debasish Basu, and K. G. Vijaya Kumar. 2010.
Internet addiction: Consensus, controversies, and the way ahead. East
Asian Archives of Psychiatry 20, 3 (2010), 123–132.
[37] Emily I M Collins, Anna L Cox, Jon Bird, and Cassie Cornish-Tresstail.
2014. Barriers to engagement with a personal informatics productivity
tool. Proceedings of the 26th Australian Computer-Human Interaction
Conference on Designing Futures the Future of Design - OzCHI ’14
(2014), 370–379. https://doi.org/10.1145/2686612.2686668
[38] Sunny Consolvo, David W. McDonald, and James A. Landay. 2009.
Theory-Driven Design Strategies for Technologies that Support Behavior Change in Everyday Life. In CHI 2009 ˜ Creative Thought and
Self-Improvement. Boston, Massachusetts, USA, 405–414.
[39] Christos Constantinidis and Xiao-Jing Wang. 2007. A Neural Circuit
Basis for Spatial Working Memory. The Neuroscientist 10, 6 (2007),
553–565. https://doi.org/10.1177/1073858404268742
[40] Richard Cooper and Tim Shallice. 2000. Contention Scheduling and
the Control of Routine Activities. Cognitive Neuropsychology 17, 4
(2000), 297–338. https://doi.org/10.1080/026432900380427
[41] Richard P. Cooper, Nicolas Ruh, and Denis Mareschal. 2014. The goal
circuit model: A hierarchical multi-route model of the acquisition
and control of routine sequential action in humans. Cognitive Science
38, 2 (2014), 244–274. https://doi.org/10.1111/cogs.12067
[42] M Corbetta, F M Miezin, S Dobmeyer, G L Shulman, and S E Petersen.
1991. Selective and divided attention during visual discriminations

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

pr
e-

[50]
[51]
[52]

[53]
[54]
[55]
[56]
[57]

[58]

t

https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691616652873
[73] Martin S Hagger, Chantelle Wood, Chris Stiff, and Nikos L D Chatzisarantis. 2010. Ego depletion and the strength model of self-control: a
meta-analysis. Psychological bulletin 136, 4 (2010), 495–525. https:
//doi.org/10.1037/a0019486
[74] Wendy Hardeman, Stephen Sutton, Simon Griffin, Marie Johnston,
Anthony White, Nicholas J. Wareham, and Ann Louise Kinmonth.
2005. A causal modelling approach to the development of theorybased behaviour change programmes for trial evaluation. Health
Education Research 20, 6 (2005), 676–687. https://doi.org/10.1093/
her/cyh022
[75] Tristan Harris. 2016.
How Technology Hijacks People’s
Minds — from a Magician and Google’s Design Ethicist.
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/tristan-harris/how-technologyhijacks-peoples-minds_b_10155754.html
[76] Jaimee L. Heffner, Roger Vilardaga, Laina D. Mercer, Julie A. Kientz,
and Jonathan B. Bricker. 2015. Feature-level analysis of a novel
smartphone application for smoking cessation. The American Journal
of Drug and Alcohol Abuse 41, 1 (2015), 68–73. https://doi.org/10.
3109/00952990.2014.977486
[77] Christian S Hendershot, Katie Witkiewitz, William H George, and
G Alan Marlatt. 2011. Relapse prevention for addictive behaviors.
Substance Abuse Treatment, Prevention, and Policy 6, 1 (2011), 17.
https://doi.org/10.1186/1747-597X-6-17
[78] Alexis Hiniker, Sungsoo Ray Hong, Tadayoshi Kohno, and Julie A
Kientz. 2016. MyTime: Designing and Evaluating an Intervention
for Smartphone Non-Use. Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (2016), 4746–4757. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858403
[79] Robert Hockey. 2013. The Psychology of Fatigue: Work, Effort and
Control. Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9781139015394
[80] Wilhelm Hofmann, Kathleen D. Vohs, and Roy F. Baumeister. 2012.
What People Desire, Feel Conflicted About, and Try to Resist in
Everyday Life. Psychological Science 23, 6 (2012), 582–588. https:
//doi.org/10.1177/0956797612437426
[81] Michael Inzlicht, Lisa Legault, and Rimma Teper. 2014. Exploring
the Mechanisms of Self-Control Improvement. Current Directions in
Psychological Science 23, 4 (2014), 302–307. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0963721414534256
[82] Michael Inzlicht, Brandon J. Schmeichel, and C. Neil Macrae. 2014.
Why self-control seems (but may not be) limited. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences 18, 3 (2014), 127–133. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.12.
009
[83] L Itti and C Koch. 2001. Computational modelling of visual attention.
Nature reviews. Neuroscience 2, 3 (2001), 194–203. https://doi.org/10.
1038/35058500
[84] B A Iwata. 1987. Negative reinforcement in applied behavior analysis:
an emerging technology. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis 20, 4
(1987), 361–378. https://doi.org/10.1901/jaba.1987.20-361
[85] Daniel Kahneman. 2011. Thinking, fast and slow. Allen Lane (Penguin),
New York.
[86] Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky. 1979. Prospect Theory: An
Analysis of Decision Under Risk. Econometrica 47, 2 (1979), 263–292.
[87] Elisabeth T. Kersten-van Dijk, Joyce H.D.M. Westerink, Femke Beute,
and Wijnand A. IJsselsteijn. 2017. Personal Informatics, Self-Insight,
and Behavior Change: A Critical Review of Current Literature. Human–Computer Interaction 32, 5-6 (2017), 268–296. https://doi.org/
10.1080/07370024.2016.1276456
[88] Inyeop Kim, Gyuwon Jung, Hayoung Jung, Minsam Ko, and Uichin
Lee. 2017. Let’s FOCUS: Mitigating Mobile Phone Use in College
Classrooms. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 1,

pr
e-

pr
in

[59] Daniel A. Epstein, An Ping, James Fogarty, and Sean A. Munson.
2015. A lived informatics model of personal informatics. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing - UbiComp ’15. 731–742. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2804250
[60] Owain Evans, Andreas Stuhl, Noah D. Goodman, Andreas Stuhlmüller,
and Noah D. Goodman. 2016. Learning the Preferences of Ignorant,
Inconsistent Agents. Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (2016), 323–329.
[61] Flipd Inc. 2018. Flipd. https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?
id=com.flipd.app{&}hl=en{&}gl=us
[62] Jonathan Safran Foer. 2016.
Technology is diminishing us.
https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/03/jonathan-safranfoer-technology-diminishing-us
[63] Kirsten Foot. 2014. The online emergence of pushback on social media
in the United States: A historical discourse analysis. International
Journal of Communication 8, 1 (2014), 1313–1342.
[64] A. Gazzaley, W. Clapp, J. Kelley, K. McEvoy, R. T. Knight, and M.
D’Esposito. 2008. Age-related top-down suppression deficit in the
early stages of cortical visual memory processing. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 105, 35 (2008), 13122–13126. https:
//doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0806074105
[65] Henner Gimpel, Christian Regal, and Marco Schmidt. 2015. myStress: Unobtrusive Smartphone-Based Stress Detection. ECIS 2015
(2015), 0–12. http://aisel.aisnet.org/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=
1015&context=ecis2015_rip
[66] Peter M. Gollwitzer and Paschal Sheeran. 2006. Implementation
Intentions and Goal Achievement: A Meta-analysis of Effects and
Processes. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 38 (2006),
69–119. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2601(06)38002-1
[67] Robbie Gonzalez. 2018. The Research Behind Google’s New Tools for
Digital Well-Being. Wired (may 2018). https://www.wired.com/story/
the-research-behind-googles-new-tools-for-digital-well-being/
[68] Google. 2018. Digital Wellbeing. https://wellbeing.google
[69] Google Play. 2017. Forest: Stay focused. https://play.google.com/
store/apps/details?id=cc.forestapp&hl=en_GB
[70] David H Gustafson, Michael G. Boyle, Bret R. Shaw, and Fiona M McTavish. 2011. An E-health solution for people with alcohol problems.
Alcohol Res Health 33, 4 (2011), 327–337. https://doi.org/10.1038/jid.
2014.371
[71] Anthony Ha. 2012. The Phone Stacking Game: Let’s Make This
A Thing. https://techcrunch.com/2012/02/04/the-phone-stackinggame-lets-make-this-a-thing/
[72] Martin S Hagger, Nikos L D Chatzisarantis, Hugo Alberts, Calvin Octavianus Anggono, Cédric Batailler, Angela R Birt, Ralf Brand, Mark J
Brandt, Gene Brewer, Sabrina Bruyneel, Dustin P Calvillo, W Keith
Campbell, Peter R Cannon, Marianna Carlucci, Nicholas P Carruth,
Tracy Cheung, Adrienne Crowell, Denise T D De Ridder, Siegfried
Dewitte, Malte Elson, Jacqueline R Evans, Benjamin A Fay, Bob M Fennis, Anna Finley, Zoë Francis, Elke Heise, Henrik Hoemann, Michael
Inzlicht, Sander L Koole, Lina Koppel, Floor Kroese, Florian Lange,
Kevin Lau, Bridget P Lynch, Carolien Martijn, Harald Merckelbach,
Nicole V Mills, Alexej Michirev, Akira Miyake, Alexandra E Mosser,
Megan Muise, Dominique Muller, Milena Muzi, Dario Nalis, Ratri Nurwanti, Henry Otgaar, Michael C Philipp, Pierpaolo Primoceri, Katrin
Rentzsch, Lara Ringos, Caroline Schlinkert, Brandon J Schmeichel,
Sarah F Schoch, Michel Schrama, Astrid Schütz, Angelos Stamos,
Gustav Tinghög, Johannes Ullrich, Michelle Vandellen, Supra Wimbarti, Wanja Wolff, Cleoputri Yusainy, Oulmann Zerhouni, Maria
Zwienenberg, Chandra Sripada, Daniel Kessler, and Roy Baumeister. 2016. A Multilab Preregistered Replication of the Ego-Depletion
Effect. Perspectives on Psychological Science 11, 4 (2016), 546–573.

[103]

[104]

[105]

t

[102]

overuse among college students. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’14). ACM, New
York, 2327–2336. https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557366
Ian Leslie. 2016. The scientists who make apps addictive. The Economist (2016). https://www.1843magazine.com/features/the-scientistswho-make-apps-addictive
Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2010. A stage-based model of
personal informatics systems. In Proceedings of the 28th international
conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’10. 557.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753409
Hajin Lim, Ian Arawjo, Yaxian Xie, Negar Khojasteh, and Susan R
Fussell. 2017. Distraction or Life Saver? The Role of Technology in
Undergraduate Students’ Boundary Management Strategies. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 1, CSCW, November
(2017). https://doi.org/10.1145/3134703
Markus Löchtefeld, Matthias Böhmer, and Lyubomir Ganev. 2013.
AppDetox. Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Mobile
and Ubiquitous Multimedia - MUM ’13 (2013), 1–2. https://doi.org/
10.1145/2541831.2541870
Edwin A. Locke and Gary P. Latham. 2002. Building a practically
useful theory of goal setting and task motivation: A 35-year odyssey.
American Psychologist 57, 9 (2002), 705–717. https://doi.org/10.1037/
0003-066X.57.9.705
Danielle Lottridge, Eli Marschner, Ellen Wang, Maria Romanovsky,
and Clifford Nass. 2012. Browser design impacts multitasking. In
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 56th Annual
Meeting. https://doi.org/10.1177/1071181312561289
Arlene R Lundquist, Emily J Lefebvre, and Sara J Garramone. 2014.
Smartphones: Fulfilling the need for immediacy in everyday life, but
at what cost? International Journal of Humanities and Social Science
4, 2 (2014), 80–89.
John H. Lurquin and Akira Miyake. 2017. Challenges to ego-depletion
research go beyond the replication crisis: A need for tackling the
conceptual crisis. Frontiers in Psychology 8, APR (2017), 1–5. https:
//doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00568
Ulrik Lyngs. 2018. A Cognitive Design Space for Supporting SelfRegulation of ICT Use. In Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’18). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, SRC14:1—-SRC14:6. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3170427.3180296
Ulrik Lyngs. 2018. CHI Proceedings R Markdown Template. https:
//github.com/ulyngs/chi-proc-rmd-template
Ulrik Lyngs, Reuben Binns, Max Van Kleek, and Nigel Shadbolt. 2018.
"So, Tell Me What Users Want, What They Really, Really Want!". In
Extended Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI EA ’18). ACM, New York, NY, USA, alt04:1—
-alt04:10. https://doi.org/10.1145/3170427.3188397
Claudia Marino, Gianluca Gini, Alessio Vieno, and Marcantonio M.
Spada. 2018. A comprehensive meta-analysis on Problematic Facebook Use. Computers in Human Behavior 83 (2018), 262–277. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2018.02.009
Claudia Marino, Gianluca Gini, Alessio Vieno, and Marcantonio M.
Spada. 2018. The associations between problematic Facebook use,
psychological distress and well-being among adolescents and young
adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Affective
Disorders 226, September 2017 (2018), 274–281. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jad.2017.10.007
Gloria Mark, Mary Czerwinski, and Shamsi T Iqbal. 2018. Effects
of Individual Differences in Blocking Workplace Distractions. In
Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’18). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 92:1—-92:12.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173666

pr
in

3 (sep 2017), 63:1—-63:29. https://doi.org/10.1145/3130928
[89] Jaejeung Kim, Chiwoo Cho, and Uichin Lee. 2017. Technology
Supported Behavior Restriction for Mitigating Self-Interruptions in
Multi-device Environments. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive,
Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 1, 3 (sep 2017), 1–21.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3130932
[90] Young-Ho Kim, Jae Ho Jeon, Eun Kyoung Choe, Bongshin Lee, KwonHyun Kim, and Jinwook Seo. 2016. TimeAware: Leveraging Framing
Effects to Enhance Personal Productivity. In Proceedings of the 2016
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’16).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 272–283. https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.
2858428
[91] Jake Knapp. 2013. The distraction-free iPhone (or ‘Why I’m happier
since I disabled Safari’).
https://medium.com/time-dorks/thedistraction-free-iphone-or-why-im-happier-since-i-disabledsafari-80f8d525b0d8
[92] Eric I Knudsen. 2007. Fundamental Components of Attention. Annual review of neuroscience 30 (2007), 57–78. https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev.neuro.30.051606.094256
[93] Minsam Ko, Seungwoo Choi, Koji Yatani, and Uichin Lee. 2016. Lock
N’ LoL: Group-based Limiting Assistance App to Mitigate Smartphone Distractions in Group Activities. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, New York,
998–1010. https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858568
[94] Minsam Ko, Kyong-Mee Chung, Subin Yang, Joonwon Lee, Christian
Heizmann, Jinyoung Jeong, Uichin Lee, Daehee Shin, Koji Yatani, and
Junehwa Song. 2015. NUGU: A Group-based Intervention App for
Improving Self-Regulation of Limiting Smartphone Use. Proceedings
of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
& Social Computing - CSCW ’15 (2015), 1235–1245. https://doi.org/
10.1145/2675133.2675244
[95] Artie Konrad, Vitoria Belotti, Nicole Crenshaw, Simon Tucker, Les
Nelson, Honglu Du, Peter Pirolli, Steve Whittaker, Steve Whittaker
Artie Konrad, Vitoria Belotti, Nicole Crenshaw, Simon Tucker, Les
Nelson, Honglu Du, Peter Pirolli, Artie Konrad, Vitoria Belotti, Nicole
Crenshaw, Simon Tucker, Les Nelson, Honglu Du, Peter Pirolli,
and Steve Whittaker. 2015. Finding the Adaptive Sweet Spot: Balancing Compliance and Achievement in Automated Stress Reduction. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’15 (2015), 3829–3838. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702512
[96] Hiroki P. Kotabe and Wilhelm Hofmann. 2015. On Integrating the
Components of Self-Control. Perspectives on Psychological Science 10,
5 (2015), 618–638. https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691615593382
[97] Geza Kovacs, Zhengxuan Wu, and Michael S Bernstein. 2018. Rotating
Online Behavior Change Interventions Increases Effectiveness But
Also Increases Attrition. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 2, CSCW
(nov 2018), 95:1—-95:25. https://doi.org/10.1145/3274364
[98] S. Shunmuga Krishnan and Ramesh K. Sitaraman. 2013. Video stream
quality impacts viewer behavior: Inferring causality using quasiexperimental designs. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking 21, 6
(2013), 2001–2014. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNET.2013.2281542
[99] Florian Lange and Frank Eggert. 2014. Sweet delusion: Glucose drinks
fail to counteract ego depletion. Appetite 75, July 2015 (2014), 54–63.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.appet.2013.12.020
[100] Heyoung Lee, Heejune Ahn, Samwook Choi, and Wanbok Choi. 2014.
The SAMS: Smartphone addiction management system and verification. Journal of Medical Systems 38, 1 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10916-013-0001-1
[101] U Lee, J Lee, Minsam Ko, Changhun Lee, and Yuhwan Kim. 2014.
Hooked on smartphones: an exploratory study on smartphone

[106]

[107]

[108]

pr
e-

[109]

[110]

[111]
[112]

[113]

[114]

[115]

t

Information, Communication & Society 16, 10 (dec 2013), 1596–1618.
[132] James R Müller, Marios G Philiastides, and William T Newsome.
2005. Microstimulation of the superior colliculus focuses attention
without moving the eyes. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 102, 3 (2005), 524–9. https:
//doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0408311101
[133] Mark Muraven and Elisaveta Slessareva. 2003. Mechanisms of SelfControl Failure: Motivation and Limited Resources. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin 29, 7 (2003), 894–906. https://doi.org/10.
1177/0146167203253209
[134] D.A. Norman and T. Shallice. 1986. Attention to Action: Willed and
Automatic Control of Behaviour. In Consciousness and Self-regulation
(Advances in Research and Theory, Vol. 4), R.J. et al. Davidson (Ed.).
Plenum, 1–18.
[135] Ted O’Donoghue and Matthew Rabin. 2001. Choice and Procrastination. Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1 (2001), 121–160.
https://doi.org/10.1162/003355301556365
[136] Fabian Okeke, Michael Sobolev, Nichola Dell, and Deborah Estrin.
2018. Good Vibrations: Can a Digital Nudge Reduce Digital Overload?. In Proceedings of MobileHCI ’18: 20th International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services, Barcelona, Spain, September 3–6, 2018. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3229434.3229463
[137] Bendegul Okumus, Anil Bilgihan, and Ahmet Bulent Ozturk. 2016.
Factors Affecting the Acceptance of Smartphone Diet Applications.
Journal of Hospitality Marketing and Management 25, 6 (2016), 726–
747. https://doi.org/10.1080/19368623.2016.1082454
[138] Facundo Olano. 2018. app-store-scraper.
https://github.com/
facundoolano/app-store-scraper
[139] Facundo Olano. 2018. google-play-scraper. https://github.com/
facundoolano/google-play-scraper
[140] Rita Orji and Karyn Moffatt. 2018. Persuasive technology for
health and wellness: State-of-the-art and emerging trends. Health
Informatics Journal 24, 1 (2018), 66–91. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1460458216650979
[141] Antti Oulasvirta, Tye Rattenbury, Lingyi Ma, and Eeva Raita. 2012.
Habits make smartphone use more pervasive. Personal and Ubiquitous
Computing 16, 1 (2012), 105–114. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-0110412-2
[142] Srikanth Padmala and Luiz Pessoa. 2010. Interactions between cognition and motivation during response inhibition. Neuropsychologia 48,
2 (2010), 558–565. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.
10.017
[143] Srikanth Padmala and Luiz Pessoa. 2011. Reward reduces conflict by
enhancing attentional control and biasing visual cortical processing.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 23, 11 (2011), 3419–3432. https:
//doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00011
[144] Pavlok. 2018.
PAVLOK Productivity.
https://
chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/pavlok-productivity/
hefieeppocndiofffcfpkbfnjcooacib?hl=gb
[145] Charlie Pinder, Jo Vermeulen, Benjamin R. Cowan, and Russell Beale.
2018. Digital Behaviour Change Interventions to Break and Form
Habits. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 25, 3 (2018),
1–66. https://doi.org/10.1145/3196830
[146] Charlie Pinder, Jo Vermeulen, Benjamin R. Cowan, Russell Beale,
and Robert J. Hendley. 2017. Exploring the feasibility of subliminal
priming on smartphones. In Proceedings of the 19th International
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and
Services - MobileHCI ’17. https://doi.org/10.1145/3098279.3098531
[147] Adam Popescu. 2018. Keep Your Head Up: How Smartphone Addiction Kills Manners and Moods. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/
25/smarter-living/bad-text-posture-neckpain-mood.html

pr
e-

pr
in

[116] Gloria Mark, Shamsi Iqbal, and Mary Czerwinski. 2017. How Blocking Distractions Affects Workplace Focus and Productivity. In UbiComp/ISWC’17 Adjunct. Maui, HI, USA, 928–934. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3123024.3124558
[117] Veronica Marotta and Alessandro Acquisti. 2017. Online Distractions,
Website Blockers, and Economic Productivity: A Randomized Field
Experiment. (2017). https://weis2017.econinfosec.org/wp-content/
uploads/sites/3/2017/06/WEIS{_}2017{_}paper{_}26.pdf
[118] Theresa M. Marteau. 1989. Framing of information: Its influence
upon decisions of doctors and patients. British Journal of Social
Psychology Mar, 28 (1989), 89–94. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.20448309.1989.tb00849.x
[119] S. M. McClure, K. M. Ericson, D. I. Laibson, G. Loewenstein, and
J. D. Cohen. 2007. Time Discounting for Primary Rewards. Journal
of Neuroscience 27, 21 (2007), 5796–5804. https://doi.org/10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.4246-06.2007
[120] Robert R. McCrae and Paul T. Costa, Jr. 1999. A Five-Factor theory of
personality. In Handbook of Personality: Theory and Research, L. A.
Pervin and O. P. John (Eds.). Guildford Press, New York, NY, USA,
139–153. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4615-0763-5_11
[121] Brandon T. McDaniel and Sarah M. Coyne. 2014. “Technoference”:
The interference of technology in couple relationships and implications for women’s personal and relational well-being. Psychology
of Popular Media Culture 5, 1 (2014), Advance online publication.
https://doi.org/10.1037/ppm0000065
[122] Susan Michie, Marie Johnston, Jill Francis, Wendy Hardeman, and
Martin Eccles. 2008. From Theory to Intervention: Mapping Theoretically Derived Behavioural Determinants to Behaviour Change
Techniques. Applied Psychology 57, 4 (2008), 660–680. https:
//doi.org/10.1111/j.1464-0597.2008.00341.x
[123] Milk The Moment Inc. 2018. The MILK App. https://itunes.apple.
com/gb/app/the-milk-app/id1340000116?mt=8&ign-mpt=uo%3D4
[124] Brian T. Miller and Mark D’Esposito. 2005. Searching for "the top" in
top-down control. Neuron 48, 4 (2005), 535–538. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.neuron.2005.11.002
[125] E K Miller and J D Cohen. 2001. An integrative theory of prefrontal
cortex function. Annual review of neuroscience 24, 1 (2001), 167–202.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.24.1.167
[126] George A. Miller. 1956. The magical number seven, plus or minus two:
some limits on our capacity for processing information. Psychological
review 63, 2 (1956), 343–352. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0043158
[127] W. R. Miller, V. S. Westerberg, R. J. Harris, and J. S. Tonigan. 1996.
What predicts relapse? Prospective testing of antecedent models.
Addiction 91, SUPPL. (1996). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1360-0443.
1996.tb02336.x
[128] Marina Milyavskaya and Michael Inzlicht. 2018. Attentional and Motivational Mechanisms of Self-Control. Handbook of Self-Control
in Health & Well- Being (2018), 11–23. https://doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9781107415324.004
[129] D. C. Molden, C. M. Hui, a. a. Scholer, B. P. Meier, E. E. Noreen, P. R.
D’Agostino, and V. Martin. 2012. Motivational Versus Metabolic
Effects of Carbohydrates on Self-Control. Psychological Science 23, 10
(2012), 1137–1144. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797612439069
[130] Christian Montag, Alexander Markowetz, Konrad Blaszkiewicz, Ionut
Andone, Bernd Lachmann, Rayna Sariyska, Boris Trendafilov, Mark
Eibes, Julia Kolb, Martin Reuter, Bernd Weber, and Sebastian Markett.
2017. Facebook usage on smartphones and gray matter volume of
the nucleus accumbens. Behavioural Brain Research 329, April (2017),
221–228. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2017.04.035
[131] Lela Mosemghvdlishvili and Jeroen Jansz. 2013. Negotiability of
technology and its limitations: The politics of App development.

[168]

[169]
[170]

t

[167]

mHealth and uHealth 3, 1 (2015), e16. https://doi.org/10.2196/mhealth.
3713
Amitai Shenhav, Matthew M Botvinick, and Jonathan D Cohen. 2013.
The Expected Value of Control: An Integrative Theory of Anterior
Cingulate Cortex Function. Neuron 79, 2 (2013), 217–240. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2013.07.007
Amitai Shenhav, Sebastian Musslick, Falk Lieder, Wouter Kool,
Thomas L Griffiths, Jonathan D Cohen, and Matthew M Botvinick.
2017. Toward a Rational and Mechanistic Account of Mental Effort. Annual Review of Neuroscience 40, 1 (jul 2017), 99–124. https:
//doi.org/10.1146/annurev-neuro-072116-031526
Steven J. Sherman. 1980. On the self-erasing nature of errors of
prediction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 39, 2 (1980),
211–221. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.39.2.211
Richard M. Shiffrin and Walter Schneider. 1977. Controlled and
automatic human information processing: II. Perceptual learning,
automatic attending and a general theory. Psychological Review 84, 2
(1977), 127–190. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.84.2.127
Yousheng Shu, Andrea Hasenstaub, and David A. McCormick. 2003.
Turning on and off recurrent balanced cortical activity. Nature 423,
May (2003), 288–293. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature01614.1.
Adam Slack. 2018. chrome-web-store-scraper. https://github.com/
AdamSlack/chrome-web-store-scraper
Manya Sleeper, Alessandro Acquisti, Lorrie Faith Cranor,
Patrick Gage Kelley, Sean A. Munson, and Norman Sadeh.
2015. I Would Like To..., I Shouldn’t..., I Wish I... Proceedings
of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing - CSCW ’15 (2015), 1058–1069.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675193
Eliot R. Smith and Jamie DeCoster. 2000. Dual-Process Models
in Social and Cognitive Psychology: Conceptual Integration and
Links to Underlying Memory Systems. Personality and Social
Psychology Review 4, 2 (2000), 108–131. https://doi.org/10.1207/
S15327957PSPR0402_01
MobileSoft s.r.o. 2019. AppBlock. https://play.google.com/store/
apps/details?id=cz.mobilesoft.appblock&hl=en&gl=us
Stanford HCI Group. 2018. HabitLab for Chrome (Extension for
Google Chrome web browser). https://habitlab.stanford.edu/
Katarzyna Stawarz, Anna L Cox, and Ann Blandford. 2014. Don’t
Forget Your Pill!: Designing Effective Medication Reminder Apps That
Support Users’ Daily Routines. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’14). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 2269–2278. https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557079
Katarzyna Stawarz, Anna L Cox, and Ann Blandford. 2015. Beyond
Self-Tracking and Reminders: Designing Smartphone Apps That Support Habit Formation. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’15). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 2653–2662. https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702230
Katarzyna Stawarz, Chris Preist, Debbie Tallon, Nicola Wiles, and
David Coyle. 2018. User experience of cognitive behavioral therapy
apps for depression: An analysis of app functionality and user reviews.
Journal of Medical Internet Research 20, 6 (2018). https://doi.org/10.
2196/10120
Piers Steel and Cornelius J. König. 2006. Integrating theories of
motivation. Academy of Management Review 31, 4 (2006), 889–913.
https://doi.org/10.5465/AMR.2006.22527462
Cary Stothart, Ainsley Mitchum, and Courtney Yehnert. 2015. The
attentional cost of receiving a cell phone notification. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 41, 4
(2015), 893–897. https://doi.org/10.1037/xhp0000100
Stringinternational.com. 2018.
Timewarp.
https:
//chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/timewarp/

pr
in

[148] Laura Portwood-Stacer. 2012. Media refusal and conspicuous nonconsumption: The performative and political dimensions of Facebook
abstention. New Media & Society 15, 7 (2012), 1041–1057. https:
//doi.org/10.1177/1461444812465139
[149] W. T. Powers. 1973. Behavior: The control of perception. Aldine,
Chicago.
[150] Prettymind.co. 2018.
Timewaste Timer.
https:
//chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/timewaste-timer/
pengblgbipcdkpigibniogojheaokckd?hl=gb
[151] James O. Prochaska, Carlo C. DiClemente, and John C. Norcross.
1993. In Search of How People Change: Applications to Addictive
Behaviors. Journal of Addictions Nursing 5, 1 (1993), 2–16. https:
//doi.org/10.3109/10884609309149692
[152] Andrew K. Przybylski, Kou Murayama, Cody R. Dehaan, and Valerie
Gladwell. 2013. Motivational, emotional, and behavioral correlates
of fear of missing out. Computers in Human Behavior 29, 4 (2013),
1841–1848. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2013.02.014
[153] Ameet Ranadive and David Ginsberg. 2018. New Tools to Manage
Your Time on Facebook and Instagram. https://newsroom.fb.com/
news/2018/08/manage-your-time/
[154] Wenjie Ruan, Quan Z. Sheng, Lina Yao, Nguyen Khoi Tran, and
Yu Chieh Yang. 2016. PreventDark: Automatically detecting and
preventing problematic use of smartphones in darkness. In 2016 IEEE
International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communication Workshops (PerCom Workshops). 1–3. https://doi.org/10.1109/
PERCOMW.2016.7457071
[155] Runnably. 2019. Bashful. https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?
id=com.runnably.bashful&hl=en&gl=us
[156] Tracii Ryan, Andrea Chester, John Reece, and Sophia Xenos. 2014.
The uses and abuses of Facebook: A review of Facebook addiction.
Journal of Behavioural Addictions 3, 3 (2014), 133–148. https://doi.
org/10.1556/JBA.3.2014.016
[157] M. Sapacz, G. Rockman, and J. Clark. 2016. Are we addicted to
our cell phones? Computers in Human Behavior 57 (2016), 153–159.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2015.12.004
[158] Christine Satchell and Paul Dourish. 2009. Beyond The User: Use
And Non-Use in HCI. Proceedings of the Annual Conference of the
Australian Computer-Human Interaction Special Interest Group (OZCHI
’09) November (2009), 9–16. https://doi.org/10.1145/1738826.1738829
[159] Sarita Yardi Schoenebeck. 2014. Giving up Twitter for Lent: How
and Why We Take Breaks from Social Media. Proceedings of the 32nd
annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI
’14 (2014), 773–782. https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2556983
[160] Stephen M. Schueller, Ricardo F. Muñoz, and David C. Mohr. 2013.
Realizing the Potential of Behavioral Intervention Technologies.
Current Directions in Psychological Science 22, 6 (2013), 478–483.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721413495872
[161] Natasha Dow Schüll. 2012. Addiction By Design - Machine Gambling
in Las Vegas. Princeton University Press, New Jersey.
[162] Willem Schungel. 2018. Checkout of your phone. https://itunes.apple.
com/gb/app/checkout-of-your-phone/id1051880452?mt=8&uo=4
[163] Seekrtech. 2018. Forest: Stay focused. https://www.forestapp.cc
[164] Tim Shallice and Richard P. Cooper. 2011. The Organisation of Mind.
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
[165] Nicholas Shea, Annika Boldt, Dan Bang, Nick Yeung, Cecilia Heyes,
and Chris D Frith. 2014. Supra-personal cognitive control and
metacognition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 18, 4 (2014), 186–193.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2014.01.006
[166] Nelson Shen, Michael-Jane Levitan, Andrew Johnson, Jacqueline Lorene Bender, Michelle Hamilton-Page, Alejandro (Alex) R
Jadad, and David Wiljer. 2015. Finding a Depression App: A Review and Content Analysis of the Depression App Marketplace. JMIR

[171]

[172]

[173]

[174]

pr
e-

[175]
[176]
[177]

[178]

[179]

[180]
[181]

[182]

[196]

[197]
[198]

[199]

t

[195]

of Medical Internet Research 12, 1 (2010), e4. https://doi.org/10.2196/
jmir.1376
Steve Whittaker, Vaiva Kalnikaite, Victoria Hollis, and Andrew Guydish. 2016. ‘Don’ t Waste My Time’: Use of Time Information Improves
Focus. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. ACM, New York, 1729–1738.
Isaac Wiafe and Keiichi Nakata. 2012. Bibliographic analysis of persuasive systems: techniques, methods and domains of application. In
Persuasive Technology: Design for Health and Safety; The 7th International Conference on Persuasive Technology. 61–64.
Christopher D. Wickens. 1980. The structure of attentional resources.
Atten and performance VIII 8 (1980).
Katie Witkiewitz and G. Alan Marlatt. 2004. Relapse prevention
for alcohol and drug problems: That was zen, this is tao. American
Psychologist 59, 4 (2004), 224–235. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.
59.4.224
Troy Wolwerton. 2018. Apple’s Tim Cook says he’s also spending
too much time with his phone. http://uk.businessinsider.com/appleceo-tim-cook-used-new-company-tools-to-track-his-phone-use2018-6
Wendy Wood and Dennis Rünger. 2016. Psychology of Habit. Annual
Review of Psychology 67, 1 (2016), 289–314. https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev-psych-122414-033417
Tim Wu. 2016. The Attention Merchants: The Epic Scramble to Get
Inside Our Heads. Knopf Publishing Group.
Xiaomeng Xu, Kathryn E Demos, Tricia M Leahey, Chantelle N Hart,
Jennifer Trautvetter, Pamela Coward, Kathryn R Middleton, and
Rena R Wing. 2014. Failure to replicate depletion of self-control.
PLoS ONE 9, 10 (2014), e109950. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0109950
Lucy Yardley, Tanzeem Choudhury, Kevin Patrick, and Susan Michie.
2016. Current Issues and Future Directions for Research Into Digital Behavior Change Interventions. American Journal of Preventive
Medicine 51, 5 (2016), 814–815. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2016.
07.019
K.S. S Young. 1998. Internet Addiction: the Emergence of a New
Clinical Disorder. CyberPsychology and Behavior 1, 3 (1998), 237–244.
http://online.liebertpub.com/doi/abs/10.1089/cpb.1998.1.237
Kimberly S Young. 1999. Internet addiction: Symptoms, evaluation,
and treatment. In Innovations in Clinical Practice (Volume 17), L. VandeCreek and T. L. Jackson (Eds.). 19–31. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10879009-9120-x

pr
in

mmmhadpnjmokjbmgamifipkjddhlfkhi?hl=gb
[183] Cass R. Sunstein and Richard H. Thaler. 2008. Nudge. Penguin,
London.
[184] Caroline Tell. 2013. Step Away From the Phone! https://www.
nytimes.com/2013/09/22/fashion/step-away-from-the-phone.html
[185] Virginia Thomas, Margarita Azmitia, and Steve Whittaker. 2016.
Unplugged: Exploring the costs and benefits of constant connection. Computers in Human Behavior 63 (2016), 540–548. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2016.05.078
[186] D M Tice, E Bratslavsky, and R F Baumeister. 2001. Emotional distress
regulation takes precedence over impulse control: if you feel bad, do
it! Journal of personality and social psychology 80, 1 (2001), 53–67.
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.80.1.53
[187] Nitasha Tiku. 2018. The WIRED Guide to Internet Addiction. https:
//www.wired.com/story/wired-guide-to-internet-addiction/
[188] Trevorscandalios. 2018. Focusly.
https://chrome.google.com/
webstore/detail/focusly/jlihnplddpebplnfafhdanaiapbeikbk?hl=gb
[189] Alexander J.A.M. Van Deursen, Colin L. Bolle, Sabrina M. Hegner,
and Piet A.M. Kommers. 2015. Modeling habitual and addictive
smartphone behavior: The role of smartphone usage types, emotional
intelligence, social stress, self-regulation, age, and gender. Computers
in Human Behavior 45, April (2015), 411–420. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.chb.2014.12.039
[190] Michelle H. van Velthoven, John Powell, and Georgina Powell. 2018.
Problematic smartphone use: Digital approaches to an emerging
public health problem. Digital Health 4 (2018), 1–9. https://doi.org/
10.1177/2055207618759167
[191] Kathleen D. Vohs and Roy F. Baumeister (Eds.). 2016. Handbook of
Self-Regulation - Research, Theory, and Applications. Guildford Press,
New York, NY, USA.
[192] V. H. Vroom. 1964. Work and Motivation. Wiley, New York.
[193] Jingting Wang, Yuanyuan Wang, Chunlan Wei, Nengliang Aaron Yao,
Avery Yuan, Yuying Shan, and Changrong Yuan. 2014. Smartphone
interventions for long-term health management of chronic diseases:
an integrative review. Telemedicine journal and e-health: the official
journal of the American Telemedicine Association 20, 6 (2014), 570–583.
https://doi.org/10.1089/tmj.2013.0243
[194] Thomas L. Webb, Judith Joseph, Lucy Yardley, and Susan Michie. 2010.
Using the Internet to promote health behavior change: A systematic
review and meta-analysis of the impact of theoretical basis, use of
behavior change techniques, and mode of delivery on efficacy. Journal

[200]
[201]
[202]

pr
e-

[203]

[204]
[205]

