Arab World English Journal (February 2019)
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/th.222

Theses ID 222

Pp. 1- 53

Saudi EFL University Instructors’ Barriers to Teaching the Speaking Skills:
Causes and Solutions
Noura Abdulaziz Abdulmohsen Al Hassan
Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman University
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

Author: Noura Abdulaziz Abdulmohsen Al Hassan
Thesis Title: Saudi EFL University Instructors’ Barriers to Teaching the Speaking Skills: Causes
and Solutions
Subject/major: Linguistics
Institution: College of Languages and Translation, Al-Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic
University
Degree: MA
Year of award: 2015
Supervisor: Dr. Zuhair Zaghlool
Keywords: accuracy, fluency, motivation, questionnaire, speaking, speaking deficiency, teaching
barriers
Abstract
The aim of this study was to investigate the causes and the solutions of Saudi EFL university instructors’
barriers to teaching the speaking skill. The sample of the study consisted of 132 randomly-selected EFL
preparatory year instructors at Al-Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic University, Princess Nourah Bint
Abdulrahman University, and King Saud University in Riyadh city. Three instruments were utilized to
collect data for the study: the first one was a questionnaire, the second was semi-structured interviews, and
the third one was lectures observations. The researcher designed a five-point Likert scale questionnaire to
collect the data of the study which was validated by a panel of raters consisting of ten university professors
and instructors. To ensure reliability, Cronbach Alpha formula was calculated. Besides, The findings of the
study revealed that the causes of Saudi EFL university instructors’ barriers to teaching the speaking skill in
the preparatory year were as follows: students’ use of L1 during group work or pair work, lack of
vocabulary, fear of making mistakes, lack of self-confidence, and lack of motivation. Furthermore, the study
results advocated the following solutions to Saudi EFL university instructors’ barriers to teaching the
speaking skill: enhancing students’ self-confidence to speak without fear, correcting students’ mistakes
kindly, meeting students’ needs in speaking textbooks, and adopting recent motivating techniques, increasing
the motivating speaking activities in textbooks, and testing the speaking skill. Finally, the study concluded
that teacher training and preparation programs should help EFL instructors overcome and avoid such
teaching barriers in teaching the speaking skills
Cite as: Al Hassan, N. A. A. (2015). Saudi EFL University Instructors’ Barriers to Teaching the Speaking
Skills: Causes and Solutions. College of Languages and Translation, Al-Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic
University. (Master Thesis). Retrieved from Arab World English Journal (ID Number: 222. February 2019,
1-53. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/th.222

Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Ministry of Education
Al-Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic University
College of Languages and Translation
Department of English Language and Literature

Saudi EFL University Instructors’ Barriers to Teaching the Speaking Skills:
Causes and Solutions

By
Noura Abdulaziz Abdulmohsen Al Hassan

Supervised by
Dr. Zuhair Zaghlool

Submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in
Linguistics

Safar, 1437 - November, 2015
Riyadh - Saudi Arabia

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

2

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

3

Acknowledgments
I am grateful to Allah, most gracious most merciful, for the blessings He has bestowed
upon me in strength, patience, and knowledge to complete this thesis.
I acknowledge with utmost gratitude and appreciation my respected supervisor Dr. Zuhair
Zaghlool for his great guidance, inspiration, encouragement, time, advice and consideration in the
process of carrying out my study. Without his endless support and supervision, this research would
have never been possible. I would like to thank and extend my gratitude to the committee members
Dr. Aly Shokry and Dr. Hussein Rababah.
I am forever indebted to my beloved mother and father, my greatest inspirations. I would
like to thank them for their endless love, patience, encouragement, and prayers. They have instilled
in me the sense of achievement, responsibility, dedication, and self-confidence. I also thank them
for their emotional, moral, and financial support throughout my academic career.
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my beloved brothers; Mohammed and
Abdullah, and my beloved sisters; Sara, Lujain, and Jana for their sincere and endless love, care,
encouragement, help, and support.
Finally, thanks are due to my relatives and friends for their constant help and support during
all stages of the study.

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

4

Abstract
The aim of this study was to investigate the causes and the solutions of Saudi EFL
university instructors’ barriers to teaching the speaking skill. The sample of the study consisted of
132 randomly-selected EFL preparatory year instructors at Al-Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic
University, Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman University, and King Saud University in Riyadh
city. Three instruments were utilized to collect data for the study: the first one was a questionnaire,
the second was semi-structured interviews, and the third one was lectures observations. The
researcher designed a five-point Likert scale questionnaire to collect the data of the study which
was validated by a panel of raters consisting of ten university professors and instructors. To ensure
reliability, Cronbach Alpha formula was calculated.
Besides, The findings of the study revealed that the causes of Saudi EFL university

instructors’ barriers to teaching the speaking skill in the preparatory year were as follows:
students’ use of L1 during group work or pair work, lack of vocabulary, fear of making
mistakes, lack of self-confidence, and lack of motivation. Furthermore, the study results
advocated the following solutions to Saudi EFL university instructors’ barriers to teaching the
speaking skill: enhancing students’ self-confidence to speak without fear, correcting students’
mistakes kindly, meeting students’ needs in speaking textbooks, and adopting recent
motivating techniques, increasing the motivating speaking activities in textbooks, and testing
the speaking skill. Finally, the study concluded that teacher training and preparation programs
should help EFL instructors overcome and avoid such teaching barriers in teaching the speaking
skills.

‫‪5‬‬

‫‪BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING‬‬

‫الملخص‬
‫تهدف هذه الدراسة إلى استكشاف المصاعب التي تواجه مدرسي اللغة اإلنجليزية كلغة أجنبية في تعليم مهارات التحدث‬
‫للمرحلة الجامعية و إيجاد الحلول المناسبه لها‪ .‬لقد اشتملت الدراسة على عيّنة مكونة من ‪ 132‬مدرس من أساتذة السنة التحضيرية‬
‫اخ ِتيروا عشوائيا ً في ك ٍل من جامعة االمام محمد بن سعود اإلسالمية‪ ،‬جامعة الملك سعود‪ ،‬و جامعة األميرة نورة بنت عبدالرحمن‬
‫في مدينة الرياض‪ .‬استخدمت الباحثة ثالث أدوات بحث لتجميع بيانات الدراسة و هي االستبانات‪ ،‬المقابالت الشخصية‪ ،‬و مراقبة‬
‫المحاضرات‪ .‬صممت الباحثة استبانة على مقياس "ليكرت" خماسي النقاط لتجميع بيانات الدراسة‪ .‬لقد تم مراجعة و تحكيم‬
‫االستبانة على مجموعة من المح ّكمين مكونة من عشر أساتذة ومدرسيين جامعيين للتحقق من مصداقيتها و استُخدِمت معادلة‬
‫(كرونباخ ألفا) للتأكد من ثبات االستبانة‪.‬‬
‫صعوبات التي تواجه المدرسين في تدريس مهارات التحدث كانت كاآلتي ‪ :‬ميل‬
‫و لقد أظهرت نتائج الدراسة أن أسباب ال ّ‬
‫ّ‬
‫الطالب لمفردات اللغة‪ ،‬خوف الطلبة من ارتكاب‬
‫الطلبة الستخدام اللغة األولى في العمل الجماعي في المحاضرات‪ ،‬افتقار‬
‫األخطاء‪ ،‬افتقار الطلبة إلى الثقة بالنفس و التحفيز‪ .‬و من ناحية أخرى‪ ،‬أظهرت الدراسة أن الحلول لتخطي هذه الحواجز هي‬
‫ّ‬
‫الطالب في‬
‫كالتالي‪ :‬تشجيع الطلبة على بناء الثقة بالنفس و التحدث دون خوف‪ ،‬تصحيح أخطاء الطلبة بلطف‪ ،‬تلبية احتياجات‬
‫الكتب الدراسية و استخدام أحدث التّقنيات للرفع من مستوى التّحفيز لدى الطالب‪ ،‬زيادة األنشطة المحفّزة للتحدث في الكتب‬
‫الدراسية و تقييم مهارات التحدث‪ .‬و ختاماً‪ ،‬اقترحت الدراسة أنه ينبغي وضع برامج تدريبية ألساتذة اللغة اإلنجليزية بالسنة‬
‫التحضيرية لتفادي هذه الحواجز في تعليم مهارات التحدث‪.‬‬

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

6

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Acknowledgments………………………………………………………………...…………....... 3
Abstract in English………………...…………………………………………....…………..…… 4
Abstract in Arabic………………………………………………………………….…………..... 5
Table of Contents………………………...………………………………..………..…................ 6
List of Abbreviations………………………………………………………………….............… 9
CHAPTER I – INTRODUCTION

1.1 Introduction………………………………………………………………………………….10
1.2 Statement of problem………………………………………………………………………...11
1.3 Significance of the Study…………………………………………………………………….12
1.4 Objectives of the Study……………………………………………………………………...12
1.5 Questions of the study ………………………………………………………………………12
1.6 Operational Definitions………………………………………………………………………12
1.7 Limitations of the Study……………………………………………………………………..14
1.8 Chapterization…………………………………………………………………...…….……..14
CHAPTER II – LITERATURE REVIEW
2.1 Introduction………………………………………………………………………………… 15

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

7

2.2 The Importance of the Speaking skill………………………………………………………. 15
2.3 The Problem of Speaking Deficiency amongst EFL Students……………………………… 16
2.4 Barriers Teachers Face in Teaching the Speaking Skill…………………...……………….. 19
2.5 Conclusion……………………………………………………………………………..…… 28
CHAPTER III – METHODOLOGY
3.1 Population and Sample of the Study……………..…………………………………………. 29
3.2 Research Instrument……………………………………………………………………….... 29
3.3 Instrument Validity…………………………………………………………………………. 29
3.4 Instrument Reliability…………...………………………………………………………….. 30
3.5 Procedure………………………...…………………………………………………………. 30
3.6 Statistical Analysis………………………………………………………………..…...….… 31
CHAPTER IV – DATA ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS
4.1 Introduction…………………………………………………………………………...……. 32
4.2 Data Analysis………………………………………………………………………...………32
4.3 Results of the Study…………………………………………………………...…………… 33
4.4 Summary of the Results……………………………………………………….……………..38

CHAPTER V – DISCUSSION, CONCLUSION, AND RECOMMENDATIONS
5.1 Introduction…………………………………………………………………………………..39
5.2 Discussion…………………………………………………………………………...……….39
5.3 Conclusion…………………………………………………………………………..……….40

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

8

5.4 Recommendations for Future Research ……………………………………………………..42
References…………………………………………………………………………………..……43
APPENDIX 1: The Questionnaire of the Study…………………………………………...…….46
APPENDIX 2: The Interview Questions………………………………………...………………48
APPENDIX 3: Questionnaire Raters……………………………………………...……………. 49
APPENDIX 4: Dean’s Letter to Universities……………………………...…...............…….….50
APPENDIX 5: KSU Preparatory Year Dean’s Approval letter………………………………….51
APPENDIX 6: Frequencies and Percentages of the Data of the Study………………………….52

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

List of Abbreviations
CA: Communicative Approach
CLT: Communicative Language Teaching
EFL: English as a Foreign Language
EMS: English-Medium Subject
ESL: English as a Second Language
KSU: King Saud University
M: Mean
PD: Professional Development
SD: Standard Deviation
SNS: Social Networking Sites
SPSS: Statistical Package for Social Science

9

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

10

Chapter I
Teaching English as a foreign language requires teaching the four skills: listening,
speaking, reading and writing. Speaking and writing are the productive skills whereas listening
and reading are the receptive skills. According to Boonkit (2010), speaking is one of the four
macro skills necessary for effective communication in any language, particularly when
speakers are not using their mother tongue. In fact speaking skills are the most important skills
that need to be taught for effective communication. Moreover, speaking is the most
fundamental human skill (Comings, Garner & Smith, 2006). Zaremba (2006) states that of all
the four macro English skills, speaking seems to be the most important skill required for
communication. In addition, Sayed (2005) pointed out that first year students in Egypt
experienced problems in their oral communication with others that disabled them from using
English for communicative purposes. Therefore, the main goal for teachers and students is to
be able to effectively communicate in spoken English with other speakers.
In Saudi Arabia public schools, students are taught English from fourth grade and
until they graduate from their secondary schools to college; nevertheless, some students are
not able to communicate and express themselves in English effectively. As they reach their
tertiary level, they still lack both accuracy and fluency (Ansari, 2012).
When teaching the speaking skills in the classroom, teachers expect students to be
able to understand, speak, respond, and communicate in and outside the classroom. In fact, it
is what has been practiced in the classroom that will help students be ready to communicate
with others outside the classroom environment.

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

11

Since teaching speaking is the key skill in EFL learning, much responsibility lies upon
the teacher. Hence, teachers handling English classes face insurmountable difficulties
(Kannan, 2009). Specifically in Saudi Arabia, and due to students’ low performance, English
language programs need improvement especially on the teachers’ quality (Al-Ahaydib 1968).
In fact, teachers face many obstacles that impedes them from teaching the speaking skills in
their most efficient ways. According to Baker and Westrup (2003), many teachers are good in
teaching vocabulary and grammar, but when it comes to teaching speaking; both teachers and
students find challenges and difficulties concerning this skill. Besides, Al-Ma’shy (2011)
affirmed that most English teachers concentrate on improving reading and writing skills and
do not take into account the importance of speaking and listening skills. Likewise, Brown and
Yule (1983) asserted that for most of the language teaching history great focus has been on
writing a language. This means that teaching the speaking skills is neglected and focus is
shifted on reading and writing skills. Al-Twairish (2009) found out that teacher centered
language instruction is the leading form of English language teaching in Saudi Arabia. She
also pointed out that most teachers preferred to focus on teaching grammar because it did not
require a high level of English proficiency on the part of the instructor. Therefore, teachers
should take into consideration that teaching the speaking skill is not as easy as teaching the
other three skills and they are bound to face difficulties and problems in the teaching process.
1.1 Statement of the problem
Teaching the speaking skills is very challenging. Not much research is conducted on
studying the difficulties that teachers encounter as they teach the speaking skill. Eryaka (2013)
explained that what has been missing in the solving such a problem is studying the perspective
of those who teach English as a Foreign Language (EFL). Investigating these problems is an

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

12

important matter especially in the Saudi context and much research is needed particularly on
the EFL teachers’ behalf. Therefore, the research attempts to investigate this issue in EFL
teaching and propose adequate solutions.
1.2 Significance of the Study
The researcher hopes that the findings of the current study will help EFL teachers in
teaching the speaking skill. Moreover, it will help EFL teachers and instructors recognize the
problems they might face in the process of teaching. Hopefully, these findings would assist
teachers and curricula developers by giving valuable feedback on how to overcome such
barriers. Finally, this research will urge researchers to conduct more studies in this area.
1.3 Objectives of the Study
This study aims at:
1. Investigating the barriers that encounter EFL teachers as they teach the speaking skill,
and
2. Providing solutions to overcome these barriers.
1.4 Questions of the study
The study is intended to answer the following questions:
1. What are the causes of Saudi EFL university instructors’ barriers to teaching the speaking
skill?
2. What are the solutions to Saudi EFL university instructors’ barriers to teaching the
speaking skill?
1.5 Operational Definitions
The following terms are defined to clarify their usage in this following study:

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

13

Speaking
Speaking is the productive oral skill which consists of producing systematic verbal
utterances to convey meaning (Nunan, 2003, p. 48).

Spoken language is short, often

fragmentary utterances, in a range of pronunciations. There is often a great deal of
repetition and overlap between one speaker and another, and speakers frequently use nonspecific references (Nunan, 1989, p. 26).
Fluency
Skehan (1996, p. 22) states, “Speaking fluency refers to the ability to produce the spoken
language “without undue pausing or hesitation”. In other words, pauses and hesitation in speech
hinders fluency in speaking.
Accuracy
Yuan and Ellis (2003) believe that speaking accuracy is the extent to which the language
produced conforms to target language norms. According to Wang (2014) this involves the correct
use of pronunciation, vocabulary and grammar.
Teaching Barriers
Anything that inhibits progress or achievement of an objective can be viewed as a barrier
(Rodden, 2010). Therefore, teaching barriers are factors that limit teachers from achieving their
goals of giving knowledge and education to learners.
EFL: English as a Foreign Language
ESL: English as a Second Language
FLT: Foreign language Teaching

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

14

NSE: Native Speakers of English
NNSE: Non-Native Speakers of English

1.6 Limitations of the Study
The findings of this study are restricted by the following factors:
1. The study was conducted in the first semester of 1436/1437 – 2015/2016.
2. This study was restricted to EFL preparatory year instructors at Al-Imam Mohammad Ibn
Saud Islamic University, Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman University, and King Saud
University in the city of Riyadh.
3. The sample included 132 EFL instructors.
1.7 Chapterization
This study is presented in five chapters. Chapter I includes a brief introduction. Chapter II
is a literature review of related studies. Chapter III deals with the methodology adopted. Chapter
IV is composed of the analysis of data. Finally, chapter V provides discussion of the results, the
conclusion of the study, and suggestions for further research.

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

15

Chapter II
Literature review
This literature review aims at analyzing an array of existing scholarly information
presented by EFL researchers concerning the barriers which face instructors in teaching the
speaking skill. Sufficient evidence has shown that most EFL students cannot fluently
communicate using the spoken English language for a variety of reasons, which include their
instructors’ inability to effectively equip them with the EFL speaking skills (Boettcher, 2013).
This chapter presents an overview of related studies investigating the importance of the
speaking skill, the widespread problem of speaking deficiency among students in non-English
speaking countries, Teacher-related problems which are encountered as they teach speaking
EFL and finally a conclusion is given at the end of this chapter. The array of literature available
in learning and teaching EFL speaking are from both Arab and foreign studies that discuss this
problem from both teachers’ and students’ perspectives.
2.1 The Importance of the Speaking Skill
EFL instructors carry a great responsibility to address the needs of learners in teaching the
English language. Not knowing the students need for learning the English language may
interfere with their overall ability to teach the speaking skills. A study conducted by Bailey
(2006) asked more than one thousand EFL learner participants to respond to the sixth goal of
the US National Education by the Equipped for the Future Initiative. Participants were assigned
with an essay prompt inquiring about what acquiring effective speaking skills meant to them.
Findings of this study showed that gaining effective speaking skills in the English language
meant a lot to them. It meant that they could effectively access important information among

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

16

other resources that they can use to orient themselves within the larger global spectrum.
Learners can also be able to interact with people in the neighborhood, participate in social and
political activities as well as advance into the future.
Yan (2007, cited in Al-Saqri, 2014)) asserts that the target of learning English is to
communicate with others. To achieve this, it is important to increase the students' selfconfidence in the skills of speaking in order to support and stimulate them to be more willing
to translate their ideas in the second language. Yan concludes that fluency and accuracy should
be integrated within activities in the classroom.
Nunan (1989, p. 26) states, “Speaking is one of the most important skills in learning EFL.
It is the means through which one can communicate with others to achieve certain goals or to
express his opinions, intentions, hopes and viewpoints in a clear way. Unlike written language,
spoken language consists of short, often fragmentary utterances. It is characterized by the use
of non-specific words and phrases, the use of fillers, repetition, loosely organized syntax and
an overlap between one speaker and another.”
Febriyanti (2011) believes that speaking is one of the most substantial and essential skills
that must be practiced at regular intervals to communicate orally. The mastery of speaking skill
is a priority for many ESL and EFL learners. Learners often assess their success in language
learning of English on the basis of their improvement on speaking the language.
2.2 The Problem of Speaking Deficiency amongst EFL Students

The fact that most instructors do not understand the educational objective sought after
by most learning institutions in supporting the implementation of the EFL programs may
interfere with their overall ability to effectively teach the EFL speaking skills (Bailey, 2006).

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

17

Research has shown that learning institutions particularly in non-English speaking nations have
increasingly encouraged for the dispensation of competent speaking skills among learners at
all education levels following the internationalization of the English language as a basic
medium of communication around the globe (Al-Jadidi, 2009).

Wallace, Stariha and Walberg (2004) asserted that the lack of practicing the language
caused an increase in problems among learners and eventually leads to deficiency in mastering
the speaking skills. They pointed out that the more practice students are given the better they
perform in speaking. They also discussed that formal speaking improves among students when
teachers give them an insight on how to organize their thoughts and ideas, and when students
are well prepared for their presentations. This helps reduce the feeling of fear and helps create
a friendly atmosphere.
Thapalia (2006) stated that students were fraught with fear of using English in rural
areas in Nepal. They lacked the ability to speak English although they scored well in their
subjects. Public school teachers were perceived as the cause of this issue due to the use of their
mother tongue Nepali in teaching EFL. The bilingual and translation methods were the
teaching approaches they used for FLT. As a result, the development of the listening and
speaking skills were neglected because focus was to achieve scores in the previous methods.
Because they were deprived from listening and speaking English, they couldn’t produce the
language with such minimal listening input. To solve this problem, schools were advised to
equip classrooms with audio/video materials to improve listening and speaking skills.
Kannan (2009) explained that all problems pertaining to speaking EFL will be resolved
when teachers give attention to each learner individually. Teachers should motivate students

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

18

to participate and to speak in English only. Lots of practice must be given to learners.
Furthermore, the atmosphere of the classroom should be friendly and appealing. Kannan
concludes that extra attention and coaching must be given to slow learners.
Samantray (2009) points out that the speaking skill among students is in a deficient
level due to the ways students are taught English. Students are forced to speak, read, and
answer questions although they have not had enough listening tasks. This means that they have
not received enough input to be able to produce language. Teachers main focus is to look for
students’ mistakes and correct them, neglecting learners’ effort in trying to produce the
language. Because that is their focus, students put more effort on accuracy at such an early
stage which hinders them from speaking easily and fluently.

Ansari (2012) believes that the basics of English are not acknowledged among Arab
learners. Although they have been taught for seven years, which is a reasonable amount of
time, they still look at their teachers with great hope. Learners believe that their teachers will
make them learn English in a fast pace which amplifies teachers responsibilities toward their
learners.
Kanwal and Khurshid (2012) conducted a study to explore the university students’
difficulties in learning English language skills. In order to highlight the language difficulties a
27 item questionnaire was developed and was administered to 200 randomly selected students
of department of English. Collected data was analyzed and percentages were computed.
Results showed that overall university students required extra help in improving their English
listening, speaking, reading and writing skills. Students were hesitant in speaking. Moreover,

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

19

university students were not fully satisfied with their present course contents of English
language and teaching methodologies.
Boettcher (2013) conducted a study which asserted that students need to know the
meaning of a vocabulary item and be able to use the word on a performance level such as
writing or speaking. Moreover, the study mentioned that most studies show how interacting
with words and learning vocabulary supports student learning and increases students' success
and language skills in all modalities: reading, writing, speaking, and listening. Besides, the
process of teaching vocabulary is as important as the words themselves. Learning happens
through linguistic negotiation: talk. However, studies show that teacher talk dominates the
majority of classroom interchanges. The standard teacher-centered and dominated talk hinders
students from improving talk. Even researchers who are committed to increasing student
discussion fall into this teacher-talk trap. This in return affected speaking in students’ learning
EFL.

2.3 Barriers Teachers Face in Teaching the Speaking Skill
Torky (2006) conducted a study to investigate the effectiveness of task-based
instructions in developing the speaking skills of secondary school students in Egypt. The
reason behind her study was the students’ significant low performance in speaking. In her
study, an informal questionnaire was assigned to 20 EFL teachers and supervisors. The
questionnaire aimed to explore and identify the current methods in teaching speaking. It was
found that both teachers and supervisors had no adequate knowledge of the speaking skills
necessity for students. In addition, students had no opportunities to practice speaking because
of the short time allocated in class. Moreover, teachers expressed their needs for new and better

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

20

teaching methods that could help in increasing students’ motivation in speaking. It was
observed that teachers were obsessed with correcting errors which led to students’ lack of selfconfidence which impeded their fluency. Furthermore, it was found that students’ textbooks
had very few activities that tackled speaking and that textbooks focused more on language
forms. They did not include real information gap or motivating topics to influence students to
speak. The researcher recommended that speaking skills should be given more attention. More
time and effort should be dispensed to the speaking skills; students should be given
opportunities to practice authentic speech on a daily basis. Finally, both teachers and students
should be aware of the importance of the speaking skills and what is necessary for educational
studies at each level in order to develop the language properly and successfully.
Farooqui (2007) found that instructors’ perception concerning students’ ability to speak
the English language could affect their ability to give out the EFL speaking skills. The
participants in the study were five teachers. The instruments were semi-structured interviews,
observation, and document analysis. During this study, most respondents stated that instructors
blamed students for having a narrow English vocabulary while perfecting their reading and
writing skills. Students also felt shy, did not care about this challenge, and hence did not bother
speaking out in front of a class. Moreover, students did better in reading and writing skills but
perform very poorly in speaking. Other students reportedly had limited opportunities to
practice the spoken language outside classroom and thus did not put what they learn in class
into practice. According to the participants, the education system also discouraged students
from practicing the speaking skills as only reading and writing was tested during examinations.
Because students did not have sufficient proficiency in English, teachers found it difficult to
orally communicate with them in any type of activity. Teachers usually provided students with

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

21

easy topics to aid them in getting started with speaking. As a result, teachers found it
challenging to identify gaps in students’ spoken language, which in return limited their ability
to effectively dispense the skills.
Lary, Lynch and Cali (2008) stated four main causes of EFL problems in learning and
teaching: students’ lack of motivation, the insufficient allotted time for teaching EFL, the
insufficient materials, and the overcrowded English classes that distract teachers. This problem
may not be completely solved, but using certain strategies like forming small groups can help
teachers to a certain extent. A set of suggested solutions are mentioned including using
activities that correlate with learners personalities and characteristics that raises the motivation
in EFL learners.
Al-Jadidi (2009) carried out a study which mainly focused on bilingual (English and
Arabic) versus monolingual (English only) teaching and the role of first language (Arabic)
usage in the classroom. Many students seemed to prefer learning with bilingual rather than
monolingual teachers. The study was carried out in six different higher education colleges in
or near Muscat. Ten classroom observations were carried and eleven teachers and fifteen
students were interviewed from the same college. The researcher observed that the bilingual
teachers as a group and monolingual teachers as a group had different characteristic
pedagogical styles and approaches. The bilingual teachers were more teacher-centered, relied
more heavily on the use of textbooks, focused more on the teaching of grammar and used less
varied techniques of instruction and engagement than did the monolingual teachers. On the
other hand, the monolingual teachers, while they were more learner-centered and incorporated
more communicative, interactive lessons and activities, seemed to be less successful in
classroom management and focused less on accuracy, grammar and lexis than their Arabic-

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

22

speaking colleagues. The outcomes of the student interviews reflected the outcomes of the
teacher interviews and classroom observations. Both students and teachers thought that
bilingual teaching was essential at beginning levels of education and that the ability to speak
both English and Arabic was beneficial for teachers. Many students, however, thought that as
they advanced, interaction in the classroom should be conducted in English only. Together, the
perspectives of EFL teachers and students and of the researcher as an EFL teacher point to a
significant, but limited, role for Arabic usage in EFL tertiary college classrooms.
Recommendations of the findings suggested that monolingual teachers should try to enrich
their learning and develop their understanding of the language-learning matters of their
students by learning Arabic and about Islamic-culture. On the other hand, bilingual teachers
should work to include more communicative approaches and more varied activities into their
teaching. The findings also indicated that teachers’ inability to understand the primary
objective that the government had in supporting the implementation of the EFL program could
lower their capacity to teach the speaking skills.
Al-Twairish (2009) carried out a study to measure the effect of the implementation of
the Communicative Approach (CA) on the listening and speaking skills of Saudi third year
secondary students. To address this issue, a quantitative study was conducted on two randomly
selected intact classes at Dammam Tenth Secondary School. These two classes were assigned
as an experimental group which consisted of 37 students, and a control group which consisted
of 41 students. It was mainly hypothesized that the students taught according to the CA would
score higher in the post-test than in the pre-test and that there would be significant statistic
difference in scores of the experimental group and the control group. Several communicative
activities were used with the experimental group. As for the control group, it was exposed to

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

23

traditional, non-communicative, instruction using structurally based methods, such as the
audio-lingual method. A pre-test was given to both groups at the beginning of the experiment
to ensure that they had the same language background. At the end of the experiment, a posttest was administered to both groups. The study revealed that the CA had a positive effect on
the students' listening and speaking skills. The experimental group obtained significantly
higher mean scores on the post-test than on the pre-test; the difference between the pre-test
mean scores and the post-test mean scores for the control group was not statistically significant.
Finally, the experimental group students were more differentiated than the control students on
the post-test. In consideration of these results five recommendations were made. First, a shift
should be made from non-communicative to communicative ELT. Second, educational policymakers should consider the applicability of the CA in the Saudi context. Third, EFL teachers
should receive in-service training in applying CA principles. Fourth, students should be
encouraged to speak the target language with their colleagues. Finally, local ELT textbook
writers should work along communicative lines.
Al-Ma’shy (2011) carried out a study to investigate the causes of EFL speaking
weakness in Saudi secondary schools in Al-Gunfuthah City. Two hundred and forty students
were randomly selected from four secondary schools in Al-Gunfuthah and 30 English teachers
were randomly selected to contribute to this study. Four instruments were used in this study.
The first instrument was students' questionnaire. The second instrument was teachers'
questionnaire. The third and fourth instruments were students' interview and teachers'
interview. The most important findings of this study were that Saudi secondary school students
were generally weak in speaking English. In addition, most secondary school students had
positive attitudes towards speaking in English. Moreover, the speaking difficulties faced by

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

24

the students were related to pronunciation, grammar, vocabulary, and fluency. Finally, many
reasons for students' weakness in terms of speaking in English were present. These reasons
were associated with the English textbook used in the secondary level, the students, and the
English teachers. The study recommendations included using effective teaching aids in schools
such as language laboratories, videos, and computers to teach English. Besides, English
teachers should assist in improving students' speaking skills by motivating students to speak
in English. In addition, the number of English contact hours or periods should be increased in
order to give the students enough opportunities to practice the English language. Finally,
English classes should be divided into four distinct parts based on the four skills in order to
assure teaching all of the four skills comprehensively.
Chang (2011) carried out a study which showed that lack of quality professional skills
among EFL teachers in implementing the Communicative Language Teaching (CLT) method
affected their ability to effectively teach EFL including the speaking skills. The participants in
this study were eight EFL instructors from two universities in Taiwan. Although the Taiwan
government as well as the Ministry of Education in this country offer workshops and
professional training opportunities for EFL teachers, the finding showed that teachers
persistence in practicing CLT, students resistance to class participation, limited teaching hours,
test-oriented teaching, and the lack of an English environment were considered barriers to
teaching. Moreover, there was a need for appropriate curricula and larger classes to affectively
teach EFL speaking.
El-Fiki (2012) conducted a study that examined the professional development
experiences of a group of EFL and English-medium subject (EMS) teachers working in private
and public schools in Cairo, Egypt. The research questions focused on teachers’ perceptions

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

25

of change and improvement occurring in their teaching practices, their beliefs on the sources
of change available to them, and the perspectives of school principals and professional
development providers on teachers’ change prospects. In this study, a multi-method approach
was applied, with a teacher survey given to 174 teachers. The approach of field observation
and examination of relevant documents, artifacts, semi-structured interviews were also used.
The findings indicated that teachers perceived great change in their practices though their
implementation of communicative approaches. Moreover, teaching was influenced by various
professional learning opportunities. In addition, change or lack results from teachers’
adaptability to their local contextual demands through a process of resistance, resilience, or
maintaining the status. The findings pointed out the importance of teachers in change processes
and suggested that change results from a process of interaction between teachers and others
within their community. The suggestions of the study included the need to replace the technical
ideas of professional development with a more ecological orientation, to establish professional
learning communities amongst teachers and within schools, and to form a coherent framework
for change initiatives. The study mentioned that in the public system, English was taught
through traditional teacher-centered approaches. It focused on developing knowledge about
language forms rather than building competency and fluency in language use. English was
taught through isolated grammar points and repetition of drills. Classes were considered quite
crowded which reached up to 70 students sometimes. In addition, there was a heavy reliance
on the ministry assigned textbooks which often formed the syllabus taught. This approach led
to low levels of English proficiency and high levels of student failure and disappointment. As
a result, this system had not produced proficient speakers of English. El-Fiki reported that EFL
had widely been integrated in most learning institutions in Egypt in an effort to improve quality

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

26

of education. Teachers in both the public and private schools were increasingly changing their
perception regarding the introduction of a foreign language in their education curriculum and
subsequently adjusting their teaching practices to meet the new educational prospects.
However, a considerable number of EFL instructors particularly in regions outside Cairo did
not understand the primary objective behind these new developments, and hence, did not
bother to adjust their teaching practices to fulfill the new educational objective. As a result,
they only committed their efforts to dispense the reading and writing EFL skills, which
consequently lowered their overall ability to effectively teach the speaking skills.
Gan (2012) tried to identify the problems with oral English skills of ESL students at a
tertiary teacher training institution in Hong Kong. The instruments of this study were semistructured interviews that addressed the difficulties ESL students encountered in their oral
English. Findings stated that insufficient opportunities to speak English in lectures and
tutorials, lack of a focus on language improvement in the curriculum, and the poor input
environment for spoken communication in English outside class apparently resulted in this
problem. The results of the study led the researcher to question the effectiveness of the
knowledge- and pedagogy-based ESL teacher training curriculum. The findings emphasized
the need to integrate a sufficiently intensive language improvement component in the teacher
preparation program. The study also showed that the unfavorable environment outside the
classroom demoralized students from showing significant commitment in learning EFL, which
consequently affected the instructors’ ability to dispense the speaking skills. During this study,
Gan discovered that a huge proportion of Chinese population outside the classroom
environment used native Cantonese as their first language of communication. Consequently,
English language was rarely used in the social communication, hence denies learners the

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

27

opportunity to practice the spoken language in their daily life. On the other hand, students
preferred to perfect their speaking skills in the Cantonese language to be able to compatibly
adapt to the wider Chinese society.

Al Mineeai (2013) explored the problems in speaking EFL among female students from
secondary schools in Bisha from the teachers' and students' viewpoints. Open and closed
questionnaires and an interview were used as instruments for this study. The participants
included 228 female students and 14 teachers from five secondary schools in Bisha. The
findings of the study revealed that there were speaking EFL problems related to the curriculum,
teachers, and students. The curriculum related problems were seen as the most crucial of all
problems. The curriculum was not designed in accordance to students' level and did not meet
students' needs and problems of their daily lives. Moreover, the time required for training and
improving listening and speaking skills were not enough. Also, exams did not really assess
speaking skills. Finally, the pupils' textbook is not interesting, and does not have enough
illustrations. The second major problem in the study was teacher related issues. For instance,
some teachers did not use a variety of teaching aids and technology that facilitated speaking
skills. Some EFL teachers lacked proficiency in teaching methods and in the evaluation
processes. They also lacked training in speaking and in teaching how to speak EFL.
Furthermore, some teachers were unsuccessful in creating a stimulating classroom atmosphere.
The final problem in speaking EFL was student-related problems. These problems were not
represented in the students’ personal difficulties such as lack of confidence, shyness, hesitation,
fear of others reactions, and anxiety. Contradictorily, students appeared familiarized with and
understood the importance of EFL and consequently they were motivated to speak English
fluently and proficiently. As for the solutions to the problems of speaking EFL, it was

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

28

suggested that speaking skills should be evaluated. Furthermore, speaking skills must be taught
effectively with practice, patience, and hard work in speaking classes. Students should listen
to authentic videos, have conversations, participate in role playing, and practice daily life
situations separately in particular classes. It was also recommended that they should use the
laboratory at least once a week to become familiar with native accents and to imitate them
regularly.

2.4 Conclusion
The literature review indicates the importance of the speaking skill. Moreover, it
reveals teachers’ barriers pertaining to teaching the speaking skills such as the crowded classes,
the inadequate textbooks, the unmotivated students, the students’ fear of mistakes, inadequate
time allotted to the speaking skill, students’ use of L1 in the speaking classes, and the dearth
of teacher training programs. Furthermore, the reviewed studies suggested the following
solutions to teaching speaking and overcoming the barriers: implementing technological
services in teaching, providing interesting aids and techniques, increasing teaching speaking
hours, decreasing the number of students in classes, and the need for adequate textbooks.
Finally, the review of literature paved the way for the researcher to prepare the
instruments of the study in addition to interpreting the results of the study. Moreover, it
provided the researcher with a new vision about the various aspects of the speaking skill.

Chapter III
Methodology

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

29

This chapter clarifies the methodology and the design of the current study. It gives
information about the population, sample, instruments, procedures as well as the statistical analysis
that was employed in the study.
3.1 Population and Sample of the Study
The population of the study consisted of both male and female EFL preparatory year
instructors at Al-Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic University, Princess Nourah Bint
Abdulrahman University, and King Saud University in the first semester of the academic year
1436/1437 – 2015/2016 in Riyadh city. The Sample was composed of 132 randomly-selected male
and female EFL preparatory year instructors.
3.2 Research Instrument
Three instruments were utilized to collect data of the study: a five- point Likert scale
questionnaire, semi-structured interviews, and classroom observations. The questionnaire
consisted of two main categories. The first category was about the causes of Saudi EFL university
instructors’ barriers to teaching the speaking skill. The second category dealt with the solutions to
those barriers (See Appendix 1).
3.3 Instrument Validity
The first version of the questionnaire and the interview questions were validated by a panel
of raters which consisted of ten English language university professors and instructors (See
Appendix 3). The questionnaire and the interview questions were modified according to the panel's
feedback. Fortunately, the researcher received positive feedback from the panel of raters
describing the questionnaire items and the interview questions as well designed, unbiased,
comprehensive, intelligible, appropriate, and relevant.
3.4 Instrument Reliability

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

30

To ensure the reliability of the questionnaire, it was administered to a pilot sample of 30
randomly-selected EFL preparatory year instructors. This sample was not included in the study.
Then Cronbach Alpha formula was calculated using the SPSS program. Alpha was (0.78); this
result was acceptable and appropriate for the purpose of this study.
3.5 Procedure
1. The researcher designed the questionnaire of the study and the interview questions
benefiting from previous studies (See Appendixes 2 & 3).
2. This questionnaire and the interview questions were validated by a panel of raters
which consisted of ten EFL university professors.
3. The questionnaire was edited according to the raters' suggestions.
4. The edited questionnaire was administered to a pilot group consisting of thirty
randomly-selected EFL preparatory year instructors who were excluded from the
sample of the study.
5. The collected data were analyzed statistically employing the SPSS program to calculate
Cronbach’ Alpha Formula for reliability.
6. The questionnaire was also modified according to the statistical results.
7. The final version of the questionnaire was administered to the sample of the study.
8. The collected data were analyzed via the SPSS program.
9. The researcher carried out the interviews with ten EFL preparatory year instructors.
10. The researcher attended 6 speaking skill lectures and took notes.

3.6 Statistical Analysis

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

31

Cronbach's Alpha formula was used to determine the reliability of the questionnaire.
Frequencies, percentages, standard deviation, and means were calculated to analyze the data of the
study utilizing the SPSS program.

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

32

Chapter IV
Data Analysis and Findings
This chapter presents the results of this study which investigated the causes of and solutions
to Saudi EFL university instructors’ barriers to teaching the speaking skill at Al-Imam Mohammad
Ibn Saud Islamic University, Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman University, and King Saud
University in the city of Riyadh. As indicated in the previous chapter, the research participants in
this study were male and female EFL preparatory year instructors. The questions of the study were
the following:
1. What are the causes of Saudi EFL university instructors’ barriers to teaching the speaking
skill?
2. What are the solutions to Saudi EFL university instructors’ barriers to teaching the
speaking skill?
4.1 Data Analysis
The statistical data of the study were collected via the questionnaire of the study which was
given to the participants. A five-point Likert scale was used to score the levels of the causes and
solutions of Saudi EFL university instructors’ barriers to teaching the speaking skill. This is a scale
used in questionnaires to specify the level of agreement or disagreement based on the following
criteria of Rensis Likert (1932): All questions follow the Likert scale: Strongly Agree (5), Agree
(4), Neutral (3), Disagree (2), Strongly Disagree (1)

The collected data were computed and analyzed using the SPSS program to answer the
questions of the study. To achieve this goal, means (M) and standard deviations (SD) were
calculated.

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

33

4.3.1 Results of the Study Concerning the Causes of Saudi EFL University Instructors’
Barriers to Teaching the Speaking Skill
To answer the first question of the study which was “What are the causes of Saudi EFL
university instructors’ barriers to teaching the speaking skill?'', the researcher calculated the means
and the standard deviations for instructors' responses. Table (1) illustrates the means and standard
deviations of instructors' responses to the questionnaire items.
Table (1)
Means and Standard Deviations of Causes of Saudi EFL University Instructors’ Barriers to
Teaching the Speaking Skill
No.
7
1

3
4

2
8

6

12
5

Statement

N

Total

Mean

Standard Rank
Deviation
1.06
1

Students tend to switch to L1
during group work or pair work.
Students lack the vocabulary
needed to express themselves
orally.
Students are afraid of making
mistakes when they speak.
Students do not practice the
speaking skill because they lack
self-confidence.
Students lack motivation to
practice the speaking skill.
Textbooks do not encourage
students to practice the speaking
skill outside the classroom.
Students are reluctant to speak
because they cannot form correct
grammatical sentences.
The allotted time for speaking
activities is insufficient.
Students are not encouraged to
speak since they are not tested on
the speaking skill.

132

534

4.05

132

490

3.71

1.09

2

132

482

3.65

1.24

3

132

457

3.46

1.11

4

132

453

3.43

1.26

5

132

442

3.35

1.19

6

132

433

3.28

1.09

7

132

405

3.07

1.11

8

132

402

3.05

1.20

9

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

11

10
9

Textbooks speaking activities do
not meet students’ needs and
interests.
Textbooks speaking activities are
insufficient.
Textbooks speaking activities are
not motivating.

34

132

398

3.02

1.13

10

132

397

3.01

1.16

11

132

390

2.95

1.14

12

Table (1) indicates that students’ use of L1 during group work or pair work is the most
important cause for Saudi EFL university instructors’ barriers to teaching the speaking skill. This
result is drawn from statement number 7 “Students tend to switch to L1 during group work or pair
work.” which is ranked first and has got the highest mean 4.05. Moreover, this result is highly
supported by the instructors’ opinions during the interviews. One of the instructors mentioned, “It
irritates me when students switch to L1 in group work, and it irritates me more how much time I
take from class to go over those groups and urge them to speak in English.” Another teacher stated,
“As a Saudi teacher teaching Saudi students EFL, it’s a really tough job because students tend to
use L1 whenever they approach me, knowing that I understand Arabic perfectly well. During class
speaking activities, some students tend to feel shy from their colleagues (Peer Pressure) and remain
silent; however, they speak nicely in my office.” Another instructor asserted, “Students need some
time to prepare for any speaking activity. If they are not given much time, they switch to L1 and
speak to each other and to me in L1.” In addition, through the researcher’s observation of speaking
lectures, the researcher noticed that most students chattered in Arabic during pair work or group
work.
The other important barriers to teaching the speaking skill are lack the vocabulary, fear of
making mistakes, and lack of self-confidence. Those results are drawn from statements 1, 3, and 4
“Students lack the vocabulary needed to express themselves orally.”, “Students are afraid of

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

35

making mistakes when they speak.”, “Students do not practice the speaking skill because they lack
self-confidence.” which are ranked the second, the third, and the fourth; they have got very high
means 3.71, 3.65, and 3.46 respectively. These results were emphasized by the EFL instructors
during the interviews. One instructor stated, “You would think that in a preparatory level students
are mature and understand the challenge of learning EFL, but that’s not the case, they still neglect
the importance of learning and speaking EFL. Believe it or not, students still laugh at their peers
when they commit mistakes, and it is my duty to stop such negative effects which certainly causes
them the lack of confidence and fear of committing mistakes.” During the researcher’s observation,
the researcher noticed that lack of words impeded students from expressing themselves orally. If
they did not know a certain word, they asked the instructor in L1 for the word they wanted to say.
Another important cause to the barriers of teaching the speaking skill is the lack of
motivation. This finding is taken from statement number 2 “Students lack motivation to practice
the speaking skill.” which is ranked the fifth and has the high mean 3.43. In addition, Table (1)
revealed that EFL instructors do not agree that textbooks speaking activities are insufficient or not
motivating, so they are not considered barriers to teaching the speaking skill. In other words, they
believe that textbooks speaking activities are sufficient and motivating. Those two results are
reflected in statements 10 and 9 “Textbooks speaking activities are insufficient.” “Textbooks
speaking activities are not motivating.” which are ranked the ninth and the tenth with the lowest
means of 3.01 and 2.95 respectively. Moreover, those findings are supported by the instructors in
the interviews. One of the instructors mentioned that in all her long years of teaching, she has seen
so many textbooks and has seen how much effort has been put to make the curriculum appealing
and motivating for students and that the problem does not lie in textbooks.

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

36

4.3.2 Results of the Study Concerning the Solutions to Saudi EFL University Instructors’
Barriers to Teaching the Speaking Skill
To answer the second question of this study, “What are the solutions of Saudi EFL
university instructors’ barriers to teaching the speaking skill?'', the researcher calculated the means
and the standard deviations for instructors' responses. Table (2) illustrates the means and standard
deviations of instructors' responses to the questionnaire items associated to the second part.
Table (2)
Means and Standard Deviations of Solutions of Saudi EFL University Instructors’ Barriers
to Teaching the Speaking Skill
No.
Statement
N
Total Mean
Standard
Rank
Deviation
4
Instructors should encourage
132
557
4.22
1.10
1
students to establish self-confidence
and speak without fear.
3
Instructors should be friendly and
132
552
4.18
1.05
2.5
gentle in correcting students’ English
speaking mistakes.
9
Textbooks speaking activities should 132
552
4.18
1.02
2.5
meet students’ needs and interests.
2
Instructors should adopt recent
132
547
4.14
1.01
4
stimulating techniques to enhance
students’ motivation to practice
speaking such as role play,
provocative questions, group work,
pictorial stories, transfer activities,
retelling stories, etc.
8
Textbooks should include adequate
132
542
4.11
0.99
5
stimulating speaking activities which
increase students’ motivation.
5
Textbooks and instructors’ tests
132
532
4.03
1.10
6
should examine students’ speaking
skill.
11 Speaking classes should have a small 132
530
4.02
1.32
7
number of students.
12 Textbooks should include pictures
132
529
4.01
1.09
8
which stimulate speaking.

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

7

6
10
1

Textbooks should guide students to
access online activities to practice the
English speaking skill outside the
classroom.
Students should not use L1 in
speaking group work and pair work.
The allotted time for speaking
activities should be increased.
Students should develop their own
strategies of learning and using
English vocabulary items orally.

37

132

528

4.00

1.08

9

132

505

3.83

1.12

10.5

132

505

3.83

1.08

10.5

132

485

3.67

1.17

12

Table (2) reveals that the first solution for Saudi EFL university instructors’ barriers to
teaching the speaking skill is enhancing students’ self-confidence to speak without fear. This result
is taken from statement number 4 “Instructors should encourage students to establish selfconfidence and speak without fear.” which has the highest mean (4.22) and is ranked the first. This
result is supported in the interviews because two instructors indicated that they are obligated to
help build students self-confidence and reduce their fear of speaking.
Moreover, the other most important solutions are correcting students’ mistakes kindly,
meeting students’ needs in speaking textbooks, and adopting recent motivating techniques. Those
results are drawn in statements number 3, 9, and 2 “Instructors should be friendly and gentle in
correcting students’ English speaking mistakes.”, “Textbooks speaking activities should meet
students’ needs and interests.”, “Instructors should adopt recent stimulating techniques to enhance
students’ motivation to practice speaking such as role play, provocative questions, group work,
pictorial stories, transfer activities, retelling stories, etc.” which have very high means (4.18, 4.18,
4.14) and are ranked the second and the fourth respectively; items three and nine have got the same
mean and the same rank. In fact, those results are backed by classroom observations. The
researcher observed instructors’ tolerance of students’ mistakes, their satisfaction of textbooks

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

38

activities, and employment of recent techniques. Instructors assured the researcher that they
tolerated students’ mistakes to create positive attitudes among students towards learning English.
In addition, four interviewed instructors expressed that the textbooks should be constantly renewed
to keep track in meeting students’ needs and interests from a generation to another.
Furthermore, the other two important solutions to teaching the speaking skill are increasing
the motivating speaking activities in textbooks in addition to testing the speaking skill. Those two
results are deduced from statements 8 and 5 “Textbooks should include adequate stimulating
speaking activities which increase students’ motivation.” “Textbooks and instructors’ tests should
examine students’ speaking skill.” which ranked fifth and sixth and have high means 4.11 and 4.03.
4.4 Summary of the Results
The findings of the study revealed that the causes of Saudi EFL university instructors’
barriers to teaching the speaking skill in the preparatory year were as follows: students’ use of L1
during group work or pair work, lack of vocabulary, fear of making mistakes, lack of selfconfidence, and lack of motivation. Furthermore, the study results advocated the following
solutions to Saudi EFL university instructors’ barriers to teaching the speaking skill: enhancing
students’ self-confidence to speak without fear, correcting students’ mistakes kindly, meeting
students’ needs in speaking textbooks, and adopting recent motivating techniques, increasing the
motivating speaking activities in textbooks, and testing the speaking skill.

Chapter V
Discussion, Conclusions, and Recommendations

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

39

This chapter discusses the research findings, analyzes the results according to the
literature review, offers conclusions from these results, and provides some recommendations
for educators and future research based on what is presented and analyzed so far.
5.1 Discussion
TEFL is a great responsibility and especially teaching speaking. EFL instructors face
difficulties and problems in their teaching process. The purpose of this research was to
investigate the causes of and the solutions to Saudi EFL university instructors’ barriers to
teaching the speaking skill. The questions of the study were the following:
1. What are the causes of Saudi EFL university instructors’ barriers to teaching the speaking
skill?
2. What are the solutions to Saudi EFL university instructors’ barriers to teaching the
speaking skill?
After interpreting the data, the researcher summarized the most obvious problems
associated with teaching EFL speaking skills and related the findings to the previous ones. The
collected data were discussed in accordance with the questions of the study. In the investigation
of EFL university instructors’ barriers to teaching the speaking skill, the study highlighted the
following. First, it was found that the paramount obstacle to teaching EFL speaking skills was
that students switched to L1 during group or pair work. Instructors found it disturbing and time
consuming in the process of teaching the speaking skills. In fact, it is the instructor’s role to
encourage students to use FL in group work or pair work. The instructor should not stay at the
front of the class; he should move around the groups to listen and offer help. Second, similar to
Farooqui (2007) and Boettcher (2013), learners’ lack of vocabulary needed to express themselves
orally, was a major cause of Saudi EFL university instructors’ barriers to teaching the speaking

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

40

skill. Learning vocabulary supports learners and teachers together. Third, the fact that students
were afraid of making mistakes and did not practice the speaking skill due to the lack of selfconfidence was in agreement with Thapalia (2006), Torky (2006), Yan (2007, cited in Al-Sagri,
2014), and Al Mineeai. Fourth, the finding of the study that an important barrier to teaching the
speaking skill was lack of motivation is in consistent with Torky (2006), Farooqui (2007), Lary,
Lynch, Cali (2008), Al-Ma’shy (2011). It is the instructors’ responsibility to enhance students’
motivation through employing recent engaging and effective techniques. Fifth, the results of this
study also confirmed the findings of Wallace, Stariha, Walberg (2004), Kannan (2009), Torky
(2006), Febriyanti (2011) and Gan’s (2012) that lots of practice must be given to EFL learners
in speaking skill classes at regular intervals. Finally, the findings related to the barriers of
overcrowded classes and limited teaching hours are in accordance with Torky (2006), Lary,
Lynch, Cali (2008), Al-Ma’shy (2011), Chang (2011), and El-Fiki (2012).
5.2 Conclusion
This study was carried out in order to provide some insights and hopefully clarifies the
problems of Saudi EFL university instructors’ barriers to teaching the speaking skills. The
researcher hopes that the participants of the study can be seen as a representative presentation
of all Saudi EFL university instructors although the data source of this study was restricted to
Al-Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic University, Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman
University, and King Saud University in the city of Riyadh. One can note that from the
instructors’ discussions in the interview and in class observation the problems they face and
come out with suggestions in reference to solutions. Some of the participants gave some
valuable suggestions.

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

41

Instructors realize the importance and significance of teaching the speaking skills, but
they lack the variety in the teaching methods. Most speaking classes are teacher-centered and
it would do a great deal of improvement if instructors used other methods like the
Communicative Approach. In addition, teacher preparation programs can help in reducing
such barriers. As mentioned earlier, the most important barrier that instructors faced was when
students switched to L1. An instructor suggested a solution in one of the interviews and stated,
“I teach speaking for level (A) students in the preparatory year. I understand students’ hesitance
in speaking. But for higher levels, and because of their use of L1 excessively, I would
recommend separating speaking skills to be taught or practiced with a trained native speaker.”
Moreover, teacher training will assist in providing ways to establish students’ self-confidence
and speak without fear. It will also help in providing new techniques to enhance and raise
students’ motivation. In addition, textbooks should constantly be changed to meet students’
needs and interest in every level. Moreover, and due to the short time allotted in speaking
classes, students should be given a better chance to speak, either by elongating the class time,
or at least by reducing the number of students in class. Encouraging students to speak outside
classes in English and creating an authentic environment to practice speaking will help increase
students’ vocabulary and discourse. Furthermore, correcting mistakes in front of others has a
negative effect on learners’ motivation to speak; therefore, instructors should develop new
techniques in correcting students’ errors gently. Computer assisted language learning has gone
a long way and is proven to improve speaking skills. Instructors should guide students to such
programs, where they have one-to-one speaking classes that enrich students with motivation,
vocabulary, and practice.

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

42

To conclude, hard work, patience, commitment, teacher training programs, motivated
and self-confident students, appropriate equipment, and stimulating speaking activities in
textbooks, will undeniably reduce the barriers to teaching the speaking skills.
5.3 Recommendations for Future Research
1. Involving private universities in the future is recommended to compare its results with the
present study’s result.
2. Conducting an empirical study on the proposed solutions to the barriers of teaching speaking
is needed.
3. Studying the most recent techniques in terms of teaching speaking and conducting
experiments to verify their efficiency in improving the ability to teach speaking EFL.

References

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

43

Al-Ahaydib, M. E., (1986). Teaching English as a Foreign Language in the Intermediate and
Secondary Schools of Saudi Arabia: Diagnostic study. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation,
University of Kansas.
Al-Jadidi, H. (2009). Teaching English as a Foreign Language in Oman: An Exploration of
English Language Teaching Pedagogy in Tertiary Education, Unpublished Ph.D.
Dissertation, Victoria University, Australia.
Al-Ma’shy, A.A. (2011). Causes of EFL Speaking Weakness in Saudi Secondary
Schools in Al-Gunfuthah City. Unpublished M.A. Thesis, King Saud
University.
Al Mineeai, A. (2013) Problems of Speaking Faced by Female EFL Students in Bisha
Secondary Schools from Teachers' and Students' Perspectives. Unpublished M.A. Thesis,
Al- Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic University.
Al-Saqri, S. (2014) EFL Saudi Secondary School Students' Oral Deficiency: Causes and
Solutions, Unpublished M.A. Thesis, Al-Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic University.
Al-Twairish, H. (2009) The Effect of the Communicative Approach on the Listening and Speaking
Skills of Saudi Secondary School Students. Unpublished M.A. Thesis, King Saud
University.
Ansari, A. A. (2012). Teaching of English to Arab Students: Problems and Remedies.
International Research Journals Educational Research. Vol, 3, No.6. Pp.519-524.
Bailey, K. (2006). Issues in Teaching Speaking Skills to Adult ESOL Learners. The Annual Review
of Adult Learning and Literacy, Vol. 6. Pp. 113-163.
Retrieved from
http://www.ncsall.net/fileadmin/resources/ann_rev/comings_ch5.pdf
Baker, J., & Westrup, H. (2003). Essential speaking skills. Continuum.
Boettcher, J. (2013). Literature Review: English Language Learners and Academic Vocabulary.
Unpublished M.A. Thesis, Hamiline University, Minnesota.
Boonkit, K. (2010). Enhancing the Development of the Speaking Skills for NonNative Speakers of English. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, Vol. 2,
No. 2. Pp. 1305-1309.
Brown, G. and Yule, G. (1983) Discourse Analysis. Cambridge University Press.

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

44

Chang, M. (2011). Factors Affecting the Implementation of Communicative Language Teaching
in Taiwanese College English Classes, English Language Teaching, Vol.4, No.2. Pp.3-12.
Comings, J., Garner, B., & Smith, C. (2006). Review of Adult Learning and Literacy, Volume 6:
Connecting Research, Policy, and Practice (Vol. 6). New Jersey: L. Erlbaum Associates.
El-Fiki, H. (2012). Teaching English as a Foreign Language and Using English as a Medium of
Instruction in Egypt: Teachers’ Perceptions of the Teaching Approaches and Sources of
Change. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Toronto.
Erkaya, O. (2013) Factors That Motivate Turkish Teachers. International Journal of Research
Studies in Language Learning, Vol. 2. No. 2. Pp. 49-61.
Farooqui, S. (2007). Developing Speaking Skills of Adult Learners in Private Universities in
Bangladesh: Problems and Solutions, Australian Journal of Adult Learning, Vol.47, No.1.
Pp. 94-110.
Febriyanti, E. R. (2011) Teaching Speaking of English as a Foreign Language: Problems and
Solutions. Jurnal Bahasa, Sastra, dan Pembelajarannya. Vol. 1, No. 2.
Gan, Z. (2012). Understanding L2 Speaking Problems: Implications for ESL Curriculum
Development in a Teacher Training Institution in Hong Kong, Australian Journal of
Teacher Education, Vol.37, No. 1. Pp. 43-59.
Kannan, R.( 2009) Difficulties in Learning English as a Second Language, ESP World.
Vol.8, No.5.
Kanwal, W .& khurshid, F. (2012) University Students' Difficulties in Learning English
Language skills. Language in India. Vol.12, No. 2. Pp. 327-337.
Larry, M.& Lynch & Cali, (2008) Critical Problems in English Language Teaching and Learning
and What to Do About Them. Becoming a Better EFL Teacher. Retrieved from
http://bettereflteacher.blogspot.com/2008/02/three-critical-problems-in-english.html
Nunan, D. (1989) Designing tasks for the communicative classroom. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Nunan, D. (2003). Practical English Language Teaching. New York: McGrawHill/Contemporary.
Rodden, N. (2010). An Investigation into the Barriers Associated with ICT Use in the Youthreach
Classroom: A Case Study of a Centre for Education in the North West. Unpublished M.A
Thesis, University of Limerick.

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

Samantray,
K.
(2009).Teaching
speaking.
Yemen
Times.
http://bettereflteacher.blogspot.com/2009/05/teaching-speaking.html

45

Retrieved

from

Sayed, M. M. (2005). The Effect of Using a Multiple Intelligences–based Training Program
on Developing English Majors Oral Communication Skills. Unpublished M.A. Thesis,
Assiut University, Egypt.
Skehan, P., & Foster, P. (1999). The Influence of Task Structure and Processing Conditions on
Narrative Retellings. Language Learning, Vol.49, No. 1. Pp. 93-120.
Thapalia, B. (2006) Factors and Problems of Teaching English as a Second Language in Rural
Areas in Nepal. Retrieved from
http://neltachoutari.wordpress.com.factors-and-problems-of-teaching-english-as-asecond-language-in-rural-areas-in-nepal/
Torky, S. (2006). The Effectiveness of a Task-Based Instruction Program in Developing the
English Language Speaking Skills of Secondary Stage Students. Unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Ain Shams University.
Wallace, Stariha, and Walberg (2004) Teaching Speaking and Writing. International Academy
of Education. Retrieved from
http://www.iaoed.org/files/prac14e.pdf
Wang, Z. (2014). Developing Accuracy and Fluency in Spoken English of Chinese
EFL Learners. English Language Teaching ELT, Vol. 7, No. 2. Pp. 110-118.
Yuan, F., & Ellis, R. (2003). The Effects of Pre-task Planning and On-line Planning on Fluency,
Complexity and Accuracy in L2 Monologic Oral Production. Applied Linguistics, Vol. 24,
No. 1. Pp. 1-27.
Zaremba, A. J. (2006). Speaking Professionally. Canada: Thompson South-Western.

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

46

APPENDIX 1

Instructors’ Questionnaire

Saudi EFL University Instructors' Barriers to Teaching the Speaking Skill: Causes and
Solutions
Dear Instructor,
This questionnaire is an important part of an M.A. study which seeks to investigate Saudi
EFL instructors’ barriers to teaching the speaking skill. It also attempts to offer solutions to those
problems from the instructors’ perspectives. Your participation is highly appreciated. The answers
will remain confidential and will be only used for academic purposes. Please, respond to each
statement and by putting a check (√) in the space that represents your opinion.

The researcher
Noura Al Hassan
nora7sn@hotmail.com

Part One: Causes of Saudi EFL University Instructors’ Barriers to Teaching the Speaking Skill
1.
Students lack the vocabulary needed to express themselves orally.
2.
Students lack motivation to practice the speaking skill.
3.
Students are afraid of making mistakes when they speak.
4.
Students do not practice the speaking skill because they lack self-confidence.
5.
Students are not encouraged to speak since they are not tested on the speaking
skill.
6.
Students are reluctant to speak because they cannot form correct grammatical
sentences.
7.
Students tend to switch to L1 during group work or pair work.
8.
Textbooks do not encourage students to practice the speaking skill outside the
classroom.
9.
Textbooks speaking activities are not motivating.
10. Textbooks speaking activities are insufficient.
11. Textbooks speaking activities do not meet students’ needs and interests.
12. The allotted time for speaking activities is insufficient.
Part Two: Solutions of Saudi EFL University Instructors’ Barriers to Teaching the Speaking Skill
1.
Students should develop their own strategies of learning and using English
vocabulary items orally.
2.
Instructors should adopt recent stimulating techniques to enhance students’
motivation to practice speaking such as role play, provocative questions, group
work, pictorial stories, transfer activities, retelling stories, etc.
3.
Instructors should be friendly and gentle in correcting students’ English
speaking mistakes.
4.
Instructors should encourage students to establish self-confidence and speak
without fear.
5.
Textbooks and Instructors’ tests should examine students’ speaking skill.
6.
Students should not use L1 in speaking group work and pair work.
7.
Textbooks should guide students to access online activities to practice the
English speaking skill outside the classroom.
8.
Textbooks should include adequate stimulating speaking activities which
increase students’ motivation.
9.
Textbooks speaking activities should meet students’ needs and interests.
10. The allotted time for speaking activities should be increased.
11. Speaking classes should have a small number of students.
12. Textbooks should include pictures which stimulate speaking.

Thank You

Strongly
Agree

Agree

Neutral

Statement

Disagree

No.

47

Strongly
disagree

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

48

APPENDIX 2

Interview Questions

1. Do you think English speaking skill is important? Why?

2. What are the challenges you encounter in teaching the speaking skill?

3. What are your suggestions to overcome those challenges?
4. Do you think textbooks meet students’ speaking needs and interests?
5. How can an EFL instructor enhance students’ motivation to improve their English speaking

skill?

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

APPENDIX 3

Questionnaire Raters
1. Dr. Hussein Rabab’ah
2. Dr. Azmi Adel
3. Dr. Yasser Gomaa
4. Dr. Omar Na'eem
5. Dr. Abdulaziz Al-Hassan
6. Dr. Alsadeq Abshah
7. Dr. Mustafa Bin Kharafah
8. Dr. Ahmad Brier
9. Dr. Faisal Alasiri
10. Dr. Ghazi Alotaibi

49

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

APPENDIX 4
Dean’s Letter to Universities

APPENDIX 5

50

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

KSU Preparatory Year Dean’s Approval Letter

APPENDIX 6

51

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

52

Frequencies and Percentages of the Data of the Study
Number (1): Strongly Disagree
Number (2): Disagree
Number (3): Neutral
Number (4): Agree
Number (5): Strongly Agree
Causes of Saudi EFL University Instructors’ Barriers to Teaching the Speaking Skill
1

Frequency

Percentage

Frequency

Percentage

Frequency

Percentage

5

Percentage

10
11
12

4

Frequency

6
7
8
9

3

Percentage

1
2
3
4
5

2

Frequency

No.

7
10
13
7
14

12
27
14
22
36

9.1
20.5
10.6
16.7
27.3

24
21
12
27
25

18.2
15.9
9.1
20.5
18.9

58
44
60
55
44

43.9
33.3
45.5
41.7
33.3

31
30
33
21
13

23.5
22.7
25
15.9
9.8

8
3
7
9

5.3
7.6
9.8
5.3
10.
6
6.1
2.3
5.3
6.8

26
10
30
47

19.7
7.6
22.7
35.6

34
23
32
31

25.8
17.4
24.2
23.5

49
38
36
31

37.1
28.8
27.3
23.5

15
58
27
14

12
10
7

9.1
7.6
5.3

38
41
41

28.8
31.1
31.1

32
30
35

24.2
22.7
26.5

37
39
34

28
29.5
25.8

13
12
15

11.4
43.9
20.5
10.1
6
9.8
9.1
11.4

BARRIERS AND SOLUTIONS TO TEACHING SPEAKING

53

No.

1
Frequency

Percentage

Frequency

Percentage

Frequency

Solutions for Saudi EFL University Instructors’ Barriers to Teaching the Speaking Skill

1

11

8.3

12

9.1

16

2
3
4
5

4
6
6
8

3
4.5
4.5
6.1

9
6
8
5

6.8
4.5
6.1
3.8

8
8
8
14

6

4

3

16

12.1

24

7

8

6.1

4

3

17

8
9
10

5
6
6

3.8
4.5
4.5

5
4
10

3.8
3
7.6

13
10
24

11
12

10
6

7.6
4.5

14
10

10.6
7.6

11
11

Frequency

Percentage

5
Percentage

4
Frequency

3
Percentage

2

12.
1
6.1
6.1
6.1
10.
6
18.
2
12.
9
9.8
7.6
18.
2
8.3
8.3

63

47.7

30

22.7

54
50
39
53

40.9
37.9
29.5
40.2

57
62
71
52

43.2
47
53.8
39.4

43

32.6

45

34.1

54

40.9

49

37.1

57
52
53

43.2
39.4
40.2

52
60
39

39.4
45.5
29.5

26
55

19.7
41.7

71
50

53.8
37.9

