Katharina Völker, PhD
katharina.voelker@uni-tuebingen.de
Review
Islam is Mercy: Trajectories of a Modern Religion
[Islam ist Barmherzigkeit - Grundzüge einer modernen Religion]
by Mouhanad Khorchide
Freiburg: Herder, 2012, 220 pp.,
18,99 € (hardcopy),
ISBN 978-3-451-30572-6
(review 2nd edition 2013)
Recently, Mouhanad Khorchide, Professor for the pedagogy of Islamic religion
at University Münster sparked considerable controversy amongst certain
representatives of Muslim communities in Germany. The book takes an outlook
onto a 'theology of mercy’ (Barmherzigkeitstheologie) that considers mercy and
love as essential for a relationship with God. Critics claim such 'Western' drafts
are muffled versions of Islam, 'fabricated' to boost the social gentrification
process of Muslims' statuses within non-Muslim majority countries. But
Khorchide's publication Islam is Mercy -Trajectories of a Modern Religion aims
higher and hopes to deliver a “chance to get to know a new Islam” (27). And,
as with many attempts of reforming established traditions, the author exposes
his ideas to the accusation of being a misrepresentation. However, Khorchide
nowhere claims his ‘concept’ of Islam to be finalised. Furthermore, he honestly
declares his approach to be a personal one, namely impressed by his life in
Islamic countries.
2 Who and how is God? In the Quran the most mentioned attribute of the
Divine is ‘mercifulness’. Seeking to be close to humanhood (and not only to
Muslimhood) (35), God enters a relationship with creation through revelation,
inspiration, and sending prophets. The dialogical character of this relationship
does not allow for a black pedagogy (40-44), forcing Muslims to obey without
independent reasoning (cf. 74). God's pedagogy is patient and uses measures
accordant to a person’s phase of life (63). All measures operate within the
spectrum of God's mercy (44-47). For Khorchide follows, that hell is a place of
transformation where people receive once more the chance to return to God
(47-56).
3 God's Relationship to Humankind and the World. Khorchide describes creation
to be a (necessary?) consequence of God's overflowing mercy. At the same
time, and this seems not entirely compatible, God wilfully instructs creation.
Khorchide's primary argument in this chapter explains how God does not wish
to create slaves (76, cf. 104) but co-lovers. That the author describes this ‘wish’
of the Divine as “God searches for co-lovers” (72), and God is “in search for
itself” (70) could make these and other passages of the book difficult to
comprehend: since when is God 'seeking' and hence not self-sufficient?
Probably aware of this potential controversy, Khorchide declares that God does
not 'need' humankind (76). At some point in this chapter the reader suspects
the author to allude to Hegel's construct of the human mind's role within God's
self-knowledge.

4 Humanity in Islam. Being Muslim means accepting God's love, becoming a
medium of God's love and creation (85, 87, cf. 93). Henceforth, Islam is defined
as the acceptance of God's love and mercy. The acceptance of God's love is not
inevitably determined by the belief in God (88).
5-6 God's Self-Revelation in Islam and Service for God is Service for Humanity .
God's love and revelation can be received by all and all humans can initiate
the dialogical relationship, e.g. by reciting the Quran (110). Having experienced
God's love, results in merciful human behaviour (112) which again assists God
in becoming present (111).
7 Sharia as Judicial System Opposes Islam. Referring to Kant, Khorchide
equates 'being good' with 'being free' (117). To achieve freedom is part of the
inner perfection of humanity (116) and any judicial system solely promoting
public order, does not advance the accomplishing of freedom. Khorchide
accepts historical influences on the generation of the Quran (119ff) and points
out the fewness of concrete legal instructions in the text. With sympathy he
mentions the historical contextualization as practised by the Ankara
Theological School (123) and Nasr Hamid Abu Zayd. Similar to Abu Zayd,
Khorchide establishes the difference between theological (universal/timeless)
and concrete context-related Quranic content. Some regulation principles are
universal: e.g. justice and equality (135f). He also advances the strategy of
distilling the 'intention' (137, 140) or 'essence' (157) of the Quran. A
contemporary Quran hermeneutics reads the contingent Quran content in the
light of the universal and will establish universal principles such as justice,
equality, freedom and social responsibility. Any judicial system supporting
those principles is closer to Islam than any other system called 'Islamic' (155).
8 Humanistic Quran Hermeneutics. The Quran is a book of spirituality (160)
leading the human soul accordingly into communion with God. God's mercy
and love is the core principle of a humanistic hermeneutics (167). In this
chapter Khorchide applies the hermeneutic principles, as also mentions in
chapter 7, to several controversial Quranic passages (e.g. regarding the
position and rights of women and non-Muslims). His reading is familiar from
works by Fazlur Rahman and Nasr Hamid Abu Zayd.
The chapter contains few unsupported generalizations like 'given the
historical context in the past, following slightest accusations, women were
either killed or beaten.' Khorchide also presents a rather extended critique of
Felix Körner's account of Islam's theological attitude towards non-Muslims (191195). Yet, it is not explicated wherefore Körner is relevant for this discussion.
The final reflections in chapter 9 (Islam as deliverer of the People) and 10
(Demands from contemporary Islamic theology) refer to God's gift of reason
and freedom to humanity. The mind of humanity can only be delivered through
the love and mercy of God (199). Both, Muhammad's biography and the Quran
contain evidence of the potentiality of this spiritual deliverance (201f). Selected
historical events help demonstrate how the core message of Islam became
high-jacked by intrigue, power-struggles and the politicization of religion (20512). Khorchide deems the 'Arab Spring' as symptomatic for the rebellion
against the misuse of religion by political elites. The author concludes that a
contemporary Islamic theology centres around the human individual and
asserts how authentic faith is only possible in the frame of 'true freedom'

(214f).
Khorchide's outlook onto a humanistic (perhaps even 'liberation'-) theology is a
crucial contribution to understanding the complexity of this religion. His ideas
about Islam from within the Muslim circle attempt to transform and renew
concepts of the God-creation relationship. Important, yet not unique, this book
offers ideas similarly expressed by intellectuals like Amina Wadud, Farid Esack,
Nasr Hamid Abu Zayd, Fazlur Rahman, and Muhammad Arkoun. Religion
remains meaningful only when it manages to keep up with the social
transformations affecting its members. Religion essentially needs to be
constantly rethought, just as Khorchide attempts to achieve with this book. His
thoughts are not without ambiguities and can certainly be challenged on
several levels. But in the end, this is what the author calls for with his support
for spiritual freedom and independent reasoning. This work makes an intriguing
read for all who are interested in alternative streams of Islamic theology,
specifically those trends emerging in the European university landscapes.
There exists no justification for denouncing and rejecting these drafts as 'only
products of the West'. Most Muslim reform scholars originate or have lived a
considerable time in Muslim societies. And while their voices often become first
heard in non-Muslim majority countries, some of their ideas have already
travelled to Muslim countries and have met the pleased ears and open hearts
of the next generation of believers. An English version of this book could surely
extend its readership.

