"x"
"1" "The role of climatic and environmental factors in the Hunnic phenomenon in south-east Europe"
"2" "Abstract"
"3" "The causes of the Hunnic  ‘ phenomenon’ in south-east Europe and its impact on the populations of the late Roman provinces may be found in a complex web of climatic and environmental affordances, economic responses and resulting changes to social organisation. Multiple lines of evidence suggest that there was indeed an influx of people from regions north of the Black Sea or further east in the fourth century CE, but there is no indication of a large-scale migration from central Asia. It is possible that the climatic downturn and increased aridity in the 430s to 450s disrupted both the economic organisation of the incomers and that of the local Romanised population, requiring both to adopt new subsistence strategies. Such shared  subsistence strategies  may have  engender ed  a sense of a shared identity.   R ather than a clash of cultures, we see evidence of close integration and adaptive strategies to ancestral and newly encountered life-ways."
"4" "Keywords : Huns, identity, subsistence, climatic downturn"
"5" "Dr Susanne Hakenbeck, Department of Archaeology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3DZ; Email: seh43@cam.ac.uk"
"6" "Introduction"
"7" "The Hunnic incursions into eastern and central Europe in the fourth and fifth centuries have historically been considered one of the key factors in bringing the Roman empire to an end ,   being the initial crisis that set in motion the so-called Great Migrations of ‘barbarian’ tribes .  S cholarship on the Huns ha s frequently  posited  them  in a fundamental dichotomy   between civilisation and barbarism, where the  very  fact that they were mobile and did not engage in agriculture contributed to their apparently barbarian nature. Relationships between nomadic-pastoral populations and empires are frequently conceptualised as violent and  unstable .  In eastern-central Europe ,  the  Hun nic migrations are one event in a sequence of incursions of nomadic populations; they were  preceded by Scythians and followed by Avars  and  Magyars all the way to the Mongol s . To the far east of the steppes ,  there  we re  also  complex  relationships between mobile groups and the Chinese empire ."
"8" "In each case  the  narrative  is  of violence and sometimes conquest, and of raids for gold and other luxury goods, apparently motivate d  by an ‘infinite thirst for gold’ . However, the sources documenting  these events are written from the perspectives of the settled populations, often  by  members of the elite with little direct experience of the peoples and events they described.  The causes  of   the Hunnic ‘phenomenon’– their apparently sudden appearance, rapid military and political impact and sudden disappearance –  and their impact on populations in the late Roman Danube frontier provinces  are still poorly understood.  Drawing on multiple strands of evidence – historical, archaeological and environmental – this chapter aims to advance an explanation."
"9" "Historical  accounts  of the Huns"
"10" "According to  written  sources ,  the Huns  came from  to the  east of the Sea of Azov, between the Volga and Don rivers . Moving westwards, they are  thought  to have crossed the  Volga  in around 370  CE ,  causing  the movement of Goths who resided there .  In the following fifty years the Huns are believed to have settled  on the Great Hungarian Plain , east of the Danube , at times reaching as far as the Rhine and southern Scandinavia, though this is speculative .  In the firs t  half of the  fifth century, various sources indicate that Hunnic warbands were active in within the Roman empire, sometimes  allied with  Roman forces, sometimes engaged in raiding, and capitalising on local instabilities .  From the 430s – Attila came to power in 434 – the Huns increasingly demanded gold payments  and then also the  evacuation of a strip of Roman territory along the Danube . In 451 Huns invaded France, resulting in the disastrous battle of the Catalaunian fields, and a year later they invaded northern Italy and sacked Aquileia. In 453,  Attila  died suddenly ,  choked to death  b y  blood from a nosebleed . This le d to internecine fights for supremacy among Attila’s sons, and in 454 they were defeated in battle at the river Nedao . By the 470s the Huns  were no longer a significant force ."
"11" "A number of historical sources tell us of the rapacious activities of the Huns , and of  their greed, violen ce and untrustworthiness.  N egative  descriptions  begin with Ammianus Marcellinus, a fourth-century military officer, who describes the Huns  thus :"
"12" "They all have compact, strong limbs and thick necks, and are so monstrously ugly and misshapen, that one might take them for two-legged beasts or for the stumps, rough-hewn into images, that are used in putting sides to bridges.   But although they have the form of men, however ugly, they are so hardy in their mode of life that they have no need of fire nor of savo u ry food, but eat the roots of wild plants and the half-raw flesh of any kind of animal whatever, which they put between their thighs and the backs of their horses, and thus warm it a little.  […]"
"13" "Later writers elaborated on this, with Jordanes describing Attila as ‘a man born into the world to shake the nations, the scourge of all lands, who in some way terrified all mankind by the dreadful rumo u rs noised abroad concerning him’ .  By their appearance and behaviour, the Huns  seemed   in every way opposed to Roman civilisation. This negative image was perpetuated in historical scholarship and has persisted in the popular imagination into the present day ."
"14" "Yet these descriptions of the Huns were largely not based on eye-witness accounts. A critical analysis of the textual sources reveals that  late Roman  writers drew on established conventions when describing nomadic groups, reaching back to Herodotus . Greek and Roman writers had long engaged with the peoples living beyond their frontiers in the creation of a universe that was Mediterranean-centric ,  both geographically and morally . Ammianus Marcellinus describes the Huns as less than human, because they do not engage in agriculture and do not live in permanent settlements , since t he pursuit of agriculture  was  central to Roman ordered existence. It was an economic necessity but also a sign of virtue .  Ancient ethnographic writings served  ‘ to other’ populations beyond the Roman empire ,  and there could be no greater ‘other’ than peoples constantly on the move and unwilling to farm the land."
"15" "Huns and Xiongnu: is there a link?"
"16" "The apparently alien nature of the Huns in central Europe is often linked to their a ssumed origins in central Asia, adding a racial dimension to their ‘othering’. A ncient ethnographic sources  we re vague about the homeland of the Huns prior to their engagement with the Roman empire, suggest ing  only a location  east of the Sea of Azov, between the Volga and Don rivers .  However, since the eighteenth century, the Huns have  often  been equated with the central Asian Xiongnu ,  a nomadic group mentioned in Chinese sources as being active in the eastern steppes from the first  century BCE to the third century CE . Since then there has been considerable  debate about the plausibility of this link , on the basis of  written , phonological  and  archaeological evidence ."
"17" "A rchaeological research  in the culture-historical tradition  aimed to identify  ethnic and tribal groups  by apparently characteristic items of material culture, usually from graves.  T he innumerable groups mentioned in written sources  in  late antiquity and the early medieval  period  were associated with particular jewellery styles or burial with weapons , and t he distribution of such artefacts  was  then  used to attempt  to track the groups’ movements."
"18" "While this approach   has been criticised extensively, both because it makes use of ahistorical concepts of ethnicity and because of its simplistic interpretations of material culture ,   it has nevertheless been  used to try to connect European Huns and Xiongnu through  archaeological evidence ."
"19" "Yet , t he Huns have defied even  conventional  attempts to pin them down. Early works recognised the heterogeneity of material culture derived from central Asia or the steppes north of the Black Sea . More recent research has increased the evidence but also the great variability of the material .  The most characteristic items ar e bronze mirrors and cauldrons,  as well as component parts of composite bows with very widely scattered find spots   (Fig.  1 ) .  Other items, such as narrow longswords, gold diadems and particular jewellery types,  have a more defined distribution north of the Sea of Azov and along the middle Volga .  None of these form a clear link with the archaeological evidence associated with the Xiongnu, whose burial practices and grave goods are quite different ."
"20" "Fig. 1:  An example of a ‘Hunnic’ cauldron, found in Törtel in Hungary in 1869 (photo by György Klösz , public domain )."
"21" "Another feature that is often cited as evidence for Huns is arti ficial skull  modification  ( Fig. 2 ) . This is a practice that is carried out in infancy when the bones of the skull are soft and  unfused. The skull is manipulated with bindings to flatten the frontal and elongate the  parietal bone. When the bones are fused ,  this shape remains a permanent feature of a person’s appearance.  The practice first occurred in Eurasia west of the Tian Shan mountains in the second century BC E , spreading westwards via the northern Black Sea region at the turn of the millennium and reaching central Europe by the fifth century  CE .  However, while the practice originates in central Asia, it  is not  typical for  the burial complexes of Mongolia that have been associated with Xiong n u .  In central Asia ,  burial of individuals with modified skulls was very diverse, and it cannot be associated with any distinct group.  Furthermore,  research has shown that skull modification spread more slowly than the rapid timeline of Hunnic appearance and disappearance. It can be considered to have become a local practice in the Carp athian basin, with ten to thirty  percent of individuals in some cemeteries having modified skulls ."
"22" "Fig. 2:  A modified skull of a child,  unknown provenance (photo by  author, Natural History Museum Budapest)"
"23" "While archaeological evidence does not support the notion of large-scale, rapid movements of people from central Asia into Europe in the early centuries of the first millennium CE, it nevertheless suggests extensive connectivity across Eurasia .  Belt sets, bronze mirrors, cauldrons, and occasionally silk, among other items,  indicate  enduring routes for long-distance communication and trade  between the Black Sea and Mongolia, and even as far northern China . Skull modification was also a part of this."
"24" "There is therefore no certain evidence that Huns originated as the Xiongnu in Mongolia and from there spread rapidly and as a coherent group into Europe. Based on existing historical and archaeological evidence, it is much more likely that the Huns mentioned by Ammianus Marcellinus were indeed an aggregation of people from  somewhere  north of the Black Sea."
"25" "Huns in the Carpathian basin"
"26" "In the Carpathian Basin t he various strands of  ‘Hun’ material culture  only  rarely occur together to form a coherent picture.  Some rich assemblages, such as at Pannonhalma  and Szeged-Nagyszékosós,  have been interpreted as  Hun  funerary sacrifices or cenotaphs , since there is no evidence of a body,  and have been linked to the  Hunnic  elites .  Similarities in  the depositional practice and material culture  can be found in  steppe  areas north of the Black Sea, the lo w er Danube and the mouth of the Dnepr , and there are few   Roman or Mediter ranean  influences  (Fig.  3 ) .  However , e lite burials of the period are often very ‘international’ and share commonalities across vast distances .  It is therefore problematic to consider these funerary sacrifices as  exclusively   typical of Hunnic practices."
"27" "Fig. 3: Late  fifth to early sixth century objects from  Kerch in  Crimea showing stylistic influences from both the stepp e  areas north of Crimea and the Mediterranean (Berthier-Delagarde Collection, British Museum, under a Creative Commons  Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International  (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0) license)"
"28" "There is no distinct material culture that would allow us to identify ordinary, lower-ranking Huns.  Cemeteries in the Pannonian provinces and beyond, to the north and east of the Danube, are characterised by heterogeneity  and a hybridisation of material culture and burial traditions . There is evidence of extra ordinary connectivity, linking the Black Sea, the Mediterranean and western Europe , and late classical  craft-working  traditions  are joined  with innovations from beyond the Roman frontier.  ‘ F oreign’ material culture and practices can therefore not simply be taken as evidence of migrations."
"29" "Equally, while there is evidence for destruction in fortifications and settlements in the eastern provinces of the Empire, for example, burning at the fort of Iatrus in Moesia , it is difficult to link this unequivocally to Hunnic attacks. Even the destruction at Aquileia, where historical accounts clearly indicate an attack by Hunnic forces in 452  CE , has recently been re-evaluated . It was recognised that every burnt layer was dated to the Hunnic attack, rather than through independent archaeological methods, thereby increasing the impression of complete destruction. This was likely the case at other sites too."
"30" "Archaeological evidence for Huns in Europe is ephemeral and difficult to interpret. There is no  evidence for a large-scale migration, or even invasion, from the Black Sea regions or further east. To understand  to what extent these people may have seen themselves as part of a group with a shared identity, we have to shift our focus from a fixation on artefacts as ethnic signifiers to other potential markers  of group cohesion."
"31" "Economic practice and identity"
"32" "Since the first millennium BC E , written sources have divided the pastoral nomadic groups of central Asia and eastern Europe into a multitude of named tribal groupings. However ,  it is questionable whether these named groups constituted rigid ethnic divisions. They may or may not have had a sense of a shared ethnic identity or common descent. More likely, these pastoral populations formed confederations based on a shared economy and lifestyle. Moving beyond approaches that focus  exclusively on material culture, it may be more productive to consider peoples’ practices and habits when attempting to understand the causes of the rapid appearance and impact of the Huns in the Pannonian basin. In the absence of any written information about how Huns and other nomadic-pastoralist  groups conceptualised their group identity, it is therefore more fruitful to approach them through their subsistence  economy ."
"33" "Anthropological and archaeological studies of ethnicity have emphasised the importance of  praxis  in the generation of group distinctions ,  and there are ethnographic examples of groups identifying primarily through their social or economic  habitus . More generally,  Rogers  Brubaker has drawn attention to the organisational and institutional frameworks that facilitate the aggregation of ethnic groups ."
"34" "Isotope analysis provides information about peoples’ diets and the extent to which they were mobile, and, by extension, an insight into their subsistence practices. Archaeological evidence, in particular from burials, allows us to study habit s  that may engender group identity. Together, these strands of evidence enable us to reconstruct the circumstances of the lives of individuals in considerable detail and to situate them within the wider archaeological and historical context of frontier relationships in the fifth-century."
"35" "Ethnographic and archaeological evidence from central Asia indicates that mobile animal herders consumed more meat and milk than farming populations, and they also had a preference for millet (Panicum milliacaeum) over other grains. The subsistence strategies of nomadic-pastoralists result in patterns of isotopic data that can be quite different from those of agricultural populations .  Pastoralists  frequently  had  elevated δ 15 N and δ 13 C values compared to those of farmers."
"36" "To test whether there was a shift in diet and mobility that may be linked to nomadic pastoralists during the Hunnic period along the middle Danube, a recent study analysed skeletons from five cemeteries dating from the fifth century . Four sites were located within Pannonia and one on the banks of the river Tisza, in the Great Hungarian Plain, to provide a comparison across the Danube frontier. At all five sites there were individuals with  skull modification and there was some evidence for material culture pointing to the Black Sea region."
"37" "A comparison with the diet of early medieval settled farmers and of mobile pastoralists from the central Asian steppes showed that animal protein consumption was slightly higher than among farmers, but lower when compared to central Asian pastoralists. Similarly, the δ 13 C values suggested that the consumption of millet (or of other C4 plants) lay between that by Inner Asian pastoralists and by German agricultural populations. At all tested sites, there were some individuals who had been highly mobile, as revealed by the  87 Sr/ 86 Sr of their tooth enamel compared to local environmental values. A comparison of isotopic evidence from multiple teeth from the same individuals often showed more than one change in diet and/or residence."
"38" "The results of this study revealed that the people buried in these cemeteries, both in Pannonia and in the Great Hungarian Plain, had a diet that fell between the endpoints of an agricultural and a fully pastoral diet. There seems to have been a high level of mixing, with some individuals significantly changing their diets over their lifetimes. This showed that farming and pastoralism were not mutually exclusive strategies, but were used flexibly by people buried in the same communities. Farming and animal herding could be mutually beneficial strategies that were not limited to particular ethnic groups."
"39" "An  encounter narrated by Priscus of Panium, the only  written  source that provides an eye-witness account of relations between Huns and Romans , aptly illustrates how identity  can be  mediated through  social and economic conformity . While waiting for an audience at the court of Attila, Priscus meets a well-dressed Greek-speaker in Scythian (i.e. Hunnic) clothing . Surprised to find a man speaking perfect Greek among  people  where Greek was not a common language, Priscus asks the man to tell his story. The man relates the following:"
"40" "He laughed and said that he was Greek by birth. He had come as a trader to Viminakion […], had spent a long time there and married a very wealthy woman.  When the city came under the barbarians […] he was selected for Onegesios [an advisor of Attila] himself in the distribution of war spoils […]. After he had distinguished himself in later battles against the Romans and the Akateri, he gave the barbarian ruler, according to Scythian custom, the spoils he took and so obtained his freedom. He married a barbarian woman, and now had children. […] He believed his present life to be better than his previous life."
"41" "The narrative then proceeds with a discussion between Priscus and the stranger about the respective merits of the political order among Romans and Huns. Persuaded in the end by Priscus, the man bursts into tears, agreeing with  him  that Roman laws and the Roman state were indeed superior to life among the barbarians."
"42" "While this exchange fits into an established narrative  topos  – a barbarian commenting critically on Roman society – and may even be entirely fictional , it nevertheless reveals interesting possibilities about relations between ordinary people on either side of the frontier. Whether or not the trader existed as described, Priscus clearly thought it possible that a person from within the Roman world could set up among the Huns and even prefer their way of life, however wrong he considered this to be. Furthermore, as Michael Maas has pointed out, the trader does not fit into neat categorisations, ‘being at once a Greek, a Roman and a Scythian, that is ,  both civilized and barbarian. He stands between cultural worlds in ways that Priscus considers confusing’ .  His clothing marks him out as a Hun, but his language suggests otherwise. The differences between the Hunnic and the Roman way of life are here largely articulated as differences in the nature of government, rather than being fundamental ethnic or moral differences, as Ammianus Marcellinus had posited a century earlier .   In this brief account we see that categorisations of people in the Carpathian basin of the fifth century could be complex, defying simple dichotomies between Romans and barbarians."
"43" "This  opens up the possibility that a person born to one particular way of life could join another , as the story of Priscus and the Greek-speaker illustrates . There is both  ethnographic and archaeological evidence that such a fluid approach to apparently very different subsistence strategies is not unusual . Most pastoralists rely on some form of agriculture, either by engaging in it themselves or through close interaction with agricultural populations, and nomadic groups can be mobile for part of a year or move between long-established locations."
"44" "The Huns, as described in written sources’ were therefore likely an aggregation of people with shared subsistence practices that relied to a great extent, but not exclusively, on mobile pastoralism. By the time their activities were well-documented, due to their complex interactions with the Roman empire in the fifth century, quite possibly only a small proportion of these ‘Huns’ had ancestry from the Black Sea region or further to the east. This is supported by a recent study of eight individuals with modified skulls from Bavaria indicated that most had genetic ancestry in south-eastern Europe, but, intriguingly, one woman had around 20 per cent East Asian ancestry. A control sample, also with modified skull, from the Roman city of Viminacium in Serbia had a similar ancestry profile . Many of the people who practiced skull modification and engaged in mobile pastoralism were therefore probably locals who joined in with Hunnic activities. Yet, Huns were also documented as having a distinct political and military organisation which has been likened to an empire ."
"45" "The steppe environment  and climate"
"46" "How then can we understand the  apparently sudden appearance  of  ‘the Huns’ and  the  resulting destabilisation in the Roman frontier areas? For this we need to consider the  wider  backdrop of environmental, climatic and economic affordances  in the fourth and fifth centur ies ."
"47" "The Eurasian steppes are an expanse of grassland that extends 8000 km from modern day Ukraine to Manchuria. From north to south, the steppes change from forest, to forest- steppe and then to desert steppes and desert zones punctuated by oases. Towards the East, climate is more continental and more arid, resulting in short growing seasons . Over the course of the Holocene, the extent of these ecological bands fluctuated in accordance with more humid and more arid phases ."
"48" "The Eurasian steppes supported populations engaged in large-scale animal husbandry since the Chalcolithic  around the turn of the fifth to the fourth millennium BCE . Mounted pastoral nomadism emerged in the second half of the third millennium BC E . Since then, the steppes  have  supported nomadic-pastoralist groups , right up to the present day . Food production depended on animal herding, requiring groups to be mobile year round, though the boundary to semi-nomadic lifeways is fluid. Different populations relied to a greater or lesser extent on agriculture and sedentism . These groups had large herds of sheep, horses and, in some areas, camels. Herd sizes could be variable and depended on the size of the available pasture areas. The Eurasian steppes, with their clearly banded ecozones, supported a fully nomadic and pastoral lifestyle. Nomads  might often  only encounter agriculturalists in – for them – marginal environments: the oases of central Asia ."
"49" "The Great Hungarian Plain forms the westernmost exclave of this  enormous steppe belt, but here the situation is quite different . The environment in the Great Hungarian Plain is characterised by a mosaic of different types of steppe habitats that have also been subject to considerable changes over the course of the Holocene . From the Neolithic onwards land was increasingly used for agriculture, leading to extensive anthropogenic landscape changes . Prior to the eighteenth century land-use typically switched between crop cultivation and grazing in multi-year cycles .  Areas of grassland were not very large and land was widely used for agriculture.  Exclusive nomadic pastoralism was not possible here ."
"50" "Recent research has attempted to link a putative mass migration of Huns from central Asia to mega-droughts caused by the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) climate system of the Pacific Ocean . Such mega-droughts have been recorded in the Dulan-Wulan juniper tree ring record and in a second, more recent, juniper tree record, both from northern Qinghai province . These droughts lasted for several decades, the first, in around 360 CE, being the worst in the past 2000 years . A second major drought then occurred in the mid-fifth century . On the basis of the  archaeological  evidence outlined above we must discount these droughts as not being relevant to the European Huns. Furthermore, this study and others   assume an overly simplistic link between climatic pressures and population movements."
"51" "However, Europe, too, saw climatic fluctuations during the fourth and fifth centuries. Tree-ring sequences from across Europe provide the basis for a reconstruction of summer temperatures going back to the second century BCE .  They suggest a series of negative temperature anomalies in the mid-fourth century and again in the early fifth century. While the downturns were not as extreme or sustained as the Late Antique Little Ice Age that began in the sixth century, this period nevertheless saw cycles of negative temperature anomalies  and episodes of drought ."
"52" "Regional reconstructions of hydroclimate, available in the Old World  Drought Atlas , allow us to infer how these climatic fluctuations would have affected the Carpathian Basin. After a period of limited fluctuations in the early fourth century, th e decade of 330 and 340 CE saw  wetter than average climate in south east Europe and drought in north- central Europe  (Fig.  4 ) . A similar, but  less pronounced, pattern was evident throughout the years 350 to 370 CE and 390 to 400 CE. From 420 onwards the picture is reversed, with increasingly dry years in south-east Europe and wetter years in the north .  The period from 430  CE  up to Attila’s death in 453  CE  c ulminat ed  in a de cade of drought in the 440s, followed by a decade of  drier-than-average climate .  The second half of the fifth century again saw wetter climate in south-east Europe and drier climate in the north (c. 470-490 CE)."
"53" "Fig. 4: Reconstructed decadal changes in the Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI) in South-East Europe during the summer months (JJA) from 300 to 460 CE. Darker red hues indicate drier summers, darker blue hues indicate wetter summers. Created using the Old World Drought Atlas  ( http://drought.memphis.edu/OWDA/ , 24/7/2018)"
"54" "It is difficult to evaluate what the implications of such fluctuations might have been on the people living on either side of the Roman frontier. The floodplains of Danube and Tisza are extensive and, due to the enormous catchment of the Danube watershed, would have supported ecosystems quite independent from the continental hydroclimate.  Archaeobotanical evidence from the third- to fourth-century settlement site of Kiskundorozsma-Nagyszék in  Csongrád County suggests a highly diverse environment consisting of waterlogged meadows, pastures and open woodland . Indeed,  extensive areas of the floodplains of the river Tizsa were permanently or periodically inundated ."
"55" "Climatic changes affected such an environment in complex ways. A study of the impact of the onset of the medieval Little Ice Age on settlement patterns in the Tisza river valley suggests an increase of waterlogged and pasture land by about 50  per cent  with a concomitant reduction in arable land. Such an increase in the extent of wetland floodplains increased albedo and changed local evaporation patterns which likely had an impact also on the regional climate system .   Ulf  B ü ntgen and  Nicola  Di Cosmo attempted to relate the withdrawal of the Mongols in 1242 AD to cold and wet conditions that year following several years of low precipitation . They suggested that this reduced the land available for agriculture and access to pastureland for horses, impacted on military effectiveness and possibly caused a famine. Countering this, Pinke et al. have argued that prolonged precipitation in fact increased fodder yields which would have provided improved conditions for the Mongol army ."
"56" "In the fourth and fifth centuries, where historic and environmental data are much less highly resolved, it would therefore be highly problematic to link historic events to climatic conditions in a way that implies a simple cause-and-effect.  Nevertheless, the climatic fluctuations of the period, in particular the dry decades from 430 to 450 CE, would  likely  have  had an impact on both agricultural and pasture carrying capacities, at least in areas that were not directly in the moisture-rich floodplains.  This may have resulted in a destabilisation of the existing ecological and economic networks , both  in  the  late Roman  provinces of  Pannonia  and Moesia  and  in  the regions  to the north and east of  the Danube frontier . Altered environmental affordances may have provoked adaptations to subsistence,  economy and perhaps even to social organisation.  How this may have played out will be discussed further below."
"57" "Climatic changes and the  Hunnic  ‘ phenomenon’"
"58" "Historical sources tell us that Roman and Hun diplomacy was extremely complex with, at least initially, mutually beneficial arrangements, resulting in Hun elites gaining access to vast amounts of gold. This system of collaboration broke down in the 440s, leading to constant raids of Roman lands and increasing demands for gold and, at one point, a demand for  a strip of territory along the Danube ‘five days’ journey wide’ . This coincided with increasing aridity in the Carpathian Basin."
"59" "Nomadic-pastoralist groups in many periods have had complex relationships with large states and empires. Along the Mongolian-Chinese border, nomad ‘empires’ arose in the third century BC that shadowed Chinese imperial empires . These nomad empires sustained themselves by extorting wealth from the Chinese empire, through trade or violence. It has been suggested that nomadic-pastoralists had to engage with settled societies to obtain necessary resources, because they were economically not self-sufficient . However, there is extensive archaeological evidence for complex steppe economies involving farming, but also metallurgy . In the case of the Xiongnu, Di Cosmo suggests that they expanded into a larger confederation because the Chinese empire expanded into steppe areas in the third century BC E , threatening animals and pasture lands . Following inter-nomadic struggles, the Xiongnu emerged as the most powerful group and subsequently expanded their power over the whole steppe region, including settled and nomadic groups. Tributes extracted from China and other states served to support the Xiongnu warrior elite by allowing them to keep private armies and a life of luxury ."
"60" "The situation in the Car pathian basin may have been similar.  Given the general instability of the time – episodes of warfare on the frontier as well as a decrease in long-distance trade  –  flexibility in subsistence practices and the ability to make use of both farming and mobile animal herding, as observed from the isotopic evidence,  could have been an important insurance strategy during a climatic downturn, helping people to mitigate unstable economic times."
"61" "Changes in subsistence practices resulted in the majority of the population engaging in a mixed agro-pastoral economy with less reliance on large-scale herding , as had probably been practised by the original incomers from the steppes . This must have caused significant changes to the established social  organisation . Former horse-based animal herders may have reinvented themselves as warbands led by a war lord or warrior king and they relied on him for support. The wealth and prestige items to be had within the Roman empire became necessary for sustaining these warbands and the lifestyle to which they had become accustomed. The violence and raiding activities of the Hun elites that were so dramatically recorded in late Roman written sources, may thus have been a consequence of the flexible and adaptive approaches to subsistence strategies of both incoming and established populations of the frontier zone in response to climatic fluctuations in the fifth century."
"62" "Conclusion"
"63" "The causes of the  Hunnic  ‘ phenomenon’ in south-east Europe and its impact on the populations of the late Roman provinces may be found in a complex and multi-causal web of climatic and environmental affordances, economic responses and resulting changes to social organisation. Historical, genomic and material culture evidence suggests that there was indeed an influx of people from regions north of the Black Sea or from areas  further east in the fourth century CE. However, the nature and extent of this is difficult to quantify. Certainly, there is no indication of a large-scale migration from central Asia."
"64" "T he first half of the fifth century CE  saw  a period of climatic downturn , with two decades of very dry summers from the 430s to the 440s.  H istorical sources  describe the  Huns  at this time  as a highly stratified group with a  military organisation that was difficult to counter, even for the Roman armies. It is possible that the climatic downturn and increased aridity in the 430s to 450s disrupted the earlier economic organisation of the incomers from the steppes who, we can assume, formed the core of the Hunnic elites. This climatic-economic disruption may have changed Hunnic social organisation, requiring Attila and others of high rank to extract a supply of gold from the Roman provinces for that was probably used to keep warbands and to assure inter-elite loyalties."
"65" "Isotopic evidence shows that  populations  in the Carpathian basin ,   both within the province of Pannonia and in the more steppic areas of the Great Hungarian plain,  exercised a  high degree of flexibility in subsiste nce strategies.   Groups and individuals switched between subsistence strategies, often quite rapidly. It is possible that this was in response to climatic changes, as well as perhaps to warfare and instability. Certainly ,  agricultural diversification is a safer strategy than reliance on monoculture in uncertain economic times.  Evidence from burial practices  suggests high levels of hybridity ,  with Roman practices, such as brick-lined graves, being used in combination with ceramics and metalwork of both local Pannonian and distant provenance. Such hybridity also extended to subsistence practices.  It was possible  that such different subsistence strategies engender ed  a sense of a shared identity, irrespective of whether that was expressed through material differences.   However, rather than a clash of cultures, we see evidence of close integration and adaptive strategies to ancestral and newly encountered life-ways."
"66" "While Priscus engagingly describes the way of life at the court of Attila and also among high-ranking Hunnic women, archaeological evidence provides few clues for these elites and their military activities. It  appears that violence, where it occurred, happened in brief convulsions that quite dramatically entered the historical record. Large proportions of the populations ,  about whom no written account exists ,  appeared to have engaged with each other quite pragmatically and flexibly."
"67" "Bibliography"
"68" "Original sources"
"69" "Marcus Porcius Cato,  On agriculture;  Marcus Terentius Varro , On agriculture . Translated by W. D. Hooper and H. B. Ash, 1934. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press"
"70" "Jordanes,  The Origin and Deeds of the Goths  [Getica] . Translated by C. C. Mierow, 1915. Princeton: Princeton University Press."
"71" "Ammianus Marcellinus,  Res Gestae . Translated by J. C. Rolfe, 1956. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, MA. and London: Harvard University Press."
"72" "Priscus,  The fragmentary history of Priscus: Attila, the Huns and the Roman Empire, AD 430-476 . Translated by J. Given, 2014. Christian Roman Empire Series 11. Merchantville, NJ: Evolution Publishing."
"73" "Further sources"
"74" "A. Alföldi, Funde aus der Hunnenzeit und ihre ethnische Sonderung = Leletek a hun korszakból és ethnikai szétválasztásuk, Archaeologia Hungarica. 9 (Budapest 1932)"
"75" "B. Anke, Studien zur reiternomadischen Kultur des 4. bis 5. Jahrhunderts, Beiträge zur Ur- und Frühgeschichte Mitteleuropas 8 (Weissbach 1998)"
"76" "R. Astuti, \"The Vezo are not a kind of people\": identity, difference, and \"ethnicity\" among a fishing people of western Madagascar, American Ethnologist 22/3, 1995, 464-482"
"77" "T. J. Barfield, The shadow empires: imperial state formation along the Chines-Nomad frontier, in: S. E. Alcock – T. N. D'Altroy – K. D. Morrison - C. M. Sinopoli (Hrsg.), Empires (Cambridge 2001) 10-41"
"78" "F. Barth, Nomads of south Persia: the Basseri tribe of the Khamseh confederacy (Oslo 1964)"
"79" "F. Barth (Hrsg.), Ethnic Groups and Boundaries (Bergen/London 1969a)"
"80" "F. Barth, Pathan identity and its maintenance, in: F. Barth (Hrsg.), Ethnic Groups and Boundaries (Bergen/London 1969b) 117-134"
"81" "G. C. Bentley, Ethnicity and practice, Comparative Studies in Society and History 29/1, 1987, 24-55"
"82" "I. Bóna, Das Hunnenreich (Stuttgart 1991)"
"83" "P. Bourdieu, Outline of a Theory of Practice (Cambridge 1977)"
"84" "S. Brather, Ethnic identities as constructions of archaeology: The case of the  Alamanni , in: A. Gillett (Hrsg.), On Barbarian Identity. Critical Approaches to Ethnicity in the Early Middle Ages (Turnhout 2002) 149-175"
"85" "U. Brosseder, Belt plaques as an indicator of East-West relations in the Eurasian steppes at the turn of the millennia, in: U. Brosseder - B. K. Miller (Hrsg.), Xiongnu Archaeology. Multidisciplinary Perspectives of the First Steppe Empire in Inner Asia (Bonn 2011) 349-424"
"86" "U. Brosseder, A study on the complexity and dynamics of interaction and exchange in Late Iron Age Eurasia, in: J. Bemmann - M. Schmauder (Hrsg.), Complexity of Interaction along the Eurasian Steppe Zone in the first Millennium CE (Bonn 2015) (Bonn 2015) 199-332"
"87" "U. B. Brosseder, Xiongnu and Huns. Archaeological perspectives on a centuries-old debate about identity and migration, in: M. Maas - N. Di Cosmo (Hrsg.), Empires and Exchanges in Eurasian Late Antiquity: Rome, China, Iran, and the Steppe, ca. 250–750 (Cambridge 2018) 176-188"
"88" "R. Brubaker, Ethnicity without groups, European Journal of Sociology 43/2, 2002, 163-189"
"89" "U. Büntgen – N. Di Cosmo, Climatic and environmental aspects of the Mongol withdrawal from Hungary in 1242 CE, Scientific Reports 62016, 1-9"
"90" "E. R. Cook, Megadroughts, ENSO, and the invasion of Late-Roman Europe by the Huns and Avars, in: W. V. Harris (Hrsg.), The Ancient Mediterranean Environment between Science and History (Leiden 2013) 89-102"
"91" "E. R. Cook – R. Seager – Y. Kushnir – K. R. Briffa – U. Büntgen – D. Frank – P. J. Krusic – W. Tegel – G. van der Schrier – L. Andreu-Hayles – M. Baillie – C. Baittinger – N. Bleicher – N. Bonde – D. Brown – M. Carrer – R. Cooper – K. Čufar – C. Dittmar – J. Esper – C. Griggs – B. Gunnarson – B. Günther – E. Gutierrez – K. Haneca – S. Helama – F. Herzig – K.-U. Heussner – J. Hofmann – P. Janda – R. Kontic – N. Köse – T. Kyncl – T. Levanič – H. Linderholm – S. Manning – T. M. Melvin – D. Miles – B. Neuwirth – K. Nicolussi – P. Nola – M. Panayotov – I. Popa – A. Rothe – K. Seftigen – A. Seim – H. Svarva – M. Svoboda – T. Thun – M. Timonen – R. Touchan – V. Trotsiuk – V. Trouet – F. Walder – T. Ważny – R. Wilson – C. Zang, Old World megadroughts and pluvials during the Common Era, Science Advances 1/10, 2015, 1-9"
"92" "J. De Guignes, Histoire générale des Huns, des Turcs, des Mogols, et des autres Tartares Occidentaux, Académie Royale des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres (Paris 1756)"
"93" "É. de la Vaissière, The steppe world and the rise of the Huns, in: M. Maas (Hrsg.), The Cambridge Companion to the Age of Attila (Cambridge 2015) 175-192"
"94" "Z. De Takács, Congruencies between the Arts of the Eurasiatic Migration Periods (Continued), Artibus Asiae 5/2/4, 1935, 177-202"
"95" "N. Di Cosmo, Ancient Inner Asian nomads: their economic basis and its significance in Chinese history, The Journal of Asian Studies 53/4, 1994, 1092-1126"
"96" "N. Di Cosmo, Ancient China and its Enemies (Cambridge 2002)"
"97" "B. L. Drake, Changes in North Atlantic Oscillation drove population migrations and the collapse of the Western Roman Empire, Scientific Reports 7/1, 2017, 1227"
"98" "M. Érdy, An overview of the Xiongnu type cauldron finds of Eurasia in three media, with historical observations, in: B. Genito (Hrsg.), The Archaeology of the Steppes. Methods and Strategies (Naples 1994) 479-438"
"99" "J. N. Fenner – D. Tumen – D. Khatanbaatar, Food fit for a Khan: stable isotope analysis of the elite Mongol Empire cemetery at Tavan Tolgoi, Mongolia, Journal of Archaeological Science 462014, 231-244"
"100" "N. Fettich, A szeged-nagyszéksósi hun fejedelmi sírlelet; La trouvaille de tombe princière hunnique a Szeged-Nagyszéksós 32, Archaeologia Hungarica (Budapest 1953)"
"101" "M. D. Frachetti, Multiregional emergence of mobile pastoralism and monuniform institutional complexity across Eurasia, Current Anthropology 53/1, 2012, 2-38"
"102" "F. Gyulai, Archaeobotany in Hungary: seed, fruit, food and beverage remains in the Carpathian Basin from the Neolithic to the Late Middle Ages (Budapest 2010)"
"103" "S. E. Hakenbeck, Local, Regional and Ethnic Identities in Early Medieval Cemeteries in Bavaria (Firenze 2011)"
"104" "S. E. Hakenbeck, Infant head shaping in the first millennium AD, in: S. Crawford – D. M. Hadley - G. Shepherd (Hrsg.), Oxford Handbook of the Archaeology of Childhood (Oxford 2018) 483-504"
"105" "S. E. Hakenbeck – E. McManus – H. Geisler – G. Grupe – T. C. O'Connell, Diet and mobility in Early Medieval Bavaria: a study of carbon and nitrogen stable isotopes, American Journal of Physical Anthropology 143/2, 2010, 235–249"
"106" "T. Hayashi, Huns were Xiongnu or not? From the viewpoint of archaeological Material, in: C. Buyar – B. Isakov – B. I. Kim – I. Sahin - H. W. Choi (Hrsg.), Altay Communities (Istanbul 2014) 13-26"
"107" "P. J. Heather, The Huns and the end of the Roman Empire in western Europe, English Historical Review 110/435, 1995, 4-41"
"108" "O. Heinrich-Tamáska – P. Straub, Zur Datierung und Deutung der Gräber und Gräberfelder des 5. Jahrhunderts n. Chr. in Pannonia Prima und Valeria, in: T. Vida (Hrsg.), The Frontier World: Romans, Barbarians and Military Culture (Budapest 2015) 617-678"
"109" "T. R. Hermes – M. D. Frachetti – E. A. Bullion – F. Maksudov – S. Mustafokulov – C. A. Makarewicz, Urban and nomadic isotopic niches reveal dietary connectivities along Central Asia’s Silk Roads, Scientific Reports 8/1, 2018, 5177"
"110" "F. Hirth, Ueber Wolga-Hunnen und Hiung-nu, Sitzungsberichte der philosophisch-philologischen und der historischen Classe der königlich-bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 1899 2/2, 1900, 245-278"
"111" "B. D. Hull – T. C. O'Connell, Diet: recent evidence from analytical chemical techniques, in: H. Hamerow – D. A. Hinton - S. Crawford (Hrsg.), The Oxford Handbook of Anglo-Saxon Archaeology (Oxford 2012) 667-687"
"112" "P. Jackson, The Mongols and the West: 1221-1410 (London and New York 2014)"
"113" "K. Jettmar, Hunnen und Hsiung-nu - ein archäologisches Problem, Archiv für Völkerkunde 6/71953, 166-180"
"114" "S. Jones, The Archaeology of Ethnicity (London and New York 1997)"
"115" "C. Kelly, Attila the Hun: Barbarian Terror and the Fall of the Roman Empire (London 2009)"
"116" "C. Kelly, Neither conquest nor Settlement: Attila’s empire and its impact, in: M. Maas (Hrsg.), The Cambridge Companion to the Age of Attila (Cambridge 2014) 193-208"
"117" "A. M. Khazanov, Nomads and the Outside World  2nd (Madison 1994)"
"118" "C. Knipper – D. Peters – C. Meyer – A.-F. Maurer – A. Muhl – B. R. Schöne – K. W. Alt, Dietary reconstruction in Migration Period Central Germany: a carbon and nitrogen isotope study, Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences 52013, 17-35"
"119" "P. L. Kohl, The Making of Bronze Age Eurasia (Cambridge 2007)"
"120" "K. V. Kremenetski, Steppe and forest-steppe belt of Eurasia: Holocene environmental history, in: M. Levine – C. Renfrew - K. Boyle (Hrsg.), Prehistoric steppe adaptation and the horse (Cambridge 2003) 11-27"
"121" "L. Kronenberg, Allegories of Farming from Greece and Rome: Philosophical Satire in Xenophon, Varro, and Virgil (Cambridge 2009)"
"122" "M. Kulikowski, Northern invaders. Migration and conquest as scholarly topoi in Eurasian history, in: M. Maas - N. Di Cosmo (Hrsg.), Empires and Exchanges in Eurasian Late Antiquity: Rome, China, Iran, and the Steppe, ca. 250–750 (Cambridge 2018) 151-165"
"123" "J. Luterbacher – J. P. Werner – J. E. Smerdon – L. Fernández-Donado – F. J. González-Rouco – D. Barriopedro – F. C. Ljungqvist – U. Büntgen – E. Zorita – S. Wagner – J. Esper – D. McCarroll – A. Toreti – D. Frank – J. H. Jungclaus – M. Barriendos – C. Bertolin – O. Bothe – R. Brázdil – D. Camuffo – P. Dobrovolný – M. Gagen – E. García-Bustamante – Q. Ge – J. J. Gómez-Navarro – J. Guiot – Z. Hao – G. C. Hegerl – K. Holmgren – V. V. Klimenko – J. Martín-Chivelet – C. Pfister – N. Roberts – A. Schindler – A. Schurer – O. Solomina – L. v. Gunten – E. Wahl – H. Wanner – O. Wetter – E. Xoplaki – N. Yuan – D. Zanchettin – H. Zhang – C. Zerefos, European summer temperatures since Roman times, Environmental Research Letters 11/2, 2016, 024001"
"124" "M. Maas, Fugitives and ethnography in Priscus of Panium, Byzantine and Modern Greek Studies 19/1, 1995, 146-160"
"125" "O. Maenchen-Helfen, Huns and Hsiung-nu, Byzantion 171944, 222-243"
"126" "O. Maenchen-Helfen, The World of the Huns; Studies in their History and Culture (Berkeley 1973)"
"127" "E. K. Magyari – J. C. Chapman – D. G. Passmore – J. R. M. Allen – J. P. Huntley – B. Huntley, Holocene persistence of wooded steppe in the Great Hungarian Plain, Journal of Biogeography 37/5, 2010, 915-935"
"128" "Y. A. Marano, The towns of central and eastern  Venetia  in the Ostrogothic period, in: O. Heinrich-Tamáska (Hrsg.), Keszthely-Fenékpuszta in Kontext spätantiker Kontinuitätsforschung zwischen Noricum und Moesia (Rahden/Westf. 2011) 173-194"
"129" "Z. Masek, A fresh look at Hunnic cauldrons in the light of a new find from Hungary, Acta Archaeologica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 68/1, 2017, 75-135"
"130" "M. McCormick – U. Büntgen – M. A. Cane – E. R. Cook – K. Harper – P. Huybers – T. Litt – S. W. Manning – P. A. Mayewski – A. F. M. More – K. Nicolussi – W. Tegel, Climate Change during and after the Roman Empire: Reconstructing the Past from Scientifc and Historical Evidence, Journal of Interdisciplinary History 432012, 169–220"
"131" "A. I. Melyukova – J. Crookenden, The Scythians and Sarmatians, in: C. Benjamin (Hrsg.), The Cambridge History of Early Inner Asia (Cambridge 1990) 97-117"
"132" "Z. Molnár – M. Bíró – S. Bartha – G. Fekete, Past trends, present state and future prospects of Hungarian forest-steppes, in: M. Werger - M. van Staalduinen (Hrsg.), Eurasian Steppes. Ecological Problems and Livelihoods in a Changing World (Dordrecht 2012) 209-252"
"133" "G. Motuzaite Matuzeviciute – E. Lightfoot – T. C. O'Connell – D. Voyakin – X. Liu – V. Loman – S. Svyatko – E. Usmanova – M. K. Jones, The extent of cereal cultivation among the Bronze Age to Turkic period societies of Kazakhstan determined using stable isotope analysis of bone collagen, Journal of Archaeological Science 592015, 23-34"
"134" "E. M. Murphy – R. Schulting – N. Beer – Y. Chistov – A. Kasparov – M. Pshenitsyna, Iron Age pastoral nomadism and agriculture in the eastern Eurasian steppe: implications from dental palaeopathology and stable carbon and nitrogen isotopes, Journal of Archaeological Science 40/5, 2013, 2547-2560"
"135" "S. A. Nelson, God and the Land: the Metaphysics of Farming in Hesiod and Vergil (Oxford 1998)"
"136" "H. Pahl, Attila und die Hunnen im Spiegel von Kunst und Literatur, in: H. M. d. P. Speyer (Hrsg.), Attila und die Hunnen (Stuttgart 2007) 369-373"
"137" "Z. Pinke – L. Ferenczi – B. F. Romhányi – F. Gyulai – J. Laszlovszky – Z. Mravcsik – P. Pósa – G. Gábris, Zonal assessment of environmental driven settlement abandonment in the Trans-Tisza region (Central Europe) during the early phase of the Little Ice Age, Quaternary Science Reviews 1572017a, 98-113"
"138" "Z. Pinke – L. Ferenczi – B. F. Romhányi – J. Laszlovszky – S. Pow, Climate of doubt: a re-evaluation of Büntgen and Di Cosmo’s environmental hypothesis for the Mongol withdrawal from Hungary, 1242 CE, Scientific Reports 7/1, 2017b, 1-6"
"139" "K. L. Privat – T. C. O'Connell – M. P. Richards, Stable Isotope Analysis of Human and Faunal Remains from the Anglo-Saxon Cemetery at Berinsfield, Oxfordshire: Dietary and Social Implications, Journal of Archaeological Science 29/7, 2002, 779-790"
"140" "K. L. Privat – J. Schneeweiß – N. Benecke – S. K. Vasil'ev – T. C. O’Connell – R. E. M. Hedges – O. E. Craig, Economy & diet at the Late Bronze Age -- Iron Age site of Cica, Eurasia Antiqua 112005, 419-448"
"141" "D. Quast, Frühgeschichtliche Prunkgräberhorizonte, in: M. Egg - D. Quast (Hrsg.), Aufstieg und Untergang (Mainz 2009) 107-142"
"142" "W. Richter, Die Darstellung der Hunnen bei Ammianus Marcellinus, Historia 23/3, 1974, 343-377"
"143" "M. Schmauder, Huns, Avars, Hungarians -- reflections on the interaction between steppe empires and southeast Europe and the late Roman to early Byzantine empires, in: J.  Bemmann - M. Schmauder (Hrsg.), Complexity of Interaction along the Eurasian Steppe Zone in the first Millennium CE (Bonn 2015) 671-692"
"144" "C. Schubert, Zum problematischen Verhältnis von  res fictae  und  res factae  im antiken Nomadendiskurs, in: A. Weiß (Hrsg.), Der imaginierte Nomade (Wiesbaden 2007) 17-41"
"145" "H. Schutkowski – B. Herrmann – F. Wiedemann – H. Bocherens – G. Grupe, Diet, status and decomposition at Weingarten: trace element and stable isotope analyses on early medieval skeletal material, Journal of Archaeological Science 261999, 675-685"
"146" "X. Shao – Y. Xu – Z. Y. Yin – E. Liang – H. Zhu – S. Wang, Climatic implications of a 3585-year tree-ring width chronology from the northeastern Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau, Quaternary Science Reviews 29/17, 2010, 2111-2122"
"147" "P. R. Sheppard – P. E. Tarasov – L. J. Graumlich – K.-U. Heussner – M. Wagner – H. Österle – L. G. Thompson, Annual precipitation since 515 BC reconstructed from living and fossil juniper growth of northeastern Qinghai Province, China, Climate Dynamics 23/7, 2004, 869-881"
"148" "A. Simonenko, Chinese and East Asian elements in Sarmatian culture of the North Pontic region, Silk Road Art and Archaeology 72001, 53-72"
"149" "P. Sümegi – D. Molnár – S. Sávai – K. Náfrádi – Z. Novák – Z. Szelepcsényi – T. Törőcsik, First radiocarbon dated paleoecological data from the freshwater carbonates of the Danube-Tisza Interfluve, Open Geosciences 7/1, 2015, 40-52"
"150" "R. N. Taaffe, The geographic setting, in: D. Sinor (Hrsg.), The Cambridge History of Early Inner Asia (Cambridge 1990) 19-40"
"151" "J. Tejral, Einheimische und Fremde (Brno 2011)"
"152" "P. Tomka, Der hunnische Fürstenfund von Pannonhalma, Acta Archaeologica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 381986, 423-488"
"153" "P. Tomka, Zwischen Hsiung-nu and Hunnen aus archäologischer Sicht, in: H. M. d. P. Speyer (Hrsg.), Hunnen zwischen Asien und Europa. Aktuelle Forschungen zur Archäologie und Kultur der Hunnen (Langenweissbach 2008) 91-100"
"154" "K. R. Veeramah – A. Rott – M. Groß – L. van Dorp – S. López – K. Kirsanow – C. Sell – J. Blöcher – D. Wegmann – V. Link – Z. Hofmanová – J. Peters – B. Trautmann – A. Gairhos – J. Haberstroh – B. Päffgen – G. Hellenthal – B. Haas-Gebhard – M. Harbeck – J. Burger, Population genomic analysis of elongated skulls reveals extensive female-biased  immigration in Early Medieval Bavaria, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2018"
"155" "T. Vida, Die Zeit zwischen dem 4. und dem 5. Jahrhundert im mittleren Donauraum aus archäologischer Sicht in: M. Konrad - C. Witschel (Hrsg.), Römische Legionslager in den Rhein- und Donauprovinzen -- Nucklei spätantik-frühmittelalterlichen Lebens? (Munich 2011) 615-648"
"156" "G. von Bülow, The fort of Iatrus in Moesia Secunda: observations on the late Roman defensive system on the lower Danube (fourth-sixth centuries), in: A. G. Poulter (Hrsg.), The Transition to Late Antiquity on the Danube and Beyond (Oxford 2007) 459-478"
"157" "P. Von Rummel, Gotisch, barbarisch oder römisch? Methodologische Überlegungen zur ethnischen Interpretation von Kleidung, in: W. Pohl - M. Mehofer (Hrsg.), Archaeology of Identity –Archäologie der Identität (Vienna 2010) 51-77"
"158" "J. Werner, Beiträge zur Archäologie des Attila-Reiches, Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften. Abhandlungen. Neue Folge 38 A (München 1956)"
"159" "K. J. Willis – P. Sümegi – M. Braun – K. D. Bennett – A. Tóth, Prehistoric land degradation in Hungary: who, how and why?, Antiquity 72/275, 1998, 101-113"
"160" "A. Yao, Sarmatian mirrors and Han ingots (100BC-AD100): how foreign became local and vice versa, Cambridge Archaeological Journal 22/1, 2012, 57-70"
"161" "I. P. Zaseckaja – N. A. Bokovenko, The origin of Hunnish cauldrons in East-Europe, in: B. Genito (Hrsg.), The Archaeology of the Steppes. Methods and Strategies (Naples 1994) 701-724"
