Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number 4. December 2018
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.17

Pp. 232-241

Investigating Teacher Written Corrective Feedback as a Formative Assessment Tool

Khalid SAID
Ben M’Sik faculty of Arts and Humanities
Hassan II University, Morocco
Abdelouahid El MOUZRATI
ELT supervisor in Al Hoceima Directorate
Morocco

Abstract
The present study seeks to lay the foundations for a firmly-grounded understanding of Written
Corrective Feedback (WCF) as a Formative Assessment (FA) tool through student writing. More
specifically yet, it is concerned with examining the intricate correlation between Moroccan English
Language Teachers’ (ELT) attitudes and practices with respect to the way they understand and
apply FA by means of WCF on students’ written productions. To that end, the study seeks to
investigate this issue in the light of the following guiding questions: What beliefs do Moroccan
ELT teachers hold about FA and WCF? How do these teachers provide WCF to their students
during the writing lesson? To address these questions, we have opted for a mixed method approach
that includes questionnaires for 110 teachers, document analysis of 30 writing productions and a
follow- up semi-structured interviews with teachers. Date has been interpreted through an
Explanatory Sequential Design. Inspired by Lee‘s (2009) analytical model and Perumanathan
(2014) study, major findings have been presented regarding mismatches. These findings have
revealed strong mismatches between teachers espoused beliefs concerning WCF, as a formative
assessment tool, and their actual classroom practices. Finally, the study sets some implications for
teachers, supervisors underlining the implementation of WCF in classroom practices.
Key words: Beliefs, formative assessment, feedback, mismatch, writing
Cite as: SAID, K., & El MOUZRATI, A. (2018). Investigating Teacher Written Corrective Feedback as
a Formative Assessment Tool. Arab World English Journal, 9 (4), 232-241.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.17

232

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Investigating Teacher Written Corrective Feedback

SAID & El MOUZRATI

Introduction
Research (Ellis, 2009; Borg, 2001; Burns, 1992; Lee, 2009) into the interplay between
teachers’ beliefs and their influence on classroom practices have revealed that students writing
skills develop in proportion to their teachers’ perceptions of the role of WCF in fostering those
skills. In the context of writing pedagogy and given the intricate interplay between formative
assessment and written feedback, recent studies (Al Shahrani, 2013; Chen, 2012; Lee, 2009; Ho,
2014; Johansson & Nilsson, 2017; Perumanathan, 2014; Tuck, 2012, among others) have tried to
uncover the beliefs that underlie teachers’ practices in order to identify the factors that contribute
to effective feedback. This last argument provides the rationale for the present study.
In Morocco, the field of Teaching English as a Foreign Language (TEFL), and especially
the teaching of writing, has undergone many shifts and trends. These shifts and trends have found
their way into an extensive body of research into writing pedagogy (Abouabdlkader, 1999;
Bouziane, 1999, 2002; Chaibi, 1996; Idihiya, 1990; Habbaz & Lmqadem, 2017; Oulbouch & Zyad,
2015; Zyad, 2015).
Recent innovative approaches adopted by the Moroccan TEFL Guidelines (2007) like the
Standards-based Approach (SBA) and the Competency-based Education (CBE) set relatively high
expectations with regard to the teaching of the skill of writing as a process. The process approach
to the teaching of writing calls for a change in teachers’ perception as well as practices concerning
learners’ compositions. That is, writing needs to be viewed as a sustained process of drafting and
revising where sources of feedback are student writers themselves, their peers and teachers. The
current study aims to examine one of these sources of feedback, namely, teacher WCF as a
formative tool to help learners become effective and independent writers.
Although the Moroccan Pedagogical Guidelines, ministerial notes, teachers’ guides
continue to assert the importance of teacher WCF as a formative tool, very few studies have been
made in the EFL domain to examine written teacher feedback from both students’ perspective and
teachers’ perspective. Oulbouch and Zerhari (1994) find that “the general tendency was to ‘focus
on surface-level features…such as grammar and mechanics [local issues] but little interest is
attached to content and organizations [global issues]” (p.33). In the same respect, Mabchour
(1997) investigates the issue of WCF from a purely textual and an accuracy-driven perspective.
These studies, it seems, have not attempted to question teachers’ and students’ perceptions of
written feedback and its underlined potential in ensuring students’ language development, hence
its formative role and value, which is the focus of the current study as mentioned earlier.
The following questions guide this research paper:
1. What beliefs do ELT teachers hold about Formative Assessment and WCF?
2. How do ELT teachers provide WCF to their students during the writing lesson?
Theoretical Framework
Formative Assessment
Formative Assessment (FA), as assessment for learning, constitutes an empirically wellgrounded pedagogical perspective (Black & Wiliam, 1998a, b; Bloom, 1969; Bloom et al, 1971;
Carless, 2012; Cowie & Bell, 1999; Crooks, 1988; Stiggens & Chappuis, 2005; Sadler, 1989, 2013;
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

233

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Investigating Teacher Written Corrective Feedback

SAID & El MOUZRATI

Scriven, 1967; Tomlinson, 2006; Trochim, 1998; Wiliam, 2006, 2010; William & Thompson,
2008). According to Scriven (1967), the first to use the concept of ‘Formative Evaluation’, the
term ‘formative’ is used to refer to the role that assessment could continually play to help refine
and ameliorate the field and craft of syllabus design and curriculum development. However,
Scriven’s premises is not elaborated ‘out of the box’ in that he perceives of evaluation as the end
product of learning rather than an on-going process that takes place during teaching and learning
Black and Wiliam (1998a) contend that the improvement of classroom assessment could
result in the improvement of classroom learning on account that formative assessment can lead to
significant learning gains and can help narrow the achievement gap while benefitting all learners.
Sadler (1989), laying more emphasis on ‘learning outcomes’, argues that a theory of evaluation
would have “less relevance for outcomes in which student responses may be assessed simply as
correct or incorrect” (p.119).
Written Corrective Feedback
In the writing classroom, the merits of written feedback cannot be overlooked (Fisher &
Frey, 2013; Harmer, 1983; Keh, 1990; Lam, 2017; Ur, 1996). When feedback on an essay or
research paper is summative-oriented, there is less likelihood that it will change the quality of
learners’ performance, as there is less room for them to redo, or rethink, their work (Fisher & Frey,
2013). Ellis (2009) outlines a typology of written feedback, which incorporated a variety of
strategies that most researchers have adopted in their studies. Although Ellis’s typology continues
to have a strong influence on both researchers and teachers, its academic appeal has been met with
deep scrutiny (Van Beuningen et al,2008, 2012; Bitchener & Knoch,2010; Sheen,2007; sheen et
al, 2009; Bitchener, 2008; Truscott & Hsu,2008).
The Research Design
First, recognizing the strengths and weaknesses of the quantitative and the qualitative
methods, if used alone, the present study has relied on a mixed-method approach. Second, in view
to having reliable data through different tools, our concern has been to check the validity of the
results obtained from the three tools: document analysis, a questionnaire and a semi-structured
interview.
As far as the interpretation of the study results is concerned, the “Explanatory Sequential
Design”, which is typically a two-phase design to collecting quantitative and qualitative data at
different times, has been opted for. The sampling design is the non-probability sampling. That fits
this small-scale research study. The sample includes both males and females with varying teaching
experience and taking into consideration the rural an urban difference (table 2). Subsequently, the
study is conducted on a segment of the target population that is representative of the entire
population concerning the most salient characteristics, namely gender, age, socio-cultural
background, pre-service training, and teaching experience. The teaching experience is also so
varied as far as seniority is concerned.
The teacher questionnaire is made up of four interrelated sections (table 1), in addition to
the introduction and the respondents’ background. Each section corresponds to a specific research
question. We opted for a 1-7 scale with the end values only anchored (e.g. to strongly disagree and
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

234

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Investigating Teacher Written Corrective Feedback

SAID & El MOUZRATI

strongly agree). Pearson's correlation coefficient was calculated on the scores of the participants
(teachers and students who completed the questionnaire twice. The correlation coefficients varies
from 0.69 to 0.87 with an overall reliability that reaches (r=0.90, p<0.001).
Table 1 Components of the Teachers’ Questionnaire Section Area of investigation
Section
Area of investigation
Section one
Teachers’ perceptions vis-à-vis FA
Section Two
Teachers’ perceptions vis-à-vis WCF
Section Three
Teachers’ implementation of WCF techniques
Section Four
Challenges in implementing WCF
The Demographics of the Informants
One hundred and six EFL teachers from the directorates of El Kelaa Des Sraghana and
Chefchaouen are the respondents of the teachers’ online questionnaire. To outline the features of
our questionnaire respondents, we will describe the following features: the areas our informants
work in, gender, age, work experience, and academic and professional qualifications (table 2 and
3).
Table2: Distribution of teachers according to gender, area, school type and training
Gender

Teaching areas

School type

Previous training on WCF

Table 3: Distribution of teachers according to qualification, experience and degrees
Male

Female

Urban

Rural

27%
37%qualifications
60%
22%
Professional

Semi-urban

Private

18%
18%
Teaching Experience

Public

Yes

NO

82Educational
30% Degrees
66%

Not Sure
4%

Discussion of the Findings
ENS Following
CPR
FSE
CRMEF
1-5 the subsequent
6-10
+10sections
BA discuss
MAthe findings
PhD
Lee (2009)
model,
regarding
mismatches between teachers’ espoused beliefs and their actual WCF practices. Each mismatch is
51%described
16% and11%
22%
13%teachers’
66%practice
21%and beliefs,
47% both
39%supported
14% by data from
first
is then illustrated
by
written feedback, questionnaire survey, follow-up interviews, and document analysis. Finally,
attempts are made to explain the mismatch based on the data collected.
Mismatches Concerning FA
First, the majority of the surveyed teachers (87%) show a strong agreement towards FA as
an assessment for learning and not an assessment of learning. They have positively responded to
statements about the purpose of FA to promote learning and enhance teaching. However, within
the same section, more than 69% state that they award grades for students’ writing productions.
This goes against the rationale of FA which aims at improving and polishing learners’ skills rather
than making judgments and grading their productions. Another piece of evidence in support of this
‘graded’ oriented tendency comes from students’ questionnaire. The majority of the respondents
claim that teachers award them grades from their writing productions. This explains why
considerations of evaluation rather than assessment guide students’ reactions towards teachers’
feedback.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

235

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Investigating Teacher Written Corrective Feedback

SAID & El MOUZRATI

Second, 59% of the respondents believe that they feel confident in carrying out FA
practices in the classroom. However, when interviewed, ALL the teachers admit they have no prior
training on how to implement FA strategies in the classroom. Another source of contradiction
comes from the analysis of teachers’ feedback on students writing productions which comes in a
product-oriented ‘flavour’. Finally, 60,7% of the respondent teachers assume that students
understand the purpose of formative assessment. Yet, this belief is not supported by students who
do not see any value behind assessing their writing productions.
Mismatches Concerning Assumptions of WCF
First, the majority of the participants show strong agreement that there is a real need for
teachers to provide WCF on students’ writing. However, only 18% strongly agree that WCF helps
students learn to locate their own errors and analyse them. This means that teachers fail to figure
out the formative role of WCF. Second, concerning WCF techniques, 68% claim that teachers
should vary their error feedback techniques. This claim can be contrasted with teachers’ actual
practice in correcting students’ writing productions, as well as from students’ surveys. In this
respect, students ‘responses reveal that they felt uncomfortable about their teachers’ use of the
same mode of feedback irrespective of the type and the peculiarity of the error.
Third, a considerable number of teachers (43,41% Strongly Agree, 49,46% Agree) believe
that students need positive written feedback in order to motivate them. Yet, upon analysing the
way teachers respond to students’ errors in writing, it seems that teachers address mainly the
mechanical deficiencies in students’ writing. Another support for this mismatch comes from
students’ questionnaire who strongly believe that teachers’ concern is to locate ‘weaknesses’ and
negative areas in their feedback. Teachers’ writing comments tend to focus more on irregularities
than merits of students’ products. This again runs against one of the basic principles in WCF which
encourages teachers to make their feedback as motivational and as positive as possible.
Mismatches Concerning WCF Techniques
Teachers (through the survey as well as the interview) claim that they provide feedback on
student errors selectively. They also argue, during the interview, that selective feedback is worthproviding on account that teachers save time and students get more focused feedback than holistic
or comprehensive feedback.Such practice, however, is not consistent with their belief. When
analysing their real feedback of students writing productions it appears that teachers opt for the
comprehensive mode of feedback provision. Another support for this mismatch comes from
students who also remark that teachers tend to correct all their mistakes.
The second mismatch is concerned with prioritising either form or meaning. During the
interview, the majority of the teachers claim that they pay most attention to meaning and content.
These teachers claim that quality of writing product depends not only on accuracy but also on the
development of ideas and organization. Similarly, in the analysis of the results of the teachers’
questions it appears that 32% of the respondents claim to address the meaning or organization of
the work. However, analysis of the students’ questionnaire shows that teachers focus on language
form in their comments on student writing. This prioritisation of accuracy is also supported by
evidence from feedback document analysis of students’ written productions which also reveals
that teacher seem to attend to form over meaning.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

236

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Investigating Teacher Written Corrective Feedback

SAID & El MOUZRATI

Thirdly, during the interview as well through the questionnaires, teachers continue to assert
themselves as the prime source of feedback. However, by analysing students’ questionnaire, it
seems that students rarely turn to teachers to discuss the content of the feedback with their teachers
and prefer, instead, to discuss it with their peers. The majority of the respondents continue to
complain that teachers’ feedback is too vague and too general (58,3%).
As graph 1 clearly shows, the strategies that are mostly used by teachers when they correct
their students’ writing assignments are: IWCF (17%), CWCF (16%) and Local issues WCF (16%).
Such a fact can be accounted for by the teachers ‘major concern of drawing students’ attention to
almost all kinds of errors they commit with respect to their mastery of the target language form
(local issues)

Graph1: The distribution of correction strategies

Teachers tend to tackle all kinds of mistakes throughout the students’ productions, hence the
overuse of IWCF and CWCF, instead of targeting certain linguistic features at a time by being
selective, thus using SWCF , which might be more helpful for students to develop their mastery
of the target language gradually and confidently. Besides, by adopting the comprehensive, local
and indirect approach, teachers might frustrate their students and demotivate them when the latter
receives a paper tainted in red pen from top to bottom. According to research, selective error
feedback on several patterns of error is more beneficial than comprehensive error treatment, on
account that the latter is exhausting and overwhelming to both students and teachers.
What might increase students’ frustration is the absence or scarcity of positive comments
as shown by the graphs. Teachers tend to focus on students’ errors and weaknesses and neglect
positive points in students’ papers. Teachers should praise students’ achievements as well. By
creating such a balance between positive and negative comments, students would be motivated to
work on their areas of improvements to add them up to the few achievements they have realized
so far. What we have noticed across the sample of students’ writings that we examined is that not
only are teachers’ comments rare and harmful most of the time but also inappropriately placed.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

237

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Investigating Teacher Written Corrective Feedback

SAID & El MOUZRATI

That is, teachers tend to provide comments, be it on local issues or global ones, either at the end
of the writing paper or on the front page under the grade. In both cases, the comments are
disassociated from the points they refer to, which might confuse students and give them no insight
about the errors the observation indicate.
Implications and Recommendations
Upon gathering data, analysing and interpreting the results, several implications can be
inferred at various levels from the current study relating to teachers, curriculum designers as well
as supervisors and training planners. Teachers have to render of revising an integral part of their
feedback sessions and increase its frequency. They should encourage students on how to use
feedback effectively, in the sense that the amount of feedback does not necessarily determine its
quality. Teachers should provide feedback that is explicit and clear. Concrete, motivating and
positive feedback should be prioritised. Alternatively, teachers might ask students to identify
feedback comments that they found useful or decide what type of feedback they consider most
useful and explain why.
Teachers should be trained pedagogically on how to teach writing effectively and
engagingly so as to make of their WCF a formative tool to help students attain long-term gains.
As the document analysis revealed, for example, most teachers lack the subject matter
knowledge required to identify and teach students to work with global errors; i.e. errors related to
organization and content. We believe supervisors must hold intensive training to inform teachers
of the FA pedagogy with respect to the writing instruction.
It is also the syllabus designers and curriculum developers as well as policymakers’ duty
to dissociate the writing component from the textbook and design special writing course books for
students and teachers on teaching writing. Policymakers should introduce and initiate new
assessment regulations that would put much emphasis on FA and include self-assessment. Such
procedures are likely to offer in-service courses and developmental projects for teachers on FA/
AFL (Assessment for learning).
Conclusion
The present study set out to investigate how EFL Moroccan teachers perceive of and
implement WCF as a FA tool. We tried to shed light on how FA is being understood and what
perceptions teachers hold about it in relation to WCF. The study also tried to unearth the sort of
classroom practices teachers make to comment on students’ writings. To achieve that objective,
the study adhered to the mixed-method approach. This study’s findings have important
implications for the ELT in general and the teaching of EFL writing in specific. Some
recommendations for different ELT community and school stakeholders have also been put
forward.
About the Authors:
Khalid SAID is an ELT Supervisor in Midelt Directorate, Morocco; he is also a Doctorate
student at Hassan II University, School of Humanities, Ben M’Sik, Morocco. His main research
areas are EFL textbook evaluation and Critical Discourse Analysis. He worked as an ELL
teacher in several high schools in Morocco. https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5679-6624
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

238

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Investigating Teacher Written Corrective Feedback

SAID & El MOUZRATI

Abdelouahid El MOUZRATI is an ELT supervisor in Al Hoceima directorate, Morocco. He
took part in planning and implementing several school projects in partnership with civil society
associations. His interests include assessment, mentoring and curriculum
development. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5339-5865
References
Abouabdelkadir, H. (1999). The teaching of process writing. ELT curriculum: New challenges,
new solutions (48-58). Rabat: MATE.
Al Shahrani, A. A. (2013). Investigation of written corrective feedback in an EFL context: beliefs
of teachers, their real practices and students’ preferences. M.A. Dissertation. Melbourne:
University of Melbourne
Bitchener, J. & Knoch, U., (2010). Raising the linguistic accuracy level of advanced L2 writers
with written corrective feedback, Journal of Second Language Writing, 19, 207-217.
Black, P. & Wiliam, D. (1998 a). Inside the black box. London: NFER Nelson.
Black, P., & Wiliam, D. (1998b). Inside the Black Box: Raising Standards through Classroom
Assessment. The Phi Delta Kappan, 80, (2), 139-148.
Bloom, B. S. (1969). Some theoretical issues relating to educational evaluation. In R. W. Tyler
(Ed.), Educational evaluation: new roles, new means: the 68th yearbook of the National
Society for the Study of Education (pp. 26-50). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Bloom, B., Hastings, J., & Madaus, G. (1971). Handbook on the formative and summative
Evaluation of Student Learning. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Borg, M. (2001). Teachers’ beliefs, ELT Journal (55), 2, 186–8.
Bouziane, A. (1999). Towards a curriculum of EFL writing in Morocco. In M. Ahellal, O.
Marzouki, & M. Najbi (Eds.), EFT curriculum: New challenges, new solutions (pp. 6-18).
Rabat:MATE.
Bouziane, A. (2002). Linguistic and Rhetorical Features in Moroccan EFL Pupils’ Narratives: A
Longitudinal Study. Unpublished Doctorate in Education, Faculty of Education, Rabat.
Burns, A. (1992). Teacher beliefs and their influence on classroom practice,Prospect (7), 3, 56–
66.
Carless, D., (2006). Differing perceptions in the feedback process. Studies in Higher Education
31 (2), 2019-233.
Chaibi, A. (1996). Investigating Problems Constraining the Implementation of Process Writing
in the Moroccan EFL Classroom. Unpublished Dissertation submitted for the Diploma of
Inspector of English, CFIE, Rabat
Chen, J. (2012). Teachers’Practices and Student Views of Written Feedback A Case of TCFL
Students. Arizona State University. UMI Number: 1509405
Cowie, B., & Bell, B. (1999). A model of FA in science education, Assessment in Education, (6),
10, 11-16. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09695949993026
Crooks, T. J. (1988). The impact of classroom evaluation practices on students, Review of
Educational Research, 58, 438–481.
Ellis, R., (2009). A typology of written corrective feedback types, ELT Journal, (63), 2, 97-107
Fisher, D. & Frey, N. (2013). A FA System for Writing Improvement, English Journal (103).1,
66–71.
Habbaz, O & Lamkadem, I. (2017). Investigating the Challenges of Teaching Writing in the EFL
Second Year Baccalaureate Classes in Morocco. Unpublished Paper submitted in Partial
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

239

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Investigating Teacher Written Corrective Feedback

SAID & El MOUZRATI

Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Diploma of “Inspecteur Pédagogique de
l’Enseignement Secondaire Qualifiant”. Rabat.
Harmer, J. (1983). The Practice of English Language Teaching. Longman Handbooks for
Language Teaching.
Ho, C. (2014).Teachers’ perceptions of formative assessment practices in the English language
classroom within the Hong Kong context.BA. Hong Kong: The University of Hong Kong
Idihya, T. (1990). Writing at Lycee. Unpublished Dissertation submitted for the Diploma of
Inspector of English, CFIE, Rabat.
Johansson,J. Nilsson, M. (2017). Feedback as Formative Assessment on EFL Students’ Writing.
Faculty of Education and Society.Department of Culture, Languages and Media
Keh, C.L. (1990). Feedback in the writing process: a model and methods for implementation,
ELT Journal, (44), 14
Lam, B,H. (2017). Constructing FA Strategies. In: Kong S., Wong T., Yang M., Chow C., Tse K.
(eds) Emerging Practices in Scholarship of Learning and Teaching in a Digital Era.
Springer, Singapore. DOI https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-3344-5_16
Lee, L. (2009). Ten mismatches between teachers’ beliefs and written feedback practice, ELT
Journal, 63(1), 13-22; doi:10.1093/elt/ccn010
Mabchour, A. (1997). Teacher’s Written Feedback. Unpublished Paper submitted in Partial
Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Diploma of “Inspecteur Pédagogique de
l’Enseignement Secondaire Qualifiant”. Rabat.
Oulbouch, A. & Zerhari, K. (1994). Evaluating Teacher Written Feedback on Student Writing.
Unpublished Dissertaion submitted for the Diploma of Inspector of English, CFIE, Rabat
Pedagogical Guidelines. (1997). Moroccan Ministry of Education. English Department.
Pedagogical Guidelines. (2007) Moroccan Ministry of Education. English Department
Perumanathan, P.S. (2014). Formative Assessment and Feedback in the Primary Classroom: An
Interplay between Teachers’ Beliefs and Practices. PhD Dissertation. Victoria University
of Wellington
Sadler, D. R. (1989). Formative assessment and the Design of Instructional Systems,
Instructional Science, (18), 2, 119-144
Sadler, D. R. (2013). Opening up feedback: Teaching learners to see. In Merry, S., Price, M.,
Carless, D., & Taras, M. (Eds.), Reconceptualising Feedback in Higher Education:
developing dialogue with students. (pp. 54-63). London: Routledge
Scriven, M. (1967). The methodology of evaluation. In R. W. Tyler, R. M. Gagné & M. Scriven
(Eds.), Perspectives of curriculum evaluation (pp. 39-83).
Stiggins, R., & Chappuis, J. (2005). Using student-involved classroom assessment to close
achievement gaps, Theory into Practice,( 44), 1, 11-18
Tomlinson, C., & McTighe, J. (2006). Integrating differentiated instruction and under-standing
by design: Connecting content and kids. Alexandria, VA: ASCD.
Trochim, W. (1998). An Evaluation of Michael Scriven's "Minimalist Theory: The Least Theory
that Practice Requires, American Journal of Evaluation, (19),2, 243-49
Truscott, J. & Hsu, A. Y. (2008). Error correction, revision and learning, Journal of Second
Language Writing, (17), 292-305.
Tuck, J. (2012). Feedback-giving as social practice: teachers’ perspectives on feedback as
institutional requirement, work and dialogue, teaching in Higher Education, (17), 2, 209221.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

240

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Investigating Teacher Written Corrective Feedback

SAID & El MOUZRATI

Ur, P. (1996). A course in Language Teaching: Practice and theory. Cambridge University
Press.
Van Beuningen et al. (2012). Evidence on the effectiveness of comprehensive error correction in
Second language Writing, Language Learning, (62), 1-41
Van, B, et al. (2008). The effect of direct and indirect corrective feedback on L2 learners’ written
accuracy, ITL International Journal of Applied Linguistics, (156), 279-296.
Wiliam, D. (2006). Formative Assessment: Getting the Focus Right, Educational Assessment,
(11), 3, 283-289.
Wiliam, D. (2010). An integrative summary of the research literature and implications for a new
theory of formative assessment. In H. L. A. a. G. J. Cizek (Ed.), Handbook of Formative
Assessment (pp. 18-40). New York, NY: Routledge.
Wiliam, D., & Thompson, M. (2008). Integrating assessment with instruction: What will it take
to make it work? In C. A. Dwyer (Ed.), the future of assessment: Shaping teaching and
learning (pp. 53–82). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Zyad, H. (2015). L2 Writing Instruction Approaches and Their Impact on Composition Studies
in Morocco, International Journal of English and Education, (4), 4, 107-119

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

241

