Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/call5.9

Pp.110 -123

The Attitudes of Second Year EFL Students at Dr Moulay Tahar University towards
Learning English Pronunciation through Mobile Assisted Language
Nadia GHOUNANE
Department of English Language and Literature
Faculty of Letters, Languages and Arts
Dr Moulay Tahar University of Saida, Algeria

Abstract
Teaching and learning pronunciation has become a neglected issue because it is regarded as an
abstract science, although it is a peripheral ingredient in English oral production. With the dawn
of technology and its various tools, exploring pronunciation and its effectiveness in successful
communication attracts a bunch of scholarly attention. The use of Computer Assisted Language
Learning opens the gateway for the possibility to integrate other tools in language learning as
mobiles and gives birth to mobile learning or free education. In this vein, the incentive behind the
current research work is in twofold: to investigate the attitudes of both teachers and students
towards the inclusion of mobiles in language learning, and to prove the effectiveness of this new
approach in improving the listening and speaking skills of foreign language learners. To fulfill
these aims, the researcher held an interview with 15 teachers teaching English at Dr Moulay Tahar
University of Saida. The researcher also conducted a pretest and a posttest with 95 students of the
second year from the same university. To this end, the findings revealed that both teachers and
students have positive attitudes towards the introduction of mobile technology in language
learning, even though some teachers still favor the traditional approaches of language teaching and
learning. The results also demonstrated that the applications, used in the experiment, showed the
usability of Mobile Assisted Language in learning English pronunciation.
Keywords: Attitudes, EFL Learners, English pronunciation, Mobile Assisted Language Learning
Cite as: GHOUNANE, N. (2019). The Attitudes of Second Year EFL Students at Dr Moulay
Tahar University towards Learning English Pronunciation through Mobile Assisted Language
Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL (5), 110 -123.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/call5.9

110

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Attitudes of Second Year EFL Students at Dr Moulay Tahar University

GHOUNANE

Introduction
Technology has taken an eminent position in all areas of human lives. With the easy access to the
different devices of technology including computing and mobile phones, people find it easy to
exchange research and Information and Communication Technology (ICT) becomes an integral
part in teaching and learning in the last few decades. The inclusion of smartphones and tablets in
daily life has turned into a necessity that one cannot neglect or discuss the use of technology in
education without shedding light on it as a fact. Indeed, the incorporation of mobile phones
facilitates human communication, and improves their self-learning. According to Wang,
Wiesemes & Gibbons (2012), “mobile phone learning (m-learning) simply as learning anywhere,
anytime through mobile devices” (as cited in Ozer & Kılıç, 2018, p. 2916).
Students of nowadays display positive attitudes towards the use of mobile learning through
storing lectures, downloading e-books, and applications that help them (Ozer & Kılıç, 2018). As
far as foreign language learning is concerned, more recent studies indicate that language learners
tend to employ mobile devices in learning a foreign language rather than computers. However, the
amalgamation of m-learning needs to be guided by pedagogical instructions, so that both students
and teachers can benefit from its use in class; therefore, this leads to the birth of an approach in
language learning called Mobile Assisted Language Learning (MALL). In spite the fact that the
use of MALL has gained an eminent position in language learning and teaching, and still regarded
as self-directed learning because it provides a place for individuals to download journals, e-books,
and develop the listening skills with videos from YouTube. (Ozer & Kılıç, 2018).
On the other side of the corner, searching on how to teach and learn English pronunciation has
received the least attention, even though it is linked to listening and speaking skills. Nonetheless,
teaching pronunciation as a field has witnessed a revival by some scholars who adhere
pronunciation to proper English, i.e., “language learners need to have intelligible pronunciations
to be able to express themselves more clearly in a variety of situations” (Lowenberg, 2002; Levis,
2005; McArthur, 2001; McKay, 2002; Seidlhofer, 2004; Widdowson, 2003, as cited in Saran,
Seferoglu & Cagiltay, 2009, p. 98).
The teaching approaches to English pronunciation and students’ proficiency have raised several
inquiries on how to improve their learning. Some researchers go to the point that students need to
help themselves outside the class to develop their English pronunciation. With the dawn of
technology and what has provided to the field of language teaching and learning, oral production
has received more attention in comparison to the previous years. Thereby, the availability of ICT
tools promotes a chance for English pronunciation, though research in the field is still new as it is
put by Nunan (2005) (Saran, Sferoglu & Cagiltay, 2009).
The focal point behind the current research work is to give an in-depth look at the status of
teaching English pronunciation in the Algerian context. It also intends to get a glimpse at the use
of technology in general and mobile phones in particular in teaching and learning English
pronunciation; henceforth, it endeavors to test the teachers’ and learners’ attitudes towards the
introduction of Mobile Assisted Language Learning (MALL) in language teaching and learning.
Lastly, the researcher attempts to test the effectiveness of some mobile applications on her
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

111

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Attitudes of Second Year EFL Students at Dr Moulay Tahar University

GHOUNANE

learners’ oral production. In this regard, the present research questions spring from the research
objectives mentioned above:
- What are the attitudes of teachers and their students towards the use of MALL?
- What is the effectiveness of mobile phone applications on the learners’ oral production?
To find reliable answers for the previous research questions, the following research hypotheses
stem from the research questions mentioned above:
-

The attitudes of teachers may vary between positive and negative since the integration of
MALL is still new, while students share positive attitudes.
The use of some applications may show excellent results and increase students’ motivation.
There are tremendous constraints in the teaching and learning of pronunciation through
MALL.

To scrutinize the research questions mentioned earlier, the researcher relied on quantitative and
qualitative research tools in addition to previous scholarship, which is presented in the next title.
Review of the Related Literature
M-learning or mobile education has started replacing e-learning in the last few decades, although
many researchers are still not familiar with this new approach. In the light of this tight, Brown
(2003) observes that it is easy to make a differentiation between e-learning and traditional learning,
but when it comes to m-learning, it is a little bit difficult to draw the distinction. Researchers like
Georgiev, Smrikarove & Georgieva (2004) include m-learning in e-learning, i.e., it is a part of it
since both of them depend on ICT tools in learning. On the other spectrum, some scholars like
Turner (2012) highlight that e-learning is not m-learning, and we cannot apply the approach of the
former to include the second in language teaching and learning. From this claim, one can argue
that there is a discrepancy between traditional methods, e-learning, and m-learning.
Before giving an in-depth look at the difference between the two concepts and how one can
approach learning or teaching through m-learning, it is crucial to provide an account of the term
itself. Mobile learning has recently been inserted to education due to technological advancements
in this field; however, defining the term diverges widely. Some scholars like Trifanova &
Ronchetti (2006) elucidate that m-learning means the use of mobile devices anywhere and at any
time whether the teacher directs it or it is self-learning.
The increasing nature of m-learning leads to the spring of a new learning approach called
MALL, also known as “anywhere” approach which gives freedom for students to learn in class
and at home through the use of mobile tools including smartphones, and tablets. Although there is
a good intention towards the integration of m-learning in education, mainly in language teaching
and learning, there are still some difficulties in selecting the best approaches (Traxler, 2007).
According to Chen (2008), mobile education has taken a particular position among learners
because it has confirmed its usability in learning vocabulary, grammar, developing the reading
skill, and pronunciation. Some studies have revealed that m-learning allows students to listen and
record their speech, which in turn can help in improving their pronunciation (Wu & Chen, 2014;
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

112

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Attitudes of Second Year EFL Students at Dr Moulay Tahar University

GHOUNANE

as cited in Ozer & Kılıç, 2018, p. 2916). In the same line of thought, Kukulska-Hulme & Shield
(2008) maintain that mobile devices can provide several practical activities in language learning
that can be listed as follows:
-

Recording lectures, videos, and activities that can introduce learners to the native speakers
of the language,
Enhancing their vocabulary building, and developing their pronunciation,
Downloading teachers’ lectures in MP3 files,

As far as pronunciation and listening are concerned, the introduction of new mobile devices helps
learners to download audio-dictionaries that aid them in developing their oral production, through
learning phonetic transcription of different words. Besides, mobile devices can also help learners
in developing their listening skill through listening activities (Chen, 2008). Although much has
been found and written about the importance of m-learning in raising students’ motivation because
it is regarded as student-centered learning, it still lacks pedagogical instructions, mainly on how to
integrate it in teaching and learning English pronunciation and listening.
According to Haggag (2018), there have been various studies that show the positive effects of
mobile learning on teaching and learning English phonetics. These studies dealt with mobile
devices as those conducted by Okunbor & Retta (2005), Fleischer (2012), Thomas & O’Bannon
(2015) and others, while other studies explored the integration of some applications in teaching
and learning phonetics such as those of Xiao & Luo (2015), Liu et al. (2014) and Alemi et al.
(2012).
When it comes to the attitudes of EFL learners, some studies denote that language learners have
developed positive attitudes towards the use of mobile devices in learning languages. Bese (2011)
has conducted a survey through which he shows that students “responded positively to MALL”,
while Sussex (2008) maintains that “students enjoyed being able to listen anywhere and at anytime;
their research also suggested that learning became more student-centered and collaborate because
students could communicate with peers whenever they needed help” (as cited in Ducate &
Lomicka, 2013, p. 447).
MALL and the Teaching of English Phonetics
When it comes to the inclusion of MALL in pedagogy, several studies have been conducted on
how to introduce it as an approach and the attitudes of both teachers and students. As has already
been mentioned in the previous title, there are some contributions on how MALL has improved
the learning of the four linguistic skills, mainly writing, listening, speaking, and reading.
Researchers like Luo, Chen & Fang (2015), Miangah & Nezarat (2012) and others summarize the
impact of inserting m-learning in English as a foreign language (EFL) classes as follows:
-

It provides a suitable atmosphere for learning inside and outside the class,
Students can have access to references at any time,
Learners can acquire knowledge through videos that keep them in touch with the cultural
components of the target language (Rozina et al., 2017).

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

113

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Attitudes of Second Year EFL Students at Dr Moulay Tahar University

GHOUNANE

Notwithstanding that there have been positive attitudes towards the integration of mobile learning
in higher education, mainly in language learning, there are still a few challenges facing its use.
According to Stockwell (2012), the usage of m-learning is still limited since the access to
information on mobile phones is restricted because of the small size of the mobile screen which
makes the learning tiring. Sharples (2009) highlights that researchers conduct several studies on
the integration of MALL, mainly in language teaching. He also adds that there is an absence of
scholarship on the use of mobile devices on the way EFL learners listen and speak (Ducate &
Lomicka, 2013).
As far as the teaching of phonetics is concerned, researchers like Xiao & Luo (2015) find it
useful to introduce mobile phones applications. They add that each area of phonetics needs a
specific device or application. In their view, “Phonetics is an essential part of foreign language
learning, with the help of mobile technologies, mobile learning has developed into a new mode of
learning” (Xiao & Luo, 2015, p. 1, as cited in Haggag, 2018, p. 193).
Interests on the incorporation of mobile education in teaching English for EFL or English as a
second language (ESL) classes attract a bunch of scholarly attention. Some researchers like Imam
et al. (2014) tend to create an application to enhance English pronunciation, while other scholars
attempt to develop applications that help foreign learners in learning English stress, although most
of the scholarship was conducted on Computer Assisted Pronunciation.
Due to the lack of scholarship on the integration of MALL, one can claim that this field of
research remains in its primary stage. What is challenging in its use is the lack of pedagogical
instructions that can help learners on the one hand and providing activities and quizzes instead of
depending on CALL activities on the other hand. This research seems challenging because the
previous scholarship focuses on studying attitudes instead of the impact of mobile devices on the
students’ language proficiency and development. When it comes to pronunciation, there is an
absence of scholarship on how the anywhere and anytime approach can improve the speaking and
listening skills of EFL learners.
Research Methodology and Design
The current research work relies mostly on quantitative and qualitative research tools for data
collection. The researcher depended on an interview to test the teachers’ attitudes towards the use
of MALL to teach EFL classes. To support her findings, she also conducted a pretest and a posttest
with two groups of students belonging to the second year license level during the sessions of
phonetics in the first and second semesters.
During the experiment, the researcher encouraged her students to download applications for
phonetic transcription. She also heartened them to employ websites during the lectures, in addition
to the use of digital recordings to check their pronunciation in terms of sound pronunciation and
stress placement.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

114

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Attitudes of Second Year EFL Students at Dr Moulay Tahar University

GHOUNANE

Sampling
The researcher selected the sample from Dr Moulay Tahar University of Saida, Algeria during the
academic year 2018/2019. As a teacher and a researcher in the area of English pronunciation, the
researcher aimed to introduce new approaches that go hand in hand with the development in the
field of technology and depending on her students’ needs. The researcher conducted several tests
on the students’ level of oral performance and motivation towards the field of phonetics. What
also encouraged the researcher’s to choose the topic is her students’ motivation towards mobile
applications to test their pronunciation. Hence, the sample was 95 students from the second year
for the pretest and posttest, while the researcher held an interview with 15 teachers from the
department of English language and literature at Dr Moulay Tahar University.
Data Collection and Analysis
Data collection took about six months because the researcher employed different research tools
and based on her observation on sound pronunciation and stress placement. Some of these features
are dealt with during the second year, for this reason, the researcher had to give her students
lectures on these features before the experiment.
Mobile-Based Phonetic Tests
English Sounds Test
During the first semester, the students had a general revision on English sounds and their
articulation in addition to syllables. The researcher focused on testing her students’ articulation of
some English sounds that they found them difficult during their first year including , , , ,
, , , , , . Students were required to record their pronunciation of English sounds and
then listen and detect their errors. Later on, they were asked to download and employ a free
application entitled “Sounds: The Pronunciation App”. The application consists of a sound chart
that helps them in getting the exact pronunciation of English sounds. The students were asked to
listen and repeat the sounds according to RP pronunciation. The researcher found that 70.52% of
students have corrected their pronunciation of these sounds.
The pronunciation application also contains activities based on reading, listening, and writing.
As far as reading is concerned, the students were given 15 transcribed words in the app to find out
their written forms as it is shown in table 1:
Table 1. Students’ responses in the selected words from the application (reading test)
Transcribed words Written forms
Students’ answers in percentage
Announcement
87.36%

Foreign
95.78%

Mirror
81.05%

Knee
100%

Original
85.26%

Iron
95.78%

Anchor
58.94%



Collaborator

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

74.73%
115

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Attitudes of Second Year EFL Students at Dr Moulay Tahar University

GHOUNANE



Honeycomb

56.84%



Diminution

90.52%

Unquenchable
50.52%

Towpath
53.68%

Signpost
89.47%

Catheter
94.73%

Courtly
96.84%

Throughout this activity, students were asked to read the transcribed forms of these words, and
then write to check their correction. They found it interesting and were more motivated in
comparison to other groups who were just given words to transcribe, or they were provided by the
transcribed forms and did the opposite. According to table 1, the students found difficulties in
reading the transcribed types of some words including ‘towpath’ with 53.68%, unquenchable with
50.52%, anchor with 58.94% and ‘honeycomb’ with 56.84%.
The findings also revealed that this application raised the students’ attention towards some
mistakes that they were making regarding some sounds like  and  in words including ‘anchor
and unquenchable’ or vowels like  and  in words such as ‘courtly and foreign’.
Throughout the same application “Sounds: The Pronunciation App”, the researcher asked her
students to transcribe the words which were found in it. They were given a list of words with a
table of phonetic symbols and were told to write the transcription of these words and check them
later on. The two groups were also given 15 words for their test:
Table 2. Students’ responses in the written test from the application (writing test)
Words in letters
Their transcribed forms
Students’ answers in
percentage
Opportunity
64.21%

Carpenter
91.57%

Coordinator
75.78%

Prepackaged
93.68%

Treasure
96.84%

Opportunism
66.31%

Soapflake
94.73%

Woebegone
51.57%

Viaduct
76.84%

Racecourse
92.63%

Macabre
85.26%

Giant
69.47%

Nuanced
52.63%

Bauxite
62.10%

Auctioneer
50.52%

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

116

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Attitudes of Second Year EFL Students at Dr Moulay Tahar University

GHOUNANE

In this activity, the students were asked to write the phonetic transcription of the above words
which are found in the application. About 93.68% of them shared positive attitudes towards this
activity. They justified their answers claiming that it supplies them with a keyboard of sound
symbols and correction after they finish the activity. They also stated that they enjoy the
application because they read and listen to the listed words. In contrast, 6.31% of the learners
maintained that it is tiring because of the small screen of their mobile phones in addition to the
lack of network.
According to the results mentioned in table 2, students still have a problem in the use of 
sound. They also have a constraint in distinguishing  and. The use of diphthongs mainly
, ,  and , i.e., they still find it difficult in putting these vowels. They justified their
answers claiming that it is due to the lack of practice in their first year because they found it
annoying to check words and practice them using a pocket dictionary.
The application also consists of a quiz tester based on the reading, writing and listening that the
researcher asked her students to practice it at home to encourage their self-directed learning and
test their attitudes towards anywhere and anytime approach. It was found that 95.78% of the
students did the activity because she asked them to write the answer to the quiz tester.
Stress Placement Test
The unit of stress placement in simple, complex, and compound words is introduced during the
first semester of the second year. Through a classroom evaluation, the researcher discovered that
64.21% of the selected students for the experiment found it challenging to put stress, although they
were provided with rules for stress placement, while 83.15 % of them did not know how to place
the secondary stress, in spite the fact that the researcher supplied them with activities for both class
and home.
After testing the students’ attitudes towards the mobile application for English sounds, and its
impact on their feedback, the researcher decided to continue the experiment focusing on the
students’ acquisition and understanding of the stress rules through a free application entitled
“Stress Training App” which contains 30 levels. To test her students’ level, she started with the
first one, which consists of four words. The researcher found that 90.52% of her students knew
where they could place stress for the words that are listed in table 3; for this reason, she moved to
other levels.
Table 3. Students’ responses in stress placement test at the first level (application test)
Words for the test
Stress placement
Students’ answers in
percentage
Confident
89.47%

Speculate
52.63%

Difficulty
64.21%

Correctly
92.63%

The application is based on listening to identify stress placement. The students were asked to listen
to the word, detect the stress placement, transcribe the word on board and provide the rule, i.e., the
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

117

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Attitudes of Second Year EFL Students at Dr Moulay Tahar University

GHOUNANE

teacher combined the MALL approach with the traditional one based on developing the learners’
listening skill. The activity raised their motivation, unlike the conventional method that made them
bored from practicing and checking out the rules in the handout. According to table 3, most of the
learners’ answers were more than 50%. The results also exhibited that students dealt with primary
stress in simple words on the first level. What also characterizes the application is that the learner
cannot move to the following level without getting at least one star in the first one.
In the second level, the learners were exposed to activity in placing both primary and secondary
stress. Through evaluating her students’ background in placing secondary stress, she found that
83.15% of them did not know how and when they have to put secondary stress. The second level
of the application also gave four words for practice, and the students had to get at least one star so
that they can move to the third level. Based on listening, the learners placed secondary stress for
the selected words as it is shown in table 4:
Table 4. Students’ responses for secondary stress placement in the second level of the application
Words in the second level Secondary stress placement
Students’ answers in
percentage
Exploration
81.52%

Demonstration
83.15%

Speculation
85.26%

Fundamental
88.42%

Although hinging on four words is not enough to test the students’ level in placing secondary
stress, the experiment had encouraged them to search for other applications and conduct extra
activities at home. Depending on listening, the students were able to put both primary and
secondary stress in the above examples as the findings show. More than 80% of the students
succeeded in this activity and moved to the third level, howbeit they had some difficulties in
transcribing words of more than three syllables.
Mobile-Based Reading and Listening Test
The researcher insisted on merging listening, and reading in learning English pronunciation.
Through reading, the students can attend and evaluate their speech depending on their mobile
recording. The researcher relied on the selection of the materials on a mobile application entitled
“BBC English Listening App”, which consists of BBC current world news with some short stories.
The students had to select a passage from BBC news. They started reading these passages and
recording their speech as the first pretest. Later on, they had to listen to native speakers reading
the passages. They also had to detect stress placement. They selected listening to “BBC news 02
& 03 with Rosemary Crick & Fiona MacDonald” and “The Story of Sherlock Holmes: The Yellow
Face” to be familiar with RP. They were asked to choose the words that they used to pronounce
incorrectly. After that, they picked up passages for reading and registering randomly depending
on the choice of the teacher. Students were also required to listen and read carefully the chosen
passages and correct their wrong pronunciation before recording for the posttest.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

118

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Attitudes of Second Year EFL Students at Dr Moulay Tahar University

Table 5. Phonetic tests
Testing
Pronunciation
Pretest
51.57%
Posttest
72.63%

Stress
45.26%
62.10%

GHOUNANE

Intonation
48.42%
64.21%

As table 5 divulges, there is a significant distinction between the pretest’ and posttest’s results. In
the pretest, students started reading and recording without listening to the application. They just
began with a first reading before recording to have an idea about the texts. As it is found in the
test, students perceived difficulties in pronouncing certain words, and sounds such as
correspondent, chaotic, pedestrianized, missile, inconsistent, negotiators, circumstances and
reproachfully…etc. While in the posttest, the pronunciation background had improved with
72.63% because they based their reading on listening to native speakers through the application.
As far as stress placement is concerned, the researcher wanted to raise the students’ attention
towards the issue of time constraints in studying how to place stress in both words and sentences,
while the focus of the syllabus is to consider stress placement in words. Therefore, the researcher
tried to give more time for stress placement in sentences even though learning phonetics for one
session per week is not enough; for this reason, the results were not good during the pretest with a
score of 45.26%.
As far as intonation is concerned, the results showed a significant difference between the
students’ level in the pretest and posttest. Depending on just theoretical lectures without
integrating the listening, reading, and writing students cannot develop a background and language
proficiency. As such, the researcher aimed to incorporate mobile applications that take into account
all the skills in learning English pronunciation, even though it seemed difficult due to the lack of
scholarship.
Teachers’ Interview
The sample for the interview was chosen from the department of English language and literature
at Dr Moulay Tahar University of Saida, Algeria. The researchers picked out 15 teachers who had
experience in teaching English pronunciation through modules of oral expression and phonetics.
The interview took two months since most of the teachers are not living in Saida, they are from
other towns; for this reason, getting in touch with them is a little bit difficult. The researcher
conducted a focus group interview due to this reason. She interviewed teachers in three meetings
for 50 minutes.
The interview consisted of six questions that addressed the attitudes and motivation of the
selected teachers towards the incorporation of m-learning in their lectures. The findings proved
that most of the teachers (86.66%) supported the inclusion of technology in education. They
highlighted that technology should be boosted by pedagogical instructions that help both teachers
and learners, but when it comes to mobile use in learning, 40 % of them disagreed and related that
to time constraints and overloaded syllabi. They added that they have not enough time to include
it in class, while 60 % of them maintained that they are trying to integrate m-learning mainly in
grammar and oral expression based on the learners’ listening and speaking skills.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

119

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Attitudes of Second Year EFL Students at Dr Moulay Tahar University

GHOUNANE

The researcher explained the motivation of the students towards the use of mobile phones in
class and home. She maintained that her students tend to download the e-books that she sent them
on their mobiles instead of their computers. She also justified their negative attitudes towards
bringing pocket dictionaries for the session of phonetics and how they prefer to check the
transcription of words in their mobiles through downloading e-dictionaries. For this reason, she
searched for an e-dictionary that can be used by her students. Throughout the following questions,
the researcher tested the teachers’ motivation and attitudes towards the inclusion of mobile
education in their classes:
- Do you allow your students to use mobile phones to learn in class?
73.33% of the teachers replied on this question stating that they are allowing their students to use
their e-dictionaries. They added that some learners are downloading applications for grammar rules
that they depend on them whenever they need to check out. They also highlighted that some of the
students prefer to write teachers’ notes of the lectures in their mobiles to search for more
information at home. 60% of the teachers added that some of their students do not even take notes
from the PowerPoint presentations or the board, but they instead prefer to take photos by their
mobiles. They maintained that they could not prevent their students, and to introduce an approach
to use it in class is a little bit difficult because m-learning is still in its infancy to be integrated into
classes.
- Do you guide your students in using mobile language applications?
86.66% of the interviewees argued that they guide their students in selecting the appropriate
applications for more research at home, not in class. In their parts, two grammar teachers claimed
that they encouraged their students to download some free grammar applications that contain rules
to be used in class and activities at home like “English Grammar in Use with Test App”. Similarly,
three teachers of oral expression maintained that this module is based on developing the listening
and speaking skills of the learner; for this reason, they searched for technology tools to help their
students. They added that they started encouraging them to build their skills through downloading
programs in their computers and mobile phones. They maintained that since the learners are more
motivated for m-learning, they guide them in selecting the appropriate applications according to
their needs and attitudes because it is regarded as self-directed learning in their point of view.
- Do you think that there is a possibility to introduce it officially in the Algerian context?
70% of the teachers maintained that if we suppose that Algerian universities go hand in hand with
world development in technology and the integration of new tools in the field of teaching and
learning, Algerian experts have to create new teaching curricula and materials that fit the use of
mobile learning. They added that its integration depends on the availability of mobile phones and
the net, and claimed that not all students have smartphones or tablets or access to the net. They
further highlighted that most good language applications are not for free; for this reason, their use
is restricted. Furthermore, 30% of the interviewees commented that if it is integrated into higher
education, they will find it challenging to switch from the traditional method that they used to
follow as students and then as teachers. They further claimed that the use of mobile learning is not
always positive because it has become a source for different types of academic misconduct, mainly
plagiarism and e-cheating.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

120

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Attitudes of Second Year EFL Students at Dr Moulay Tahar University

GHOUNANE

Recommendations
Although most of the teachers’ attitudes vary between negative and positive towards the
integration of MALL in language teaching and learning due to the reasons mentioned earlier, this
cannot be generalized for all EFL teachers in the Algerian context. Another critical point is that
teachers can welcome MALL if the following points are taken into account:
-

The teaching of English pronunciation can be motivated by the incorporation of new
teaching approaches and technological tools.
Teachers should encourage and guide students to use technology in the right way.
Teachers should cope with the latest changes in the fields of technology and education.
Teachers should take into consideration their students’ attitudes in teaching.
MALL can be introduced to classrooms if teachers are trained on how to employ the new
approach.
Teachers should guide their students in selecting the appropriate applications according to
their needs.
Teachers can benefit from the students’ attitudes towards mobile devices, i.e., combining
the formal with the informal settings of learning.
Teachers can direct their learners’ attitudes and put them in the right path, i.e., guiding them
to download activities that develop their four linguistic skills.
Teachers can mix both approaches, that is, the traditional one and MALL in class to avoid
relying on CALL and printed copies.

Research Limitations
Although the results of the study were overwhelming, there had been some obstacles that hampered
the researcher mainly time constraints, a long syllabus, lack of scholarship concerning MALL and
its implementation in the teaching and learning of English pronunciation. Besides, not all students
have smartphones and access to the net. Another important point is that two groups from the second
year license level who only conducted the survey, and the researcher cannot generalize that on the
teaching of English phonetics in all Algerian universities, or for the teaching of English in general.
These findings can provide a point of departure for more scholarship on how to move from
traditional approaches that link both the student and the teacher to time management and handouts
into the world of technology.
Conclusion
The present research under scrutiny was an endeavor by a researcher to cope with developments
in the fields of technology and language teaching and learning. Indeed, the researcher attempted
to test the attitudes of both learners and teachers towards the inclusion of m-learning in higher
education in the Algerian context through an experiment conducted in teaching English
pronunciation, which is dismissed from scholarship in the Algerian context. The current study
also aimed to provide a glimpse on the effectiveness of m-learning not only in guiding the learners
to acquire new vocabulary or develop their listening skill, but it was a road that bridges the gap
between all skills through combining the reading, listening, and writing skills.
The findings displayed that the integration of Mobile Assisted Language Learning is
welcomed by students, while teachers see that time constraint, old traditional, and overloaded
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

121

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Attitudes of Second Year EFL Students at Dr Moulay Tahar University

GHOUNANE

syllabi are stumbling blocks in its successful incorporation, in addition to the lack of scholarship
on how to introduce MALL and train teachers. On the students’ part, the results showed that they
enjoyed the experiment claiming that mobile phones keep them closer to any progress in the field
of language teaching and learning at anyplace and anytime. The results also revealed that the
students rely primarily on their teachers’ instructions in choosing the appropriate applications
depending on their needs, and the field of research, i.e., it is not only a learner-oriented approach
because the student is always in need of his/her teachers’ guidance in selecting the appropriate
application.
About the author:
Dr Nadia GHOUNANE is an associate professor of English language and literature at Dr Moulay
Tahar University of Saida. Her teaching areas include academic reading and writing, research
methodology, phonetics, sociolinguistics, and grammar. She published some research papers in
fields of sociolinguistics, literature and didactics. Her field of interest includes ICT and teaching,
teens’
language
and
social
media,
academic
writing
and
publishing.
ORCiD: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9491-7981
References
Brown, T. (2003). The Role of M-learning in the Future of E-learning in Africa? Conference
Proceedings from the 21st ICDE World Conference, At Hong Kong, China, 110, 122-137.
Chen, N. S. (2008). Effects of Short-Term Memory and Content Representation Type on Mobile
Language Learning. Language Learning and Technology, 12, (3), 93-113.
Ducate, L., & Lomika, L. (2013).
Going Mobile: Language Learning with an iPod Touch in
Intermediate French and German Classes. Foreign Language Annals, 46, (3), 445-468.
Georgiev, T. S., Smrikarov, A., & Georgieva, E. (2004). M-learning-a new Stage of E-learning.
Conference Proceedings from the 5th International Conference on Computer Systems and
Technologies, 1-5.
Haggag, H. M. (2018). Teaching Phonetics Using a Mobile-Based Application in EFL Context.
European Scientific Journal, 14, (14), 189-204.
Kukulska-HHulmc, A., & Shield, L. (2008). An Overview of Mobile Assisted Language Learning:
From Content Delivery to Supported Collaboration and Interaction. ReCall, 20, (30), 271-280.
Ozer, O., & Kılıç, F. (2018). The Effect of Mobile- Assisted Language Learning Environment on
EFL Students’ Academic Achievement, Cognitive Load and Acceptance of Mobile Learning
Tools. EURASIA Journal of Mathematics, Science and Technology Education, 14, (7), 29152928.
Rozina, A. G. et, al., (2017). Mobile Assisted Language Age Learning (MALL) in Developing
Second Language Learners’ Understanding of Grammar. Journal of Academia UiTM Negeri
Sembilan, 5, 187-208.
Saran, M., Seferoglu, G., & Cagiltay, K. (2009). Mobile Assisted Language Learning: English
Pronunciation at Learners' Fingertips. Egitim Arastirmalari-Eurasian Journal of Educational
Research, 34, 97-114.
Traxler, J. (2007). Defining, Discussing and Evaluating Mobile Learning: The Moving Finger
Writes and having writ. The International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning,
8, (2). Available at: http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/346/875
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

122

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
The Attitudes of Second Year EFL Students at Dr Moulay Tahar University

GHOUNANE

Trifonova, A., & Ronchetti, M. (2006). Mobile Learning: Is Anytime+ Anywhere= Always
Online? Conference Proceedings from the 6th IEEE International Conference on Advanced
Learning Technologies. Available at:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/221425274_Mobile_Learning_Is_Anytime_Anywh
ere_Always_Online
Turner, N (2012). What is mlearning? Available at://aurionlearning.
files.wordpress.com/2012/03/mobile-devices1.jpg

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

123

