Gender Differences in Time in Child Care During Unemployment

Margaret Gough Courtney1
University of La Verne, La Verne, CA

Running Head: Gender, Unemployment, and Time in Child Care
Keywords: child care, unemployment, work and family, gender and family, household labor,
family demography

1

Mail correspondence may be directed to Dr. Margaret Gough Courtney, Department of

Sociology & Anthropology, University of La Verne, Hoover Building 118A, La Verne, CA
91750. Email mgough@laverne.edu; phone 909-448-1581. The author acknowledges support
from a National Science Foundation (NSF)-American Sociological Association Postdoctoral
Fellowship. NSF had no involvement in the analysis or interpretation of the data presented in this
paper. Alexandra Killewald and Joseph Cabrera provided helpful comments on previous versions
of this article.

Gender Differences in Time in Child Care During Unemployment
Abstract
Objectives
There is great interest in the relationship between paid and unpaid labor time. Yet, in the United
States most studies have focused on the housework component of unpaid labor. Limited research
has examined how parental employment status relates to child care time. This study examines
how unemployment is related to time in multiple types of child care and how this relationship
varies by gender.
Methods
I use data from the 2003-2013 American Time Use Surveys to study cohabiting and married
parents ages 18-65 (N=44,198). I predict time spent in total child care, routine child care, and
educational/recreational child care by parental unemployment status using ordinary least squares
and seemingly unrelated regression models, and examine differences between weekday and
weekend time use.
Results
Consistent with time-based theories, I find unemployed parents spend more time in child care
than employed parents, but patterns vary by gender: unemployed mothers and fathers spend more
time in child care on weekdays, but unemployed fathers spent less time in child care on
weekends.
Conclusions
Results suggest similarities and differences between the unemployment-child care time
relationship and the relationship of unemployment with other types of unpaid labor such as
housework.

2

Gender Differences in Time in Child Care During Unemployment
Although an extensive literature has examined engagement in paid labor and how it relates to the
division of unpaid labor (housework and care work) in families (e.g., Bittman et al. 2003, Gough
and Killewald 2011, Hochschild and Machung 1989, Raley et al. 2012; Roeters et al. 2009), less
attention has been paid to unemployment as it relates to time in child care. Yet, child care is a
common, labor-intensive form of unpaid labor that is closely tied to parents’ labor force
participation, especially for mothers (Hochschild and Machung 1989).
This study contributes to the literature by using data on involuntary unemployment to
better understand how engagement in paid labor, or the lack thereof, is associated with the
gendered allocation of time to unpaid labor, specifically child care. Using the American Time
Use Survey (ATUS) I test household labor theories in the child care context, comparing
unemployed (and looking for work) and employed mothers on the one hand and unemployed
(and looking for work) and employed fathers on the other. I pay close attention to gender
differences because unpaid labor is strongly gendered—normative for women but not men (West
and Zimmerman 1987)—and to differences in the types of child care activities—routine versus
interactive (Roeters et al. 2009).
Understanding time spent in child care is important when thinking about how paid labor
may affect the division of unpaid labor in households. Because child care is costly (Blau 2001)
and more commonly outsourced than other household labor (Sullivan and Gershuny 2013) one
might expect to see large changes in child care time during unemployment because of reduced
income, with the excess burden placed on the unemployed parent. This could have implications
for the balance of power in households and the unemployed parent’s ability to achieve reemployment. Studying time in child care may also provide additional insights into the gender

3

division of labor in households. For example, some theories suggest that partners seek to bargain
out of housework because it is undesirable (Bittman et al. 2003, Brines 1994), but there is less
evidence that this is true for child care (Raley et al. 2012). Rather, parents often report that they
enjoy spending time with children, especially time in educational or play activities (Krueger et
al. 2009, Robinson and Godbey 1999). And, unlike the negative educational gradient for
housework, there is a positive gradient for child care: college-educated parents spend more time
in child care than less educated parents (Guryan et al. 2008), possibly because they see parenting
as an investment in their child’s future (Connelly and Kimmel 2010). Thus, while the division of
child care in a household could have similar attributes to the division of other types of unpaid
labor, there may also be something fundamentally different about dividing child care time.
Although the data do not allow me to study allocations of time at the dyad level, I provide
individual-level evidence of how unemployed parents engage in child care, and relate this to
relevant theories.
Background
Theory
Three general theoretical perspectives govern much of the research on the division of unpaid
labor, having been developed most extensively by housework researchers and extended in
various ways to the child care literature (Raley et al. 2012, Roeters et al. 2009). These
perspectives are described in greater detail elsewhere (e.g., Bianchi et al. 2000), so I provide only
a brief overview of each to motivate the hypotheses. The time and resource theories are primarily
conceived as dyadic theories, but here, as in other child care studies using ATUS data (e.g.,
Chesley and Flood 2017, Craig and Mullan 2010), only the individual implications of the
theories are tested because the ATUS collects time-use data from only one parent in the

4

household.
In the housework literature, time availability theory posits that the partner with more time
available for housework will contribute more to family responsibilities, such as housework and
child care, than the partner with less time available (Bianchi et al. 2000, England and Farkas
1986). For example, in a household in which the wife works part time and the husband works
full time, the theory predicts the wife will do much more household work than the husband.
Similarly, the demand/response capacity approach in the child care literature (Brayfield 1995,
Coverman 1985), assumes parents can substitute for one another in child care based on demands
they face in the labor market (Roeters et al. 2009:1195). Employed parents may be limited in
their ability to be involved in child care because of time scarcity (Bianchi 2000), but unemployed
parents do not spend time in paid labor, so they should theoretically have more time for child
care, even if they are spending some time searching for a job. Furthermore, given typical work
patterns, unemployed parents often experience a significant reduction in weekday time
constraints, so their time in child care may be more responsive on weekdays than on weekends.
Thus, for individual parents, and regardless of their partner’s involvement in child care, these
time-based theories lead me to hypothesize that:
Hypothesis 1A (H1A): Unemployed parents will spend more time in child care than
employed parents.
Hypothesis 1B (H1B): There will be a larger gap in child care time between unemployed
and employed parents on weekdays, when employed parents typically have greater time
constraints, than weekends.
Resource theory is the second common theoretical perspective used to explain the
division of unpaid labor. In the housework context, relative resources or bargaining theory states

5

that the partner with relatively greater resources (typically operationalized as income) has more
power to bargain out of housework, and will therefore do less, than the partner with fewer
resources (Bittman et al. 2003, Brines 1994). Autonomy theory states that individuals, usually
women, use their earnings to either buy substitutes for their unpaid labor time (e.g., prepared
meals) (Gupta 2007) or to forego housework (Gupta 2006, 2007, Killewald and Gough 2010).
It is difficult to apply relative resource theory at the individual level because it is
foundationally about bargaining. Additionally, extending resource theories to child care is not
entirely straightforward (Raley et al. 2012). Whereas housework is considered by most to be an
undesirable activity to be bargained away or outsourced, the literature suggests that parents like
spending time with their children (e.g., Robinson and Godbey 1999). Thus, it is not clear that
parents would want to use their resources to bargain out of child care. On the other hand, there
are ways in which having relatively greater resources could matter. Not all child care is created
equal; routine child care, such as feeding and bathing children, is considered to be more
mundane and less enjoyable than child care related to play (Sayer et al. 2004). Raley and
colleagues (2012) also noted that parents might find certain child-related tasks like transportation
onerous. For these reasons, in the event of unemployment, a still-employed partner may desire to
shift these routine or onerous child care tasks to the unemployed parent, using a bargaining
strategy. While I cannot test whether such a “shift” is happening, evidence of greater time in
routine child care among the unemployed compared to employed parents with similar
characteristics may provide indirect evidence for this theory.
Perhaps more than relative resources theory, autonomy theory can also be extended to
child care; parents, particularly mothers, may use their individual earnings to purchase
substitutes for their own time in child care, such as services at a day care center. Although

6

parents reportedly enjoy child care, it remains the most-outsourced household task (Sullivan and
Gershuny 2013), likely because it facilitates dual-earning. In the event of unemployment,
individual resources may be constrained, and parents may do more child care themselves,
outsourcing less.
As described above, bargaining theory can be tested indirectly by looking at time in
different types of child care—routine versus educational/recreational. But without data on
outsourcing it is not possible to conclusively distinguish between autonomy and time-based
mechanisms because unemployment affects both time and individual financial resources.
Because of the conflicting theoretical predictions of resource theories in the child care context,
and the difficulty of testing bargaining without data on partner’s time use, I test the resource
theories indirectly and hypothesize that:
Hypothesis 2 (H2): The gaps in child care time between unemployed and employed
parents will be larger for routine child care tasks than for educational or recreational child
care tasks because routine tasks may be less desirable.
Both the time- and resource-based theories are conceived of as gender neutral because
they assume that, net of economic characteristics, men and women are equally likely to use their
time or resources rationally; this ignores the fact that time in paid and unpaid labor is gendered.
Full-time work in paid labor is normative for men (West and Zimmerman 1987), and
increasingly for women. But, time in unpaid labor is normative for women and less so for men
(Berk 1985, West and Zimmerman 1987). In recent decades a norm of “intensive mothering” has
developed for women, which reinforces traditional gender norms. The idea behind intensive
mothering is that women are responsible for their children’s physical, emotional, and
developmental needs and should be extremely devoted to their children (Hays 1998). Some

7

similar changes in norms have occurred for fathers. Although traditionally time in housework
and child care was normative for women but not men, in recent decades the role of the father has
changed in significant ways, such as through the development of a new ideal father norm. This
norm suggests that fathers should provide daily physical and emotional support to children
(Goldscheider and Waite 1991) and that men should be more involved in the home (e.g.,
Coltrane 1996). Many men seem to subscribe to this ideal (Gerson 1993, 2010) whether or not
they actually implement it.
These gender norms and gender roles relate to the third theoretical perspective to inform
this study—West and Zimmerman’s (1987) “doing gender” theory. Unlike the time and relative
resource theories, doing gender theory is not necessarily built upon the premise of dyadic
decision making. As applied to housework, the theory states that housework is a venue in which
men and women perform their gender roles, with men eschewing housework and women
embracing housework. Although this might also be true for child care, the potentially competing
norm of the new father role, and the fact that both fathers and mothers tend to enjoy time with
their children, means the implications of the theory are not immediately clear for child care. Past
research has found that mothers’ time in child care regularly exceeds fathers’ time (e.g., Raley et
al. 2012), which could be consistent with doing gender. If women and men also do gender
through child care, perhaps to a lesser extent than for housework, and routine child care is more
similar to housework (normative for women but not men) than educational/recreational child
care because it is less desirable and less optional (Sayer et al. 2004), I hypothesize that:
Hypothesis 3A (H3A): The gap in child care time between unemployed and employed
mothers will be larger than the gap between unemployed and employed fathers because
unemployment reduces the time constraints on doing gender through child care.

8

Hypothesis 3B (H3B): The gap in child care time between unemployed and employed
fathers will be smaller for routine child care activities than the gap for educational or
recreational child care activities. Note that this hypothesis is the opposite of Hypothesis
2.
Hypothesis 3C (H3C): The gap in child care time between unemployed and employed
mothers will be larger for routine child care activities than the gap for educational or
recreational child care activities.
Past Research
A few studies have examined the relationship between unemployment and housework time, and
other studies have explored changes in fathers’ involvement in child care and parents’ time in
different child care tasks. Studies of unemployment and housework have found that unemployed
individuals spend more time in housework than employed individuals (Burda and Hamermesh
2010, Ström 2002) or that periods of unemployment are associated with greater time spent in
housework compared to periods of employment (Gough and Killewald 2011, Shamir 1986). The
studies provide support for the time- and resource-based theories, and one study (Gough and
Killewald 2011) found support for doing gender. Using fixed-effects models, the authors
demonstrated that both men and women increased time in housework during periods of
unemployment, but the magnitude of the women’s increase was about twice the magnitude of the
men’s increase. If housework and child care time have similar determinants one would expect to
find results similar to those of previous housework studies.
Studies of fathers’ involvement in child care have examined several facets of fathering
related to labor force participation. In the 1990s, Casper (1996) found that fathers’ increased
involvement as primary caregivers appeared to be related to the availability of jobs and the

9

economy overall. A higher percentage of children were being cared for by their fathers, and a
lower percentage was attending day care centers, when unemployment and part-time
employment rates were high for men during the recession of the late 1980s and early 1990s
(Casper 1996).
Recent studies have shown that the ideal father norm is not being realized to the extent
previously imagined, but fathers do seem to be more involved with child care than in the past,
particularly on weekends. Researchers presume this to be a result of weekend involvement
conflicting less with fathers’ paid labor than involvement in child care during the week (Hook
and Wolfe 2012, Yeung et al. 2001). If this is true, we should expect to see similar behavior from
working mothers, and, as hypothesized earlier, a greater discrepancy in child care time between
employed and unemployed parents on weekdays compared to weekends.
Finally, other researchers have examined fathers’ and mothers’ time in routine and
interactive child care tasks, or how mothers’ resources affect fathers’ involvement in child care.
Using data from the Netherlands, Roeters and colleagues (2009) found that mothers’ time in
child care was largely unaffected by own or spouse work demands, but fathers’ participation in
routine child care was more reactive to such demands. They argued that this was consistent with
the notion that fathers prefer interactive activities and focus more child care time on play than
routine care. Bittman and colleagues (2004) also found evidence that fathers’ time in routine
child care was significantly related to their spouses’ market work hours, though this was not the
case for interactive activities. The more time their spouses dedicated to paid labor, the more time
fathers spent in routine child care. Fathers also seem more likely to participate in physical care of
children when mothers have higher relative earnings (Raley et al. 2012). Thus, contrary to doing
gender, there may be larger differences in time for routine tasks than for educational/recreational

10

activities during a father’s unemployment, a finding that would be in conflict with H3B but
would support H2. I test how a partner’s work hours might influence time in child care in a
supplementary analysis.
Method
Data come from the 2003-2013 waves of the ATUS. The ATUS is a nationally representative
time diary study conducted by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics and the Census Bureau. The
detailed time diary data are well suited for this study and allow me to examine time in child care
overall and broken out by types of activities—routine and educational/recreational (Roeters et al.
2009 refer to the latter as “interactive”). The ATUS sample is a subsample of individuals
selected from households that completed the final month of Current Population Survey (CPS)
interviews. Respondents are interviewed once about their time use on the previous day; some
demographic and other data are also collected. Data were extracted from ATUS-X (Hofferth et
al. 2013), which is an IPUMS Time Use project.
The sample includes men and women ages 18 to 65 who are cohabiting or married, not
disabled or retired at the last CPS interview, and with at least one own child under age 18 living
in the household. To better reflect modern family forms, I estimate models using a combined
sample of cohabiting and married parents. Results limited to married parents are very similar to
those including cohabiting parents. I refer to all spouses and cohabiting partners as “partners”.
I estimate models of the overall association between unemployment and time in child
care for men and women separately since the analysis hinges on comparing unemployed and
employed mothers along with comparing unemployed and employed fathers. In sensitivity
analyses, I test for statistically significant variation in the outcomes by subgroup, including
whether results differ depending on the age of the youngest child. I also estimate supplementary

11

models combining (involuntarily) unemployed and (voluntarily) out of the labor force (OOLF)
fathers, some of who may be discouraged workers. Finally, to assess robustness related to partner
labor force participation, I estimate models including the usual work hours of the partner.
Dependent Variables
There are three dependent variables: 1) total time in child care; 2) time in routine child care; and
3) time in educational/recreational child care. A list of the specific time-use measures used to
create these variables is provided in Appendix A. Total time in child care includes a spectrum of
tasks, such as physical care for children, playing with children, and so forth. It is the sum of time
in all routine and educational/recreational child care tasks. Routine child care includes tasks such
as physical care of children and transporting children. Educational/recreational child care
includes education-related and play activities. Values of the dependent variables are top coded at
the 99th percentile and refer to only one parent in the household.
Independent Variable
The key independent variable is own unemployment at the time of the ATUS interview. The
variable is binary, taking a value of 1 if the respondent reports being unemployed and looking for
work and 0 otherwise. This is the same independent variable used in past research on time use
during unemployment.
Control Variables
I control for two additional labor-related variables. First, I include an indicator variable for being
OOLF at the time of the ATUS interview. These parents are voluntarily not working or are not
searching for work. Second, to keep the household as the focus, even though partner variables
are limited, I include an indicator variable for whether the partner was working at the time of the
ATUS interview. Unfortunately, I cannot specifically assess partner unemployment because in

12

the ATUS the unemployed and OOLF partners are combined into one category. Although
previous studies have used information from the last CPS interview (e.g., Raley et al. 2012) for
partner resource and employment information, I am concerned about changes occurring between
the last CPS interview and the ATUS interview, especially in later years of the survey (post2008) during the Great Recession and subsequent slow recovery. As such, I rely on the data
available at the time of the ATUS interview.
I also control for demographic characteristics that could be correlated with both
unemployment and child care time, such as number of children, age, education, and
race/ethnicity. Since everyone in the sample has at least one child I control for the number of
children in the household using dummy variables to indicate the presence of two, and three or
more children because the number of children is related to the amount of child care that must be
completed. I also control for the age of the youngest child because as children age they take more
responsibility for their own care, reducing demands on parents. I control for the respondent’s
age, education, and race/ethnicity. Education is a categorical variable with possible values of less
than high school (includes GED), high school diploma, some college, and college degree.
Race/ethnicity is a categorical variable with possible values of non-Hispanic (NH) white, NH
black, Hispanic, NH American Indian or Alaskan Native, NH Asian or Native Hawaiian or Other
Pacific Islander, and NH multiracial. I also control for metro status (i.e., living in a metropolitan
area), region, and annual state-level unemployment rate because poor local labor market
conditions may affect decisions about time in household labor (Burda and Hamermesh 2010). In
preliminary models I controlled for income using the categorical measure available from the last
CPS interview; results were nearly identical so I use the more parsimonious model without
income for all analyses presented.

13

Missing Data
I drop observations with poor data quality, as indicated by BLS coding (494 observations)—the
BLS flags these observations as unsuitable—and observations with missing partner’s
employment status at the time of the ATUS interview (92 observations). I use missing flags for
missing values on the only two covariates with missing data—metro status and age of the
youngest child – with no more than 2.2 percent missing for either variable. My final analytic
sample includes 44,198 respondents.
Analysis
In Model 1, I estimate the unadjusted association between unemployment and child care time.
This provides initial evidence for H1A that unemployed parents will spend more time in child
care than employed parents. In Model 2, I include all control variables plus a control for whether
the time diary observation refers to a weekend as opposed to a weekday. This provides evidence
for all of the hypotheses except for H1B, which states that the gaps in child care time between
unemployed and employed parents will be larger for weekdays than for weekends. To test this
hypothesis, I include an interaction between unemployment status and weekend diary in Model
3. The omitted category for Model 3 is employed with a weekday diary with three comparisons:
unemployed with a weekday diary, employed with a weekend diary, and unemployed with a
weekend diary. Models are weighted using the sample weights and replicate weights provided in
the ATUS and are estimated using svy commands in Stata 13. Because I do not have
longitudinal data to estimate models of transitions into and out of unemployment, I estimate
ordinary least squares (OLS) models. I use seemingly unrelated regression (SUR) and adjusted
Wald tests to assess whether differences in coefficients across models were statistically
significant.

14

Results
Descriptive statistics are shown in Table 1. The first three columns show statistics for fathers
who are employed, unemployed, and OOLF. The next three columns show comparable statistics
for mothers. There is considerable variation in child care time in the sample, as indicated in the
ranges shown in the final column. On average, unemployed parents appear to spend more time in
child care than employed parents but not necessarily as much time in child care as parents who
are OOLF.
[Table 1 about here.]
Hypothesis Testing
Hypotheses 1A and 1B
H1A states that unemployed parents will spend more time in child care than employed parents.
The results of models testing this hypothesis are shown in Table 2, Model 2 (full results for
Models 2 and 3 are available in Appendix Tables 2-4). Panel 1 of Table 2 reports the results for
total time in child care; Panel 2 reports the results for routine child care; and Panel 3 reports the
results for educational/recreational child care. On average, unemployed fathers spend about 35
more minutes per day in total time in child care; 22 more minutes per day in routine child care;
and 12 more minutes per day in educational/recreational child care compared to employed
fathers. Thus, for fathers the results support H1A.
[Table 2 about here]
Results for mothers indicate similar patterns. On average, unemployed mothers spend
about 36 more minutes per day in total time in child care; 16 more minutes per day in routine
child care; and 20 more minutes per day in educational/recreational child care compared to
employed mothers. The results for mothers also support H1A. Overall, for both mothers and
fathers, at the individual level there is initial evidence supporting the time-based theories.
15

H1B states that the gaps in child care time between employed and unemployed parents
will be larger for weekdays than for weekends. Results of models testing this hypothesis are
shown in Table 2, Model 3. The omitted category is an employed parent with a weekday diary.
Thus, to identify the gap between unemployed and employed parents on weekdays one can
simply examine the magnitude of the coefficient on Unemployed—weekday diary. For weekends
the gap can be calculated by subtracting the coefficient for Employed—weekend diary from the
coefficient for Unemployed—weekend diary.
For fathers, the coefficient on Unemployed—weekday diary indicates that unemployed
fathers spend an average of 46 more minutes per weekday in child care than employed fathers.
By contrast, unemployed fathers spend 46 fewer minutes per day in child care on weekends than
employed fathers (-38.70-7.70 from Table 2, Model 3). These differences are statistically
significant (unadjusted Wald test: χ2=55.42, p<.001). Overall, the results for fathers do not
support H1B because the gaps for weekdays and weekends roughly cancel each other out, rather
than the weekday gap being larger.
The results for mothers differ from those of fathers. Compared to employed mothers with
weekday diaries, the Unemployed—weekday diary coefficient in Model 3 indicates that
unemployed mothers spend about 37 more minutes per weekday on child care. The gap for
weekend time, calculated by subtracting the coefficient for Employed—weekend diary (-25.11)
from the coefficient for Unemployed—weekend diary (-4.84; not significantly different from
employed, weekday diary), is about 20 minutes, but the difference in the gaps between
unemployed and employed mothers for weekdays versus weekends is not statistically significant
(unadjusted Wald test: χ2=1.53, p=0.22). Thus, the results do not support H1B.
Hypotheses 2, 3B, and 3C

16

H2 states that the gaps in child care time between employed and unemployed parents will be
larger for routine child care than for educational/recreational child care activities, and H3B and
H3C consider possible differences in these patterns by gender. The latter hypotheses state that
the gaps for fathers will be smaller for routine child care versus educational/recreational child
care (H3B), which is the opposite of H2, whereas for mothers they will be larger (H3C). SUR
and adjusted Wald tests are used with Model 2 to assess support for these hypotheses. All gaps
refer to time differences between unemployed and employed parents.
Unemployed parents spend more time in routine and educational/recreational child care
than employed parents across the models. Testing for differences by type of care results in mixed
findings. For fathers, the gap for routine child care is substantively larger than the gap for
educational/recreational child care (22 minutes vs. 12 minutes; see coefficients in Table 2), and
statistically significant (F=5.80, p=0.02). Thus, H2 is supported but not H3B. For mothers, the
gaps are substantively closer than for fathers (16 minutes in routine care vs. 20 minutes in
educational/recreational care; see coefficients in Table 2), and this 4-minute difference is not
statistically significant (F=0.88, p=0.35). Thus, for mothers, neither H2 nor H3C are supported.
Hypothesis 3A
Finally, I hypothesized that the gaps in child care time between unemployed and employed
mothers would be larger than the gaps between unemployed and employed fathers. Using SUR
and adjusted Wald tests to compare the coefficients in Table 2, Model 2, I find minimal support
for this hypothesis. For total child care time the difference (35.55-34.72=0.83 minutes) is very
small, and the Wald test has an F-statistic of 0.02 (p=.90). For routine child care the gap between
unemployed and employed fathers (21.7 minutes) appears larger than the gap between
unemployed and employed mothers (16 minutes), but this difference is not statistically
significant (F=1.64, p=0.20). For educational/recreational child care the gap between
17

unemployed and employed mothers (20 minutes) is significantly larger than the gap between
unemployed and employed fathers (12 minutes) (F=4.05, p=.04). Thus, H3A is very minimally
supported for educational/recreational child care only.
Sensitivity Analyses
I conduct four types of sensitivity analyses as previewed in the methods section. First, I assess
whether the results differ by age of child, comparing parents of children under the age of 5 with
parents of children ages 5 and older because children under the age of 5 are less likely to be in
school and more likely to require considerable hands-on parental care. Results for Models 2 and
3 including an interaction with child age are shown in Table 3.
[Table 3 about here.]
Results in Table 3, Model 2 indicate that unemployed fathers spend more time in child
care compared to employed fathers regardless of child age, with the exception of
educational/recreational child care, for which they do not significantly differ if they have
children under the age of 5. Results for Model 3 indicate that the prior patterns of unemployed
fathers spending more time in child care on weekdays and less on weekends holds for fathers of
children under the age of 5; unemployed fathers with children age 5 or older do more child care
on weekdays but do not do less child care on weekends. This is true for total child care and
routine child care. For educational/recreational child care, unemployed fathers with children age
5 or older spend more time in care on weekdays only. Results for mothers indicate that
unemployed mothers spend significantly more time in total child care when children are age 5 or
older, compared to employed mothers, but there are no differences among mothers of small
children. This is also true for routine child care and educational/recreational child care. Results
for Model 3 for mothers indicate that unemployed mothers spend more time in child care on

18

weekdays when the child was is 5 or older, but there are no significant differences among
mothers of small children.
Second, I assess the robustness of my results within subgroups (blacks versus non-blacks,
Hispanics versus non-Hispanics, and parents with college degrees versus those without college
degrees; results not shown). Most of the coefficients on black and Hispanic are imprecisely
estimated, likely because of limited sample size; there were 119 black unemployed dads, 145
Hispanic unemployed dads, 86 black unemployed moms, and 286 Hispanic unemployed moms.
However, the results may also suggest that the main model results pertain primarily to non-black,
non-Hispanic, and non-college educated parents. Future research should explore this further.
Third, I examine whether results differ when unemployed and OOLF fathers are
combined because OOLF fathers may be discouraged workers and thus have similar experiences
to unemployed fathers (but no longer be looking for work). The results are largely consistent
with the main analysis (results available on request). Including the OOLF fathers with the
unemployed fathers increases the coefficients by a few minutes for total child care and
educational/recreational child care (e.g., 38 minutes for total child care in the combined group vs.
35 minutes among only the unemployed).
Fourth, I examine whether controlling for the partner’s usual work hours changes the
results. I find the results are very similar. For total child care and routine child care the
coefficients on unemployment are attenuated only slightly. The largest difference is for routine
child care for fathers for which the coefficient on unemployment is reduced from 21.6 to 17.9
after accounting for partner’s usual work hours. For fathers’ educational/recreational child care
time the coefficient is slightly larger after accounting for partner’s usual work hours (14.23 vs.
11.98), but for mothers it remains almost identical to the main analyses. The weekday versus

19

weekend pattern tested for H1B also held. Overall, the results are very consistent across models.
Limitations
As with all studies there are limitations. The ATUS data are cross sectional, so one
cannot examine transitions into and out of unemployment. This means that reverse causality is a
(fairly unlikely) possibility—greater time spent in child care may lead to a job loss, rather than a
job loss leading to greater time in child care. I also do not have data on the length of the
unemployment spell, which could have consequences for time use; the division of labor is
thought to be “sticky” (Gough and Killewald 2011), so it may be the case that the division of
labor changes less than would be expected on the basis of lower economic resources during
unemployment, but that as the length of a spell wears on, couples make additional changes. In
addition, to provide a broad picture of the relationships it is necessary to combine time in
specific child care tasks, thereby losing information in the data. A closer examination of specific
tasks will be a useful endeavor for future research. Nonetheless, given the fairly limited literature
on this specific topic and population, these estimates provide a useful starting point for future
research on this topic.
A second drawback to the ATUS is that it is not possible to examine division of
household labor from the perspective of the dyad, which is the basis for many of the household
labor theories, because the ATUS collects time use data from only one person in the household.
Being able to examine child care time from a dyadic perspective would provide a more complete
picture of whether the results presented represent a reallocation of household labor between
parents during unemployment or whether they represent changes in the amount of household
production being completed. Previous research on housework indicates that both mechanisms
may contribute to differences in time use during unemployment (Gough and Killewald 2011); it

20

is possible this would also be true for child care. Lastly, I cannot uniquely distinguish between
time- and resource-based theories because unemployment affects both time and resources, and
both mechanisms may operate on time use; separating routine and educational/recreational child
care helps to assess bargaining theory indirectly but not autonomy theory.
Discussion
A considerable amount of research has examined the relationship between paid labor and time in
household labor, and some studies have examined how unemployment relates to time in
housework, but study of the relationship between unemployment and time in child care for both
mothers and fathers is limited in the United States. With this study I contribute to the literature
by using data from the ATUS, testing existing theories of the division of household labor, and
examining how unemployment is related to time in different types of child care.
Three theoretical perspectives undergird this study, as in other studies of housework and
child care. The first theory is time availability and the related demand/response capacity
approach. I generally find support for the time-based theories from an individual-level
perspective; support for differences between weekdays and weekends is mixed. Unemployed
parents spend more time on average in total child care, routine child care, and
educational/recreational child care than employed parents, supporting H1A. These results are
consistent with prior research on unemployment and housework, and studies of fathers as
primary caregivers (Burda and Hamermesh 2010, Casper 1996, Gough and Killewald 2011).
In terms of differences related to weekdays versus weekend days (H1B), time constraint
results are not supported. Unemployed fathers do spend more time in child care on weekdays
than employed fathers, but they also spend considerably less time in child care on weekend days
than employed fathers, with the magnitudes of the gaps cancelling each other out. This may
indicate that unemployed fathers shift some of their child care responsibilities from weekends to
21

weekdays during unemployment, while employed fathers may partially compensate for less time
in child care on weekdays by spending more time in child care on weekends. For mothers the
results are not consistent with H1B—the difference in gaps for weekdays versus weekends
between unemployed and employed moms is not statistically significant. However, perhaps
interestingly, both employed and unemployed mothers spend more time in child care on
weekdays than on weekends. I discuss the rather striking gender difference in how unemployed
fathers and mothers spend time in child care, compared to their employed counterparts, in more
depth later in this section.
The second theoretical perspective was the resource perspective. To assess the possible
role of resources in the bargaining context, given the lack of dyadic data, I tested the gaps in
child care time between employed and unemployed parents to see if they were larger for routine
versus educational/recreational child care (H2). I find some evidence for this hypothesis for
fathers. The gap for fathers between unemployed and employed is larger for routine child care
than for educational/recreational child care, but for mothers there is no significant difference in
the gaps. Thus, there is some evidence consistent with bargaining predictions in the child care
context for fathers when this indirect method of measurement is used.
Although both the time- and resource-based theories are conceived as gender neutral,
there is abundant evidence in the literature that time in child care is gendered, as is time in
housework. The third theoretical perspective, doing gender, predicts that if routine child care
bears similarities to housework, the gaps in child care time between unemployed and employed
mothers will be larger than those for fathers (H3A). This is not a certainty given the competing
ideal father role. The gendered nature of child care also led me to hypothesize that the gaps
between unemployed and employed fathers would be smaller for routine child care than for

22

educational/recreational child care, because the latter is more desirable (H3B; opposite of H2),
and that the gaps between unemployed and employed mothers would be larger for routine child
care versus educational/recreational child care because the former is more gender normative
(H3C). I find very little support for these hypotheses. With regard to H3A, the gap between
employed and unemployed mothers is only slightly larger than the gap between unemployed and
employed fathers for total child care and is not statistically significant; the gap for routine child
care is also not significant. For educational/recreational child care, the gap between employed
and unemployed mothers is about 8 minutes larger than the gap between employed and
unemployed fathers and statistically significant (p=0.04). Thus, for educational/recreational child
care, there is minimal support for H3A. I find no support for H3B or H3C. For fathers the gap for
routine child care is larger than the gap for educational/recreational child care, and for mothers
the gap for educational/recreational child care is not significantly different than the gap for
routine child care. The results are generally not consistent with a doing gender perspective in the
way I hypothesized, though both results are potentially consistent with notions of intensive
mothering and the ideal father norm.
While the evidence for doing gender tested in Hypotheses 3A-3C is minimal, the
conception of doing gender tested here is rather specific. The more general idea that men and
women perform gender in the household labor context is well supported by this analysis. Even
though the gaps in child care time between unemployed and employed mothers are substantively
very similar to the gaps in child care time between unemployed and employed fathers overall,
mothers still spend much more time in child care than fathers, regardless of employment status.
This is consistent with the notion of child care being normative for women and not men, and it is
consistent with past research on time in housework.

23

The analysis meant to tease out the role of time constraints by comparing weekdays to
weekend days (Model 3) suggests that mothers and fathers have different approaches to time in
child care when unemployed. Unemployed mothers spend more time in child care than their
employed counterparts on weekdays, as do unemployed fathers, whether because they have more
time available, to compensate for not contributing financially to the family, or for some other
reason, such as pressure to engage in intensive parenting. However, unemployed fathers spend
less time in child care on weekend days than their employed counterparts, which is not the case
for mothers. One possible interpretation of this finding is that unemployed fathers are doing
gender through shifting child care time around rather than simply increasing it (though they do
end up spending more time in child care than employed counterparts over the course of an entire
week). In other words, unemployed fathers may have the view that if they are going to be doing
extra child care during the week (behavior that is non-normative for men) then they should
compensate for this “deviant” behavior on the weekends by doing less child care than they
normally would (and that employed fathers do). A second, more speculative, possibility is that
mothers are playing a role in unemployed fathers’ child care behavior. For example, if mothers
perceive it as difficult to be home with the children all day (even if realistically many
unemployed fathers are probably only caring for children after school), they may feel as though
they need to reduce the burden on their partners by giving their partners a break from child care
on the weekend. This is one reason why having dyadic data on time use is so useful; one could
test whether partners of unemployed fathers are increasing their child care time on weekends at
the same time that the fathers are decreasing time. Data on gender role attitudes could also help
shed light on these potential explanations for the differing behavior of fathers and mothers.
The greater time in child care for unemployed parents compared to employed parents is

24

not inconsequential in terms of social significance. Results can be contextualized in terms of
weekly time use, financial implications, and possible benefits to children. In terms of the
importance of these differences from a time perspective, using the coefficients from Model 3 to
calculate the weekly difference in time (holding covariates constant), unemployed fathers spend
about 2.25 more hours per week in child care than employed fathers. Comparing this to the
average time in child care for employed fathers (5.8 hours, Table 1), this is 39% more hours.
Unemployed fathers spend approximately 61% more time in routine care than employed fathers,
and 21% more time in educational/recreational care. Mothers demonstrate a somewhat different
pattern. Using the coefficients from Model 3 (holding covariates constant), unemployed mothers
spend about 3.8 more hours per week in child care than employed mothers. Comparing this to the
average time in child care for employed mothers (9.3 hours, Table 1), this is 41% more hours.
Unemployed mothers spend approximately 34% more time in routine care per week compared to
employed mothers and 46% more time in educational/recreational child care. Thus, whereas
unemployed fathers are relatively more involved in routine care compared to employed fathers,
the larger gap for mothers is with educational/recreational care.
In terms of financial implications, we can attempt to attach a dollar value to the extra
hours of care each week using the average cost of a babysitter in urban areas. The average hourly
rate is $10-15 (care.com n.d.), so 2.25 extra hours of father care per week could potentially save
a family $1125-$1688 over the course of a year (at $10-$15/hr). For mothers the savings could
be as high as $1900-$2850 (at $10-$15/hr). Thus, especially for low-income families, greater
hours of parent care among unemployed parents compared to employed parents could translate
into significant savings.
Finally, we can think about potential benefits to children. Researchers have argued that

25

greater parental education is important for child investments. Guryan and colleagues (2008)
demonstrated that college-educated mothers spent about 6 more hours per week in child care
than mothers with less than a high school education, and college-educated fathers spent about 4
more hours per week in child care compared to fathers with less than a high school education.
Therefore, the extra 2.25 hours of child care per week that I calculate for unemployed fathers,
and the extra 3.8 hours for unemployed mothers, are equivalent to more than half of the benefit
of a college degree in terms of time investments. Given findings for educational differences in
time investments for children’s well-being, the extra time unemployed parents spend in child
care compared to similar employed parents could benefit children’s development, along with
potentially helping to buffer the negative consequences of a loss of financial resources that may
accompany job loss. There is one caveat: if unemployed parents are depressed, or providing a
negative home environment, children may not experience benefits of additional parental child
care. Studies that offer insight into parents’ mental outlook during unemployment may help to
shed light on this possibility.
In sum, I find considerable support for time-based theories at the individual level. But I
find very limited support for bargaining theory. I also find limited support for doing gender in
terms of the hypotheses tested, but, as noted above, there is strong evidence of doing gender in
the broader sense of the theory. While the time-based results may seem self evident, the lack of
evidence for bargaining and for doing gender in terms of types of tasks suggests there may be
something qualitatively different about the division of child care in a household compared to the
division of housework, a position also argued by Sullivan (2013). The broader evidence for
doing gender suggests that, similar to other types of labor, and despite fathers’ endorsement of
the ideal father norm, gendered norms and expectations may remain influential in the decisions

26

parents make about caring for children.
Although two of the three main theoretical approaches to the study of the division of
household labor appear mostly applicable in the child care context, researchers ought to consider
the development of new, multi-faceted theories of the relationship between paid work and child
care. For example, one might build from the demand/response capacity model to incorporate
cultural notions of good parenting, expectations for caring, expectations of the provider role,
gender dynamics within households, and so forth. Richer theoretical explanations, together with
additional sources of data, may help us better understand the underlying dynamics of gendered
child care arrangements in the home whether during employment or unemployment.
To develop and refine theories of the division of child care time, researchers also need the
ability to analyze more sources of data. The ATUS is valuable for its fine-grained measures of
child care time, but longitudinal data would shed additional light on how families make child
care decisions. Researchers designing new longitudinal surveys, or modifying existing surveys,
should consider the benefits of including measures of time in child care to allow researchers the
option of studying changes in child care time like they have done for changes in housework time.
Although longitudinal time diary data would be ideal, this type of data collection is currently cost
prohibitive. Thus, researchers should develop a battery of validated, stylized questions (similar to
those asked about housework) so that more data can be collected on this important topic.

27

References
Berk, Sarah F. 1985. The Gender Factory: The Apportionment of Work in American Households.
New York: Plenum Press.
Bianchi, Suzanne M. 2000. “Maternal Employment and Time with Children:
Dramatic Change Or Surprising Continuity?” Demography 37: 4:401-414.
Bianchi, Suzanne M., Melissa A. Milkie, Liana C. Sayer and John P. Robinson. 2000. “Is
Anyone Doing the Housework? Trends in the Gender Division of Household Labor.”
Social Forces 79: 1:191-228.
Bittman, Michael, Lyn Craig and Nancy Folbre. 2004. “Packaging Care.” Family Time: The
Social Organization of Care 2:133.
Bittman, Michael, Paula England, Liana Sayer, Nancy Folbre and George Matheson. 2003.
“When does Gender Trump Money? Bargaining and Time in Household Work.”
American Journal of Sociology 109: 1:186-214.
Blau, David M. 2001. The Child Care Problem: An Economic Analysis. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.
Brayfield, April. 1995. “Juggling Jobs and Kids: The Impact of Employment Schedules on
Fathers' Caring for Children.” Journal of Marriage and the Family 57:321-332.
Brines, Julie. 1994. “Economic Dependency, Gender, and the Division of Labor at Home.”
American Journal of Sociology 100: 3:652-688.
Burda, Michael C., and Daniel S. Hamermesh. 2010. “Unemployment, Market Work and
Household Production.” Economics Letters 107: 2:131-133.
Care.com. (n.d.) How Much Should You Pay Your Sitter? Retrieved from
https://www.care.com/c/stories/3158/how-much-should-you-pay-your-sitter/
Casper, Lynne. M. 1996. Who’s Minding Our Preschoolers? U.S. Census Bureau.
28

(files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED395670.pdf). Last accessed June 29, 2015.
Chesley, Noelle, and Sarah Flood. 2017. “Signs of Change? At‐Home and Breadwinner Parents'
Housework and Child‐Care Time.” Journal of Marriage and Family 79: 2:511-534.
Coltrane, Scott. 1996. Family Man. New York: Oxford University Press.
Connelly, Rachel, and Jean Kimmel. 2010. The Time use of Mothers in the United States at the
Beginning of the 21st Century.WE Upjohn Institute.
Coverman, Shelley. 1985. "Explaining Husbands' Participation in Domestic Labor." The
Sociological Quarterly 26: 1:81-97.
Craig, Lyn, and Killian Mullan. 2010. “Parenthood, Gender and Work-family Time in the United
States, Australia, Italy, France, and Denmark.” Journal of Marriage and Family 72:
5:1344-1361.
England, Paula, and George Farkas. 1986. Households, Employment, and Gender: A Social,
Economic and Demographic View. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine.
Gerson, Kathleen. 1993. No Man’s Land: Men’s Changing Commitments to Family and Work.
New York: Basic Books.
------. 2010. The Unfinished Revolution: How a New Generation is Reshaping Family, Work, and
Gender in America. New York: Oxford University Press.
Goldscheider, Frances K., and Linda J. Waite. 1991. New Families, No Families? The
Transformation of the American Home. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Gough, Margaret, and Alexandra Killewald. 2011. “Unemployment in Families: The Case of
Housework.” Journal of Marriage and Family 73:1085-1100.
Gupta, Sanjiv. 2006. “Her Money, Her Time: Women’s Earnings and their Housework Hours.”
Social Science Research 35: 4:975-999.

29

------. 2007. “Autonomy, Dependence, Or Display? The Relationship between Married Women’s
Earnings and Housework.” Journal of Marriage and Family 69: 2:399-417.
Guryan, Jonathan, Erik Hurst and Melissa Kearney. 2008. “Parental Education and Parental
Time with Children.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives 22: 3:23.
Hays, Sharon. 1998. The Cultural Contradictions of Motherhood. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
Hochschild, Arlie, and Anne Machung. 1989. The Second Shift: Working Parents and the
Revolution at Home. New York: Viking.
Hofferth, Sandra L., Sarah M. Flood, and Matthew Sobek. 2013. American Time Use Survey
Data Extract System: Version 2.4 [Dataset]. Maryland Population Research Center,
University of Maryland, College Park, MD, and Minnesota Population Center, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN. (http://www.atusdata.org).
Hook, Jennifer L., and Christina M. Wolfe. 2012. “New Fathers? Residential Fathers’ Time with
Children in Four Countries.” Journal of Family Issues 33: 4:415-450.
Killewald, Alexandra, and Margaret Gough. 2010. “Money Isn’t Everything: Wives’ Earnings
and Housework Time.” Social Science Research 39: 6:987-1003.
Krueger, Alan B., Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, Norbert Schwarz and Arthur A. Stone.
2009. “National time accounting: The currency of life.” Pp. 9-86 in Measuring the
subjective well-being of nations: National accounts of time use and well-being. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Raley, Sara, Suzanne M. Bianchi and Wendy Wang. 2012. “When do Fathers Care? Mothers’
Economic Contribution and Fathers’ Involvement in Child Care.” American Journal of
Sociology 117: 5: 1422-1459.

30

Robinson, John, and Geoffrey Godbey. 1999. Time for life. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania
State University Press.
Roeters, Anne, Tanja Van Der Lippe and Esther S. Kluwer. 2009. “Parental Work Demands and
the Frequency of Child‐Related Routine and Interactive Activities.” Journal of Marriage
and Family 71: 5:1193-1204.
Sayer, Liana C., Suzanne M. Bianchi and John P. Robinson. 2004. “Are Parents Investing Less
in Children? Trends in Mothers’ and Fathers’ Time with Children.” American Journal of
Sociology 110: 1:1-43.
Shamir, Boas. 1986. “Unemployment and Household Division of Labor.” Journal of Marriage
and the Family 48:195-206.
Ström, Sara. 2002. “Unemployment and Gendered Divisions of Domestic Labor.” Acta
Sociologica, 45:89-106.
Sullivan, Oriel. 2013. “What do we Learn about Gender by Analyzing Housework Separately
from Child Care? Some Considerations from Time‐use Evidence.” Journal of Family
Theory & Review 5: 2:72-84.
Sullivan, Oriel, and Jonathan Gershuny. 2013. “Domestic Outsourcing and Multitasking: How
Much do They Really Contribute?” Social Science Research 42: 5:1311-1324.
West, Candace, and Don H. Zimmerman. 1987. “Doing Gender.” Gender & Society, 1:125-151.
Yeung, W. Jean, John F. Sandberg, Pamela E. Davis‐Kean and Sandra L. Hofferth. 2001.
“Children's Time with Fathers in Intact Families.” Journal of Marriage and Family 63:
1:136-154.

31

Table 1. Descriptive Statisticsa

Age at last CPS
interview
Race/Ethnicity
White
Black
Hispanic
American
Indian/Alaskan
Native
Asian/Pacific
Islander
Multiracial
Education
Less than high
school
High school
Some college
College degree
Children
Two children
Three or more
children
Age of youngest child
Child less than age 5
Region
Northeast
Midwest
South
West
Metropolitan
Weekend time diary
Spouse/partner
employed at ATUS
interview
State-level
unemployment rate
Time use
(minutes/day)
Total child care

Fathers
Employed
Unemp.
Mean
Mean
(SDR SE)
(SDR SE)
39.64 (0.08)
38.34
(0.42)

OOLF
Mean
(SDR SE)
39.65
(0.66)

Employed
Mean
(SDR SE)
38.26
(0.08)

Unemp.
Mean
(SDR SE)
35.43
(0.40)

Mothers
OOLF
Mean
(SDR SE)
35.40
(0.14)

Range
18-65

.67
.07
.20
.01

.49
.20
.23
.02

.56
.13
.24
.01

.71
.08
.15
.01

.51
.09
34
.02

.59
.04
.29
.01

0-1
0-1

.05

.05

.06

.05

.04

.06

0-1

.01

.01

.01

.01

.01

.01

0-1

.15

.27

.24

.09

.28

.22

0-1

.26
.24
.35

.34
.21
.18

.28
.23
.24

.23
.28
.40

.28
.24
.20

.26
.23
.30

0-1
0-1
0-1

.64
.23

.60
.24

.60
.23

.59
.19

.62
.27

.71
.33

0-1
0-1

6.37 (0.31)
.47

6.97 (0.05)
.40

5.68 (0.20)
.49

4.83 (0.07)
.59

0-17
0-1

.18
.22
.34
.25
.82
.33
.65

.18
.25
.35
.22
.82
.29
.90

.16
.22
.34
.29
.83
.29
.81

.15
.19
.36
.29
.85
.28
.92

0-1
0-1
0-1
0-1
0-1
0-1
0-1

7.17 (0.16)

6.70 (0.02)

7.39 (0.09)

6.79 (0.04)

2.5-13.8

6.33 (0.04) 6.20 (0.24)
.46
.47
.18
.24
.34
.24
.83
.28
.64

.18
.25
.31
.26
.84
.28
.65

6.73 (0.02) 7.62 (0.10)

0-1

49.43 (0.67)

79.68
90.28
82.55
116.25
152.50
0-476
(4.42)
(6.25)
(0.92)
(4.37)
(2.11)
Routine child care
21.77 (0.37)
41.25
44.62
47.13
65.45
83.57
0-320
(2.92)
(3.84)
(0.63)
(3.01)
(1.46)
Educational/recreati
26.78 (0.44)
36.39
43.05
34.31
49.75
67.04
0-330
onal child care
(2.58)
(4.14)
(0.49)
(2.64)
(1.30)
N
19402
753
509
16160
1042
6332
a
Descriptive statistics are estimated using the replicate weights provided in the ATUS. For continuous variables, the
successive difference replication (SDR) standard errors are reported. For proportions, standard errors are not provided
because the entire distribution is shown.

32

Table 2. Estimates of Association Between Unemployment and Time (minutes/day) in Total Child Care, Routine Child Care, and Educational/recreational Child Care for
Cohabiting and Married Parents
Fathers (N=20664)
Mothers (N=23534)
Model 1
Model 2a
Model 3a
Model 1
Model 2a
Model 3a
Panel 1. Total Child Care
Unemployed
30.23 (4.41)***
34.72 (4.04)***
35.72 (4.55)***
35.55 (3.79)***
Unemployed—
45.72 (5.30)***
36.96 (5.38)***
weekday diary
Unemployed—
-38.70 (7.88)***
-4.84 (8.29)
weekend diary
Employed—weekend
7.70 (1.16)***
-25.11 (1.49)***
diary
R2
.01
.14
.14
.08
.28
.28
Panel 2. Routine Child Care
Unemployed
19.47 (2.95)***
Unemployed—
weekday diary
Unemployed—
weekend diary
Employed—weekend
diary
R2
.01
Panel 3. Educational/ Recreational Child
Care
Unemployed
9.61 (2.55)***
Unemployed—
weekday diary
Unemployed—
weekend diary
Employed—weekend
diary
R2
.003

21.72 (2.76)***

19.42 (3.08)***

16.01 (2.66)***

28.58 (3.72)***

15.88 (3.81)***

-24.13 (5.62)***

0.48 (5.58)

1.25 (0.68)+
.12

.12

11.98 (2.43)***

-17.38 (1.04)***
.05

16.30 (2.68)***

.26

19.55 (2.50)***

15.79 (3.00)***

21.04 (3.36)***

-13.43 (4.26)**

-5.15 (5.10)

5.82 (0.81)***
.06

.06

.26

-7.62 (0.91)***
.04

.12

.12

Includes controls?
X
X
X
X
UnempXWeekend
X
X
diary interaction?
+
p<.10; *p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001.
a
Models 2 and 3 include the following control variables: out of the labor force, spouse employment, marital status, state-level unemployment rate, number of children, age
of the youngest child, region, metro status, age at the CPS interview, education, race/ethnicity, and weekend indicator.

33

Table 3. Estimates of Association Between Unemployment and Time (minutes/day) in Total Child Care, Routine Child
Care, and Educational/recreational Child Care for Cohabiting and Married Parents, by Child Age
Fathers (N=20664)
Mothers (N=23534)
Model 2a
Model 3a
Model 2a
Model 3a
Panel 1. Total Time in Child Care
Unemployed, child less than 5
22.75 (9.73)*
4.49 (8.44)
Unemployed, child 5 or older
24.10 (4.71)***
33.65 (4.92)***
Employed, child less than 5
7.86 (2.37)**
14.17 (2.66)***
Weekday diary, child 5 or older
Unemployed
27.85 (5.69)***
38.21 (6.87)
Weekday diary, child less than 5
Unemployed
39.40 (13.38)**
-1.78 (11.13
Employed
3.50 (2.59)
16.11 (2.95)
Weekend diary, child 5 or older
Unemployed
-14.48 (8.96)
-16.58 (9.66)
Employed
0.66 (1.26)
-22.08 (1.48)
Weekend diary, child less than 5
Unemployed
-53.06 (17.43)***
22.46 (14.48
Employed
15.33 (2.62)***
-6.72 (2.60)
R2
.14
.14
.28
.28
Panel 2. Routine Child Care
Unemployed, child less than 5
Unemployed, child 5 or older
Employed, child less than 5
Weekday diary, child 5 or older
Unemployed
Weekday diary, child less than 5
Unemployed
Employed
Weekend diary, child 5 or older
Unemployed
Employed
Weekend diary, child less than 5
Unemployed
Employed
R2

15.77 (6.35)*
14.36 (2.80)***
5.71 (1.17)***

.13

Panel 3. Educational/ Recreational Child Care
Unemployed, child less than 5
4.81 (5.77)
Unemployed, child 5 or older
9.73 (2.82)**
Employed, child less than 5
1.84 (1.51)
Weekday diary, child 5 or older
Unemployed
Weekday diary, child less than 5
Unemployed
Employed
Weekend diary, child 5 or older
Unemployed
Employed
Weekend diary, child less than 5
Unemployed
Employed
R2
.06
Includes controls?
UnempXWeekend diary
interaction?
+
p<.10; *p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001.

X

-0.86 (5.97)
16.64 (3.26)***
11.21 (1.85)***
16.44 (3.46)***

18.94 (4.46)

26.79 (8.92)**
4.02 (1.34)**

-5.82 (7.88)
13.01 (2.06)

-7.93 (5.64)
-1.52 (0.60)*

-8.30 (5.92)
-14.53 (1.01)

-35.33 (12.46)**
6.04 (1.58)***
.13

17.23 (9.45)
-6.32 (1.87)
.26

.26
5.14 (5.69)
17.10 (3.57)***
2.07 (1.77)

11.87 (3.52)**

19.67 (4.89)

8.65 (7.50)
-0.73 (1.63)

3.07 (7.52)
2.17 (1.93)

-8.27 (5.30)
1.72 (0.93)+

-9.40 (6.43)
-7.51 (0.99)

-11.65 (10.22)
8.91 (1.77)***
.06
X
X

7.80 (10.15
-0.27 (1.77)
.12

.12
X

X
X

a

Models 2 and 3 include the following control variables: out of the labor force, spouse employment, marital status, statelevel unemployment rate, number of children, age of the youngest child, region, metro status, age at the CPS interview,
education, race/ethnicity

35

Appendix A
Table A1. Components of Total Time in Child Care Measure by Routine and
Educational/Recreational
Total Time in Child Care Tasks
Routine Child Care Tasks
Educational/Recreational Child Care Tasks
Physical care of household children
Playing with household children
Looking after household children as primary activity
Playing sports with household children
Waiting for/with household children
Helping/teaching household children
Caring/helping household children NEC*

Homework with household children

Providing medical care to household children

Waiting associated with household child’s education

Waiting associated with household child’s health
Organizing/planning for household children

Reading to/with household children
Arts/crafts with household children

Picking up/dropping off household children
Obtaining medical care for household child

Talking/listening to household children
Attending household children’s events

Related to household child’s health NEC*

Meetings/school conferences for household children
Home schooling household children
Related to household children’s education NEC*

*Not elsewhere classified

36

Table A2. Complete Results of Estimates of Association between Unemployment and Time
(minutes/day) in Total Child Care for Cohabiting and Married Parents
Fathers
Model 2
Model 3
34.72 (4.04)***
-38.70 (7.88)***

Unemployed
Unemployed—
weekend diary
Unemployed—
weekday diary
Weekend
6.08 (1.17)***
Employed—
weekend diary
Out of the labor
44.46 (5.67)***
force
Spouse/partner
8.60 (1.39)***
employed
State-level
0.81 (0.31)*
unemployment rate
Children
2
6.43 (1.46)***
3+
3.67 (1.98)+
Age youngest child
-4.75 (0.15)***
Region (Northeast is
omitted)
Midwest
-4.27 (1.86)*
South
-9.39 (1.84)***
West
-8.38 (2.12)***
Metropolitan
8.34 (1.47)***
Age at CPS
-0.41 (0.10)***
interview
Education (Less
than high school is
omitted)
High school
1.95 (2.46)
diploma
Some college
11.18 (2.73)***
College degree
19.79 (2.49)***
Race (White is
omitted)
Black
-16.48 (2.46)***
Hispanic
-14.84 (2.28)***
American Indian/
-13.14 (8.35)
Alaskan Native
Asian/ Hawaiian
-3.20 (3.34)
Pacific Islander
Multiracial
-5.11 (5.82)
Constant
72.32 (5.27)***
R2
.14
N
20664
+
p<.10; *p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001.

Mothers
Model 2
Model 3
35.55 (3.79)***
-4.84 (8.29)

45.72 (5.31)***

36.96 (5.38)***

7.70 (1.16)***

-25.35 (1.44)***

-25.11 (1.49)***

44.39 (5.67)***

56.06 (2.04)***

56.06 (2.04)***

8.59 (1.39)***

11.95 (2.43)***

11.96 (2.43)***

0.81 (0.31)*

0.33 (0.36)

0.33 (0.36)

6.45 (1.46)***
3.70 (1.98)+
-4.76 (0.15)***

9.66 (1.58)***
9.45 (2.50)***
-7.83 (0.21)***

9.67 (1.58)***
9.45 (2.51)***
-7.83 (0.21)***

-4.34 (1.86)*
-9.32 (1.84)***
-8.40 (2.11)***
8.25 (1.47)***
-0.41 (0.10)***

-7.79 (2.63)**
-9.07 (2.41)***
-14.40 (2.59)***
8.80 (2.03)***
-0.80 (0.15)***

-7.80 (2.63)**
-9.07 (2.41)***
-14.40 (2.59)***
8.80 (2.03)***
-0.80 (0.15)***

11.30 (3.46)**

11.29 (3.46)**

11.21 (2.70)***
19.75 (2.46)***

17.11 (2.76)***
37.14 (3.03)***

17.11 (2.76)***
37.13 (3.03)***

-16.63 (2.48)***
-14.72 (2.26)***
-13.30 (8.35)

-30.44 (3.12)***
-28.69 (2.48)***
-31.57 (12.52)*

-30.42 (3.13)***
-28.71 (2.48)***
-31.71 (12.52)*

1.89 (2.43)

-3.03 (3.33)

-5.37 (3.83)

-5.36 (3.83)

-4.74 (5.78)
71.74 (5.23)***
.14
20664

-0.81 (7.30)
140.30 (6.86)***
.28
23534

-0.81 (7.30)
140.23 (6.86)***
.28
23534

37

Table A3. Complete Results of Estimates of Association between Unemployment and Time
(minutes/day) in Routine Child Care for Cohabiting and Married Parents
Fathers
Model 2
Model 3
21.72 (2.76)***
-24.13 (5.62)***

Unemployed
Unemployed—
weekend diary
Unemployed—
weekday diary
Weekend
0.24 (0.69)
Employed—
weekend diary
Out of the labor
24.76 (3.65)***
force
Spouse/partner
6.10 (0.81)***
employed
State-level
0.15 (0.20)
unemployment rate
Children
2
3.61 (0.83)***
3+
1.88 (1.10)+
Age youngest child
-2.46 (0.08)***
Region (Northeast is
omitted)
Midwest
-3.90 (1.19)**
South
-5.24 (1.19)***
West
-4.50 (1.22)***
Metropolitan
3.95 (0.88)***
Age at CPS
-0.23 (0.05)***
interview
Education (Less
than high school is
omitted)
High school
0.13 (1.34)
diploma
Some college
4.82 (1.51)**
College degree
8.74 (1.44)***
Race (White is
omitted)
Black
-7.67 (1.42)***
Hispanic
-8.28 (1.30)***
American Indian/
-7.64 (5.12)
Alaskan Native
Asian/ Hawaiian
-3.20 (2.28)
Pacific Islander
Multiracial
-2.38 (3.17)
Constant
37.53 (2.90)***
R2
.12
N
20664
+
p<.10; *p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001.

Mothers
Model 2
Model 3
16.01 (2.66)***
0.47 (5.58)

28.58 (3.72)***
1.25 (0.68)+

15.88 (3.81)***
-17.36 (1.06)***

-17.38 (1.04)***

24.71 (3.65)***

24.98 (1.42)***

24.98 (1.42)***

6.09 (0.81)***

7.11 (1.86)***

7.10 (1.86)***

0.15 (0.20)

-0.11 (0.25)

-0.11 (0.25)

3.62 (0.83)***
1.90 (1.10)+
-2.47 (0.08)***

7.50 (1.06)***
8.20 (1.62)***
-4.92 (0.14)***

7.50 (1.06)***
8.20 (1.57)***
-4.92 (0.14)***

-3.94 (1.19)**
-5.21 (1.18)***
-4.51 (1.22)***
3.89 (0.88)***
-0.23 (0.05)***

-4.06 (1.70)*
-3.98 (1.62)*
-7.25 (1.78)***
4.08 (1.39)**
-0.71 (0.10)***

-4.06 (1.39)**
-3.98 (1.62)*
-7.25 (1.78)***
4.07 (1.39)**
-0.71 (0.10)***

6.45 (2.28)**

6.45 (2.28)**

4.84 (1.50)**
8.71 (1.43)***

8.28 (1.99)***
18.27 (2.02)***

8.28 (1.99)***
18.27 (2.02)***

-7.76 (1.43)***
-8.20 (1.29)***
-7.74 (5.15)

-10.87 (2.03)***
-10.25 (1.69)***
-13.36 (7.32)+

-10.87 (2.04)***
-10.25 (1.69)***
-13.34 (7.34)+

0.09 (1.33)

-3.09 (2.26)

-1.88 (2.62)

-1.88 (2.62)

-2.15 (3.14)
37.17 (2.88)***
.12
20664

5.78 (5.07)
93.43 (4.79)***
.26
23534

5.78 (5.07)
93.44 (4.78)***
.26
23534

38

Table A4. Complete Results of Estimates of Association between Unemployment and Time
(minutes/day) in Educational/Recreational Child Care for Cohabiting and Married Parents
Fathers
Model 2
Model 3
11.98 (2.43)***
-13.43 (4.26)**

Unemployed
Unemployed—
weekend diary
Unemployed—
weekday diary
Weekend
5.25 (0.83)***
Employed—
weekend diary
Out of the labor
18.06 (3.96)***
force
Spouse/partner
2.31 (1.01)*
employed
State-level
0.58 (0.20)**
unemployment rate
Children
2
2.78 (1.01)**
3+
1.19 (1.27)
Age youngest child
-2.24 (0.11)***
Region (Northeast is
omitted)
Midwest
-0.25 (1.27)
South
-3.70 (1.27)**
West
-3.40 (1.50)*
Metropolitan
4.06 (1.13)***
Age at CPS
-0.12 (0.07)+
interview
Education (Less
than high school is
omitted)
High school
3.18 (1.79)+
diploma
Some college
6.97 (1.93)***
College degree
11.74 (1.77)***
Race (White is
omitted)
Black
-8.39 (1.81)***
Hispanic
-6.34 (1.50)***
American Indian/
-5.91 (5.47)
Alaskan Native
Asian/ Hawaiian
0.49 (1.91)
Pacific Islander
Multiracial
-2.69 (4.48)
Constant
31.42 (3.78)***
R2
.06
N
20664
+
p<.10; *p<.05; **p<.01; ***p<.001.

Mothers
Model 2
Model 3
19.55 (2.50)***
-5.15 (5.10)

15.79 (3.00)***

21.04 (3.36)***
-7.88 (0.83)***

5.82 (0.81)***

-7.62 (0.91)***

18.03 (3.96)***

30.55 (1.27)***

30.55 (1.27)***

2.31 (1.01)*

4.35 (1.51)**

4.36 (1.51)**

0.58 (0.20)**

0.47 (0.23)*

0.47 (0.23)*

2.79 (1.01)*
1.20 (1.28)
-2.24 (0.11)***

2.05 (1.08)+
0.54 (1.66)
-2.88 (0.12)***

2.06 (1.08)+
0.54 (1.66)
-2.88 (0.12)***

-0.27 (1.27)
-3.68 (1.27)**
-3.41 (1.50)*
4.03 (1.13)***
-0.12 (0.07)+

-3.76 (1.62)*
-5.20 (1.48)***
-6.87 (1.71)***
4.53 (1.23)**
-0.04 (0.08)

-3.78 (1.62)*
-5.20 (1.48)***
-6.87 (1.71)***
4.54 (1.23)***
-0.04 (0.08)

3.16 (1.78)+

4.23 (2.03)*

4.22 (2.02)*

6.98 (1.93)***
11.73 (1.76)***

8.59 (1.75)***
18.14 (2.02)***

8.60 (1.75)***
18.14 (2.02)***

-8.44 (1.81)***
-6.30 (1.50)***
-5.97 (5.47)

-18.74 (2.08)***
-18.08 (1.53)***
-16.41 (7.11)*

-18.71 (2.09)***
-18.10 (1.54)***
-16.55 (7.08)*

0.55 (1.91)

-3.73 (2.63)

-2.56 (4.47)
31.21 (3.76)***
.06
20664

-6.34 (4.63)
44.44 (4.34)***
.12
23534

-3.72 (2.63)
-6.34 (4.63)
44.36 (4.35)
.12
23534

39

