Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019 Chlef University International Conference Proceedings
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/Chief1.10

Pp.109- 121

Towards more Liable Use of Internet Sources among University Students:
Rethinking Teacher’s Routine Evaluation Methods

Nadia KHIATI
Department of English Language and Literature
Faculty of Letters, Languages and Arts
Dr. Tahar Moulay University
Saida, Algeria
Abstract
Within the flow of information of today’s digital learning environment, university students’ illinformed use of external electronic sources negatively affects the quality of their academic writing.
While sanctions represent but the final disciplinary measure, university teachers’ pre-empting such
academic misconduct before the final year project remains a necessity. This paper proposes a
reconsideration of the teacher’s routine evaluation methods to promote good study skills, and thus
high quality teaching and learning. Drawing on a personal teaching experience (in the department
of English of Saida University), the paper suggests simple methods through which students
routinely practise sound referencing. Preliminary observational data that triggered the topic of the
present paper consist of samples of students’ internet-based assignments and project papers with
missing references. Additional notes generated from classroom discussions with post-graduate
Master students about (un)intentional plagiarism represent the insider student perspective of its
causes. Initial findings reveal that student-submitted non-referenced work was not only due to poor
time management, paraphrasing, or note taking skills but also to modelling poor citation habits
(illustrated in the academic genres they were exposed to in their formal learning environment, such
as PowerPoint presentations, class notes, hand-outs, and so on). The paper concludes with the
necessity to raise teachers’ awareness to the importance of providing a good model of wellreferenced teaching materials and learning supports as the initial step. Other practical methods
consist of constantly checking students’ work for missing references, asking them to resubmit their
work with requisite paraphrasing, as well as giving scores for correct referencing.
Keywords: Academic plagiarism, digital/cyber-plagiarism, referencing, teacher assessment,
techniques
Cite as: KHIATI, N. (2019) Towards more Liable Use of Internet Sources among University
Students: Rethinking Teacher’s Routine Evaluation Methods. Arab World English Journal, May
2019 Chlef University International Conference Proceedings. 97-108. DOI:
https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/Chief1.10

109

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Towards more Liable Use of Internet Sources

KHIATI

Introduction
The plethora of information and ideas that the internet offers today makes many university students
– when assigned some homework, for instance – easily access website contents and directly copy
to their writing without providing any end-of-text references that indicate the sources used. This
instance of students’ cyber-plagiarism which is now spread worldwide is a source of worry for
many universities (Fialkoff et al., 2002; Köse & Arikan, 2011; Suerda, Comas & Urbina, 2005;
Park, 2003), and the Algerian university is no exception. This is because such practice is
synonymous to academic dishonesty, which negatively affects university aspiration to quality
assurance.
Students’ over-dependence on electronic sources not only signals a certain ignorance of sound
research skills and a misuse of information and communication technologies (ICTs), but university
academic code of ethics consider students who plagiarize as violators of the copyright conventions
(Sutherland-Smith, 2005). Worse, from a Second Language Research (ESL) vantage point, this
practice is likely to limit the students’ analytical abilities restricting therefore their learning
achievement. If not pedagogically remedied for, such effortless habits may be extended to the final
graduation project, and, to the worst, extended to the outer professional world.
To downplay the general attitude (or false excuses among students) that the university teaching
staff is doing little to reduce plagiarism, the author of this paper attempts to share her experience
with student plagiarism in the teaching environment and how she critically and proactively dealt
with this phenomenon. By drawing on additional teachers’ and students’ perspective on cheating
in the academic environment, as well as on existing research on plagiarism, the paper attempts to
reconsider the teacher’s evaluation methods while sharing some practical assessment/teaching
techniques already implemented in her classroom to pre-emptively reduce such academic
misconduct.
To reach the above-mentioned aim, the paper will first consider the main concepts related to
plagiarism. Then, it will stop at the observed academic context from which the author made her
first-hand observations as regards students’ instances of plagiarism as well as teacher-student
perceptions of its causes. Finally, a discussion of the rough clues obtained from the teaching
environment in line with similar studies will pave the way for the proposition of practical
techniques that the author already tested onsite alongside additional suggestions deriving from
other authors’ teaching experience.
Theoretical Background
To start with, the domain-specific plagiarism that is of interest to the present paper is academic
plagiarism that mainly refers to university students’ plagiarizing ideas and information into their
writing when preparing any academic work. The literal meaning of the word plagiarism, whose
Latin origin (i.e., plagium) is theft, considers the plagiarist as the “one who steals the thoughts or
writings of another” (Mallon, 1989, p. 11, cited in Sutherland-Smith, 2005). From an institutional
legislative standpoint, plagiarism is described as a ‘wrongful’ act of ‘stealing’, or
‘misappropriating’ the work of another (Sutherland-Smith, 2005). All of the above definitions
stress out the connotation of academic misconduct that plagiarism committed by students carries.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

110

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Towards more Liable Use of Internet Sources

KHIATI

The term cyber- or digital plagiarism implicates the students’ use of the internet to plagiarize
others’ work (Suerda, Comas & Urbina, 2005; Park, 2003). Granitz & Loewy (2007) employ the
term internet plagiarism mentioning in this vein that non-internet plagiarism is still in vogue. That
said, while involving -but not limited to- the academic contexti, cyber- or digital plagiarism entails
students’copying -from external internet sources, such as academic articles or essays-and pasting
to their own writing. The forms that (academic) cyber-plagiarism take range from downloading
whole essays or articles, to copying parts of texts from different internet sources, to translating a
text found in another language before submitting it as their own (Suerda, Comas & Urbina, 2005).
From an ethical concept, intentional plagiarism denotes a deliberate intent to deceive by
appropriating to oneself someone else’s work. According to Granitz & Loewy (2007), students,
who intentionally plagiarize, are aware of their ‘wrongdoing’. These transgressors do so either for
the ‘utilitarian’ outcome of obtaining better grades, or as a ‘rational reaction’ to teacher’s poor
effort or boring/irrelevant assignment. According to the same authors (2007), students involved in
plagiarism may even justify their misconduct with ‘a situational element’, like a sudden sickness
or other family circumstances (pp. 297-298). From the other pole, unintentional plagiarism
translates, from a deontological vantage point, the students’ ignorance or unawareness that such
an act is morally wrong (Granitz & Loewy, 2007).
From an ESL research stance, unintentional plagiarism signals the writer’s ignorance of the
importance of giving credit to someone else’s ideas or work as a scholarly obligation (Howard,
1999). In this vein, Park (2003) further explains that students’ not knowing how to insert reference
lists forms part of their ignorance of referencing conventions of academic work. It is worth noting
here that students’ii academic plagiarism avoidance is an important element of academic writing
class and English for Academic Purposes (EAP) support courses (Flowerdew & Li, 2007; Hyland,
2008; Nathan, 2007).
Unintentional plagiarism, henceforth, signals from one part students’ limited knowledge of the
different types of plagiarism. Regardless the well-known verbatim or word-for-word plagiarism,
copying words or sentences from one source or more, without citing, or reformulating them in
one’s own words nor inserting quotes represents mosaic plagiarism, according to Harvard Guide
to Using Sources (2015). Even when inserting a citation, solely replacing a few words here and
there in the original text without using one’s own language also constitutes plagiarism, that
Harvard Guide to Using Sources (2015) terms as Inadequate paraphrase. Moreover, ending up
with a piece of writing that is devoid of references, even when having properly paraphrased, is
another form of plagiarism, called uncited paraphrase (2015).
Besides the afore-mentioned internal causes or student-provided justifications of plagiarism,
other external causes from the existing ESL literature appear in Bartzis (2009, cited in Basturkmen,
2014) who considers -among other things- that rote learning habits, low language proficiency, nonefficient paraphrasing, as well as time constraints caused by work load or other family obligations
to be the main reasons behind plagiarism. Particularly relevant to cyber-or digital plagiarism, a
supplementary cause is the students’ disregarding or misunderstanding of important concepts like
intellectual property and copyright, considering any material found online as ‘a found object’
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

111

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Towards more Liable Use of Internet Sources

KHIATI

(Park, 2003, p. 481). Not possessing website evaluation skillsiii is an additional factor that leads to
the increase of the phenomenon, as truly mentioned in university libraries (Alberta university,
2004, cited in Suerda, Comas & Urbina, 2005) and similarly evidenced in the author’s teaching
environment.
As to ways of detecting plagiarism without software, one of them is to rely on the teachers’
experience and professional knowledge. University teachers (including the author of this paper)
will unanimously agree with the hints that Suerda, Comas & Urbina, 2005 state, notably that
noticing in their students’ essays an incoherence of ideas or paragraphs, a mixture of good and
poor writing style within the same text, interalia, helps teachers detect plagiarism. However, the
author has uncovered other similarly pertinent hints in her students’ essays. This will be elaborated
on in the results section. However, the teacher’s professional knowledge and instinct are not
enough.
In addition to professional knowledge, search engines or anti-plagiarism softwareiv are also used
among the academic staff to detect plagiarism. The software provides a report detailing the level
of plagiarism from online resources after comparing the submitted text with the previously entered
essays or texts to its database (see Köse & Arikan, 2011). In the results section, the author’s
experience of the first method will be elaborated on. Prior to this, a sketch of the procedures used
to collect initial information about students’ plagiarism in the author’s teaching environment is
proposed hereafter.
Methodology
While addressing the issue of student’s plagiarism, the present paper adopted the concept of
reflective or critical teaching which involves the teachers’ “critical reflection about their efforts in
a language course” (Richards & Lochart, 1994, p. 1). Repeatedly noticing students submitting nonreferenced written assignments and plagiarized essays triggered such critical thinking. Considering
this issue amplified as a result of a recently proposed module for Master2 students, Ethics and
Deontologyv that the author was the first to be in charge of, during the same academic year 20172018. Obviously, the themes tackled in this module revolved around academic ethics.
What is interesting about critical teaching is its action-oriented phase in that constantly
reflecting on and learning from one’s teaching experiences enables the teacher to bring further
innovations, alternatives, or modifications to his/her routine teaching practices for better learning
results (Murphy, 2001, cited in Basturkmen, 2014). This is why, the primary aim was to share the
author’s experiences with and attempts to implement remedial actions, namely in terms of bringing
some modifications in the routine assessment methods to pre-empting such academic misconduct.
The author adopted a qualitative stance ab initio to broadly understand student’s plagiarism.
Hence, a rush to quantification was premature. To this end, the author relied on three sources to
ponder over the phenomenon of students’ transgression of academic writing requirements. They
are proposed in Figure 1.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

112

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Towards more Liable Use of Internet Sources

KHIATI

Figure 1:The sources used for qualitative data collection

Initially, subsidiary notes generated from the English department’s teachers discussing the causes
of poor academic writing (that were noticeable within master students’ final project mainly)
allowed the author to stop at the teacher perspective. However, the main examination of the
phenomenon took place with her respective (third year Licence and Master 2 Didactics, 2017-2018
Academic Session) students at the department of English of Dr. Tahar Moulay University- with
field notes generated. Furthermore, a record of students’ plagiarism occurrences together with
saving some samples of their essays and submitted assignments was also possible. Classroom
discussions with Master2 students allowed for an elucidation of the latter insider perspective as to
the reasons that made students plagiarize. The author proposed to the students in question some of
the internal and external causes of plagiarism identified in the literature about plagiarism. They
had to choose which reasons closely reflected theirs. That said, students could propose other
reasons than those provided by the author. The results obtained by means of such informal data
gatherings will be discussed below.
Results and Discussion
This section presents the students’ as well as teachers’ perceptions of the real causes of plagiarism
in the academic context along with the author’s notes generated from her teaching environment,
when dealing with students’ plagiarism practices. The rough clues obtained will be discussed in
line with existent research to pave the way for a subsequent proposition of practical
teaching/assessment methods to be implemented by teachers.
Teachers’ Perceptions of Academic Plagiarism by Students
Starting with the teachers’ perspective as to the reasons that make students plagiarize, the notes
recorded from the teachers’ discussion seemed to implicate students’ unawareness of the different
types of plagiarism together with poor time management skills (Figure 2). Though not statistically
proven, the author’s similar observations seem to be in fine tune with the teachers-proposed poor
time management skills. According to the author’s field notes (when dealing with the different
types of plagiarism with Master 2 students in the Ethics and Deontology Module), students showed
no familiarity with some forms of plagiarism, like mosaic plagiarism, inadequate and uncited
paraphrase.
Arab World English Journal
113
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Towards more Liable Use of Internet Sources

KHIATI

Figure 2. Teachers' perception of student plagiarism
To the author’s knowledge, the only type of plagiarism that students think they should avoid is
verbatim plagiarism. To some of them, citing sources is of secondary importance as long as they
do not copy verbatim to their work, totally ignoring that other types of plagiarism exist - and are
the most widespread. This claim finds echo in previous studies reporting on the ignorance of
plagiarism forms as a major cause that were mentioned earlier (Park, 2003; Suerda, Comas &
Urbina, 2005).
Students’ Own Reasons of Plagiarism
Preliminary insight from classroom discussions with Master2 students revealed that time pressure,
modelling others’ inadvertent academic practices, and to a lesser extent, poor paraphrasing skills
were the main reasons that made them submit others’ work as their own (see Figure3). Seemingly,
these insider views replicate other university libraries’ and studies’ implicating poor paraphrasing
and time management skills among students (see Suerda, Comas & Urbina, 2005). Surprisingly,
in relation to the reported academic staff’s inadvertent behaviour, some students presumed that
they happened to exposed to, or given course materials lacking references, as well. To put it in the
words of a students’ delegate, from the moment that some ‘academics do not care about
documenting their reading materials, PowerPoint presentations and handouts, then, why should
we (care about it in our own writing)?’.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

114

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Towards more Liable Use of Internet Sources

KHIATI

Figure 3: Students’ justification of plagiarism
The afore-mentioned perception resonates with previous studies reporting on similar students’
justification of their intentional plagiarism. These students similarly presumed that university
academic staff were seemingly not doing big efforts to reduce the phenomenon (Park, 2003). This
reason literally finds resonance in Granitz & Loewy’s (2007) citing an almost same expression
employed by a student attempting to justify this malpractice, notably that the ‘teacher doesn’t put
much effort into this, so why should I?’. It seem that students here attempt to justify their
wrongdoing through a process of ‘fair exchange’, as Granitz & Loewy (2007) termed it, that
renders their resorting to - after all, intentional- plagiarism a legitimate reaction to the presumed
teachers’ or other academic staff’s little effort (p. 297).
It is believed that the above reason remains but one of the many reasons, thus far discussed in
the theoretical section (like time constraints, workload, family obligations, etc.) that students
reverted to justify their intentional plagiarism. Nevertheless, it is safe to mention here that
academic staff/teachers’ (including the author herself) proactive involvement in the process of
reducing plagiarism among students will undoubtedly be helpful. This involvement may range
from simply showing a model of good practice and academic integrity to adopting more stringent
measures (like giving low grades to students in question).
Authors’ Own Experiences with Plagiarism Detection
Having thus far reported on the students’ reasons for plagiarism, this sub-section reports on the
author’s own measures to detect plagiarized content. Before reverting to search engines, the
detection of students’ suspicious essays revealed similar hints of plagiarized content already
suggested in the literature (Suerda, Comas & Urbina, 2005). However, the author could disclose
others, like an almost perfect essay from students whose low level was known to the teachervi. This
suggested that a whole article was totally plagiarized. Though time and effort consuming, reverting
to online search engines was the second measure to definitely discern plagiarized content.
In this second step, doing an Internet search by entering one sentence or two in a search engine
often led the author to the original article being copied, a mere instance of academic cyberplagiarism that other authors like Suerda, Comas & Urbina (2005) and Park (2003) described.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

115

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Towards more Liable Use of Internet Sources

KHIATI

Figure 3 .Instance of author's internet-assisted detection of student plagiarism
As illustrated in Figure 4, the author simply indicated the plagiarized text with –here- an arrow
or square brackets along with providing the electronic address of the original website or article. In
the case of the above figure, the original source was Noor-Ul-Amin’s (2013) article, “An effective
use of ICT for education and learning by drawing on worldwide knowledge, research and
experience: ICT as a change agent for education (A Literature review)”, that one can easily
download from the internetvii. Likewise, this was a way to tell the students in question that ICTs
they used to deceive also helped the teacher to assess the quality of their academic writing and
detect any forms of cheating. In the following section, the author attempts to share some actionoriented solutions that have been implemented with students to sensitize, then, involve them in the
process of avoiding plagiarism.
Recommendations and Conclusion
This section concretizes the main aim of the present paper, namely, by proposing practical teaching
and assessment techniques through which teachers may proactively pre-empt plagiarism among
students: recommendations mainly drawing on the author’s humble teaching experience with the
phenomenon, then, on additional awareness-raising measures suggested by other authors. First
and foremost, one of the routine teaching practices that the author adopted with her students was
to reference all her teacher-provided materials and documents. This is shown in figure 5.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

116

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Towards more Liable Use of Internet Sources

KHIATI

Main References:
Dudley-evans, t., and M. St John.
(1998). Developments in English for
Specific Purposes//Hutchinson, t., and
Waters, A. (1987). English for specific
…purposes: A learning-centred

approach.
EVANS, T., and M. ST JOHN.
(1998). Developments in English
for Specific Purposes
HUTCHINSON, T., and WATERS,
A. (1987). English for specific
purposes: A learning-centred
approach.
Figure 4: Samples

Adapted from:
Ferguson, G. (1997). Teacher
education and LSP: The role of
specialized knowledge. In R. Howard,
& J. Brown (Eds.), Teacher education
for LSP. …..

of author's referenced materials (right image, class-notes and left image, a power point
presentation)

Teachers’ likewise demonstrating a good model of information provision that abides by academic
requirements seems to be a sine qua non to ensure students’ exposure to such models of good
practice. As regards monitoring students’ work, this took effect through asking the latter to submit
handwrittenviiiinstead of typed assignments, while explaining to them that they should paraphrase
and insert the references. Instances of handwritten, referenced assignments as illustrated in figure
6.

Figure 5: A sample of students’ hand-written referenced assignment
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

117

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Towards more Liable Use of Internet Sources

KHIATI

Even though the main objective of the task was content-focused, this technique was a way to
have students routinely practise paraphrasing. Besides the above-mentioned teacher-demanded
handwritten assignments, another preventive measure that the author implemented with her
students aimed to familiarize them with sound research practices. To this end, the teacher
emphasized on the importance of acknowledging the electronic sources used by inserting a
references list in the student-submitted written homework assignment when using external internet
sources. Here, the teacher clearly explained that correct end-of-text references would be scored
along with a personal style and relevance of the contentix.
At times, the teacher pre-selected the research materials/electronic sources by simply providing
some links that students had to follow, or else, by sending articles under PDF format via email
correspondence. The aim was manifold. This mainly assisted students in their time management
efforts, making them spend less time in searching for relevant information. Such authorexperienced strategy interestingly finds resonance in ESL research about academic writing (for
e.g., Johns, 2006). Additionally, pre-selecting electronic reading materials intended to discourage
students from copying-pasting to their document besides having them to be fully engaged with
these sources by practising paraphrasing and note taking. Knowing that the teacher’s provision of
the research material presupposes familiarity with its content, students will certainly double their
efforts to summarize the main points and reformulate what they read in their own style before
submitting their work for final assessment.
The module of Deontology and Ethics was an opportunity for the author of this paper to
encourage some student-animated presentations on topics like good paraphrasing, citing electronic
sources, note-taking from reading materials and so on, all of which promote a plagiarism-free
writing (see figure 6). Presentations resembled workshops where animating students distributed
visuals and handouts for practice. Actively engaged in the process of avoiding some causes of
plagiarism, the students in question even shared with their classmates some practical tips and stepby-step techniques on the above teacher-proposed topics. Similar sessions enhancing good
paraphrase could be organized by teachers of Academic writing, for instance.
Besides the above-mentioned classroom-experienced techniques, equipping students with
sound website evaluation skills is also believed to help them use trustworthy sources, save time,
and avoid to accidently be involved in plagiarism. Evaluating the accuracy, coverage, and authority
of websites is of particular importance here. Students searching online will forcibly encounter
information that is not well-documented and sometimes missing references, which tells a lot about
the website’s authority. Comparing internet sources also enables students to know more about the
accuracy of information and coverage of the topic.
Finally, awareness-raising to the long-term and short-term dangers of plagiarism (through
lectures, study days or training workshops to be organized to the benefit of students) is highly
recommended. In parallel, actively engaging the latter in the process of reducing academic
misconduct is noteworthy. Following Park’s (2003) suggestion, students’ delegates should play
the role of informing the other students about the importance of avoiding academic misconduct
and the risks they run if they are ever caught. To the author’s knowledge, students-initiated
information dissemination (be it face-to-face or social-network-mediatedx) is more efficient than
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

118

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Towards more Liable Use of Internet Sources

KHIATI

teacher’s initiative. Last but not least, students will certainly be more alert when they sign an
honour pledge in which they engage state that they will not plagiarize or cheat in their final year
dissertation, exams, assignments, or in any other academic work (Park, 2003).
Because the present paper was based on rough clues obtained from unsystematic data
gatherings, a more rigorous investigation of the phenomenon, with a larger population (including
both undergraduate and post-graduating students from the department of English and teachers),
and more systematic data collection, is requiredxi. For instance, quantifying the students’ selfreported instances of plagiarism will be revealing. By assuring that anonymity will be preserved,
the potential investigator can even conduct an interview with both students and teachers for more
qualitative data on the areas in which students are likely to cheat the most (i.e., assignments and
exams…etc.).
To sum up, this paper proposed a bottom-up preliminary insight into student electronic
plagiarism through the author’s shared experiences with this phenomenon. Most importantly, it
projected the idea that the academic staff, namely teachers, should responsibly and proactively
cope with the large incidence of plagiarism among students so as to contribute to the Algerian
university quality assurance. Even though students are the first responsible for this apparently
worldwide phenomenon, the paper has nevertheless put forth practical ways of reducing such
incidence through teachers’ implementing simple, routine assessment measures that make students
practise sound referencing and paraphrasing on a regular basis as early as their under-graduation
years.
Notes
1. Plagiarism is not only confined to the academic setting but also involves music, literature,
software, journalism, politics, and so on (Suerda, Comas, & Urbina, 2006).
2. Awareness of academic plagiarism issues is also an EAP skill that not only students are
concerned with but even teachers in academia (see for e.g., Mohammed, Sabahand &
Nur, 2018).
3. There are several website evaluation checklists on the internet that detail the criteria
followed to evaluate websites. They are easily accessible via the simple query “website
evaluation checklist” on google.com search engine.
4. Students can also use Anti-plagiarism software as a language-learning tool to assess the
adequacy of their paraphrase.
5. Deontology encompasses respecting others’ right and adhering to duties as dictated by
morality. Understanding the deontology of plagiarism is to view such act as morally
wrong (Granitz & Loewy, 2007).
6. This was due to the prolonged classroom contact with the students in question.
7. See the references below for more details about the URL address of the article.
8. The author of this paper continues to implement this technique of handwritten assignment
until the present time to discourage the passive copy-paste practice among students,
especially when it comes to doing an internet-based homework. This being said, the author
is herself a fervent advocator of the use of ICTs as language learning tools, notably the
word processor as early as the first draft- owing to the language learning opportunities the
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

119

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Towards more Liable Use of Internet Sources

KHIATI

latter affords to students, like spell check, synonyms, the possibility to edit and save the
document, among other things.
9. The main focus of the class was not necessarily on the form (like that of an Academic
writing class) but on the content. However, this did not prevent the teacher from drawing
her students’ attention to the importance of considering academic writing requirements
even in their content-focused assignments.
10. Internet-mediated communication is now a habitual practice among the students. The
students’ delegates are in charge of sharing class-notes, homework assignments, teachers’
notes/messages to students (mostly via a common group is a social network).
11. The author of this paper is currently (AY: 2018-2019) supervising a Master student who
chose to deploy a variety of tools to investigate student plagiarism within the English
Department of Saida University.
About the author:
Dr. Nadia Khiati has been teaching at the Department of Letters and English language of Saida
University, Algeria, since 2012. She got her Doctorate degree (in English for Specific Purposes)
in 2017 from Djillali Liabes University of Sidi Belabes, Algeria. She currently teaches ESP and
Introduction to languages for specific purposes. Her research and teaching interests are mainly
related to her fields of specialisation, that is ESP, Academic speaking, academic writing, etc. Other
fields of interests are related to Second Language learning, ICT and ELT, language and translation.
https://orcid.org/0000-002-1107-692X
References
Basturkmen, H. (2014). LSP Teacher Education: Review of Literature and Suggestions for the
Research Agenda. Ibérica, 28, 17-34.
Fialkoff, F. A. (2002). Bringing Order to an Unruly Web. Library Journal, 127 (7), 775-792.
Flowerdew, J., & Li, Y. (2007). Language Re-use among Chinese Apprentice Scientists Writing
for Publication. Applied Linguistics, 28, 440-465.
Granitz, N., & Loewy, D. (2007). Applying Ethical Theories: Interpreting and Responding to
Student Plagiarism. Journal of Business Ethics, 72(3), 293-306. Accessed on 23/11/2018
from http://files.transtutors.com/cnd/uploadassignments/2340341_4_granitz ---loewy2007.pdf
Harvard College Writing Program. (2015). Harvard Guide to Using Sources: What Constitutes
Plagiarism?
Retrieved
from:
http://isites.harvard.edu/icb.do?keyword=k70847&pageid=icb.page342054
Howard, R. M. (1999). Standing in the Shadow of Giants: Plagiarists, Authors, Collaborators.
Stamford: Ablex.
Hyland, K. (2008). Academic Clusters: Text Patterning in Published and Postgraduate Writing.
International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 18(1), 41- 62.
Johns, A. M. (2006). Students and Research: Reflective Feedback for I-search Papers. In
Hyland, K. & Hyland, F (eds.) Feedback in Second Language Writing (pp. 162-181).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Köse, Ö. A., & Arikan, A. (2011). Reducing Plagiarism by Using Online Software: An
Experimental Study. Online Submission, 1, 122-129.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

120

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) May 2019. Chlef University conference Proceedings

Towards more Liable Use of Internet Sources

KHIATI

Mohammed, E., Sabah, A., & Nur, H. S. M. (2018). Needs Analysis in English for Academic
Purposes: The Case of Teaching Assistants at the University of Khartoum. How, 25(2), 4968.
Murphy, J. M. (2001). Reflective Teaching in ELT. In Dans M. C.-M. (ed.), Teaching English
as a Second or Foreign Language (pp. 499-514). Boston: Heinle and Heinle.
Nathan, P. (2007). Teaching against Plagiarism in the EAP classroom. In IATEFL 2006
Harrogate conference selections. Canterbury: IATEFL.
Noor-Ul-Amin, S. (2013). An Effective Use of ICT for Education and Learning by Drawing on
Worldwide Knowledge, Research and Experience: ICT as a Change Agent for Education (A
Literature review). Scholarly Journal of Education, 2(4), pp. 38-45. Retrieved from:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/312197085_An_effective_use_of_ICT_for_educ
ation_and_learning_by_drawing_on_worldwide_knowledge_research_and_experience_IC
T_as_a_change_agent_for_education_A_Literature_review
Park, C. (2003). In Other (People’s) Words: Plagiarism by University Students—Literature and
lessons. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 28(5), 471-488.
Richards, J. C. & Lochart (1994). Reflective Teaching in Second Language Classrooms. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Suerda, J., Comas, R., & Urbina, S. (2005). The "Copy and Paste" Generation Plagiarism among
Students, a Review of the Existing Literature. International Journal of Learning, 12 (168),
161-168.
Sutherland-Smith, W. (2005). Pandora's Box: Academic Perceptions of Student Plagiarism in
Writing. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 4, 83-95.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

121

