Change We Can Believe In: Structural and Content
Dynamics within Belief Networks*
Nic Fishman†
Nicholas T. Davis‡
November 16, 2020

Running head: Belief dynamics
Keywords: Ideology, belief networks, network analysis

* The authors thank Jon Green, Mark Brandt, Chris Federico, Meredith Conroy, Laura Bucci, Kevin Reuning,
Nathan Kalmoe, Dan McFarland, and Dave Peterson for input, kind words, and advice at various stages of this project.
Three referees contributed excellent feedback that strengthened the final manuscript, and the authors are grateful to
the editors for supplying helpful guidance during the revision process. No external funding supported this research;
any remaining errors are our own.
† Nic Fishman is an undergraduate student in the Department of Computer Science, Stanford University (njwfish@stanford.edu).
‡ Nicholas T. Davis is an Assistant Professor, Department of Political Science, University of Alabama (ntdavis2@ua.edu)

Belief Dynamics

Change We Can Believe In: Structural and Content
Dynamics within Belief Networks
Abstract
Scholars have used network analysis to explore the structural properties of mass ideology. This
manuscript incorporates two important, though ignored features in past research by investigating how time shapes the properties of belief networks for different populations of people –
those who exhibit high and low levels of political knowledge. We find that: (1) belief network density increases asymmetrically among people with high relative to low knowledge;
(2) symbolic preferences are more central to belief networks irrespective of survey timing or
population; in contrast, policy beliefs exhibit some increase in centrality over time among the
politically knowledgeable; and, (3) a belief’s centrality is unrelated to the amount of change
it explains in other beliefs. Troublingly, this latter finding presents problems for describing
belief networks using the vernacular of Conversian belief systems – a disconnect that seems
grounded in the mismatch between Converse’s individual-level theory and network analysis’
population-based properties.
Word count (inclusive full text, figures, and references): 9.938 words
Replication materials: The data and materials required to verify the computational reproducibility of the results, procedures and analyses in this article are available on the American
Journal of Political Science Dataverse within the Harvard Dataverse Network, at:
https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/ED5O5U.

Belief Dynamics

How do most people live without any
thought? There are many people in the
world, — you must have noticed them in
the street, — how do they live? How do
they get strength to put on their clothes in
the morning?”
Emily Dickinson

Democracy requires that citizens navigate complex social and political choices. Although classic
democratic theory took for granted the capacity of ordinary people to think logically and make
rational political decisions (e.g. Downs 1957), analyses of Americans’ political attitudes turn up
an alarming amount of illogic and incongruity (Converse 1964; Achen and Bartels 2016; Kinder
and Kalmoe 2017). Yet, while ordinary citizens may not think “ideologically,” their belief systems
nevertheless exhibit some amount of structure. An increasingly common way of visualizing the
permutations these preferences take involves network analysis, which models how attitudes cohere
in relation to each other and borrows heavily from Conversian ideas about the arrangement of such
preferences (e.g. Boutyline and Vaisey 2017; Brandt, Sibley, and Osborne 2019).
Although past research has shown that network analysis can be adapted productively to the
study of political ideology, we identify two important aspects of the survey response that have
not been sufficiently explored within this framework. First, it is unclear whether belief networks
are more well-developed among persons who know something about politics. If it is true that the
“quality” of ideology varies by political acumen (Kalmoe 2020), then the properties of belief networks may similarly vary according to the extent to which people understand the political system.
Second, the role of time in the development of political belief networks is unclear. Past research
has yet to assess whether or how the content within and the structure of belief networks shift over
time.
This uncertainty about the stability of belief networks over time and across groups raises
several important questions. Conditional on knowledge, do citizens’ belief networks exhibit structural changes in density over the course of an election? A large literature on campaign learning

1

Belief Dynamics

implies that beliefs are primed, if not changed (Jacobson 2015). Belief networks, then, might exhibit greater richness in connectivity over the course of an election if they function as “Conversian”
representations of belief systems. By extension, if network structure is dynamic, then do the elements that comprise belief networks shift to and from the periphery? They should according to
Converse’s logic about the centrality of groups. Finally, answering these question raises another,
perhaps more fundamental one: what does centrality within the belief network mean substantively?
Does centrality predict which elements “constrain” individuals’ political preferences? If not, then
it seems unlikely that belief network analysis maps conceptually onto how political scientists have
conventionally stylized belief systems.1
This manuscript addresses these questions using panel data collected over the course of the
2008 presidential election. Several findings offer insight into the dynamics of belief networks.
First, belief network density increases over time among our population of politically knowledgeable persons, which emphasizes how the informational richness of elections might shape belief
network structure asymmetrically. Second, symbolic preferences are more central to belief networks irrespective of time or sub-population. Policy preferences, however, exhibit some increase
in centrality over time, but only among the knowledgeable – illustrating, again, an important asymmetry that corroborates the idea that low-information publics may struggle to glean much from
informational signals (Price and Zaller 1993; Arceneaux and Vander Wielen 2017; Bakker, Llekes,
and Malka 2020). Third, we find that a belief’s centrality is unrelated to the amount of change
it explains in other beliefs. In other words, centrality, which ostensibly conveys an element’s
“importance” within the network analysis framework, does not resemble predictiveness, or the
conventional measure of importance within standard parametric models.
On balance, these findings not only reveal the role that elections play in shaping the structure, content, and expression of political beliefs, but also raise questions regarding how to interpret
the qualities of belief networks in relation to “ideology.” This latter finding, in particular, presents
1. Hereafter, when we reference belief systems, we mean the theoretical configuration of preferences in the Conversian framework. Belief network, however, implies something different. This term embodies an artificial structure
of preferences generated from network analysis. These things could, in theory, be quite analogous, but that is an open
question to which we dedicate this paper.

2

Belief Dynamics

problems for describing belief networks using the vernacular of Conversian belief systems – a
disconnect that seems grounded in the mismatch between Converse’s individual-level theory and
network analysis’ population-based properties.

Political ideology as a belief network
The average person possesses a range of beliefs, values, and orientations that motivate their interaction with the political world (Jost 2006; Federico 2015). The shape that the combination of
these preferences takes embodies the belief system, or what Converse (1964, pg. 3) described as
a “configuration of ideas and attitudes in which the elements are bound together by some form of
constraint or functional interdependence.” While this definition seems straightforward, research on
the structure or quality of political ideology has nevertheless struggled with both terminological
precision and the evidentiary standards regarding what qualifies as “ideology” (e.g. Gerring 1997;
Martin 1999; Jost 2006; Kinder and Kalmoe 2017; Azevedo et al. 2019).
Much of these debates involve disagreement over survey instrumentation, measurement, and
analytical assumptions. However, an alternative way of thinking about the relationships among
political preferences involves analytical tools that take the interdependence among individuals’ attitudes seriously. In particular, network analysis provides such a framework by modeling a range of
preferences as a network of “nodes” (belief elements) that are connected via “edges” (interdependent links). Unlike classic spatial models of ideology, which focus primarily upon latent structural
models and the reduction of dimensionality, this modeling approach makes few assumptions about
how political belief elements “ought” to relate to one another (e.g. Boutyline and Vaisey 2017).
Central preferences form the locus or core of the network, which bind together other belief elements at the periphery. These relationships are formally embodied in the concept of “centrality,”
which reflects the positioning or importance of a given idea element relative to other preferences
(c.f. Borgatti 2005).
Presumably, these properties of belief network analysis provide “high fidelity” (Baldassarri

3

Belief Dynamics

and Goldberg 2014, pg. 81) to Converse’s ideas, in no small part because centrality seems to embody his ideas about the relative positioning and functionality of belief elements within the system.
Yet, because network analysis fits a model over a population, it functionally models the “average”
nature of the interrelationships among all idea elements in the aggregate. This disjuncture between
levels of analysis raises questions about whether belief network analysis actually conforms to Converse’s conceptualization of the belief system – questions that can only be answered by considering
the dynamics of belief network qualities.

Political campaigns and the temporal dynamics of belief networks
While network analysis has opened up tempting paths for investigating how mass beliefs are configured, much of the current psychological research involving political belief networks involves
cross-sectional data (e.g. Boutyline and Vaisey 2017; Brandt et al. 2019). As a result, several
questions involving the temporal stability of belief networks persist. First, it is not clear whether
belief networks exhibit stationarity (i.e. their properties are constant over time) or if they change
dynamically over the course of, say, an election. For example, while symbolic and operational
elements exhibit different levels of centrality (Brandt et al. 2019), it is unclear whether this content shifts differently within the belief network over time. These dynamics are important because
observing higher levels of policy centrality near an election, for example, would illustrate a responsiveness that is often discounted in minimalist depictions of ideology (e.g. Converse 2000;
Kinder and Kalmoe 2017).
Second, a central premise in Converse’s work involves the idea that “central” idea elements
at the core of a belief system should bring other preferences into alignment. However, it is not
clear whether or not network centrality has any “causal” bearing on content or vice versa. This
ambiguity makes it difficult to unpack what centrality actually means for the belief network, which
has important implications for assessing whether belief network analysis actually produces as an

4

Belief Dynamics

approximation of a Conversian belief system.
A political campaign is a useful context in which to explore these temporal dynamics for
several reasons. Although mid-century conventional wisdom suggested that the effects of campaigns on citizens’ preferences were minimal (e.g. Berelson, Lazarsfeld, and McPhee 1954), this
view is now a minority one (Iyengar and Simon 2000; see Jacobson [2015] for a thorough review).
Because campaigns are information-rich environments, they serve multiple purposes. They inform
citizens about who candidates are (Alvarez 1998), what they stand for (Popkin 1991), and their
qualifications (Johnston et al. 2004), which helps calibrate voters’ personal beliefs (Bartels 1993)
and, ultimately, their vote choice (Vavreck 2009; Sides, Tesler, and Vavreck 2019). In fact, debate
about the role that campaigns play in changing beliefs notwithstanding, there is widespread agreement that campaigns achieve these outcomes by priming the salience of both political identities
(Berelson et al. 1954; Erikson and Wlezien 2012; Huddy, Mason, and Aarøe 2015) and ideology
(Gelman and King 1993; Hillygus and Shields 2008). As a result, comparing respondents’ belief
networks at the beginning and conclusion of an electoral campaign provides an excellent opportunity to not only explore the dynamics of political belief networks, but to analyze whether elections
teach prospective voters “what goes with what.”

The importance of political knowledge
However, the informational richness of campaigns notwithstanding, cue uptake is not distributed
evenly among the mass public. As far back as the 1970s, scholars suspected that information supplied by elites generated inequalities in both knowledge and capacity. Thus, a natural “knowledge
gap” might manifest where citizens of higher socioeconomic status would acquire information at a
faster rate than peers of lower socioeconomic status (Tichenor, Donohue, and Olien 1970), in part
because the political system exacerbates inequality. Citizens who perceive that the system does not
“work” for them are less likely to be interested in navigating politics (Du Bois 1920; Delli Carpini
and Keeter 1996). However, while it is plausible that the already information-affluent would become richer during an election (Price and Zaller 1993; Luskin, Fishkin, and Jowell 2002), the costs
to acquire information are tied directly to the availability and diffusion of information. In turn, it is
5

Belief Dynamics

possible that the increased intensity and salience of political information found during a campaign
may instead assist the otherwise-unaware in developing their attitudes. This idea corresponds to
Zaller’s (1992) proposition that “less sophisticated” voters may develop and become more confident in their political preferences over the course of a campaign, which serves up the type of
informational signals that such citizens do not routinely see.
We take the possibility of such “heterogeneous” learning effects within political networks
seriously because ideology constitutes different things for people who are (un)familiar with politics. In particular, political knowledge – sometimes couched as “awareness” or “sophistication” –
describes the ability of respondents to understand how politics “works.”2 Much research indicates
that this acumen reliably shapes how values and beliefs are folded into and expressed within belief
systems (e.g. Goren 2012; Miller, Saunders, and Farhart 2015; Kalmoe 2020; Federico and Malka
2018).
However, while knowledge reliably conditions ideology, the empirical evidence that campaigns may affect (un)aware citizens in different ways is more nuanced. Some scholars find that
campaigns assist the least politically-aware; others find that citizens with higher levels of awareness are more responsive to these events (see: Claassen [2011] for a succinct review). Although
most of this research program involves whether and how campaigns persuade, Arceneaux’s (2006)
research is particularly relevant here because it demonstrates how campaigns can link ideology to
partisan preferences via priming. Conditional on knowledge, symbolic and instrumental preferences behave differently as the election nears, where “[l]ess politically sophisticated individuals
use campaigns to learn basic features of the electoral landscape, such as defining which party
matches them ideologically, whereas political sophisticates enter the campaign with a sense of
the parties’ ideologies relative to their own, and use campaigns to glean other types of electorally
relevant considerations” (pg. 167).
We believe that this finding offers suggestive evidence of and an important justification for
parsing belief network analysis by political knowledge for two reasons. First, as we show in the
2. We treat “sophistication” and “knowledge” as rhetorically equivalent for the purposes of this paper, but prefer
the latter term due to its lack of elitist connotations.

6

Belief Dynamics

online supporting materials, individual-level differences in both political interest and news consumption vary among the more and less knowledgeable.3 Second, political knowledge conveys
familiarity with the political system and its actors. The combination of both exposure to and individual motivation for interacting with the campaign environment should translate into different
patterns of network development over time.4 Because political knowledge is an effective summary
property that distinguishes the politically (dis)interested and (un)aware, we expect to observe different content and structural changes in belief networks across these two groups over time.5

Theoretical expectations
Drawing on these ideas, we now outline the logic of several analyses that involve parsing the
dynamics of belief network change among high- and low-knowledge citizens over the course of
the 2008 presidential election.

Changes in political belief network density
We begin with a summary property of belief network structure – density – which permits us to test
how the number of associations or connections among idea elements change over time. Because
high-knowledge citizens understand politics, we expect that their belief network should be denser
than low-knowledge respondents before a political campaign. Given that these individuals have a
firmer grasp on politics and are more likely to navigate information-rich sources (Marshall 2019),
it is possible that the density of their belief network will be constrained by ceiling effects (i.e. the
belief network begins with more density and so has little room to grow). If so, then the density of
this network might shift only nominally over the campaign.
In turn, if low-knowledge citizens express only a modest understanding of political facts and
political coalitions, then they should begin a political campaign with a loosely connected belief
3. See Figures B1 and B2 on pages 7 and 8.
4. More generally, there is a wider literature on cue-taking that suggests such differences may arise in how information is processed. Arceneaux and Vander Wielen [2017], for example, find evidence of a positive relationship between
sophistication and cue up-take; Bakker, Llekes and Malka [2020] demonstrate that informational cues are “best” used
by persons with strong rather than weak identities, and political knowledge covaries with these preferences.
5. To be clear, the aggregate nature of network analysis makes establishing the underlying causal mechanism for
such shifts more difficult than conventional individual-level analysis. While we believe the campaign-learning story is
plausible, belief network shifts are likely not monocausal and future research on this question is encouraged.

7

Belief Dynamics

network (i.e. one that exhibits low density). As the campaign progresses, these persons should
be exposed – either directly or indirectly – to political information that they might not otherwise
receive during non-election periods. As such, we expect significant changes in belief network
density for these individuals, where the number of associations among belief elements increase
over time.

Changes in the centrality of symbolic and operational content
While density is an informative property within the belief network framework, centrality conveys
the relative embeddedness of individual belief elements within a network. Thus, it is valued given
our interest in the interconnectedness of belief elements. Although more appropriately described as
a family of measures, recent political psyschology research usually explores one of three centrality
types (e.g. Brandt, Sibley, and Osborne 2019; Brandt 2020): (1) strength centrality, a measure
of the connectivity of a given node to other neighboring elements, which conveys the general
importance of an element; (2) betweenness centrality, a measure of how much information passes
through a belief element, which conveys whether a belief is a “bridge” to other preferences; and,
(3) closeness centrality, which conveys the locational importance of an element, or the extent to
which a belief element can influence the network quickly.6
Generally, when centrality is high (low) an instrument is presumed to be more (less) “important” to the network. However, as discussed previously, not all idea elements carry the same
“weight.” A major focus within research on ideology involves parsing symbolic preferences –
affective attachments toward political objects – from operational ones – the instrumental policy
attitudes people hold (e.g. Ellis and Stimson 2012). This distinction is nontrivial. Research
demonstrates that both partisanship (Greene 2004; Huddy, Mason, and Aaore 2015) and liberalconservative self-placement function as forms of social identity (Devine 2015). That is, individuals
conceptualize their political orientations relationally, assigning positive (negative) emotional value
to the in-group (out-group). In contrast, policy attitudes are conceptualized as instrumental pref6. This family of measures presumably reveals different relationships among nodes within the overarching belief
network; however, as canonical network analysis texts detail, there are a great many centrality forms from which one
could choose that might shape the conclusions one draws from network analysis (c.f. Borgatti 2005; Freeman 1978)

8

Belief Dynamics

erences. They are a set of cognitive beliefs about the appropriate strategies for governing social,
economic, and political institutions.7
To the extent that these elements are situated differently within belief systems, Converse
(1964, pg. 46) himself noted that “the party and affect toward it are more central within the the
political belief systems of the mass public than are the policy ends that the parties are designed to
pursue.” Indeed, Brandt et al. (2019) find this proposition to be true. Symbolic belief elements are
a great deal more central within a belief network than operational ones, suggesting that affective
elements help bind belief networks together.
It is unclear, however, whether and how the properties associated with these belief elements
might shift within the network over time. Given the fixity of identity (Niemi and Jennings 1991;
Johnston 2006), it is plausible that symbolic content will resist changes in centrality over time, but
it seems equally likely that such preferences could become more central within the belief network
over the course of the election because campaigns prime group affect (Huddy, Mason, and Aaore
2015). Correspondingly, it is possible that instrumental policy preferences will exhibit a larger
increase in centrality over the course of the election, in part because these idea elements are the
currency of political campaigns, but also because it is less likely that these idea elements are
interconnected when politics is less salient. In that case, the cascade of political signals that occur
in the information environment as the election nears may increase the centrality of operational idea
elements because their “floor” is low at the start of the campaign.
In either case, knowledge likely constrains how these elements change over time, although
we have weak priors about what such changes might encompass. For example, because highknowledge citizens are more familiar with political matters, they may exhibit larger increases in
centrality among operational preferences compared to low-knowledge persons. Alternatively, perhaps symbolic elements become more central among low-knowledge persons because they rely
7. Of course, this stylized distinction pitting “affective” against “cognitive” elements risks diminishing the notion
that identities subsume policy preferences (i.e. identities are laden with some policy content) and that policy preferences are often encoded with affect (e.g. abortion attitudes [Turell et al. 1990] and immigration [Verkuyten 2004]
elicit significant emotional responses from individuals). Nevertheless, the two sets of preferences are distinct enough
to warrant some sort of separation (e.g. Ellis and Stimson 2012), artificial as it may be.

9

Belief Dynamics

more heavily on affective group attachments to navigate political space.

The implications of centrality
Finally, turning full circle, we investigate the substantive implications of centrality. If belief networks approximate Conversian belief systems, then we would expect content changes in beliefs to
be closely associated with the structural properties of the network. Indeed, Converse’s (1964, pg.
45) framework seems to rest on the idea that temporal stability of a belief is strongly related to its
locational placement within the belief system (i.e. centrality). Yet, it is tricky to assess whether belief network centrality functions as Converse conceived it, in part because Converse’s expectations
about centrality involved how belief elements function over time.
In practice, centrality is often stylized as a causal property. Indeed: “...just as any theory
of belief system dynamics must include connections between elements, these connections must be
causal in some way. That is, one element will influence connected elements” (Brandt and Sleegers
2020, pg. 4). The correspondence between belief system and belief network centrality, however,
has been taken mostly at face value within the study of ideology-as-belief-network (Boutyline and
Vaisey 2017; Brandt et al. 2019; Bringman et al. 2019). Yet, Dablander and Hinne (2019, pg.
2) caution that centrality “is easily confused with having causal influence. However, this does not
follow from the network paradigm...as it provides only a statistical representation of the underlying
system, not a causal one.”
In fact, the “causal” nature of centrality in belief networks – that is, whether more central
beliefs affect other belief elements in a predictive capacity, for example – is an open empirical
question. To assess whether centrality has a “causal” nature, we can explore how it is related to
more conventional estimates of “importance” within regression frameworks. As a rough proxy for
the quantity we really want but cannot test – the causal influence of beliefs on network structure
over time – we propose to substitute a kind of “predictiveness” heuristic that functions as a measure
of instrumental importance.
If voters have a set of largely unordered beliefs at the start of the election (plausibly because
they are not that entrenched in politics), then exposure to a campaign’s information environment
10

Belief Dynamics

may alter their beliefs in accordance with the predominating frames used by elites. If there are
some “central” beliefs that voters are less willing to change their minds about, then we would
expect those to pull and push their other opinions over time. In that case, beliefs at the start of
the election that are more central ought to influence whether other beliefs change over the course
of the election. Although we formalize this logic mathematically below, our specific expectation
can be stated as follows: if belief network centrality roughly approximates Conversian centrality
– as prevailing theories of belief networks presume – then we should observe that belief centrality
constrains downstream beliefs. In other words, central beliefs should, correspondingly, be “predictive” ones. Whether this relationship is conditional on knowledge, as we speculate in the prior
sections, is an open question.

Data and design
The forthcoming analysis uses data from the 2008-2009 American National Election Studies Panel
Study at Waves 1 (January, 2008) and 10 (October, 2008). 701 respondents completed surveys at
both waves. The specific waves were selected due to the overlap of available instruments common
to both questionnaires.8

Measures
Political preferences. Our choice of belief elements to model is limited by the survey design.
Policy questions and political identification are rarely asked at common waves. Thus, our pool
of available items is constrained to all of those questions that were included on the Wave 1 and
10 surveys, which still included a wide spectrum of policy areas. The six instruments included:
attitudes toward gay marriage, taxes, single payer healthcare, habeas rights for suspected terrorists,
court orders for wiretapping, and illegal immigration. For each policy item, respondents were
asked whether they favored (opposed) a stated policy solution. They then received a branching
question that asked whether they favored (opposed) an option “a little,” “moderately,” or “a great
8. Although attrition in panel surveys is a problem (the individuals who do not participate at Wave 10 may be
systematically different from persons who completed both surveys), the dearth of panel data that includes a common
battery of identity and issue questions at multiple time points means there are few alternatives to this dataset.

11

Belief Dynamics

deal.” This sequence generated a response set for each item that ranged from 1 to 7, where low
(high) values correspond to traditionally left-leaning (right-leaning) preferences.
We use four items that tap into symbolic preferences. Two items asked whether respondents liked (disliked) the parties and employed similar branching question prompts to establish the
strength of affect felt toward the Republican and Democratic Parties. In addition, both the traditional liberal-conservative and party identification instruments were included. Again, all measures
ranged from 1 (left-leaning) to 7 (right-leaning).9
Political knowledge. To stratify the sample on the basis of political acumen, we relied on
six items that assess factual political knowledge. Respondents were asked 1) the number of times
U.S. Presidents can be elected, 2) the number of years that U.S. senators serve, 3) the number of
senators from each state, 4) the number of years members of the U.S. House of Representatives
serve, 5) the successor to the Vice President, and 6) the necessary percentage of votes needed to
override a presidential veto. Correct answers were coded 1 and otherwise 0. We then calculate an
additive scale. High-knowledge persons answered at least five of six questions correctly (n = 242);
respondents in the low-knowledge group answered four or fewer items correctly (n = 459).

Method
Epskamp et al. (2018) document an analytical approach that creates a network of survey responses
using pairwise Markov random fields (PMRF), where the network is comprised of nodes connected
by undirected edges indicating conditional dependence between two variables. In our case, we
assume the joint is distributed as a multivariate normal, which permits a Gaussian graphical model
where the edges are treated as partial correlation coefficients that are estimated using the covariance
matrix of the data or polychoric correlations in the case of ordinal data (as most political survey
data is). This structure accounts for the dependence/independence relations in the data, affording
clear node relationships and intuitive structural properties (e.g. the stronger an edge is between
two nodes, the more related those node are net of all other positions).
9. We restrict symbolic elements to these items, which means excluding candidate affect. Unfortunately, the coverage of these instruments for a broad array of figures across waves is poor.

12

Belief Dynamics

Of primary interest here are comparisons of several belief networks (e.g. networks using data
collected at different waves) constructed on several populations (e.g. persons who possess different
levels of political knowledge). Boutyline and Vaisey (2017) recommend approaches for comparing
sub-populations, primarily along two dimensions involving whether the logics underlying network
structure and / or the degree of network organization differs.10 Drawing on this work, we propose
to compare sets of belief networks by generating the belief networks for two populations (stratified
by knowledge) at two time points (January, October 2008); we then use non-parametric permutation tests to evaluate the significance of differences in overall density and strength centrality. Tests
of this type entail repeatedly randomizing the assignment of individuals between the two populations under examination, re-constructing the belief networks, and aggregating the difference of the
property of interest into a distribution of differences. The distribution generated in this fashion can
be used to perform a two-tailed t-test on the observed difference, which reveals whether changes
in network properties (and between sub-populations) are significant.11

Results
Network density over time
We begin by generating four belief networks in Fig. 1 that constitute the partial correlations among
nodes for high- and low-knowledge persons at Waves 1 and 10. Holding the node positions constant, it appears that high-knowledge persons in Wave 10 (Panel D) possess stronger associations
among the idea elements within their belief network relative to the other networks presented in
Panels A - C (i.e. the connections [lines] are thicker than those observed in other panels). This
quality is important because it serves as a heuristic for the overall amount of structure or amount
of dependence in a given network, which describes how “organized” a population’s beliefs are.
10. Here, “logics” refer to the direction of the correlation, positive or negative; two networks have the same underlying logic if all the correlations are directed in the same way.
11. Several R packages were useful in this task: Canty and Ripley’s (2020) boot allowed for convenient bootstrapping for permutation tests; Epskamp and Fried’s (2020) package bootnet was used to construct the belief networks;
Epskamp, Giulio, and Haslbeck’s (2020) qgraph, as well as Harrell Jr.’s (2019) Hmisc were vital in creating graphical
representations of the networks.

13

Belief Dynamics

We calculate and compare densities for the four networks in Table 1. Several results are
notable. First, it is curious that the difference in the overall densities between high- and lowknowledge persons, which is modest, is not significantly different at Wave 1 (the p-value narrowly
misses the more liberal p<0.10). To the extent that the information environment is only modestly saturated with political signals during the early months of the campaign, it would seem that
the tendrils connecting belief elements in their “fallow” state do not differ across high- and lowknowledge populations. This finding deviates from our assumption that high- and low-knowledge
persons ought to naturally differ in the structure of their belief networks, irrespective of time.
However, changes in density over time are conditional upon knowledge. Over the course of
the campaign, the network for low-knowledge persons does not become significantly denser. The
amount of organization among beliefs is effectively static. In contrast, high-knowledge respondents do see significant increases in network density. Among this population of persons, political
preferences become significantly more well-connected. This pattern seems to match Converse’s
(1964, pg. 44) prediction that “[t]he configuration of political beliefs held by individuals simply
becomes increasingly idiosyncratic as we move to less sophisticated people.” To the extent that
denser belief networks are less idiosyncratic, that seems to be the case here.
Networks Compared
Difference in Density
Low-knowledge W10 vs W1
0.0239
(p = 0.314)
High-knowledge W10 vs W1
0.2038
(p = 0.01)**
Wave 1 High-knowledge vs Low-knowledge 0.0573
(p = 0.106)
Wave 10 High-knowledge vs Low-knowledge 0.2372
(p < 0.001)***
Table 1: Differences in the overall density of belief networks over time and between high- and lowknowledge respondents. Note: Density is calculated as the sum of the network edges. Given that we
have aligned the underlying response scales to all match a liberal/conservative scale, positive edges map to
“coherent” collections of beliefs within the current party-policy millieu. Taking the sum is a methodological
necessity to avoid boundary conditions in our randomization tests. *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

The dynamics of operational and symbolic content
Having assessed how the organizational properties of belief system change over time, we now
explore the importance of symbolic and operational content within these networks. Here, we are

14

Belief Dynamics

concerned with whether these idea elements are 1) more or less central at each wave for each
group, and 2) whether the strength centrality of such elements shift over the course of the election.
Again, we generate visual representations of theses changes, which are displayed in Fig. 2.12
We make several observations. First, among persons in the low-knowledge group and across
both waves, symbolic elements are significantly more central than operational ones. In contrast,
whereas symbolic elements were more central than operational ones among high-knowledge respondents at Wave 1, these differences disappear by Wave 10. In other words, this change in
strength centrality is consistent with a story of high-knowledge persons developing more complex
positions on operational beliefs as they (presumably) learn about them over the course of the campaign. This finding makes some sense from the standpoint that such “ideological-thinking” is often
restricted to those people who are actually familiar with how politics works.
To investigate these findings further, we disaggregate the content contained within these
categories to assess how the individual belief elements included in the networks shift in centrality
over time. Fig. 3 portrays two series of illustrations.13 First, Panels A and B portray Waves
1 and 10 strength centrality for each of the 10 belief element among low- and high-knowledge
persons, respectively. Beginning first with Panel A, although we observed that neither symbolic
nor operational elements shifted in centrality over the campaign for the low-knowledge group in
Figure 2, we nonetheless find some significant differences in strength centrality across individual
belief elements over time. Taxes, wire-tapping and healthcare became modestly more central by
Wave 10, while habeas and immigration attitudes become less central. Further, while partisanship,
ideological identification, and affect toward the Democratic Party were more central at Wave 10,
there was a massive reduction in centrality in Republican Party affect at that wave.
Among the high-knowledge group in Panel B, we observe large changes in strength centrality
12. Readers interested in supplementary analysis involving betweenness and closeness centrality will find these
models replicated in the online supporting materials, Section C, pages 11-13. Results for Panel A generalize across
all three metrics; results for Panels B and C are common across strength and closeness centrality, but not betweenness
centrality; results illustrated in Panel D also mostly generalize across all three metrics.
13. Supplementary analysis involving estimates for betweenness and closeness centrality of these individual elements can be found in the online supporting materials, Section C, pages 17-20. Here, there is some modest variation
in the centrality of particular belief elements across types of centrality, but the broader patterns are similar.

15

Belief Dynamics

among three issues (tax, habeas, and same-sex marriage preferences), which seems to have driven
the shift in operational content over time in the prior figure. In contrast to these items, we observe
no meaningful changes in the centrality of symbolic instruments. Centrality among these items
begins the election “high” and remains relatively stable over the duration of the election.
Moving to the bottom two panels, we contrast belief element strength centrality for the
two groups against each other at Wave 1 and Wave 10. In Panel C, we observe large differences between high- and low-knowledge respondents on tax preferences and liberal-conservative
self-placement and more modest differences on several other issues. Democratic Party affect
among low-knowledge persons also appears more central than among those with higher levels
of knowledge at Wave 1. Pivoting to Wave 10 in Panel D, we observe a somewhat similar picture. Whereas persons with greater political knowledge exhibit much more strength centrality on
liberal-conservative self-placement, taxes, and gay marriage, low-knowledge respondents’ partisanship exhibits slightly higher levels of strength centrality.
To some extent, these findings are straightforward. Ideology means something qualitatively
different for individuals who understand the political system. This notion is reflected in the growth
of strength centrality in cultural (e.g. gay marriage) and economic preferences (e.g. taxation)
among the more knowledgeable over time and again in the differences in strength centrality of these
elements relative to low-knowledge persons in Wave 10. Further, the most prominent difference
in strength centrality among the two groups’ belief elements involves liberal-conservative selfidentification. Past research suggests that these labels are most productive to individuals who
understand what these labels mean (c.f. Kinder and Kalmoe 2017), and this result corroborates
that finding.
What are we to make, however, of the significant heterogeneity in strength centrality among
the various operational elements? Although high-knowledge respondents observe a net increase
in operational strength centrality from Waves 1 to 10 (per Fig. 2), this change seems primarily
driven by several considerations including tax, habeas, and same-sex marriage preferences. In
fact, these changes seem track with other survey data of issue importance in the 2008 election. Pew

16

Belief Dynamics

(2008) and Gallup (2008) found, for example, that voters accorded high levels of importance to
the economy and foreign policy (which encompasses both immigration and War-on-Terror belief
elements). Among Republican voters, moral issues were deemed important, while Democrats
placed significant attention on healthcare.14 In turn, these issues were among those emphasized by
the parties during the campaign (Vavrek 2009; Hillygus and Henderson 2010; Balz and Johnson
2009), which occurred against a shifting social, economic, and political backdrop that included a
financial crisis, stagnating Iraq foreign policy, and shifting cultural mores. To some extent, we see
these issues become more interconnected for knowledgeable persons nearer to the election.

How “important” is centrality? Is it predictive?
Building on the results of the previous section, we turn next to probing the meaning of strength
centrality through the lens of time in order to better understand the substantive implications of
centrality. We begin with a simple model for predicting changes over time in issue B(k) from B( j) :

(k)

(k)

( j)

Bi,10 − Bi,1 = α + βBi,1 + εi jk

(1)

(k)

Where Bi,w is the position held by respondent i on position k at wave w, α is an intercept
term, β is the slope, and εi jk is an independent error. Then, using the R2 of this model we can
define the predictiveness of an issue B( j) on another issue B(k) :

R2jk

= 1−

(k)
(k)
ˆ ( j) )2
∑i (Bi,10 − Bi,1 − α̂ − βB
i,1
(k)

(k)

(k)

(k)

∑i (Bi,10 − Bi,1 − N1 ∑i (Bi,10 − Bi,1 ))2

(2)

In turn, we can develop a general metric for the predictiveness of the issue B( j) :

Pj =

∑ R jk

(3)

k6= j

Our predictiveness metric, Pj , will be high if the issue B( j) is an issue important to structuring
14. Given that partisans ranked issue importance differently (Pew 2008), future analysis of partisan differences in
centrality may be productive.

17

Belief Dynamics
voters’ other beliefs.15 It is this estimate that we will link to centrality (C j ) in several ways, which
are all rooted in the longstanding notion that centrality approximates predictiveness.
Although scholars generally assume that the beliefs that emerge as more central in belief
network analysis are in fact more important in the framing of new information or in the pulling and
pushing of other beliefs, it is not clear whether this supposition is correct. If it is, then the most
central belief elements at Wave 1 should also have the highest predictiveness. Because stability and
importance are proposed to be interlinked in the conventional depiction of centrality (e.g. Brandt,
Sibley and Osborne 2019, pg. 1361), upstream centrality should logically constrain downstream
predictiveness. We can call this the “prospective” relationship, and we give our specification for
this model in (4). Alternatively, we might expect that elements that appear to have structured the
belief network over the course of the election would be more central at Wave 10; we call this
the “retrospective” relationship, and give the specification in (5). Finally we offer an alternate
specification for this retrospective relationship where the elements that appear to have structured
the belief network over the course of the election would have experienced the most (positive)
change in centrality over the course of the election, see (6).

Pj = α prospective + β prospectiveC j,1 + ε j

(4)

C j,10 = αretrospective + βretrospective Pj + ε j

(5)

C j,10 −C j,1 = αchange + βchange Pj + ε j

(6)

Figure 4 illustrates the results of these different ways of thinking about the relationship between predictiveness and centrality, conditional upon knowledge. First, are elements that are central at Wave 1 also structuring elements (i.e. elements that have predictive significance)? This is
the “prospective” model, most consistent with the causal theories we give above. The estimates
15. It is relevant to note that this will be a very aggressive estimate of the relationship among variables. An implicit
assumption of this model is that the beliefs at Wave 1 are all that influences belief changes at Wave 10, which is a
strong, if not flawed assumption. But, this minimal toy model should be sufficient for the analyses in which we are
interested. If we cannot recover the expected pattern of findings using this approach, then the inclusion of stronger
modeling assumptions (i.e. controls) should only make the task more difficult.

18

Belief Dynamics
presented in Panel A suggest that this is not the case – the relationship is not significant.16 Second,
are elements that are central at Wave 10 structuring elements? This would be the “centrality as
retrospective causality” argument; maybe beliefs that were structuring (i.e. highly-predictive) at
Wave 1 are more central in the resultant belief network at Wave 10. In Fig. 4 Panel B we again
observe a non-significant relationship; the slopes are essentially flat. We conclude with a tweak
to this analysis: are elements that move the most from the periphery to the center from Wave 1 to
Wave 10 structuring elements? This would be consistent with predictiveness explaining the change
in centrality, but, again, in Fig. 4 Panel C, we find a non-significant relationship (and one that is
pointed in the wrong direction).17
What are we to make of these results? Technically, centrality captures both whether a belief
is structuring another belief and whether a belief is structured by another belief. Thus, it fails
to discriminate between the two qualities, which have different substantive implications. These
results do not mean that centrality is uninterpretable, but perhaps imply that it is capturing some
generalized sense of belief element salience, rather than anything that resembles predictiveness.
Central belief elements may be strongly interconnected with other preferences, but they do not
exhibit the “constraining” behaviors that scholars would expect central beliefs to exhibit. This
point makes some sense, however, when we consider the theoretical-analytical mismatch between
the Conversian framework that scholars want belief network analysis to approximate and the aggregate nature of network analysis more generally – belief network analysis involves population,
not individual-level analysis. In other words, is difficult to expect the results of a population-level
analysis to approximate how Converse hypothesized an individual’s mental processes operate.

16. Modeling output for these relationships is available in the online supporting materials, Section D, page 25.
17. In Section D of the online supporting materials (pages 22-24), we replicate these analyses with betweenness
and closeness centrality and find the same pattern of non-signifcant or counter-intuitive results. Irrespective of the
centrality metric we use here, the relationship between predictiveness and centrality never manifests as we would
expect.

19

Belief Dynamics

Discussion and conclusion
Presumably, new methodological techniques and powerful computing resources can provide tools
to help unlock the mysteries regarding how ordinary people think about matters of politics. Nevertheless, ideology remains an elusive quantity. Fields’ (1990) comments are perhaps an appropriate
warning about the difficulty of subjecting ideology to analysis. She argues that ideology

...is not a material entity, a thing of any sort, that you can hand down like an old
garment, pass on like a germ, spread like a rumour, or impose like a code of dress
or etiquette. Nor is it a collection of disassociated beliefs – attitudes is the favored
jargon among American social scientists and the historians they have mesmerized –
that you can extract from their context and measure by the current or retrospective
survey research.
Whatever the essence of “ideology,” it does not succumb easily to quantification. We ought to take
seriously, then, the criticism that the complex nature of ideology resists stylized manifestations of
it.
Still, this pessimism notwithstanding, quantifying the contours and dynamics of belief systems is an exercise with important implications for social and political outcomes. Identifying the
conditions under which beliefs structure and are structured by other beliefs gives us a window into
why individuals may receive or reject incorporating information about politics when navigating the
campaign context. Understanding those dynamics are valuable to both practitioners and academics
alike.
This paper contributes to this task by investigating the properties of belief networks to test
whether they behave like Conversian belief systems. A central premise in the study of ideology
involves the idea that well-developed mental frameworks should exhibit many connections among
beliefs.18 We would have expected that belief networks naturally become more dense as the information environment becomes richer – but perhaps only among those people for whom politics
is familiar. In the case presented here, a temporal snapshot of voters’ attitudes at either January
18. Certainly, the range of a system may be narrow or broad (per Converse), but, irrespective of the scope, a “welldeveloped” system ought to exhibit interconnectedness among elements.

20

Belief Dynamics

or October 2008 would have led to very different conclusions about this property. We found that
density in the belief network was conditionally dynamic – among high-knowledge persons, it increased over the course of the election, while network density among individuals with lower levels
of knowledge remained unchanged. This finding suggests that pooling across surveys for the purposes of network analysis may be problematic because the timing of data collection matters. By
extension, this within-election dynamic suggests that across-election dynamics may be similarly
relevant. The elements that structure the belief network in one election may or may not structure it
in future ones with new candidates and different issue agendas.
Our second contribution was to scrutinize the property of (strength) centrality. Our interest
in this concept stems from Converse’s preoccupation with the relative positioning of idea elements
within the belief system. We showed that strength centrality among operational and symbolic elements shifts differentially over time for both high- and low-knowledge people. Further, our analysis produced some surprising results – namely, it is not abundantly clear whether or not strength
centrality actually resembles the sort of predictive importance that Converse ascribed to it.
These findings muddy how we ought to interpret the “importance” of centrality when modeling ideology as a belief network.19 As a result, it is worth pondering what the results derived
from network analysis mean for the individual. Although network analysis does not allow for
individual-level analysis, we were nevertheless able to parse belief networks by political knowledge, which is important given what scholars know about the relationship between the “quality” of
ideology and such acumen (e.g. Kinder and Kalmoe 2017). To the extent that other demographic
features might moderate relationships among idea elements, network analysis may obscure such
contingencies.
In sum, while belief networks appear useful for stylizing ideology as an organizational framework, we suspect that they only weakly resemble the person-level “belief systems” of political
psychology. In particular, the lack of a clear and sensible relationship between predictiveness and
19. Notwithstanding these conclusions, more research is needed. While we have demonstrated that the properties of
belief networks are dynamic, it is less clear whether the structure of belief networks regress. That is, does centrality
recede and content change as the information context becomes less rich? Unfortunately, the present dataset is limited
and does not allow for such analyses.

21

Belief Dynamics

centrality uncovered here suggests that, while Converse’s depiction of centrality is elegant, it nevertheless remains an elusive quality to quantify. The mismatch between the aggregate nature of
network analysis and Converse’s individual-level framework is probably partly to blame. It is difficult to imagine that centrality estimates fit across a population of people will correlate with the
extent to which instruments predict individual-level belief changes. As a result, we would be hesitant to ascribe Conversian theory to the belief network analysis, attractive as that may be. However,
if ideology emerges from social order, then trying to wrangle sensible structure out of discrete belief elements via belief network analysis may offer a window into the permutations that “ideology”
manifests in the wider social-political environment. Brandt (2020), for example, analyzes belief
networks cross-nationally and finds that certain institutional features help explain the permutations
that belief networks take in different country contexts. In this vein, and to the extent that understanding the latent structure of such beliefs within the mass public may explain prevailing political
cleavages and agendas, belief network analysis remains valuable.

22

Belief Dynamics

References
Achen, Christopher H, and Larry M Bartels. Democracy for realists: Why elections do not produce
responsive government. Vol. 4. Princeton University Press, (2016). ISBN: 1400888743.
Alvarez, R Michael. Information and elections. University of Michigan Press, (1998).
American National Election Studies. American National Election Studies (ANES) Panel Study,
2008-2009. ICPSR29182-v1., (2009). http://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR29182.v1.
Arceneaux, Kevin. “Do campaigns help voters learn? A cross-national analysis.” British Journal
of Political Science 36, no. 1 (2006): 159–173.
Arceneaux, Kevin, and Ryan J Vander Wielen. Taming intuition: How reflection minimizes partisan
reasoning and promotes democratic accountability. Cambridge University Press, (2017).
Azevedo, Flavio, John T Jost, Tobias Rothmund, and Joanna Sterling. “Neoliberal ideology and
the justification of inequality in capitalist societies: Why social and economic dimensions of
ideology are intertwined.” Journal of Social Issues 75, no. 1 (2019): 49–88.
Bakker, Bert, Yphtach Lelkes, and Ariel Malka. “Understanding Partisan Cue Receptivity: Tests
of Predictions from the Bounded Rationality and Expressive Utility Perspectives.” Journal of
Politics July, no. 3 (2020): doi.org/10.1086/707616.
Baldassarri, Delia, and Amir Goldberg. “Neither ideologues nor agnostics: Alternative voters’ belief system in an age of partisan politics.” American Journal of Sociology 120, no. 1 (2014):
45–95.
Balz, Daniel J, and Haynes Bonner Johnson. The Battle for America, 2008: The Story o fan Extraordinary Election, (2009).

23

Belief Dynamics

Bartels, Larry M. “Messages received: The political impact of media exposure.” American political
science review 87, no. 2 (1993): 267–285.
Berelson, Bernard R, Paul F Lazarsfeld, William N McPhee, and William N McPhee. Voting: A
study of opinion formation in a presidential campaign. University of Chicago Press, (1954).
Borgatti, Stephen P. “Centrality and network flow.” Social networks 27, no. 1 (2005): 55–71.
Boutyline, Andrei, and Stephen Vaisey. “Belief network analysis: A relational approach to understanding the structure of attitudes.” American Journal of Sociology 122, no. 5 (2017): 1371–
1447.
Brandt, Mark J. “Estimating and examining the replicability of belief system networks.” Collabra:
Psychology 1, no. 24 (2020).
Brandt, Mark J, Chris G Sibley, and Danny Osborne. “What Is Central to Political Belief System
Networks?” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 45, no. 9 (2019): 1352–1364.
Brandt, Mark J., and Willem W.A. Sleegers. “Evaluating Belief System Networks as a Theory of
Political Belief System Dynamics,” (2020).
Bringmann, Laura F, Timon Elmer, Sacha Epskamp, Robert W Krause, David Schoch, Marieke
Wichers, Johanna TW Wigman, and Evelien Snippe. “What do centrality measures measure
in psychological networks?” Journal of Abnormal Psychology 128, no. 8 (2019): 892.
Buckingham, Willis J. Emily Dickinson’s Reception in the 1890s: A Documentary History. University of Pittsburgh Press, 1989.
Canty, Angelo, and Brian Ripley. Package ‘boot’.
Claassen, Ryan L. “Political awareness and electoral campaigns: Maximum effects for minimum
citizens?” Political Behavior 33, no. 2 (2011): 203–223.

24

Belief Dynamics

Converse, Philip E. “Assessing the capacity of mass electorates.” Annual review of political science
3, no. 1 (2000): 331–353.
. “The nature of belief systems in mass publics.” Critical Review 18) (1964): 1–74.
Dablander, Fabian, and Max Hinne. “Node centrality measures are a poor substitute for causal
inference.” Scientific reports 9, no. 1 (2019): 6846.
Delli Carpini, Michael X, and Scott Keeter. What Americans know about politics and why it matters. Yale University Press, (1996).
Devine, Christopher J. “Ideological social identity: Psychological attachment to ideological ingroups as a political phenomenon and a behavioral influence.” Political Behavior 37, no. 3
(2015): 509–535.
Downs, Anthony. An Economic Theory of Democracy. New York: Harper, (1957).
Du Bois, William Edward Burghardt. Darkwater: Voices from within the Veil. Courier Corporation,
(1920) 1999.
Ellis, Christopher, and James A Stimson. Ideology in America. Cambridge University Press, (2012).
Epskamp, Sacha, Denny Borsboom, and Eiko I Fried. “Estimating psychological networks and
their accuracy: a tutorial paper.” Behavior Research Methods 50, no. 1 (2018): 195–212.
Epskamp, Sacha, Giulio Costantini, and Jonas Haslbeck. “Package ‘qgraph’.”
Epskamp, Sacha, and Eiko I Fried. “Package ‘bootnet’,” 2015.
Erikson, Robert S, and Christopher Wlezien. The timeline of presidential elections: How campaigns do (and do not) matter. University of Chicago Press, (2012).

25

Belief Dynamics

Federico, Christopher M. “The structure, foundations, and expression of ideology.” In New directions in public opinion, edited by Adam Berinsky, 103–125. Routledge, (2015).
Federico, Christopher M, and Ariel Malka. “The contingent, contextual nature of the relationship
between needs for security and certainty and political preferences: Evidence and implications.” Political Psychology 39 (2018): 3–48.
Fields, Barbara Jeanne. “Slavery, race and ideology in the United States of America.” New Left
Review 181, no. 1 (1990): 95–118.
Freeman, Linton C. “Centrality in social networks conceptual clarification.” Social networks 1, no.
3 (1978): 215–239.
Gallup. “Obama Has Edge on Key Election Issues,” (2008). Accessed April 9, 2020. https://news.
gallup.com/poll/108331/obama-has-edge-key-election-issues.aspx.
Gelman, Andrew, and Gary King. “Why are American presidential election campaign polls so
variable when votes are so predictable?” British Journal of Political Science 23, no. 4 (1993):
409–451.
Gerring, John. “Ideology: A definitional analysis.” Political Research Quarterly 50, no. 4 (1997):
957–994.
Goren, Paul. “Political values and political awareness.” Critical Review 24, no. 4 (2012): 505–525.
Greene, Steven. “Social identity theory and party identification.” Social Science Quarterly 85, no.
1 (2004): 136–153.
Harrell Jr, Frank E. “Package ‘Hmisc’.”
Hillygus, D Sunshine, and Michael Henderson. “Political issues and the dynamics of vote choice
in 2008.” Journal of Elections, Public Opinion and Parties 20, no. 2 (2010): 241–269.

26

Belief Dynamics

Hillygus, D Sunshine, and Todd G Shields. The persuadable voter: Wedge issues in presidential
campaigns. Princeton University Press, (2008).
Huddy, Leonie, Lilliana Mason, and Lene Aarøe. “Expressive partisanship: Campaign involvement, political emotion, and partisan identity.” American Political Science Review 109, no. 1
(2015): 1–17.
Iyengar, Shanto, and Adam F Simon. “New perspectives and evidence on political communication
and campaign effects.” Annual review of psychology 51, no. 1 (2000): 149–169.
Jacobson, Gary C. “How do campaigns matter?” Annual Review of Political Science 18 (2015):
31–47.
Johnston, Richard. “Party identification: Unmoved mover or sum of preferences?” Annu. Rev. Polit.
Sci. 9 (2006): 329–351.
Johnston, Richard, Michael G Hagen, Kathleen Hall Jamieson, et al. The 2000 presidential election
and the foundations of party politics. Cambridge University Press, (2004).
Jost, John T. “The end of the end of ideology.” American psychologist 61, no. 7 (2006): 651–670.
Kalmoe, Nathan P. “Uses and abuses of ideology in political psychology.” Political Psychology
41, no. 4 (2020): 771–793.
Kinder, Donald R, and Nathan P Kalmoe. Neither liberal nor conservative: Ideological innocence
in the American public. University of Chicago Press, (2017).
Luskin, Robert C, James S Fishkin, and Roger Jowell. “Considered opinions: Deliberative polling
in Britain.” British Journal of Political Science 32, no. 3 (2002): 455–487.
Marshall, John. “Signaling sophistication: How social expectations can increase political information acquisition.” The Journal of Politics 81, no. 1 (2019): 167–186.

27

Belief Dynamics

Martin, John Levi. “Entropic measures of belief system constraint.” Social Science Research 28,
no. 1 (1999): 111–134.
Miller, Joanne M, Kyle L Saunders, and Christina E Farhart. “Conspiracy endorsement as motivated reasoning: The moderating roles of political knowledge and trust.” American Journal of
Political Science 60, no. 4 (2016): 824–844.
Motta, Matthew P. “What do interviewer intelligence ratings actually measure?” Research & Politics 3, no. 3 (2016).
Nicholson, Stephen P. “Dominating cues and the limits of elite influence.” The Journal of Politics
73, no. 4 (2011): 1165–1177.
Niemi, Richard G, and M Kent Jennings. “Issues and inheritance in the formation of party identification.” American Journal of Political Science, (1991), 970–988.
Pew. “Results from the 2008 Annual Religion and Public Life Survey,” (2008). Accessed April 9,
2020. https://www.people-press.org/2008/08/21/section-3-issues-and-the-2008-election/.
Popkin, Samuel L. The reasoning voter: Communication and persuasion in presidential campaigns. University of Chicago Press, (1991).
Price, Vincent, and John Zaller. “Who gets the news? Alternative measures of news reception and
their implications for research.” Public opinion quarterly 57, no. 2 (1993): 133–164.
Sides, John, Michael Tesler, and Lynn Vavreck. Identity crisis: The 2016 presidential campaign
and the battle for the meaning of America. Princeton University Press, (2019).
Tichenor, Phillip J, George A Donohue, and Clarice N Olien. “Mass media flow and differential
growth in knowledge.” Public opinion quarterly 34, no. 2 (1970): 159–170.

28

Belief Dynamics

Turell, Susan C, Mary W Armsworth, and John P Gaa. “Emotional response to abortion: a critical
review of the literature.” Women & therapy 9, no. 4 (1990): 49–68.
Vavreck, Lynn. The message matters: The economy and presidential campaigns. Princeton University Press, (2009).
Verkuyten, Maykel. “Emotional reactions to and support for immigrant policies: Attributed responsibilities to categories of asylum seekers.” Social Justice Research 17, no. 3 (2004): 293–
314.
Zaller, John R. The nature and origins of mass opinion. Cambridge university press, (1992). ISBN:
0521407869.

29

Belief Dynamics

(a) Low-knowledge, Wave 1

(b) Low-knowledge, Wave 10

(c) High-knowledge, Wave 1

(d) High-knowledge, Wave 10

Figure 1: Belief Networks for high- and low-knowledge respondents at Waves 1 and 10. Note: Thicker
edges indicate a weight with a higher absolute value. Node position is maintained across all four visualizations.

30

Belief Dynamics

(a) Low knowledge, Wave 1

(b) Low knowledge, Wave 10

(c) High knowledge, Wave 1

(d) High knowledge, Wave 10

Figure 2: Strength centrality estimates associated with operational and symbolic elements for highand low-knowledge respondents at Waves 1 and 10. Note: Box plots convey mean centrality among
respective elements at given time step.

31

Belief Dynamics

(a) Low-knowledge Strength Centrality

(b) High-knowledge Strength Centrality

(c) Wave 1 Strength Centrality

(d) Wave 10 Strength Centrality

Figure 3: Node strength centrality of high- and low-knowledge belief networks across waves. Note:
Bars convey node strength centrality for respective item by group or wave. *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001

32

Belief Dynamics

(a) Centrality to Predictive Significance

(b) Predictive Significance to Centrality

(c) Predictive Significance to Centrality Change
Figure 4: Panel models of the relationship between predictiveness and centrality. Note: Predictiveness
is operationalized as the sum the variance that a given belief element predicts across other belief elements.
Strength centrality for a given belief element conveys the sum of all absolute edge weights to which a node
is directly connected. “Change” in predictiveness and centrality is derived by taking Wave 10 estimates less
Wave 1. Underlying models include dummy variable for knowledge group, to which a linear fit has been
superimposed.

33

