Ensuring the Spread of Referral Marketing
Campaigns: A Quantitative Treatment
Kumar Gaurav1,+ , Sayantari Ghosh2,+,* , Saumik Bhattacharya3 , and Yatindra Nath Singh1
1 Indian

Institute of Technology Kanpur, India
Institute of Technology Durgapur, India
3 Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, India
* sayantari.ghosh@phy.nitdgp.ac.in
+ these authors contributed equally to this work
2 National

ABSTRACT
In marketing world, social media is playing a crucial role nowadays. One of the most recent strategies that exploit social
contacts for the purpose of marketing, is referral marketing, where a person shares information related to a particular product
among his/her social contacts. When this spreading of marketing information goes viral, the diffusion process looks like an
epidemic spread. In this work, we perform a systematic study with a goal to device a methodology for using the huge amount of
survey data available to understand customer behaviour from a more mathematical and quantitative perspective. We perform
an unsupervised natural language processing based analysis of the responses of a recent survey focusing on referral marketing
to correlate the customers’ psychology with transitional dynamics, and investigate some major determinants that regulate the
diffusion of a campaign. In addition to natural language processing for topic modeling, detailed differential equation based
analysis and graph theoretical treatment, experiments have been performed for generation of a recommendation network to
understand the diffusion dynamics in homogeneous as well as heterogeneous population. A complete mathematical treatment
with analysis over real social networks can help us to determine key customer motivations and their impacts on a marketing
strategy, which are important to ensure an effective spread of a designed marketing campaign. Pointing out possibilities of
extending these studies to game theoretic modeling, we prescribe a new quantitative framework that can find its application to
all areas of social dynamics, beyond the field of marketing.

1 Introduction
Online social networks have become an undeniable accessory in today’s life. People habitually use online social networks for
conveying information as well as opinion due to the convenience, competence, and substantial dissemination power. Use of
social networks is increasing day by day among political campaigners and marketing managers for promoting an idea, product
or a brand. If a marketer encourages consumers to share and spread a marketing message through their social contacts, it is
called Referral Marketing. As the spread of the message can have an epidemic-like effect, this is also commonly termed as
Viral Marketing (VM). Over the past decade, the domain of VM has grown explosively, which now includes passing along
advertisements, photos, videos, promotional hyperlinks, animations, games, newsletters, press releases etc. to promote a
particular product. In last few years, several studies1–4 started to conceptualize VM as a close derivative of disease infection
models from mathematical epidemiology. It has been pointed out that understanding the contagion in a population from the
perception of a mathematical epidemiologist will be considerably beneficial for the marketers for planning VM campaigns in a
more organized and methodical manner.
Model formulation, study and analysis of epidemics have been applied to several problems beyond the boundaries of health and
biology over past decade, to successfully depict and understand these phenomena, and device strategies. Starting from the
theoretical papers by Kermack and McKendrinck5 , infectious disease models have been vastly applied to analyse the spread of
information, rumor, custom, scientific ideas, opinions, petitions etc6–9 . In the classical models of epidemiology, the spread of
infectious diseases depends mainly on the interactions between susceptible and infected, while the interactions become more
complex and nonlinear as the models describe more realistic social scenarios. An epidemic, typically, is defined as a situation
in which the number of the infected reaches a significant percentage at steady state. In the case of a VM campaign, it would
be a situation where the sharing via social network creates enough momentum so that the marketing message reaches and
attracts a majority of its target consumers. In this particular context, purpose of the study will be focused on maximizing the
spread, while the usual epidemiology studies aim to contain the epidemic, which in itself adds an interesting perspective to the
problem. The spread of marketing messages in social networks raises various theoretical and practical questions: How can an
advertisement reach maximum audience? Beyond the design and content, are there any factors that affect this dynamics? What

Figure 1. Analyses of survey data: (a) Top 25 words with highest term- frequency in the open ended and semi-open ended
responses after preprocessing as described in Sec. 2.1; (b) topic modeling of processed response. The 7 detected topics (T1-T7)
from 3 different open ended questions are shown here. For better visualization, we show 5 words with highest scores in each
topic.

actions can the companies take to speed up the diffusion rate?
In marketing, Bass10 used underlying epidemic model as a foundation for his new product diffusion model. But, in the context
of online social networks and digital contagion, Sohn et al.11 first demonstrated the VM diffusion as SIR and SEIAR processes
of epidemiology in very recent times. Rodrigues et al.12 have proposed a mathematical model of the VM progression, using
insights from epidemiology with quantitative treatment. Bhattacharya et al.13 demonstrated a more realistic model of VM
propagation, where some essential feedback interactions were considered for the first time. However, these models11–13 do
not reflect the spreading process adequately. Though there are several survey-based studies and marketing data available for
VM diffusion which clearly indicate the complex and nonlinear interaction in a population, most of these studies stick to the
classical epidemiology models to depict and understand the scenario. An extensive survey by Ghosh et al.14 has revealed
that beyond the viral components from creative perspective, a clear insight of customer behaviour becomes indispensable for
ensuring the relevance and survival of a newly-launched campaign. With the goal to develop a model which is more realistic
and data-driven, they implemented the major observations of the survey to create a conceptual framework for diffusion of VM
advertisement in society.
In our present study, we analyze the data collected from recent surveys14–17 , focusing mostly on qualitative studies18 , which
gives a room for introduction of new and complex interactions, as well as conceptual frameworks. First, using Natural Language
Processing (NLP) tools and topic modeling, we figure out several important dynamical aspects which need to be incorporated
into the model to describe the dynamics more appropriately. As topic modeling can find out the important as well as latent
topics in a response, which are difficult to visualize otherwise, we use Latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) to analyze the survey
responses. Next, we propose a flow chart of the dynamics which aligns much better with reality and develop a holistic model for
epidemic-like spreading of VM campaigns. Furthermore, the implications of spams and brand names on consumer attitude and
the process of an inert becoming a Broadcaster is analyzed more deeply. To understand the VM dynamics, mean-field equations
are derived and numerical simulations are carried out. The dynamics have also been studied keeping heterogeneity of social
systems in mind and extensive simulation based studies were carried out over random, scale-free and real social networks. Due
to the unavailability of an existing recommendation network structure in public domain, an experiment has been carried out to
generate the structure of a recommendation network and to study the dynamics on recommendation-based contact network.
2/15

2 Quantitative and Qualitative Analyses of Survey Data
2.1 Detecting Important Words and Topics
To understand the sentiments of customers, we extensively analyze the collected survey results of Ghosh et al.14 using different
language processing techniques which are explained in Sec. 5 (Methods). The analysis has been done on the responses of the
open ended questions, i.e., where users were asked to explain/ justify certain answers, and semi-open ended questions, i.e.,
where users can add answers other than the choices provided with the respective questions. A series of data pre-processings are
applied on the collected data to capture the user-sentiments and the probable factors that were not considered by the surveyors
while circulating the survey. First, we analyze the responses using term frequency (TF) analysis19 . This helps us to observe the
words that are occurring frequently in the responses due to their importance. However, the computation of term frequency
requires a careful filtering to remove commonly occurring words like ‘a’, ‘the’, ‘is’ etc., as these words would otherwise shadow
the important words related to the specific survey. We also group the synonymous words, e.g. {reward, benefit, prize}, {spam,
bulk, phishing} etc., so that the cumulative true impact of these factors can be observed. The results of the term frequency
analysis is shown in Fig. 1 (a), which demonstrates that words like ‘sharing’, ‘product’, ‘brand’, ‘secure’, ‘bored’, ‘hidden’
etc. are used frequently by the participants to establish their viewpoints while answering the questions. The most frequently
occurring words contain both ‘positive’ words, i.e., the factors that increases someone’s probability to be engaged in viral
campaigning activity, and ‘negative’ words, i.e., the factors that decreases the probability of becoming an active broadcaster of
a viral message. ‘Rewards’, ‘easy’, ‘secured’ are some of the frequently occurring positive words, whereas ‘bored’, spam’,
‘hidden clauses’, ‘long process’ etc. are some negative words. There are also some frequently appearing words in TF which
are not easily interpretable, e.g. ‘recent trends’,‘friend’, ‘share’ etc. Thus, even after manual preprocessing of the data, not
all the latent sentiments are clear from the survey responses using TF analysis. To better understand the correlation between
these responses and the sentiments of the users we also perform topic modeling of the data using classical Latent Dirichlet
allocation (LDA)20 to find out the topics in the data. LDA is an unsupervised generative probabilistic method which can capture
the underlying broad topics in a document. Assuming a response as mixture of different sentiments and factors that control
the engagement of an individual in a VM campaign, we performed the LDA analysis on the same preprocessed data. In case
of LDA, the preprocessing helps to generate a bag of exclusive words, rather than a simple bag of words. The LDA clearly
exhibits that for decision making, the participants considered different factors like content (T1 in Fig. 1(b)) security (T3 and T4
in Fig. 1(b)), amount of profit (T5 in Fig. 1(b)), ease of sharing (T6 in Fig. 1(b)) and personal trust on the recommender as well
as on the brand (T7 in Fig. 1) to forward or reject a received viral offer. To propose our model, we critically analyze these topic
modeled open-ended and close-ended responses.
2.2 Important factors driving customer motivation
In the diffusion process of a VM campaign, there are three obvious states in which a member of the population could be in:
unaware of the message; received (and passing along) the message; and aware, but inactive about the message. The natural
course that a campaign follows, is to pass-through these three sub-populations. For a successful campaign, a definite percentage
of the population remains active through-out this diffusion, and even after equilibrium is attained. Beyond this simple linear
flow of the campaign, there are also several more complex interactions that are very much probable on a social network. For
example, in Fig. 1(b), T7 indicates that friends and family has certain influence in someone’s participation in a campaign. To
understand these driving factors in referral marketing, we start by reporting our observations about some major factors which
reflect customer’s perspective about marketing messages. These observations are according to the outputs of the LDA analysis
which are co-aligned with the findings of several recent surveys14, 21 .
2.2.1 Inherent Aversion: Rigidly Inert

The marketing platform that takes e-mail forwarding as one of the key methods to spread word-of-mouth nowadays, suffers
strongly due to spam e-mails. VM is essentially attached with emailing (or electronically sending) a company constructed
promotional statement to acquaintances, which tends to be perceived as spam as soon as the required number of sharing starts
growing. From the analysis of survey data14 in Sec. 2.1, we note that the aversion towards bulk messages, possibly with fake
commitments, has constructed the major theme of T2 and T4 in Fig. 1(b). Our TF analysis also supports this claim; from
Fig. 1 (a), an important observation to point out is that the repulsion of users towards spam mails came out as an emergent
theme from the spontaneous responses, while the interviewer never mentioned this idea in the questions. According to our
results, the respondents have clearly associated their reasons for losing interest or not participating in a referral request with
words like ‘spam’, ‘hidden’ and ‘(not) secured’. Support to our LDA study can also be provided from several survey-based
studies where the participants clearly mentioned that they often confuse the marketing mails with the spams. To mention a
few, in a study by Raad et al.15 , they observed that to avoid the risk of the spam, a majority of participants were not willing
to take the risk of even opening the marketing e-mails. Phelps et al.22 have clearly pointed out that boundary between spam
and pass-along marketing mails is not always clear to the recipients. Several studies17, 23, 24 have shown that many recipients
3/15

Figure 2. A schematic diagram of the proposed model. The arrows along with the parameters indicate the possible transitions
from one state to other and the rate of transitions respectively.
associate a feeling of intrusion, irritation, invasion of privacy and general security concerns with unsolicited marketing e-mails
and mobile messages. Thus, based on our observation, we conclude that, for a realistic modeling, a class among participants
must be considered who are strongly against bulk, unsolicited mailing, and thus, referral marketing, in general.
2.2.2 Brand Trust

In marketing campaign propagation, the brand name plays a crucial role25–28 . People comfortably share marketing messages
from popular brands which can attract substantial numbers of prospective consumers. Research studies29, 30 have correctly
pointed out that in this era of seamless social persona, people understand the necessity to stand behind their words, and thus they
inherently tend to believe reputed brands from the aspects of privacy and authentic engagement. Interestingly, two consecutive
surveys in 2015 and 201731 pointed out, that customers identify a brand as unprofessional, suspect superficiality, and finally
email opt-out (or unsubscribe) in case of excessive frequency of promotional mails32 , which are perceived as spams. Analysing
the survey that we focus on14 , we also found that the idea of spam and brands to be closely related. In response to direct
questions, 39% respondents thought that recognized brands will not be associated with spamming, contextually blind automated
bulk mailing and falsifying brand stories. Through further analysis of survey data in Sec. 2.1, we also detect that the topic T7
(Fig. 1(b)) associates the word ‘brand’, with words like ‘family’, ‘friend’ and ‘trust’. This shows that people need to ‘trust’
the person who is referring the product (e.g., ‘family’ or ‘friend’) as well as the brand-names while participating in referral
marketing. We consider this as an important observation which should be incorporated in the model of campaign diffusion, by
introducing a parameter that will take care of the brand reputation and popularity in the mass. This will directly contribute in
making people interested about the campaign in the first place, if the brand is trustworthy, and will also nudge them to get back
to the product, if they become inert eventually.
2.2.3 Remembering and Reminding

Another important aspect that we notice in the survey14 is the distinctive reasons that can make a person inert about an
advertisement campaign. While losing interest after being active for some time could be one way, for many customers simply
forgetting about the message was the case as well. Thus in TF analysis (Fig. 1(a)), we have high values for the words ‘bored’,
‘attention-diverted’ and ‘forgot’. People who lost interest, got bored or doubtful (due to low profit-to-effort ratio) while
broadcasting the campaign are easily intrigued by an authentic success story of the product/campaign. Studies have shown that
a genuine information highlighting a substantial reward from a particular campaign can turn them to active participants14, 21 .
On the other hand, people who forgot or got diverted for some reason were usually, in the first place, interested to avail the offer.
There could be several induced ways to bring them back to the active group as they will not need much persuasion.
• Strategically designed retargeting emails from the company33 or encountering catchy slogans that tap into the visceral
states to motivate immediate consumer behavior34 could be one of the most successful ways to motivate them to return to
the active state. Here they are not influenced by another individual, but by the company itself, and here the latent interest
of the customer is essential.
• Casual reminders from friends22 or participation in recent discussions about a particular product in their own social
circle35 (commonly termed as buzz) can tempt the inerts to become active again. This happens due to direct influence of
peers which might need some persuasion. As shown in topic T3 (Fig. 1(b)), relevance of the campaign is an important
aspects to the users. This relevance can be reminded or discussed by family members or friends. In TF analysis (Fig.
1(a)) also, we observe higher frequencies of the terms like ‘remind’, ‘recommend’, ‘friends’, ‘recent-trends’ etc. The
brand name can also play a crucial role here as people avoid sending provocative marketing messages from lesser known
advertisers to friends repetitively16, 28
4/15

Figure 3. (a) Variation in steady state fraction of b with reproduction number R for (upper panel) α = 0.1, when only a single
epidemic state persists beyond R = 1 and for (lower panel) α = 1, when bistability can be observed in range Rc to 1.
Parameter values are σ = 0.2, λ = 0.02, and µ = 0.05. In these figures, green (and blue) lines indicate stable solutions while
cyan (and red) lines indicate unstable solutions for p = 1 (and p = 0.7 respectively). For these parameter values, we calculated
Rc = 0.562 (and Rc = 0.594) for p = 1 (and p = 0.7 respectively) using Eq. 6. (b) Phase diagram of the model in α − R
space for σ = 0.2, λ = 0.02 and µ = 0.05. The red line indicates R = 1. The region filled with orange color beyond R = 1
always exhibits monostable endemic state. The cyan (and green) line indicates Rc , while the red (and black) dashed line
indicates αth for p = 1.0 (and p = 0.7). The white region, where α < αth , exhibits monostable VM free state. In the green
shaded region for p = 1.0 (and darker green shaded region for p = 0.7), α > αth , R > Rc and R < 1. Thus, this area exhibits
bistability, where either VM free state or the endemic state is chosen by the system depending upon the initial state.
So, while modeling the diffusion process mathematically, we must consider the complexity of these relapses.

3 Data-driven Model: Formulation and Results
3.1 Formulation of Model based on Data Analyses
Analyzing the survey and the interaction between different people, we model the transition between sub-groups under the
influence of the above mentioned factors in Fig. 2. To study the mean-field behavior, the total population (T) is divided into
three non-overlapping subpopulations : Unaware (U) class who are yet to receive the message or the campaign, Broadcaster (B)
class who have the potential to spread the campaign and Inert (I) class who are willingly or unwillingly not taking part in the
campaign though they have come across it at least once. The unaware class U contains the target market or the susceptible
people, who have not received the message yet but have a chance of receiving it from the broadcasters. In the broadcaster class
B, we consider the individuals who has received the message earlier and have the potential to spread the message further to their
contacts. If a member in the broadcaster spreads the message by recommending it through his social contacts, we consider
the member is in active state. We assume that at a rate ρ, a broadcaster spreads the message to a member from unaware class,
which creates new prospective broadcasters. We consider that whenever a broadcaster sends the referral message to an unaware
individual, unaware moves to broadcaster class with probability p and to inert class with probability (1 − p). We denote p as
the trust parameter, which assumes a high value if the campaign is from a trusted brand or the message comes from a trusted
member. The impact, or acceptability of the campaign to the unaware community is accounted using this probability parameter,
p. Based on our discussions in Sec. 2.2.1, the term (1 − p) takes into account of the fact that some of the people from unaware
class might have an inherent aversion to spam-like messages, and decide to ignore it straightaway. Messages from not so
trustworthy brand or members increases the value of (1 − p).
For various reasons people who used to be in broadcaster class B, can stop sharing the message, and move to the inert class I.
As we have seen in Sec. 2.2.3, there are two distinctive ways to bring these inert people back to broadcaster class: the first one
5/15

could be independent of their interaction with another individual (like, reminder from the company etc.), while the second
one is induced by their interaction with another broadcaster, directly or indirectly (like, reminder from a friend, discussion
with family member). To justify all these possible transitions from I to B, we have included two feedbacks from inert class to
broadcaster: one, a linear transition from inert to broadcaster with rate λ i, and another, a nonlinear interaction-driven transition.
Considering the observations discussed in Sec. 2.2, we decide that nonlinear relapse should depend on how well-known the
brand is, and thus, we incorporate the probability p, the brand-trust parameter, in this relapse rate, considering the term as α 0 bi,
while α 0 = α p, where α is the original relapse rate, and p again takes care of the acceptability of the advertisement to a person.
In practical scenarios, people enter and leave the population. To include this factor, we have introduced birth and death in our
model. Both birth and death rates are kept equal to µ, so that a fixed population size can be maintained12 . For a particular VM
dynamics, birth and death can be viewed as events when people join or leave a particular social platform where the campaign is
going on. Considering numbers of unaware, broadcaster and inert individuals as continuously varying quantities, switching
between subpopulations can be modelled by the following set of coupled ordinary differential equations:
u0

=

µ − ρbu − µu

b0

=

pρbu + λ i + α 0 bi − σ b − µb

i

0

(1)

0

= σ b + (1 − p)ρbu − λ i − α bi − µi

where, α 0 = α p, and the rest of the parameters have significance as depicted in Fig. 2.
3.2 Mean Field Study
3.2.1 Reproduction Number

Reproduction number for a marketing message propagation can be defined as the expected number of secondary broadcasters
produced by typically a single person, who is recommending a product to his peers in a completely susceptible population.
For simplistic models of mathematical epidemiology, this quantity defines the epidemic threshold of a particular infection. As
found in the Sec. 5.2, reproduction number of the model is
R=

ρ(λ + µ p)
µ(λ + µ + σ )

(2)

From Eq. 2, we can observe that, for smaller value of p, a larger value of ρ is required to satisfy the basic condition for an
epidemic to spread, i.e., R > 1. In a practical sense, it means that if more people are switching directly to inert class from
unaware class, may be for a lesser known brand, more marketing effort will be required to attain an endemic steady state. The
sensitivities of R for various parameters are as follows:
σ
R
R
R
ΓR
ρ = 1; Γ p = µ p; Γσ = − (λ +µ+σ ) ; Γλ =

σ +µ(1−p)
λ
(λ +µ p) (λ +µ+σ ) ;

(3)

µ
λ
ΓR
µ = −( λ +µ p + λ +µ+σ )·

It can be observed that R changes linearly with ρ. Thus, in our experiments, we change ρ to vary R keeping other parameters
fixed to analyze system dynamics and bifurcation. Positive value of ΓR
p also gives us the indication that brand reputation plays
an important role in the final steady state values.
3.2.2 Bifurcation & its significance

The relapse rate happens to be a very important factor that defines the nature of the dynamics, as the model exhibits different
behavior for smaller and larger value of α (discussed in Sec. 5.2). In Fig. 3(a), we plot the steady-state fraction of class B for
two different values of α. To highlight the impact of the parameter p, results have been shown for p = 1 and p = 0.7. The
upper panel of Fig. 3(a) shows the results for α = 0.1, a smaller relapse rate. This depicts that though the epidemic occurs
after Rc = 1, the endemic steady-state fraction of broadcasters, b? , reduces as the value of p decreases. For a smaller value of
p, the probability of an unaware individual to move to broadcaster class will be less, and more people will be moving from
unaware class to inert class directly. As the relapse rate, α is also small and it is scaled with p as well, switching from inert to
broadcaster will take place at a smaller rate. Reduction in broadcaster fraction, b? can be attributed to the combined effect of
these two parameters. It shows the effect due to an less appealing or less trusted advertisement campaign (smaller p), where no
substantial efforts have been invested in ensuring relapse of lost customers (smaller α).
In the lower panel of Fig. 3 (a), we can see that for a higher value of α, a drastically different behavior can be observed. In this
case, the significant change can be detected in the region R < 1, where we can see the emergence of a region of bistability. It
clearly demonstrates that an endemic state, where prevalence of the viral campaign in ensured in the population, can even occur
for R < 1 within a critical value of R = Rc . Even when p decreases bistability still persists, suggesting that sustainability
of the campaign can even be achieved for less appealing advertisements, iff, a significantly high relapse or regaining of inert
6/15

customers can be accomplished. For any p < 1, although a fraction of unaware population is coming directly to the inert class,
the large value of α brings them back to the broadcaster class establishing endemic state till R = Rc , which is markedly less
than 1. We will proceed to figure out the expression of Rc in the next section.
3.2.3 Conditions for Bistability

Bistability observed in our model system implies dependence of system dynamics on history (i.e., initial state of the population),
which is commonly termed as hysteresis36 . We have shown in Sec. 5.2 that bistable region (multiple stable steady state
solutions) may exist when R < 1, for larger values of α. There are two conditions that must be satisfied to ensure bistability
through the coefficients in Eq. 14.
• Limiting value of induced relapse, α: Equating the coefficient m of Eq. 14 to zero, we found threshold value of α
αth =

ρ(σ + µ + λ )
·
p(ρ − µ)

(4)

• Limiting value of infectious contact, ρ: Again from Eq. 14, the critical value of ρ can be calculated by equating
m2 − 4ln to zero and is given by
αµ
p
ρc =
·
(5)
(α + λ + µ + σ ) − 2 α(µ − pµ + σ )
Substituting ρc in place of ρ in the expression of reproduction number R (Eq. 2) gives the critical value of reproduction
number Rc as
Rc

=

ρc (λ + µ p)
(λ + µ p)
αµ
p
=
·
µ(λ + µ + σ ) (α + λ + µ + σ ) − 2 α(µ − pµ + σ ) µ(λ + µ + σ )

(6)

Fig. 3(b) depicts the dynamical behaviour in form of a phase diagram in α − R space for σ = 0.2, λ = 0.02 and µ = 0.05.
We point out that the region of bistability here indicates the sustainability of the advertisement campaign in a population even
when R < 1, i.e., the infective contacts are not that effective. We note that the region of bistability shrinks as p, the brand-trust
parameter decreases. It clearly points out that well-known brands are much more prone to have resonant stories in social media
due to their established brand-value.
3.3 Graph-theoretical Analysis
3.3.1 Model Dynamics on Networks

In contrast to mean-field approach, diffusion in networks will be dependent on the degree distribution of the network. We
denote with uk , bk , and ik the fraction of unaware, broadcaster and inert nodes with degree k. Nodes having same degree are
considered to behave in same fashion. Using this degree block approximation, differential equations for evolution of degree
based compartments of different class will be
u0k

=

µ − ρn kuk Θb − µuk

b0k
i0k

=

pρn kuk Θb + λ ik + αn kpik Θb − (σ + µ)bk

(7)

= σ bk + (1 − p)ρn kuk Θb − λ ik − αn kpik Θb − µik

We are considering ρn to be the rate at which a broadcaster spreads the information to an unaware neighbor. Similarly, αn is the
relapse rate influenced by the neighbors. Subscript ‘n’ in both these symbols signify network setting and they are counterpart of
ρ and α used in homogeneous setting. Θb is the density function which gives probability of broadcasters around a node. In a
general scenario, density function of any class around a node depends on degree of the node but for uncorrelated network, it is
k bk
independent of degree k and is given by Θb = ∑k kphki
.
Multiplying all three equations of Eq. 7 by
Θ0u

=

kpk

∑ hki µ − ρn ∑
k

Θ0b

=

k

pρn ∑
k

Θ0i

= σ∑
k

k2 pk
hki

kpk
hki

and then performing summation over k, we get

k2 pk
kpk
uk Θb − µ ∑
uk
hki
k hki

uk Θb + λ ∑
k

kpk
k 2 pk
kpk
ik + αn p ∑
ik Θb − (σ + µ) ∑
bk
hki
hki
k
k hki

(8)

kpk
k 2 pk
kpk
k 2 pk
kpk
bk + (1 − p)ρn ∑
uk Θb − λ ∑
ik − αn p ∑
ik Θb − µ ∑
ik
hki
k hki
k hki
k hki
k hki
7/15

(b)

(a)

(c)

(d)

Figure 4. Numerical simulation of convergence to the steady state for different initial conditions with parameter values µ=
0.05, ρ = 0.25, σ = 0.2, λ = 0.02, p = 0.7, and (a) α = 0.1 for a homogeneous system with a single campaign free steady
state; (b) α = 1 for a homogeneous system with bistable steady states ; Temporal variation of u and b with different initial
conditions for equivalent parameter regime as for (b) in (c) random network and (d) scale-free network. In all of these figures,
X and Y coordinates of the initial point of any flow represents the initial fractional population of unaware and broadcaster class
of the population.

We solve Eq. 8 at initial phase of the campaign and at the steady state to get the epidemiological threshold for the heterogeneous
structure.
3.3.2 Propagation at Initial State

Solving simultaneous linear differential equations Eq. 17 and Eq. 18, we have
d2 Θb
dΘb
− (C1 +C4 )
+ (C1C4 −C2C3 )Θb = 0
(9)
2
dt
dt
As clear from the form of the equation, Θb will be the summation of two exponential, exponent of which depends on roots of
auxiliary equation of the differential Eq. 9. For campaign to spread, Θb needs to be an increasing function in time which in turn
needs both roots of the auxiliary equation to be positive. So, required condition is C1C4 > C2C3 . Substituting expression of all
these constant terms we have the condition
ρn
λ + pµ
hki
(
< 2
µ µ(σ + λ + µ) hk i
Replacing ρn by

ρ
hki

(10)

the condition modifies to

ρ (λ + pµ)
hki2
=R> 2 ·
µ (σ + λ + µ)
hk i

(11)
2

Left-hand side of the inequality is the reproduction number R of the homogeneous model and right-hand side is hki
which
hk2 i
depends on average degree and average of square of individual degrees of the nodes in the network. The exact value of the
expression will depend on the type of network. The expectation of k2 for a random network with Poisson degree distribution is
k2 = hki (hki + 1) .
hki
Using the expression for k2 in Eq. 11, we get R > hki+1
which can be further approximated by R > 1 if hki >> 1. It
is important to observe that from the mean field analysis, we achieved the same condition of epidemiological outbreak. If
we consider a scale-free network, its degree distribution can be written as p(k) = Bk−γ .R Using this degree distribution, we
estimate the average degree as hki = B 1γ l 2−γ , and average of degree square as k2 ≈ B l∞ k2−γ dk. When γ ∈ (2, 3]; (2 − γ)
is in range of [−1, 0); hk2 i diverges, and for γ > 3, k2 is finite. In other words, in the range γ ∈ (2, 3], there is no threshold
for epidemiological outbreak. For other values of γ, we will observe similar behaviour like random network with different
diffusion rate.
3.3.3 Steady State Network Analysis

As discussed in Sec. 5.5, in steady state, the expression of Θb becomes a consistency equation, i.e., we have Θb = f (Θb ). At
Θb = 0, f (Θb ) is also zero. Hence Θb = 0 is a solution of the equation. Value of the function at Θb = 1 is
f (1) =

1
pk k2 ρn (µ p + λ + αn kp)
1
=
∑
hki k (µ + ρn k)(λ + µ + σ + αn kp) hki ∑
k (1 +

pk k
σ +(1−p)µ
µ
ρn k )(1 + λ +µ p+αn kp )

(12)

8/15

Table 1. Important characteristics of different network
Network
characteristics
Number of nodes
Number of edges
Average degree
Maximum degree
Power law Exponent

Hamster
Network
2426
16631
13.71
273
2.46

Email
Network
1133
5451
9.624
71
6.77

Jazz
Network
198
2742
27.7
100
5.27

Recommendation
Network
1157
2558
4.422
59
1.34

It is clear from the above expression that f (1) < 1. To have another solution in the interval 0 to 1, slope of the function at
Θb = 0 must be greater than 1.
d f (Θb )
dΘb

(Θb =0)

After replacing ρn by

=
ρ
hki ,

1
pk k2 ρn (µ p + λ )
ρn (µ p + λ ) k2
≥1
=
∑
hki k µ(λ + µ + σ )
µ(λ + µ + σ ) hki
we will get the same condition what we had in early stage analysis, i.e.,

ρ (λ +pµ)
µ (σ +λ +µ)

=R>

hki2
.
hk2 i

3.4 Numerical Results
We have carried out the simulations for homogeneous as well as heterogeneous approach. Along with random and scale free
networks, some real network structures have also been considered, including one constructed from our own referral experiment.
To compare the results of deterministic mean-field model with network model, we select same set of parameters values in
simulations.
3.4.1 Simulation of Deterministic Model

Depending upon the parameter values, system may lead to message-free state or endemic state. Two different cases for
homogeneous setting have been shown in Fig 4(a)−(b). As discussed for Eq. 4, bistability can be observed in the system for
value of α greater than αth . It is observed in Fig. 4 (b), depending on initial fraction of different classes, system reaches to
endemic or message-free equilibrium; this exhibits hysteresis.
3.4.2 Simulation over Model Networks

Parameter values for bistable case have been used to plot the results for both of the model networks, random as well as scale-free
network in Fig. 4 (c) and (d) respectively. Results of random network almost matches the findings of homogeneous model.
Along with similar endemic steady-state values, bistability can also be observed in random network scenario of Fig. 4 (c).
In case of scale-free network, endemic steady state values are not exactly same and maximum error in endemic steady-state
fraction of a particular class is 5%. Under bistable parameter set, message-free steady state never appears and system leads to
endemic steady state for every set of initial conditions. It can be observed in Fig. 4(d) where every flow terminates at endemic
steady state. This observation is in alignment with our analytic result regarding absence of epidemic threshold in scale-free
network as mentioned in Sec. 5.4.
Degree-wise steady state fraction uk , bk , and ik has been plotted for random and scale free networks in Fig. 5 (a) and (c)
respectively. Fraction of u, b and i in the neighborhood of a node of different degrees has also been plotted for both the networks
in Fig. 5 (b) and (d) respectively. A node with higher degree has higher probability to be in broadcaster class, in random as well
as scale free network. For random network, the fraction of believers around a node is independent of its nodal degree, but for
scale free network this fraction is not identical. It is again due to the heterogeneous structure of the network and presence of
hubs in the network.
3.4.3 Simulation over Real Networks

The important parameters associated with some real networks (Hamster network, Email network and Jazz network) collected
from KONECT database37 are tabulated in Table 1. We have used these networks for our simulation studies; the steady state
fractions of unaware (u∗ ), broadcaster (b∗ ) and inert (i∗ ) for various networks are mentioned in Table 2; for comparison, results
for homogeneous dynamics are also mentioned in that table.
Though the networks taken from KONECT database account for social connections, and each of them depicts contacts between
people in a community, none of these networks are actually recommendation network. To better understand the referral flow, we
perform an extensive experiment (see in Sec. 5) to build up a recommendation network. After generating the recommendation
network, we observe the final steady states of the network for different parameters and initialization as shown in Fig. 6, where
we have shown three different cases. In Fig. 6(a), we set the parameters such that R < Rc < 1. In this case, even though we
9/15

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 5. (a) uk , bk and ik with respect to k at steady-state in random network; (b) Fraction of u, b and i in the neighborhood
of a node with degree k in random network; (c) uk , bk and ik with respect to k at steady-state in scale-free network; (d) Fraction
of u, b and i in the neighborhood of a node with degree k in scale-free network.

Table 2. Comparison of steady state fractions in various networks, with the homogeneous dynamics (R = 0.64)
Steady state
fraction
u∗
b∗
i∗

Homogeneous
Setting
0.277
0.521
0.202

Random
Network
0.288
0.510
0.202

Scale-free
Network
0.319
0.467
0.214

Hamster
Network
0.512
0.342
0.146

Email
Network
0.394
0.417
0.189

Jazz
Network
0.348
0.469
0.183

Recommendation
Network
0.352
0.441
0.207

have 500 broadcasters initially (denoted by Bin in the figure), in the final steady-state there is no broadcaster left. For Figs. 6 (b)
and (c), we keep the parameters such that Rc < R < 1, i.e., the parameter set is in the region of bistability. In this parameter
setting, if we keep Bin very low, the steady state becomes broadcaster free, however, if we start with sufficiently high number of
broadcasters, we get endemic steady state even if R < 1. Here, Figs. 6 (b) and (c) can be associated with the lower branch (cyan
or red) and the upper branch (green or blue) of Fig. 3 (a). The lower branch and the upper branch is detected as mentioned in38 .
In the bistable region, different final states of the recommendation network for different initial conditions exhibits the presence
of hysteresis. We also observe that, system’s propensity for the endemic state increases as R goes close to 1. For different real
networks, we consider parameters equivalent to Fig. 3(a) (bottom) with R = 0.64 to observe the flow, and the final steady state
fractions of u∗ , b∗ and i∗ are compared in Table 2. It can be observed that even when R < 1, 41-51% of the population belong
to the broadcaster class, indicating the survival of the campaign in steady state because of the bistable property.

4 Summary & Discussions
For a successful business, marketing is not only a supportive component, but it is one of the key ingredients39 . In today’s digital
environment, the goal of a marketing campaign might have grown beyond enticing a consumer to click on a product icon.
Now the objective has expanded to reach maximum number of people and create ‘sustained engagement’ with the consumer40 .
Weber has correctly pointed out41 that to succeed in social media marketing, marketers must ‘talk with’ the customers, rather
than ‘talk at’ them. Surely, a VM campaign provides an inexpensive, personal-level way to reach the customers, where the
inherent ignorance or indifference of the customers can be handled well. But with more than 3 million active advertisers posting
their ads on social networking sites like Facebook, to reach a bigger audience, it is essential that the campaign establishes
substantially long iterations in the population. In last couple of years, marketers have gradually started to use retargeting to
convert customers who had formerly window-shopped in their websites, or abandoned carts suddenly33, 42–44 . It has become
a familiar part of our web-experience now-a-days to see hyperlinked photos of products that we have once browsed. Using
Facebook code snippet called pixel, services of firms like Retargeter, Adroll, Perfect Audience, etc. or using giant exchanges
like Google, Twitter45 , the campaigners are re-engaging lost customers frequently. But some recent works have demonstrated
that severe privacy concern and cynicism among consumers is a straightforward effect of constant retargeting, which directly
affects the buying intent17, 23, 24, 46 .
In this paper, we show that, while one way for ensuring re-engagement could be repetitive posting of the campaign by the
firm itself, a much more effective way could be creating a framework where some people in the population always remain
enthusiastic about the product, and act as ambassadors themselves. As a group of friends, families or colleagues often
have similar interests as well as proximity, a social-circle-driven retargeting technique will have much more prospect than
conventional company-acted reminder ads. Assuring the unresponsive inert customers about the authenticity, security and
10/15

Figure 6. Different steady state transitions of the recommendation network. The top row indicates initial conditions of the
network with different initalizations and parameter values, and the bottom row indicates the final state of the network for the
corresponding cases. Blue color indicates unaware nodes whereas orange and green indicate broadcaster and inert nodes. Bin
and B∗ indicate initial and final number of broadcasters. (a) When the parameters are selected from an endemic-free region, in
the steady state, the population is always broadcaster free. In (b) and (c) parameters are selected from bistable region. Thus,
when the network is initialized with small number of broadcaster it reaches to a broadcaster free state, but when initialized with
more number of broadcasters, the final steady state is endemic even though R < 1. (d) The parameters are selected from an
endemic region. So, even the initial number of broadcasters are small, the network always reaches to an endemic steady state.

usefulness of the campaign becomes much more plausible through this way. Our proposed model relies thoroughly on a survey
data that deals with consumer mindset and outlook14 , to prescribe ways to achieve sustainability for online campaigns. We
demonstrate that customers have an individuality which cannot be ignored, and inherent aversion towards marketing messages
among a considerable percentage of people have to be considered. Beside the creative aspects of the campaign, the brand
loyalty and brand name also plays a very important role to create positive reaction of a person towards a campaign message.
Exhaustive investigation of our differential equation based quantitative model shows the nonlinear relapse rate, α, plays a key
role to safeguard the survival of the campaign. We also show that bistability, which comes into picture due to the inherent
nonlinearity of the dynamics, works as an opportunity for the firm to make the viral campaign maintain its endemic state, even
in adversarial conditions. We have calculated and discussed the critical parameters that help to sustain the desired endemic state
by exploiting the properties of bistability.
Exploring beyond the homogeneous system dynamics, we studied the system considering the network structures. Along
with model networks, we simulated the dynamics on existing social networks as well as on our experimentally generated
recommendation network, to show that regaining those who are not showing any interest despite being aware of the campaign,
is extremely important; acquirement, retargeting, and win-back of these customers create the path towards the success of an
online marketing campaign. We have also shown that over-usage of advertising mails are many a time treated equivalent to
spamming, and create negative brand value instead of a positive impact. For newer brands (i.e., where the value of brand trust
parameter p is not in favor), along with the lucrativeness of the offer, figuring out innovative ways to remind the unresponsive
customers can be the key to success. With no brand history, these points must be included in their referral policy, otherwise an
initial adverse acceptability of the brand might lead to the failure of the entire campaign process.
Our work is the first of its kind, where we introduce NLP based topic modeling to understand customer psychology towards VM
campaigns14, 15, 17, 22–24, 30–33 and implement it in form of a precise dynamical model which mimics epidemic-like behavior. We
explore the conditions of success for the campaign in terms of realistic parameters both for homogeneous and heterogeneous
population structure. We must mention that from the perspective of an advertising firm, working on a marketing or political
campaign, the astonishing effect of the relapse rate and the brand trust parameter can have much deeper consequences.
Researchers have already seen evidence that when a relevant win-back offer is given, the once-lost temporarily inert customers
become more profitable in their second lifetime47 . Our findings firmly establishes several recent observations41, 47 on quantitative
grounds that rebuilding a targeted buzz in market can many times have a much stronger effect than the initial buzz itself. Not
11/15

only for marketing, but also for remarketing, the companies should not act as broadcasters themselves, but instead, they should
channelize their message through personal and social influences.
Beyond the findings we report in this paper, our methodology has potential to push forward the field of quantitative modelling of
referral marketing dynamics. Firstly, this brand-trust parameter p brings the idea of realistic decision making to quantitatively
understand referral marketing psychology. This parameter is chosen to give an estimate of the perceived trust the community
has for a particular brand, so that, without any hesitation, they can participate in a marketing campaign. With this idea of
perceived trust, our referral marketing model can also be studied from the perspective of evolutionary game theory. In voluntary
participation to a marketing campaign, an individual’s decision-making may depend on several factors such as the trust towards
the brand, consequences after participation, incentives associated with a campaign and fear of phishing or spamming. In a
future study, we will proceed to associate the dependence of decision making on the behavioural response of fellow community
members, and model the problem from the point-of-view of the traditional social dilemma depicted by game theory. Considering
the balance between perceived trust towards the brand, and perceived risk associated with referral marketing campaigns, an
effective pay-off could be calculated, and thus, Nash equilibrium could be detected, which will have striking similarities with
vaccination game dynamics48 . This work is the first step which can connect the well-developed tools of vaccination games with
the strategies of referral marketing policies causing a huge benefit for the marketing community.
Another highlight of our proposed methodology is that it is extremely promising in bridging the gap between social surveys
and mathematical modelling, in general. Inside and outside the boundaries of marketing field, several social issues involving
public psychology are commonly explored and researched by committed efforts of survey-based studies. On the other hand,
mathematical models and computation based analysis have also shown great implications in understanding and predicting
complex dynamical social systems. To our knowledge, there is no other study where a concrete methodology has been proposed
with survey-based data giving direct inputs to model construction, not by heuristic arguments but by solid quantitative study
through extensive language processing. Combining open-ended survey responses, NLP based tools, mean-field study and
network analysis, we attempted to put the pieces of a puzzle together which can offer a very general comprehensive methodology
to mathematically and computationally analyse survey responses, make concrete predictions on behavioural reaction through
mathematical models, and see the implications in real-life social networks.

5 Methods
5.1 Analyses of Survey Data
On the survey data of Ghosh et al.14 , first we perform a series of preprocessing, which includes removal of English stop words, punctuation
and numbers49 from the data, the lower-case conversion and lemmatization to have a standard representation of the text. The first level
analysis was performed through term frequency19 analysis to detect frequently used words by the users to answer their questions. To better
understand the correlation between these words, next, we perform topic modeling on the processed text data. As the responses are longer,
instead of using LFLDA50 , BTM51 or WNTM52 , we use classical LDA20 to find out the topics in the data. The optimal number of topics in
the LDA model is decided using the coherence score.
5.2 Mean Field Study: Equilibrium Analysis
The system of Eq. 1 can have two kinds of equilibrium: a VM-free equilibrium E0 (with the entire population being unaware), and an
Endemic equilibrium E ? (with a finite percentage of broadcasters present in steady state). As there is no time evolution at equilibrium, all
the components of E ? can be evaluated by equating u0 , b0 and i0 of Eq. 1 to zero. While solving for E ? , the first equation of system model,
defined in Eq. 1, gives
u? =

µ
ρb? + µ

(13)

Relevant substitutions from Eq. 13 and replacing i? by (1 − b? − u? ), simple algebra results into l(b? )2 + mb? + n = 0, where
l

=

α pρ

m

=

(σ ρ + µρ + λ ρ + α pµ − α pρ)

n

=

µ(σ + µ + λ ) − ρ(λ + µ p)·

(14)

Examining the coefficients, we conclude that l is always positive; m is positive for small values of α, and n is positive or negative depending
ρ(λ +µ p)
on whether µ(λ +µ+σ ) = R is smaller or greater than 1. Two completely different steady state scenarios can arise:
Case 1: For negative n (i.e., R > 1), the quadratic equation has a unique positive solution b?+ , as another solution b?− is always negative and
so, unphysical, and there exists a unique endemic equilibrium E ? whenever R > 1.
Case 2: On the other hand, for positive n (i.e., R < 1), the number of physical roots of the equation depends on the sign of q, and therefore,
the nonlinear relapse parameter α. Depending on this fact if α is high (or low), multiple (or no) endemic equilibria may exist.
For analysing stability of these equilibria, we consider Eq. 2 as
f1

=

µ − ρbu − µu

f2

=

pρbu + λ i + α pbi − σ b − µb

f3

=

σ b + (1 − p)ρbu − λ i − α pbi − µi

(15)

12/15

and calculate the Jacobian of f, where f = [ f1 , f2 , f3 ]13 .
5.3 Parameter selection in Network
Instead of same ρ and α for every node, as considered in the mean-field analysis, the rates have been made proportional to degree of the
ρ
α
nodes. ρn and αn are chosen to be hki
and hki
respectively so that expected values of ρn k and αn k are ρ and α used in mean-field analysis. It
synchronizes the parameter set of both the approaches and allows us to compare the obtained results.
5.4 Initial Propagation in Network
In initial phase of message spreading53 , b and i can be approximated by zero and u by 1. Using these values in Eq. 8, we get
Θ0u

=

µ − ρn

Θ0b

=

pρn

k2
Θ − µΘu
hki b

k2
Θ + λ Θi − (σ + µ)Θb
hki b

k2
Θ − (λ + µ)Θi
hki b
Last two equations of the Eq. 16 forms a system of simultaneous linear differential equations with constant coefficients.
dΘb
= C1 Θb +C2 Θa
dt
dΘa
= C3 Θb +C4 Θa
dt
Θ0i

=

(16)

σ Θb + (1 − p)ρn

(17)
(18)

5.5 Steady State Condition in Network Propagation
In large time limit, system will reach steady state. Rate of change of fractions u, b and i will be zero. In case of degree based compartment
scheme, uk , bk and ik will not change. Equating first and third equation of Eq. 7 to zero, we have
uk =

µ
µ + ρn kΘb

and

ik =

σ bk + (1 − p)ρn kuk Θb
λ + µ + αn kpΘb

(19)

Putting these values in second equation of the same set will give
bk =

ρn kΘb (µ p + λ + αn kpΘb )
(µ + ρn kΘb )(λ + µ + σ + αn kpΘb )

Multiplying bk by
Θb =

kpk
hki

(20)

and performing summation over k, we get

1
pk k2 ρn Θb (µ p + λ + αn kpΘb )
∑
hki k (µ + ρn kΘb )(λ + µ + σ + αn kpΘb )

(21)

This above expression is a self consistency equation of Θb , i.e. Eq. 21 can be written as Θb = f (Θb ).
5.6 Simulation over Networks
The simulations are performed over random network and scale-free network having 1024 nodes and average degree 10. Our random network
follows Erdös-Rényi model with binomial degree distribution which converges to Poisson distribution if the network has very large number of
nodes. The scale-free network that we have used for our analyses is generated using Barabási-Albert model of preferential attachment54 and
it follows power law degree distribution having power exponent 3. Though, both random network and scale-free network are popular in
network science, most of the real world networks do not follow the characteristics of any particular network model. Thus, we have simulated
the flow of recommendation campaigns under different conditions over several real world networks. These analyses help us to understand
the behavior in real social interaction scenarios. For our simulation studies over real networks, we collect some popular social networks
from KONECT database37 , namely, Hamster network, Email network and Jazz network. But, as these networks are not generated from any
recommendation campaign, we have also generated a recommendation network from a referral experiment.
5.7 Experiment for Generation of Recommendation Network
We have selected 5 people who know each other and asked them to forward a mail with a make-believe referral marketing message. The
policy for the recommendation is as follows: after forwarding the message to his contacts, a person will get credit points depending on the
number of forwards his/her contacts made. For example, if Alice forwards the message to 10 friends, and out of 10, 4 persons forward the
message further to some other people, then Alice wins 4 credit points. To track the propagation of the message and to the network, we have
asked everyone to send one copy of the forwarded message to our groups’ email address, so that we can draw the connections between the
participants. Two friends of Alice may send the message to each other even if both of them receive the message from Alice. Though, in our
experiment, the network structure becomes a directed graph, but we assume that the network structure is undirected, because if ‘A’ can send a
viral message to ‘B’, ‘B’ may also send some other viral message to ‘A’. As the experiment goes on, we also receive some isolated points
and branches. The isolated branches may arise if someone forwards the message to other people but forgets to include our email id while
forwarding the message, and his/her contacts forward the message following the instructions correctly. For the ease of discussion, we have
removed the isolated branches while building the final network. Finally, we have a sparse network with 1157 nodes and 2558 edges.
13/15

6 Data Availability
All data are available on request.

References
1. Holmes, E. E., Lewis, M. A., Banks, J. & Veit, R. Partial differential equations in ecology: spatial interactions and population dynamics.
Ecology 75, 17–29 (1994).
2. Gaurav, K., Ghosh, S., Bhattacharya, S. & Singh, Y. N. Equilibria of rumor propagation: Deterministic and network approaches. In
Region 10 Conference, IEEE TENCON 2017, 2029–2034 (IEEE, 2017).
3. Woo, J., Son, J. & Chen, H. An sir model for violent topic diffusion in social media. In Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), 2011
IEEE International Conference on, 15–19 (IEEE, 2011).
4. Shtatland, E. S. & Shtatland, T. Early detection of epidemic outbreaks and financial bubbles using autoregressive models with structural
changes. Proc. NESUG 21 (2008).
5. Kermack, W. O. & McKendrick, A. G. Contributions to the mathematical theory of epidemics. ii.—the problem of endemicity. Proc. R.
Soc. Lond. A 138, 55–83 (1932).
6. Fan, D. P. Ideodynamics: The kinetics of the evolution of ideas. J. Math. Sociol. 11, 1–23 (1985).
7. Diekmann, O., Heesterbeek, J. A. P. & Metz, J. A. On the definition and the computation of the basic reproduction ratio R0 in models for
infectious diseases in heterogeneous populations. J. mathematical biology 28, 365–382 (1990).
8. Blackmore, S. The meme machine (vol. 25) (2000).
9. Bobashev, G. V., Goedecke, D. M., Yu, F. & Epstein, J. M. A hybrid epidemic model: combining the advantages of agent-based and
equation-based approaches. In Simulation Conference, 2007 Winter, 1532–1537 (IEEE, 2007).
10. Bass, F. M. A new product growth for model consumer durables. Manag. science 15, 215–227 (1969).
11. Sohn, K., Gardner, J. T. & Weaver, J. L. Viral marketing–more than a buzzword. J. Appl. Bus. Econ. 14, 21–42 (2013).
12. Rodrigues, H. S. & Fonseca, M. J. Can information be spread as a virus? viral marketing as epidemiological model. Math. Methods Appl.
Sci. 39, 4780–4786 (2016).
13. Bhattacharya, S., Gaurav, K. & Ghosh, S. Viral marketing on social networks: An epidemiological perspective. Phys. A: Stat. Mech. its
Appl. 525, 478–490 (2019).
14. Ghosh, S., Bhattacharya, S., Gaurav, K. & Singh, Y. N. Going viral: The epidemiological strategy of referral marketing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1808.03780 (2018).
15. Raad, M., Yeassen, N. M., Alam, G. M., Zaidan, B. & Zaidan, A. Impact of spam advertisement through e-mail: A study to assess the
influence of the anti-spam on the e-mail marketing. Afr. J. Bus. Manag. 4, 2362–2367 (2010).
16. Jayawardhena, C., Kuckertz, A., Karjaluoto, H. & Kautonen, T. Antecedents to permission based mobile marketing: an initial examination.
Eur. journal marketing 43, 473–499 (2009).
17. Morimoto, M. & Chang, S. Consumers’ attitudes toward unsolicited commercial e-mail and postal direct mail marketing methods:
intrusiveness, perceived loss of control, and irritation. J. Interact. Advert. 7, 1–11 (2006).
18. Tashakkori, A. & Teddlie, C. Mixed methodology: Combining qualitative and quantitative approaches, vol. 46 (Sage, 1998).
19. Jotikabukkana, P., Sornlertlamvanich, V., Manabu, O. & Haruechaiyasak, C. Effectiveness of social media text classification by utilizing
the online news category. In 2015 2nd International Conference on Advanced Informatics: Concepts, Theory and Applications (ICAICTA),
1–5 (IEEE, 2015).
20. Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y. & Jordan, M. I. Latent dirichlet allocation. J. machine Learn. research 3, 993–1022 (2003).
21. Zhao, Z. & Renard, D. Viral promotional advergames: how intrinsic playfulness and the extrinsic value of prizes elicit behavioral
responses. J. Interact. Mark. 41, 94–103 (2018).
22. Phelps, J. E., Lewis, R., Mobilio, L., Perry, D. & Raman, N. Viral marketing or electronic word-of-mouth advertising: Examining
consumer responses and motivations to pass along email. J. advertising research 44, 333–348 (2004).
23. Leppaniemi, M. & Karjaluoto, H. Factors influencing consumers’ willingness to accept mobile advertising: a conceptual model. Int. J.
Mob. Commun. 3, 197–213 (2005).
24. Barnes, S. J. & Scornavacca, E. Mobile marketing: the role of permission and acceptance. Int. J. Mob. Commun. 2, 128–139 (2004).
25. Chaudhuri, A. & Holbrook, M. B. The chain of effects from brand trust and brand affect to brand performance: the role of brand loyalty.
J. marketing 65, 81–93 (2001).
26. D. Hollebeek, L. & Chen, T. Exploring positively-versus negatively-valenced brand engagement: a conceptual model. J. Prod. & Brand
Manag. 23, 62–74 (2014).
14/15

27. Fournier, S. & Alvarez, C. Brands as relationship partners: Warmth, competence, and in-between. J. Consumer Psychol. 22, 177–185
(2012).
28. Chu, S.-C. Viral advertising in social media: Participation in facebook groups and responses among college-aged users. J. interactive
advertising 12, 30–43 (2011).
29. Briggs, T. Social media’s second act: toward sustainable brand engagement. Des. Manag. Rev. 21, 46–53 (2010).
30. Ellison, N. B., Steinfield, C. & Lampe, C. The benefits of facebook “friends:” social capital and college students’ use of online social
network sites. J. computer-mediated communication 12, 1143–1168 (2007).
31. https://www.marketingsherpa.com/article/chart/why-consumers-unsubscribe. Online (Accessed: 30.08.2019).
32. Silva, K. https://www.business2community.com/email-marketing/surprising-truth-sending-many-emails-01786693. Online (Accessed:
30.08.2019).
33. Berke, A., Fulton, G. & Vaccarello, L. The retargeting playbook: How to turn web-window shoppers into customers (John Wiley & Sons,
2014).
34. Loewenstein, G. Out of control: Visceral influences on behavior. Organ. behavior human decision processes 65, 272–292 (1996).
35. Wolny, J. & Mueller, C. Analysis of fashion consumers’ motives to engage in electronic word-of-mouth communication through social
media platforms. J. marketing management 29, 562–583 (2013).
36. Strogatz, S. H. Nonlinear dynamics and chaos: with applications to physics, biology, chemistry, and engineering (CRC Press, 2018).
37. Kunegis, J. Konect: The koblenz network collection. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on World Wide Web,
1343–1350 (ACM, 2013).
38. Tunc, I. & Shaw, L. B. Effects of community structure on epidemic spread in an adaptive network. Phys. Rev. E 90, 022801 (2014).
39. Drucker, P. The society of organizations. Harv. business review 95104 (1992).
40. Harris, L. & Rae, A. Social networks: the future of marketing for small business. J. business strategy 30, 24–31 (2009).
41. Weber, L. Marketing to the social web: How digital customer communities build your business (John Wiley & Sons, 2009).
42. Ismail, Z. & Kolbegger, C. Correlated consumer telephone numbers and user identifiers for advertising retargeting (2014). US Patent
App. 13/865,966.
43. Moriguchi, T., Xiong, G. & Luo, X. Retargeting ads for shopping cart recovery: Evidence from online field experiments. Available at
SSRN 2847631 (2016).
44. Yeo, J., Kim, S., Koh, E., Hwang, S.-w. & Lipka, N. Predicting online purchase conversion for retargeting. In Proceedings of the Tenth
ACM international conference on web search and data mining, 591–600 (ACM, 2017).
45. Finkle, T. A. Adroll: A case study of entrepreneurial growth. New Engl. J. Entrepreneurship 16, 47–50 (2013).
46. Zarouali, B., Ponnet, K., Walrave, M. & Poels, K. Do you like cookies? Adolescents’ skeptical processing of retargeted facebook-ads
and the moderating role of privacy concern and a textual debriefing. Comput. Hum. Behav. 69, 157–165 (2017).
47. Kumar, V., Bhagwat, Y. & Zhang, X. Regaining “lost” customers: The predictive power of first-lifetime behavior, the reason for defection,
and the nature of the win-back offer. J. Mark. 79, 34–55 (2015).
48. Bauch, C. T. & Earn, D. J. Vaccination and the theory of games. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 101, 13391–13394 (2004).
49. Pietsch, A.-S. & Lessmann, S. Topic modeling for analyzing open-ended survey responses. J. Bus. Anal. 1, 93–116 (2018).
50. Nguyen, D. Q., Billingsley, R., Du, L. & Johnson, M. Improving topic models with latent feature word representations. Transactions
Assoc. for Comput. Linguist. 3, 299–313 (2015).
51. Yan, X., Guo, J., Lan, Y. & Cheng, X. A biterm topic model for short texts. In Proceedings of the 22nd international conference on
World Wide Web, 1445–1456 (ACM, 2013).
52. Zuo, Y., Zhao, J. & Xu, K. Word network topic model: a simple but general solution for short and imbalanced texts. Knowl. Inf. Syst. 48,
379–398 (2016).
53. Liu, J., Tang, Y. & Yang, Z. The spread of disease with birth and death on networks. J. Stat. Mech. Theory Exp. 2004, P08008 (2004).
54. Barabási, A.-L. & Albert, R. Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science 286, 509–512 (1999).

Author contributions statement
S.B. and S.G. conceived the idea of the study. K.G. and S.G. performed the simulations and the experiments. S.G. and K.G. analysed the
results. Y.N.S., S.B. and S.G. prepared the manuscript. All authors reviewed the manuscript.

15/15

