SOCIAL NETWORKING ANALYSIS

Seminar Paper

Advanced Topics In Social Network Analysis
Lecturer: Dr. Tsahi Hayat

Exposure to Crowdfunding Campaigns: What increases the
likelihood of donating to a crowdfunding campaign?

Submitted by:
Gil Semons
Julia Weiner
Natalie Yona

2

SOCIAL NETWORKING ANALYSIS

ABSTRACT

With the advent of Internet technology, the new concept of crowdfunding emerged
and became popular within a very short time span. Crowdfunding activity helps to resolve the
problem of fund scarcity; especially for small entrepreneurs. Social Media and the Internet
are the powerful tools for the effective implementation of crowdfunding. The present
research paper is the thorough study on the term crowdfunding. The specific area chosen for
the research is the correlation between the exposure of crowdfunding activity and the
response of the people to this activity. The hypothesis for the research was that there is a
positive correlation between these two phenomena. The extensive research was conducted on
the base of two types of information; primary data and secondary data. Some sociology and
mass media theories were also analyzed in context of crowdfunding.
According to the findings from literature review and conducted surveys, it is
concluded that the hypothesis supports the research question. If proper exposure is given to
the crowdfunding campaign, it is effective in generating funds for some social or economic
purposes. But a comprehensive research is needed to find out some important facts regarding
the topic.
Keywords: Crowdfunding, exposure, response, social media.

2

3

SOCIAL NETWORKING ANALYSIS

TABLE OF CONTENT

Title Page ……………………………………………………………………………………...1
Abstract………………………………………………………………………………………..2
Table of Content………………………………………………………………………………3
Introduction……………………………………………………………………………………4
Related Work
Theoretical Framework………………………………………………………………………..5
Prior Research…………………………………………………………………………………7
Research Question and Hypothesis…………………………………………………………..11
Research Methodology……………………………………………………………………….13
Results………………………………………………………………………………………..15
Discussion……………………………………………………………………………………18
Conclusion……………………………………………………………………………………21
References……………………………………………………………………………………22

3

4

SOCIAL NETWORKING ANALYSIS

Introduction
The most important thing for any business to run is money. Thus it can be assumed
that scarcity or lack of capital is the major hurdle businesses must confront. Crowdfunding
has emerged as a new way of generating funds online. There are some websites, which work
as generators of funding from the general public. These sites obtain their shares from the
percentage of generated money. Crowdfunding has been emerging as a popular tool to
generate funds from the people for public projects (Kaminka, Fox & Bouquet, 2016). The
accomplishment of the project is successful collective efforts of the individuals involved in
the crowdfunding campaign. The people pay some amount to make the project happen and in
some cases they gain rewards. There may be misunderstanding between crowdfunding and
share. But both concepts are different. In shares, individual can gain monetary returns from
the business, but in crowdfunding, the reward is not guaranteed. Especially, when the
crowdfunding is donation based, the individuals do not get any kind of concrete reward. They
may gain recognition and respect. Generating funds for a project from virtual people is a very
challenging task. It is challenging to reach to them, chase them and appeal them to contribute.
Very few studies have been conducted on crowdfunding, the ways to expose
crowdfunding to the people and the response from the people. It was found that some of the
crowdfunding platforms are doing very well and they are attracting a remarkable number of
people. On the other hand, some of the sites are not as popular and most of the general public
do not even know them. The research applies some communication theories to describe the
research topic. These theories include two-step theory, media dependency theory and magic
bullet theory. Along with the theoretical approach, the researchers try to obtain information
from previous studies. These previous studies are inadequate to study the research topic indepth, so the survey has been conducted. The reports of the survey help to reach to the
conclusion of the research paper.

4

5

SOCIAL NETWORKING ANALYSIS

Related Work
3.1. Theoretical Framework
The research question can be analysed through different theoretical perspectives.
Various social, cultural and communication theories can be applied. The first theory that can
be applied to the present research is the social construction theory or the social construction
of reality. The fundamental of social constructive theory is the collaborative or collective
social interaction (Applefield & Huber, 2000). Dialogue (Interaction) is the catalyst for
understanding (Applefield & Huber, 2000). The crowdfunding campaigns aim at establishing
dialogues among social members and strengthening the ability of individuals or the groups to
take social challenges collectively; and thus, bringing about the positive changes in social
circumstances in order to meet human needs. The people involved in crowdfunding
campaigns have the knowledge and understanding of the objectives and necessities of such
campaign. It is crucial for the successful implementation of social work theory and its
practice in the chosen environment. The individuals or group participate in the construction
of their perceived realities. The crowdfunding activity is the result of the perceived social
reality of the people. The perceived realities are social as well as economic. Nowadays,
crowdfunding campaigns are majorly promoted on social media platform such as Facebook,
Twitter and smartphone apps like WhatsApp. The information spreads on digital media or
social media with a fast pace. Millions of followers share information as well as their
contribution to crowdfunding campaign.
The two-step theory can also be applied in relation to the amount and type of
exposure of crowdfunding campaigns and the individual interest to fund for certain causes.
According to two-step flow theory, informal social relationships have an influence on people
and the influence is shaped by the media. According to this theory, interpersonal relationships
have a very strong influence on shaping public opinion. The exposure of crowdfunding
campaign through social media contains virtual interaction. It is through virtual interpersonal
mediums that crowdfunding campaigns can be exposed effectively. The virtual platform also
facilitates to establish online discussion between individuals (Hayat, Samuel-Azran & Galily,
2016). Through discussion and information shared by the followers and bloggers, the
campaigns can be succeeded (Hayat & Hershkovitz, 2018; Hayat, Hershkovitz & SamuelAzran, 2019). The founders of two-step flow theory, Paul Lazarsfeld, Bernard Berelson and
Hezel Gaudet stated that the mass media content first reaches the opinion leaders, who are

5

6

SOCIAL NETWORKING ANALYSIS

active media users and they pass the collected information to the less active media consumers
(Lazarsfeld, Berelson & Gaudet, 1944). In traditional media such as television and radio, the
information reaches to the television channels or radio stations and they disseminate the
information. So, in this circumstance, the active media users are radio stations and television
channels, and the passive users are the masses. The passive users of media were the common
people. But with the advent of social media, anyone can be the active user of media. The
information related to the crowdfunding can be shared by any individual/s, who has/have indepth information available with him/her/them. When the people will be exposed to the
information, they will be motivated to fund for the project.
Media Dependency theory is one more theoretical approach which can be applied
here. Developed by Ball Rokeach and DeFluer, this theory argues that the audience depends
upon the media information to meet needs and to reach goals (Ball-Rokeach, Sandra &
Defluer, 1976). Relating to the present research question, the need is the exposure of
crowdfunding campaign to the masses and the goal is to generate maximum funds.
Magic Bullet theory or hypodermic needle model of mass communication can be
applied in context of the mass appeal for crowdfunding. According to the theory, the message
is sent directly to the masses and if it is appealing and effective it hits the minds of the people
like a bullet. It is very apt in the case of crowdfunding activity.
3.2. Prior Research
At first, it is important to know the concept of crowdfunding in detail. According to a
report published by World Bank, crowdfunding is an Internet-enabled way for businesses and
other organizations to generate funds in the form of either investment or donations from the
people. The concept is a relatively new term that emerged in 2008, in the era of digital and
internet technology. It began an online extension of traditional financing by friends and
family (InfoDev, 2013). It was reported by World Bank that there are very less or
insignificant cases of frauds in crowdfunding market (InfoDev, 2013). An exploratory
research has been conducted on the dynamics of crowdfunding by Mollick (2013). He
explains four approaches of crowdfunding: humanitarian approach, lending approach, reward
based approach and the investing approach in which investors are given equity stakes or other
such benefits (Mollick, 2013). Crowdfunding according to Herburg et al. (2014) is a sociotechnical system to facilitate interaction between entrepreneurs and the financial supporters.
They further state that the campaign is promoted and thus exposed to the public through the

6

7

SOCIAL NETWORKING ANALYSIS
entrepreneurs via Facebook, Twitter and other social networking sites. The entrepreneurs
may also reach to the masses by uploading videos on YouTube.
It has become easier for the entrepreneurs to generate funds for the project through

virtual crowdfunding platforms; rather than being dependent on venture capitalists, banks and
other financial institutions (Herburg et al. 2014). Crowdfunding is a virtual activity in which
people pool their money together, invest in the project and thus financially support the project
initiated by other people or other organizations (Rossi, 2014). As mentioned earlier,
crowdfunding is a recent phenomenon and therefore, its consequences are not yet fully
understood (Rossi, 2014). Rossi also discusses how crowdfunding is developed. The basic
idea of generating funds is old; but the tools used to generate funds has seen major innovation
with the advancements in technology. To Rossi, these new modes of communication, such as
the Internet and social networking sites, have revolutionized fundraising for the start-up of
businesses. It has been a blessing, especially for the small companies, which are having
difficulty to generate capital for their business (Rossi, 2014).
The importance of crowdfunding in relation to the exposure is elucidated by Bradford
(2012). Bradford focuses on the benefits of crowdfunding. Through Internet and social
media, it has been quite easy to reach anyone in the world. Bradford (2012) states that the
fundamental principle of crowdfunding is to raise money through relatively small
contribution from large number of people. When he says small contribution and large
number, he means to say that the amount contributed by the people may be small but the
scope of funding is so vast. Using the medium of internet, the fund seekers can reach millions
of potential investors without spending money exorbitantly on advertisements or other
commercial activities. Bradford (2012) also finds that the crowdfunding sites such as Kiva
Kickstarter, and IndiGoGo have managed to generate amounts around billions of dollars and
it is in just a few years.
Bradford (2012) found that Crowdfunding is popular in politics as well as in
entertainment industry. The concept of crowdfunding is not limited to the US, but due to its
success it has spread in other countries like Hong Kong, Great Britain, Brazil, Germany,
Netherlands, Sub-Saharan regions etc.
The growing response of crowdfunding has been explored by Rossi (2014). The
activity is exposed to the billions of people impactfully. North America and Europe are the
major region in which the phenomenon is dominating. The world-wide capital raised from

7

8

SOCIAL NETWORKING ANALYSIS
crowdfunding is 1.23 billion Euro from North America and 727 million Euro from Europe
(Rossi, 2014).

Brabham (2008) explains the way of accessing to millions of people and seeking their
response. According to him, the web is an essential and inevitable technology as it provides
the medium to individuals from every part of the world to interact in a single environment.
The web has crossed all geographical boundaries and cultural backgrounds. The collective
activity of interaction and welcoming user-generated content and other forms of information
stimulate the users and motivate them to contribute some amount (Brabham, 2008). Brabham
calls the activity of crowdfunding as a model for aggregating talent, leveraging ingenuity and
at the same time reducing cost and time to solve the fund problem (Brabham, 2008). While
discussing the general types of crowdfunding and their contribution in generating funds,
Brabham presents the following data.
Among total crowdfunding, the share of reward based platforms has 43.5% share.
Lending based platform has 14.5% share. 28% of the share is generated from simple donation
and about 14% share is generated through equity based platform (Brabham, 2008). The share
is interpreted in the following pie chart.

Participation of crowd for different types of crowdfunding

14%
43.50%
28%

14.50%

Reward Based

lending based

Simple Donation

Equity Based

The above information shows that the reward based platform is most popular followed
by simple donation. Brabham’s findings state that when the amount is shared by the people

8

9

SOCIAL NETWORKING ANALYSIS
on crowdfunding platform, they do not expect returns from their funds. They do not
contribute for the sake of investment.
According to Schwienbacher and Larralde, the crowdfunding can be motivational for

the investors due to some reasons such as their participation in building a new firm, effective
tool to make their personal network strong and build relationship and access to the competent
crowd (Cumming, 2012).
Based on the previous research, it can be concluded that crowdfunding has been a
blessing for small businesses and new entrepreneurs, who were previously limited due to lack
of funds. The previous studies do not discuss the direct connection between amount of
exposure to crowdfunding campaigns and the motivations people gain from these campaigns
to contribute some amount in the form of either donation or investment. The previous studies
are thus inadequate to reach to the conclusion of the research paper. Hence the researchers
were encouraged to close this gap by collecting primary data from survey research.

9

10

SOCIAL NETWORKING ANALYSIS

RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND HYPOTHESIS
The formulated question for the present research is as follows:
 What is the correlation between exposure to and knowledge of the crowdfunding
campaign and its creator, and the person’s chances of funding for the causes of
crowdfunding campaign?
In other words, the question can be formulated in a following way:
 How knowledge of such campaign motivates the people to share amount in
crowdfunding campaign?
In the research question, the keywords are exposure, campaign, chances and funding.
The keyword exposure is the subject of communication studies. Exposure, accessibility or
reaching to a huge mass are the topic of concern in mass communication. With this respect,
the researchers has discussed some mass media theories such as media dependency theory,
magic bullet theory and two-step theory. The keywords such as exposure and campaign are
also related closely to sociology. Hence the social constructionism theory is also used to
discuss the research question. Social constructionism theory supports knowledge about a
certain social phenomenon through interacting with the people. The knowledge about the
social phenomenon helps the mass audience to decide whether or not he/she will provide
funds. For example, if a small media house creates a crowdfunding campaign to raise funds
for the production of a documentary on a social problem; it is important for the potential
financers to have a knowledge about the social problems and their impact on the society. This
knowledge can be gained through an online discussion forum in the form of posts,
microblogs, and blogs on social media.
Though the literature review did not support the research question fully, it provided
some major information, which is helpful to find out the answer of the research question.
Firstly, the prior research made the concept of crowdfunding clear. It helped to gain the
information about the history of the emergence of crowdfunding. The previous research also
gave a brief review of different approaches or types of crowdfunding. No substantial result is
found regarding the drawbacks or adverse consequences of crowdfunding. The literature
review also elucidates various benefits of crowdfunding. It is also made clear in the literature
review that the substantial funds can be generated through crowdfunding. It has been a
successful venture in Americas and Europe.

10

11

SOCIAL NETWORKING ANALYSIS
The data related to the following factors related to research question could not be obtained
from literature review:
 Are people motivated to fund because of the campaigns?
 Do the financers of the same campaign know each other?
 Which is the most popular platform for crowdfunding campaign? (the data for this
question was different in previous study and actual survey study).
 Are people ready to donate to an unknown person or organization, about which they
know very less.
 How much funds are the financers ready to contribute?
For obtaining the answers of these questions and many other questions, the

researchers had to take support from survey research. While designing research, the following
hypothesis was formulated.
There is a strong correlation between the exposure of crowdfunding campaign and the
positive response to it from the people throughout the world. The popularity of social media
sites such as Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn is measured in the survey. This information
helped to measure the exposure of the campaign through social networking sites.
To summarize the section, it can say that to test hypothesis, the related studies,
theories of sociology and mass media and the survey questionnaire collectively proved to be
an effective technique to reach to the conclusion of the research.

11

12

SOCIAL NETWORKING ANALYSIS

RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
There are different types of research. For the present research paper, descriptive
research was selected. Also known as Ex Post Facto research, the surveys have been
conducted to explore facts in the context of the research question. Being a descriptive
research, the main objective is to find different types of exposure to crowdfunding campaigns
and their impacts on the motivation towards people to fund for the project. The research
covers the domains in the fields of sociology, economics and communication. Crowdfunding
falls under sociology due to its social issue where people invest or lend money for the
accomplishment of the social project. It is also a research of economics because it is related
to finance, investment, equity and returns on investment. The research falls under the domain
of communication for the reasons that it studies the factors of exposure or promotion of the
campaign. As mentioned in the literature review, crowdfunding is related to social media
activity, and is the research topic of media and communication. Crowdfunding is a
phenomenon and like other researches, the researchers do not have any control on the
variables. The researchers just put forward the facts.
Survey and questionnaire methods come under the category of quantitative research.
The data for the research is analyzed in the form of quantitative methods, including graphs,
charts, tables, percentages, etc. The same as qualitative research, the researchers have not
tried to find the data through in-depth interviews and observations, but the study relies on
surveys. Computational method is used instead of statistical interpretation.
The research also comes under the category of an empirical research because it is a
data-based research. Unlike longitudinal research, it is a one-time research.
For this research, the data was collected from both primary and secondary sources.
The primary data is obtained through the responses distributed to the questionnaire from
different people. For every question, the number of respondents varied. But in general, the
number of the respondents was between 40 and 60. The secondary data for the research was
obtained from the previous research conducted in the topic of crowdfunding. The authentic
websites, books, and journals were the major sources to obtain information. The researchers
made sure that the sources were reliable and relevant to the research question. The sources
serving the objectives of the research were considered.

12

13

SOCIAL NETWORKING ANALYSIS

While selecting the population, it was ensured that the respondents were aware of the
term “crowdfunding”. The term was explained by the researchers before distributing the
questionnaire among the participants. The sample design used for this research is a deliberate
sampling, which is also known as purposive or non-probability sampling. Accordingly, the
respondents chosen were based on their knowledge of crowdfunding, their orientation
towards social issues, economic factors or their knowledge of media and communication. The
reason behind choosing non-probability sampling was that the research topic is specific. It
was noticed that crowdfunding is a comparatively new concept. It was found that it is not yet
familiar to the common people; for this reason, they could not be the right respondents.
Furthermore, it is also a critical term, which resulted in the sample respondents whom were
chosen were between the age group of 20 and 50. The questionnaires were sent via mail and
social media posts. The researchers took follow-up questions of the respondents from time to
time. Among 60 respondents, 48 participants have responded to the questionnaire. Some
respondents did not respond to all questions asked in the questionnaire.

13

14

SOCIAL NETWORKING ANALYSIS

RESULTS
During the survey, the respondents answered the questionnaire, which consists of total
15 questions. The demographic questions such as name, age, gender, profession, education
etc. were incorporated in questionnaire. Based on the primary data, the following was the
outcome:
Among social networking sites, the most popular site is Facebook. Considering its
popularity, the first question was based on the number of friends connected with Facebook.
approximately 500 friends of each of the respondents are active on Facebook. Along with
Facebook, Instagram is the second most frequently used social networking sites among the
respondents. Twitter is less frequently used website as compared to Facebook and Instagram,
but is more frequent than LinkedIn or Google. The respondents are not the frequent visitors to
Google or LinkedIn website.
Eighty percent (80%) of the respondents said that they visit the crowdfunding
websites and they know about the objectives and overall operation of these websites. Only
20% of the respondents have not visited any of crowdfunding websites. 87% respondents are
exposed to crowdfunding campaigns via social networking sites. Some of the respondents
also obtained information about the campaign through different crowdfunding campaigning
sites. But from either source, 87% are familiar with the campaign.
The most common category for crowdfunding campaign, according to the
respondents, is medical followed by community and charity. The crowdfunding campaign
conducted for education is least among all categories. Apart from medical, community,
education, sports, charity, for other several reasons the crowdfunding campaign is conducted.
Its percentage is equal to the medical category. The most popular site for crowdfunding
campaign among the respondents was GoFundMe. Among 33 respondents 20 respondents
(60.60%) have donated funds to GoFundMe. Six participants said that they have funded to
Kickstarter. Apart from this site, other several crowdfunding sites are popular among the
respondents. Indiegogo site was not at all popular. It did not manage to catch the attention of
any of the respondents. It was found that IndieGoGo, Razoo and Crowdwise could not
manage to gain funds from any of the respondents. Apart from these funding sites, other
different sites are also there. They were funded by 7 respondents.

14

15

SOCIAL NETWORKING ANALYSIS

As mentioned earlier, Facebook is the most popular site for crowdfunding campaign
according to maximum number of respondents. The respondents believe that it is the most
effective channel for the campaign. After Facebook, Twitter is also the effective channel
according to some respondents. Significant number of respondents also believe in word-ofmouth publicity. Results show that the campaigners can reach maximum number of people
via online as well as offline (Facebook as well as mouth-to-mouth) promotion.
The frequency of sharing crowdfunding campaign via social media is also very high.
45.45% respondents believe that it has been shared 1 to 100 times. While 36.36% people
think that it is shared 101 to 300 times on social media. It can be said that the frequency of
sharing the campaign on social media is significant.
Almost half of the respondents said that they managed to reach the goal in the funding
period. For the respondent that indicated that they could not reach the goal was minimal. For
those who managed to surpass the goal was also minimal. Maximum number of respondents
said that they knew the donors. Among the donors 90% were known to them and only 10%
were strangers for them.
In the questionnaire, the respondents were given options of two different campaigns;
Local Youth Center Program and Youth Sports Center in Guatemala. They were asked if they
had to donate $100 to any of these two campaigns, which campaign they would choose. 64%
of them chose Local Youth Center Program while 36% of them chose Youth Sports Center in
Guatemala. The Local Center Program is more popular among the respondents.
There was a mixed response found regarding correlation between funding to strangers
and to the acquaintances. For example, 32.45% of the respondents said that the creator of the
campaign was totally unknown to them and still they donate for the campaign. While exactly
the same percentage of people said that the creator was their friend’s friend, means they knew
the creator.
Maximum number of respondents (16) are ready to pay $10 to $29 for crowdfunding
campaign. Among the respondents, some of them are even ready to pay $100 to $199 for the
campaign. Only one respondent is ready to pay more than $200. The maximum number of
respondents (42%) said that they did not know the person who donated for the crowdfunding
campaign. At the same time, 34% of the respondents said that they do not know all of the
donors but they know some of them. Only 1 among 35 respondents said that he knew all of

15

16

SOCIAL NETWORKING ANALYSIS

the donors. 4 respondents said they knew half of the donors but remaining half of the donors
were unknown to them.
It is an important activity to share the campaign link after donating, in order to get
more people to donate, however the respondents did not agree. When they were asked
whether they shared the campaign link on Facebook, among 35 respondents, 16 said that they
shared the campaign link on Facebook after they donated in the campaign, whereas, 19
respondents did not share it.

16

17

SOCIAL NETWORKING ANALYSIS

DISCUSSION
Based on the results, it can be said that Facebook is the website of choice for reaching
maximum number of people regardless of geographical, cultural and social boundaries. It was
found that the social networking sites such as Facebook and Instagram are also very effective
in crowdfunding campaigns. These to social media sites are successful with crowdfunding
campaigns because they have a presence of maximum people on these sites. These sites have
proven that they are the effective tools to make the people know and to generate their interest
for a certain activity.
The crowdfunding is a virtual based campaign; therefore, the increased virtual
population will help to expose such crowdfunding campaigns rapidly and effectively. The
information related to crowdfunding is shared hundreds of times on social media. According
to the Magic Bullet Theory of mass communication, the information or the message is like a
bullet and it is fired from the media’s “gun.” In digital context, we can say that the
crowdfunding related information is like a bullet which is “shot” to the people through the
metaphorical gun that is the social networking websites. The message is directly received and
fully accepted by the receivers. Like a bullet, the information or message penetrates the
minds of the people via social media sites. To make it more effective, the message can be
made creative and appealing.
Very contradictory results have been found between previous research and the
information obtained from primary data. For example, Bradford’s (2012) results found that
Kiva, Kickstarter, and IndieGoGo managed to generate billions of dollars in crowdfunding
campaign. The data obtained from the survey states that IndieGoGo platform of
crowdfunding site was a failure as it was not able to gain funds from any of the respondents.
From the results, it can be said that the visit of people to different crowdfunding
website is significant. More than 85% of the people have been exposed to the crowdfunding
sites. It means that people are taking interest in knowing more about the activity.
The common purpose of financiers behind sharing the a campaign are the medical
based campaigns. Education is one of the most important sectors for which charity or such
kind of fund is needed. Unfortunately, the respondents have shown least interest in funding
for education purpose. Yet in underprivileged nations, the small children are deprived of
basic education.

17

18

SOCIAL NETWORKING ANALYSIS
The frequency of sharing the information regarding crowdfunding campaign is very

high. The social networking site play a crucial role in motivating the people to contribute and
raising funds. The respondents are blinded to who the other financiers are because the process
is online, being anonymous. During discussion forum online, they may be knowing who are
the other financiers involved in the campaign. Without knowing the donors and without
knowing the person, they are encouraged to offer funds. If they know everything, it will
certainly have positive impact on the amount of money generated.
When the performance of the campaign platform was assessed, some opposite results
came forward. IndieGoGo is one of the crowdfunding platform. In previous research
conducted in 2012, it was found that the site successfully generated billions of dollars
through crowdfunding campaign. While in survey, it was found that not a single respondent
has given funds to this campaign platform. There may be two reasons behind these mixed
results. Firstly, because the previous research was conducted by Bradford in 2012 and the
survey was conducted more recently, in 2017. There is a gap of five years between first result
and the recent result. The second probability is that the selected sample for the survey may be
too small to obtain accurate result. Moreover, the sample size may be within the specific
geographical boundaries. The future research can be conducted by increasing the population.
If we want accuracy in the result of the research, several researches should be conducted in
different regions. The scope of the result should be massive. It can be conducted on national
or international level. It is because this is one of the most important topic for studies and as of
now any specific study has not been yet conducted by the previous research.
To summarize, it can be said that the social networking sites such as Facebook,
Instagram, Twitter, LinkedIn, Emails play very crucial role in spreading the message and
objectives of crowdfunding campaign. Through these sites, the people should spread
appealing and positive message about crowdfunding campaign. If each financier decides to
propagate the campaign, he/she will be able to spread the message to a few hundreds of
people. Those hundreds of people will pass the same message to the their friend list and so
on. For that reason, the message will be spread and it will encourage the people to respond
positively to the campaign.
One more thing that needs to be noted here and that is sharing of campaign links. The
use of social networking sites is abundant among the respondents. Among their relatives,
friends and acquaintance, hundreds of respondents are active on social networking sites, but it

18

19

SOCIAL NETWORKING ANALYSIS
was found that more than half of the respondents have never shared campaign link on these
sites. It means that the respondents are not yet utilizing full potential of social media sites.
The percentage of sharing the link among the people needs to be increased.
From the survey, it can be said that the response of the people to such kind of
campaigns are very positive and their chances of funding for such campaigns are very high.

19

20

SOCIAL NETWORKING ANALYSIS

CONCLUSION
Crowdfunding campaign is the new version of the old phenomenon of financial
support. Before the advent of mass media and social networking sites, the funds for small
business were raised locally. Along with local financial institutions, the funds were arranged
from friends, relatives or family members. But with the rise of Internet, the scenario changed
rapidly and within a few decades, crowdfunding campaigns gained popularity. Crowdfunding
is a blessing to small, creative and dedicated entrepreneurs to prove their abilities. In this
context, the present research is very crucial.
Two major points were incorporated in the research question of this research. First the
exposure of crowdfunding campaigns to the people and the second factor was their response
(positive or negative) to the campaign. Various theoretical approaches were discussed in the
context of this study. No negative reaction or respond was noted regarding the objectives and
the authenticity of the campaign. The campaign has received immense popularity and
recognition in the world. The contribution of people is also growing rapidly. More and more
people are coming ahead to invest their money in such online campaign. The people did not
expect their dissatisfaction or doubt about the campaign. But it is important to increase the
scope of the campaign. The research is very important to know whether the crowdfunding
campaigns are doing well in shaping the minds of the people and motivating them to provide
financial support. The present paper delivers a thorough knowledge about the concept of
crowdfunding, the current scenario and the future of crowdfunding activities.

20

21

SOCIAL NETWORKING ANALYSIS

REFERENCES
Applefield, J., & Huber, R. (2000). Constructivism In Theory And Practice: Toward A Better
Understanding. The High School Journals., 84(2), 35-53.
Ball-Rokeach, S., & DeFleur, M. (1976). A Dependency Model of Mass-Media Effects.
Communication Research, 3(1), 3-21.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/009365027600300101
Bradford, S. (2012). Cite a Website - Cite This For Me. Digitalcommons.unl.edu. Retrieved
24 September 2017, from
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1118&context=lawfacpub
Cumming, D. (2012). The Oxford handbook of entrepreneurial finance. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Harburg, E., Hui, J., Greenberg, M., & Gerber, E. (2014). Understanding the Effects of
Crowdfunding on Entrepreneurial Self-Efficacy. Northwestern University.
Hayat, T., Samuel-Azran, T., & Galily, Y. (2016). Al-Jazeera Sport’s US Twitter followers:
Sport-politics nexus?. Online Information Review, 40(6), 785-797.
Hayat, T., & Hershkovitz, A. (2018). The role social cues play in mediating the effect of
eWOM over purchasing intentions. Journal of Customer Behavior. 17 (3), 173-187.
Hayat, T., Hershkovitz, A., & Samuel-Azran, T. (2019). The independent reinforcement
effect: The role diverse social ties play in the credibility assessment process. Public
Understanding of Science, 28(2), 201-217.
InfoDev. (2013). Crowdfunding’s Potential for the Developing World. Washington DC:
World Bank. Retrieved from http://funginstitute.berkeley.edu/wpcontent/uploads/2013/11/Crowdfundings_Potential_for_the_Developing_World.pdf
Kaminka, G., Fox, M., & Bouquet, P. (2016). ECAI 2016: 22nd European Conference on
Artificial Intelligence ..., Parts 1-2. IOS Press.
Mollick, E. (2014). The dynamics of crowdfunding: An exploratory study. Journal Of
Business Venturing, 29(1), 1-16. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.2013.06.005
Berelson, B., Gaudet, H., & Lazarsfeld, P. (1944). The People's Choice. How the voter makes
up his mind in a presidential campaign.. Duell, Sloan & Pearce: New York.
Rossi, M. (2014). The New Ways to Raise Capital: An Exploratory Study of
Crowdfunding. International Journal Of Financial Research, 5(2).
http://dx.doi.org/10.5430/ijfr.v5n2p8
Schwienbacher, A., & Larralde, B. (2012). Crowdfunding of Small Entrepreneurial Ventures.
In Cumming, D. (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Entrepreneurial Finance. Oxford
University Press.

21

