FRANK J. MÜLLER
Opportunities and Challenges of
State-financed Open Educational
Resources: The Norwegian model –
a way to more inclusion ?

Table of Content
1

Preliminary remarks and terminology......................................................................... 3

2

The advantages of OER ................................................................................................. 4

3

The framework conditions in Norway........................................................................ 6

4

The political perspective ................................................................................................ 7

5

Funding and its legal basis............................................................................................... 8

6

The market......................................................................................................................10

7

The competition.............................................................................................................13

8

Collaborative development .........................................................................................15

9

Challenges in everyday school life .............................................................................17

10 Openness ........................................................................................................................19
11 Open formats - the example flash and h5p .............................................................20
12 Licencing issues...............................................................................................................23
13 Sustainability ...................................................................................................................26
14 Pedagogical considerations .........................................................................................27
15 Navigating the material ................................................................................................36
16 User data .........................................................................................................................39
17 User-oriented design.....................................................................................................43
18 The technical framework conditions.........................................................................46
19 Quality assurance...........................................................................................................49
20 Professionalisation processes......................................................................................53
21 International cooperation ............................................................................................63
22 Future prospects ...........................................................................................................65
23 Conclusion.......................................................................................................................68
24 Notes on methods.........................................................................................................70
25 Systematic dissemination..............................................................................................71
26 Acknowlegements..........................................................................................................71
27 References ......................................................................................................................72
28 Imprint .............................................................................................................................73
29 Glossary............................................................................................................................74

1 Preliminary remarks and terminology

1 Preliminary remarks and terminology
A: That was the title of the talk I gave: “A sustainable large-scale model for OER” and that was kind of what is most
interesting for other countries as well because there are many initiatives around OER in the world but not all of
them are large-scale and not all of them has been running for a long time and show proof of being a sustainable
model. That is kind of in a nutshell why we are interesting for someone else.
Interview 1, 3-3
The above quote describes why the Nasjonal Digital
Læringsarena (NDLA) from Norway is interesting as an
example for other countries. No other country in the
world has experience with Open Educational Resources
(OER) with a comparable budget and time frame.
In the German discussion on open educational resources, Norway has also been frequently mentioned as an
example1 through contributions at OER conferences and
individual publications (Deutscher Bildungsserver, 2016).
However, many details remained unclear. The aim of this
study and the associated publication is to give readers an
insight into the developments and experiences of Norwegian colleagues. Nine NDLA employees are interviewed as well as the cooperation partners, a representative
from the area of education policy and a representative of
a schoolbook publishing house.
The topic of OER presents the opportunity to jointly address two current challenges; namely, the usage of ICT in
school and classroom teaching as well as inclusion (Müller, 2016), and to focus on the question: "How can teachers be supported in dealing with heterogeneity"? Here,
drawinging on Andreas Hinz (2002), the understanding
of inclusion reaches beyond the dimensions of impairments and takes into account manifold cultural, linguistic and social backgrounds as well as gender issues and
sexual orientation. The two challenges are both enormously complex and wide-ranging in their own rights.

Therefore, state financing from the budget that up to now
funds the publishers of schoolbooks (Muuß-Merholz &
Schaumburg, 2014, p.22) is probably the most realistic
way to achieve sustainable implementation. NDLA can
serve as a good example, even though it does not represent the priority area of inclusion so offensively. However, the more detailed analysis of the interviews shows
that NDLA is exemplary in many respects with regard to
the various dimensions of difference.
Following the UNESCO, “Open Educational Resources
(OER) are any type of educational materials that are in
the public domain or introduced with an open licence.
The nature of these open materials means that anyone
can legally and freely copy, use, adapt and reshare them.
OERs range from textbooks to curricula, syllabi, lecture
notes, assignments, tests, projects, audio, video and animation.” In the sense of accessibility for and following
the example of NDLA, the following publication, unlike
Kreutzer (2013, p.12) for example, also attaches importance to free availability without any barriers.
In addition to grassroots initiatives (Blees, Cohen & Massar, 2013, p.15), institutions in the federal states of Germany that developed in recent years, e.g. in Thuringia
(https://www.schulportal-thueringen.de/media/),
Berlin or Hamburg (https://www.digitallearninglab.
de/)) or are in the process of doing so, can also benefit
from the extensive experience gained in Norway.

1 For example in an interview by Christer Gundersen from NDLA with Jöran Muuß-Merholz held in April 2016 (https://open-educational-resources.de/oer036ndla-oer-in-norwegen/)

3

4

2 The advantages of OER

2 The advantages of OER
Before discussing the framework conditions and the specific experiences from Norway, a brief outline will be
given of what the interviewees consider to be the central
advantages of OER.
A central approach of NDLA leads all efforts back to the
question what is "best for learning", in contrast to the
question what is "best for business". In this context, it was
emphasized that the idea of copyright is diametrically opposed to the idea of learning and only serves to secure
the business model of the publishers.
As a consequence, NDLA and its cooperation partners
recommend to waiver classical copyright and the sole
economic exploitation of ideas and instead to offer other
people the chance to build on such ideas. This applies in
particular to digital material, where the creation of a digital
copy does not incur any additional costs, unlike analogue
printing, for example. It is undisputed that this calls traditional value chains into question and thus interferes with
publishers' previous business models. Notwithstanding,
the core task of policy makers in education is the provi­
sion of optimal support for pupils and teachers – and not
the preservation of business models and value chains.
Teachers in Norway are able to pursue this concept of
`building on the ideas of others´, but also other countries
can build on the software and content of NDLA. Free
licence models are also required to enable further development based on the Norwegian software. Free interfaces (API) for the content are a beginning, but ultimately
they remain insufficient.
One aspect resulting from the free licensing of content
is the cross-national, joint creation and further development of content, which has only become possible in
recent years due to the worldwide web.
So, that is interesting also with Google translate, we‘re
millions of people all around the world contributing
and it makes it better year by year. So that’s also in a
way, you know, sharing and increasing equality and a big
partnership. That’s very fascinating because once we
used to live in cottages in wood and talked to 10 people that lived around us. We never went abroad. And
now we’re sort of, we’re intertwined and we are developing and creating networks. This is in a way just like

you create a city where people get together and you
also create resources where people share ideas and
ideas come together. It’s in a way the same thing that
you create this huge common… what should I say…
conscience or awareness or space…
Interview 12, 142-142
Just as the construction of materials is becoming increasingly internationalized, its use is also possible worldwide. NDLA has designed this specifically without login and
password. This makes a contribution to the democratisation of learning processes, regardless of location and
age, as the worldwide spread of smartphones and other
access options continues to increase. The NDLA team is
also aware of this aspect and wants to make a conscious
contribution to it.

The best for learning is not necessarily
the best for business.
But we do something we believe in, I can only speak for
myself, trying to go international now just the idealism
in the fact that you actually want education for every­
one. You want all kids to learn, that´s what I like the
most. I have been to South-Africa and African countries, I have been to Asia, I have been to a lot of places
where they have their cellphone or their smartphone
and that´s about it. Just to bring education to everyone,
I think that´s a great idea.
Interview 11, 37-37
Since OER are in the case of NDLA always digital, the
advantages of digital media also apply. This includes the
integration of multimedia content such as videos, sound
files, interactive maps, graphics and task formats. Digital
content from publishers can also benefit from these possibilities.
Other benefits remain restricted to OER, such as greater
flexibility, accessibility for all and adaptability to students'
needs.
While the schoolbooks in Norway are updated every ten
years in accordance with the curricula, OER can be developed on an ongoing basis.

2 The advantages of OER

When we started, we started with subjects that were many students, like languages, Norwegian, mathematics, science and so on, and we are still developing in
new subjects, because it’s a huge amount of different
subjects in our schools and the Norwegian school system is in changing approximately every 10th year, we
have a new curriculum and new plans, and we have to
approve new books or digital items, so we hope to cope with that type of development, so we can cope and
not produce and then we are finished and not grow old
and then we have to wait for a new book, it will be a
continuing development, I hope.
Interview 9, 8-8
The faster development of students' everyday reality also
calls for educational materials that can be updated more
quickly.
The costs of OER differ from those of digital materials
from publishing houses, in that they are independent of
the number of students seeking access.
If you buy from NDLA or from a publisher, it’s same
thing for us, but when we can use the NDLA for one,
two, three or four years for the same price, if we’re
going to use the from one of the publisher, we have
to pay for each year and there are counties with more
pupils and then we have to pay more and we will have
a lack of subjects in the other end. So it’s about a system for getting as much as we can for our money, you
know, in an ordinary way, I think.
Interview 9, 22-22
Not all the advantages mentioned apply equally to all
OERs at this stage. Nonetheless, all OER providers can
design their offerings according to the NDLA model in
the sense of the greatest possible openness.
When I’ve been looking at other sites or open educational sites, it very often comes down to some kind
of login or download and print. I’ve been looking at
MOOCS for example, a lot of them are, you know,
‘print this pdf ’ or ‚copy this into that‘ and ‚watch the
video here and ask the questions here and print them
and email them’. They are very simple in a way, or a
very sort of still in the old school. So, I haven’t found
another site like NDLA which is so sort of open, just

5

OER can be updated quicker than
classic schoolbooks, which in Norway
follow the ten-year rhythm of curriculum development.

click and read and… very often it is some kind of you
need to download or you need to register and you
need to do this and that. And then you have a site that
offers ‘okay, we have 10.000 resources’ and then you
go and look and all it is, is links, links to other sites and
some of them are still up and some of them are down
and some of them had changed contents. So, I haven’t
found… NDLA is a set of menus and you know you
find it there. I know we have some issues but basically,
it’s all there and we don’t oversell it, we undersell it if
any. Searchable, lots of subjects, open, free, no hidden
text, no hidden agendas.
Interview 12, 144-144

6

3 The framework conditions in Norway

3 The framework conditions in Norway
The interviews showed that numerous framework conditions in Norway were unfavourable to the emergence
of a large, state-financed platform such as NDLA. How
it was possible to succeed is therefore all the more interesting.
In Norway, there is less need to save money than in other
countries.
It wasn’t the economy that was the driving idea to
establish NDLA, it was the quality of the learning resources.
Interview 9, 62-62
The number of pupils in Norway is much smaller
(200,000) than in other countries, so the savings potential
is much lower than in Germany or France, for example.
The number of pupils in Norway corresponds to that of
a large federal state in Germany (e.g. Lower Saxony).
The market for schoolbooks in Norway is dominated
by four strong publishers (Cappelen Damm, Aschehoug,
Gyldendal and Fagbokforlaget). They distribute special­
ised educational works covering a subject over multiple
school years, each of which has a very high market share.
Since the pupils write their solutions to the tasks in the
books, they can only be used once. The profits from such
publishing are correspondingly high.
The teacher unions oppose the development of OER for
various reasons. In addition to the fundamental rejection
of any change by conservative interest groups, there was a
discussion about the additional remuneration of teachers
for their work if, for example, the school administration
were to oblige them to make the materials produced by
the teachers during their working hours available under a
free licence. Criticism often refers to potential negative
developments as opposed to actual negative developments. Another aspect is the involvement of teachers in
the production of schoolbooks. The teachers involved

receive royalties from the textbook publishers and are
therefore opposed to NDLA because of potential loss
of earnings.
In addition to these hindering framework conditions,
there are others that are helpful for understanding the
Norwegian development..
Ten years ago, an initiative was launched to equip schools
with computers and wifi, so that each pupil now has a
laptop with internet access. The teachers, therefore, had
a period of ten years to adapt their lessons in this respect. All teachers also have a central login system via their
schools. Other platforms can build on this identification.
The curriculum, which is binding throughout the country,
simplifies the development of digital materials because it
opens up more latitude for materials that lead to comparable competence developments than mandatory schoolbooks or teaching materials.
There are 19 counties in Norway. Oslo has a special role
because it is both a county as well as a municipality. The
counties are responsible for upper secondary educa­
tion, the municipalities for primary and lower secondary
education.
In addition, there are two common written languages in
Norway (Bokmål and Nynorsk), so that materials must
be available in both languages.

In spite of the hindering conditions in Norway, it has been possible to build up
a comprehensive, professional offer of large scale OER for secondary education.

4 The political perspective

7

4 The political perspective
The Norwegian Publishers fight against OER and try to influence policy makers.
Since the counties are responsible this proves to be more difficult than on a
national level.
NDLA's failure to engage itself at the political level has
the consequence that when Norwegian politicians are ap­
proached on the topic of educational materials, they focus
on the needs of publishers and not on those of students.
The politicians are not concerned with reusability, the
possibility of further development or the question of free
access. In return, they are under constant pressure from
publishers.
In dialogues with publishers, politicians often shift the responsibility for NDLA to the county level. This happens in
ignorance of the matter and leads to statements such as
"OER stands against innovation". It is therefore a central
task to make clear that the majority of financial resources
(94%) will continue to be available to the market or in
part create a new market.

Although such a withdrawal may seem helpful to demand,
there are currently no other efforts by other counties to
withdraw from NDLA.
The newspaper publishers are – understandably – also on
the side of the publishers and position themselves clearly
against NDLA.
Nevertheless, it is annoying for those involved when the
politicians responsible at the county level do not have the
courage to stand up for NDLA and give them support.

Lobbying by publishers also plays a role at the county lev­
el and led, for example, to the Akerhus region withdrawing from NDLA for one year and NDLA losing 12% of
its funding.
So what happened was, that they payed money to the
schools directly and said ‘You should buy learning material, digital learning material for this sum of money.’
And the county said ‘Oh, you shouldn’t use NDLA
because we have pulled out.’ And they said ‘Ok, in a
year’s time we will ask you how it went.’ So politicians
asked schools how it went. First thing they said: they
hadn’t used the money, they had used ten percent of
the money. Ok, strange. Next, are you using NDLA,
and they saw on the traffic, it had increased by 270%
in one year. And that is because they said ‘Don’t use
NDLA!’ (chuckling), then they will use NDLA, so
(laugh­ing), so nobody else and they just moved in again
and they didn’t have to pay for the year, but they were
outside, so it’s like a club.
Interview 1, 145-145

Communicating with education policy
makers is essential so that they have
the students' needs in mind and not
just publishers' needs.

8

5 Funding and its legal basis

5 Funding and its legal basis
The schoolbook publishers have failed with their complaints before the EFTA court: the
funding and preparation of OER cannot be considered as inadmissible state funding.
According to the law, the 19 counties of Norway are
responsible for providing the 200,000 upper-secondary
students with free analogue and digital materials. This is
the result of a legislative amendment adopted in 2006.
The text of the law stipulates that pupils should have
access to high-quality educational material in digital and
analogue form.
„Opplæringa i offentleg vidaregåande skole eller i lærebedrift er gratis. Fylkeskommunen har ansvaret for å halde elevane med nødvendige trykte og digitale læremiddel
og digitalt utstyr.“ (https://lovdata.no/dokument/NL/
lov/1998-07-17-61#KAPITTEL_3)
Translated, this quote says that learning in a state school
or in a company that provides vocational training is free
of charge. The county is responsible for providing pupils
with the necessary printed and digital learning materials
and digital equipment.
This change in the law opened up the latitude to create
NDLA.
So one of the messages from me to all of the people,
that are wondering: how could we make something like
this happen, I always said ‘if you are lucky enough to
achieve structural shifts you should run fast and in the
right direction, because you have a vacuum and possibility to do something which doesn’t happen otherwise.
A bureaucracy in a government, in the counties, you
very seldom get yelled at, if you do the same job you
did last year, so there is small incentive to do changes.
But if the law changes, the structure changes, if a lot of
money falls in your hand, they didn’t fall in your hand
last year, you have a responsibility to do something
about that money.
Interview 1, 38-38
This change in the law meant that parents were no longer
responsible for purchasing books and materials. How­
ever, the counties resisted the possible temptation to cut

costs by introducing standardized uniform books/materials for all schools. This leads to a wide range of educa­
tional materials, of which NDLA is a part.
The counties receive money from the state to provide
materials and are then responsible for implementation.
Almost all of the 19 counties – with the exception of
Oslo (where the schoolbook publishers are located) –
are involved in financing the platform and its content. The
main users – with increasing traffic – are the schools in
Oslo, which benefit from the materials without participat­
ing in their creation.
The participating counties spend 20% of their schoolbook budget on NDLA ($50 per student). In 2016, this
amounted to 2.6 million US dollars. NDLA currently provides materials for 80 subjects. The amount per subject
and student is therefore less than one dollar.
The publishers brought an action before the EFTA Court
against this form of financing NDLA by the state (with
jurisdiction for the European Free Trade Area together
with the ECJ) and lost it (EFTA Surveillance Authority,
2011). As a consequence, other EU states as well as Iceland and Liechtenstein can follow the Norwegian model
in the conception of their laws and avoid lengthy legal
proceedings.
The remaining 80% of the schoolbook budget is still used
by schools for schoolbooks and materials. There is no
effort on the part of the counties to increase the share of
NDLA and, unlike the publishers claim, there is no intention to replace all printed materials.

20% of the resources for schoolbooks in
secondary education in Norway is used to
create OER.

5 Funding and its legal basis

The use of funds can be broken down into content and
organisation. From an organisational point of view, 30%
of the funds are used to pay teachers seconded from
schools to NDLA and 70% are returned to the market
to buy services from outside. This means that 94% of the
money for schoolbooks is still available to the market.
In respect of its different tasks, the budget must be bal­
anced between the development of new content, the
development of the new platform (see page 48) and the
revision of old content (see page 52).
Although the focus of financial resources on the development of the new platform is seen as a challenge in part, it
is supported by all interviewees because they understand
the necessity. At the same time, there is a desire to use
more resources for content development in the coming
years. This leads partly to the fact that the interviewees
consciously want to refrain from the development of certain functionalities (e.g. functions of a learning management system), which they would very well want to use if
there were unlimited means.

9

Most of the money from NDLA, about
70%, is returned to the market via public
tenders. This means that 94% of the
money for schoolbooks remains available
to the market.

NDLA returns part of the money to the counties to pay
the seconded teachers. The participation of the counties
in the development varies depending on the concrete
projects.
Funds must also be used for the professionalisation of the
organisation (e.g. examination of legally sound, Europewide tenders).

10

6 The market

6 The market
NDLA's relationship to the market plays a special role in
the interviews. In addition to the question of the acquisition of content on the market, the main issue here is the
conflict with schoolbook publishers.
The aim of NDLA is not to create content itself, but to
provide students with high-quality materials.

The Norwegian schoolbook publishers refuse
to participate in the OER market. The desire
on the part of NDLA to cooperate with the
publishers is not fulfilled.

As shown above, 70% of the available funds are returned
to the market. This is done through thematic public tenders.
One condition of the invitation to tender is the criterion
of openness in the sense of a free licence.
But we will say that ‘what is best for learning?’ Well
actually openness-equality. Openness-equality that
means that we, when we buy something, that we are
obligated to say, that what has a quality for us, we once
pay for it.
Could we pay for quality?
Yes of course, we could pay for quality!
Well, what is the problem? Just do it!
Well, you will piss off the publishers.
We don’t care! The market is the market and we have
an obligation to the students, we have an obligation to
ourselves.
Interview 1, 21-21
The acquisition of content under cc licence is a challenge
for NDLA.
The initial situation was that NDLA wanted to acquire
content from the publishers in order to make it available
on its own platform.
Interestingly enough, the schoolbook publishers who are
members of "Forlegger-foreningen" completely refused
to cooperate with NDLA due to the question of licences.
So we can't sell our content on a Creative Commons
license and then we don’t have the rights anymore, for
what we have been developing for 200 years. So, we
are not selling to NDLA, why should we?
I: Was there at any moment in time where you thought
‘we could cooperate with them’?

A: Yes, we had some discussions but there was not
a substantial model for the publishing houses at that
time. Because when they don’t give it for free we have
offers, we have licenses, we have rights. You have to…
There is a system around our content, what is not based on that everybody else just can do whatever they
want to do with it.
Interview 8, 51-53
Interestingly enough, the schoolbook publishers who are
members of "Forlegger-foreningen" completely refused
to cooperate with NDLA due to the question of licences.
A: Yeah, let me put it this way: If you’re selling cars
and you don’t want to sell the cars that the customers
want to buy, how long will you live in that market? It’s a
cheap point, but I think because if we are buying things
from the publisher to put in our platform, we aren’t
stealing from them, so we want them to cooperate in
a model, not because of we are one bit of the market,
it’s because we want our students to have opportunities to choose from a lot of systems. If the publisher
got it the way they want, you have to buy each of them
for, just for an amount of time.
Interview 9, 14-14
This refusal by schoolbook publishers appears interesting in the context of economic models of supply and
demand. Instead of naming a price that does justice to the
production effort, participation in the market is refused.
At the same time, this refusal creates an alternative, new
market.
This new market includes start-ups and smaller companies as well as the state broadcaster or the University of
Bergen.

6 The market

The startup Cerpus in Lofoten, for example, grew from
three to 25 employees, due to a close cooperation with
NDLA, because they knew how to combine technolog­
ical competence with pedagogical understanding. The
experience gained is now being used to drive their own
projects forward. To this end, companies can make use
of the interfaces (APIs) developed by NDLA and also use
the NDLA database free of charge themselves. This is
possible because NDLA places great emphasis on making
high quality learning content accessible rather than insisting on being the only provider of the content.
However, the cooperation with smaller companies also
produced unintended effects. Smaller companies quickly
became dependent on NDLA because NDLA had bought
everything they could produce over a longer period of
time. When there was a phase in which NDLA bought
less, the search for other clients proved to be difficult, as
the schoolbook publishers, for example, refused further
cooperation if they knew about the previous coopera­
tion with NDLA.
The smaller providers also had reservations about the
Creative-Commons licence. Here a clear naming of the
authors (and maybe contact details) can help them to acquire new orders.
Overall, the interesting question of the further development of sustainable business models around OER
remains. It is also important to be cautious and not to
leave the business with the user data of the students or
teachers to individual providers. Equally critical must be
the handling of materials financed by third parties. For
example, a cookbook for schoolchildren was reported,
which was refinanced by the Norwegian Meat Association (matprat). Here, it would have to be clarified to what
extent financing by business, politics or lobbies would
have to be stated on the publication.
An interesting model of the "Kommune Forlaget" picks
up the licence structure of NDLA. It used NDLA's

11

10-year-old texts and images, which are under a free
licence, revised them and created a book version of the
material, which is now being sold to schools. The reworked content was sold back to NDLA under a free
licence. This results in a cyclical revision model from
which both sides benefit.

The revision or update of OER content
can also be ensured via the market.

Legally sound invitations to tender are more complicat­
ed with regard to the description of requirements for
conceptual, creative work than for ordering computers
or chairs. Since teachers generally have no experience in
this area, it is important to mediate between the requirements of the tendering process and the pedagogical requirements. Thus, criteria have to be defined and a selection made based on these criteria and the price. This all
has to be recorded and contracts have to be worked out.
Schoolbook publishers complain about a low willingness
to pay for digital content. Therefore, a large part of the
content is offered free of charge. However, the price of
the offers is similar to that of paper versions. Alternative
pricing models such as the sale of smartphone apps (100
sales for 2 € instead of 10 sales for 20 €) are not used.
Bundles of online and offline materials are also only being
discussed.
So far, there are four platforms for digital schoolbooks
operated in parallel by the publishers. The task of the
state, from the publishers view, is to provide technical infrastructure in the sense of an identity provider or as funders. The Danish model is an example, where the state
assumes 50% of the costs for digital content when schools
purchase materials from publishers. Using an identity

Legally compliant calls for tender require professionalization.

12

6 The market

management system, schoolbooks can be assigned and
billed to individual pupils across publishing houses.
Also mentioned is the Belgian model "KlasCement", whose
materials partly refer to schoolbooks and which uses
OER as digital wreath products in addition to the book.
This does not question the business model of schoolbook publishers, but the dependence on schoolbooks
remains, and the model does not guarantee free access
to educational materials, as NDLA does.

7 The competition

13

7 The competition
No one (even nobody at NDLA) wants NDLA to be the only content provider.
Everyone is in favor of varied offers, where the teacher is responsible to choose.

The competition between NDLA and the suppliers represented on the market was often the subject of discussion. The role of digital resources, for example, but also
the question of the diversity of offers is at stake.
Publishers are concerned that NDLA could become the
only provider of digital resources and thus the only source.
This would deprive teachers of choice.
But when we have NDLA as our competitor, and they
get 70 million a year, it's hard to compete. Especially
when you also get the price on our products, when
they give it for free. So that’s the big challenge and
that’s the risk for that in… we can come to a situation where is only one alternative for digital learning
materials. In the long run the publishing houses can’t
manage to give all the digital materials for free, when
the digital is increasing. More from the development
side from our side and they’re using it also more and
more in the schools.
Interview 3, 7-7
At the same time, several members of NDLA and cooperating partners emphasize that no one wants NDLA
as an all-embracing single provider or questions the ratio
of 20% for NDLA and 80% for the traditional book market.
A: Yes, I see, that if it’s so that NDLA is so good that
we have dealt with all kind of views in one single subject, that would be dangerous, then NDLA had be­
come the thing I don’t want! I want it to be a supplement for the others and it’s, I think it’s a limit how
much our county can cope with in all kind of things.
There will be some subjects that we don’t take care
of, so I think we have to take serious the opinion from
the publishers.
Interview 9, 26-26

All those who comment on this, wish to continue to
receive a variety of different offers. The state is seen as
responsible in this respect. Norwegian publishers are already receiving additional support from the exemption of
all books from value-added tax (25%).
Beyond that, the publishers are well positioned as they
also control the distribution structures:
A: It is a bit weird but that all refers to the lock in I
was talking about, 'cause if you were a company, your
deepest wish would be to have a monopoly. And the
publishing houses in Norway, they own not only the
publishing but they also own the distribution which is
the companies that distribute books to the bookshops
and they also own the bookshops, so they have the
entire revenue stream from. And that “lock in”-kind of
way of thinking about or doing business, it also is sort
of propagated into the school system.
Interview 10, 67-67
Even if NDLA had been implemented as a commercial
enterprise, from the publishers' point of view, competition under the condition of free licences would not be
conceivable.
Interesting in the context of the discussion about competition is the following broader view on sources of information and debate, which encompasses more than a
textbook or a website:
I: If you could wish for something for the next ten
years, what would it be?
A: That, not in NDLA and not in the publisher’s minds,
and I stress, not in the NDLA as well, that we produce
a book on paper or a subject on the internet that are
trying to tell our pupils that if you read this, that you

14

7 The competition

Digital resources are not seen as a substitute for books.

have learned everything you can learn in this subject. I
don’t like the idea of one book coping with one subject
in the school. I wish in the future, that when we are
dealing with a curriculum for our students, they can find
the way of learning that suits themselves, something
in one book, something in another book, something
in the computer, something to speak with the teacher,
something to speak with the grandpa or whatever.
Because we have to realize that future good citizens

and workers have to analyze, see things together,
choose and be able to cooperate, so I think my wish
is that we shall support another way of learning than
we are trying to do today, the debate about between
NDLA and the publisher is far away about a debate
about an old-fashioned learning-view. So I think we
have to change our way to deal with these things in
the future.
Interview 9, 59-60

8 Collaborative development

8 Collaborative development
Expanding and updating large-scale OER platforms require capacities that in the
long term cannot be met by editorial teams alone.

Due to the geographical situation in Norway and the
cross-nation financing of NDLA, a very digitally orient­
ed, spatially distributed cooperation has been necessary
from the outset.
After the initial development of structures and content in
subject-specific editorial teams, the development process
became more open and collaborative. For the development of materials in the fields of history, religion and sociology, workshops were held with participants from all
walks of society with an interest in the subject area and
its communication.
These include, for example, museums, the Bureau of Statistics, and universities. Synergy effects can arise here if
these institutions also use Creative Commons licences.
For the institutions, this leads to a greater reach and the
embedding of content in larger subject-based contexts.
But what we do is we make quality assurance on this
and if many big museums have animations, they use
hundreds and thousands of Norwegian kroner on each
animation. And they can give it to us for free. And it
is better for us to take that material contextualize it
for secondary school in Norway and that will be much
better resource than we could have if we used 50000
kroner on producing it ourselves.
Interview 3, 49-49
Such cooperation, however, takes time, which NDLA has
at its disposal as a state institution without the pressure
of financial success. This cooperation with external institutions (e.g. the Office of Statistics) then enables, for
example, the automatic updating of NDLA content via
interfaces (APIs) of the cooperation partners.
In addition, there is a discussion on the extent to which
third parties (teachers, pupils and interested external
parties) can be involved in a structured way, so that, for

example, specialist networks are created that are involved
in the revision of content.
This also applies to the creation of content for subjects
that are only taught rarely and are therefore commercially uninteresting for publishers. It is also unrealistic for
NDLA to set up specialized editorial teams for all subjects of vocational training without changing the budget. Here, committed teachers can take on smaller task
packages and receive a work contract for the equivalent
of 3,000 €.
A: Well, you know, a lot of the subjects are not commercial, in a sense that it doesn’t pay off to create a
traditional book, because there are not enough students to buy them. In these subjects, teachers often
come up with an idea of their own and create their
own sort of learning resources. And I think that if you
can get four, five, six teachers to cooperate and say
okay, you can have this one, I can have that one from
you…. I think they're willing to cooperate because, and
again, they don’t have to do all the work themselves
and… the quality of work improves… and it's also interesting to learn how other teachers work. So I think
they will find that it is in their own interest to cooperate, because they can’t just go to the book shop and buy
a new textbook. The publishers don't have a …, well
they don't see the commercial potential in it. I’m talking
now about a lot of subjects in, within vocational stud­
ies, and also in general studies at the second or third
level. We’re sort of just scraping by, you know, with
resources that a book can offer. So I think that teachers
will see that it's in their own interest to cooperate and
participate. And of course, a web site offers so much
more functionality, than a book of course. But I mean,
publishers can also create websites and some of them
have created great webpages, so everyone can do that.
We have a system in NDLA with what we call teacher
contracts and that's also a sort of a, a way to sort of

15

16

8 Collaborative development

deal with this. You pick teachers who show a particular
interest, or who are creating or who like to write. Then
you offer them a contract of let's say 30.000 Norwegian Kronars and during the year they produce learning
resources. Then you agree….okay, you do some…
you look at these literary tasks or you do this topic..
and then they hand in. That is also a very efficient way
of working.
Interview 12, 20-20
In this context, it is important that the cooperation partners approaching NDLA plan from the beginning and not
only at the end of their project, because then it becomes
more difficult to integrate the contents. The cooperation

with the University of Bergen, for example, was more
difficult than necessary because licences had not been clarified upfront. Here a checklist or roadmap for external
cooperation partners might be helpful..

Teachers and students can be involved in the
creation and revision of OER content.

9 Challenges in everyday school life

9 Challenges in everyday school life
The systematic training of teachers and creating linkages to teacher education
are a challenge for OER platforms.
As in other countries, the ICT competence of teachers
in Norway varies widely. In the last 5 years, however,
there has been a noticeable improvement.
This may be due to the generous provision of IT infrastructure to schools, which led to a qualification offensive.
A: You know, Norway is the land of milk and honey so
I realize. Perhaps it’s not a good start for a country to
start with a deal to spend a huge amount of money to
give the computers for free, I’m not sure if that’s the
right way but it was the way it come out. So we had
spent a lot of resources to develop the competences
between the teachers to deal with this way of learn­
ing, some teachers are very good and some teachers
are just clinging to the book and use the computer
for certain exercises and this is the way, so it’s very
diverse.
Interview 9, 58-58
This advanced IT competence is also evident in the applications for positions at NDLA from teachers who –
unlike in the past – have generally already had contact
with OER and Creative Commons. However, this is particularly the case at upper secondary level.
Contact to OER and CC licences is not yet synonymous with competence in dealing with OER. NDLA has
developed a platform that clearly informs employees
about how to deal with OER. This could also be used (in
further training) by teachers.
Cooperation with universities and practical phases in
the field of teacher training is one of the areas of work
in NDLA that is not yet particularly developed. Here,
there may still be potential for more intensive cooperation in order to benefit from the work and experience
of each other.

In addition, the question of the required digital competence on part of pupils and teachers arises. Is the
consumption of multimedia content sufficient or should
it not be about the creative creation of content?
Accordingly, other contents of teacher training and
further education are required.
But I’m also aware that the problem is that they know
how – there is discussion about the digital skill sets,
what is it? They [the students] can do the swiping, gam­
ing and the what not. But they can’t actually use sort
of digital skills that you are actually going to use when
you go out working. There is no way you going to do a
PS4 controller in a publishing house. But what you do
need to use is Word, Excel and you need web editors
to make you own webpages. That’s the kind of digital skills they should be focused on instead of doing
educational resources made by publishers, which use
multiple-choice questions for history. There is no digital
teaching at all.
Interview 10, 179-179
From the perspective of the teachers, the continuous
availability of the material (in unchanged form) is of
particular importance. It can be frustrating if the URL,
which worked yesterday, the next day leads to a void
or a changed text in the classroom. Therefore, NDLA's
archive function is very helpful in providing a reliable
working basis for students and teachers. It should be examined to what extent such a function could be included
in an introductory video for teachers.
The question of technical availability also falls under the
category of reliability. Even if the responsibility for malfunctions lies with the technical provider of the website,
subsequent dissatisfaction is directed against the offering
institution.

17

18

9 Challenges in everyday school life

The temporal continuity of OER content through an archive function creates
security for the teachers.
Of course, we talked about what to do if you should
start a similar initiative and that is, I think… you make
sure that the editor, the production system is up and
running and bug free. And you make sure that you cooperate with schools that have the necessary facilities.
Because if the network is very bad and if the access
to the computers are not sufficient it will reflect badly on your initiative. So, it’s better to grow in a way
that things work because the teachers don’t… if the

provider of the web server or the network provider
hasn’t done its job properly and your content is not
showing up properly, you can make sure that the
teacher… , they blame you. So, you need to make sure
it will work in the classroom, you can’t say ‘okay, on
that day, the network provider didn‘t provide what they
had promised us, it doesn’t work. You get the blame.
Interview 12, 148-148

10 Openness

19

10 Openness
The openness of NDLA affects both the developed platform software and the content.
A central question that NDLA has repeatedly asked it­
self and is still asking is how the budget can be used to
achieve goals, as sensibly as possible This includes the
infrastructure for providing content as well as the content itself.
In terms of a cost-effective solution for the infrastructure, it is necessary to check whether there is reliable
open source software that meets one's own needs. In
this case, it would not be necessary to develop your
own solution or to buy or rent additional software. Instead, one could build on this existing possibility. The
experience with the open source content management
system Drupal showed that an individual solution be­
came necessary after a few years. Thus, this was newly
developed according to the requirements of a state-run
OER platform and made available under a free licence
on Github (https://github.com/NDLANO).
The creeping death of Adobe Flash showed: if no satisfactory open solution is available, then it might make
sense to develop one instead of entering a closed ecosystem, from which one can only find the way out with
pain. How NDLA reacted to Steve Jobs rejection of
Flash on the iPad will be discussed in more detail in the
following chapter.
As far as content is concerned, NDLA is prepared to
pay a reasonable price for the creation of high-quality
content. The openness of the content is (as far as possible) a non-negotiable criterion, which results from the
requirement of "high quality". If materials are not subject
to copyright, students can deal with them creatively in a
completely different way.
It’s better for the students to be able to share it, to
reproduce it to be in a dialogue with their own learn­
ing material and also they are more critical, when they
use open learning material, because they have to ask
themselves who has written these. It’s not just the
publisher but that is something else, it is a person.
Interview 1, 21-21

Thanks to Steve Jobs, openness at NDLA
is not just limited to the content of OER,
but also includes the software and formats
of delivery.
Openness requires transparency of sources and a critical examination of the authors and the information.
This desire for critical discourse and the joint further
development of the materials is also the reason why
"Arena" as a place of discussion is part of the name of
NDLA.
Direct, unrestricted access to all learning content is called for and implemented radically by NDLA:
In the future, do preach about openness! That's
the most important thing. No barriers, no login, no
boundaries and no anything. You're free to use it.
Interview 5, 195-195
The ideas about open licences on the software side
are shared by some, but not all, cooperation partners.
In one interview, it was argued that not all software
is necessarily open source, but that connectivity and
openness should be ensured through open standards
and open interfaces (APIs). This also includes the documentation of the interfaces so that open content can be
exchanged via them. In particular, the question is raised
how cooperating partners can sustainably finance themselves if the software is under open source licence.

20

11 Open formats – the example flash and h5p

11 Open formats – the example flash and h5p
In education, the software h5p was developed with the
support of NDLA as an open standard and as an alternative to Adobe Flash.
The starting point for the development of h5p was
Steve Jobs' decision not to support Adobe Flash on the
iPad. This turned out to be a big problem for the providers of multimedia materials in the education sector, as
their content was no longer accessible on a widespread
platform.
As a result, NDLA was approached by cooperation
partners who had also worked a lot with Flash previously and developed a Flash editor for NDLA. They then
offered to develop an open framework.
So they approached us and said ‘Ok, last time you said
it should be an open frame-work. This time, we should
make an open frame-work but we should do it for you
and it will be totally free and you will be the client that
says what he wants and we will make everything that
you need, it should be an open framework and that
was like their flying start and they are now making international success.
Interview 1, 137-137
The company Joubel developed the h5p format as an
open standard. This can be integrated as a plugin into
numerous platforms (drupal, wordpress, moodle, the
new NDLA platform). Due to the licence, other companies can further develop the platform in case Joubel
should no longer exist one day.
A: I don't think you should be religious about Open
Source. I think it has its use. So, what we were experiencing what happened when flash went away and all
the costs, different organizations like the NDLA has
put into making their Flash based content into HTML5

content, which was very very costly. So, I think people
would be very reluctant to put something into a new
platform that is not Open Source. If Flash had been
Open Source it definitely would have survived longer.
So I think, it has to be Open Source, if we want to
make a standard for all interactive content in education
or in the world it must be Open Source. So it's just the
right licensing for this software.
Interview 7, 39-39
In the case of the development of an alternative format
that better meets the requirements, content from the
open h5p format can be more easily transferred to the
new format than content from closed formats such as
Flash.
With the open format, other educational institutions
have also adopted h5p and commissioned Joubel to create more content types according to their own needs.
Meanwhile, the development is supported by 25 organisations from 10 different countries (e.g. Victoria University from Australia). NDLA and all other users benefit
from these new modules.
Due to the open format, translations are much easier, so
that OER platforms can more easily recreate multimedia
content in their own language.
Things we sold to NDLA, we sold the e-lectures to them
and I think the price went, it was over half a million kroner for one hour animated e-lecture. It's quite expensive
so they could only afford four hours or something per
subject. And obviously that's far too little to cover an
entire subject in a good way. And we see the same problem. The publishers in Norway their budgets per subject is much much smaller than the NDLA’s. So, they are
nowhere close to afford really good content that covers
the entire subject. Norway is a quite rich country, even if

By financing the development of h5p, NDLA has laid the foundation for an open
educational multimedia format that benefits many other educational institutions
(including those outside Norway).

21

Figure 1: Content types of h5p (https://h5p.org/content-types-and-applications)

22

11 Open formats – the example flash and h5p

we are small we have okay budgets, so other countries
have the same problem. So, in order to get really good
content for the entire subject you need reuse in a really
big way. And in order to achieve that you need a standard for how the interactive content is created so that
NDLA can share all that content and someone in South
Korea instead of building it up all over again explaining
Pythagoras via interactive technology for the ten, you
know they are probably hundred thousand, times. Has
it been done then they instead they just translate and do
this content and they have a really good start. I hope we
will get there. It looks good right now.
Interview 7, 41-41
Through the integration of translation platforms, the
first translation into other languages can be done faster
and cheaper than if the editorial teams themselves were
to do it.
Accessibility and access to smartphones and tablets are
guaranteed by h5p.
In future, the content created with h5p under a Creative-Commons licence can be shared via an h5p-hub,
so that content can be used more easily. Here, too, the
question of metadata is raised in order to ensure that it
can be found.
The previous content in Flash format is currently being
elaborately transferred (partly by screencasts) into new
formats.

The content types include many different formats (see
Figure 1).
The frequently used content types are interesting. For
example, the type Course Presentation, which resembles a PowerPoint presentation, is one of the most frequently used. At the same time, it presents the greatest
difficulties to the developers, as the design varies on different end devices.
Some formats also contain voice input, whereby the development of own voice input solutions was omitted in
this case and therefore was based on the solutions of
Apple, Google and Microsoft.
Switching from NDLA to h5p does not mean that all
users of NDLA are happy with the replacement of Flash
by h5p. Particularly the freedom in design of Flash is
missed. Nevertheless, everyone is aware of the potential of h5p and the need to switch to an open standard.
With h5p, Joubel aims to develop the format into a
worldwide standard. The speed of the development
will be of decisive importance. Is it fast enough to
implement a sufficiently large number of formats and
a large amount of content via h5p? There are comparable initiatives from Kineo with Adapt Learning,
which, however, rely on SCORM and their own server
structure instead of plug-ins. They also focus more on
in-company training.

12 Licencing issues

12 Licencing issues
Licencing issues are a central, yet complex, issue in the
context of Open Educational Resources. For a general
overview on this topic, the reader can refer to the remarks made by Kreutzer (2013). NDLA, too, has addressed many different aspects of licensing issues.
The free licence is seen as an indispensable working basis as it provides the fundament for students and teachers to further develop their own materials.
So, if we know that pupils learn more if they get to
develop their own learning resources, then we have to
find a way to present that to our users. And in that
aspect we are, as open educational resources as a concept and creative commons as a licenses, is essentially
for us. Because if the pupils and the teachers can’t edit
on our material then we probably can’t offer them the
best learning resources. And you couldn’t do that on a
copyright license, that would be illegal. That is probably
the one small detail which is going to make this whole
area within education disruptive.
Interview 3, 7-7
NDLA is currently investing time in the verification of
old licencing information. Especially in the case of older
content, there are unclear licencing situations. In order
to avoid such a situation and possible warnings due to
licence infringements, it is necessary from the outset to
implement a system for the accurate documentation of
cc licences.
Depending on the combination, the use of different
licences can lead to numerous traps. Therefore, efforts
are being made to use cc-by or cc-by-sa for everything.
These are the preferred licences because they are the
most open possible. The use of cc-0 is not possible for
Norwegian authors due to the Norwegian copyright
law. At a minimum, the licence "naming and share-alike"
(cc-by-sa) is expected as a guideline for the seconded
teachers paid by the state. The licence with the sharealike regulation is also intended to encourage others to
make their content available under a free licence.
So, we should have everything on same license.
I: Are there any efforts to change licenses to get it all
to one?

A secure documentation of OER
platform licenses right from the start
avoids concerns in the future.
A: Yeah, because especially in… to get it right, we
know that the one license that will be easier, but also
when we should mix this together. Like I made a video
and I need a picture almost, the most of our picture is
non-commercial and share-alike. And then I get put together with a video I make no-derivs. But what license
should be on the video? It lasts. And the picture and
rest, the multilicensing part, that’s difficult. Like share-alike… you can’t put a no-derivs on a share-alike
object.
Interview 4, 32-34
As long as the licences are not all the same, an approach
used by NDLA to create transparency is to display the
licences bundled at the bottom of the page to do justice
to the right holders. The upcoming version of NDLA's
platform contains simplified menus that help users to
continue using content and gain information about the
actual rights and obligations of the specific CC licence in
understandable language.
So far, students have had limited awareness of copyright
law and the use of CC licences.
So, for the users – they don’t care! The users, they
don’t know that we are using open learning resources. They couldn’t care less. They are not interested
in OER. Why should they be? They just want to learn.
Interview 1, 102-102
An exception to this are pupils who have chosen the
field of media at upper secondary level.
Information about licences and their implications for
further use is important for teachers as well. The issue
of licences is also addressed as a barrier to the sharing
of content by teachers. Based on a vague awareness of
the copyright infringements committed and a lack of
knowledge on how to avoid them, teachers are reluctant to share content online.

23

24

12 Licencing issues

Figure 2: Comprehensibly displayed license information

When presenting the CC licence, another issue is the
question of how relevant revisions are to be identified
in a traceable and transparent manner. The question of
the naming of relevant revisions is particularly important
when a wiki-like model of revisions is developed. When
is a contribution an addition to the content that deviates
so far from the original that it should be indicated?
It is also interesting to purchase images from professional databases under a free licence. NDLA buys professional images under a free licence from ScanPix (cc-bync). This company in turn buys images from iStock. This
way iStock images are freed for non-commercial use.
When creating own pictures under cc-licence, the Norwegian personal rights law represents an interesting but
hypothetical challenge, since the persons depicted have

the possibility to revoke their consent. However, concerns about the misuse of cc content, e.g. by extremist
political parties, are unfounded due to the abuse prevention clause in the cc licence.
So far, NDLA has not received any court warnings due
to licensing issues. In case of difficulties, NDLA was
contacted and subsequently removed the content. The
use of music under a free licence on Youtube is more
time-consuming, as incorrect rights claims can occur,
especially with classical music, since several orchestras
have recorded the same music. When purchasing music
licences for other music, the Creative Commons licence
is restricted to non-commercial, no derivatives.
Similar negotiation processes with rights owners are
necessary for films and texts. Film rights are one of the

12 Licencing issues

NDLA is committed to providing teachers and students with understandable
information about licences and their consequences for learning processes.
exceptions to the cc licence. Nevertheless, they are
available to all users in Norway via geoblocking without
login. All you need to know is a school and whether you
are a pupil or a teacher. The costs are limited annually
and charged according to the usage.
And also the right holder said that ‘oh we need logon’
and I said ‘okay, but you have to sell it somewhere
else because I’m not paying for it because it’s logon.
Because it should be completely open without logon’.
And then he said ‘oh but we need something’. So this
is what happens. So look, I may click on this one and it
says ‘You have to click on a box that say you are a pupil
at a school in Hordaland county. If this is not correct
click here.’ Okay, I click here and then I will choose a
different county, I will choose school, I will determine
if I was a librarian, teacher or student. I say librarian
and I will click save. I will then choose if I want to have
subtitles in Bokmål and Nynorsk and I will say save and
it will start play. So I haven’t logged on, I just said which
school I am attending.

market that will allow current literature to be embedded, at least in extracts.
From the point of view of cooperation partners, the
dispute over licences has been an integral part of a development process. Over the course of time, it became
apparent that the hoped-for resale of the contents to
third parties did not work in a promising manner.
A: We were also in the beginning a little bit reluctant
to their licensing wishes. So, in the beginning we didn’t
give them Creative Commons and we didn’t give them
exactly the licenses they wanted. We had board members who were quite traditional and who were hoping
that we could resell the content we made for NDLA to
others. And that meant don’t put Creative Commons
licenses on it. Luckily, there were many others as well
who thought the same so they didn’t get, I don’t think
they got Creative Commons license content in the beginning from anyone, at least not a lot.
I: And how did this change?

I: Okay. So basically everyone in Norway can do that?
A: Yeah, with very many films, very many short films,
animations, documentaries, TV-shows. So, we have actually a lot of German films, when I come think about
it. Because we have German as subject. So we got the
rightholders organization to agree to this and every­
thing is okay.
Interview 1, 83-85
Free licences are also difficult to obtain in the field of
literature. Some of these are classics that become public
domain after 75 years. It remains to be seen to what
extent there will be more open formats on the literature

A: I think it was we saw that we didn't succeed in reselling it anyway so why insist on it? When they did their
purchases, they had their own criteria for what kind of
license you offer and I think that criteria got a bigger
percentage of the total score. And we just decided that
we have created stuff for NDLA for a while we are
unable to resell it so it's no point in... We can just as
well get some more points when we compete for the
next jobs from NDLA. But I think it was pretty much
like that. It took some time before their philosophy and
vision that we started to believe in it.
Interview 7, 53-55

25

26

13 Sustainability

13 Sustainability
Thanks to the cc licenses, NDLA is more future-proof than predecessor projects
which disappeared after the end of the financing.
In interviews with NDLA members who had previously
worked in other projects it became clear that these temporary projects were often not very sustainable.
I also get to know a lot of people around the country doing other things, very interesting projects. And
nobody took care of them, they were funded for two
or three years and then they died, so we were looking
for a model to be able to let them live and building it
together and really, NDLA is my name, I was the one
who created it.
Interview 13, 4-4
Sustainability was seen as one of NDLA's great potentials and was cited as one reason why free licences for
software and content were urgently needed.
I think that most people in NDLA – me included- we
are not, like, fighting for the brand. We are fighting
for the students, we are fighting for better schools. If
NDLA tomorrow would disappear we would be so
proud because it would be replaced by something better. Because we have secured open license for infrastructure and on content and that makes it possible, if
you unplug it, someone else could plug it in – and pay
for the electricity. They could just hijack it, they could
make a fork.
Interview 1, 65-65
Accordingly, even if the funding should not be continued,
an extension is possible without further ado.

At the level of teachers and students, this means that
they have the right to copy and store content in a format that they can access for the rest of their lives and
use and disseminate in other contexts.
This is not possible with the current licencing models
of the schoolbook publishers. In Norway, too, time-restricted licences are provided for digital schoolbooks.
I: So, if it's epub3, you got one copy for yourself as
you keep it for the rest of your life or is that also with
the…?
A: No, this is license and these are different kinds of
models here but mostly you have them for three years
as a student. Here we have lots of (playing a video/
song). You have songs, you can write, you can mark
and all that kinds of thing you can keep of course. But
that’s a license based product.
Interview 8, 27-28
Since NDLA covers both the classical school subjects of the upper secondary level and the vocational
training area, the use of NDLA materials by learners
extends beyond everyday school life into universities
and professional practice. This is also made possible
by the absence of schoolbound logins and the associated direct searchability of content via Google.

14 Pedagogical considerations

27

14 Pedagogical considerations
Pedagogical considerations loomed large in the interviews and accordingly encompass numerous subcategories, of which the central results will be presented here.

14.1 Dimensions of diversity as content
From the perspective of inclusive pedagogy, dealing
with diversity at different levels is particularly interesting. Which aspects of diversity are taken into account?
Is diversity depicted or thematized within the materials?
How is the diversity of learners and teachers taken into
account? How are differentiated offers made?
So far, there are no rules for the consideration of diversity, but they are discussed and defined as additional
documents on the pedagogical platform.
The Norwegian law on the approval of schoolbooks
used to prescribe the consideration of gender aspects as
mandatory. This was abandoned in 2001. Nevertheless,
the way of thinking has been internalized by the parties
involved and, in case of doubt, would be demand­ed by
the users.
The challenge now does not lie in understanding the
contents of the various dimensions of difference additively, but in interweaving them with the object. Histor­
ically, such a predominantly additive solution already
existed in connection with the social role of women.
I: Is disability part of the materials? So are there images
of disabled students or is it a certain topic here or there
by some short stories or tasks or something like that?
A: We've been discussing... you see some years ago
when we creating just... I have to use the example
about women. When we were, you say, more or less
forced into, 30 years ago the government or the department said 'you have to explain how women were
in that. Then always, we've gotten a little part in the
text saying the woman in history and so on and so on.
And that could be the thing today, it's not the ability,
just have some texts about people with some difficulties. But I think that is always the wrong way to take it.
We have to mix it into the whole text and the whole issue to show that those are people living together. And

we have to consider their needs anytime in the day, not
just in some parts. So, I think our main goal is to mix it
together and show it in the whole context.
Interview 5, 68-71
In addition to the consideration of women's perspectives, the inclusion of content that is interesting for different groups of pupils (including boys and girls) is also
addressed. Due to rapidly changing real life, however, it
is not very easy to maintain a current reference.
The dimension of sexual orientation will play a role in
the current development of materials for the subjects of
sociology and religion. It will be less centrally thematized
in other subjects. All in all, the liberal, humanistic orientation of the NDLA colleagues also shapes the presentation of the contents.
The dimension of cultural background is a present topic
within NDLA. However, the implementation is rather
difficult due to the employees' own, less diverse backgrounds. Nevertheless, there is an effort to systematically incorporate different cultural backgrounds into
texts and images. Analogous to the other dimensions,
it is important not to make this additive. An example
of the consideration of local minorities can be found in
the contents about the people of the Samen, which are
woven into the texts.
The dimensions of dis/abilities have only been dis­cussed
sporadically in the materials so far.

14.2 Differentiation
A special potential is seen in the possibility presented for
differentiation with help of digital materials. The conception of differentiated offers for individual pupils is made
much easier by ICT. Thus, the level of difficulty can be

Gender issues in OER are addressed
through a combination of awareness and
user feedback at NDLA.

28

14 Pedagogical considerations

assigned to individual learning paths and additional videos,
pictures and audio documents can be used for illustration. Working with well thought out individual learning
paths enables teachers to work without classifying into
stigmatising academic levels (A-level, C-level).
14.3

Individual learning paths allow teachers to
easily adapt to students while working on the
same topic.

Cross-subject learning

The use of content in different contexts and the linking
of content is interesting when creating a cross-subject
platform such as NDLA. This is one of the challenges in
contextualizing content. Where can an object or a process (e.g. from mathematics or chemistry) be found in
other contexts?
The presentation of content from different perspectives
(e.g. democracy, climate change, sustainable development) is on the agenda for the development of new
content in the context of the next curricula plans.

14.4 Teaching and learning research
NDLA cooperates with research institutions in Norway
and beyond and is oriented towards the results of teaching-learning research. The reason for this orientation
is quite interesting:
Because today, we focus too much on subject con­
tents, too much on Napoleon, to little on how to remember things, how to work…, how do you become
better learners.
If you take a sprinter like Usain Bold, everyone will
recognize that he spends hundreds of hours on very
small adjustments. He always uses the best gear, the
best things money can buy. We kind of look at the students, they’re also going through a sprint… how can
we sort of…, how do you learn best. What’s your

ideal posi­
tion. What can we improve on. But you
know, we don’t have…, hardly any focus on that… It’s
more like… okay you got 5 out of 10… work harder.
Maybe, it’s working the wrong way, maybe it’s not..,
maybe there are tools here, that we can provide them
with, help.
Interview 12, 97-101
In addition, NDLA’s own research is carried out in cooperation with pilot schools. The procedure is geared
to the needs of the users. The users are both pupils and
teachers. New materials are evaluated through observations, tests and interviews before they are produced
on a larger scale.
I: So, teachers and students are your users in terms of
user needs?
A: Yes. We do quantitative analysis, we ask people, we
do a lot observation of them, we have five to seven different sources, where we use, I would call it a research
pyramid technique to find out where to go. You can
do one study and the study tells that ‘well, you should
do that and that and the rest is more blurry’. And then
okay, let’s do another study. Let’s not just measure this
on the logs, on the service, let’s go to the classroom
and ask people. And we can ask them and we can find
out, not by leading the questions, but if there are things
coming up there matching, the measurements we done
then, well, maybe here is something we should do.
And then we could test it, because if you ask a pupil
how this should be done, they will probably lie, also

Interdisciplinary learning is made possible by a common OER platform, but it does
not happen on its own.

14 Pedagogical considerations

teachers, everybody is, because you have to observe
what actually happens. If someone says that the first
thing to do is look here, then we know, that is probably
not where he is looking first because we know from
eye-tracking that you will look there. So we use all this
sources and when many sources tell us the same thing,
then we test it. We build it and we test it. And we try
to find the next step. We are so early right now, that
that kind of information will give us many, many years
of work from that start.
Interview 3, 43-44
In the context of definitions, for example, the question
is how a term can be best explained. Can this be achieved
by means of a text, an image or a video?
When developing new content types, tests are carried
out with comparison groups before the content is made
available to teachers for use and further adaptation.
And we will also always test new types of content, always do the development and check ‘okay, is this better or is this better’ (A-B-testing). Until we reach or we
see that ‘okay, this is good enough’ then we give it to
the teachers and pupils and they can change it if they
like and they can use it or don’t.
Interview 3, 49-49
It should be noted here that the interactions with the material take place against the background of a variety of
framework conditions and environment variables, which,
unlike in other research areas, cannot be compared with
reasonable effort.
The tests with the help of screen readers give hints
about the use of the contents by different students and
influence the further design.
I: What would you say were the interesting out-comes
or insights from the student-testing?
A: Well one of the things that I found the most interesting and that really made me think was when we
used eye-tracker. How they actually read. We have a
lot of you know thoughts and ideas and even opinions
on how students read and to be honest they didn't
read the way we thought they would read. So we had

29

Since pupils are the users of the platform,
their needs should be central to the
development of OER.
created this page. Like we had the main text and then
we had some additional texts on the right hand side
that we thought would be an easier version of what
was in the main text ,simplify it like an abstract or like
some key issues there, so we thought that that would
help the students. But they didn´t even read it. They
weren´t bother with you know reading stuff they just
thought like: "Well if it's important, it's here like in the
main text. That is just extras." So they didn´t even think
about it and I know that a lot of our people have spend
a lot of time thinking about how to create that part in
a good way. So that it should actually help the students.
Whereas they don´t care to read it. That's interesting.
Also when we used the eye-tracker we saw that how
we organize our texts and how we build them. We had
one student struggling with reading a lot and I think
he used 4 times as long as the other students to read
it and how he read and how he found it easier if the
paragraphs weren´t too long. The headings were described well. And were we had a lot of headings, if we
used instead of full texts you had small points or small
bullets. So that´s the way he actually read. How that
helped him. That was also good for us because we tend
to like,I mean we are teachers, we love words especially Norwegian and the language teachers they write and
write and write and also the craving for visual elements,
how that helps them at least the possibility to be able to:
"Okay you can read but also listen or you can also watch a
video and you know using multimedia learning material as
well." So all those things were actually helpful for us. Yeah.
Interview 11, 50-51
The feedback from the field studies saved time in the development of new content, and the design was geared
more to the needs of the users.
A further approach to the consideration of user needs
is the creation of situational offers that include time and
place of use.

30

14 Pedagogical considerations

But we know that when a pupil has been reading on
preparing for exams for three days and has been sitting
ten hours today preparing for those exams, then we
know that when she is going to start at seven PM in the
evening, start to prepare for small glossary test tomorrow, then we know she isn’t really interested in reading
more. Then we know she needs something to listen to
or something like a video or something else. So, it is
not only about strategy so how pupil best consumes
learning for her personality it’s situation based. When
I’m here in the bus I don’t want to read page by page
of text. I want to put on my headset and see a introduction video. So it’s not only learning strategy, it’s situational learning.
Interview 3, 50-51
The analysis of the resulting user data can also help to
decide which materials are interesting or helpful for
which group of pupils. For the opportunities and threats
of the BigData approaches, the reader can refer to the
chapter on user data (p. 16).

14.5 Proselytisation for pedagogical approaches
In its effort to take the pedagogical freedom of teachers
seriously, NDLA has decided not to carry out mission­
ary work for certain pedagogical approaches. This may
be difficult for the individual, but missionary work is still
considered inadmissible.
I: So, do you try to influence the teachers in a certain
way of teaching?
A: That's a hard question. Because we would very
much like to do that, I think. Anyway because I think
if you read that paper you will see that we are telling
the teachers that if you're going to use a computer in
your lessons, you have to let the pupils be active. You
have to let them work, you have to let them cooperate and so on. If you let them hide behind a screen
and do the teaching from above, then they will soon
be on facebook. And I don't mind pupils being on
facebook. I think when Facebook is an issue let's use
facebook to create good teaching or good learning. But
the question was 'do we influence the teachers'. I think
we can't do this as much as we would like to because
there is a standing word or something in Norway that

Openness at NDLA also means the openness
of materials for different pedagogical approaches.
the teachers should be free to use their own methods
for learning and I don't think that is right to the total
end or something. I think we have to admit there is
some methods that are better than others in learning
but we can't officially go out and say 'do that!' No, we
can't do that.
Interview 5, 81-82
Rather, the aim is to achieve the greatest possible degree of openness for the use in different pedagogical
settings. Due to financial limitations, however, this cannot be achieved for all materials and every approach.
I: And what about the different ways, for example you
said ‘problem based learning’, so how do you decide
what pedagogic strategies you are using for teaching?
So, for example ‘problem based learning’: Are there
certain ways of teaching you prefer and you say ‘well,
they should be able to work in a group’ for example?
A: I have to answer that in two ways, when you talked
to ‘Leonhard’, he will present a pedagogical platform
to you and I don’t know if you are talking to ‘John Eide’
during your visit here, but he is working more opera­
tional on that. They will say ‘we know this, these are
better learning resources than these, we know that
from research. As long as we know anything proven
by evidence based, then we can say, we will probably work on that and resources we know is not that
good, we won’t work on it’. So in that way we will
follow the research, we will follow the evidence based
practice and further try to participate in the investigation in what works and what doesn’t work. On the other
hand, we’re not following other… I would say, we
would have to make our content available for every pedagogical approach. That means, for example, we have
some math subject, they are produced for a way of
teaching pupils. The biggest challenge for us, in addition
to moving to a new platform would be how to make
that learning material available for other pedagog­ical
approaches. So I would say we would probably wish,
that all our learning resources should be possible to use

14 Pedagogical considerations

in a problem based learning approach in the same way
as we would like it to be possible to use it in another
pedagogical approach. We have to open this, we have
to be open to all learning systems, we have to be open
to all pedagogical approaches, we have to be open to
different kind of users and different kind of situations
and so on.
Interview 3, 52-53
Nevertheless, the introduction of digital media is a major
change for teachers who maintain a classic book- and
teacher-centred teaching style. This goes hand in hand
with a democratisation of digital means of production
and thus a multitude of new modes of expression for pupils. The possibilities for activating pupils, which are interwoven in NDLA, may also have an influence on teaching.

14.6 Promoting learning processes through
disruption (information is not knowledge)
An interesting question that emerged in the interviews
was "What kind of latitude does a state learning platform
have in the presentation of content?” Unlike Wikipedia,
whose movement was an inspiration for NDLA, NDLA
is not about creating exactly any one form of content representation, but about making the subject accessible to
students at different levels of difficulty through different
paths.
It should be considered to what extent a technically correct version of a text is necessary for the design of learn­
ing processes or whether an erroneous version might
even be more useful for promoting discussion. With ref­
erence to Frank Zappa's "information is not knowledge
and knowledge is not wisdom", it was discussed whether
a deliberately erroneous version with a reference to errors contained in it would enable a more in-depth discussion than correct materials. This is especially true since
learning processes involve more than information intake,
e.g. discussion and linking with known content. For a
state platform such as NDLA, however, it is unrealistic to
present technically incorrect content owing to potential
conflicts with publishers.
The discussion about the difference between information
extraction and critical alienation on the basis of specifically erroneous, discussion-stimulating sources is an interesting suggestion in the discussion surrounding OER.

14.7 M
 ultiple ways to access the same topic
(video, text, audio)
The central opportunity of digital media and OER is the
possibility to offer various approaches to a topic and
thus to be more than a digitized textbook.
But of course we also studied the curricula and we
studied textbooks to see what can we learn from
textbooks, because there is always a tradition you can
learn from, even though you break with something you
can always learn. I think we also had a lot of focus on
creating a lot of interactivities for the students, so it
shouldn't just be reading. And we focused a lot on multimedia content, so rich content. Because I think that's
part of the web experience that you have a lot of media, you know, a lot of pictures, a lot of videos, lots of
sounds - part of the experience.
And we also were very committed to creating a variety
of resources so you should have a lot of variation and
you should be able to choose from two or more sort
of approaches to a topic. You could use all the textual
approach or you could watch a video. So, we weren’t
able to do that with all the topics, but that was sort
of an idea we had. I think it was a very good idea. But
in retrospect, creating so much content also produced
prob­lems with maintenance, keeping things relevant and
up to date. So I remember we had lots of texts about
Obama and 'change the world' and... But, when we
finished sort of creating the various contents, it was...
you moved on to other topics, to English at second and
third level, you know with 17-, 18-years-olds.
Interview 12, 3-4
The problems with content maintenance are discussed
in Chapter 19.

Provoking learning processes through
targeted built-in errors in OERs is not
easy with state-run platforms.

31

32

14 Pedagogical considerations

14.8 Activity of pupils
The pupils' own activity in cooperation has been discuss­
ed several times and is part of the pedagogical platform
document.
Anyway because I think if you read that paper you will
see that we are telling the teachers that if you're going
to use a computer in your lessons, you have to let the
pupils be active. You have to let them work, you have to
let them cooperate and so on. If you let them hide behind a screen and do the teaching from above, then they
will soon be on Facebook. And I don't mind pupils being
on Facebook. I think when Facebook is an issue let's use
Facebook to create good teaching or good learning.
Interview 5, 82-82
Student activity means both online activities and offline
activities. Online activities include changing from consumer position to the role of content producer. This can
be done through photos, videos, podcasts or blogs. It
is not just a question of creating content, but also of
critically and respectfully interacting with one's own
performance and that of others. The Internet has made
a considerable contribution to the democratisation of
means of production and distribution channels, and at
the same time requires addressing their responsible use.
[…] we want them to go away from saying ‘what you
are going learn is this book’, which is what they’re always
thinking and a lot of the students and teachers, they
didn’t read the curriculum, they just read the book and I
know teachers that they haven’t discovered that there is
another curriculum, not the last one and not that before,
because they are doing like they did on 1994, so you
know, it’s a habit to deal with, they just do it like before.
And the students, ok they think, they have a easy day,
when the teacher is just talking, so they, the students,
don’t have to do anything, you know. But we want them
to teach in another way, to activate the students quite
another way. And also of course use digital tools and
working with what the students are doing every time,
they are using their phones to make videos or to listen
to speak or yeah, and the students, they are living in a
free world, where they can express themselves in a quite
other way than when I was that age, because everyone
what I read, always some other had written but now

The democratization of production tools and
distribution channels is enabling major changes
in student and teacher roles.

they can be writers and they can publish and they have a
blog or they have a… so they are more active in society
and we have to use that to learn them and to fix that role
for them in a good way, to use this freedom and do best
for themselves and for the society. And that’s what we
have to build in to what we are doing in the classroom, I
think not only respect what others have written but also
respect what you are writing yourself.
Interview 13, 107
The aspect of cooperation as an integral part of the pedagogical platform is emphasized several times and is of
major significance in the context of digital media, since
the danger of social isolation is quite real with contin­
uously individualized task processing.
So, yes, so we worked out a platform for what kind of
pedagogy we are going to use and so we're thinking
that activity uh pupil's activity is very important, stressing that point very hard, cooperation, learning to work
together is very important, that's the stressing and then
you can say that we tell students or the pupils where
they are all the time, so they will reflect on their own
learning and so on.
Interview 5, 24-24

14.9 Offline activities of students
One of NDLA's concerns is the activation of students
through tasks that are not only to be solved online and
that require interaction with the world and with other
people. This includes, for example, studies and photo
documentations of ease of accessibility in one's own
environment.
A: Yeah, yeah, we are trying to do both. Learn from
all the digital University and working with digital learn­

14 Pedagogical considerations

ing, you have to teach the student to learn without this
computer also. And we’re trying to get challenge them,
they have to go out and study things, they have to find
the answer out there, talking with each other or they
are to do some kind of roleplay or they have to try
to make a short film, or they have to do something
like that. So they have to be the creator, not only this,
yeah. And I’m skeptical if you just had to click this, it’s
like kind of activity but it’s not a real activity, yeah.
So we are doing both and I think you had a talk with
Leonhard, and he is very, yeah, we have this pedagogical platform for NDLA, saying you have to activate the
students and with that, I mean, we are not just teaching
them to click but we are learning them to go out and
find out and see the world and reflect, that’s also important way of learning.
Interview 13, 99-99

33

The lifeworld relation of the materials
is of particular relevance to OER.
the other hand, prefers a neutral presentation as op­
posed to complete renunciation of the topic.
A reference to the world of the pupils and its func­
tioning is established through the cooperation with the
statistics office (cf. Chapter 8). In sociology, for example,
it is possible to deal with the environment on the basis
of statistics and then compare these with their direct
environment.

14.12 Localisation
14.10 Smartboards
The use of smartboards is also linked to the question
of student activity. For example, digitisation aimed at
smartboards carries the risk of neglecting student activity.
When Smartboards did rise some years ago we thought
oh that's a nice thing to just use for a presentation or
something and so we think that smartboards are okay
for starting your learning session or something but you
have to leave the smartboard very soon and let the
pupils work together and do their own learning and
they learn through working and through cooperation
and through discussing and through doing some things.
And you can’t just sit and watch and say 'no, that's not
our way we doing it.
Interview 5, 84-84

In terms of relevance to everyday life, the localisation
of learning content is particularly attractive. This is due
in particular to the availability of space. In comparison,
classical schoolbooks have to be much more limited.
I was telling you about the toll lists, and they actually have, in Bergen in 1736 there were four cages for
canary birds that where imported to Bergen. And for a
person today living in Bergen to know that it’s like a total different way of perspective telling a story. History
as a subject as well. So it gets more localized because
I have 2050 pages and I have to tell the world history.
I can’t use 20 pages like this to dive into the noble arts
of canary birds in Bergen, I have enough with the main
topics. So they have the possibility of making a richer
subject where teachers can choose. So, I’m definitely
a fan.
Interview 10, 183-183

14.11 Relevance to real life
The pupils' life-world reference is taken seriously, which
sometimes leads to astonishment for outsiders. There
is content about the brands Puma and Adidas (http://
ndla.no/nb/node/161277?fag=137416), for example,
where in Germany there would probably be a dis­cussion
about advertising and neutrality of materials. NDLA, on

Digital media and OER do not automatically
turn bad lessons into good ones.

34

14 Pedagogical considerations

Learning with OER is more than drag & drop and quizzes. Dealing with the subject
matter and classmates needs space and structure.
Cooperation with local museums or universities has already been mentioned (p. 15).
A possible next step is to link GPS data with learning
content. This can be online via map services or offline
via excursions to historical sites or, for example, to
locations where water quality measurements are made
and then sharing the results online. Localised scavenger
hunts, which are linked to interaction with the environment, are also available for other subjects (e.g. training
in the hotel industry).

14.13 Students' freedom to shape their own
learning process
One of the pedagogical considerations mentioned is the
freedom of the pupils to shape their own learning process and to take responsibility for it. This also includes
the freedom to switch off the laptop and learn things in
the real world. This, however, must remain connected
to the materials. Likewise, space must be created to articulate needs and exert influence to prevent pupils from
becoming material processing machines.

14.14 T
 eaching as a creative exchange
process
The statements on teaching, which is understood as a
creative process within a group, also go in a similar direction. This process is to be organized by the teacher.
Teachers must be supported by the school management
with regard to the creation and use of freedom of scope
or by the conception of tasks or the provision of digital
tools.
The tools include Talkwall, for example, a software tool
that enables interaction within the learning group (Audience-Response-System). Arguments can be gathered
and exchanged and thus a deeper discussion can be
achieved. This can be used, for example, in the analysis
of news or in the interpretation of poems.

Let’s say they have read a poem at home. When you
ask them ‘what write in here now, in this microblog,
what do you think about the point? ‘Oh, it was very
boring’ and then ‘no, it was fun’. And then that's the
first part of class. And then the teacher goes through
the poem with the students and they discuss various
parts of it about ‘why it is done like this why is it done
like this? What does this symbolize?’ And then at the
end of class, ‘what do you think about the poem now?’
And then perhaps one says that ‘oh, I really like the
symbolism of the poem’ and another one says perhaps
‘oh, I like that, even though it’s written 200 years ago,
it still has something to say to me’. It is also then you
move from ‘it was boring’, ‘it was fun’ to something
very precise where you actually use terminology from
the subject. So that's basically my sort of what I would
like to develop. A kind of tool which is student orient­
ed, which is process oriented and which is very visual.
So, this is it.
Interview 12, 114-114
The development of such tools is one of the tasks of
NDLA's development department.

14.15 Range of offers
The question of the range of NDLA offers is linked to
many other aspects. These include sustainability and
maintenance as well as the involvement of teachers in
the production of materials (paid and unpaid). What is
attractive from a pedagogical point of view, however, is
that the availability of space makes it possible, for example, to present different perspectives on an object.
How is Alexander the Great perceived from the perspective of the Iranians? What are the different proce-

A collective pedagogical platform enables an
organization like NDLA to work on the basis
of common values and to professionalize.

14 Pedagogical considerations

35

A collective pedagogical platform enables an organization like NDLA to work on
the basis of common values and to professionalize.
dures for solving mathematical questions? These can be
presented side by side in digital space and enable different approaches or a more in-depth discussion.

14.16 Pedagogical platform as a basis for joint
action
Over the past ten years, NDLA has developed a cen­
tral pedagogical platform that brings the core elements
and beliefs together that need to be taken into account
when creating materials. It is supplemented by additional
documents dealing with individual subtopics, e.g. project
teaching and problem-centred learning. The ideas con­
tained in the platform are the yardstick for the development of new projects and ideas.

14.17 Transparency of learning progress
A further point is the transparency of the learning progress of pupils, which makes a reflection of the own
learning processes possible. This is another challenge to
be considered when creating OER.

The range covered by large-scale OER
platforms is closely linked to the issue of
keeping it up-to-date.

36

15 Navigating the material

15 Navigating the material
In particular with large-scale offers such as NDLA, the
question of how to navigate the material arises.
Many users access NDLA via Google. At first glance, this
seems surprising and it has unintended consequences.
Thus, there are contents which are integrated in several
subjects. In 5-10% of the search queries you will find a
resource in an unintended subject context. For example,
when searching for a mathematical content, it appears in
its application in chemistry. Therefore, it is an important
question to which context the material belongs or can
belong and which context the user is interested in at any
given moment.
Our biggest challenge right now with NDLA.no is that
we actually don’t have a front page. There is a front
page but according to usability there is none. Our front
page is google.no and the way we are consumed is that
the pupil, most of the users are pupils (like 80-90 %),
they go to Google, they use some words to find some
content and NDLA pages come up in that list of resources so they look into them and they click on one
of them. And then they follow that link into one of
our pages and if it’s the page they were looking for
they might complete the consumption of that page and
afterwards they leave. And then they go back to Google or YouTube and then they do another search and
then they might just hit on another NDLA page and
then they go there. That is the usage pattern of NDLA
today. And by using Google as our frontpage we have
more than 60 thousand user sessions a day. What if
they could consume all this material, also in the learning
context? It should be consumed or put into the learning
situation.
Interview 3, 13-13
This shows that the design of contextualized homepages is a central challenge for interdisciplinary platforms with the scope of NDLA. Here, for example,
short-term cookies could be used to store the de­
sired subject context and long-term cookies to store
the age/grade of a student on the user's computer.
Contextualisation can also be given to the user's responsibility. For example, if pupils access the site via
Google, they could be offered the different contexts
of the resource and asked to choose the one that is
relevant to them.

In order to improve learning in contexts, it may be help­
ful to display the content reached via Google, but also to
refer to any necessary basics and further content. This
can be done by editors, by computer-based recommendations ("Other users who have read this article are also
interested") or a combination of both.
In connection with the design of the new platform, the
extent to which subject-specific differences in navigation
are necessary was discussed. Differences in the curricula
structure between subjects can be of great significance
so that curriculum-based navigation seems impossible.
At the same time, it is necessary to weigh the individual
preferences of the editorial teams against a lean software architecture that, nevertheless, meets the core
needs.

Users of NDLA.no often use Google instead
of website navigation.
We have some basic principles for the new design and
that is... to create text or topical texts as an entry
point for all of the topics, subject consists of. And
then to have just two or three sort of content types
connected to it, so that all the sites look the same
and the terminology is sort of universal for the whole
site. So that you create…., if you have learned to use
one subject, you can use another. You can easily get
used to using another and… we’re in a process here,
that we haven’t sort of landed it completely. Because in
a phase…., when you leave the old system, it’s very
easy to see: "Okay, we had too much of this, too
much of this, we need to do this here. And in that
sort of early phase, everything is very clear. We just
need to do that, we just need to tell one story, yeah,
let’s do that."
And then, when you start to plan for the next genera­
tion, you have to ask yourself: "Okay, so the simple
story is…, that’s the simple story…, okay, let’s go over
the simple story…. And then you build and build and …,
but what about…? And then it becomes messy again.
And the solution you thought it was there, dis­solves in
a way, because you have to…, well, that doesn’t fit that
subject and that doesn’t fit that subject…"

15 Navigating the material

So, if you, if you, my sort of…, my honest opinion is
that, perhaps we should not make all the subjects the
same. Perhaps math, perhaps science should look different from culture and communication.
So perhaps the way this subject is built and the way it
looks should reflect this sort of artistic subject, a scientific subject, or is it… So, it doesn't necessarily have to
be the same. As long as it sort of projects some of the
culture or the essence of the subject and as long as it’s
intuitive. That’s one aspect of it.

Another challenge is the presentation of spiral curricula.
Recurring topics are to be presented according to annual student cohorts and at different levels and linked
with topics from other subjects. Especially when ac­
cessed via Google, the question is: how can I offer users
the right class level/knowledge level and also show
them the ways to foundation knowledge and advanced
knowledge.
The different levels of difficulty within NDLA must be
visualized.

Another aspect of it is, that the curriculum plans are
very different from subject to subject. So in some vocational subjects, it is very down to detail. You must be
able to weld, or you must be able to explain how this
and this works. In those subjects, the sort of the curriculum entry system is very good. That's actually, that's
the year plan..., you go through…., but in Norwegian,
English and history, you have only a sort of five or six
curriculum goals, they are very general: Learn how to
communicate, orally, and in writing, in various genres…
that’s appropriate for the situation. Full stop! So, it’s a
world between.

NDLA offers many access points to navigate the existing
material. Since the different users also use different ways
to navigate the material, it makes sense to keep them. In
the new version, however, one form of navigation is to
be placed in the centre, while others are first hidden or
can be found at the bottom of the page.

So, curricular is very good to navigate in some voca­
tional subjects, but it's hopeless in English, which I developed…, so… But now we sort of, we have decided,
that we need to create one kind of design, one kind
of interaction, that applies to all subjects and all the
topics in all subjects. And that’s, that’s…, I mean…,
that’s doable. That’ll work.

In NDLA generation I, we had lots of ways to find, you
know, resources. You could go through menus, you can
use search, you can use some of a curriculum guide,
then you can use a way of content-type tree. So, they
said, this not good, you have to decide on one way of
navigation and stick to it. So, that's sort of what we’re
going to try to do in generation II of NDLA. Improve
usability by cleaning up navigation, menus, and… sort
of logic, because everyone agrees that it's difficult to
find your way around in NDLA today.

I remember, when I was working with English. You
know, we felt like we wanted to give our.., give the students sort of experience, you know lots of pictures, a
lot of video, lot of this is London. Look at the beautiful
pictures…. You can’t have it all, can you? I don’t think
so, you have to….
And, where in the NDLA is now sort of…, we have
to sort of slim down, become more efficient and create routines, …that makes it possible for us to maintain more subjects, more resources, with less working
hours, you know….
Interview 12, 46-46

Comprehensively formulated goals for
students help them to navigate OER.

I: But isn't someone relying on “search” and someone
is relying on the “topic wise” search, and someone is
relying on the other way of finding resources. And, if
you just concentrate on one, won’t you create some
deeply unhappy users?
A: I think you have to focus on one. I think you can keep
all the navigation systems intact.
I: Okay, you don't help them completely in, but you
present them it in a different way.

37

38

15 Navigating the material

A: Yeah, so, if you put the curricular search way into
our contents, way down on the site, it’s okay. But you
have to keep the first, the entry page, has to be sort of
clean: This is how you navigate and this you will recognize throughout NDLA. At the bottom, you can have
lots of ways in, you know, about 50, 60. It doesn't matter. Now what is very important is that, keep it simple
for most users and those users who want to have some
kind of specially advanced features they have to look it
up. They have to click at a button to access it, or have
to scroll down to access it. That solves the problem.
Interview 12, 31-36
The use of individualizable learning paths is one ap­
proach to achieving a clearer structure and navigation
in context. This can counteract the fragmentation of
learning content.
I think, for myself at the moment, the best way we
have done this last year is this learning path. I think this
is in the area we are working it’s a better way of doing
it and the users are supporting that because it’s very
fragmented, they don’t see the connection between
things. We have relations between that side but they
didn’t find them but now they see it, there is a connection and I think they are happy with that.
Interview 13, 86-86

Figure 3: Example of a learning path

These can be flexibly adapted by the teacher to the
needs of the students. In the sense of a "playlist", teach­
ers can compile content and share it with students or
other teachers. Since the content comes from NDLA
and is properly licenced, it is easier to share. The material can be annotated with personal notes and notes for
students. The learning paths provide transparency with
regard to the following content, tasks and goals.
In addition to transparency for the user, it is also of
great importance to provide the content with its context in a machine-readable form. For this purpose, the
new software provides interfaces (APIs) that can pass
the content on to other software systems. This enables
other projects and countries to reuse NDLA content
and to use their own financial resources for other tasks
and contents. The contents can also be imported into
learning management systems (LMS) such as "it's learn­
ing" or "canvas" via the APIs with their contexts. It is
interesting to note that NDLA explicitly welcomes this
further use of content. If the transfer of NDLA’s con­
tent to other platforms leads to the success of the platform in question and to learning success for pupils in
other places, it is a success for NDLA as well.
The material is structured based on the competence
expectations formulated in outline plans intended for
teach­ers. A central concern for the further development
of NDLA, however, is the introduction of competence
goals that are comprehensible to pupils, too.

16 User data

39

16 User data
A fundamental question in the areas of digital media and
open educational resources is how to deal with users'
data. This issue was also addressed in the interviews.
NDLA has (for the time being) decided against the func­
tionality of a learning management system (LMS). The
existing login function was abandoned because the students could communicate with each other via this system. In order to be able to use NDLA for exams at the
end of the school year, the function was permanently
deactivated. At the same time, this means that no user
data is stored. On the one hand, this avoids numerous
problems with the storage of user data.
On the other hand, the question arises, for example,
how teachers can then gain insight into the pupils' results.
At schools in Norway, OneDrive is sometimes used as
a storage solution to storing the results and make them
available to the teacher. Alternatively, schools can use
their own learning management systems such as "it's
learning" and import content from NDLA (see chapter
Interfaces).
A further problem is the intermediate storage of semi-­
finished tasks. This is not possible because of the missing
login. A URL would be useful in order to enter a successfully solved task again at this stage.
The discussion about learning management systems and
the level of access a teacher receives in student data
rais­es the question of self-determined learning in con­
trast to full supervision.
[…] We have to give our students freedom, they are
not, they can learn in another way also and we are
going to give them that for but we are not going to
catch them. Then I don’t like this learning management
system, like catching in everyday there is someone
watching you. There is a big brother, who really is your
teacher, watching everything you do.
I: But isn’t this one difficulty that may occur with the
learning path? That the students…
A: But there is no result, because if they shouldn’t want
to give his teacher what he has been written, he can do
that, but it’s not technical, automatically. The teacher

NDLA is intentionally no longer a learning
management system and therefore usable
for exams.

can’t watch what you are doing, you can dream about a
goal, instead. It’s freedom, we have to give young people, because there is a lot of thing in society today to
watch us. We feel everyone know where I’m going and
if the teacher know every step you take, you can see it
on the screen, there’s no freedom.
I: Yeah, the teacher shouldn’t be able to see, ‘Oh, your
mouse didn’t move for two minutes and your eyes looked at this corner of the screen’.
A: No, give these young people freedom, like we have
when I was at that age, I could protest. I could say, ‘Oh
that is so rubbish’ and this freedom is what we are going against a society where everyone want to control
you and that’s what I’m really afraid of.
I: Yeah, but maybe this learning path is kind of limiting
the students as well, then.
A: Yeah, it can, I know that and therefore I want them
to be able to remix and there is no way if they want
to ‘ok there is twelve paths’, this is help for you but
if you want to just jump out of it at eight, ok, so do
it! And perhaps, if you can it, you can do something
else. That’s ok, I think and you can go and close your
computer and can go to the real world and you can
learn from that.
Interview 13, 91-97
In addition, the question of how to deal with previous
user data when a change of school or teaching staff occurs. Do they remain with the original school/teacher,
are they deleted, or are they (partly) handed over to the
new school/teacher or the parents? On the one hand,
(positive or negative) attributions may be reproduced
at the new school/the new teaching staff; on the other
hand, without the data, it will not be possible to pick up
from a student’s previous learning development.

40

16 User data

This user data is already available, but has so far not
been saved. The h5p content passes on information
about pauses, clicked content etc. to the embedding
platform via an XAPI interface.
A: So, our philosophy is to only focus on the content.
So big data all of that, we leave it to others. But what
we do is: We implement a standard called XAPI, I
don’t know if you are familiar with it. It's a standard
for – it's also called tin can, it's the same -expressing
what the user does when learning. So, you can express
anything, you can express that Bob clicked that word
XY in the paragraph YZ and what time he clicked it. So
what do we do: We express for instance if you look
at our interactive video, we can express at that time
you pressed pause, you were pausing 17 seconds and
you did seek three minutes out in the video, you played
for about 15 seconds, you click to open a question,
you answered … on the question then got one or to
one point. So, everything you're doing on the h5p is
expressed with XAPI. But we just make this stream
of statements available, but if nothing captures them,
they disappear. So, we don't store them. And we just
make them available. Some of our users are something
called a learning record store. It's a standardize way to
store these statements and analyze them, and definitely
big data and you can have analytic engines and things
coupled on to that. So, if we had this click to word
support I don't think we have it in anything other than
we have the content that could mark the words where
you supposed to click words. But we could put it into
articles so, if we make something for bigger text maybe
it's a good idea to make it possible to click words and
tell the system. And that will be up to others to do the
big data and make use of all this data and use it to, offer
the learner a better, or more suitable next steps in this
learning path, or to improve the content. You can do a
lot of things with it.
Interview 7, 21-21

Big Data usage of OER is possible without
a login and useful for adaptive Learning.
protection of such data, this will always be a problem.
In addition, numerous companies have an interest in the
legal exploitation of such data. It is pointed out that the
data stored on learning platforms should belong to the
pupils. At the moment, students often give their data
to platform providers who are mainly concerned with
economic exploitation.
The right and the technical possibilities to have access to
one's own data and to be able to delete them will be of
central importance.
The NDLA login features that are no longer available are
considered nice-to-have, but not really necessary. This is
also due to the difficult legal situation.
A: That is a possible trap. If you develop too much
log-in feature and store data and it’s not traditionally
secured in a way. That is a trap. But I’m not sure that
we need all that log-in activity. I think that you can, if
you just present tasks and resources, you can find some
visions like, you know, send it via e-mail and store it on
your computer or… you don’t have to have all that interaction. It’s nice to have but it’s not strictly necessary.
And if you don’t have clearance or if you are not within
in the law, of course that can be very serious.
Interview 12, 193-193
An informed consent by young people or their legal
guardians seems only conditionally possible, due to
the incalculable consequences of consent or refusal.
It would be conceivable that future employers would
demand access to this data as a "voluntary" part of
application documents.

NDLA's new platform will be able to collect this data.
The more comprehensive such a platform becomes,
the more problematic will be the storage of these data
on the individual level. It would be possible to create
comprehensive interest and competence profiles of
learn­ers. Since there can never be a completely secure

The presentation of adaptive learning materials is attractive for many of the interviewees, but it also entails risks
that cannot be ignored. A negative assessment of the
learning development of students carried out by software can lead to underestimating their ability and thus
systematically to their being underchallenged.

16 User data

We have to sort of end up…, we have to…, you think
about the next generation, next generation. We have
to sort of end up somewhere, where everything is very
customizable. The sort of the student or the teacher
that say exactly what they want, what level they’re on,
what they find difficult or not, and then you get some
kind of customized experience on the web.
But there’s also some sort of Pandora’s box here. If you
have a 10-12 year old student in 10-15 years time…. At
some point of time it sort of takes a test. And they find
out, you’re not very textual, you're a more visual type…
you don't like this, you don’t like this, you don’t like this..,
so now we’re going to streamline something for you.
There’s sort of horrible thought when it comes to individual freedom and the fact that we change and we…
I mean, if you don’t like reading texts… you’re a visual
guy, does that mean, that we should feed that feature in
you all the time? Or shouldn’t you be exposed to a lot
of text? So it is, when you talk about customization…
it’s a very fine line between sort of predicting, that
you’re not going to be a new Einstein, so we’re going
to feed you with simple tasks. And you’re 12 years-old
and in two years you have developed extremely, and
perhaps, it will become Einstein… So, that’s the really
scary part about customizing, about sort of…you said,
‘it’ll be too much, yeah we’ll customize it for you’. But
how to make sure, that that process will enrich your life
and not limit it? That’s a huge question.
Interview 12, 87-89
A meaningful use of the resulting data can, however,
also take place without storage on an individual level.
I: Well, for example if you look at the short stories
and you have this flip through… and I thought it would
be nice to have a function that you can hoover over
a word and you get the translation and on the same
time you have a big data algorithm, that says ‘well, this
word was hoovered over by 10.000 students’. Are you

planning something like this for the upcoming version
or is it…?
A: Yeah, we are working on that. That’s not specific
to the upcoming version. We’re already mapping a lot
of sort of that types of activities. Like we can see all
the incidents of copy and paste, or not to paste but
the copy. Whenever something is copied we can use a
Google Tag Manager and that will sort of be one event.
So, we don’t have the hoover facility but very many
other things we can map, like where they click, how
long they stay on the site, how far they go when they
drag a task before they quit or how many complete
the task.
Interview 12, 137-138
The data collected so far can be analysed across all persons. Thus, problem areas as well as different learning
types or location- or time-dependent usage patterns
can be identified.
The question of who has access to this anonymous data
remains unanswered. For the development of new content, it might be useful to give cooperating companies
access to it, since they can then recognize which content
is accepted, which words represent difficulties or which
task formats work for which groups of students.
So, I am identifying points of which books actually work
better. What you can do is of course you can identify,
if you mine data you can probably use say ten thou­
sand students going through my books. I could identify
which tasks that work, where the difficult words were,
horrible explanations, bad pictures: I can again take
them away so I get the essence of a perfect, fantastic
school book.
And of course those data would be fantastic for me.
And say, for example, the data says that your 7 year old
boy has problems reading so he can be identified and
helped, that’s also, it’s fantastic.

Responsible handling of user data in OER as well as the avoidance of full
monitoring of usage is important (Big Brother).

41

42

16 User data

And that sort of says ‘okay, go ahead and share this
data’ because it would be fantastic for all users, all
producers of teaching materials to make the perfect
teaching materials. That's specially sewn for every individual. Bad part is of course that you stack up huge
amounts of pupil data. And those pupil data if it's any
open domain could be used to anything. So, insurance
companies and stuff like that. I think the real big problem is in the in the municipalities it's of course in every­
one's interest that both data and information is free.
Technology also is free. And municipalities love open
source for example. And I think that's an excellent idea
but what we we're struggling to find out is how to se­
cure the data but also share them to sort of correct…
if we could figure that out that would be fantastic.
Interview 10, 51-53
On the practical level, this adaptive differentiation is
made possible by adapting to the results of the students,
for example by introducing new content types through
h5p.

17 User-oriented design

43

17 User-oriented design
One aspect that has been mentioned several times by
different people is the user-oriented design. In this respect, the question arises: Who are the users? Until
2015, the focus was mainly on teachers. The development of the students was discussed with them. From
2015 onwards, more attention was paid to the pupils
and they were involved in the development of the materials through interviews, observations and tests.
That’s when we sort of changed focus because until
2015 we always spoke with the teachers and to teach­
ers about students but not directly to the students and
then suddenly we thought, hey who is using this? It’s
actually the students, maybe we should ask them what
they want, how they learn. That’s the new approach and
last year we had 34 classes of students, actually it’s as
many as 1700 Students, we had some internet-schools
as well and we used them interviewed them, observed
how the teaching was done and cooperated with them
to find out what is good with NDLA and what needs
to be changed. What can we improve? We have done
that this year as well and not just talking to them and
observing but actually done user-testing like tasks that
we asked them to do on the computer and then ob­
served and film and used eye tracker to make sure,
you know, because both students and teachers are
normally very nice. They say well, we have a lot of nice
things, it´s good, but the students they do things we see
well it´s not that easy, to find your way around and we
have too much stuff and all these things. That’s a very
good thing for us now that we are actually comparing,
work­ing on, I guess the others have told you that as
well, our new design that’s supposed to be ready 2018.
Interview 11, 5-5
This change of perspective is not easy for an organisation or its individual members.
I: You said, you switched the user focus from teacher
to student. So do you do both now or do you concentrate on the students?
A: In the beginning, we thought that we had to just really make us aware of the students, we had to do mostly
that but of course we can’t forget the teacher, so this
year we have sort of taken the teachers approach back
or just we do both. But just for us to make that shift

The usability of a OER platform is central
to students, teachers and editors.
because most of us who work at NDLA, we are teach­
ers, we worked a long time with students. I think we
had, that includes myself, had an idea that we knew
what the students wanted, we knew how they learned,
we knew so many things, but obviously we didn´t know
everything. That has been quite a change, I mean if you
worked only with teachers for 8 years and than suddenly you have to shift focus and work with students
it´s kind of, even though teachers work with students
all the time, it is a change. I don´t think I am representative for all Norwegian teachers but I have been very
aware that students, that´s my opinion anyway, they
can give me so much feedback on how to improve my
teaching. Every 4 weeks I ask my students to evaluate
me. It was not just me evaluating them but evaluate
me as a teacher and my teaching. They gave me a lot
of advise on how to improve my teaching and what I
could do better, what was good. But I am not sure if
Norwegian teacher do that, so for me it was natural
because I communicated so much with the students already and they are really good at give me constructive
feedback in a good way. They would never say things
that would hurt me, just in a way that made me think,
so I could improve. That´s actually what we are trying
to do now as well. We do notice that it´s sometimes a
little bit difficult for the people who actually create our
resources to trust or, how do I put it, to say that’s is the
same value what the students say and what the teach­
ers say, sort of. But they are students, yes and they are
actually using this, so we are in a process.
Interview 11, 20-21
The developers, who thought they knew the right way
because of their many years of experience, began to
question their expertise after having had the chance to
test materials together with students..
A: We have people who has been working on tradition­
al learning resource development, modelers, for the
past 20 years. And they are kind of setting that way of
thinking. So the teachers know the pupils, they know

44

17 User-oriented design

better than the pupils how things should be presented
and what they should learn. They know their exper­
ience, they know so much about pupils so they can just
tell them what to do, and then they will learn and so on.
We have to challenge that kind of culture. Best way we
experience to do it is that ‘okay, let them makes some
resources’ and then we put them into a user-interface
and then we send them out to the pupils together with
professional pupil doing user-testing.
Interview 3, 9-9
At the same time, it is necessary to keep in mind the
needs of both groups: those of the students as endusers and those of the teachers as gatekeepers – as well
as those who are to make adjustments to the materials
in the interests of their students.
In order to keep an eye on the manifold needs of pupils and teachers in the course of development, different
fictitious personas were developed, each with detailed
descriptions. Every persona is encouraged to question
how materials must be designed to meet the needs of
the respective user. The personas are publicly available at
https://brukskvalitetsplattform.ndla.no/personas.html
(translated: https://is.gd/ponomi).
But to individualize the student we have made something
called personas, I don´t know if you know what that is?
I: Yeah, I worked with design thinking in Germany
A: Well good. We actually created sort of ‘real’ students for us to have them in our mind all the time. So
we have to think about this and we have to think about
that. So we are two teachers, so how would Monika react to this resource or how would Helge react because
he is a vocational teacher, where she is a academical
and she loves our computers and IT and he just hates
it, for the students as well. She teaches her students
on health and social and she struggles with so and so.
He is a student at, lets say, math, higher math and physics. How would he react? To force us to actually think
about real students and real people and have that with
us all the time when we produce stuff. Because it´s so
easy to think of them just as a group and there is such
a variety and we need to focus on all kind of things that
are important. It´s not just that we have students who

Figure 4: Example of a persona (NDLA 2017, original in Norwegian)

are functioning well but we have students with all kinds
of problems, it might be visual, hearing. To think about
these things as well, concentration issues, just anything.
Of course we can´t just create 200.000 personas, with
all the students that we have in Norway, but some,
some typical, some bigger groups. I think that has
helped us in our work as well.
Interview 11, 25-27
This is a way to take into account the diversity of students in terms of gender, cultural background and academic achievement.

17 User-oriented design

A: At least we focus on gender for one and then we focus on vocational versus academicals so we have three
of each. I am working on some new now, because we
didn´t have them all. We have the difference between
the students who are really the topnotch, who want
to become lawyers and some of them struggle with
how much should I read, how can I really achieve those
top grades. The really weak, the students who struggle, because they haven´t in middle school or in even
primary school, they haven´t gotten the basics of math
or Norwegian. They sort of take their problems with
them through the system, so that´s a difference. Also
Norwegian / Non-Norwegian, like saying you are from
Syria or another country, who have actually traveled
and struggle with, I mean some of them struggle with
the language and everything. Others can be really smart
in math or in English and that kind of stuff. Some of
the Norwegian subjects, such as trying to learn religion
or any other subject in Norwegian is difficult because
of all the words that they don´t know. That’s another
dimension than being practical and more theoretical.
Also we need to have some underachievers, because
there are some of them as well who only go to school,
like a lot of students: How little can I do to get good
grades, sort of. I think those are some of the dimensions anyway. And of course age. That´s what we call
version one. We need to work on more as well, to add
more to it. We started there and that was ... yeah.
I: So you have these personas and do you give them to
the people who create materials?

we added the personas to that as well and not just the
facts but also pictures so they can visualize this person.
That´s actually him, that´s Mohammed, that´s Hanna,
that’s Lisa. Giving them names, giving them a context
so they know about their parents, where they live all
sorts of things and what they struggle with. Just to get
the story around them as well. I can show you them
later on. That makes us think more and being aware
that’s it´s not just a group of students but it’s this and
this person and also this and this teacher.
Interview 11, 29-33
The work with personas, test classes and the focus on
the needs of the users draws on the methods of design
thinking, which, as described in Müller & Duong (2015),
also have their appeal for pedagogical scenarios.
User-oriented design is a focus of the work being done
on the new platform. This includes both end users and
contributors. One pointer for the usability question was
to follow the processes of Google and Facebook, who
have invested numerous resources in developing the
most efficient interfaces possible.
With regard to accessibility, the Norwegian government
has stipulated that from 2018 onwards all new materials should be accessible to pupils with disabilities. From
2021, this will also apply to existing materials. These are
currently being checked with the help of the WCAG
standard. In order to provide subtitles to all existing videos by 2021, each day four videos are subtitled in the
two Norwegian languages.

A: Yes
I: To keep those in mind.

h5p also endeavours to make all content types barrierfree.

A: I can show you later on, if you want, that the platform where we have all the rules and tips, hints: How to
write online, how to use picture, how to use licenses,

Using personas (fictuous pupils or teachers described in detail ) helps the
editors not to lose sight of and to understand the diversity of the students in
the creation of OER.

45

46

18 The technical framework conditions

18 The technical framework conditions
With regard to the technical framework conditions, the
interviewees addressed the new platform, on the one
hand, and the simple usability by content creators on
the other.
Concerning the metadata, a new standard (NS4180)
will be introduced, based on the preparatory work of
the Learning Resource Metadata Initiative (LRMI) of
the Dublin Core Metadata Initiative (DCMI). The core
task of metadata maintenance is to communicate the
benefits to those who create content. This may sound
trivial as any teacher should understand that retrieval
is crucial. However, too complex metadata forms can
discour­age contributors. For example, Cerpus – a cooperation partner of NDLA – uses Dewey to classify
the content of courses. Moreover, the question arises
whether one should reinvent the wheel or rather build
on existing systems. The use of existing international
classifications makes it possible to find the contents in
other languages and thus, if necessary, only have to pay
for the translation.
Preset metadata (e.g. based on previous posts or the
environment of creation) can facilitate the process of
creation. For example, a math teacher is very likely to
create other materials for mathematics, and materials
within a learning path are usually dedicated to a common topic.
In order to make qualitative statements about the difficulty of content, Cerpus uses the revised concept of
Bloom's Taxonomy. These data are collected in dialog­
ical form in order not to overwhelm the contributors.
Today, you have a very technological approach to a lot
of interfaces. You have this field, this field, this field,
this is compulsory, this is not, so for all of those great
teachers out there, who are sort of creative, this is just
so noisy. It’s so noisy. And of course the developer, the
guy who codes it, doesn’t understand it at all. Because

that’s… ‘his is home’: This is so safe and warm with all
these forms, with a system. For a Norwegian teacher,
a history teacher, a social science teacher, it is scary.
It’s: Oh, all this different forms, can I do something
wrong here?
Interview 12, 76-76
The idea of a role-based editor that hides the more
complex tools leads exactly in this direction.
A: Yah, and it has to do with sort of identity ‘who am
I in this organization, why am I here, what am I good
at’. Because if you have to fix all these other things as
well and become a securer and the quality is not good
enough and… yes, creates frustration. What are you
good at? Do what you’re good at. Clear by the other
things. So, in the new publishing system we might be
looking at, you know, a customizable editor, so that if
we have a teacher that is working for us on a teacher
contract (…30.000 a year), he can log in to our solu­
tion. And everything he sees is perhaps a title field and
a text field with a very simple editor. And maybe he
can search for a picture that I knew it would be taken
direct­ly to Pixabay or Flickr or a database with only
creative commons pictures. Very simple. So, a role
specific editor, I think that’s important.
Interview 12, 160-160
The Belgian OER platform "KlasCement" was cited as an
example of an understandable, dialogical user guidance
in respect of image licences.
I: So, well especially when you come to images or stuff
like that, you have to know about the license.
A: Yeah, but “KlasCement”, look at their solution,
because you get to upload a picture and then when
you click “save”, you will get a human question, not a
technical question. But sort of a question that a human
‘s going to understand. Then they ask you: “Is it your
picture, yes or no?”

A role-based, simplified and dialogue-based input option allows less tech-savvy
teachers to collaborate on OER without scaring them off.

18 The technical framework conditions

“No? Okay, then where did you find it?” -It’s Google's
picture. “Okay, does google own the picture, or is
there?…”.
You know, it's great. And of course it comes right after
you load the picture, not before. Because, when you
get all those questions before you load the picture…
you’re not going to waste time… But you have loaded
the picture and you’re that close… and then you have
three or four questions and the last one is great… it’s
something like: Not sure? Then contact us.
So then, 78 percent of all the uploads can be fixed
through a couple of questions and those who can’t find
out after those questions, they can contact the help
desk. So, I think that’s a good system, sort of questions.
You do something, and you get these questions and
they’re not in technical terminology.
Interview 12, 80-80
The design of these processes has a direct influence on
further cost structures. Particularly in larger facilities,
unnecessary, mandatory operating elements (e.g. checkboxes, clicks) result in frustration and lower productivity.
A: One of the mistakes we made was perhaps not putting enough effort into creating a publishing system that
was sort of efficient enough. Lots of forms and fields,
it was too technical in a way and you had to click and
click and click. And when you have 50 people working,
if those 50 people work in a publishing system that
is outdated and not sort of customized enough, you
have to make a lot of unnecessary clicks, if you add
up all time spend on clicking unnecessarily, you would
probably find that ‘okay, you have spent millions on
working hours’ and frustration and, yes. But you don’t
really notice that because those fifty people they are
sort of sitting at their own offices in separate parts of
the country complaining at different times. So, that is
kind of sort of a leak, it leaks a little bit here and a little
bit there. If it had been a big leak somewhere it was
like ‘oh, we need to fix it, watch!’ But because this is so
spread out at a sort of a low level in the organization,
it is not attended to sufficiently. So, that‘s one of the
things that we could learn from, is to sort of create
an efficient production system so that those who are
basically teachers, pedagogues, could focus on what

47

Preset OER metadata in the creation of
OER can be helpful in getting teachers to
take on this task rather than ignoring it.

they’re good at. You know, producing subject resources and not clicking in dropdown menus and entering
Google Tags and… you know, other people can do
that, but let them write or create resources in an efficient way.
I: So, you would split the task for example and say,
‘well, someone creates the resource and somebody
else takes care of finding the right tags or whatsoever’?
A: Let’s say we have an English teacher working for
us. We have hired him because he is creative, because
he knows the students, he knows his topics, he knows
how to reach through to students, he writes well – why
should we try to sort of teach him all the other aspects
of publishing? We should use him for what he is good
at and sort of clear away all the other noise… let him
be the good writer he is.
I: So, would you say it would be better to let him just
write and ‘here is picture of Big Ben’ and somebody
else searches for a free picture of Big Ben or provides
him with three pictures and he can choose or anything
like this?
A: Yes, I think so. And I think we should have a specialist
on Google, or our search engine optimization, so that
when we produce and publish something, it should go
through also a specialist that checks that this resource
is tagged for optimal searchability. I don’t believe that
you should, those that you… hire into editorial staffs, I
don’t think you should make them become specialists
in all this other areas as well. I don’t think that is an
efficient way of working.
Interview 12, 153-158
Such a distribution of roles links aspects of professionalisation with the technical design of processes.

48

18 The technical framework conditions

The newly built platform of NDLA.no is available as open source on github and is
already geared towards multilingualism.
The software used determines the technical framework
conditions. The decision for the content management
system "Drupal" was at the time correct in view of its
quick implementation; nevertheless, it lead to numerous
problems.
This included having to take into account the individual
wishes of the various editorial teams, which led to an
increasingly comprehensive expansion via modules that
made the system slow and maintenance-intensive. This
led to numerous crashes and data loss.
For reasons of clarity and to avoid similar problems
in other countries, the decision-making process is de­
scribed in detail in the following. At the beginning of the
project, the ministry representatives were concerned
that NDLA was only setting up another platform for
sharing content. Therefore, they referred NDLA to a
company to build the platform for the project. The editors of the first three subjects expressed all their wishes.
Based on their previous experience, the company opted
for Drupal 5 as the underlying platform and an existing
community. However, Drupal 5 was only suitable for a
limited part of the requirements. For the other requirements, numerous modules were added, each of which
fulfilled only a limited part of the requirements. This
made the system unstable and difficult to administer.
At this point, NDLA was given the responsibility again
and started looking for a partner to further develop and
stabilize the site. Subsequently, the system was updated
using Drupal 6, which remained the basis of NDLA for

a long time. The update process was extremely complicated due to the numerous integrated modules and
editors’ different design requirements. The subsequent
maintenance of the source code was likewise complex.
After a period of ten years, however, the needs of
NDLA (both end-users and editors) can be described
much more precisely than would have been possible
previously. NDLA's new platform therefore takes up
these aspects of process design and many other aspects from NDLA's ten years of expertise. The platform
is developed as an open source, is designed for multilingualism and can therefore be used by other countries
free of charge. It can be downloaded from github (https://github.com/NDLANO). Such a specific platform
is more expensive than the use of a CMS, but this is exactly what makes the Norwegian software so useful to
build on instead of developing one’s own new solutions.
Another expectation attached to the new platform is
that it is likely to improve the possibilities for external
cooperation. This includes on the one hand the struc­
tured collection of feedback and suggestions for revision
and on the other hand the quality assurance of external
contributions by the support team.
The technical requirements have also changed significantly over the last ten years. While ten years ago it was
common to minimize image sizes in order to save bandwidth, a challenge today is to adapt resolutions to the
device (up to 4K displays) and the available bandwidth.

18 The technical framework conditions

19 Quality assurance
The question of how quality assurance can be designed
in Open Educational Resources is a focus of the NDLA
colleagues. The question not only includes the aspect of
updating content and correcting errors, but also the verification of external contributions.
The quality of NDLA was assessed very positively in a
study encompassing 1,600 teachers in Norway.
The topic of quality has already been addressed in
connection with the market (p.10). It should be emphasized that NDLA is willing to pay for high-quality content. However, this requires a detailed description of
what is to be understood as high quality beyond the required openness.
What is interesting here is NDLA's understanding of
quality and the resulting objectives:
So, we don’t have goals that everything should be as good is
it could be but it should be as good as it should be.
Interview 1, 23-23
This perfectionism limiting, overarching requirement is
substantiated by five dimensions of quality, which were
seen to be essential in the course of NDLA’s development process.
And then we have these five quality dimensions. One
of them is subject quality, one is pedagogical quality,
one is technical quality, one is the user perspective quality and one is production quality. So all of these five
dimensions have different representatives in the organization. And we have guidelines on how to achieve
continued improvement on all of them.
Interview 1, 141-141
As mentioned in the interview, the five areas are represented by teams, each of which has its own leadership
and is also represented at weekly meetings.

Figure 5: Areas of NDLA’s quality development

In a large-scale organisation like NDLA, there is now an
internal support structure that assists editors in creating
offers of high quality.
But the year later we rearranged our organization and
I became a team leader of the support team. You have
seen our organization; we have, like, a circle where
we build and then we test and then we change and go
along like this and we have also a process to try new
stuff inside, and that is explore, testing and if they are
good enough then we build on. It could be technical
stuff to build or it could be a lesson. But my team is the
middle, we call ourselves ‘RoS’ (Counceling and support) and we support all other teams, so we are 12-13
people and I am the team leader. And then we have

A department at NDLA supports editors in the technical implementation
of content.

49

50

18 The technical framework conditions

some specialist like a photographer, he travels along
and takes pictures, of the right licenses. But we also
have one, do you know scanpix stock photos, where
we buy pictures, and there we have one person to find
pictures, so yeah. It’s called Scanpix. And then we have
all people in Alsvag, we call them desk (like desk pub­
lishing), before we send something on air, we take a
quality test to check if the license is right and the image
is big enough, the colors are nice, you know, lots of
technical things we just check off the list. And every
Thursday it goes on air. So, then we call them desk –
that’s the team with a leader, so they are 4-5 people.
There is also support of production, like if we have an
editor, who would like to make a quiz, she could just
set up questions and answers and then some other had
to put it inside.
Interview 4, 6-6
The question of a common style is addressed by this
"Desk" team and the guidelines from the pedagogical
platform.
New team members can find information pages on
the "brukskvalitets platform" (https://brukskvalitets­
plattform.ndla.no/) that provide an introduction to the
following topics, which are directly linked to the quality
of the materials:
• Principles of communication and dissemination,
• Personas,
• Universal design,
• Language and sound,
• Content Types,
• Use of images,
• Use of films,
• Use of licences,
• Writing learning material for ndla.no,
• Writing for Social Media,
• Writing messages,
• Creating newsletters,
• Creation of learning materials and
• Glossary – Principles for word selection.
On these pages there are numerous further notes on
the design of OER materials, which were not all discussed in the interviews. New projects can profit from
these references (even if they do not speak Norwegian:
https://is.gd/etenad).

Errors can not always be avoided, even with the most
comprehensive quality assurance measures. Information
on the correction of errors or on update requirements
are already provided by the users. Depending on the
scope of the problem, these can be corrected by the
person processing the mails directly or passed on to
the leader of the support team. The management of
support requests is now handled by zendesk.
The analysis of the feedback is not limited to the processing of the direct requests via the contact form. Instead,
social media are used to an enormous extent for quality
assurance and exchange with end users. This includes
the fact, for example, that each subject has its own social
media channels.
But we also, in a large extend, we are very hard listeners, we want to learn from the usage from the students
so we use social media a lot and we are very active
on social media so every subject has its own channel
on social media. We are also very active on YouTube,
we try to reach the students on our YouTube Channel,
which is very popular. Somebody makes the video on
NDLA we also make it available on YouTube as well.
Sometimes because of the right we cannot do it, but
most of the time. And we also use a lot of statistics to
try to understand how our students use our pages and
try to improve them based on our traffic numbers, it’s
not actually learning analytics but it’s still something we
are trying to have the focus of the user not just on the
user and try to find out how the world looks from their
perspective.
Interview 1, 23-23
A third source of feedback are the cooperating schools
and their 1,200 pupils.
We have this pilot school arrangements, last year we
had 1200 students enrolled, to give us feedback. And
that is structural feedback, we actually visit the schools
and work with them.
Interview 1, 23-23
On the one hand, this enables feedback on existing offers, but also a user-oriented, iterative development of
new offers (see p. 50).

18 The technical framework conditions

There is also a discussion about quality for shared content.
Here, too, the question of perfectionism must be clarified.
That’s the way we create quality resources, by sharing
it. And by quality I mean, I’m thinking more in terms of
“is this relevant to the students? Is it fresh? Is it interesting?” You know. So, if that teacher goes down to the
workshop, makes his video, it’s fresh, it’s relevant, it’s
close, it’s made now.
Interview 12, 25-25
The teachers themselves also think about wether their
performance is good enough:
Teachers are afraid that what they produce is not good
enough. If it could just be an idea or one task or noth­
ing that lasts for 6 weeks just a small little thing. I think it
would be easier for teachers. But I have this great idea,
it would take the students 30 minutes to work on but
it´s still good. So that the difference between what’s
good and what’s not good enough and the quality
aspect is also a challenge that we need to think about.
We also need to respect teachers as professionals.
They have an education. We need to trust them, that
what they do is actually good enough.
Interview 11, 37-37
A special proximity to the subject matter or a special
up-to-dateness may be more important than a perfect
production quality. An example from the Germanspeak­ing area of the importance of the relationship
between the teacher and the students, the charisma of
the person and their enthusiasm for the subject is the
You-tube channel Grammar rocks!!! (https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCgB2mCGCzUsgJe6cJjqyMXA).
Nevertheless, the question of quality assurance with regard to shared content remains a challenge. One topic
of the interviews was the creation of a "Circle of Trust"
function.

Figure 6: Circle of Trust Model (own figure)

Colleague A trusts colleague C and editor D. They both
trust in the work of Colleague B. In a "Circle of Trust"
model, therefore, colleague A would also report colleague B's materials as trustworthy.
This has already been tried out at the personal level in
sub-projects.
Since all teachers in Norway have a personal identification within a nationwide login system, such a solution
could be implemented relatively easily in Norway.
When it comes to quality assurance, it is particularly important to raise awareness among teachers about licens­
ing issues in order to avoid copyright infringements. A
peer review would also be an alternative to a review by
editors, who would be overwhelmed by a larger amount
of shared content.
Another interesting question is how pupils can be in­
volved in further development of materials. NDLA still

Norwegian teachers are afraid that their work might not be perfect.
However, one has to ask to what degree perfection (beyond correctness)
of OER is necessary for the students.

51

52

18 The technical framework conditions

has some reluctance in this respect, because they are
under special observation and cannot jeopardize the
success of the project by being too open. It would be
conceivable, however, for the pupils to report back
by means of a +1 button in the learning path, where
they should mark the part of the learning path that has
helped them the most or click on the material where
they see the greatest need for improvement.
Another question in the field of quality assurance is:
How can materials be kept up-to-date over longer
periods of time? NDLA is addressing this challenge at
various levels. The creation process of many materials goes back to three-year-old editorial teams. These
editorial teams are dissolved after their work phase,
their members turn to new tasks or return to their original schools. As a result, the materials produced are
exposed solely to the wind and weather of the digital
world and run the risk of losing their reference to the
analogue world. This danger exists to a similar extent
for schoolbooks.
NDLA has taken various measures to better address the
problem of updating in future. These include a reminder
function so that materials are given a date when they are
created at which they are to be checked. In addition, the
integration of content from external cooperation partners (e.g. the Office of Statistics) ensures that materials
remain up-to-date. External partners provide data via
their own interfaces, which are then embedded in the
current versions of the NDLA materials.
Another approach is to separate texts into more consistent sections and more easily updated parts. These
are, for example, introductory paragraphs with current
references.

NDLA's new technical platform will include
reminders to check whether topics need an
update (a best before date).

Interesting are the remarks of a cooperation partner regarding the effectiveness of the use of funds concerning
the quantity of high-quality materials that were created
by the financial support:
In my opinion, the point is: “Bang for the buck”, to get
most out of your money. So if you’re the government,
what would you going to do? Pour money into public
companies or sort of pinpoint the money into a company that doesn't need to make new money or make
revenues for stockholders. I think even though NDLA
has probably cost in less than ten years 700 million
crowns, if you put those 700 million into the open market and said ‘Go ahead we'll buy this and that’. I think
that the bang for buck that you'll get would be much,
much lower. Because here you have an organization
that doesn't need to think about revenue. They can
just focus on one thing only and that is the quality of
content. They don't have to think about sort of going
bankrupt or losing their job. So I think it will be almost
impossible to get 700 million kroners worth of editorial material or textbook material that would cover all
42 subjects. I mean NDLA covers stuff from smithing
and all kinds of stuff that nobody even thought about
making teaching materials for.
Interview 10, 32-32

20 Professionalisation processes

20 Professionalisation processes
NDLA is of particular interest to other countries
because of its long duration, the wide range of offers
for upper secondary education and the experience
gained. This explicitly refers to the professionalisation
processes that the organisation has gone through. The
continuous further development of the organisation
appears to employees as both an opportunity and a
challenge.
NDLA positions itself in the existing system as a virtual
organisation, which acts on behalf of the political lead­
ers and the representatives of the 18 counties (see page
8). It is in close contact with the schools and acquires
content via the market. Teachers from schools are particularly involved in these processes.
Internally, a distinction is made between two levels at
which teachers are involved. Firstly, the level of systematic material production and dissemination and,
secondly, the level of voluntary revision and sharing
of own materials under free licence. While NDLA is
very successful at the level of systemic production,
the second level is still expandable.
The systematic creation is a clearly structured process.
Based on the assessment of needs by the NDLA team
(e.g. through feedback from schools or analysis), the
Board of Directors decides on the choice of subjects
for which materials should be created. After this decision, teachers are sought who apply to belong to the
respective editorial team. Teachers are seconded for
a period of three years (30% of the budget). The editorial team is given a leadership and is provided with
a budget (e.g. 1 million € for three years). The re­
quirements for the materials are defined on the basis
of the curriculum. Public institutions such as universities
or museums are contacted whether they would like to
contribute content.
The editorial team then considers which content it creates itself and which content is put out to tender to be
created by the market.
70 % of our budgets is spend on procurement and you
are going to meet two of the vendors. And the rest, 30
%, goes into paying for the teachers.
Interview 1, 20-20

Figure 7: Process sequence

Further information can be provided on the individual
process stages.
The choice of subjects, for example, is based on criteria
other than those used by a schoolbook publisher. For
example, it is possible to pick up subjects for which there
is little demand. The example of the Sami language illustrates this.
And we got one subject called 'the south a lap Lan­
guage'. We got eight pupils in Norway but we got to
do the materials for those. And it costs just as much
for the eight people as it does for the subject that cov­
ers about 20.000. So what do I have to consider? The
board would like that we go into the subjects that cov­
er 20.000, 10.000 and so on. Also got a lot of pupils.
But aswell we have to think about those who does not
that, the market wouldn't supply them with learning materials, so we have to consider that as well. So, how to
find a balance between the small subjects or the subjects for fewer pupils and those with many pupils? And

53

54

20 Professionalisation processes

as a background we got a lot of wishes coming in from
the teachers: 'Oh please can't we have materials in my
subject?' and so on. So, it's just a mix, so considerations,
balancing, looking into how many pupils there are, what
have the market supply the subject and so on. If you're
going into the material that we've got now you will see
that we've got materials in the big subjects and some
small subjects but I think that the big subjects are in majority. But anyway, I think in the future we have to create
material for more and more of that the small subjects.
Interview 5, 77-77
The materials for the Sami language were paid for with
additional funds from other sources. At the same time,
the editorial team benefits from NDLA's experience,
infra­structure and reach.

The starting points in the creation
of OER in Norway were the subjects with large student numbers.
The Board of Directors also takes into account the
schools' wishes for new materials and revisions.
This balance between subjects that attract larger and
smaller student numbers is also interesting for Germany,
where less popular subjects (e.g. computer science) or
local languages (such as Platt or Sorbian) could benefit
from such an offer. NDLA has started with Norwegian,
Healthcare and Natural Sciences and now covers 80 out
of 330 subjects at upper secondary level.
Interesting are the varying recommendations as to which
subjects other countries should start with. One interviewee argues that one should start with marginal subjects,
such as violin maker, and convince with quality, only supplementing the core subjects on demand.
To avoid sudden death, I think you should focus on subjects that are not a money machine for the publishing
houses. Let's say you have, in Norway if we had focused
only on some vocational subjects and some for special­
ized upper secondary, we wouldn’t probably have had

all the fuss we’ve had with the publishing houses. The
Norwegian state is by law obliged to provide everyone
with learning resources and in Norway for a lot of the
subjects it’s not commercially interesting for the publishing houses to create those resources. So, I would say
to the state you have an obligation to provide the students with learning resources. The publishing houses
won’t do it because it’s not commercially interesting.
We can do it, we can organize creative commons, share,
open, human rights. This is also about human rights,
the right to free education. And then I would sort of
build up the organization and then… teachers teaching
other subjects would perhaps…[say:] ‘You’re so creative, I so much like what you did in that subject, why
don‘t you do something like this in our subject as well?’
And then you can sort of spread and gradually eat into
the markets of the publishing houses. But I wouldn’t go
sort of head on with the publishing houses.
I: You wouldn’t start with German, Math, and English?
A: No. I would start with violin tuner or something.
Because if you create good educational resources in a
small subject, you will also be able to do it in a big subject when time comes. I mean teaching is teaching, you
have different subjects but pedagogical part of it is…
and the tools for presentation production, user experience, organization, I mean… so I would start.
I: That's quite interesting because usually people would
say ‘well, we would start with German, Math and English because it’s the biggest market and it’s the most
interesting for schools to have materials in this field… .
A: I would start with the small subjects and I would do it
damn good and I would sort of create this very enthusiastic group and then I think you would create the demand
from a third party of from others, from students, from
teachers. Why don’t you to make something for this as
well? We’ll pay lots of money for this and you can produce for that subject for one tenth. So, come into it for
us as well. But.. don't go in there [to] sort of to go after
the publishing houses, go in there as a sort of… your
agenda is to create great learning resources for students.
And if you can sort of prove that you can that in some of
the smaller subjects, then let other people draw the conclusion ‘hey, why don’t we do this in German?’ And then

20 Professionalisation processes

Focusing on the niche subjects (training for violin makers) in the creation of
OER could initially help to achieve peaceful coexistence with publishers.
they look at you and say ‘okay, we invite you to..’ instead
of you barging inside ‘hey, now we are going to do...’
Interview 12, 123-127
Another approach is to start with the core subjects and
integrate smaller subjects later.
When setting up a new team, the team leader is hired
first, who then selects the other team members together with the NDLA management.
The concept development process has developed
further in recent years. While at the beginning it was
only the task of the editorial team to develop a "script"
for the subject, now the interested public is also includ­
ed in a workshop format.
Earlier there has been a more traditional project or
method which we call it ‘Dreiebook’ in Norwegian it’s
like a concept gets to start when several quality criteria
of how should our new subject be build and a project
manager etc. similar to commercial companies. Our
success the 3-4 last years has been to invite all parties with interest in communicating knowledge within
a subject to the society to workshops and to collaborate on building this. We did this on the history subject
(history one and two), we started that with religion
now and a sociology-similar subject. We will probably
follow that origin that means network production, conceptually quite similar to what Alexander Osterwalder
did when he built the business model generation book.
He was the moderator of 450 editors.
Interview 3, 49-49
Cooperation in the editorial teams enables a four-eyes
principle in the development of materials at the subject
level.
A critical dimension of professionalism relates to the
handling of tenders. Due to the fact that 70% of the

available funds are returned to the market, a legally
sound tender for these funds is indispensable. This requires support of the editorial teams on the part of a
competent contact person who mediates between pedagogical dreams and legally compliant tenders. NDLA
has created standard processes for this, which point out
the requirements for a legally compliant tender.
A further form of structured cooperation between
teach­ers is project-related involvement via work con­
tracts. Here, teachers receive 3,000 € for the processing
of a fixed work package and then have a period of one
year to complete it.
And they have a lot to do every day but there’s a program where we are taking these people into NDLA
for some time and let them work with us. Then they
are open and sharing in the creative commons license.
No one say ‘no’ and they were happy to get allowed
to be along with NDLA, I just interviewed 20 people
last week and everyone was, they got some very small
paying for what they’re doing, but they also happy
“Oh, this is what they dreamed of, this next year will
be the good one” is what they’re saying. So I think that
way they want to share and then they know, there is
some­one looking after the spelling and checking some­
thing and they can ask for help and then they had the
courage to publish.
Interview 13, 54-54
Regarding voluntary remixing and sharing of content by
teachers, it has already been mentioned that NDLA is not
very successful in this area. Several ideas and initiatives
have been developed to change this.
This is particularly due to the fact that both the development and the maintenance of materials for all subjects (400
subjects in upper secondary level II including vocational
training) cannot be realised using the previous model with
editorial teams.

55

56

20 Professionalisation processes

To cover the full range of subjects (400 subjects in upper secondary education,
including VET) with OER, the previous approach via editorial teams does not work.
Here a crowd-based approach would be required.
It´s not really a difficulty, but when you have 400 subjects you would want to create them all and quickly. But
how we do it today, like we have people working on a
subject for 2 years. It takes too long, so to figure out
how to involve the crowd, anyone, all teachers, I mean
there are tons of good teachers out there, who could
actually work with us. And how we could create learn­
ing material in a new way. So that we would get easily a
lot of subjects.
Interview 11, 37-37
With regard to the causes for refusing to share selfcrea­ted content, the fear that content could not be
good enough is pointed out. In addition, content is
locally being shared via LMS or Dropbox, as can be observed in schools in Germany at which copyright issues
are largely ignored. This also applies to the remixing
of NDLA content. This is (to a large extent) carried
out without the consideration of licensing issues and is
therefore not publicly shared.
So, for the users – they don’t care! The users, they
don’t know that we are using open learning resources. They couldn’t care less. They are not interested
in OER. Why should they be? They just want to learn.
I: But if you want to use it for remixing?
A: Yeah, then you have to go to… we don’t see a lot
of radical remixing like ‘Bandana’ or ‘We are remix­
ing’. It’s more like, they have always done it. The users
as a rule just don’t care about the legal side.
I: Yeah, that’s the point.
A: And for them to say ’oh, but you have to know
about the legal side.’ They will think ‘Don’t bother
us anymore. We are not learning better because you
came here to tell us about legal side’. We: ‘Yeah, but is
illegal!’, they ‘Don’t bother us about this!’

So what we are doing is to make it legal without bother­
ing them too much, okay?
Interview 1, 102-109
One idea to motivate teachers to share is to attribute
the authorship of OER materials so that authors receive
regular feedback on the use or development of materials and the scope of their contributions. This can be
done, for example, through a "helpful material" button,
where authors receive direct feedback from students
and other teachers.
This is the way users are motivated to share content
on other platforms (e.g. Google Maps, Research-Gate).
A cooperation partner (Cerpus) of NDLA is currently
working on such a versioning system for OER content
(Edstep). It remains to be seen to what extent it will be
able to assert itself on the market.
It would also be conceivable to reward active teachers
who share content with flexible days off 2 or by taking
such cooperation into account in the official assessment
of their work.
One approach to attribution is to make the creation of
content more transparent, so that it can be taken into
account more strongly in recruitment/evaluation and
so that contributors are proud of their involvement and
better appreciated by employers.
The Belgian KlasCement platform allows teachers to
download more materials when they share more themselves.
Another suggestion to motivate teachers to share con­
tent is to start with a limited number of high quality
materials for a subject and then add more.

2 F or reasons of school organisation perhaps limited to 3 per semester or school year

20 Professionalisation processes

I also think that it would be very interesting to look
at a model where NDLA sort of creates some core
resources. Have you ever been to….., in Scotland
they have these narrow fjords or passages where seawater passes through with very strong currents. They
have these chains, that they put out there with some
corals on them. And then the nutritious seawater flows
through and more and more corals build up.
That is kind of a way, that I think it can work, if you
create in a subject let's say 20 resources, that have a
high quality and that you know that the teachers will
look for. So then you sort of put these out there and
then, as students and teachers use these resources,
you use google analytics to see: Here we have lots
of users, here we don’t have as many, what’s particular about this one? And you also have contact forms
on the websites and you ask around: “Did you use
this one, or did you use this one”. “Yes, I used that
one, you should also make something on….”. “Okay,
would you like to contribute?”. So you put something
out there and you make sure it’s being used and you
have supplementary stuff resources that are attached
to it, which may have poor sort of quality, as such,
but, which will provide a choice for other users and
diversity. I think, that the term quality is often a sort
of stumbling block, when we talk about learning resources, because so many people feel that it has to
be very professional, with two or three teachers…
and the translator has to look at it. And… it has to
be language vetted, it has to be so, so good. I'm not
sure that it sort of pays off with the students in the
classroom.
Interview 12, 21-22
Here, too, we find ourselves in the quality discussion
again. At the same time, the free licence of the content
allows an adjustment at any time if content still fails to
conform to the standard.
Especially when it comes to teachers sharing something
in their spare time, it is necessary to make it as easy
as possible. In order to lower the barriers to sharing
content, reference was also made to the design of input
masks (see p.45f ), which must be geared to the needs,
language and skills of the teachers and relieve them of
the tasks that take too much of their time.

Another approach is micro-editing: if it is only a matter
of adapting a question or a section of text, users should
be able to quickly and easily make suggestions for changes, which are then checked by the team. Attempting to
do that without a login is one way to make it as easy as
possible.

Licencing issues are barriers of sharing
content as OER.

Now it comes to the time aspect. We have to create
some solutions. Today, you have to sort of log on
to websites and fill in lots of forms. It has to be a
lot simpler, in terms of the contributors being… they
read something and they say, okay, that’s a darn question, it’s not good at all. Then, if a teacher reads one
of our resources and finds they a bad question, you
should be able to click directly on the website and
write a new version of it and press share. That should
then go to our desk or one of the editorial staffs, as a
suggestion. So, I think you could have…, we could at
least try out, to let everyone do it without even logging in. And it just goes as an anonymous suggestion.
If that creates too much spam, we have to have some
kind of log-in and teachers can use their professional
log-in. Everyone has a log-in through their employer.
Interview 12, 72-73
The learning paths mentioned also enable teachers to
make minor adjustments and to create their own learn­
ing paths from OER materials, which they can in turn
share more easily.
AM: Say you, you delete some part of the part. Okay,
and you add some text in the start to think about these
in your own context. And then it’s much like a Spotify
playlist. It’s not scary to share a playlist because it is not
your own work it’s only your own list.
AW: You can make play or you can make some personal, like you can write your own text a little bit to
personalize in some ways…

57

58

20 Professionalisation processes

AM: Yeah and add a YouTube video and another resource…
AW: Yeah, but if you only write some things and most
of the other things are… other peoples that you just…
that make a list, it’s like a comment on the list in some
ways, so…
AM: That’s not so scary I don’t think about licensing
because everything is already licensed and you just remix and add some comments.
Interview 4, 287-291
Another way to encourage teachers to share is through
in-school workshops with teachers.
The largest success that we have had in that area has
been with bigger programs funded by the government,
where they said 'ok, now, all schools should send
teach­ers on courses and they should make something
in the workshops regarding to how they can teach, for
instance, vocational students about subjects which is
not so vocational. And we will say to the government
'oh, what a very good idea, but you want to have a
portal where they have to share what they're doing at
this workshops.' 'Oh good idea.' And we will make this
portal for them and they will go to that, and all schools
in Norway are sending teachers to these courses and
they must produce something and put this on the portal. So, that is kind of sharing but it is like with the gun
to the head, but they are sharing. So, a moderate success on that terms but we have also this open, totally
open sharing arena.
Interview 1, 13-13
Even though this does not amount to a voluntary sharing
out of intrinsic motivation, in combination with other
measures, it can lead to more sharing overall.

Experience from other platforms such as Wikipedia
shows that white men are more likely to be volunteers
than other groups of people. It should therefore be considered to what extent voluntary participation should be
limited or whether other forms of involvement should
be retained (day-by-day secondment, project-related
additional payment).
With regard to process development it should be not­
ed that this is a result of the last 10 years and that the
NDLA did not kick off with the perfect solution in
many areas (e.g. software development), but therefore
was able to deliver a product that schools could work
with in the given time period. This situation secured
further funding from the counties. Underestimation of
the complexity of the development of a technological platform led to the fact that the solution that was
eventually developed did not correspond to the requirements. However, over those ten years, the users
collected considerable expertise, what requirement are
essential for a large-scale OER platform. According to
one interviewee, an online production environment for
high-quality OER content with interactive content and
no Flash, with community-supported quality assurance
and a learner-friendly edition for the students, cannot be
developed in anything less than a year.
As an organisation that has grown over the years, it has
also been necessary to rethink the processes and structures that have gradually emerged. As a result, NDLA's
structure has been redesigned in recent years and is now
based on the philosophy of being lean.
What we have actually done is we had quite a lot of
work in implementing lean/ lean six sigma similar management philosophy and tools into organizational
practice. A lot of those projects aren’t very successful.

Motivating teachers to share content is not an easy task. User-friendly structures
and systematic recognition (e.g. over days off or in assessments) could help.

20 Professionalisation processes

The structure of NDLA consists of a team comprising several small teams with
weekly online meetings and a fixed structure in the leadership team and the
respective working groups.
Where I have been working with those projects in the
implementation, a lot in the implementation. So I knew
that if we are going to have a hope in lean-orientating
and that means end user-orientating all of NDLA. Then
we have to start with the people looking in our organization. We had to start building competencies and
that’s how it started. We started sketching out some
basics on who is responsible for what and in that we
started the translation and we also involved all key
personal in our organization in this transition. I think
now that we can say that two years after, 18 months
after it looks like we succeeded. We go to the core in
lean, we started implementing, they would call it the
‘Shoeheart-cycle’ into businesses in Japan. The ‘Shoeheart-cycle’ is rather simple. It says plan what you are
going to do, do what you planned, study the difference
and act on the difference – either by changing your plan
or better following your plan. […]
Interview 3, 5-5
One effect of working as a virtual organisation is that
NDLA is spread all over Norway. The work is done via
Skype, hangouts or telephone. Through the described
structures, decisions and questions are communicated
and discussed in weekly meetings. At the beginning
of each week there are team meetings, followed by a
meet­ing of the team leaders.
[…] This is the basic theory and what we do is, we do
use that cycle on three levels: We use it operatively in
the operative teams, we use it on tactics level on our
leadership level (with my leadership team) and we do
it on highest level. And that makes it possible for us to
say when there is a plan from top we need to communicate to lower level, then it goes through me, then I
have to find out what it means and together with my
team implement that plan and detail it. And then my
team managers, the team leaders, will take that into
their management cycle. And in the same government
structure we report back. So if, let’s say, those people

working with communicating with our users find out
that ‘well, this plan didn’t work’ and then report back
‘this doesn’t work’ and our then our users tell us ‘if
you do a little bit adjustment here and there then it
might work’. Then that message can go up to the next
leadership level and back and also to the top. So it is a
very simple structure and I’m actually working on the
lean philosophy, it’s day by day some competences
such since we worked on on some education of my
personal that it actually is follow up. Every week we
have the same structure on the meetings, we have the
same follow up, we distinct in separating decisions from
actions from activity and so on. So we do lean, we also,
for innovative work we do, we do lean start-up oriented methods in how we organize it and we also are
inspired by design-thinking as a method.
Interview 3, 5-5
With regard to the structuring processes, it was noted
that from the outset the scope for creative minds must
be sufficiently large in order to unfold and to develop a
common vision and identity. However, this means that
not every development will be a success, and the beginning can be more chaotic than process developers
imagine.
A: Okay. I think I would rely heavily on the experiences
from NDLA. I think I would in many ways… or, there
not that many ways of doing this actually because you
have to have, if you want to build an open education
resource, a lot of things are obvious and you have, you
need to have the created commons licensing, you have
to have some committed souls that really want to do
this.
I think it's very important to create some kind of identity, that you’re part of something, that you are changing
something fundamental. You have to sort of build the
team spirit. I also think that it's, I’m going to contradict
myself a little bit now, but I think that is important that

59

60

20 Professionalisation processes

Appreciating the talents of individuals while pursuing a shared vision is, for an OER
platform, a balancing act central to shaping the identity of individuals as part of a whole.

you let those committed souls give them some leverage or give them some play, give them a playground.
You know, if you have a group of teachers who really
want to do this, so let them do, let them follow their
dreams in a way, give them credits for what they want
to do and give them sort of loose chain, they can go
quite far. I think it's important that you base the identity
through a set of core values that has to do with sharing,
openness, respect, tolerance, variety if you like, always
keeping the students in your mind when you do things.
So, developing some sort of core identity that does
not inflict too much damage on each individuals, sort
of dreams of creativity. You have to sort of let them
bloom. And accept ‘okay, oh you’re so good with using
films and teaching, develop it, use it, use you‘re great
at it, you know? So, I think that's very important when
you build an organization of those who come in here,
they come in and then they can use themselves and
they use what they are good at and get acknowledgement for that. And then gradually, I have to build sort
of professionalism into it and more discipline. We start
out with sort of letting the enthusiasts bloom. I think
that is important.
Interview 12, 121-121
This also means making the talents of the individual
team members visible.
Perhaps, I think you need to appreciate the people who
become part of the initiative, that they feel appreci­a­
ted, they have talents; and that you combine that with
creating that identity of ‚we’re on a mission, we’re
going to create something together‘. Because it’s easy
to, when you start out the new..., you want to create
this identity, that you narrow it down to some special
methodology, special method: ‘We are going to do it
like this, something like that’. I think it is important to
have that creativity and appreciation of the early en­
thusiasts. You need to make sure, it has to grow roots.

I: Don’t say: This is way to go.
A: That’s very dangerous. And that’s what Øivind has
been very good at as well. To appreciate the talents
of each and one and at the same time keeping that
vision alive, that everyone can agree upon. I think it is
a balancing act because you would like to say, ‘oh no,
every­one has to do this and output will become much
better’. But you have to have blows in the organization
with you and they have to feel appreciated and that
they‘re part of something important. You have to find
the right type of leader I think it’s important.
Interview 12, 177-179
Developing a team identity and fostering cohesion
among team members who share a common vision and
are convinced they are doing the right thing is particularly important in OER when dealing with hostility from
publishers and the media.
A: So we have a lot of fun, actually, great fun but it’s
also hard when everybody hates you. What we do is
not media-strategics, we’re not very good with selling
stories about how good we are and our strategy has
been to ‘OK, let’s just work as fast as we can with
changing the world. We have the time, they are not
stopping us. Don’t stop, start, don’t stop. If they hate
you, just continue.’ And that has been our strategy,
actually. If we have bad media, just continue. We can
answer them and say what we think but we don’t
stop. Never stop, because the publishers have really
tried so many times and the momentum is also vulnerable […]
Interview 1, 145-145
NDLA has succeeded in implementing the approach of
a multi-professional team. The pedagogical expertise
of the teaching staff is complemented by that of product developers, photographers, media and web de­

20 Professionalisation processes

As an OER platform: either develop a media strategy or a thick skin.

signers, computer scientists, lawyers and administrators.
Through constant cooperation, the participants adopt
procedures from other professions and thus build up
their own expertise.
A: At least what I think people should be aware and
that still puzzles me and is a surprise for me, I mean
I am a language teacher, I’ve studied German and En­
glish and Russian and Norwegian, I am just an ordinary
teach­er and now I sort of work closely with people
who actually do web design and technology and it’s,
even though half the time I think I don’t know what
I'm doing just believe that you actually can do things
and there will always be experts and you learn so
many things. I mean just everyday think that there is so
much to learn and don’t be afraid that you don't how
to do it or you're not educated for it but because of
that work­ing as a team, I mean, you will find out and a
year ago I would have no idea on making and creating
the platform that we made. I wouldn’t know about too
much anyway about user experience or testing or well,
couple of years ago anyway.
You can learn new things and as long as you work
together in a team, I think everything's possible. So,
it's sometimes I think that ‘okay, I'm just an ordinary
teacher’, and I am, but at least you can learn as you go,
as well. So, I think that's just a team working together
because I don’t think without others you’re nothing.
You can't just think that you know everything yourself,
so that’s sort of also says it, when I spoke about the
technology and using other peoples’ technology. But
just working as a team, I think that's a very good thing.
Interview 11, 85-86

A multi professional team is need­
ed for an OER platform in order
to professionalize operations.

Ultimately, all professions are of decisive importance
for the functioning of the entire organisation. Individual professionals may not be central, but they are partic­
ularly helpful for such an OER platform. For example,
the visual level can often be covered with the help of a
photographer who teaches media design at school and
is seconded to NDLA in a half-time position.
In addition, there is the question of how the team is
composed. Here, too, the topic of diversity was introduced by the interviewees. On the one hand, this
refers to the aspect of cultural diversity, which is not
particularly pronounced in the team.
On the other hand, the question of gender equality
must be addressed. There seems to be an imbalance
here, especially at the management level:
I: Yeah, so how is it with gender? You already mentioned the white male Wikipedia-guys, is it in NDLA,
is it equally distributed or is it more on the contentproducer-side? Is it women and men equally or is it
more men or? Or more women?
A: Yeah, it’s an interesting question. When we start
back in I think this was quite equal. At this time, the
top leaders in NDLA are men and the work is on
the lowest levels almost everyone a woman, so I ad­
dressed this. Not everyone liked it, but at least some
did (laughter). It’s a danger. OK, it’s like the rest of
the society when you get to the leaders, there is more
men and that shouldn’t be like that so this I’m telling
this young men, Øivind and Pål and so I say ‘You have
to choose not the people that are like you, you have
to choose some other’ but that’s a problem for all of
us. So I think we have to be aware of this. I’m so old
that I see there are not so many years before I will
be in pension, but I will strongly tell them, that this is
really important.
Interview 13, 71-72

61

62

20 Professionalisation processes

Also, the question of age diversity in the team has to
be considered in order to be able to tap experiences of
recent decades, on the one hand, and to not let the age
span to the pupils become too big on the other.
The question of age diversity in the team is directly followed by the question of the transfer of organisational
knowledge. It was an interesting idea that a person can
only move up the career ladder in a company once it
has been ensured that someone else can take over the
previous tasks. Such a procedure also makes sense for
an organisation like NDLA.

The issue of gender equity in the team should
also be considered in the leadership of NDLA.

21 International cooperation

21 International cooperation
As shown in several contexts, it is very easy to build on
NDLA's work. Content (texts, images, videos or multimedia content) and software (h5p, the new NDLA
platform) can be used under the free licence. Even the
structures can be used as a basis for national solutions.

doing it than our smaller economy in Norway. I don't
know how many students you've got in Germany but
of course there are...

As experience with h5p has shown, NDLA also benefits from these open source solutions, since the investments of other institutions support NDLA.

A: At least way more than the Norwegian and so
you could just spend ten euros each student and you
would have an enormous sum of money just to cre­
ate this kind of organization. I think that's an important
message to give to other countries from Norway.
Interview 5, 182-184

Regarding the new platform, it can be said that other
countries can easily build on the software – and NDLA
specifically welcomes this.
A: Well, what I said was about the learning resources. The menus will be in Norwegian or English. But
it would be good for us if other people from other
countries and other initiatives came to us and said
‘can we use your solution? Can we copy your code
and just use it?’ And we say ‘yes, wonderful!’ So,
that’s… yes, you don’t have to sort of build your own
system, that’s the whole point when we share, you
take what we built. That’s the wonderful thing, we
can make copies and copies and copies and it doesn’t
cost anything. You can just install it. So, that we can
focus on what is the real value, the intellectual capital,
the experience and the competences. If you’re think­
ing about doing this in Germany, you must just ask for
anything, copy and use it…, and… I guess a lot of the
English resources for example can be translated and
used in a German context. And our math resources
can be translated and used.
Interview 12, 172-172
The same applies to content that is created under free
licence and automatically shared via interfaces:
I think international cooperation will be important in
the future. And I hope we could exchange. And the
NDLA way of doing it could be incorporated in other
countries. I think big economies are way better for

I: ...quite a few (laughter)

Here, too, Norway can benefit from the investments of
other countries, as they can use the content if necessary, and the translation of content is more cost-effective than redesigning multimedia offerings themselves.
A study by the PEW Research Center shows that in
2018 2.5 billion people will own a smartphone. The
worldwide, cost-free and unrestricted accessibility of
educational content via the Internet also supports the
democratisation of educational processes. In this sense,
free access is seen as a step towards the implementation of the human right to education:
A: And it’s about ethics also. Because if learning is a
human right and the best learning, or at least good
learning, is a human right, how could we stop it? How
can publishers say no because of more money? ‘You
have to pay me for learning, you have to pay me for
your water, you have to pay me for the medicine!’
And it’s the same question basically, because when
three-year-old in Africa don’t get their Aids-medicine
because it cost 15000 kroner a dose instead of being
free, instead the production cost, why should child
die? To fill your pocket? And it’s actually about ethics
and what kind of world do we want to build here?
And I think it is basically the same question, it is not
that obvious in the learning industry, but it is basically
the same question. Why should the publisher be able

The interfaces (APIs) of NDLA's new platform facilitate content distribution
worldwide.

63

64

21 International cooperation

to take 15000 kroner for the learning resources for
a year, which you won’t be able to access the rest of
your life, from one pupil?
Interview 3, 86-86
Via the interfaces of the new platform, NDLA is able to
automatically share the content with the world. If other
platforms adopt these standards, the limited resources
available can be used efficiently.
NDLA also supports other international projects such
as the Global Digital Library (https://digitallibrary.io/).

In the NDLA team, international cooperation
is seen as key to the global implementation of
the human right to education.

22 Future prospects

22 Future prospects
With regard to future perspectives, three central areas
were addressed. These include dealing with innovations,
the new platform and the expansion of NDLA, includ­
ing the creation of new OER platforms for other age
groups.
With regard to the handling of innovation, there is the
accusation that NDLA hinders innovation.
The publishers will say that we are killing innovation.
I think Norway is the only place in Europe or in the
world where people can get away with saying things
like "OER stands against innovation." Politicians will
think that open licensing is against innovation, they say
that small edtech-companies, which they call them,
they suffer because we don’t buy from them, you will
visit two of them, from which we buy from, we have
limited amount of budget, so we can’t use all of our
budget on procurement.
Interview 1, 129-129
It should be clearly pointed out that NDLA only re­
ceives 20% of the funds allocated and that 70% of these
are effectively made available to the market. In light of
this, 94% of the total money allocated is still available to
the market.
Furthermore, NDLA's close connections to teachers
and students as end users enable NDLA to research
and describe their needs and thus promote innovation.
The examples of Cerpus and Joubel (h5p) show that
NDLA promotes innovation that subsequently spreads
all over the world. Without the support of NDLA, h5p
would not exist as an open standard for multimedia
educational content.
The use of free licences for the content allows these
two (and all other) companies to build on the success

of NDLA. The creation of a new platform based on the
experience of the last ten years is a collection of innovations implemented by an edtech company.
There is a four-stage decision-making process for decid­
ing whether a technology or innovation is adopted by
NDLA:
This is purely organized around lean-startup and design thinking. So we have four decision points, decision
point zero to four. And one idea in here, or ten ideas
in here, develops to one to two ideas here, going into
here. And what we do is trying to find out as much
as we can about the idea as early as possible using as
little money as possible. That means speaking to the
users often. So, before we have an idea here, which is
accepted for going through this process, we demand
four questions answered. First question is: What’s the
need? Who owns this need? And if it is not the pupil
and not the teacher, then beware. Why should NDLA
do this? What makes us so special, so good? And is it
within our business area to do it? And the last question
is: Who can we test it on?
When those four questions are answered then you say
‘this idea here, you can start looking at it’.
Interview 3, 40-40
Such an approach prevents following every cost-intensive trend the entertainment industry tries to establish on the market (Augmented Reality, Virtual Reality,
Gamification, 3D, Smart Home, Robots etc.). Individual
offers (e.g. in the area of VR) are created by enthusiastic
employees and can thus be tried out.
So far, ideas for innovations come from the team and
only unsystematically from the outside, but there will be
interfaces to students and teachers in the future.

NDLA supports innovations and smaller ed-tech companies like h5p and
provides open standards for sustainability and free-to-use content.

65

66

22 Future prospects

Another approach of the cooperation partner Cerpus
is to involve pupils themselves in the development of
games and to enable them to develop questions on the
topics dealt with. Formulating complex questions on a
topic requires a deeper understanding of the subject
matter than answering questions.
NDLA's new technological platform, which has already
been mentioned a few times, is one of the concrete prospects for the future and raises great hopes among all
NDLA interviewees.

NDLA is already being used – outside the actual target
group – by pupils at the end of lower secondary level
and by students at the beginning of their studies. On
the other hand, the differences in political responsibility
mean that it is not so easy to build on NDLA's positive
experiences in primary and lower secondary education.
In this case not the 18 counties are the politically responsible institutions, but the 400 individual municipalities. An expansion to primary and lower secondary level
would be worthwhile, despite the higher expenditure
due to the significantly higher number of pupils.

Overall, NDLA's success will in future depend on the
usability, stability and scalability of the new platform, as
the existing solution with Drupal 6 is no longer sufficient
to deal with the increasing number of users and materials.

The idea of Distance Learning Centres could be of
particular interest for vocational training, where pupils
can learn together in a pedagogical setting in a mixture of specialist input online and social cooperation
on site.

For the editors of the subjects, the new platform means
a considerable effort, but also the opportunity to further
develop the subjects by foregoing the complete adop­
tion of all content and, instead, only taking the more
successful and current materials or to update others.

I think perhaps, that web teachers or net teachers or
net/web guides also will play a role, because they are
more available. And so.. I don’t know. But in Norway,
we have lots of hills and mountains, lots of distance. If
you go to a place like Sykkylven, it’s very hard to imag­
ine, that you will have teachers for a huge variety of
vocational subjects.

I: So actually, you would build a new platform and not
just copy everything into the new platform, but…
A: No…, yes, that's right. I would perhaps look at how
much it has actually been used. And say that, all our
resources that have been used that and that much,
related to the number of students of course, will be
brought along and fixed, so that will perhaps be 10
percent of our resources. So, I would focus on those,
revise those, but not the whole 100 percent.
Interview 12, 60-61
A further question concerns the age groups NDLA or
another comparable government platform can offer
content. On the one hand, it should be pointed out that

Well, let’s say, you had a learning center, with pedagogues, counsellors, janitors, and you had sort of auditoriums or something, you had a lot of facilities for
web-based teaching. Then you could sit and do a lot
of the teaching through the web. And then you can
have oil industry-related vocational subjects located in
Stavanger. They could broadcast, or you can sort of
like…, you could download it whenever you need it,
here’s the lecture showing you how to... And you could
also imagine that students actually do things, they can
operate on a frog two thousand miles away, or they
can fix something in the car. You know.., you can imag­
ine a lot of… […]

The potential of primary and lower secondary schools (grades 1-10) for
OER in Norway (and other countries) is even bigger because the number
of students is even higher.

22 Future prospects

But there are lots of other things that you can sort
of do… through the web. So, I think we have to…,
what’s a problem is…, have a place where people get
together, so that you will have our social needs met and
you have to… One of the most important things we
teach our students is how to behave, how to recognize
other people’s skills, how to differentiate between a
subject you're discussing and the person. So there are
lots of competences that need to be learned. That can
only be learned in a group. We need to see each other
and shake hands and everything. In these learning centers you can have lots of topics taught in regular classrooms as well. More sort of traditional subjects, so...
Interview 12, 92-96
Another attractive future perspective that was addressed in the interviews was the Brainbank concept
developed by Cerpus. The aim here is not merely to
document the contents learned in a learning diary,

67

NDLA has its own innovation processes
to test new technologies, to check their
meaningfulness and to use as few resources
as possible.

but also to connect them with each other by means
of descriptions in one's own words and to create and
visualise references to other contents already learned.
In the sense of a constructivist approach, at the end
of the lesson, learners reflect on the most important
contents and link them to at least one existing content.
It would be exciting to combine such a constructivist
approach with NDLA and other OER sources.

68

23 Conclusion

23 Conclusion
In summary, NDLA is a vivid example for many countries
of how a state-funded OER platform can be successfully implemented. This study highlights opportunities and
challenges and for the first time, provides a comprehensive insight into the Norwegian situation. The interviewees are NDLA employees as well as cooperation partners and opponents of NDLA.
With NDLA's free software and content licences, other
countries do not have to start from scratch, but only
adapt the system to their needs. As educational institutions around the world face similar challenges, cooperative (further) development of content and structures can
help to use available resources as efficiently as possible for
the benefit of students. This applies in particular to countries such as Germany or France, which have enormous
potential for developing their own OER platforms due to
their large number of pupils. The diagram of the federal
states of Germany illustrates the number of pupils per
federal state (rounded figures based on KMK statistics
(Standing Conference of the Ministers of Education and
Cultural Affairs of the States in the Federal Republic of
Germany, 2018)). It becomes clear that joint action on
the part of several federal states would make sense.
If one euro per pupil and per subject would be made
available, 7 million euro would be available annually per
subject for joint action involving all federal states.
Of these, 4.9 million would be returned to the market if
the Norwegian model was followed.
The organisational structures presented here also pro­
vide an insight into how such an undertaking can be
successfully implemented and which challenges need to
be overcome.
The implementation of a legal basis following the Norwegian law (see Chapter 4) makes lawsuits brought by
the publishers of schoolbooks less likely, as there are
already relevant court decisions at European level.

For inclusive pedagogy, the approach of state-financed
OER is particularly appealing, as it is possible to pro­vide
services that already take differentiation into account
and, above all, offer teachers the freedom of scope to
further adapt the content to the needs of their pupils.

Content and structures of new state run
platforms can be built on the experience,
software and content of NDLA.

When developing inclusive materials, it can be helpful to
describe pupils with different special educational needs
by means of personas and to keep these in mind dur­
ing the development. The multi-professional editorial
teams could also benefit from systematically including
teachers with qualifications in special needs education.
It is important that learning with different objectives is
incorporated into a pedagogical platform as a connecting document and into the calls for tenders. On the one
hand, the question as to the crux of the matter has to
be clarified in a special way and on the other hand, the
question of the relevance of the topic for the different
pupils has to be considered. Further suggestions for the
design of inclusive OER can be found in Müller (2016).
All in all, it can be said that thanks to the openness of
Norwegian colleagues, other countries can now benefit
in many ways from NDLA's experience and products.

23 Conclusion

Figure 8 Number of pupils (grades 1-10) rounded according to KMK statistics 2017/2018, own research

69

70

24 Notes on methods

24 Notes on methods
The present results are based on 14 expert
interviews, which were conducted person­
ally in Norway in March 2017.
In the run-up, possible contact partners
were identified together with NDLA's CEO
at the time, Øivind Høines. These include
members of NDLA from the management
level on the one hand and cooperation
partners from companies working with
NDLA and a representative of the schoolbook pub­lishers, on the other.
•	Øivind Høines (NDLA, Director, Project Manager)
•	John Eide (Chairman of the Board of
Directors)
• Knut Inge Skifjeld (Innovation Department)
Figure 9: Johannes Leiknes Nag and Frank J. Müller in conversation Photo: Vibeke
• Pål Frønsdal (NDLA, Product Manager)
Klungland Opheim (cc-by-sa 3.0)
•	Anne Høgestøl (NDLA, Head of Administration and Finance)
•	Cecilie Eftedal (Head of NDLA Operations
Department)
collection of topics was distributed via the usual com• Ragna Tørdal (Head of Development Department)
munication channels (Ebner et al., 2015, p.22).
•	Johannes Leiknes Nag (Head of Support and Backup)
The interviews were conducted in English, recorded and
• Vibeke Klungland (Marketing Employee)
then transcribed. The transcription is based on Kuckartz,
• Leonhard Vårdal (Head of Education)
Dresing, Rädiker and Tefer (2007). The transcrip­tion of
•	Tommy Nordeng from Cerpus, development partthe length of the pauses etc. was omitted.
ner of NDLA
•	Svein-Tore With from Joubel, development partner
The qualitative content analysis according to Mayring
of NDLA
and Brunner (2009) was used for the analysis. An induc•	Bjorn Simonsen, representative of “Kommune Fortive procedure for the formation of categories made it
laget“ and
possible to focus on what the interviewees said and to
•	Anders Skogvold, representative of the Norwegian
maintain the necessary openness. MAXQDA was used
Association of schoolbook Publishers (Den Norske
to create a category system, whereby each category
Forleggerforening).
was provided with a description and an exemplary anchor example.
The interviews were based on a collection of questions
and topics compiled in the run-up to the study, in each The selected transcribed interview excerpts were
case clarifying with the interviewees which areas are of approved for publication by the interviewees. For legal
particular interest to them.
reasons, no permission was granted for one of the interviews.
The attempt to open up research right from the start
by not only asking one's own questions but also further
questions from the community, can be considered as
failed due to a lack of feedback. A mindmap with the

25 Systematic dissemination / 26 Acknowlegements

25 Systematic dissemination
For communication of the research results, the present publication has chosen an approach of systematic
dissem­ination, which is not necessarily usual in science
communication, at least not in the field of education.
The relevant stakeholders in education policy (education policy spokespersons of the parties in the federal
states and the respective parliamentary groups), school
administrations, state institutes and foundations were

identified by means of queries to the institutions and
a snowball procedure. The postal addresses of these
persons were recorded and the German version of this
publication was sent to these stakeholders by mail. All
this was done in hope of achieving a higher degree of
reception than only publishing the results in an academic
journal in English. At the same time, it was published as
an Open Access version and was disseminated via the
community-specific channels in German and English.

26 Acknowlegements
First and foremost I would like to thank the interviewees
from the NDLA team as well as the partners of Cerpus,
Joubel, "Kommune Forlaget" and the Norwegian Association of Textbook Publishers for their participation in
the interviews.
The presented project, the present Open Access pub­
lication and the conference based on it in November
2019 were made possible by the research funding of the
University of Bremen as well as the support of the Municipality of Bremerhaven, the Hanse-Wissenschaftskol-

leg, the Max Traeger Foundation and Faculty 12: Educational Sciences of the University of Bremen.
Additional thanks go to Ole Nekarda, Leanne Lütjen,
Lea Fischer, Anna Driver, Anna Zimmermann, Dan
Smith (from language-associates.de), Ghislaine Wijsman
and Sandra Stockmann for their support in the work on
this project. Special thanks go to Janine Biermann for the
design, Gabi Fahrenkrog, Jöran Muuß-Merholz and the
publishing house ZLL21.

71

72

27 References

27 References
Blees, Ingo, Cohen, Nadia, Massar, Tamara (2013):
Freie Bildungsmedien (OER). Dossier: Offene Bildungsressourcen / Open Educational Resources – Handlungsfelder, Akteure, Entwicklungsoptionen in internationaler
Perspektive. Frankfurt am Main: Deutsches Institut
für Internationale Pädagogische Forschung. Accessed online at: http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:0111-opus-78683
Deutscher Bildungsserver (2016):
Machbarkeitsstudie zum Aufbau und Betrieb von OER-Infrastrukturen in der Bildung. Accessed online at: http://
nbn-resolving.org/urn:nbn:de:0111-pedocs-117154
Ebner, Martin, Köpf, Elly, Muuß-Merholz, Jöran, Schön,
Martin, Schön, Sandra, Weichert, Nils (2015):
Ist-Analyse zu freien Bildungsmaterialien (OER). (Wikimedia Deutschland, Hrsg.)
EFTA Surveillance Authority (2011):
State Aid: Norwegian support to provider of learning
material cleared. Accessed online at: http://www.
eftasurv.int/press--publications/press-releases/
state-aid/nr/1535
Hinz, Andreas (2002):
Von der Integration zur Inklusion–terminologisches
Spiel oder konzeptionelle Weiterentwicklung. Zeitschrift für Heilpädagogik, 53 (9), pp. 354–361
Kreutzer, Till (2013):
Open Educational Resources (OER), Open-Content
und Urheberrecht., pp. 66
Kuckartz, Udo, Dresing, Thorsten, Rädiker, Stefan,
Tefer, Claus (2007):
Qualitative Evaluation. VS Verlag für Sozialwissen­schaften

Mayring, Philipp, Brunner, Eva (2009):
Qualitative Inhaltsanalyse. In: Barbara Friebertshäuser,
Annedore Prengel, Antje Langer (ed.): Handbuch Qualitative Forschungsmethoden in der Erziehungswissenschaft (S. 323–333). Weinheim: Juventa Verlag
Müller, Frank J. (2016):
Inklusive Open Educational Resources - Wie frei verfügbare Bildungsmaterialien im Umgang mit Heterogenität helfen können. Schweizerische Zeitschrift für
Heilpädagogik, 22 (4), pp. 38–44. Accessed online at:
https://www.pedocs.de/volltexte/2018/15586/
pdf/Mueller_2016_Inklusive_Open_Educational_
Resources.pdf
Müller, Frank J., Duong, Thuy Chinh (2015):
Nutzerzentrierte Problemlösestrategien – Design
Thinking als Entwicklungsinstrument für inklusive
Pädagogik. In: Irmtraud Schnell (ed.): Herausforderung
Inklusion: Theoriebildung und Praxis (S. 290–299). Bad
Heilbrunn: Klinkhardt
Muuß-Merholz, Jöran, Schaumburg, Felix (2014):
Open Educational Resources (OER) für Schulen in
Deutschland. Whitepaper zu Grundlagen, Akteuren
und Entwicklungsstand. Accessed online at: http://
www.collaboratory.de/w/Datei:OER-Whitepaper_2014einseitig.pdf
Sekretariat der Ständigen Konferenz der Kultusminister der Länder in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland
(2018):
Schüler, Klassen, Lehrer und erteilte Unterrichtsstunden
nach Bildungsbereichen. Accessed online at: https://
www.kmk.org/fileadmin/Dateien/pdf/Statistik/
Dokumentationen/SKL_Teil_ A _Schueler_2017.
xlsx

28 Imprint

28 Imprint

Publisher:
Verlag ZLL21 e.V., Hamburg www.ZLL21.de

Cover picture:
Photo by rawpixel on Unsplash

ISBN:
978-3-9818942-4-0

Printing:
Print shop of the University of Bremen

Responsible for the content:
Prof. Dr. Frank J. Müller
University of Bremen
Faculty 12: Educational sciences
frankj.mueller@uni-bremen.de

Design:
Janine Biermann

Twitter:
@oerinklusive
Circulation:
250 copies
Publication:
1st edition, May 2019

The publication and the conference were sponsored by:

Lizenz:
The work is released under an Open Access licence
Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0)
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/deed.de).

73

74

29 Glossary

29 Glossary
API
Application Programming Interface, interface for linking different programs/websites e.g. for import/export of data

SCORM
Container format in which e-learning content can be
packaged in a standardised form and used in other learning management platforms

Bloom (Taxonomy)
Classification scheme for describing learning objectives

WCAG Standard
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines

Dewey (Decimal Classification)
Classification scheme for describing the contents of
library holdings
Dublin Core Metadata Initiative
Initiative that collects standardized description schemes for different data types to improve retrievability
EFTA-Court
the Court of Justice for Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein, which ensures the application of EU law to
these States
Flash
Adobe multimedia format often used for interactive
educational content
Github
Platform to share and collaboratively develop source
code of applications
Learning Resource Metadata Initiative
Initiative that collects standardized description schemes for data types in the field of elearning to improve
retrievability
Learning Management Software (LMS)
Software platforms such as moodle, it's learning, etc.
on which content can be made available to pupils
MAXQDA
Software for the analysis of interviews
NDLA
Nasjonal Digital Læringsarena
OER
Open educational resources

