"x"
"1" "Matters of care: Speculative ethics in more than human worlds , by María Puig de la Bellacasa,  Minneapolis ,  University of Minnesota  Press, 201 7 ,  280  pp., $ 30.00  (paperback), ISBN  978-1-5179-0065-6"
"2" "“ Care?  Why should I care about care?”  This question,  raised  by one of  María  Puig de la Bellacasa’s  colleagues ,  is  one that could  be  reasonably  posed  by any critical scholar .  Care is, after all, a deeply fraught concept. Historically, the ideal of caretaking   has been used to justify women’s domestic confinement  and their lack of remuneration .  More recently, it’s been coopted by corporations in their altruistic marketing strategies  (think “ C BS  Cares”   or “Chase Cares”  or  “Nordstrom Cares” ) .  Taking seriously  care’s ambivalent, non-innocent character ,  Matters of Care  offers  a praiseworthy posthumanist intervention  into the politics of caring,   working to  recuperate care from the trappings of  neoliberal  biopolitics."
"3" "In keeping with Joan Tronto’s definition of care as a “generic doing,” c are  for  Puig de la Bellacasa is less about niceties and good feelings  than it is  about the  concrete, mundane   actions  we undertake to  maintain our world  and its inhabitants .  As the subtitle of the book suggests,  Matters of Care   broadens the horizons of car ing  to include ‘more   than   human’  beings  as  both  subjects and objects of car e  in a complex web of interdependenc ies .     Moreover, the author intervenes in and revises the ethical framework we use to understand care,   adopting a more speculative ethics that resists  normative control  and offers   few absolutes."
"4" "The book is divided into two parts  and five chapters . Part One, “Knowledge Politics,”  constructs a tentative framework for caring, thinking ,  and knowing    through the lenses of  science and technology studies (STS) and feminist  standpoint  theory .  In Chapter One,  “Assembling Neglected Things,”  Puig de la  Bellacasa  articulates her own assessment of scientific knowledge politics through an extended commentary on Bruno Latour’s   ‘matters of concern.’  Matters of concern move  beyond  th ose   technoscientifically transcendent ‘matters of fact’ that preoccupy both positivists and their deconstructionist critics,  accounting  for the emotional investments  so   often neglected in the singular pursuit of Truth. Thinking with and extending    Latour’s ideas, Puig de la Bellacasa formulates  ‘matters of care’ as a more active and  involved  notion than matters of concern with a  greater political potential t o   “make things matter.”"
"5" "Chapter Two, “Thinking with Care , ”  brings   standpoint feminist epistemology and the posthumanist feminism of Donna Haraway  into the knowledge politics discussion .  This chapter  convincingly endorses ‘thinking with care’ as a means of building solidarity among humans  a s well as   ‘ other than humans . ’     Crucially,  Puig de la Bellacasa  suggests that we  extend care to account for non-human wor ld s without  forsaking our ver y  human commitments, an important corrective to the sort of environmentalism that  fails  to  attend to  human  oppression .  She provides further nuance regarding the aspect of care as  ‘ thinking for, ’  which involves the effort to understand the struggles of others but runs the risk of  appropriating or consuming their experience. Care, in this way, is always  ‘ non-innocent ’ and must therefore be handled with care."
"6" "Chapter Three, “Touching Visions,” considers the sensor y  aspects of care, contrastin g  vision   with  touch. Whereas vision, linked to the transcendent technoscientific gaze, enables distant, asymmetric observation, touch is necessarily imminent ,   in that it requires direct contact ,  and reciprocal   in  that one cannot touch  something  without also being touched  by it .  Puig de la Bellacasa  thus  considers   touch as  an ap t   sensory metaphor for knowing with care.  That said, she is careful to resist over-valorizing touch , noting  the ways in which  touch can be undesired or painful.  Touch  can  even  be used to refuse care, as  when  pushing other s  away. Especially interesting in this chapter is the author’s assessment of haptic technolog ies , which  are  perhaps little more than substitute s  for the caring touch that  these  technologies  forestall ."
"7" "Having pieced together a  tentative  framework in the previous chapters, Part Two, “Speculative Ethics in Antiecological Times,” assesses  care ethics in  the  grounded  context of permaculture work .  In Chapter Fou r, “Alterbiopolitics,” Puig de la Bellacasa p uts forth the permacultural process of sustaining life as an alternative   to the  oppressive  biopolitics  of  hegemonic ethics. Here, the author contrasts the everyday caring relationalities embedded in permaculture work with  both  the legalistic risk aversion of business / research ethics  and  the depoliticized universalism of  conventional  ethics. Finally, Chapter 5, “Soil Times,” accounts for the temporal aspect of ecological care. Specifically, the author asserts that ecological preservation requires those who care for soil  and soil-dwelling organisms  to break with the rapid pace of technoscientific futurity and account for the timescape of the soil itself. Unlike the linear rapidity of humans in the 21 st  century Western world, the soil works slowly and cyclically.  So e ven as ecological crisis forces us to act quickly to repair  what we  ha ve broken, we must find ways to align our own temporalities with the rhythms of the ecologies we care for if there is to be any hope for long-term continuity."
"8" "Taken as a whole,  Matters of Care  makes  a  case for  the political  relevance  of care  that is simultaneously evocative and measured, radical and nuanced .   Floating between such seemingly unrelated topics as soil cultivation,  corporate risk management , domestic labor, and the politics of citing women scholars,  Puig de la Bellacasa  never loses the thread linking these disjointed matters   to  a  radical  politics of car e .   As a work of speculative rather than normative ethics, this book raises more questions than it answers. So while those looking for concrete answers may be frustrated by Puig de la Bellacasa’s meandering ruminations, others will delight in the pleasant ambiguity.  Those interested in science and technology studies, feminist epistemologies, and ecological issues will gain much from this book, as will those who study social movements, emotions, intergroup processes, or just about anything else where care is relevant. I, for one, will be thinking  with this book quite a lot for the foreseeable future."
"9" "Andrew Shapiro"
"10" "The Graduate Center, City University of New York"
"11" "ashapiro3@gradcenter.cuny.edu"
