Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.11

Pp.124-135

Re-thinking the Practice of Teaching Literature to Enhance EFL Students’ Civic Skills: An
Algerian Perspective

Mohammed KHELADI
Department of English
University of Tlemcen, Algeria

Abstract
Besides the undisputable role of literature in teaching civic virtues through exposing students to
characters and themes that accurately exemplify and truly represent civility, teaching literature
can serve a means to inculcate in students various civic skills, such as conflict resolution,
leadership, negotiation of meaning and constructive criticism. Yet, to attain such skills, teachers
need to reshape their teaching practices to be in conformity with the principles of modern education
that champion active learning methodologies. The present paper argues for the necessity of
rethinking the traditional teacher-centered methods in teaching English literature in the Algerian
context as they tend to reduce students’ active participatory roles in learning. In response to this,
a number of suggestions have accordingly been put forward to enable students reach more
independency in dealing with literature. This orientation of thought stems from the belief that
active learning is conducive to active citizenship.
Key words: Active learning, civic virtues, civic skills, literature teaching, teacher-centered
methods.
Cite as: KHELADI, M. (2019). Re-thinking the Practice of Teaching Literature to Enhance
EFL Students’ Civic Skills: An Algerian Perspective. Arab World English Journal, 10 (2)124135.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.11

124

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Re-thinking the Practice of Teaching Literature to Enhance EFL

KHELADI

Introduction
The noticeable revival of literary studies since the 1980s has marked the integration of literature
in foreign language curricula worldwide (Carter, 1993). Yet, integrating literature in an EFL
context entails the careful exploitation and the sensitive handling of the literary text to put the
students in a better position to benefit from it linguistically, culturally and motivationally. In the
same vein of thought, it is hard to deny the fact that literature, as an educating material, plays a
significant role in teaching students civic virtues and noble values as it often exposes them to
universal characters and themes that exemplify and represent civility. Teaching literature is equally
considered an efficient means to inculcate civic skills in students, such as conflict resolution,
leadership, negotiation of meaning and constructive criticism. However, in order for teachers to
enable students acquire such skills; their teaching practices have to be reshaped to concretize an
active learning methodology. This is another way of saying that teachers need to rethink the
traditional instructional modes that usually consider the student as “Tabula Rasa” to be filled up
with factual knowledge about literary productions. In response to some inadequacies of teaching
EFL literature in the Algerian context, the present paper suggests alternate strategies that
encourage students reach independency in dealing with literary texts. These suggestions stem from
the belief that active learning is conducive to active citizenship.
Literature as a Resource for Teaching Civic Virtues
In addition to its significant role in language learning and cultural understanding, literature can
also contribute to the students’ civic readiness due to the fact that narratives, be them fictional or
historical, are very likely to introduce and expose them to universal characters and themes that
truly represent civility and good citizenship. In fact, literature according to Lazar (1993) has the
power to educate the whole person. It elevates and transforms experience, and functions as a
continuing criticism of values. The aesthetic delight of literature also serves to purify emotions
and morals, and illumine the intellect. That is why, it is considered as an important part of
education (Diyanni, 2002).In emphasizing the role of literature in providing the students with the
richest and the most efficient contexts for moral awareness and behaviour, Bohlin (2005)
accordingly writes:
The study of literature provides students with an occasion for focused moral reflection and
dialogue, an occasion to examine what informs the moral compass guiding fictional lives.
Adolescents need a constructive context within which to talk about the lives of others –
how they sorted out conflicting desires and learned (or failed to learn) to make their actions
consistent with their ideals. (p.27)
Furthermore, literary productions all too often mirror the social, economic and political issues in
societies. The author sees these issues from within an idiosyncratic angle, and therefore, attempts
to present them to his/her readers. This knowledge can in turn help improve society. Needless to
recall, civics sets the target of building the character of an ideal citizenship by stressing good
morals and noble values, and this can be achieved through literature. The didactic aspect of
literature is significantly efficient in inculcating these teachings in young readers in an implicit
manner (Prasanth, 2004).

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

125

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Re-thinking the Practice of Teaching Literature to Enhance EFL

KHELADI

By the same token, Quigley (2000) praises the crucial role of literature in setting and
reinforcing civics learning in educational institutions. He also discusses the benefit that might arise
from introducing students to stories that exemplify civic virtues (courage, tolerance, patriotism,
integrity, respect...etc) emphasizing the role of the teacher in selecting the most appropriate works
conducive to the fullest understanding of morality in civic life.
More to this point, Stotsky (1992) insightfully discusses the merits of literature in
inculcating in young learners civic virtues and values. She first draws attention to the role of a
national (American) literature in enriching their historical knowledge as well as raising their
awareness of the nation’s cultural identity. In this very specific context, Stotsky referred to some
outstanding American literary works such as Benjamin Franklin's autobiography and Ralph Waldo
Emerson's essays which ,according to her, have much to play in attaining an understanding not
only of America’s political and social values, but also its civic identity.
On the other hand, Stocky (1992) insists on extending the exposure of students to literature
to include works on other people and from other corners. She firmly thinks that such “foreign
works” in spite of their distinct cultural perspectives and loads, in comparison with the local ones,
can help students understand the universality of humans’ desire for freedom and justice worldwide.
In making this point and to be illustrative enough, she referred to the works of Chinua Achebe and
Alexander Solzhenitsyn.
Teaching Literature: Teaching Civic Skills
Besides its role in teaching civic virtues, teaching literature can serve a means to promote students’
civic skills (Stosky, 1992). Yet it seems wiser to wonder what the term “civic skills” refers to.
Civic skills have been approached differently among civic educators. According to Kirlin (2003)
civic skills refer to a set of individual abilities that are essential for an effective and sufficient
participation in civic life. These include communicative skills, critical thinking and interpretation
skills, monitoring skills, organizational skills, group discussion skills and cooperative skills at
large. Kirlin (2003) accordingly writes that “Civic skills do not exist in a vacuum; they are part of
a larger set of ideas about what is believed to be necessary for citizens to be engaged in public life.
(p.3)
Preparing students to be civically engaged requires teaching them new knowledge and
skills such as problem solving and thinking critically to initiate social actions in community
settings. This is the idea of Battistonni (2002) as cited in Welch (2007) who identifies a number
of specific skills that are deemed necessary for students to be engaged citizens. These include the
following:
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

Critical thinking skills
Communication skills
Problem solving skills
Civic imagination and creativity
Collective action
Organizational analysis

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

126

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Re-thinking the Practice of Teaching Literature to Enhance EFL

KHELADI

While civic skills can be acquired at several organizational environments, they are all too often
connected to and associated with civic courses offered at educational settings. Yet, beyond
restricting the acquisition of civic skills within a standalone course with rigid boundaries, the point
worth being raised in this context is the contribution of EFL teaching in promoting such skills
because the importance of civic education and citizenship expands beyond a separate well-defined
course, and therefore, it can take place in any class across curricula. In this respect, Burchett Gauna
and Paul (2016) rightly posit that “preparing students to actively take part in the world around
them is not merely the goal of one class; it is the overarching goal of school community.”(pp.1920)
It is within this vein of thought that the role of teaching EFL literature in promoting
students’ civic skills and civic engagement should be explored. In line with the necessary skills for
ensuring civic engagement, it seems that literature is in a better position to respond to and fulfill
these requirements. This would deliberately lead us to recall that literature can serve a source for:
➢ Linguistic development: since it provides the students with genuine and perfect examples
of writing and expressive varieties.(Collie & Slater,2000)
➢ Mental training: reading literature improves the theory of mind. It urges and motivates
the reader to unveil ambiguities and incompleteness of characters and plots. (Kidd &
Castano,2013)
➢ Open to interpretation: Because of its various layers of meaning, literature is open to
interpretation. The figurative aspect in literature adds impetus to perceiving it differently.
Being a material open to interpretation also enhances the students’ critical thinking skills.
(Lazar,1993)
➢ Communicative drive: taking literature as a source of discussion improves students’
communicative skills (paraphrasing, summarizing, arguing..etc) (Showalter,2003)
➢ Tolerance and understanding: getting insight into another culture through reading
literature promotes the sense of tolerance and accepting otherness.(Kramsch,1993)
➢ Cooperative effect: involving the students in reading and analyzing the same book
serves a useful task to enhance their cooperative skills (Daniels, 2002).
Active Learning and Civic Engagement
According to Quigley (2000) the acquisition of civic skills necessitates involving the students in
an active learning environment. By the same token, Colby et al (2003) assert that promoting civic
engagement in classrooms is ideally founded on some principles that include: active learning,
learning as a social process, contextualized learning, reflective practice and the ability to represent
an idea in more than one modality. The remarkable emphasis on active learning in attaining civic
engagement goes in parallel with the recent trends in modern education, which has been primarily
concerned with making students responsible for their own learning. This direction of thought has
been driven by the strong desire to achieve a sustainable, self directed and life-long learning. To
this end, active learning seems and yet has proven to be, despite the constraints that might impede
its implementation, an adequate approach to move from the traditional ways of instruction which
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

127

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Re-thinking the Practice of Teaching Literature to Enhance EFL

KHELADI

stress the role of the teacher and the knowledge s/he delivers at the expense of the role of students
in constructing knowledge.
Broadly speaking, active learning refers to some strategies and techniques that extend the
role of student beyond simply listening to a lecture. Hence, the student is required to be engaged
in learning through discovery, processing, applying as well as evaluating input. This basic idea
about the essence of active learning is expressed by Felder and Brent (2009) who posit that active
learning denotes “anything course-related that all students in a class session are called up on to do
other than simply watching, listening and taking notes.” (p.2)
By the same token, and in a more detailed manner, Faust and Paulson (1998) highlight the
dynamic nature of active learning. They therefore associate it with
Any learning activity engaged in by students in a classroom other than listening passively
to an instructor’s lecture. …. this includes everything from listening practices that help
students absorb what they hear, to writing exercises in which students react to lecture
material, to complex group exercises in which students apply course material to “real life”
situations and/or new problems. (p.4)
In brief, because the crux of active learning is, par excellence, student-centredness,it caters for the
different learning styles, addresses students’ needs and most importantly exhorts the teacher to
come down from the pedestal to assume the role of a facilitator who strives to create a supporting
and autonomous learning environment.
Active Learning VS Passive Learning
Passive learning is deeply interwoven with traditional approaches of education that consider the
teacher as the only source of knowledge. It is characterized by the limited personal involvement,
and as such, it is not self –reinforcing. Passive students do little to contribute to learning; their
roles are typically minor, and because of this, they “tend to become disinterested, non-motivated
and nonresponsive, and ineffectual” (Petress, 2008, p. 566). The issue of students’ passivity at
higher education institutions, in particular, has recently become a serious concern for many
educationalists (Bonwell& Eison, 1991). Though this phenomenon might be attributed to many
reasons, the motivational drive seems to be at the core of it. Commenting on this issue, Hariss
(1997) posits that “many university students are passive learners; their prime concern is to pass or
get a good mark which will ultimately contribute towards their opportunities for further study or
employment.”(p.13)
On the other hand, the controversial issue to be raised here regarding active and passive
learning is that both concepts are sometimes misperceived and misused, in the sense that many of
us would argue that students may learn in a passive fashion and that learning, by definition, implies
a type of activity. Clarifying this confusion, Ryan and Marten (1989) in cogent words write that:
Students learn both passively and actively. Passive learning takes place when students
take on the role of "receptacles of knowledge"; that is, they do not directly participate
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

128

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Re-thinking the Practice of Teaching Literature to Enhance EFL

KHELADI

in the learning process... Active learning is more likely to take place when students are
doing something besides listening.(p.20)
Active learning, as opposed to passive learning, stimulates the student to think about and consider
the teacher as being a resource, a guide, an enabler and a facilitator for further endeavours and
higher challenges. Active students usually assume dynamic and energetic roles in forging their
education. They tend to show the full readiness to invest in what is learned by discussing it,
working with it, explaining it, transforming and even testing it. To sum up this point, Petress (2008)
as cited in Kheladi (2017, p.56) provides the major characteristics of active and passive learners.
•
•
•

•
•
•
•

Active learner
Asks stimulating questions
Challenges ideas.
Follows up what has been learned
with personal extension:
supplementary independent reading,
extended projects etc…
Connects what is being learned with
what previously learned for better
application of input.
Cooperates with peers: s/he shares
views and exchanges findings with
them.
Demonstrates an enthusiastic attitude
towards learning.
Stimulates others.

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Passive learner
Lacks motivation and enthusiasm
Faces problems of retention.
Does not ask probing and
challenging questions.
Fails to apply what has been learned.
Even though s/he is bright, s/he tends
to acquire a reputation as not so
smart learner.
Is not always sought out for their
views or insights on what they know.
Does not easily accept cooperation
with others.

Literature Teaching in the Algerian Context: State of the Art
Similar to many other EFL contexts, the teaching of literature in most Algerian universities is
regretfully still traditional in nature in the sense that teachers depend heavily on lecturing and
extended presentations. Within such modality of instruction, students rarely penetrate underlying
meanings of literature as their roles are all too often reduced to memorizing and rote learning. In
fact, many literature courses are turned into the mere transposition of teachers’ own interpretations
of texts leaving little space for students to seek and evidence meaning by themselves.
Yet, one has to draw attention to the fact that such a traditional practice often stems from
the status of literature itself within the curriculum, particularly at the graduate studies. Literature,
in comparison with other language- oriented subjects, is to some extent unfocused. Indeed, besides
the limited time allotted to literary studies, the curriculum in its very essence is a survey of the
major literary genres and movements. This is the reason why teachers find themselves in many
cases urged to adopt a typically informative approach. However, this obsession with coverage
rather than with developing in students the necessary competencies of how literature should be
read and understood tends to prevent students from appreciating literature.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

129

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Re-thinking the Practice of Teaching Literature to Enhance EFL

KHELADI

Moreover, such a traditional practice of literature teaching has had undesirable effects on
students’ literary competence. Many literature courses tend to direct the students’ attention and
interest towards contexts, backgrounds, history and sometimes to criticism principally led by the
teacher, leaving little space for the vital foundation for appreciating literature, i.e. language. This
focus on the extrinsic analysis of the literary text, one might say, is the hall mark of many literature
graduate classrooms nationwide. Teachers usually rely on the use of excerpts particularly from
novels and assign students the task of extensive reading and because sometimes they do not,
reflexive teaching, to use Showalter’s (2003) term, automatically takes place . Very few works are
entirely studied in the classroom. This is not to devaluate entirely what Palmer (1998) and
Showalter (2003) referred to as teaching from the “microsom”. But one has to recall the fact that
excerpts often lose the excellence of style, and therefore, reducing the benefit of literature. (Cook,
1986)
Teachers on the other hand, often put the blame on students for showing a striking
reluctance in nudging themselves into extensive reading. This reluctance, however, is further
increased by the selected texts. Indeed, the focus of the syllabus is entirely centered on the study
of canonical works and seldom involves modern and non-native literature except for advanced
literary studies within which students encounter other kinds of literature, particularly postcolonial
texts. Another undeniable fact is that regardless of the approach being implemented in teaching
EFL literature, the text is not sufficiently exploited in the classroom so as to involve students in an
active learning environment, though most teachers seem to be well aware about the significance
of active learning in achieving engagement with literature among students. Their common
arguments, in this respect, stem from the assumption that such learning strategies are
characteristically hard to apply. Implementing active learning strategies according to many of them
is a real challenge especially for those dealing with large classes. In such settings, they are more
frequently encountered with the fear to lose control over their classes despite the fact the teacher
are supposed to be adequately trained to opt for efficient classroom management techniques that
ensure the desirable flow of the course for a supportive learning environment. Another source of
anxiety for teachers in applying active learning grows out from the endless obsession with
coverage. This is another way of saying that active learning strategies are time consuming, and
this in turn urges teachers to leave out some scheduled items or/and deal with others sketchily.
Yet, teachers have to account for the fact that covering the syllabus must not be attained at the cost
of students’ active engagement. The neglect of active learning is also the result of some
teachers’reluctance and resistance of change. Many of them would feel comfortable when sticking
to the traditional modes of teaching because of their uncertainties of what the new teaching
techniques would bring out to them. Consequently and inevitably this will lead them to act as
custodians of knowledge, sometimes underestimating their students’ abilities (Kheladi, 2017).
Towards An Active Learning Literature Classroom
In response to the different inadequacies and the traditional instructional methods of teaching
literature, the present research outlines some recommendations and suggestions which hopefully
will contribute to the promotion of active learning in the Algerian EFL literature classroom.
Text Selection: Towards Familiar Themes
The first step towards achieving an active learning environment concerns the text itself. Ensuring
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

130

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Re-thinking the Practice of Teaching Literature to Enhance EFL

KHELADI

engagement with literature necessitates opting for familiar themes that prompt the students to
interact and transact with literary texts. However, familiarity, in this context, is not seen in generic
terms because, as argued by Brock (1990), familiarity with the values, themes and issues portrayed
in literary texts can significantly affect the students’ comprehension and appreciation of literature
more than concrete elements like background, place or time. Therefore, opting for universal
themes such as courage, integrity, love, patriotism and sacrifice allows students to “view literature
as an experience that enriches their lives” (Ali, 1994, p.289) .Stated differently, if literature is to
matter, the text has to be chosen in relation to the real life-worlds of the students. This way
literature will succeed in addressing directly their emotions; meeting their interests, catering for
their needs and concerns. And as such it helps them grow as responsible citizens.
Exploiting Literature
It is quite paradoxical that many Algerian EFL literature teachers extensively argue for the
boundless merits of literature in the foreign language classroom while their teaching practices, in
many instances, reflect little interaction between their students and the literary text. Worse still,
many of them would go further to draw a rigid distinction between the study of literature as content
and the use of literature as a resource for language learning. Unfortunately, this clear cut divide is
often conducive to reducing the benefit of the literature. On this basis, the need for exploiting the
literary text becomes de facto a sine qua none condition for attaining an active learning
environment. Authorities on literature teaching such as Lazar (1993), Carter and Long (1991) and
Parkinson and Thomas (2000) have acknowledged the significance of working with literature.
Their suggestions, in this very specific context, include multiple activities that teachers might bring
into their classrooms some of which are traditional while others are innovative. Yet, what seems
to account much is that these activities ought to be student-centered, carried out both individually
or cooperatively. Methodologically speaking, within such activities, literary texts might be
manipulated, rewritten from a different point of view, compared, summarized, transformed to other
genres and even performed. (Kheladi, 2017)
Liberating Students’ Thoughts and Emotions: A Reader Response Stance
If an effective literary reading in the EFL classroom is to take place, it is strongly advisable to
develop an adequate pedagogy that might assume a place for the teacher to enable the students
reach independency in reading, interpreting ,and hence, appreciating literature. It is believed that
this could be achieved if a reader response approach is encouraged. The reader response theory in
literature has shifted the exclusive focus on the text to an emphasis on the reader. The very
assumption underlying this transactional model of reading is that meaning is built between the
reader and the text (Rosenblatt, 1994, Probst, 1994,). Rosenblatt (1994) argues that the transaction
process is determined by a number of variables including: the attention, the physical and the
emotional state of the reader. In a deeper sense, within a transactional reading, the reader brings to
the text personality traits, past events, present preoccupations which make his relationship with
the text distinct and unique. The reader response approach develops in the students the ability to
create meaning themselves beyond those provided and sometimes imposed by the teacher, critics,
and their peers and even by the text itself. This is in fact another way of prompting the students,
as independent individuals, to echo freely their own opinions and judgments by bearing upon their
personal life experience.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

131

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Re-thinking the Practice of Teaching Literature to Enhance EFL

KHELADI

Literary Discussions: A Step forward towards Dialogic Teaching
As stated above the transactional reading in the literature classroom is of capital importance. Yet,
it might well be supplemented and further elaborated through more open confrontations with the
opinions suggested by teachers and peers. This is the reason why literary discussions must be
encouraged and the role of the students to take part in them must be praised and sustained. Ideally,
teaching literature turns to be effective when it stimulates contemplation and synthesis by thinking
over new concepts, posing sound and critical questions, raising relevant hypotheses and drawing
convincing conclusions. To this end, literary discussions can offer the students the widest
opportunity to develop and share their own interpretations of texts, to deepen their and others’
understanding and to argue against readymade and/or previously established judgments (Clark,
2009). Introducing literary discussions is a means to move away from and transcend the
predominant monologic modes of teaching within which the teacher is the “all know master” who
arrogantly takes over the flow of talking in depositing knowledge, leaving little space for students’
interaction and participation. Conversely, dialogic instruction, which stems from Bakhtin’s (1981)
notion of dialogic discourse, challenges the idea that meaning is authoritative and fixed. Dialogic
instruction tends to favour and sustain the students’ active participation in classroom discourse. It
champions their voices in discussing and interpreting texts collaboratively with the teacher.
Therefore, “by making their classroom interaction more dialogic, teachers can engage students in
a collaborative deliberation of complex questions and support the development of students’
thinking.” (Reznitskaya, 2012, p.446).The dialogic mode of teaching is a step forward in preparing
students to be engaged in civic activities. Through discussions, students acquire the
communicative and interpersonal social skills to express and defend their own opinions as well as
to reflect soundly on those suggested by others.
Cooperative Learning
The premise of cooperative learning, as an active learning strategy, is that students are engaged in
working together towards a common goal (Carter, 1993). This in turn makes cooperative learning
more structured and more organized than traditional group works. Creating a cooperative learning
environment in the classroom necessitates the active involvement of heterogeneous group
members in tasks. In so doing, each member is required to learn from and contribute to others’
learning. Teachers, therefore, must strive to concretize the essential components of (CL) which,
according to Jonson et al (1993), are:
(1) Positive interdependence: The student in the group must embrace the belief that his/her
success is connected to and dependent on the success of his/her peers and vice –versa.
(2) Face-to-face interaction: The students are required to promote interaction in the group by
explaining to each other how to solve problems, discuss concepts and, equally, teach their
knowledge to each other.
(3) Personal accountability: Students learn together so that they can, in a later stage, perform
better as individuals. They should be made aware of the fact that though they are working together
towards a common objective, each member is responsible for his/her own contribution. Calling
randomly on individual students to present their group’s work is a common procedure to check
personal accountability.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

132

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Re-thinking the Practice of Teaching Literature to Enhance EFL

KHELADI

(4) Interpersonal and social skills: Besides linguistic skills, students learn interpersonal skills
such as attentive listening to others, providing useful explanation, giving directives and acting as
coordinators.
(5) Group processing: A common procedure for group processing is to ask each group to list
things the group have well done and things that should further be improved.
The benefit of cooperative learning in the literature classroom would be boundless when
critically implemented. The structured cooperative activities, within which the groups are provided
with well-defined guidelines regarding the task and what ought to be achieved by the end of the
course, have the very potential to improve students’ academic achievements and promote in them
effective skills, such as negotiation of meaning, problem solving, critical thinking and efficient
communicative strategies. In this respect, Slavin (1991) posits that implementing cooperative
learning in the classroom will result “in improvements both in the achievement of students and in
the quality of their interpersonal relationships” (p.71). Obviously enough, such qualities are
necessary in both school and extra school settings.
Conclusion
The present paper has praised the role of literature in promoting civic engagement. Introducing
literature to students and inciting them to explore deeply its universal themes and characters is
conducive to inculcating civic values in them. In addition to this, it has been made clear that in
order to improve students’ civic readiness, it is crucial to reconsider both the teaching materials
and the practiced methodologies. It is within this vein of thought that the present research has
brought into play the claim of many civic educationalists in stressing the significance of active
learning in enhancing students’ civic skills. Active learning requires the students to do more than
simply listening to a lecture and taking notes. It rather urges them to be fully engaged in a process
of discovery, processing, applying and evaluating input. Regretfullly, and the literature teaching
practice in most Algerian EFL settings is still interwoven with old fashioned teacher-centred
approaches that rather instill passivity in students. Active learning is seen as a requisite for active
citizenship. That is why the present paper has presented some recommendations and suggestions
to help concretize an active learning environment in the literature classroom. The text has to be
carefully chosen to motivate students seeking further and deeper knowledge. The teaching practice
on the other hand has to be aligned with a student centred approach that allows the move from
“banking” to “dialogue”.
About the Author:
Dr. Mohammed KHELADI is a senior lecturer at the University of Tlemcen, Algeria. He holds
a PhD in the Didactics of Literature. He has been teaching English for ten years now. His field
of interest is literature and civilization. ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6835-7362
References
Ali, S. (1994). The Reader-Response Approach: An Alternative for Teaching Literature in a
Second Language. Journal of Reading. 37(4), 288-296.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1981). The Dialogic Imagination: Four essays (C. Emerson, Trans., M.Holquist,
Ed.). Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

133

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Re-thinking the Practice of Teaching Literature to Enhance EFL

KHELADI

Battistoni,R.M.(2002). Civic Engagement across the Curriculum. Providence,RI:Campus
Compact.
Bohlin, K. E. (2005). Teaching Character Education Through Literature: Awakening the Moral
Imagination in Secondary Classrooms Teaching Character Education.London: Routledge
Falmer.
Bonwell, C., & Eison, J. (199). Active learning: Creating excitement in the classroom, ASHEERIC
Higher Education Report No. 1. Washington, D. C.: The George Washington University,
School of Education and Higher Education.
Brock, M.N. (1990): The Case for Localized Literature in the ESL Classroom. English Teaching
Forum XXVIII/ (3) 22-25.
Brumfit, C. & Carter, R. (1986). Literature and Language Teaching. Oxford:Oxford University
Press.
Burchett Gauna,B. &Paul,M. (2016).Civic Education Training Promote Active Learning with Real
-World outcomes. SPACE: Students’ perspectives About Civic Engagement. 2 (1),18-21.
Carter, R.(1993).Introducing Applied linguistics:An A-Z guide. Harmondsworth:Penguin.
Carter, R. & Long, M.N. (1991). Teaching Literature. Harlow: Longman.
Clark, K. (2009). The Nature and Influence of Comprehension Strategy use during Peer-led
Literature Discussions: An Analysis of Intermediate Grade Students’ Practice. Literacy
Research and Instruction. (48), 95-119
Cook, G. (1986). Texts, Extracts, and Stylistic Texture. In C. J. Brumfit and R. A. Carter
(eds).Literature and Language Teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 150–166.
Colby, A., Ehrilich,T., Beaumont,E. & Stephens, J.(2003).Educating Citizens : Preparing
America’s Undergraduates for Lives of Moral and Civic Responsibility .San Francisco
,CA: Jossey Bass.
Collie, J. & Slater, S. (2000). Literature in the Language Classroom. Cambridge: Cambdridge
University press.
Daniels, H.(2002). Literature Circles: Voice and Choice in Book Clubs and Reading Groupes.
(2nd ed). Portland, ME: Stenhouse.
Diyanni, R. (2002): Literature: Reading Fiction, Poetry, and Drama (5th Ed.). New York: Graw
Hill.
Faust, J. L., & Paulson, D. R. (1998). Active Learning in the College Classroom. Journal on
Excellence in College Teaching. 9 (2), 3-24.
Felder, R.M. & Brent, R. (2009). Active learning: An introduction. ASQ Higher Education Brief,
2(4),1-5.http://www4.ncsu.edu/unity/lockers/users/f/felder/public/Papers/ALpaper
(ASQ).pdf .
Gallavan, N. P., & Kottler, E. (2002).After the Reading Assignment: Strategies for Leading
Student-centered Classroom Conversations. The Social Studies. 93(6), 267-271.
Harris,M. (1997).Self-assessment of Language Learning in Formal Settings.ELT Journal on
Excellence in College Teaching, 9 (2), 3-24.
JohnsoN, D.W.,Johnson, R.T.& Holubec, E.J. (1993). Circles of Learning: Cooperation in the
Classroom (4th ed.). Edina, MN: Interaction Books.
Kheladi,M.(2017). Reflections upon the Teaching of EFL Literature as a Means for Promoting
Students’ Active Learning. Doctorate thesis. University of Tlemcen, Algeria.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

134

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Re-thinking the Practice of Teaching Literature to Enhance EFL

KHELADI

Kidd,D and Castano,E.(2013). Reading Literary Fiction Improves Theory of Mind. Retrieved
from:
http://scottbarykaufman.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/10Science-2013-Kiddscience.1239918.pdf.
Kirlin, M. (2003). The Role of Civic Skills in Fostering Civic Engagement. Center for Information
and Research on Civic Learning and Engagement working paper 06,
http://www.civicyouth.org/research/products/working_papers.htm.
Kramsch, C. (1993). Context and Culture in Language Teaching .Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Lazar, G. (1993): Literature and language teaching: A guide for teachers and trainers.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Parkinson, B. & Thomas, H. R.(2000).Teaching Literature in a Second Language. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Petress, K. (2008). What is Meant by active Learning?. Education. 128(4), 566-569.
Prasanth, K. J. (2004). Methods of Teaching Civics. New Delhi: Discovery Publishing House.
Probst, R. E. (1994). Reader -Response Theory and the English Curriculum. The
English Journal.83(3), 37-44.
Quigley, C.N., (2000). Global Trends in Civic Education. Center for Civic Education, Bandung.
http://www.civiced.org/papers/articles_indonesia.html.
Reznitskaya, A. (2012). Dialogic Teaching: Rethinking Language Use during Literature
Discussions. The reading teacher. 65(7), 446-456.
Rosenblatt, L. (1994). The Reader, the Text, the Poem. The Transactional Theory of the Literary
Work. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
Ryan, M. P., and. Martens, G.G. (1989). Planning a College Course: A Guidebook
for the Graduate Teaching Assistant. Ann Arbor, Mich: National Center for Research to Improve
Postsecondary Teaching and Learning.
Showalter, E. (2003): Teaching Literature. Oxford: Blackwell.
Slavin, R. E. (1991). Synthesis of Research on Cooperative Learning. Educational Leadership. 48,
71-82
Stotsky, S. (1992). The Connections between Language Education and Civic Education. ERIC
Digest, Bloomington, IN: ERRIC Clearinghouse FOR Social Studies /Social Science
Education,ED248318.
Welch, M. (2007). Identifying and Teaching Civic Engagement Skills Through Service Learning.
In Merllath, L. and Labhrain, I. M. (edits). Higher education and Civic Engagement :
International Perspectives,pp.103-120.Aldershot: Ashgate Publishging.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

135

