"x"
"1" "The making of professors :  Assessment and  recognition  in academic recruitment"
"2" "Julian Hamann"
"3" "Leibniz Center for Science and Societ y, Leibniz University Hannover"
"4" "Abstract"
"5" "How do academics  become  professors?  This  paper   considers  the making of  ‘professor’  as  a  subject  position  through which  academics  are  acknowledged   in  both  organizational contexts  and   disciplinary field s .  The paper examines  social  processes of  recognition  in  145  appointment procedures  for professorships in  the  discipline  of  history  at  sixteen   German universities between 195 0  and 1985.  Based on an analysis of  over  15 00 documents from archived appointment records, I  investigate   how  academics  are  acknowledged  as professorial in appointment procedures . The procedures  invoked both  (1)  processes of judgment, in which worth and qualities are attributed to candidates, and (2) processes of legitimation, in which said judgments are stabilized and made acceptable .   Using insights from  the sociology of valuation and evaluation, t his  paper  sheds light on   the  fundamental processes of  recognition  and valorization in academia .  The findings  contribute to  the sociology of scientific knowledge and science and technology studies ,   which  have  concentrated on academic  recognition  in  the  realm of  research ,  but paid less attention to  such  recognition   i n organizational contexts .  Complementing this literature, t he paper  allows for a more general   understanding  of ‘professor’ as a focal  academic  subject   position ."
"6" "Introduction"
"7" "How do academics become professors?  Th is  question may  seem trivial  at first .   Although  hiring  procedures  differ between  national  higher education systems, most systems require  academics  to  move  through  a series of distinct  career stages ,   beginning with earning a  PhD.  During the process ,  academics  are socialized into their respective communities,  developing  skills and collecting performance markers in teaching, research, administration , and  other  areas .  But how do es an   academic  actually  become  a   subject  who  is  acknowledged  by their peers as   professorial ? I n the current paper, I   examine this  social  process of   recognition  and  propos e   that scholars should  conceive of ‘professor’  as  not only an  organizational  status position but  also  a subject position ."
"8" "Academics  occupy  a wide variety  of academic subject positions. They are  acknowledged  as authors in  their  publications,  seen  as researchers in laboratories and libraries,  addresse d  as teachers   in classrooms, and encounter each other as colleagues at conferences and  i n the hallways of their departments.  T hus, t o   claim their space in the social realm of academia ,  academics   must   juggle a variety of   subject  positions.  However,  within the sociology of science,   studies of  the  various  ways in which  academics  are  acknowledged  have  concentrated  almost entirely  on   the  position s  of  researcher   and author .   I n this analysis, I   extend the extant  literature by exploring   the  other subject positions that  academics   occupy .  The position  of  p rofessor  intertwines  both  organizational  and  thematic  realms   of research  because  it combines  the  expectations, rights, and duties  of both scholarly communities and academic institutions .  By e xamining  the making of professors  – or,   in other words ,   exploring  how  academics  become  acknowledged   and valorized  as  being  professorial  –   this  paper  facilitates an understanding of the professorial subject position and  provides  insights into fundamental processes of   recognition  and valorization in academia   (cf. Angermuller 2017; Lamont 1987) ."
"9" "I illustrate the social process of  making  professor s , and some of the main changes this process  has undergone ,  by analyzing archived records  of   145   professorial appointment procedures  for professorships in  the field of  history  at  sixteen  German universities  from  195 0  to 198 5 .  T h is  archival   material reflects the particularities of appointing  history  professors in  the German higher education system  in the second half of the 20 th  century .  As such, this analysis is situated within a specific period and a specific national arrangement of career structures, procedures and regulations.  However, even  today,  a ppointment procedures are  an important site  for the making of  German  professors .  Whether it is their first professorial appointment or whether they have already been appointed as a professor elsewhere, any appointment is  highly symbolic.  To  identify  the  most  suitable candidate for a professorship, appointment procedures  invoke  multiple   academic subject positions by assessing  candidates as researchers, teachers,  and  colleagues .   For example, a candidate might be  simultaneously  acknowledged  as an expert  on  modern French history, a cooperative colleague ,  and  a  mediocre supervisor  of  students. To unravel these processes of  recognition  and valorization, I distinguish  between the  forms of judgment embedded in appointment procedures and  the factors  that contribute to the legitimation of  these  judgments.  Th e  procedural choreography that frames the interplay of judgments and legitimations  produces  a chosen candidate who  occupies the subject position  of  professor   and  who   is  acknowledged  as  a  professorial  someone , that is,  a person  upon  who m  a set of professorial qualities, accountabilities, rights, and duties  is conferred ."
"10" "In contrast to subject positions  such as  researcher  and  author ,  which vary systematically  across scientific communities and disciplines but  not  across  national higher education systems, the subject position professor is specific to higher education systems.  Each  national  system recruit s  professors  in its own unique way , endow ing  them with  a distinct set of  rights and duties, and  applying  different expectations and accountabilities  (cf. Angermuller 2017; Fumasoli & Goastellec 2015) . As I  show  in the following sections,  in Germany,  the  position  of  professor is  ascribed  a relatively high  level of  autonomy, and professorial recruitment is a  rather  political and symbolic  act  compared to other systems  (cf. Musselin 2010) . While current trends may suggest a global convergence of higher education systems  (cf. Enders & Weert 2009) , these processes of convergence are almost impossible to  comprehend  without  understanding   specific national particularities and their  historical development. The current paper contributes to  the scholarly understanding of this context  by shedding light on the  subject  position of the German professor ."
"11" "How academics become  a professorial  someone : Assessment and  recogni t ion"
"12" "The social world of academic s is populated by many  types  of  people ,  including  r esearchers and teachers,  authors and  deans , supervisors and mentors,  professors and PhD students , and many more.   Academics  usually occupy several of these  subject  positions at once .  In their everyday  lives , academics  must   juggle  these  various  positions  –  interpreting each one and making it their own  –  as well as  the diverse  expectations, rights ,  duties and accountabilities that are  attributed  to the  positions   (Langenhove & Harré 1999) .  Because  subject  positions locate their holders  with in the academic social order,  an  academic  must  occupy  positions  to be  acknowledged  as  a fully-fledged academic person a   with a (more or less coherent) academic identity  (Angermuller 2013, 2017) .  Of course , s ubject   positions  can  incorporate both  academic and  non-academic  attributions ,  for example,  ‘ conservative  theorist ’ , ‘Spanish social scientist’,  or  ‘ female ethnographer ’ ."
"13" "R esearch in  Science and Technology Studies (STS)  has tended to focus   less   on  the  recognition  of  subject   position s   and  more  on   their  erasure .   L aboratory studies  reveal how , in  certain  fields,  the individual researcher  merges into  a unit that functions as a collective epistemic subject  (Knorr Cetina 1999) .   Published results  tend to  delete anything subjective  and  individual  from the equation . I f a position  such as  author   appears at all, it is as a neutral medium  that  passes on statements that  were  produced by nature  (Latour & Woolgar 1979; Shapin & Schaffer 2011) .  The epistemic agency that is normally attributed to  scientific  personas  is redeployed into a network of objects and technologies  (Mialet 1999) .  S ubject  positions  may even be seen as  embedded in configurations that blur  any clear  distinction between subjects and objects  (Haraway 1991) ."
"14" "While  many recent  STS  scholars   have  emphasize d   the  decomposition and erasure  of subject  positions ,   sociologists of science   have tended to be  interested in how  subject  positions are  invoked and produced .   A fair amount of effort is needed for an individual to  become  a researcher, for example, to become recognized as ‘the pragmatist philosopher Richard  Rorty ’  (cf. Angermuller 2013; Gross 2002) . Likewise, the way an author position, for example, ‘Derrida’, is established depends on the intellectual, cultural, and institutional contexts in which an author’s texts are received  (Lamont 1987) . The literature shows that very different properties can be attributed to the subject positions researcher and author, ranging from authorship claims to intellectual responsibilities to epistemic agency. It is through these attributions that individual academics are acknowledged and positioned in the academic social order, a consequential process because different degrees and forms of academic recognition signify the authentication of an academic persona and her knowledge, and thus influence the accumulation of resources and power  (cf. Bourdieu 1988) ."
"15" "Although focusing  on  different social processes, the  two  ( rather  schematized )  perspectives   of STS and sociology of science  offer  crucial insights  into  subject  positions  and their  role  in  academic  recognition .  Yet   the se literatures are limited in that   the  positions   they study  describe  only one dimension of academic life  –  research  –  even though   a cademics   are not merely epistemic beings  who  make  intellectual  claims .   F ew studies  acknowledge  other  essential  subject  positions  in  the academic social order .   Yet a cademics  meet as  colleagues  i n the hallways of their departments and at conferences, they  face expectations as  supervisors and teachers, and they  have organizational rights and duties as  professors and deans.   These positions  may  exert  just as  much influence over  the academic social order , but  scholars  know little about how they are produced and used ."
"16" "Academic  conferences  illustrate the variety of subject positions in academia.   A t conferences, a cademics  meet not only as  researchers  who  represent intellectual claims,  but also as  colleagues . In doing so, they attribute not only intellectual  statements , but also  social identities and roles to  one another .  For example, a cademics   try to discern  whether the discussant of their  paper   is in a  friendly  mood .   T hey  decide  whether to talk to a colleague about sports or  whether  politics  would be a better topic of conversation , and they  establish who is  approachable  and  would provide enjoyable company at  the conference dinner  (Henderson 2015; Skelton 1997) .  Yet  while these interactions are  undoubtedly  important aspects of the social world of academia,  conferences are still sites  at which  academics  are valorized according to  intellectual  claims.  In fact, c onferences are an important site for authors to pitch their papers and develop ideas  (Gross & Fleming 2011; Söderqvist & Silverstein 1994) .  Th is dual nature of conferences shows that  different  subject positions are empirically intertwined, and  the distinction between  them  is analytical."
"17" "In addition to researcher ,   author  and  colleague ,  professor is another  significant  subject   position in  the social world of academi a .  I conceptualize  ‘professor’ as  going  beyond  the   organizational  status position s  that  academics occupy throughout their careers  (Hermanowicz 2007, 2009) .  Rather, t he subject position of p rofessor is  essential   to  the configuration of  specific  organizational  expectations,  rights ,  and duties .  Academics   who  occupy  professorial subject  positions are  recognized  and valorized according to these attributions   (Angermuller 2017) .  Being  recognized  as a professor  allows   academics   to  negotiate an  appropriate  salary,  supervise doctoral students, and assume administrative roles  on  committees and panels .  T hus, t he position  of  professor  is of crucial importance for the academic social order  as well as  for  the accumulation of resources and power."
"18" "The  acknowledgment  of  academics  as  professorial   someones   does  not  occur   in  publications and  laboratories,  and rarely  at  conferences .  Rather,  appointment procedures   are  very  important site s  for  the  acknowledgment  of  academics  as professorial .   In the  German higher education system ,   appointment procedure s are   particularly  meaningful  because they are  highly symbolic and political.  Thus, a s I  explain  in more detail in the following section,  the appointment of German professor s   is not only a bureaucratic procedure in which a status position is filled, but also a symbolic act of  acknowledging   someone as professorial."
"19" "T he sociological  literature on professorial appointments concentrate s  on  a range of topics, including   the  disciplinary differences and national traditions  that influence  the  recruitment  of professors  (Fumasoli & Goastellec 2015; Musselin 2010) ,  the factors and  evaluative  criteria that influence professorial recruitment , for example, productivity   ( in the form of publication s )   or gender  (Lutter & Schröder 2014; Nielsen 2016) ,  and on  departmental  power struggles ,   in  which   gender inequalities are  produced via  gendered evaluation practices   (van den Brink & Benschop 2012) .   But  research   overlook s   how  professorial  a ppointment procedures   acknowledge  a chosen candidate as professorial and turn her into  a professorial  someone ."
"20" "The  analytical toolkit   on  which I draw   for  this  study  borrows   from   t he sociology of valuation and evaluation . This literature  provides heuristic tools for  the analysis of  social processes in which worth and value is attributed, and in which meanings are produced, legitimated and institutionalized  (Lamont 2012) .  Literature  on academic evaluation  shows  how  the valorization  of  academics  contribute s  to their  recognition , f or example,  when  prospective graduate students  or deceased professors  are  assessed   based on  different conceptions of merit  (Hamann 2016; Posselt 2016; Tsay et al. 2003) .  Further, this literature shows that i n appointment procedures, candidates are constructed in an interplay of the two  attributive dimensions of excellence and gender   (van den Brink & Benschop 2012) .   While  the core  strands of the  sociology of valuation and evaluation  literature pursue the pragmatic question s  of how evaluators actually define  and agree on  crucial criteria and make common decisions  (Berthoin Antal et al. 2015; Lamont 2012) ,  the current  paper   complements this scholarship  by drawing attention to  the effects of evaluation ,   asking  how  social  processes  of  recognition  and valorization  contribute to the  subject  position  of  professor ."
"21" "The German ‘professor’ – a s ubject  position in context"
"22" "Professors are appointed in decidedly national arrangements   compris ing of   specific  academic career structures,  procedures, and  regulations.   Compared with  other  national  systems, t he German higher education system is charact erized by a relative ly  homogeneous  set of research universities , which  have become  more competitive since the 1990s   (cf. Whitley & Gläser 2007) .  Within this system,  ‘professor’ is a powerful  position.  In contrast to department-college systems  in  some  other countries ,  the chair-faculty system in Germany allows  f ull  p rofessors  a high degree of autonomy  that  is not restricted by a strong institutional leadership or administration. Rather, the autonomy of the professor is traditionally combined with state control  exerted  through bureaucracy.  O nly recently, after the   historical  period  included in  this  study ,  has  there been a turn toward market-oriented  governance   (Schimank 2005) ."
"23" "From these characteristics of the German higher education system follow a number of  particularities  for the current case   (cf. Musselin 2010) . The  comparatively strong control that the  sixteen  German states [ Länder ] exert on higher education institutions  makes  the appointment of professors ( quite  literally)  a  political issue.  Although shortlists are  compile d  by appointment committees  composed primarily of  full   professors , appointments  have  traditionally  been  overseen by the states ,   with  final hiring decisions about  p rofessors  made  by  a  state  minister . D epending on the respective state, this could be, for example, the Minister of Culture .  Th is  strong state control  administered via  bureaucracy  was  introduced in the 19 th  century to counter the  collegial autonomy of professorial   self-recruitment  and  to  prevent nepotism  (cf. Rüegg 2004) .  Reforms were enacted in 2001,  and it   was  only after the  historical  period  that is the focus  of  this analysis   that state ministries transferred their influence  over  appointments to university administration s  and  that   universities  were granted  more autonomy in their hiring policies .  However , German full professors are  still  civil servants and their salaries are paid by one of the states.  B ecause of t he political  nature  of  the  hiring  process for  professors ,  appointments  are not  only  a  formal  procedure of filling a status position  but  also  a symbolic act of  recognition ."
"24" "T he  position   of  professor  enjoys a particularly high  level of  autonomy in  the German system .  Almost all  full professors  –  and   only   full professors  –  have  tenured positions.   In t he compartmentalized structure of the German chair system ,  each  full  professor ,  or  chair holder ,   has  complete  authority over  their own academic dominion .   R esearch and teaching are  organized  in small units that revolve around the holder of the chair .   A cross all disciplines , full professors   direct the research activities of  their research staff and  make  unilateral  decisions  about  appoint ing  PhD students and   hiring  postdocs   who are   direct ly  subordinat e  to  a  professor   (cf. Enders 2001) .  The close relationship between  students  and their professor s , which often takes the form of schools  of thought  that can be traced across several generations, is especially pronounced in the field of history  (cf. Geison & Holmes 1993; Weber 1984) .  As a r esult of the chair  system, the  average age for first professorial appointment  is  relatively high (41 years)  in Germany  and only 15 percent  of academic staff at German universities  are tenured   (Höhle & Teichler 2016) .  Thus,  the  r esearch staff  in a  department ,  which is  an   association of chairs ,  has a pyramid-like structure in which power  and  prestige  are  concentrated at the top.   Because  such extensive  autonomy  is  ascribed to the  subject  position  of  professor ,  appointments  are  far - reaching decisions  that  go beyond  simply  filling an  organizational  status position.  Indeed ,  professorial  appointments have an enduring impact on  both   a department’s scholarly orientation   and  its  social  environment, including  which  PhD  student s  and  p ostdocs  join the  department ."
"25" "Methodology"
"26" "My approach attempts  to  produce  a nuanced  understanding  of  the  procedural   choreography  in which  a chosen  candidate   is   acknowledged   as  professorial .   P revious  studies  of  academic  hiring have  provided  important insights based  either on statistical analyses  (Lutter & Schröder 2014; Nielsen 2016)  or  interviews  with participants   (Fumasoli & Goastellec 2015; Musselin 2010; van den Brink & Benschop 2012) . T he present paper  takes  a different approach .   By  explor ing   the  recognition  and valorization of candidates across  the  procedural steps  of professorial appointments ,  I study a  hitherto  under - e xamined  aspect of the making of professors .  This article draws on  a corpus of over  1.500  archived documents from  145  appointment procedures  that  occurred  between 195 0  and 1985  at  sixteen  German universities   in the discipline  of history .   Access was requested from archives at 30 universities;  fourteen  university archives  either  were not in possession of appointment records or denied access because they deemed that the retention period of the respective records  had not ended .  Due to German law s   regarding  data privacy ,  I was  not  able to access archival records  from  the  most recent  30 years. However,  some  of the  main  features that  continue to  characterize professorial appointment procedures  were  introduced in the 1950s and became routine in the 1960s. I  emphasize some of the main changes that professorial appointments underwent throughout the  temporal  period of  this  study, and , where appropriate, I  highlight  differences  from  today’s appointment  procedures ."
"27" "The  archival  documents  include  job advertisements, cover letters,  curricula vitae ( CVs ) , publication lists, reviews and laudation s   in which committee s  justif y   their  selection of  shortlisted candidates  for subsequent decision - making bodies within the university .  I used a  sampling process  that  focused  on covering  appointments  which  varied on  specific key features that might influence professorial  hiring   (cf. Glaser & Strauss 1967) .   First, t he sample includes appointments at  both  traditional  and  newly established universities ,   because  universities established during the educational expansion  of  the 1960s and 1970s might apply different recruitment strategies than older universities.  Second, t he  sample  include s   appointments at  both  larger and smaller departments ,   in case  department size influence s  expectations  for  professorial candidates.  Finally , the sample includes appointment procedures  that  vary with regard to the number of  candidates  involved  ( from a handful to dozens ;  the latter  type was   prevalent in the later stages of the educational expansion) ,  the  age or experience level of those appointed , and  the  length of the process (from  a few months  to  three years ,   including  some  procedures  that required  several attempts  before  a candi date  was appointed) .  The sample thus  encompasses  key distinctions that are likely to influence the process of professorial appointments. The current analysis  does  not  analyze the effects of  these distinctions systematically, but rather concentrate s  on overarching aspects that apply  regardless  of the age of the university,  the  size of the department, and  the  career stage of the candidates."
"28" "The  analysis was   anchored in a grounded theory perspective  (Charmaz 2006; Strauss & Corbin 1990) ,   which emphasizes  iterative  data  analysis and  the  inductive generation of theoretical concepts . This  approach ,  which is based on  multiple rounds of coding,  allowed me  to identify  the main processes  through which  the  chosen candidates  were  acknowledged  as professorial .  I n  a  first phase of open coding , I categorized data according to content to identify  prevalent themes.  S everal recurring codes referring to  the  social processes of  recognition   and valorization  emerged  in this initial step . In a second round of coding ,   going back between data and analysis,  I related  and  interconnected  codes to form more precise and distinct  categories until prevalent patterns  coalesced  and no new subthemes could be found ."
"29" "My methodological approach goes beyond  determining  what archived records actually prove.   Rather than  conceiving of archival documents as mere containers for meaning that is produced elsewhere, and thus implying  that records never document ‘what actually happened’  (Trace 2002) , I propose that  the source  material is analytically relevant in its own right  (Prior 2008)  because  it  has a performative dimension within the organizational setting of the university  (Cooren 2004) .  While   archived records only provide  information that was considered appropriate for archiving , t h is  bureaucratic front stage  nonetheless   offers  fruitful  analytical  opportunities .   Together, j ob advertisements, application documents, reviews ,  and laudations on the candidates  perform   an official and legitimate version of an appointment procedure.  T his official version is highly relevant  to  the  symbolic  processes of   recognition   and valorization  that  constitute  the subject position of  professor ."
"30" "Judging  candidates and legitimizing judgments"
"31" "Since  the late 1950s, a ppointment procedures  for German professors  in all disciplines  have begun  with the nomination of an appointment committee  that consists  primarily  of  professors from the  department ,   but also includes   a few  individuals  from   outside  the department . The  appointment  committee drafts a job advertisement and examines the  incoming applications . The number of applications varies from the low double-digit s  to  over 100 . Applications include ,  at  a  minimum ,  a cover letter, a CV, and a publication list. Based on the applications, and occasionally on a reading of the applicants’ key publications,  the committee invites  approximately   five to  ten candidates for job interviews , which  are complemented by external reviews  solicited by  the committee. The candidates’ applications and publications, the  committee’s  personal impression s  from the interview s , and the external reviews represent different sources of information that the committee  uses  to compile a shortlist of ,   typic ally ,  two or three  candidates .  The committee submits  the   short list, as well as  a laudation explain ing   and justifying  its choices, to decision-making bodies  at  the university,  namely  the faculty council, the university senate  and  the president  or rector  of the university. The  social  processes that  acknowledge  a  chosen  candidate as professorial   occur  throughout  this  procedural  choreography .   I  distinguish  between  two  types of  social processes that are  analytically distinct but empirically  intertwined  (Lamont 2012) :  process es  of  judgment, in which worth and qualities are attributed to candidates, and process es  of legitimation, in which said judgments are stabilized and made acceptable."
"32" "Judging candidates"
"33" "For candidates to be  acknowledged  as  professor s , they  must  pass  multiple  forms of judgment .   The most prevalent forms of judgment in the sample  focus on  scholarly, formal, and organizational  criteria ."
"34" "Scholarly judgments"
"35" "Scholarly judgments of candidates  are  omnipresent in the sample .   While  today’s  e valuations of scholarly performance often focus on  metrics   (Fumasoli & Goastellec 2015; Hammarfelt & Rushforth 2017) , quantifiable criteria  were  not central in the  historical  period stud ied here .  Committees and reviewers in the sample dr e w on  criteria  quite   different  than those used today   for the scholarly judgment of candidates."
"36" "One  scholarly  criterion  prevalent in the sample  is the thoroughness and soundness of the candidates’ research. For example, one committee ’s  1973  laudation  stated  that  a candidate’s  publications  ‘ reveal careful methodological reflection and strict study of texts ’ ,   and praised   her  ‘ comprehensive book that is based on a wealth of historical sources ’ .  A  1958  committee commend ed  a candidate for his  exhaustive  research by  noting that his   book  was   ‘ thoroughly worked through ’ ,  while his work in general  was  ‘ characterized  by clarity and meticulousness ’ . A  1954  reviewer  was  impressed by a   candidate’s  ability  ‘ to ground his reasoning not only on an accumulation and compilation of sources, but … to always track down the one meaningful source ’ .   A  conspicuous focus of scholarly judgment on an almost craft-like thoroughness and rigor, paired with a remarkable neglect of theoretical accomplishments, is  likely  a  feature  of the discipline of history in the German context   (cf. Becher 1981; Iggers 1984) .  Notably ,  over the duration of  the  historical  period of  this  study, scholarly judgments of candidates’ research  became increasingly  based on their publications , as shown by  more extensive discussions of the content of publications ,   the reception  of publications  in the field ,  and the number of publications.  Presumably,   these  references to  a  candidate ’ s publications serve  to  bolster  scholarly judgments."
"37" "The scholarly judgment of candidates  was based on more than  their research. Another important criterion  was  the candidates’ standing in relation to their cohort in their field. For example, one  1968  committee describe d  a candidate as  ‘ one of the most outstanding talents among young German historians ’ .   In 1972, a  review er   relate d   a candidate to his cohort  via a claim  that  the  candidate ’s talents  ‘ are, to my mind, still rare in our field, which elevates [the candidate] above the standard ’ .   In 1971, a nother reviewer   described  a candidate ’ s standing by stating that he  ‘ belongs, without doubt, to the most prolific representatives of the younger generation ’ .   The se  examples show that s cholarly judgments o f  candidates’ research and their standing in the field  were  crucial criteria  for  determin ing  whether a candidate  was  professorial.  A lthough  the  subject   position  of  professor  is embedded in  the  organizational  contexts of a department and  a  university ,  prospective  occupants of the position  were  evaluated according to their scholarly  qualities  and  acknowledged  as part of a cohort and a  scientific  community ."
"38" "Formal judgments"
"39" "While   scholarly judgments of candidates are  ubiquitous  in  the  appointment procedures  included in this study , they rely on a n   essential  previous condition , namely the  formal judgment of candidates . Ambiguous scholarly criteria  such as  ‘ standing among the cohort ’  or  ‘ thoroughness of research ’  can only be meaningfully applied if  the  candidates  involved  in a n appointment  procedure  form a largely homogeneous group according  to their scholarly credentials   (cf. Boltanski & Thèvenot 2006) .  The homogenization of candidates according to formal qualification s  is a crucial first step in any appointment procedure because a ppointment committees usually  review multiple  applications for each open position.  The  sample  application documents show that  this challenge  became more  difficult across  the period of study. The sample  includes  an average of six applications per appointment procedure for the first decade in the period of study (195 0 -1965) and an average of  thirteen  applications per procedure  for the last decade (1975-1985).   Th e increasing number of applicants might be explained by the educational expansion of the 1960s and 1970s, which  not only  brought new positions, including professorships, but  also ,  and  perhaps more importantly, opened the field  somewhat ."
"40" "F acing  a number of applicants with potentially  divergent  profiles,  committee s   sort  the applications by categorizing candidates according  to their formal qualifications.  In Germany,  the  crucial formal criterion for any applicant to a professorship is the  Habilitation . Traditionally, the core of the  Habilitation  is a second book .  O ne  1977  reviewer in the sample  reminded  the committee that  ‘ any university is well advised to apply formal criteria of qualification … in a first step. I mention this right away because several  candidates  in the final selection are habilitated, while others have not yet  completed  this examination procedure ’ . The  significance  of formal criteria is  highlighted  by  cases  in which candidates lack ed  certain  formal qualifications. For example,  a 1982  laudation state d  that  although  a candidate  was  qualified for the position,  ‘ the fact that his  Habilitation  has not yet been published and that his other publications cannot sufficiently make up for this, results in [the candidate] being named only on the third position of the shortlist ’ .  Unless all participants in  an  appointment procedure offer ed  explicit argument s  as to why  the lack of a  Habilitation   was not problematic, it was  a  disadvantage  for the candidate . In one case, a  1977  reviewer argue d  that,  ‘ with respect to formal criteria of qualification, I want to highlight that the research of both [candidates] has to be considered as equivalent to the completed  Habilitations   of other candidates ’ ."
"41" "The  importance of formal qualifications is  indicated not only by these quotes, but also  by the fact that most  of the  archived  documents  –  from CVs  to  external reviews to laudations  –  repeatedly  state the time and place of the doctorate and the  Habilitation  of a candidate in a sober fashion, as if to reify the formal qualification throughout the procedure. The reference s  to formal, certified qualifications  highlight a difference between the position of professor and   less formal  academic  subject  positions , such as that of the researcher .  T he  Habilitation  is a crucial formal criterion f or  academics  to be  acknowledged  as  a  professorial  someone . Applying this criterion  allows the committee to  exclude  applicants  who  are not formally qualified  and  to  establish a common degree of qualification among the candidates."
"42" "Organizational judgments"
"43" "A  comparison  to  the  other  subject   positions  of  researcher  and  colleague   makes it clear  that  the position  of  professor is embedded in  a specific  organizational context , which leads to  the prevalence of  a third form of judgment :  organizational judgment.  Candidates  were  often judged according to  the local conditions and interests of the specific department  awarding the  professorship.   For example, t he archival records  show  that, during the educational expansion  of  the 1960s and 1970s, the rising teaching loads and administrative duties that  accompanied this   expansion  influenced  the selection of a new colleague. In  today’s climate of selective and competitive funding  (Paradeise et al. 2009) , the ability to attract third - party funding  and   a  willingness to cooperate in research clusters  are  highly  sought-after  qualities .  In fact, references to research funding organizations increase d  markedly in the  source documents across  the period of study.   Further, in  current appointment procedures , organizational judgment is likely  influenced by  today’s more explicit competition   between  universities for coveted researchers  (the university as an organizational actor is described in Krücken & Meier 2006) ."
"44" "A  typical example   of  organizational judgment   is a  1956  laudation that  anticipate d  the local requirements of the  respective  organizational context   when the authors conclude  that  the  candidate  ‘ has proven  himself  multiple times in administrative and organizational matters ;  nobody could cope better with the demands of a big subject at a large university ’ .   In a nother laudation  in the same year ,  a  committee argue d   that the goal of the appointment procedure is to attract a personality that  exhibit s   ‘ not only   …   substantial scholarly achievements, but also the ability to support the existing chair holders  i n accomplishing  the  instructional and organizational tasks in  our overcrowded subject ’ .   Such considerations are to be expected in a discipline like history, which  attracts  many students.  Even though external reviewers usually have  little  insight into the organizational concerns of the appointing department and university,  the sample  reviewers sometimes  tried  to anticipate specific organizational requirements in their reviews. For example, one reviewer  wrote  in 1970   that the department would  ‘ attract a first-rate colleague with considerable teaching experience ’ . A  1972  reviewer  emphasize d   a candidate’s   ‘ pedagogical abilities   [ which ]  ensure that  he  can represent  his  subject not only in research, but also in teaching ’ .  While references to the candidates’ teaching  ability  remained constant  throughout the  historical  period  studied here , candidates’ administrative  abilities  ( e.g. ,  experience serving as a dean )  bec a me  increasingly   important  over time."
"45" "Organizational judgments concern  not only  matters of  teaching and administrati on  but also  research.  Ideally, a candidate’s  scholarly work should  not only  conform  to the core themes outlined in the job advertisement   but  also  fit  the organizational context by complementing the scholarship already  being  conducted  in  the department. One laudation  in 1971 , for example,  stat ed  that  the  candidate  was  ‘ only fourth on the shortlist because his line of research might be a bit remote for the department ’ .  Another , in 1979,  judge d  a candidate’s research  profile  against the scholarly backdrop of the department , concluding that   the candidate  ‘ fits well into the faculty’s orientation with his connection of historiographical, economic and sociological  knowledge ’ .  Occasionally,  even  reviewers  from outside the department  judge d   a  candidate’s research  through the lens of  specific organizational concerns.  One  reviewer  wrote  in 1974 ,   ‘ I t is a specific criterion that [the candidates’] research profile should be particularly broad because of the small number of teaching personnel at [the university] ’ .  In another case, a  1981  reviewer  who judged  two candidates  to be equal  suggested  that  ‘ for any further decision,  the question of who would be the most sensible addition to the other chair at the department could tip the balance ’ ."
"46" "The sample reveals  one  additional  focus  of  organizational  judgment .  Occasionally,  a chair at a department has a specific intellectual tradition because  its  previous  occupant  was  a  distinguished  scholar  in a specific research area .  P rofessorial appointment s  for this  type  of chair  are  particularly consequential  because  the  candidate s   are  explicitly  viewed  as  potential  successor s  to  a prominent predecessor.  In these cases,  committee members and reviewers frequently refer red  to  the  appointment procedure as  ‘ the succession of [name of preceding professor] ’ .  These institutional ancestral lines  can  form a backdrop against which candidates are  judged .  S everal of the sample laudations  suggest ed  that , in such cases,  it  is  an advantage if a candidate   ‘ has already been the intermediary substitute for two semesters after [the predecessor’s] retirement ’  (1965). The se   judgment s   also consider whether a candidate measures up to the academic  significance  and responsibility that  accompanies  the  succession of  a  particularly  prestigious  scholar. For example, one  1970  laudation  concluded  that  ‘ there is no doubt that [ the  candidate] can successfully fill out the chair that has previously been held by [ a famous predecessor ]  and [another famous predecessor] ’ .  The essential role of institutional ancestral lines for organizational judgment  is  likely a particularity of the discipline of history in the German context, where research schools are traditionally important."
"47" "It is worth  reflect ing   on  the  timing  of   the  scholarly, formal and organizational judgments  that  reviewers and committees use to  acknowledge  a chosen candidate. Formal  judgments, which establish  the qualification of candidates via their  Habilitation  or equivalent work,  are  the first step s   in  any appointment procedure  and thus  serve  as an entry condition that candidates  must   meet  to be included in the  appointment procedure. However,  while  formal  judgments  occur  at the beginning of appointment procedures, the time and place of the  Habilitation  are constantly  re stated throughout the  duration of the  procedure."
"48" "Scholarly  judgments ,   which  consider , for example, the candidate ’ s standing  in  their cohort or the thorou ghness of their research ,  occur   primarily  after the formal  judgment . While  many of the sample documents focus on  scholarly evaluation,  the external reviews solicited from peers in the respective research field   are  particularly geared toward  the  assessment of the candidate ’ s scholarly qualities.  A ppointment committees always go beyond scholarly evaluation in the narrow sense and consider the  specific organizational  demands  of their department,  but the  peers  who  are invited to review candidates are  expected  to  provide  a generalized view  of the candidate  from  the perspective of the broader scholarly discipline . Although the sample  includes cases  in which reviewers attempt ed  to anticipate specific organizational requirements, the ir  judgment s  first and foremost focused on scholarly aspects."
"49" "Organizational  judgments , which  reflect  departmental requirements and expectations ,   appear  in  various places in  the chronological choreography  of appointment procedures.  The laudation, in particular,  focuses on   organizational  judgments .  The  committee ’s   explanation of  its selection of candidates for the shortlist , which is forwarded  to the successive decision - making bodies in the university,  goes  beyond  the  scholarly qualities of the candidates . T he  committee’s laudation is expected to argue  from the point of view  of the department and the university in general.  Thus,  laudations  examine   how well a prospective candidate fits  in to  the department al context ."
"50" "To be sure,  in addition to scholarly, formal and organizational judgment s ,  other forms of  judgment   occur  in appointment procedures.  A rchived records of  these procedures   shed light on  official  ( often formal and bureaucratic )   front - stage  processes  that , while  crucial for any appointment ,  only   complement  undocumented  back stage   dynamics . N on-academic  criteria  likely  play an important role  in  recruitment decisions.  For example, t here is  an extensive  literature illustrating the  many  ways in which gender and race  matter  for academic recruitment  (Misra et al. 1999; Rivera 2017; van den Brink & Benschop 2012) .  Further, s tudies from sectors  other  than academia suggest that processes of  social and cultural matching  also  influence personnel selection  (cf. Rivera 2012) .   The sample documents in this project   presumably obscure  the   non-academic judgments   that  participants  in  the procedure d id  not deem fit for official documentation.   A rchived records of appointment procedures document  only  what can be said  (Foucault 1972) .  There are  organizational  motives  for  presenting the decision - making process in a  specific  way  and  for  not documenting  certain  decisions . This official  form of  presentation , however,  does not undermine the sociological analysis . T o the contrary, it is of particular sociological interest   (cf. Garfinkel 1967) .   The second part of the analysis   focuses  on  how judgments are legitimated in the official presenta tion of appointment procedures ."
"51" "Legitimizing judgments"
"52" "Acknowledging   a chosen candidate as professorial  requires  not only   the  choreography of judgments  described above , but also the  legitimiz ation of these judgments .  Analysis of the  sample data reveal s  that  appointment  committees most often legitimize  judgments  via  the unanimity of decisions, third - party endorsements and  the  transparency of the decision-making process."
"53" "Unanimous decisions"
"54" "The sample c ommittees label ed  their decisions as unanimous  with remarkable frequency . The ir  statements emphasize d , for example, that  the  committee  ‘ nominated [a candidate] unanimously for the first place on the shortlist ’  (1971) or that  the  committee  was  ‘ in agreement about [a candidate] deserving the first place on the shortlist ’  (1962) .   C ommittee s   also signaled  unanimity  via  claims that a candidate  ‘ is one of the few, yes, indeed, the only German scholar on the job market that can be put on the first place of the shortlist ’  (1962) .  Statements of unanimity  are especially  prevalent in laudations because  committees use  these documents  to justify their  shortlist  to  decision - making bodies.  How  did committees achieve this  unanimity? In the German chair system, professorial appointments  are  made  almost entirely  among colleagues  and  are  often based on implicit non- aggression pacts in which professors try to cooperate and make consensual decisions in order to avoid later punishment  (Schimank 2005) .  A lthough  there are  no  data on  the situated decision-making processes  that occur  in committee meetings,  it is very likely  that the unanimity of the judgments is  also,  a t least partly, a  retrospective construction  (cf. Hirschauer 2010; Huutoniemi 2012) .  Because unanimity  shields  the committee’s judgments  from  doubts and makes  their  decisions  appear  more convincing in retrospect,  unanimity  is  likely  established  ex-post  the  actual  decision-making process."
"55" "Third-party endorsements by peers"
"56" "The involvement of external peers in the decision - making process  also lends  legitimacy  to  judgments  made by appointment committees .  Scholars have long  recognized the importance of third parties for the  endorsement  and  consolidation  of  judgments   (Sauder 2006; Walker et al. 1986) .   Accordingly,  the sample  committees  frequently  refer red  to  external  reviews  to support their own judgments . For example, in one   laudation  in 1959 ,  the  committee  wrote ,   ‘ As  is certified  by the attached reviews from [a renowned reviewer] and [another renowned reviewer],  the  candidate enjoys the general  recognition  of leading scholars . ’   In o ther laudations , committees  claim ed  that  ‘ all reviewers deem [a candidate] qualified for an appointment as a professor ’  (1966) or that  their  ‘ decision is approved by reviews of external colleagues ’  (1985).  When  external peers  and committees  arrive at  similar conclusions,  the external  endorsements lend credibility to the  committee’s  judgment  and mark  it as   uncontroversial .   This  credibility  derives from , first,  the reviews  represent ing  recommendations from peers  who  are  supposed to be  particularly well positioned to assess the candidates and ,  second,  the external position of  the peers . That is, by virtue of not being  part of the appointing department ,  they are  t herefore  presumably   not motivated by  self-interest with  regard to  the application."
"57" "Importantly,  t he legitimizing effect of  external  reviews  rests  on the assumption that  external reviewers provide a n  impartial judgment of the candidates.   However, i n some appointment procedures, reviews  s eem ed  to  have a different function ; they   merely affirm ed   the  committee ’s decision  about which candidates to shortlist.  When soliciting reviews, committees  can  subtly indicate that they deem a specific candidate to be particularly suitable for the job.  It is remarkable that t he existence of  these  so-called courtesy reviews  [ Gefälligkeitsgutachten ]  is evident even in the smoothened representation  of appointment procedures   in  archival records .  In  one case  in 1974 ,  a  reviewer complain ed  about  the  current tendenc y  to  ‘ solicit reviews on individual candidates only after the actual appointment procedure is already completed. As a result, reviews not only serve a merely confirmatory function, but downright request a confirmation of the previously made decision ’ .   Given this trend , it is  notable   that committees still   draw on reviews to legitimize their decisions."
"58" "Transparency"
"59" "In addition to  unanimity  and third-party endorsements,  attempts to make the process transparent  make up   a third  way of shoring up the  legitimacy of judgments.  Because  most steps  in the  appointment procedure are closed to the public, transparency is crucial to  establishing  trust and produc ing  accountability  (Strathern 2000) .  Thus, c ommittees make  an  effort to  document  certain  parts of the  appointment procedure . For example,  vacant professorships are advertised publicly . The historical material in the sample suggests that  public advertisement  was   a relatively  new  development. As  recently  as the 1960s,  instead of publicly advertising vacant posts,  several  of the sample   appointment committees  contact ed  the  German Association of University Professors [ Deutscher   Hochschulverband ]  to  i nquire  about the candidates  who were  on the job market at  a given  point in time.   Committee s  then discussed t hese candidates in meetings and contact ed  them informally to  determine  whether they would be interested in taking the job.  In other  cases, committee s  contacted   external peers  before  a professorship  ha d  been advertised. The peers then suggest ed  prospective candidates  whom   they believed were qualified for  the professorship in question. In  yet  other cases,   reviewers  recommend ed  candidates to the committee without a ny   formal application.  Sometimes they  even recommended   a junior scholar working  under their own chair . In these cases, they  ask ed  the committee , for example, to   ‘ not to interpret this as a  “ political ”  suggestion ’  (1963) ,  or stating that   ‘ I would prefer [this candidate]  over  all other candidates, not because  he is , but despite  him  being my  pupil . ’  (1965)"
"60" "Although t hese  non-transparent  and non-standardized  recruitment practices  were  outdated   by  the  late  1960s , they  were  prevalent  in the first years of the sample  procedures , especially in smaller fields within the discipline ,   with  small pool s  of suitable candidates . Non-standard  recruitments  did not necessarily result from  an interest in obscuring appointment decisions.  A ppointment procedures for professorships in larger fields with more candidates  began to   openly advertise vacant professorships in the late 1950s . Against this backdrop, it is remarkable  –  and  a  testament to the pressure  to  implement  transparent recruitment  procedures  –  that  all universities in the sample  advertise d  vacant positions   just  a decade later.  O pen advertisements  contribute to the legitimacy of the judgments made in the appointment procedure s  because a public job advertisement gives all prospective candidates  in a field  the opportunity to apply."
"61" "Along with  the public advertisement of  vacant positions , another  shift  occurred over time that  increase d   transparency .  T he  comprehensive  documentation  of the decision - making process   became  more and more prevalent in the sample toward the end of the 1960s .  A rchived appointment records  from  the 1950s and early 1960s often  only   consist of  informal letters  exchanged  between  professors .  Due to this lack of documentation, i mportant decisions  frequently  remain  invisible to  outsiders and to  posterity . F or example,  many  archived records  neither document who served  on  the committee ,  nor  give  an y  official reason s  why  certain  candidates made the shortlist and  others did not .  T oward the end  of  the 1960s,  however, a growing number of  universities  made  it  mandatory for c ommittee s   to file  appointment  reports  that  document various aspects of the appointment procedure. The se reports  usually  include  the number of applicants ,   the name of  every applica nt , the  names of  committee members,  the  minutes of every committee meeting, the  names of the  candidates invited for job talks, the  names of  reviewers ,  and  lastly  the shortlist that represents the committee’s final judgment.  Appointment reports contribute to the transparency of the procedure because they make judgments and decisions accessible, and they make those involved in the decision -making process  accountable ."
"62" "In sum ,  three main   factors   increase  the legitimacy of  judgments in appointment procedures : the unanimity of decisions ,  third-party endorsements  from  external  peers ,  and the transparency of the procedure,  including   the public advertisement of professorships  and  the documentation of the decision-making process .  Notably,  the  two  latter  measures  bec a me more prevalent in the sample  after the mid- 1960s ,  suggest ing  that   committees felt an increasing need to  more thoroughly  legitimize  the  decisions  that make  professors .   This  development  may have been the result of  a more competitive academic employment market  or  increased public accountability  ( although cutbacks in  the  public funding  of German universities  did not begin until  the 1980s ) . More generally, the  legitimation of judgments is crucial  on three fronts .  First ,  legitimized  decisions   gain  cr edibility   among  the scholarly community ,   which  keenly observes any professorial appointment in its field . Second ,  it is  more  difficult f or rejected candidates to contes t  legitimized  judgments .  Third ,  it is  more  difficult for  a university’s  decision-mak ers  to question or overturn  legitimized  judgments  made by the hiring committee ."
"63" "Discuss ion :  The making of professors  in appointment procedures"
"64" "Making  professor s  –  and becoming a professor  –  is   a social process  with no definite conclusion .  A ppointment procedures are neither the first nor the last step  of this process .  Rather, s ituations in which  academics   are addressed as  professor are scattered  throughout  everyday  academic  life.  The current paper focuses  on a specific aspect of  this  broader  social process :  h ow academics  are  acknowledged  by their peers as  a  someone  who is professorial  in hiring decisions .   My  results  suggest  that the  social processes  of  recognition   and valorization  comprise  at least  three  forms of judgment :  scholarly, formal and organizational . A t least  three factors  contribute to the legitimation of these judgments :  the unanimity of decisions, third-party endorsements, and the transparency of the  decision-making process .  The interplay of judgments and legitimations is framed by a  complex procedure  that culminates in the selection of a candidate  who  is  acknowledged  as  being  professorial.  In the process, the chosen candidate  comes to  occup y  the  subject  position  of  professor and  has  a  set  of  relevant   qualities, accountabilities, rights, and duties  conferred upon them .  This  symbolic act of   recognition  is crucial , as it not only  represents  the authentication of a scholarly persona, but  also , particularly in the case of German full professors,  influences  the accumulation of resources and power  th r ough,  for example, hiring decisions and intellectual leadership  (Bourdieu 1988) ."
"65" "I n the German chair system,   each  chair is assigned to a  specific  research field , for example,  Professor of  Modern History . For this reason,  candidates  are judged  not  by  how qualified they are   to become a professor   in general , but  rather by how qualified they are  to become a professor   in  a  specific  field .  Thus, t he  subject   position  of  professor designates more than just an organizational status position ;  e very holder of a chair  also  occupies a scholarly domain. While  scholarship and research   are   relevant  for  the position  of  professor in most  national  higher education systems,  they are  particularly  important  in  the German case . In Germany,   because research staff is expected to focus on the  chair holder’s  research,   professors   are granted  not only  the  formal right  to appoint non-tenured staff  but also  extensive  intellectual  authority .  The historical material  analyzed in this paper  shows that   scholarly judgment s   increasingly  focused   on  candidates’ publications. In the current  climate of academic audit culture and metrification , the evaluation of candidates  might  include  additional markers  of  scholarly  performance, for example third - party funding or citation numbers."
"66" "T he prevalence   of  the second type of judgement discussed in this paper, namely  f ormal judgments ,   highlights the  legality and rationality of the position   of  professor ,   for  which formal qualifications are  a  precondition .  Although the formal qualification for a  German  professorship can  alternatively  be awarded on the basis of equivalent work  (Höhle & Teichler 2016)   or , today,  through a  junior professorship  (Zimmer 2018) , the  Habilitation  retains its central  role in  the discipline of  history  (and also in other book-oriented disciplines; cf. Weingart et al. 1991) .  Regardless  of the specific marker,  formal judgments in the  archival  material  examined here  highlight the   need for  candidates  to  be formally qualified for a professorship.  Requiring a  set of uniform  formal qualifications  for all  candidates  is  crucial because, at least i n principle, all  German  professors have the same organizational rights and duties  ( for example ,  with respect to administrative work, teaching, and research ) .  During the historical  period  treated in this paper ,  all  German  full  professors receive d  the same  basic  salary ;  bonuses  were negotiable only after reforms were  implemented  in 2001.  This degree of stability is remarkable for a subject position.  In contrast ,  the position  of  author can entail markedly different   roles and responsibilities across disciplines  (Hyland & Bondi 2006) . F urther,  ‘ author ’ can be interpreted differently  depending on the respective social context . F or example ,  ‘ Derrida ’   means something   different  in France  than in  the United  S tates   (Lamont 1987) .  T he formal stability of the subject position  of  professor  is a peculiarity of the German case , where  the re is little variation  across universities, or even across disciplines,  in  what it means to be a professor .  Even  in the wake of  the   2001  reforms, the position   retain s   a  rather  formalized  and static  essence , granting its holders  similar  rights  and duties and  the same basic salary.  In  contrast, in  o ther higher education systems ,  the position  of  professor can be interpreted in various ways  with regard to , for example, salary or tenure  (cf. Angermuller 2017) .  One important prerequisite for German professors  having equal legal status  is that  all  candidates  ( i.e., potential professors ) have  the same level of formal qualification s . Thus, formal qualification is a criterion that seems  insignificant  at first  glance ,  but ,  upon further examination ,   emerges as  a key factor for the making of the subject position in question."
"67" "C andidates are  also  frequently judged  with respect to  the  specific organizational concerns  of the appointing department and university . This  form of judgment  is crucial  to the  understanding of the position  of  professor  for two  main  reasons. First,  organizational judgments  refer to the position ’s   embedded ness  in its respective organizational context   as well as  its  role  as  a functional part of the departmental status hierarchy . Full professors  are not only intellectual leaders ,  as scholarly judgments  suggest ,  but   are also,   especially i n Germany,  organizational leaders  because they  organize the ir chair  autonomously .   While o ther academic  subject  positions,  such as  researcher ,  are typically not constitu ted by organizational membership  in a formal or perm a n e nt way ,  a professor holds a lifetime position as a member of a  specific  organization.  Because the  position  of  professor  is embedded in  a specific  organizational context, candidates  are  evaluated against this  back ground .   Thus, c andidates are judged  not only  by their  potential to perform as  a professor  in  a  specific  field , but also  by th e i r   potential to perform as a professor  with in a specific organizational context .  The second reason o rganizational judgments  facilitate an  understanding of the position  of  professor   is that   with i n the German chair-faculty system,  these  judgments  underscore  that members of  the committee  are  appoint ing  a future colleague  who  will be involved not only in the department’s administrative affairs, but also in coalitions that colleagues form  in response  to  various  issues ,  not  the  least  of which is  the appointment of other future colleagues. Thus,  appointment procedures are geared toward  identifying a good   match between  an individual  candidate and  departmental  consideration s ."
"68" "The making of the position  ‘ professor ’  relies not only on  these three  forms of judgment, but also on the legitimacy of  the   judgments.  Understanding of the subject position   of professor is enhanced by examining the ways in which a ppointment c ommittees  legitimize  their  judgments .   F irst,  judgments must be  perceived  as legitimate ,  because   the  hiring   of a professor is extremely costly. Reviewers and committee members invest a  great deal of  time and effort in  each   appointment  procedure .  These  procedures are also costly for  the  candidates ,  who must expose themselves to potential  rejection and refusal.  In the German system,  appointment procedures are  also  costly for the appointing department and the university because  professorships are   usually  lifetime position s .  N ew colleagues  will  potentially  serve  for several decades. The high cost that a professorial appointment  entails  for all concerned parties  is one reason   that  many aspects of the appointment procedure are geared toward the legitimacy of judgments."
"69" "T he   second  reason  for the importance of legitimate  judgments  is more analytical .  Like   other  subject  positions, the position  of  professor relies on its occupants being  acknowledged  as  such by others . The scientific community,  as well as  administrative bodies within  and beyond  the university ,   must   acknowledge  a candidate as professorial for her to  actually  be   a professor . This  recognition  relies on the judgments in an appointment procedure  being perceived as  legitimate  by  a range of a udiences  across  a range of contexts,  including  peers in  different  research fields ,  departmental colleagues , and  university administrat ors ."
"70" "I t is  important to  consider  the  legitimation  of judgments  –  in particular,  measures to increase transparency  –  in the context of  the type of  historical  material that  was   included  in the sample.  Considering  the  performative dimension  of archived documents , a ppointment reports legitimize judgments by  performing  the transparency of important procedural steps.  Remarkably, this  performative character   does not have significant consequences  for the legitimacy of the  decision-making process ,   which appears to gain credibility  even if the transparency is only  enacted  by documents  (cf. Flyverbom et al. 2015) ."
"71" "Conclusion"
"72" "T his   analysis focused  on the three most prevalent forms of judgment and  the  factors  that legitimize  th o se judgments  that were found  in archival  record s  of  hiring decisions .  The results reflect  the   historical  period  (195 0 -1985) , the  peculiarities of the empirical material,  the specific  characteristics of the  discipline  of   history ,  and the particularity of the German case .  Thus, f or example, c urrent diversity politics  –  which  were inconceivable  during the period of time studied here  –  might lead to gender  and  ethnicity  be ing  considered  as   legitimate  evaluative criteri a . Other  factors , such as  class,   might be highly influential for professorial recruitment  but not be formally acknowledged and thus not  archived .   Further, c urrent  appointments  likely  draw on yet  other  criteria that  have  only  recently become  relevant. For example, metric assessments of research performance  such as  third - party funding or citation counts likely play an important role  in  professorial hiring ,   either  compet ing  with  or complement ing   more traditional criteria.  Beyond  historical shifts  such as these , the empirical material  used in the current analysis  has a systematic bias because  m ost social interactions  that occur  during committee meetings or job talks  are  not archived.   In addition ,   disciplinary differences in the making o f  professors  were   beyond the scope of this paper  but  c ould be examined in future research . Lastly,  this  study  focuses on  the  unique case of German professors, thus inviting comparative perspectives from other countries."
"73" "To conclude, I  would like  to re-emphasize  three  general points  about the position  of  professor .   First,  it  is rather stable  relative to  other  subject  positions.  For example,  ‘ r esearcher ’   can be interpreted in  many  ways . I t can be associated with attributes as  wide-ranging  as craftsmanship, originality and creativity, specialization,  and  team membership.  Being a researcher can  entail  very different things across  different  research fields.  In  the German case,  the  position  of  professor ,   which  is embedded in  the  organizational setting of  a  university ,   is  comparatively  stable.  All  full professors  –  that is, all academics who are  formally   acknowledged  as being professorial  –  hold   basically  the same  organizational rights and duties , which  are not up for negotiation, but  are  institutionally and legally binding ."
"74" "While  the position  of  professor  is  relatively stable compared   with   other  academic subject  positions, the historical perspective of  this  paper  reveals certain   changes  in  the position  over time.  Most notably ,  the conditions  by  which  academics  are  acknowledged  as professorial  have changed. For example,  committees increasingly judge  candidates’  research by their publications , considering such things as the ir   content, reception, and quantity . In addition,  experience in administrative work and  the acquisition of  external funding  have  become  increasingly important  criteria for judgment .  T he number of archived applications in the sample  also  suggests  growing  competition for professorships .  Not coincidentally ,   over the same period,  committees have  attempt ed  to  make  appointment procedures  more transparent .   When appointments are scarce and fiercely contested,  it  is even more important for  appointment decisions  to be   perceived as   legitimate ."
"75" "Just as t he  making  of the position  of  professor  has  undergone changes  over time, it also  varies  across  national higher education systems.  While scholarly reputation as a researcher can be transnational,   what it means to be a  professor differs remarkably  across  nations .  Although  many scholars maintain that  higher education policies throughout the world  have  converge d   (but see Gornitzka & Maassen 2014; Schimank 2005) ,  recent research  has shown  that a  German professor   still differs  from, for example, a professor in the United States .  The c haracteristics of the respective positions ,   such as  autonomy, salar y , and teaching obligations ,  vary markedly  (Angermuller 2017) , and  t he procedures  by  which professors are appointed also  vary across  national higher education systems  (Musselin 2010) .   However,  the presence of  different career structures, appointment procedures, and regulations  in other  higher education systems  do es  not imply that  it  is not a subject position in  those  systems.  Rather,  these differences mean  that the  subject  position is  constructed and  interpreted differently in other national arrangements ,  which  only  under scores  the necessity  of conducting additional  case studies to facilitate a  more nuanced  understanding of ‘professor’."
"76" "Acknowledgments"
"77" "I would like to thank Stefan  Beljean , Jens  Maesse , Julia Schubert, and Lena M. Zimmer for their comments on previous versions of this paper."
"78" "Note s"
"79" "References"
"80" "Angermuller J (2013) How to become an academic philosopher. Academic discourse as multileveled positioning practice.  Sociología histórica  2013(2): 263-289."
"81" "Angermuller J (2017) Academic careers and the valuation of academics. A discursive perspective on status categories and academic salaries in France as compared to the U.S., Germany and Great Britain.  Higher Education  73(6): 963-980."
"82" "Becher T (1981) Towards a Definition of Disciplinary Cultures.  Studies in Higher Education  6(2): 109-122."
"83" "Berthoin Antal A, Hutter M and Stark D (eds) (2015)  Moments of valuation. Exploring sites of dissonance . Oxford: Oxford University Press."
"84" "Boltanski L and Thèvenot L (2006)  On Justification: Economies of Worth.  Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press."
"85" "Bourdieu P (1988)  Homo Academicus.  Cambridge: Polity Press."
"86" "Charmaz K (2006)  Constructing Grounded Theory: A Practical Guide Through Qualitative Analysis.  Thousand Oaks, CL: SAGE."
"87" "Cooren F (2004) Textual Agency: How Texts Do Things in Organizational Settings.  Organization  11(3): 373-393."
"88" "Daston L (1992) Objectivity and the Escape from Perspective.  Social Studies of Science  22(4): 597-618."
"89" "Enders J (2001) A chair system in transition: Appointments, promotions, and gate-keeping in German higher education.  Higher Education  41(1-2): 3-25."
"90" "Enders J and Weert Ed (eds) (2009)  The Changing Face of Academic Life. Analytical and Comparative Perspectives . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan."
"91" "Flyverbom M, Christensen LT and Krause Hansen H (2015) The Transparency–Power Nexus: Observational and Regularizing Control.  Management Communication Quarterly  29(3): 385-410."
"92" "Foucault M (1972)  The Archaeology of Knowledge.  London: Tavistock."
"93" "Fumasoli T and Goastellec G (2015) Global Models, Disciplinary and Local Patterns in Academic Recruitment Processes. In: Fumasoli T, Goastellec G and Kehm BM (eds)  Academic Work and Careers in Europe: Trends, Challenges, Perspectives . Dordrecht: Springer, pp.69-93."
"94" "Garfinkel H (1967) 'Good' organizational reasons for 'bad' clinic records. In: Garfinkel H (ed)  Studies in Ethnomethodology . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, pp.186-207."
"95" "Geison GL and Holmes FL (eds) (1993)  Research Schools. Historical Reappraisals. Osiris, Second Series, Vol. 8 . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press."
"96" "Glaser BG and Strauss AL (1967)  The Discovery of Grounded Theory. Strategies for Qualitative Research.  New Brunswick: Aldine Transaction."
"97" "Gornitzka Å and Maassen P (2014) Dynamics of Convergence and Divergence. Exploring Accounts of Higher Education Policy Change. In: Mattei P (ed)  University Adaptation at Difficult Economic Times . Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.13-29."
"98" "Gross N (2002) Becoming a Pragmatist Philosopher: Status, Self-Concept, and Intellectual Choice.  American Sociological Review  67(1): 52-76."
"99" "Gross N and Fleming C (2011) Academic Conferences and the Making of Philosophical Knowledge. In: Camic C, Gross N and Lamont M (eds)  Social Knowledge in the Making . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, pp.151-179."
"100" "Hamann J (2016) 'Let us salute one of our kind'. How academic obituaries consecrate research biographies.  Poetics  56(3): 1-14."
"101" "Hammarfelt B and Rushforth AD (2017) Indicators as judgment devices: An empirical study of citizen bibliometrics in research evaluation.  Research Evaluation  26(3): 169-180."
"102" "Haraway DJ (ed) (1991)  Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature . London: Free Association Books."
"103" "Henderson EF (2015) Academic conferences: representative and resistant sites for higher education research.  Higher Education Research & Development  34(5): 914-925."
"104" "Hermanowicz JC (2007) Argument and Outline for the Sociology of Scientific (and Other) Careers.  Social Studies of Science  37(4): 625-646."
"105" "Hermanowicz JC (2009)  Lives in Science. How Institutions Affect Academic Careers.  Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press."
"106" "Hirschauer S (2010) Editorial Judgements: A Praxeology of 'Voting' in Peer Review.  Social Studies of Science  40(1): 71-103."
"107" "Höhle EA and Teichler U (2016) Career and Self-Understanding of Academics in Germany in Comparative Perspective. In: Galaz-Fontes JF, et al. (eds)  Biographies and Careers throughout Academic Life . Dordrecht: Springer, pp.241-269."
"108" "Huutoniemi K (2012) Communicating and Compromising on Disciplinary Expertise in the Peer Review of Research Proposals.  Social Studies of Science  42(6): 897-921."
"109" "Hyland K and Bondi M (eds) (2006)  Academic Discourse Across Disciplines . Berlin: Peter Lang."
"110" "Iggers GG (1984)  The German Conception of History. The National Tradition of Historical Thought from Herder to the Present.  Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press."
"111" "Knorr Cetina K (1999)  Epistemic Cultures. How the Sciences Make Knowledge.  Harvard, MA: Harvard University Press."
"112" "Krücken G and Meier F (2006) Turning the University into an Organizational Actor. In: Drori GS, Meyer JW and Hwang H (eds)  Globalization and Organization: World Society and Organizational Change . Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.241-257."
"113" "Lamont M (1987) How to Become a Dominant French Philosopher: The Case of Jacques Derrida.  American Journal of Sociology  93(3): 584-622."
"114" "Lamont M (2012) Toward a Comparative Sociology of Valuation and Evaluation.  Annual Review of Sociology  38(21): 201-221."
"115" "Langenhove Lv and Harré R (1999) Positioning and the Writing of Science. In: Harré R and Langenhove Lv (eds)  Positioning theory. Moral contexts of intentional action . Oxford: Blackwell, pp.102-115."
"116" "Latour B and Woolgar S (1979)  Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific Facts.  Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press."
"117" "Lutter M and Schröder M (2014) Who Becomes a Tenured Professor, and Why? Panel Data Evidence from German Sociology, 1980–2013.  Research Policy  45(5): 999-1013."
"118" "Mialet H (1999) Do Angels Have Bodies? Two Stories About Subjectivity in Science: The Cases of William X and Mister H.  Social Studies of Science  29(4): 551-581."
"119" "Misra J, Kennelly I and Karides M (1999) Employment Chances in the Academic Job Market in Sociology: Do Race and Gender Matter?  Sociological Perspectives  42(2): 215-247."
"120" "Musselin C (2010)  The market for academics.  New York, NY: Routledge."
"121" "Nielsen MW (2016) Limits to meritocracy? Gender in academic recruitment and promotion processes.  Science and Public Policy  43(3): 386-399."
"122" "Paradeise C, et al. (eds) (2009)  University Governance. Western European Perspectives . Dordrecht: Springer."
"123" "Posselt JR (2016)  Inside Graduate Admissions. Merit, Diversity, and Faculty Gatekeeping.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press."
"124" "Prior L (2008) Repositioning Documents in Social Research.  Sociology  42(5): 821-836."
"125" "Rivera LA (2012) Hiring as Cultural Matching. The Case of Elite Professional Service Firms.  American Sociological Review  77(6): 999-1022."
"126" "Rivera LA (2017) When Two Bodies Are (Not) a Problem: Gender and Relationship Status Discrimination in Academic Hiring.  American Sociological Review  82(6): 1111-1138."
"127" "Rüegg W (ed) (2004)  A history of the university in Europe, Vol. III: Universities in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries (1800-1945) . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press."
"128" "Sauder M (2006) Third parties and status position: How the characteristics of status systems matter.  Theory and Society  35(3): 299-321."
"129" "Schimank U (2005) 'New Public Management' and the Academic Profession: Reflections on the German Situation.  Minerva  43(4): 361-376."
"130" "Shapin S and Schaffer S (2011)  Leviathan and the Air-Pump. Hobbes, Boyle, and the Experimental Life.  Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press."
"131" "Skelton A (1997) Conferences, conferences, conferences?  Teaching in Higher Education  2(1): 69-72."
"132" "Söderqvist T and Silverstein AM (1994) Participation in Scientific Meetings: A New Prosopographical Approach to the Disciplinary History of Science - The Case of Immunology, 1951-72.  Social Studies of Science  24(3): 513-548."
"133" "Strathern M (2000) The Tyranny of Transparency.  British Educational Research Journal  26(3): 309-321."
"134" "Strauss AL and Corbin JM (1990)  Basics of Qualitative Research. Grounded Theory Procedures and Techniques.  Thousand Oaks, CL: SAGE."
"135" "Trace CB (2002) What is recorded is never simply 'what happened': Record keeping in modern organizational culture.  Archival Science  2(1): 137-159."
"136" "Tsay A, et al. (2003) From character to intellect: changing conceptions of merit in the social sciences and humanities, 1951-1971.  Poetics  2003(31): 23-49."
"137" "van den Brink M and Benschop Y (2012) Gender practices in the construction of academic excellence: Sheep with five legs.  Organization  19(4): 507-524."
"138" "Walker HA, Thomas GM and Zelditch M (1986) Legitimation, Endorsement, and Stability.  Social Forces  64(3): 620-643."
"139" "Weber W (1984)  Priester der Klio. Historisch-sozialwissenschaftliche Studien zur Herkunft und Karriere deutscher Historiker und zur Geschichte der Geschichtswissenschaft 1800-1970.  Bern: Peter Lang."
"140" "Weingart P, et al. (1991)  Die sog. Geisteswissenschaften: Außenansichten.   Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp."
"141" "Whitley RD and Gläser J (eds) (2007)  The Changing Governance of the Sciences .  Dordrecht: Springer."
"142" "Zimmer LM (2018)  Das Kapital der Juniorprofessur. Einflussfaktoren bei der Berufung von der Junior- auf die Lebenszeitprofessur.   Wiesbaden: Springer."
