This is the accepted manuscript (post-print version) of the article. As regards to
content, the post-print version is identical to the final published version, but there
may be differences in typography, layout, and copyediting. Please cite the published
version:
Liebst, Lasse S., Richard Philpot, Marie B. Heinskou, and Marie R. Lindegaard.
2018. Samfundsøkonomen, no. 4

Bystander Intervention in Street Violence: Current Evidence and Implications for
Practice
Lasse Suonperä Liebst, Richard Philpot, Marie Bruvik Heinskou, and Marie Rosenkrantz
Lindegaard1

Abstract
In street violence, bystanders are a potential resource for crime prevention, as they tend to
be present when the police are absent. This paper describes evidence of bystanders taking
an active role in the prevention of violence and considers implications for crime
prevention initiatives.

Introduction
How do bystanders react when witnessing violence in public places? Most people may
recall cases covered in the media where no one present intervened, and the scientific study
of bystander behavior was prompted by one such tragic case: The 1964-rape and murder
of the 28-year-old Kitty Genovese in New York, where 37 bystanders allegedly failed to
intervene. Two social psychological scholars, Darley and Latané (1968), set out to explain
the factors underpinning the bystander apathy observed in this and similar cases. In a
series of influential experimental studies, they found that increasing numbers of
bystanders present reduced the individual likelihood of intervention. This was described as
the ‘bystander effect,’ and is typically attributed to the psychological process by which
additional bystanders diffuse the individual responsibility for helping. That is, “why
should I intervene when the others present could do it?” Decades of subsequent research

Principal Investigator ’Violence, Bystanders, and…Action!’ (Independent Research Fund ref. 6109-00210)
and corresponding author: mrl@soc.ku.dk
1

1

established the bystander effect as one of the best-replicated findings within social
psychology (Manning, Levine, & Collins, 2007).
Recently, however, this apathetic view of bystanders has been challenged. In a
meta-analytical synthesis of the experimentally-based bystander effect research field,
Fischer et al. (2011) showed that the bystander effect does not generalize to dangerous
emergencies. When comparing bystander helping in low versus high danger conditions,
they found that the bystander effect attenuated, or even reversed, in simulations of highdanger. This suggests that bystanders intervene when it really matters, and that the
presence of others does not diffuse the responsibility for helping. Rather, in dangerous
situations, additional bystanders may offer a welcome support that increases the likelihood
of helping. This latter ‘reversed bystander effect’ is meaningful from the standpoint of the
intervener: “I can intervene because there are others to help me if this dangerous situation
gets out of hand.”
Fischer and colleagues have since verified the existence of the reversed
bystander effect in field experiments simulating aggressive emergencies (Fischer &
Greitemeyer, 2013). Adding to this, recent reassessments of the Kitty Genovese case
document that several bystanders did in fact do something to help, as expected under the
reversed bystander effect hypothesis (Manning et al., 2007). Taken together, this leaves
us, both at the meta-analytical and anecdotal level of knowledge, with a more optimistic
and agential view of bystanders.
These recent findings not only reframe the role of bystanders within the
psychological literature, but are also of importance for the parallel criminological work
that conceptualizes bystanders as ‘guardians’ (Cohen & Felson, 1979). Here, it is argued
that the mere presence of bystanders has a crime preventive effect, with bystander
presence making it more difficult and risky from the perspective of the offender to commit
a crime. Although this situational approach is effective in deterring ‘cold-headed’ crimes,
(e.g., robberies, burglaries, petty theft), it may be less effective against ‘hot-headed’
crimes, such as street violent assaults (Hayward, 2007). Moving beyond a mere focus on
bystander presence as a deterrent to crime, in this paper, we suggest that bystander actions
may offer new avenues for behavior-based crime prevention initiatives.
Alongside the meta-analytical work highlighting the importance of danger for
bystander intervention, studies more recently examine bystander involvement in the

2

dangerous setting of real-life public violence. Here, the methods employed include
assessments of police case file descriptions of public violent assaults (Heinskou & Liebst,
2017), interviews with bystanders (Levine, Lowe, Best, & Heim, 2012), on-site
observations of bystander involvement (Parks, Osgood, Felson, Wells, & Graham, 2013),
and video observations of street violence using surveillance camera footage (Levine,
Taylor, & Best, 2011; Liebst, Heinskou, & Ejbye-Ernst, 2018; Philpot, 2017). The latter
video-based method, offers a unique possibility to systematically study how violent
interactions unfold chronologically and how bystanders shape the ongoing situation
(Lindegaard & Bernasco, 2018).

How typical is intervention in street violence?
The impression left by much of the existing bystander and guardianship literature is that
those witnessing a real-life emergency rarely intervene to help (Manning et al., 2007).
However, a recent systematic assessment of 500 police-reported public assaults in
Copenhagen, Denmark, showed that at least one bystander intervened to help in
approximately three-out-of-four cases (Heinskou & Liebst, 2017). The majority of these
de-escalatory interventions were physical in nature and included behaviors such as holding
back an aggressive individual or blocking conflict parties. This high intervention rate may
be underestimated, however, given that police case files are not specifically interested in
the behavior of bystanders and may exclude conflicts that did not escalate because of
successful bystander intervention. Using a cross-national video sample of both reported,
and, crucially, non-reported public assaults, Philpot and colleagues (2019) found that at
least one bystander (but typically three or four) carried out helping interventions in nineout-of-ten of the aggressive incidents. Further, this study found similar rates of deescalation across three national contexts (the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, and South
Africa). Taken together, and in contrast to established ideas, these studies evidence that
the rate of real-life intervention in public assaults is very high.

How do people intervene?
Within the traditional bystander literature field, there exists a binary understanding of
bystander action—as passive or actively helpful. However, by studying the actual
behaviors of bystanders, this dichotomous distinction is superseded by a multidimensional

3

understanding of bystander roles and action types. For example, de-escalatory helping
may be expressed in a variety of forms: one can intervene in a physical manner by
separating or blocking the conflict parties; in a non-physical way with pacifying gesturing
or verbal pleas to calm down; or be directed towards third-parties, such as calling the
police or asking a friend or bouncer to help (Heinskou & Liebst, 2017; Levine et al.,
2011).
In addition to the de-escalatory helping measured in the above studies,
bystanders may also intervene in escalatory manners. Bystanders may fight on behalf of
their group, or even, paradoxically, use aggression with the purpose to de-escalate the
conflict (Levine et al., 2012; Levine et al., 2011; Parks et al., 2013). Besides intervention
into ongoing conflicts, video observational studies document that bystanders provide
emotional care and stress-reducing touching to victims of violence post-conflict (Liebst,
Philpot, Ejbye-Ernst, Bernasco, et al., 2018; Lindegaard et al., 2017). Bystander helping,
both in the ongoing conflict and post-conflict, are typically coordinated in a collective
effort between multiple bystanders (Bloch, Liebst, Poder, Christensen, & Heinskou, 2018;
Levine et al., 2011). For example, Bloch and colleagues describe post-conflict care as a
coordinated task performed by a ‘caring collective,’ in which different bystanders take on
different roles—e.g., one individual fetches paper towels in a nearby shop, while another
comforts the victim. Note, that similar bystander coordination is also observed in nonviolent medical emergencies (Linderoth et al., 2015).

Why do people intervene?
To date, the most common explanation for bystander non-intervention is the increased
number of those present—i.e., the bystander effect. However, as aforementioned, the
bystander effect may not generalize to dangerous emergencies, in which additional
bystanders may promote intervention—i.e., the reversed bystander effect (Fischer et al.,
2011). This latter finding is in line with a number of video observational studies recording
higher levels of intervention in more populated emergencies (Levine et al., 2011;
Lindegaard et al., 2017; Philpot, 2017). A Danish video-based study of violent public
assaults, however, found that the individual propensity to intervene decreased with
additional bystander presence, similar to the prediction of the classical bystander effect
(Liebst, Philpot, et al., 2018; see also Phillips & Cooney, 2005). Taken together, the

4

evidence remains mixed when assessing the role of bystander numbers in real-life
intervention contexts. Conversely, the high intervention rate consistently found in real-life
violent settings indicates that danger is an important contextual predictor of intervention.
However, a systematic comparison of real-life bystander intervention in non-dangerous
versus dangerous/violent contexts is needed to ascertain the validity and strength of this
association.
A uniformly robust finding is that social group membership with a conflict
party strongly predicts bystander intervention. Specifically, if the bystander identifies as
being a member of the same social group as the victim or perpetrator, it is more likely that
the bystander provides help (for a review, Levine & Manning, 2013). For example, Levine
and colleagues (2012) found that bystanders are motivated to help victims whom they
personally know—sometimes by fighting on their behalf, but most typically, through the
de-escalatory ‘self-policing’ of their unruly friends. Extending this research, Liebst and
colleagues examined the strength of social group membership as a predictor of bystander
intervention in ongoing conflicts (Liebst, Philpot, Ejbye-Ernst, Dausel, et al., 2018). The
researchers used video observational data from public assaults in Copenhagen, and
examined whether the number of individuals present or social group membership bestpredicted bystander involvement. Social group membership was determined using
nonverbal behavioral cues, such as collective behavior-in-concert and bodily proximity
(Afifi & Johnson, 2005), which were then validated against police case file descriptions.
Results showed that group membership outcompeted bystander presence as the main
predictor of intervention. A similar result was recorded when assessing consolatory
helping in the aftermath of the street assaults, with social group membership again the
dominant predictor (Liebst, Philpot, Ejbye-Ernst, Bernasco, et al., 2018). Moreover, this
finding is consistent with Lindegaard and colleagues’ (2017) previous study, which found
that in the aftermath of commercial robberies, employees were, compared to members of
the public, disproportionately more likely to console fellow victimized employees.
While social group membership is now established as a key predictor of
bystander intervention, Liebst et al. (2018) also associate this factor to an elevated risk of
bystander victimization when intervening to help. In this study, which also relied on
police-reported video data of Copenhagen assaults, the overall risk of victimization was
quite low (at 12% for de-escalatory interveners, and 18% for de-escalatory/escalatory

5

mixed interveners). Further, these victimizations were typically low in severity—for
example, being pushed away once by the perpetrator. The authors examined two potential
risk factors of bystander victimization: whether it is more dangerous to intervene into
severe conflicts, or whether it is more dangerous to intervene when knowing a conflict
party. Results found no association between conflict severity and bystander victimization,
but did identify social group membership as an elevated risk factor. Theoretically, this
suggests that an intervening friend is not perceived as a neutral party by perpetrators, but
as a partisan who is an eligible target of aggression.

How helpful are interventions?
Perhaps the most pertinent question is whether the bystander interventions are helpful in
de-escalating conflicts—yet, surprisingly, little systematic evidence has addressed this
question. This omission is, in part, due to the circumstance that the literature until recently
has assumed bystanders are largely passive. Further adding to this issue, it remains
statistically difficult to establish casual dynamics from observational data. However, in
our view, based on over 500 qualitative observations of real-life captured assaults,
bystanders play a key role in successfully ceasing conflicts. This aligns with the few
studies examining the outcome of bystander actions. In a sequential video analysis of
street violence in the United Kingdom, Levine, Best and Taylor (2011) indicated that
cumulative interventions of multiple bystanders are associated with reduced conflict
severity. This finding suggests, in line with Bloch et al. (2018), that cooperation between
bystanders makes intervention successful. More recently, Philpot (2017) examined the
distinction between bystander interventions aimed at one conflict party (i.e., the victim or
the perpetrator) or aimed at both conflict parties. He found that de-escalatory interventions
targeted at both conflict parties were associated with a lower overall severity than those
aimed at sole individuals. This study, however, was not able to untangle the causal
dynamics and should be interpreted with caution. Future research should prioritize
systematic statistical studies of the helpfulness of bystander intervention.

Discussion and implications
Current advice from the Danish Crime Prevention Council (2002) highlights that
bystanders witnessing street violence may easily escalate the situation or become a victim

6

themselves by intervening. Thus, it is suggested that bystanders stay at a distance from the
conflict while making their presence known as to indirectly deter the offender. These
recommendations fall in line with the criminological notion of bystanders as guardians
(Cohen & Felson, 1979), in which it is the mere presence of bystanders that has a crime
preventive effect. The recent evidence presented, however, advocates an update of this
advice. Real-life data shows that bystanders are not passive or merely observant during
street violence. Rather in the vast majority of conflicts at least one, but typically several
bystanders, are physically intervening to help. Given this high intervention rate, it is
important to provide guidance on how to intervene effectively and safely. Further, there is
no empirical basis for the view that bystander intervention leads to escalation. To the
contrary, evidence suggests that direct physical intervention is successful in de-escalating
conflict. Further, the risk of bystander victimization and the severity of victimization are
both fairly low, in particular for intervening strangers.
The recent advances in bystander research may also inform urban and police
crime prevention strategies. Within urban planning theory, there remains a debate whether
large amounts of individuals on the street are detrimental or beneficial to public safety. On
the one hand, some scholars suggest that more populated streets offer a greater possibility
for interpersonal friction and conflict (see Townsley & Grimshaw, 2013), without anyone
feeling obliged to taking responsibility for the place (Newman, 1972). This leads to
recommendations that large groups should be split up by authorities and that street layouts
should be designed to minimize pedestrian co-presence and traffic. On the other hand,
some argue that the co-presence of individuals provides ‘safety in numbers,’ because there
are more people present to intervene if necessary (Hillier, 2004). The literature assessed
would suggest an important balance between the two arguments: While there is little doubt
that the number of people present is a background condition for the emergence of violent
hotspots, this increased presence also provides more bystanders who will actively
intervene to help in cases of violence. Future research should look beyond the positive
association between co-presence and violence and examine the counter-balance
association of increased bystander co-presence and more helping.
The finding that typically multiple bystanders coordinate to de-escalate
conflicts has important implications for how police forces manage groups in public
settings—for example, in nightlife drinking areas, where groups tend to be approached as

7

instigating rather than regulating violence (Levine et al., 2012). The present evidence
shows that members of the public are effectively able to ‘self-police’ conflicts, without the
necessary involvement of police authorities. This readily available bystander resource is
not only cost-efficient, but may in certain situations be preferred (e.g., those events
characterized by tensions between the police and the public) (Eck, 2015). The important
point, however, is that official policing and informal self-policing are not mutually
exclusive efforts. Bystanders have an established role as witnesses in legal proceedings of
street violence. In our view, besides this role, bystanders should be further recognized as
helpful actors in the conflict itself, where they can provide valuable assistance before the
arrival of the police.
With the success of bystander intervention programs addressing sexual
violence on campuses (Jouriles, Krauss, Vu, Banyard, & McDonald, 2018), it is further
recommended that crime prevention agencies engage members of the public more directly
in bystander efforts targeting street violence. Such initiatives should inform the public that
bystander intervention is commonplace, that it is likely to help, without exposing the
intervener to great risk. Knowing that social group members are already highly likely to
intervene, such initiatives should aim towards engaging even more strangers. This
increased engagement is welcome from the perspective of the victim, but is also preferable
given that strangers are exposed to the lowest risk of bystander victimization. Finally, such
campaign may also alleviate the widespread fear that public strangers are a source of
potential danger or are apathetic when witnessing violent crimes (Hale, 1996).

References
Afifi, W. A., & Johnson, M. L. (2005). The nature and function of tie-signs. In V. L.
Manusov (Ed.), The sourcebook of nonverbal measures: Going beyond words (pp.
189-198). New Jersey: Psychology Press.
Bloch, C., Liebst, L. S., Poder, P., Christensen, J., & Heinskou, M. B. (2018). Caring
collectives and other forms of bystander helping behavior in violent situations.
Current Sociology.
Cohen, L. E., & Felson, M. (1979). Social change and crime rate trends: A routine activity
approach. American Sociological Review, 588-608.
Darley, J. M., & Latané, B. (1968). Bystander intervention in emergencies: Diffusion of
responsibility. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 8(4), 377-383.
Eck, J. E. (2015). Who should prevent crime at places? The advantages of regulating place
managers and challenges to police services. Policing: A Journal of Policy and
Practice, 9(3), 223-233.

8

Fischer, P., & Greitemeyer, T. (2013). The positive bystander effect: Passive bystanders
increase helping in situations with high expected negative consequences for the
helper. Journal of Social Psychology, 153(1), 1-5.
Fischer, P., Krueger, J. I., Greitemeyer, T., Vogrincic, C., Kastenmüller, A., Frey, D., . . .
Kainbacher, M. (2011). The bystander-effect: A meta-analytic review on bystander
intervention in dangerous and non-dangerous emergencies. Psychological Bulletin,
137(4), 517-537.
Hale, C. (1996). Fear of crime: A review of the literature. International Review of
Victimology, 4(2), 79-150.
Hayward, K. (2007). Situational crime prevention and its discontents: Rational Choice
Theory versus the ‘culture of now’. Social Policy & Administration, 41(3), 232250.
Heinskou, M. B., & Liebst, L. S. (2017). Gadevold. En sociologisk kortlægning af vold i
byen. København: Djøf Forlag.
Hillier, B. (2004). Can streets be made safe? Urban Design International, 9(1), 31-45.
Jouriles, E. N., Krauss, A., Vu, N. L., Banyard, V. L., & McDonald, R. (2018). Bystander
programs addressing sexual violence on college campuses: A systematic review
and meta-analysis of program outcomes and delivery methods. Journal of
American College Health, 1-10.
Levine, M., Lowe, R., Best, R., & Heim, D. (2012). ‘We police it ourselves’: Group
processes in the escalation and regulation of violence in the night‐time economy.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 42(7), 924-932.
Levine, M., & Manning, R. (2013). Social identity, group processes, and helping in
emergencies. European Review of Social Psychology, 24(1), 225-251.
Levine, M., Taylor, P. J., & Best, R. (2011). Third parties, violence, and conflict
resolution: The role of group size and collective action in the microregulation of
violence. Psychological Science, 22(3), 406-412.
Liebst, L. S., Heinskou, M. B., & Ejbye-Ernst, P. (2018). On the actual risk of bystander
intervention: A statistical study based on naturally occurring violent emergencies.
Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 55(1), 27-50.
Liebst, L. S., Philpot, R., Ejbye-Ernst, P., Bernasco, W., Verbeek, P., Heinskou, M. B., . . .
Lindegaard, M. R. (2018). Consolation in the Aftermath of Violent Public Assaults:
Towards an Interaction Ethology of Bystander Emergency Behavior. Paper
presented at the Danish Sociological Conference 2018, Esbjerg, Denmark. 25
January 2018.
Liebst, L. S., Philpot, R., Ejbye-Ernst, P., Dausel, K. L., Nicolaisen, M. H., Bernasco, W.,
. . . Lindegaard, M. R. (2018). Bystanders in Real-Life Dangerous Emergencies:
Group Relationships Predict Intervention. Paper presented at the Danish
Sociological Conference 2018, Esbjerg, Denmark. 25 January 2018.
Lindegaard, M. R., & Bernasco, W. (2018). Lessons learned from crime caught on
camera. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 55(1), 155-186.
Lindegaard, M. R., Liebst, L. S., Bernasco, W., Heinskou, M. B., Philpot, R., Levine, M.,
& Verbeek, P. (2017). Consolation in the aftermath of robberies resembles postaggression consolation in chimpanzees. PloS one, 12(5), e0177725.
Linderoth, G., Hallas, P., Lippert, F. K., Wibrandt, I., Loumann, S., Møller, T. P., &
Østergaard, D. (2015). Challenges in out-of-hospital cardiac arrest–a study
combining closed-circuit television (CCTV) and medical emergency calls.
Resuscitation, 96, 317-322.

9

Manning, R., Levine, M., & Collins, A. (2007). The Kitty Genovese murder and the social
psychology of helping: The parable of the 38 witnesses. American Psychologist,
62(6), 555-562.
Newman, O. (1972). Defensible space: Crime prevention through urban design. New
York: Macmillan.
Parks, M. J., Osgood, D. W., Felson, R. B., Wells, S., & Graham, K. (2013). Third party
involvement in barroom conflicts. Aggressive Behavior, 39(4), 257-268.
Phillips, S., & Cooney, M. (2005). Aiding peace, abetting violence: Third parties and the
management of conflict. American Sociological Review, 70(2), 334-354.
Philpot, R. (2017). Beyond the dyad: The role of groups and third-parties in the trajectory
of violence. (Doctoral dissertation), University of Exeter, Exeter.
Philpot, R., Liebst, L. S., Levine, M., Bernasco, W., & Lindegaard, M. R. (2019). Would I
be helped? Cross-National CCTV Shows That Intervention Is the Norm in Public
Conflicts. American Pshychologist
Townsley, M., & Grimshaw, R. (2013). The consequences of queueing: Crowding,
situational features and aggression in entertainment precincts. Crime Prevention
and Community Safety, 15(1), 23-47.

10

