Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no1.4

Pp. 47- 55

Electronic Educational Environment Moodle in English Language Training
Anna V. Butova
Foreign Languages for Engineering Chair Institute of Humanities,
Nosov Magnitogorsk State Technical University,
Magnitogorsk, Russia
Angelina I. Dubskikh
Foreign Languages for Engineering Chair Institute of Humanities,
Nosov Magnitogorsk State Technical University,
Magnitogorsk, Russia
Olesya V. Kisel
Foreign Languages for Engineering Chair Institute of Humanities,
Nosov Magnitogorsk State Technical University,
Magnitogorsk, Russia
Elena G. Chigintseva
Preschool and Special Education Chair Institute of Humanities,
Nosov Magnitogorsk State Technical University,
Magnitogorsk, Russia
Abstract
The article deals with the causes, methods and functions of using E-learning in the process of training
students English, as well as changing teacher’s and learner’s roles in the educational process. The
introduction of information and communication technologies in educational and research processes is a
compulsory requirement to implement the concept of modernization in Russian education. Recently,
interest in English as a means of international communication has increased significantly, it has already
been recognized as the language of professional communication in various fields of activity. The relevance
of this work is undoubted. Modern higher school teachers are constantly looking for more effective
approaches in training English and in the process of creating an electronic educational environment that
would allow students access to various sources of information and help satisfy the interests of the modern
student. The goal of the research is to increase the efficiency of training English in the system of higher
professional education through the development and use of educational software products that apply
modern information technology. Methods to achieve this goal include the method of using computer
technology, methods of network planning and project management. The research showed that the
organization of the information-instrumental educational environment uses a student centered approach,
the development of an electronic educational and methodological complex (EEMC) is a search for an
algorithm, most adapted to the student's cognitive needs, and EEMC in English creates the best conditions
for the principle of interactivity. The practical significance of the study is determined by the fact that its
materials related to the method of creating multimedia tasks and virtual environments can be used in the
practical work of universities, as well as in the system of further training for specialists.
Keywords: information and communication technologies, education modernization, e-learning, virtual
educational environment, English language training
Cite as: Butova, A.V., Dubskikh, A. I., Kisel , O. V., & Chigintseva, E. G. (2019). Electronic Educational
Environment Moodle in English Language Training. Arab World English Journal, 10 (1) 47- 55.DOI:
https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no1.4

47

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Electronic Educational Environment Moodle

Butova, Dubskikh, Kisel & Chigintseva

Introduction
With the increasing development of computer technology, electronic and telecommunications,
information and Internet technologies, new opportunities for their use in education are being
revealed. The introduction of new pedagogical technologies makes it possible to change the very
education paradigm, and new information technologies help realize the opportunities inherent in
new pedagogical technologies most effectively. In particular, the computerization in the field of
communication defines a new level of English language proficiency requirements. It has led to
changes in the definition of the goals and objectives of its study (Aldrich, 2003; Maurer, Sapper,
2001; Clark, 2007).
The use of new information technologies in teaching is one of the most important aspects
for improving and optimizing the educational process, enriching the arsenal of methodological
tools and techniques, which make it possible to diversify the forms of work and make the process
of English training interesting for students (Stockley, 2006).
Information and communication technologies are a wide range of digital technologies used
for creating, transmitting and distributing information and providing services “computer
equipment, software, cellular communications, electronic mail, cellular and satellite technologies,
wireless and cable communications networks, multimedia, and the Internet” (Koptyg, 2000, p. 5459; Rosenberg, 2001).
The modern educational paradigm, built on computer-based teaching aids, takes as its basis
the inculcation by students of self-education skills, but not the transfer to them ready-made
knowledge and skills. At the same time, the student activities in class are the communication with
a teacher, mediated through interactive computer programs and audiovisual media (Azman,
Dollsaid, 2018; Rossett, Sheldon, 2001; Zarutskaya, Kisel, and & et al., 2018).
The use of information and communication technologies in teaching English makes it
possible to present educational material more visually. It is also essential that the student can work
in a self-pacing form, returning to the misunderstood, if it is required, or running ahead
(Podoprigorova, 2003). In addition, computer-based training programs make it possible to train
various types of speech activity and combine them in different combinations, understand language
phenomena, contribute to the formation of linguistic abilities, create communicative situations,
automate language and speech actions, and ensure the implementation of individual work and
students' independent work.
Methodology
The systematic approach to the informatization of foreign language education allowed to consider
the principles of this process at three levels (methodological and technological, system-integrative
and conceptual-strategic). Their implementation will create a universal educational environment
for training English. At the methodological and technological level, the principles of mastering
certain aspects of the English language are developed, strategies and techniques for the formation
of skills using information and communication technologies are determined. At the systemintegration level technologies and teaching methods are synthesized within a single electronic
educational environment. At the conceptual-strategic level, the existing educational programs in
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

48

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Electronic Educational Environment Moodle

Butova, Dubskikh, Kisel & Chigintseva

the English language are adapted to the new technological conditions (Chemezov, Buhanova,
2012).
The methodological principles governing foreign language professional communication
through information and communication technologies are also emphasized: the principles of
conditionality, necessity, information content, reliability, interactivity, adaptability, complexity,
polysensory, methodical support (Tsarkova, Ivachev, & Kulikov, 2013).
Results and discussion
Learning Management Systems (LMS) are widespread in Russian universities. One of the most
popular open information systems is the Moodle system (Modular Object-Oriented Dynamic
Learning Environment) (Behterev& Loginova, 2013; Loginova, 2011; Ovchinnikova, 2011;
Rymanova, 2013).
It is a virtual learning environment that allows you to create a complete workspace for all
participants in the educational process (Khusainova, 2013).
Moodle gives the teacher the opportunity to use electronic resources to organize information
interaction between the teacher and students for solving different tasks during both classroom and
extracurricular work, expanding cooperation in training, transmitting large amounts of information
and knowledge control, organizing training in a more rational way, leaving easy topics for
independent work (Andreyev, 2010; Dubskikh, & Zerkina, 2018; Obraztsov, 2000).
Considering the possibilities of the electronic educational environment, the authors of the
article developed an electronic educational and methodological complex (EEMC) in the English
language. It is a structured set of electronic educational and methodical documentation, electronic
educational resources, teaching aids and knowledge control containing interconnected educational
content for sharing applications to learn English effectively (Sritulanon, Chaturongakul&
Thammetar, 2018). The main areas for application this complex are:
- full-time and part-time forms of education support;
- competitions, contests, quizzes in the English language;
- computer testing (Dyrdina& Zaporozhko, 2012).
The purpose of the EEMC is the development of professional foreign language communicative
competence and all its components: knowledge acquisition about the language system and the rules
to operate it in speech activity, mastering all types of speech activity in English, the basics of oral
and written culture, language skills in everyday and professional communication situations,
acquiring knowledge about speech behavior in certain standard situations based on understanding
of national and cultural features of the foreign country and on the ability to exercise their verbal
behavior in accordance with this knowledge, the formation of the ability to understand the
interlocutor, to plan verbal behavior and transmit information in cohesive, logical statements
(James, 2016; Mineyeva & Krasikova, 2010).

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

49

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Electronic Educational Environment Moodle

Butova, Dubskikh, Kisel & Chigintseva

The content of EEMC reflects the requirements of a point-rating system, an activity and
communicative approach to bachelors training. The course is based on modern e-learning
technologies that ensure the implementation of individual learning trajectories under the
continuous teacher guidance, and increase the efficiency of English training process (Daricheva,
2012; Sritulanon, Chaturongakul, & Thammetar, 2018).
EEMC has a thematic structure and includes the following blocks:
- instructional unit having organizational and methodical character. In this block, there is a
news forum to inform students about all the events taking place in the training process; goals, tasks
and educational results to master the discipline are stated; explanations of technologies and
teaching aids, types of control are shown; the working program of the discipline, thematic plan
and the individual rating plan of the student are presented; instructions and recommendations for
the implementation of all kinds and forms of educational activities are given;
- resources for studying the course in the form of reference materials on grammar,
vocabulary, English spelling, teaching and methodological information of the discipline,
hyperlinks to open full-text educational and scientific literature, periodicals, Internet resources and
other electronic educational resources (EER) for self-education of the student are presented in this
unit;
- the didactic block consists of specially selected and clearly structured didactic materials,
which are a combination of various educational and methodical materials allowing to optimize the
process of interaction “teacher-students”;
- the control unit includes materials for entrance, current, boundary and control, materials
for midterms (test/exam).
Thus, the teacher has diverse tools for organization of educational activities with students, training
English practical classes, using such forms as the forum, the glossary, the lecture, the task, the test.
A different combination of course elements is possible to achieve certain goals of classes.
Each topic of the e-learning course has a clear structure: at the beginning of the topic there
is the “Glossary”, containing the main lexical units on the studied topic. It is important to
emphasize that students are active participants in the development of a thematic glossary. They
complement and edit the list of terms, and it helps to learn new vocabulary and refresh the
previously studied. For example, in the Great Britain study course, one of the tasks for working
with the text “Russia and Great Britain compared to each other” is adding vocabulary to the
glossary on the topic. Then each unit of the glossary will be highlighted by the system in any of
the texts (in a lecture, assignment, test). It allows students to focus on these words and expressions
and, therefore, to remember them more firmly.
The system element "Lecture" is used to organize students' independent work on new
theoretical material (grammar, teaching the principles of summarization and annotation,
correspondence in English) (Gosper, Green and & et al., 2011). The most positive result in student
work is observed in the assimilation of grammatical material. As an example lectures on such
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

50

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Electronic Educational Environment Moodle

Butova, Dubskikh, Kisel & Chigintseva

grammatical topics, “Passive voice”, “Modal verbs”, “Complex Subject”, developed in Moodle,
can be given. Thanks to the lecture settings specified by the teacher, students have the opportunity
at their own pace to study new material and make a summary in the workbook. To increase active
interaction and control the understanding of the material, the teacher uses various questions and
tasks at the end of each section (page) of the lecture. Without understanding the reading material
and checking the quality of the knowledge gained, it is impossible to continue studying the topic.
Depending on the answer chosen by the student and the strategy developed by the teacher, students,
answering the questions correctly, go to the next page or return to the previous page in case of an
incorrect answer, having the opportunity to read the theoretical material once again and answer the
control questions. The teacher evaluates the lecture, marks are recorded in the grade book.
In our opinion, the element “Task” possesses a large didactic potential in training English.
The authors of the article widely use this electronic system tool both during the classroom work
and for organizing independent work and homework. The algorithm for working with the “Task”
element may be the working out of a new lexical and grammatical material, reading or listening to
authentic texts on general or professional topics. After reading listening to the text, students do a
series of lexical-grammatical exercises. In addition, the work on the content is accompanied by
communicative exercises, and the result of the work may be the performance of creative tasks
(preparation of the abstract, presentation, annotations). Students post them in the "Forum". The
element "Forum" is a tool for organizing training in a group. Based on essays, presentations,
annotations, etc., students with a teacher discuss questions, leave their comments, and evaluate
each other's works. For example, the result of the work on the theme “Study” (“Study in High
School”) is the presentation “Our University”. The students' task is not only to compile and place
a presentation in the forum, but also to evaluate the presentations of other participants of the course.
The next function of the “Forum” is an advisory function, thanks to which students have the
opportunity to ask questions, get a teacher’s advice.
In the process of creating EEMC in the English language, the authors attach great importance
to such a structure element as the “Test”. We consider it is essential to use tests not only to control
but in the teaching function, too. Depending on the test function its settings are made. The program
editor allows you to customize the rating scale, the number of attempts, deadlines, time limit and
the accrual of fines. If the test is of a training nature, the authors of the course indicate in the
settings that the test time is unlimited and give students two attempts to solve the test. This will
provide them with the opportunity, after the first attempt to analyze the mistakes made, to estimate
the depth of the knowledge gained, to repeat and study the theoretical material more carefully, and
then pass the test again. In this case, the average rating of both attempts will be set in the rating
log. The final test students pass once for a limited period of time. Thus, we emphasize that the
Moodle e-learning environment provides monitoring and evaluative monitoring of the educational
process. The system of final testing allows students to check their knowledge at the end each topic.
Tests developed by the teacher make it possible to check the level of learning quickly.
We especially note that the element "Test" allows you to implement the elements of the
rating system for bachelors’ preparation in English, as the testing system developed by the authors
has a level character. Level A tests have a reproductive nature. They use the types of questions
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

51

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Electronic Educational Environment Moodle

Butova, Dubskikh, Kisel & Chigintseva

"true / false", "multiple choice", "matching", "location in the right sequence." The “B” tests have
a reproductive-productive nature: productive questions used in the “A” tests are supplemented with
questions like “short answer”. Students should type in one or several words or small sentences as
an answer. The “C” tests have a creative character and consist of questions like “short answer,”
“description” and “essay”.
A significant advantage of using the “Test” element for the teacher is quick processing of
the results – most of the test tasks are processed and evaluated automatically. All results are stored
in a statement that allows you to give a fair assessment of students' work and monitor their learning
activities.
Moodle is equipped with a good rating system. EEMC in English has its own “gradebook”.
It shows all types of students’ works, the maximum number of points for each work and the number
of points a student has scored.
Conclusion
Using the tools of the Moodle distance learning system made it possible to make the process of
training English for students of non-linguistic specialties personally-oriented, communicative and
professional-oriented, and the teachers noted the following advantages and positive aspects of this
platform:
- improving the educational process and ensuring effective independent work of students
learning English;
- the optimal implementation of the content in training English in connection with the
creation of a fairly extensive resource base. The Moodle system allowed teachers to solve the
problem of providing students with educational and methodological materials, to present a training
manual in a more accessible and convenient electronic format directly in the learning environment;
- flexibility and mobility of learning, achieved due to the fact that EEMC is available at any
time and outside the university, so students could plan their curricula and course time, perform
tasks at a convenient time;
- taking into account the specificities of students. The Moodle system gives students with
different levels of learning and unequal abilities the opportunity to study at an individual pace. It
creates a learning and educational environment that is conducive for a student and gives the
prerequisites for more effective learning;
- active introduction of new information technologies in the training process using interactive
tasks, computer and multimedia technologies, that helps to improve the process of forming
students’ foreign language skills, increase the level of such professional personal qualities as
independence, creative activity and communication skills .

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

52

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Electronic Educational Environment Moodle

Butova, Dubskikh, Kisel & Chigintseva

About the Authors:
Anna V. Butova, Senior Lecturer, Foreign Languages for Engineering Chair, Institute of
Humanities, NMSTU. 17- year experience in teaching foreign languages, experienced
extracurricular tutor, active partaker of international scientific conferences etc. Author of about 34
publications, 1 of them are indexed in Scopus; including 1 monograph, textbooks.
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8357-6069
Angelina A. Dubskikh, PhD, Associate Professor, Foreign Languages for Engineering Chair,
Institute of Humanities, NMSTU. 16- year experience in teaching foreign languages, Culture
Studies, Applied Linguistics experienced extracurricular tutor, active partaker of international
scientific conferences etc. Author of about 59 publications, 2 of them are indexed in Scopus;
including 1 monograph, textbooks. https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7367-6093
Olesya V. Kisel, PhD, Associate Professor, Foreign Languages for Engineering Chair, Institute of
Humanities, NMSTU. 16- year experience in teaching foreign languages, Culture Studies,
Business English, experienced extracurricular tutor, active partaker of international scientific
conferences etc. Author of about 20 publications, 5 of them are indexed in Scopus; including 2
monograph, textbooks. https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8503-9948
Elena G. Chigintseva PhD, Associate Professor, Preschool and Special Education Chair, Institute
of Humanities, NMSTU. Experience in teaching is 16 years. Author of over 40 works.
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7022-9666
References:
Aldrich, C. (2003). Simulations and the Future of Learning: An Innovative (and Perhaps
Revolutionary) Approach to E-Learning. San Francisco, CA: Pfeiffer.
Andreyev, A. A. (2010). Rol i problemy prepodavatelya v srede e-Learning [The role and
problems of the teacher in the e-learning environment]. Higher education in Russia, 8/9,
41-45.
Azman, H., & Dollsaid, N. F. (2018). Applying Massively Multiplayer Online Games (MMOGs)
in EFL Teaching. Arab World English Journal, 9 (4), 3-18.
Bahol'skaya, N. A. (2017). Vliyanie interaktivnogo obucheniya na razvitie professional'noj
napravlennosti studentov pedagogicheskih special'nostej vysshego uchebnogo zavedeniya
[The impact of online learning on the development of professional orientation of students
of pedagogical specialties of higher education]. Gumanitarno-pedagogicheskie
issledovaniya. 1(1).
Behterev, A. N. Loginova, A. V. (2013). Ispolzovaniye sistemy distantsionnogo obucheniya
«MOODLE» pri obuchenii professionalnomu inostrannomu yazyku [The use of distance
learning "MOODLE" in teaching professional foreign language]. Open education, 4 (99),
91-97.
Butova A. V., Dubskikh A. I., Sevast'yanova V. S. (2014). Listening with Pleasure: teaching aid.
Magnitogorsk: Izd-vo Magnitogorsk. gos. tekh. un-ta im. G.I. Nosova, 70.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

53

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Electronic Educational Environment Moodle

Butova, Dubskikh, Kisel & Chigintseva

Chemezov, S. A., Buhanova, N.V. (2012). Problemy razvitiya elektronnogo obucheniya v UGMA
[Problems of e-learning development in UGMA]. Pedagogical and information
technologies in education, 11.
Clark, R. C. (2007). E-learning and the science of instruction: proven guidelines for consumers
and designers of multimedia learning / R. C. Clark, R. E. Mayer. 2nd ed. San Francisco:
Pfeiffer, 476.
Daricheva, M. V. (2012). Ob effektivnosti ispolzovaniya sredy distantsionnogo obrazovaniya
Moodle v protsesse obucheniya inostrannomu yazyku v neyazykovom vuze [On the
effectiveness of using the Moodle distance education environment in the process of
learning a foreign language in a non-linguistic university]. Problems of development of
continuous professional education: materials of the VI International Scientific Practical
Conference. N.-Novgorod: NGPU them. K. Minin., 240-243.
Dubskikh, A. I., Zerkina, N. N. (2018). Rol prepodavatelya v protsesse obucheniya professionalno
oriyentirovannomu inostrannomu yazyku v tekhnicheskom vuze [The role of the teacher in
the process of teaching a professionally oriented foreign language in a technical college].
Modern trends in the development of the education system. Cheboksary, 108-110.
Dyrdina, E. V., Zaporozhko, V. V. (2012). Kiriakova A. V. Informatsionno-kommunikatsionnyye
tekhnologii v kompetentnostno-oriyentirovannom obrazovanii. Orenburg: OOO IPK
«Universitet», 227.
Gosper, M., Green, D., Mc Neill, M., Phillips, R.A., Preston, G., & Woo, K. (2011). Final Report:
The Impact of Web-Based Lecture Technologies on Current and Future Practices in
Learning and Teaching. Australian Learning and Teaching Council. Sydney.
James, J. (2016). ICT Integration in Academic Writing: An Experiment in Blended Learning. Arab
World English Journal, 7 (3).
Khusainova, A. A. (2013). Pedagogicheskiye usloviya ispolzovaniya sistemy Moodle v
organizatsii samostoyatelnoy raboty pri obuchenii inostrannomu yazyku studentov
ekonomicheskikh spetsialnostey [Pedagogical conditions for the use of the Moodle system
in the organization of independent work in teaching foreign languages to students of
economic specialties]. Modern Studies of Social Problems (electronic scientific journal), 2
(22).
Koptyg, N. M. (2000). Internet-uroki kak vspomogatelnyy material dlya uchitelya angliyskogo
yazyka [Internet lessons as an auxiliary material for an English teacher]. Foreign languages
at school, 4, 57-59.
Loginova, A. V. (2011). Preimushchestva ispolzovaniya sistemy distantsionnogo obucheniya
«MOODLE» pri obuchenii inostrannomu yazyku studentov tekhnicheskikh spetsialnostey
[Advantages of using the distance learning system “MOODLE” in teaching foreign
languages to students of technical specialties]. Bulletin of Siberian Science, 1 (1), 358-362.
Maurer, H., & Sapper, M. (2001). E-learning has to be seen as part of general knowledge
management. Proceedings of ED-MEDIA World Conference on Educational Multimedia,
Hypermedia & Telecommunications, 1249-1253.
Mineyeva, O. A., & Krasikova, O. G. (2010). Formirovaniye professionalno-inoyazychnoy
kommunikativnoy kompetentnosti budushchikh inzhenerov v vuze [Formation of
professional and foreign language communicative competence of future engineers at the
university]. N.-Novgorod: VGIPU, 196
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

54

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Electronic Educational Environment Moodle

Butova, Dubskikh, Kisel & Chigintseva

Obraztsov, P. I. (2000). Psikhologo-pedagogicheskiye aspekty razrabotki i primeneniya v vuze
informatsionnykh tekhnologiy obucheniya [Psychological and pedagogical aspects of the
development and use of information technology training at the university]. Orel: Orlovskiy
gosudarstvennyy tekhnicheskiy universitet, 145
Ovchinnikova, O. M. (2011). Razrabotka kursa «Inostrannyy yazyk» v sisteme distantsionnogo
obucheniya MOODLE [Development of the course "Foreign Language" in the system of
distance learning MOODLE]. World of Science, Culture, Education, 4−1, 212-218.
Podoprigorova, L. A. (2003). Ispolzovaniye Interneta v obuchenii inostrannym yazykam [Using
the Internet in teaching foreign languages]. Foreign languages at school, 5, 25-31.
Rosenberg, M. (2001). E-Learning: Strategies for Delivering Knowledge in the Digital Age. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 344
Rossett A., & Sheldon K. (2001). Beyond The Podium: Delivering Training and Performance to a
Digital World. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass/Pfeiffer, 274
Rymanova, I. E. (2013). Ispolzovaniye sredy Moodle dlya obucheniya professionalnomu
inostrannomu yazyku studentov tekhnicheskogo vuza [Using the Moodle environment for
teaching vocational foreign language to students of a technical college]. Philological
sciences. Questions of theory and practice, 11−2 (29), 164-167.
Sritulanon, A., Chaturongakul, P., & Thammetar, T. (2018). English Speaking Teaching Model
in Distance Education. Arab World English Journal, 9 (3), 418- 433.
Stockley, D. (2006). Building a successful e-learning strategy. EI Magazine, Vol. 2, 7.
Tsarkova, S. A., Ivachev, P. V., Kulikov, S. N. (2013). Povysheniye pedagogicheskoy kvalifikatsii
s primeneniyem elektronnogo obucheniya i distantsionnykh obrazovatelnykh tekhnologiy
kak nachalo sozdaniya innovatsionnoy ploshchadki v UGMU [Improving the pedagogical
qualification with the use of e-learning and distance learning technologies as the beginning
of the creation of an innovative platform in UGMU]. Ural Medical Journal, 9 (114). 8993.
Zarutskaya, Zh. N., Kisel, O. V., and & et al. (2018) Main Teaching Strategies Most Successfully
Promoting Foreign Language Learning in Adult Groups. Research Journal of
Pharmaceutical, Biological and Chemical Sciences,9 (2). 1232-1242.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

55

