PRE-PRINT, Nga Than, October 15, 2019
Uberland: Algorithmic Boss in the New Economy
Nga Than, The Graduate Center of City University of New York
Email: nthan@gradcenter.cuny.edu
Uberland: How Algorithms are Rewriting the Rules of Work. Alex Rosenblat.
Oakland: University of California Press, 2018.
In Uberland, Alex Rosenblat takes readers on a journey through the ride-hailing
work culture of Uber drivers: how they work, communicate, and form communities. The
author combines interviews, digital ethnography, and participant observation to show
how technology, specifically algorithmic management, categorizes workers as consumers
of technology yet manages them as workers, changing what it means to be employed in
the twenty-first century.
Drawing on interviews with drivers from more than 25 cities in the United States
and Canada, Rosenblat explores why drivers work for Uber and what their work
experience is like using the app. Uber, a symbol of the sharing economy, has come to
represent how technology could create job and entrepreneurship opportunities for
American workers after the financial crisis of 2008-2009. It promises that drivers can
earn a middle-class income in their spare time as ride-hail workers. How well drivers fit
into Uber’s business plan depends on which of the three groups they fall into:
occupational, part-time, or hobbyist drivers. While Uber claims that the ride-hail model is
geared toward part-time work, drivers’ stories show a more complicated picture.
Rosenblat shows that most Uber drivers in New York work for multiple platforms
including Uber’s competitors such as Lyft, or Juno. With different motivations, many
work for Uber because of its flexibility, while others work for Uber because it is better
than other low-wage service jobs or for social reasons. Rosenblat shows that full-time
workers or occupational drivers are hurt the most by the ride-hail model because a
constant influx of new part-time employees creates a disincentive to collective
bargaining, thus keeps wages low. Over time as more drivers enter the market and Uber
increases its commission fees, individual drivers earn less. Uber’s business model thrives
when there is an excess supply of labor and when there are more hobbyists/part time
drivers who can absorb the pay cut. This model opens up part-time opportunities for
many but hurts full-time drivers.
Despite that they work alone, and the company seeks to classify them as
independent contractors, Rosenblat takes readers to visit online driver forums, so-called
“virtual watercoolers,” where workers act collectively (14). They discuss issues about the
platform that they cannot resolve with Uber directly and exchange information about
company practices and policies, particularly about any disparities or inconsistencies.
They mentor and train each other much like other gig economy workers who turn to
online venues to create virtual occupational communities (Schwartz, 2018; Gray and
Suri, 2019). Uber drivers rely on online communities for information, and sociality.
Because drivers cannot rely on whether Uber would take responsibility for its workers,

1

PRE-PRINT, Nga Than, October 15, 2019
they distance themselves from the platform and turn to digital culture to crowdsource
information that they do not get directly from the company. Drivers “create a workplace
culture and institutional memory that persists even when Uber's practices change” (199).
Similar to other sharing economy economies, Uber claims that drivers are mere
end-users, one of several such groups. On the one hand, Uber uses technological,
organizational, legal and rhetorical strategies to keep drivers from being considered
employees. Uber’s treatment of workers as consumers assumes a broader Silicon Valley
logic that user data – collected from both drivers and passengers – are a source of value
for Uber. This model raises new questions about how we understand employment
relationships. Uber has shifted its terms of employment by classifying drivers as
independent contractors or customers and end users. Through this approach, problems in
employment relationships such as harassment are dismissed under perceptions of
technological neutrality. When a problem arises, should drivers be protected under
consumer protection laws or labor law? On the other hand, through its technology, Uber
practices workplace surveillance such as rating, monitoring how drivers brake, accelerate,
follow traffic rules. Described as simply “connecting two groups of end users,” Uber’s
technology however “gives the company vast leverage over how drivers work.” (160).
As a middleman, Uber brokers ride requests from passengers, turning its app into a
dispatcher for drivers, and it handles payments for both sides. Even though it claims that
its technology is neutral and driven by algorithms. The “shady middleman,” as Rosenblat
dubs the company, engages with practices that are contrary to its position as a hands-off
intermediary. It takes advantage of access to data, and changes algorithms at will.
Drivers’ tips and cancellation fees are pocketed and shown as service fees to drivers. It
has increased driver waiting time by using in-app suggestions to nudge drivers to wait for
passengers more than the required amount of time (five minutes). The algorithms that
estimate the price of a fare are a mechanism through which Uber takes advantage of its
middle-man position. Quietly without announcing a policy change, it can decouple what
drivers earn from what passengers pay. Uber uses artificial intelligence to stratify what
passengers are willing to pay and charges them accordingly. Yet drivers receive the same
amount of pay regardless of whether passengers are in fact paying more to Uber. Many
times, Uber experiments with its predictive pricing practices but neglects to announce its
experiments to workers.
Uber’s practices of exploiting consumer data (both riders’ and drivers’) are not
unique but come from a tradition of data exploitation by Silicon Valley companies. When
Uber’s policies and practices do not square with driver experiences, it is Uber that stands
as judge. Drivers have little recourse in negotiating over wrongdoings or inequality in the
work arrangement that Uber orchestrated. Algorithms aim to provide “objective data
analysis of supply and demand” in reality nudge drivers’ behaviors for the benefit of the
platform (137). For example, Uber prompts drivers to drive to surge zones in which fares
increase to meet higher rider demand, but the zones do not necessarily benefit drivers but
the platform. Once drivers arrive in the surge zone, fares are no longer high because other
drivers also rush there. Algorithmic management of Uber’s drivers shows how platforms

2

PRE-PRINT, Nga Than, October 15, 2019
can take advantage of workers. Uber has the power to determine what is paid and what is
not or what is tracked and what is not.
Uber operates in a universe of conflicting moral logics. Drivers work for Uber
because of the flexibility that technology promises. They also have a sense of what is fair.
Meanwhile, Uber operates in a mainstream in which disruption is good, and consumers
purchase Uber services in a market context where prices fluctuate according to supply
and demand. Through algorithms, Uber can ascertain what price customers are willing to
pay, how much drivers get paid, and how drivers work. By using algorithms to manage
workers, in addition to framing drivers as customers, Uber is able to negotiate how
drivers are treated and whether they are protected as customers or workers. When dealing
with regulations, Uber uses different strategies in different cities. Echoing the Silicon
Valley belief that regulations get in the way of innovation, which will benefit society as a
whole, Uber utilizes gratitude logic to ask consumers and end users to be grateful to the
disruptive innovation it unleashes. It shrugs off regulations when regulations get in the
way of its business and expansion. This rhetoric, however, covers the power that
technology companies have over society.
Since Uberland’s publication, Uber has become a publicly traded company, and the
state of California has passed legislation that re-categorizes Uber drivers and others
employed in the gig economy as workers. But will Uber still engage in the “shady
practices” outlined in the book? Will the public and regulators adhere to its narrative of
disruptive innovation now that Uber is no longer a startup? If its technology is no better
than its competitors’, can its access to capital – in fact, a subsidy to consumers – make up
for what may ultimately be a flawed business model?
The gig economy is here to stay. Uberland is a timely book as technology
increasingly intensifies in our daily lives. It reads like book-length investigative
journalism, refreshingly jargon-free. It stays truthful to the stories that drivers tell and is
readable and engaging. It is suitable for undergraduate classes in sociology of work;
science, technology, and society; and consumption.
References
Gray, Mary L. and Siddharth Suri. 2019. Ghost Work: How to Stop Silicon Valley from
Building a New Global Underclass. Boston: Eamon Dolan Books.
Schwartz, David. 2018. "Embedded in the Crowd: Creative Freelancers, Crowdsourced
Work, and Occupational Community." Work and Occupations 45:3: 247-282.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0730888418762263.

3

