Breaking the chain: How arrests reduce the probability of near
repeat crimes*
Andrew P. Wheeler1,**, Jordan R. Riddell1, Cory P. Haberman2
*Data and code to replicate the findings can be obtained from
https://www.dropbox.com/sh/72q0i7wm60ndqve/AABgFB8zwGHG6xjExvaD01EGa?dl=0
**Corresponding author, email: apwheele@gmail.com
1. School of Economic, Political, and Policy Sciences – Program in Criminology & Criminal
Justice
The University of Texas at Dallas
800 West Campbell Road, Mail Station GR 31
Richardson, Texas 75080-3021
2. University of Cincinnati, School of Criminal Justice

1
Breaking the chain: How arrests reduce the probability of near repeat crimes
Objectives: Near repeat patterns have been identified for a host of different crimes, but effective
strategies to reduce near repeats have had more variable results. This study identifies near repeat
crime patterns in Dallas, Texas and examines the effects of an arrest on reducing the probability
of future crime.
Method: Using open source crime data from the Dallas Police Department from July 2014
through June 2018, we identified near repeat patterns for shootings, interpersonal robberies,
residential burglaries, and thefts from motor vehicles. Logistic regression models were used to
test the effect of an arrest on reducing near repeat crimes; controls for geographic, demographic,
and temporal factors were included in each model.
Results: Near repeat calculations suggest violent crime clustered closely in time and space, with
property crime dispersed over larger spatial and temporal dimensions. Across all four crime
types, findings suggest arrests resulted in 20% to 40% reductions in a near repeat follow up
crime.
Conclusions: In line with past research on shootings, arrests reduced the likelihood of subsequent
crimes. This suggests policing strategies to increase arrests may be a fruitful way to reduce near
repeat crime patterns.
Keywords: near repeat, arrests, spatial-analysis, crime-analysis
Link to code to replicate the analysis can be found at:
https://www.dropbox.com/sh/72q0i7wm60ndqve/AABgFB8zwGHG6xjExvaD01EGa?dl=0.

2
Introduction
The fact that crimes cluster in short space time windows, near repeats, is a well
established criminological finding for many different types of crimes (Johnson et al., 2007;
Ratcliffe & Rengert, 2008; Youstin et al., 2011). But, policing strategies to reduce the probability
of near repeat crimes are much more variable in their effectiveness (Elffers et al., 2018; Groff &
Taniguchi, 2019; Santos & Santos, 2016; Stokes & Clare, 2019). Here we focus on if arresting
individuals reduces the probability of a near repeat crime.
We build on prior work in two particular ways. Prior analyses of shooting data have
established that arrests reduce the probability of near repeat patterns (Wyant et al., 2012). In this
work, we establish whether this relationship also holds true for not only shootings in another
sample, but also for other instrumental crime types of residential burglaries, interpersonal
robberies, and thefts from motor vehicles. If near repeat patterns are largely a function of the
same individuals committing multiple offenses in a short spree (Johnson, Summers, & Pease,
2009), it may be the incapacitation or deterrent effects of an arrest are larger for instrumental
crimes than for shootings, which are theoretically driven by retaliatory violence (Loftin, 1986;
Ratcliffe & Rengert, 2008).
Given that macro level evidence of the effectiveness of arrests in reducing future crime
are more equivocal (Bursik, Grasmick, & Chamlin, 1990; Chamlin et al., 1992; Levitt, 1998),
examining very small space and time windows provides a more direct test of the efficacy of
arrest based strategies that are less influenced by potential endogeneity problems. If arrests
provide subsequent reductions in near repeat offending, it can provide the foundation for
assessing the benefits of increasing arrest rates in reference to reduced crime rates.
Second, a variety of more recent work has established different predictive factors that
correlate with the probability of a near repeat crime (Garnier, Caplan, & Kennedy, 2018; Moreto,
Piza, & Caplan, 2014; Piza & Carter, 2018). In addition to formulating a regression model
incorporating these demographic and facility factors to account for additional confounds not
present in prior work, we also include a factor for the historical density of crimes. Given that hot
spots of crime tend to be temporally stable (Curman, Andresen, & Brantingham, 2014; Weisburd
et al., 2004; Wheeler, Worden, & McLean, 2016), not accounting for the underlying density can
result in confounds in predicting which crimes are likely to result in a near repeat offense.
A large sample of four years of open data on crime incidents and arrests from Dallas,
Texas was used for this study. Compared to prior work on shootings, we find that arrests tended
to have similar effectiveness in reducing the probability of a near repeat offense for all the crimes
types examined (Wyant et al., 2012), typically ranging from a reduction of 20% to 40% near
repeats across different space and time windows. Given the low arrest rates for many of the
crime types under study, prioritizing events that have a higher probability of a near repeat crime
may be a reasonable strategy for police departments to tackle near repeat crimes.
Literature Review
Overview of Near Repeat Crime Patterns
Near repeat crime patterns occur when two or more crimes occur in a short spatialtemporal window. For example, a house is burglarized on a Monday, and the next door neighbor
is burglarized the following Wednesday. While most work on near repeat crime patterns has
been focused on burglary (Townsley, Homel, & Chaseling, 2003; Johnson et al., 2007), it has

3
been shown to extend to a variety of different crime types: robbery, shootings, theft from motor
vehicles, thefts of motor vehicles, arson, assault, economic crimes, piracy, and terroristic events
(Behlendorf, LaFree, & Legault, 2012; Block & Fujita, 2013; Braithwaite & Johnson, 2012;
Haberman & Ratcliffe, 2012; Marchione & Johnson, 2013; Powell, Grubb, & Nobles, 2018;
Sturup et al., 2018; Townsley, Johnson, & Ratcliffe, 2008; Turchan et al., 2018; Wells, Wu, &
Ye, 2012; Youstin et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2015).
Two phenomena may explain near repeat patterns: (1) risk heterogeneity (or the flag
hypothesis) and (2) state dependence (or the boost hypothesis) (Farrell & Pease, 1993; Short et
al., 2009). Risk heterogeneity is simply the hypothesis that certain areas have a higher overall
propensity for crime – hot spots (Weisburd, 2015). Different characteristics of targets/areas can
explain that propensity (e.g. see Bowers & Johnson, 2005). Nonetheless, near repeats in space
and time occur simply due to chance due to crimes being more common in those small areas. For
example, if a street segment tends to have an average of 10 robberies per year, and those
robberies are distributed according to a Poisson distribution, and the probability of a near repeat
crime happening within a week on that same street segment is over 17% (Park & Eck, 2013).
The second potential explanation of near repeat patterns is state dependence or boost
hypothesis. State dependence occurs when the risk of crime over time is not constant, but
increases due to a previous victimization. A shooting can increase the risk of a future shooting,
due to retaliatory violence (Loftin, 1986; Ratcliffe & Rengert, 2008). A burglary can increase the
risk of a future burglary because a burglar learned an effective way to enter similarly built homes
in an area (Bowers & Johnson, 2004). Another example is that the same offender can victimize
multiple targets within a short spree (e.g. stealing from many open cars in the same parking lot in
a short time period), or in a more serial nature (e.g. burglarizing a new house every day of the
week) (Wheeler, 2016). In the former case, offenders are restricted to a short spatial window due
to not being able to travel far in a particular time period (Ratcliffe, 2006). The latter can
potentially be within a larger spatial area, but due to offenders limited awareness space of
potential victimizable targets (Brantingham & Brantingham, 1993) they often forage in a smaller,
known areas for potential victims (Jacobs, 2010). 1 Several studies have confirmed (using arrest
data), that near repeat crimes are more likely to have been committed by the same offender
(Bernasco, 2008; Davies & Marchione, 2015; Johnson, 2013; Johnson et al., 2009). One study
even found that the probability of a near repeat in space and time is higher for networked
offenders, suggesting that offenders may vicariously share information on potential targets
(Lantz & Ruback, 2017).
Recently, researchers have attempted to identify the spatial characteristics that predict
whether a crime is likely to result in a near repeat. Broadly, these involve either identifying
micro place characteristics of the built environment (Garnier et al., 2018; Moreto et al., 2014;
Piza & Carter, 2018) or neighborhood demographic characteristics (Bowers & Johnson, 2005;
Johnson, Bowers, & Hirschfield, 1997; Nobles, Ward, & Tillyer, 2016).
Studies that focus on micro places tend to measure nearby facilities and land uses that
increase the probability of a near repeat event. For just one example of a facility, both Moreto et
al. (2014) and Garnier et al. (2018) examined whether places nearby pawnshops increased the
chance of a near repeat burglary or robbery victimization (respectively) in Newark, New Jersey.
Piza & Carter (2018), examining burglary and motor vehicle thefts in Indianapolis, classified
One conflicting finding to this is in Wheeler (2012), who finds that future offending locations tend to be quite far
apart, on average over 1.5 kilometers. But, he does also find though that events closer in time tend to be closer
together in space.

1

4
crimes into either isolated events, initiator events, or near repeat events. They then used
multinomial models based on local land use factors and a neighborhood measure of social
disorganization to identify whether those characteristics are more likely to predict initiator
events.
Studies that examine greater neighborhood characteristics often find that areas with
higher levels of concentrated disadvantage have more near repeats (Bowers & Johnson, 2005;
Johnson et al., 1997; Nobles et al., 2016). While this makes sense, in that those areas also tend to
be higher crime, others have found wide spatial variations in near repeats (Groff and Taniguchi,
2018; 2019), or that near repeat patterns spatially shift over time (Johnson & Bowers, 2004). One
additional explanation for more near repeats in disadvantaged neighborhoods (beyond they are
typically higher crime) is that individuals in low-income areas lack the capital to fund physical
security measures (Johnson, et al., 1997; Bowers & Johnson, 2005; Nobles et al., 2016).
Understanding spatial variations in near repeat risk can help identify efficient strategies to
allocate resources to mitigate future risk. Contrary to one’s intuition, Chainey et al. (2018) find
that most near repeats occur outside of hot spots, and so police strategies to address near repeats
are not as simple as chasing the dots on the map following a crime that may result in a near
repeat event (also see Haberman & Ratcliffe, 2012).
Crime Prevention Based on Near Repeats
Crime prevention undertaken by policing agencies in response to near repeat patterns can
be broadly classified under three types: (1) victim focused strategies (i.e. target hardening), (2)
proactive policing strategies (e.g. more patrols in the area of the near repeat crimes), and (3)
arrest based strategies.
Victim focused strategies have been applied towards preventing near repeat burglary
victimization. Such interventions have included publicly funded target-hardening installations
(Hirschfield, Newton, & Rogerson, 2010), contacting the victims of burglary and providing
informational pamphlets to them and neighbors (Stokes & Clare, 2019), and conducting security
audits to reduce the likelihood of a future residential burglary (Groff & Taniguchi, 2019). Target
hardening approaches can focus on area based characteristics or at-risk targets, but Hirschfield et
al. (2010) suggest a combined approach. Hirschfield et al. (2010) and Stokes and Clare (2019)
find publicly funded prevention investments were not cost effective solutions and repeat burglary
risk did not decrease in the respective studies. Results from Groff and Taniguchi’s (2019) study
also indicate no significant difference between control and treatment zones where a target
hardening strategy was implemented.
Proactive policing strategies are those that devote extra patrol resources in response to
near repeat events. Fielding & Jones (2012) find that deploying extra patrols in Trafford,
England in response to near repeat burglaries over an extended period of time resulted in a 27%
reduction of burglaries over a 12 month period. Although not specifically focused on responding
to near repeat patterns, Wells & Wu (2011) do not find evidence that a specialized gun crime unit
in Houston reduced near repeat shootings. In a predictive policing study of proactive patrol (in
which targeted locations are both based on historical patterns, as well as elevated risk due to near
repeats), Mohler et al. (2015) find slight reductions in overall crime. Finally, Elffers et al. (2018)
examination of foot patrols in the area surrounding a burglary location found no difference in
burglary crime rates after comparing the treatment and control groups.
Additionally, Santos and Santos published a series of articles using data collected by the
Port St. Lucie Police Department on proactive policing in micro-time hot spots. Micro-time hot

5
spots effectively represent near repeat patterns. Four studies demonstrated the effectiveness of
directed police patrols in reducing residential burglaries and thefts from motor vehicles (Santos
& Santos, 2016). Immediate, directed patrol and increases in police response reduced residential
burglaries and thefts from motor vehicles in micro-time hotspots (Santos & Santos, 2015a;
Santos & Santos, 2015b; Santos & Santos, 2015c).
Finally, two studies have examined the impact of arrest strategies on subsequent gun
crimes (Wu & Wells, 2016; Wyant et al., 2012). In a study of over 5,000 firearm arrests and
shootings in Philadelphia, Wyant et al. (2012) demonstrated using a modified bivariate Knox-test
that following an arrest, firearm shootings within 800 feet and 4 days were lowered by about
28%. In a replication study in Houston, Wu and Well’s (2016) find more mixed results, although
they do detect fewer shootings than expected at 400 feet and four days after the arrest.
Given the mixed results of victimization and proactive policing strategies, reducing near
repeat victimization via arrests may be a fruitful approach. There are two theoretical mechanisms
through which arrests can subsequently reduce future offending: (1) deterrence and (2) specific
incapacitation. Arrests are hypothesized to decrease crime by signaling to would-be offenders
that the risk of apprehension is high (Wilson & Boland 1978; Sampson & Cohen, 1988). In short,
offenders may observe an arrest and increase their risk perceptions, or hear about an arrest from
others (Parker & Grasmick, 1979; Stafford & Warr, 1993; Wyant et al., 2012; Lantz & Ruback,
2017).
Alternatively, offenders who are arrested and subsequently incarcerated will be
specifically incapacitated as they will not have the capability to commit another offense. Even if
offenders are then subsequently released within a short window (such as on bail), presumably
their internal estimate of the probability of being caught in the future should be increased (Anwar
& Loughran, 2011; Piquero et al., 2011). If near repeat victimization is driven by high-risk
offenders repeatedly committing crimes, then arrests should be particularly effective at reducing
the likelihood of a near repeat incident.
Although past analyses of firearm arrests and shootings have shown fleeting effects,
shootings are one type of near repeat pattern that is not theoretically explained by the same
offender committing multiple offenses in a short time period, but by retaliatory violence. So it
seems likely that specific deterrence or incapacitation due to an arrest is likely to have a much
larger effect reducing near repeats for instrumental crimes, such as burglaries, robberies, and
thefts from motor vehicles. Thus, this analysis extends prior work examining the micro spatial
patterns of shootings and firearm arrests to examine the impact of arrests on near repeat patterns
of more crime types.
Based on this prior literature, we subsequently test two hypotheses in this work:
Hypothesis 1: An arrest will reduce the probability of a near repeat burglaries, robberies,
shootings, and thefts from motor vehicles.
Hypothesis 2: An arrest will reduce the probability of a near repeat shooting, but will have a
smaller effect compared to instrumental crimes.

6
Data and Methods
Data
Dallas, Texas is the study site. Data were collected from [number] sources. First, crime incident
and arrest data from July 2014 through June 2018 were provided by the Dallas Police
Department The specific crime types included were shootings, interpersonal robberies,
residential burglaries, and thefts from motor vehicles. Second, data for control variables
capturing the locations of potentially criminogenic facilities and land use were taken from
different open data sources, such as the street index database (Cortright & Mahmoudi, 2016),
Dallas county parcel data , and commercial databases such as Lexis Nexis and Reference USA.
Third, sociodemographic control variables were developed using the 2014 five year American
Community Survey estimates at the block group level.
Dependent Variable
Recall the present study tests if arrests reduce the probability of a near repeat crime
incident in the future. The dependent variable is a dichotomous measure of whether or not a
subsequent crime incident occurs within a specific spatial-temporal window of each crime. For
every crime event, we conduct a search of whether a future crime occurred within a particular
distance and time threshold, and label that a “1”. All crimes that did not result in a near repeat
were then coded “0”. So instead of the approach in Piza and Carter (2018) which classifies
crimes into isolates, initiator, or near repeat crimes, here each crime incident is a unit of analysis
and has the potential to be an initiator event. This is key because recent research has
demonstrated that an incident that is a near repeat to a previous originator may later become an
originator (i.e., near repeat chains; see Haberman & Ratcliffe, 2012), which is accounted for in
the present approach. For simplicity in the main analysis, we focus on identifying near repeat
crime events within 1,000 feet and 7 days. This is based on past research on typical sizes of near
repeat patterns, along with our estimates of significant near repeats in this sample tend to always
be significant among the different crime types given that window. But, given selecting spacetime thresholds is arbitrary (Ratcliffe & Rengert, 2008), sensitivity analyses to examine the
deterrent effect of an arrest over different time and space thresholds are also shown. 2
Independent Variables
The main independent variable of interest in this analysis is whether a crime event
resulted in an arrest. Events which are recorded as having an arrest are then coded as a “1”, and
events without an associated arrest are coded as a “0” in the subsequently regression models. We
do not count case clearances via other means (e.g. “exceptional clearance”), only those cases
specifically mentioning an arrest occurred are coded as “1”.
Statistics for the number of crimes and the proportion of near repeats within 1,000 feet
and 7 days are broken down by whether an arrest occurred and are included in Table 1. From
this, one can surmise that arrests have a small effect, around a 10% reduction in near repeat
2

Because we examine crimes up to a month into the future in the sensitivity analyses, only initial events occurring
through May 2018 are included in the search for a future crime event.

7
crimes for shootings and interpersonal robberies and a 20% reduction for burglaries. However,
thefts from motor vehicles increase slightly. Arrest rates for each crime type vary inversely with
their severity and frequency; shootings have the highest overall arrest rate (26%), followed by
robberies (12%), burglaries (4%), and thefts from motor vehicles (3%).
[INSERT TABLE 1 HERE]
As previously mentioned, the probability of a near repeat is greatly influenced by the
baseline density at which the crime occurs (Park & Eck, 2013). More simply, long term hot spots
will have more near repeats due to them being hot spots. As such, it is important to take this prior
crime density factor into account. To do this, we use historical crime data that was provided
directly by the Dallas PD from 2010 through June 30th 2014 to measure the historical crime
density for each specific crime type. We use historical data is to prevent the measure from being
endogenous with the near repeat outcome measure, which is examined using data from July 1st
2014 through June 30th 2018. Given that hot spots of crime tend to be quite temporally stable
over time (Andresen, Curman, & Linning, 2017; Curman et al., 2014; Weisburd et al., 2004;
Wheeler, Worden, & McLean, 2016), these historical measures are suitable to control for that
historical crime density, while providing a measure that is not endogenous with the current crime
data being predicted.
For a simplified example of our analysis, say a theft from a motor vehicle occurred at the
coordinates [0,0] on 1/1/2016, and we are interested in examining near repeats within 7 days and
1,000 feet. If another theft from a motor vehicle occurred at coordinates [100,100] on 1/4/2016,
we would classify that origin event as having a near repeat “1” for the outcome. Additionally, if
an arrest did not occur for that origin event, it would receive “0” for the arrest indicator. As some
places have many more crimes than others, we also include a term of all thefts from motor
vehicles that occurred within 1,000 feet of the [0,0] coordinate in the historical crime data (from
1/1/2010 through 6/30/2014). To illustrate how this would potentially impact the results, imagine
two scenarios: one in which there were a total of 50 crimes within 1,000 feet of [0,0] in the
historical data, versus 300 crimes within 1,000 feet in the historical data, which equal a density
of approximately 0.2 and 1.3 crimes on a per 7 day basis respectively. For the lower density
estimate under a Poisson process, it would be expected to have a near repeat crime 20% of the
time within 7 days simply by chance. Whereas for the higher density estimate it would be
expected to have a near repeat 73% of the time.
Because the prior crime density can have such a large impact on the resulting
probabilities of a near repeat crime, it is not only important to include as a potential covariate in
the analysis, but we also examine its interaction with whether an arrest reduces the probability of
a near repeat crime. In areas that have a very low probability of a near repeat, it may be that
arrests are not as effective in preventing a future crime (a floor effect). It also may be the case in
areas where crimes are very common (so have a very high probability of a near repeat) arrests
additionally do not appear to be effective (a ceiling effect). The latter may especially be the case
if a place is very heterogeneous in who commits a crime there, and so many near repeats are not
a function of the same offender(s) committing multiple crimes. The ability to model different
effects in a regression framework are one reason we use a regression modelling approach, as
opposed to the modified Knox test approach as used in Wyant et al. (2012).
Given prior work showing that near repeat patterns are influenced by different facilities,
we have included these additional factors into our model (Garnier et al., 2018; Moreto et al.,

8
2014; Piza & Carter, 2018). We include a total of eighteen different crime generator factors.
Each of these crime generators are encoded as distance from a crime to the nearest crime
generator. Given these are control variables and are not the main interest of the analysis, we do
not spend substantial time examining these factors in the subsequent models. Wheeler and
Steenbeek (2019) provide a more detailed description of the data sources and how they are
relevant in predicting micro level crime patterns, which similarly extends to predicting near
repeat crime patterns (Garnier et al., 2018; Piza & Carter, 2018).
These particular crime generator factors include commercial establishments: (1) large
business retailers (e.g. Walmart, The Home Depot, CVS), (2) smaller food and clothing stores,
(3) gasoline stations, (4) eating and drinking places, (5) liquor stores, (6) large entertainment
areas (e.g. movie theaters, concert halls), (7) smaller entertainment areas (e.g. gyms, bowling
alleys) and hair salons, (8) motels, (9) hotels, (10) shopping malls, (11) banks, and (12) check
cashing stores. We also included non-commercial land use factors of (13) libraries, (14) middle
and high schools, (15) public railway stations (DART Stations), (16) apartment complexes, (17)
hospitals, (18) mobile home parks.
We also include a set of covariates based on the residential census demographics, again
similar to that in Piza and Carter (2018). These measures are taken from the 2017 five year
American Community Survey estimates. These measures include: (1) the percent of families in
poverty, (2) the percent of individuals unemployed (of those over 16 and in the workforce), (3)
the percent of individuals receiving some type of government assistance, (4) the percent of
female headed households with children under eighteen, (5) the percent of the population that is
Hispanic, (6) the percent of the population that is Asian, (7) the percent of the total population
that is non-Hispanic black, (8) the proportion of families that have moved in the prior year, and
(9) the total number of the population under 17. These are similar to measures that have been
used in prior near repeat analyses (Piza & Carter, 2018; Ratcliffe, Taylor, & Perezin, 2016), and
represent typically well established factors that proxy social disorganization theories of crime
(Pratt & Cullen, 2005; Sampson, Raudenbush, & Earls, 1997; Shaw & McKay, 1969).
The final set of factors are temporal controls. We include a set of dummy variables for
the month of the incident and a linear time trend (as crimes have overall been slightly decreasing
in Dallas over the examined period). These should take into account potential seasonal or overall
time trend effects, which may result in particular periods having a higher or lower probability of
a near repeat crime in space and time (Piza & Carter, 2018). Table 2 provides descriptive
statistics for the other variables used in the analysis, aggregated across each crime type.
[INSERT TABLE 2 HERE]
Methods
To test whether an arrest results in a reduced probability of a near repeat event, we use
logistic regression analysis. In this model we include whether the current crime resulted in an
arrest, the prior crime density per week (based on the same threshold distance for crimes
occurring from 2010 through June 2014), an interaction between the two, and the remaining
crime generator, and demographic and temporal control variables as have been used in prior
research. The logistic regression model can then be formally written as:

9
Prob[Future Crime < 𝑓𝑓(𝑑𝑑, 𝑡𝑡)]
= logit −1 [𝛽𝛽0 + 𝛽𝛽1 (Arrest) + 𝛽𝛽2 (Prior Crime Density)
+ 𝛽𝛽3 (Arrest ⋅ Prior Crime Density) + Σ𝛽𝛽𝑘𝑘 𝑋𝑋𝑘𝑘 ]

Where we predict the probability that a future crime occurs within a threshold distance d and
time t. Hypothesis 1 is that 𝛽𝛽1, the coefficient for whether an arrest occurred, is negative and so
reduces the probability of a near repeat. Given that we also estimate an interaction between
arrests and prior crime density (i.e. arrests may be more or less effective in high crime areas), we
assess this effect using marginal effect estimates over the domain of prior crime densities,
holding all other variables at their means (Mize, 2019). The remaining control variables are then
represented as 𝛽𝛽𝑘𝑘 𝑋𝑋𝑘𝑘 .
This model is estimated for individual crime types of thefts from motor vehicles,
interpersonal robberies, residential burglaries, and shootings. Hypothesis 2 is that while we
expect that the arrest effect for shooting incidents is negative (Wyant et al., 2012), it is closer in
absolute magnitude towards zero than the other instrumental crimes.
Results
Near Repeat Analysis
Knox ratios and accompanying p-values for each of the four crime types were generated
for 30 spatial bins (100 feet each) and 30 temporal bins (1 day each), using 99 permutations to
assess statistical randomness in the results (Tables listed in Appendix B due to their size).
Results from the near repeat calculations suggest the day after an instigator event carries the
highest risk for a repeat or near repeat event for each of the four crime types, but overall patterns
in time and space deviate between crime types. Shootings were found to cluster closely in time
and space, with the highest level of risk for a repeat shooting occurring in the first day and within
300 feet of the instigator incident. Near repeat interpersonal robberies showed a larger spatial
and temporal distribution than shootings, with an increased risk to the surrounding area (0-300,
500-700, 1900-2200, 2400-2700 feet) during the day after a robbery. The risk to the 3000 feet
around the initial robbery decreases as time passes. This is true for residential burglaries and
thefts from motor vehicles but to a lesser extent.
For a month after a burglary or vehicle break in, the offense location carries a higher risk
of near repeat offenses. Up to a week after the instigator event, near repeat burglaries and vehicle
break-ins follow the pattern of a series of crimes occurring closer to the initial offense location
within the week and then spreading in distance as time continues. These findings are consistent
with prior research finding near repeat patterns are more likely than by chance, and that those
patterns fade for further spatial and time distances, but it is difficult to make specific rules for
how far away in space or time near repeat patterns are likely to occur across crime types.
Regression Model Results
Table 3 displays the results of logistic regression models predicting the likelihood of a
future crime for each crime type based on a series of spatial, temporal, and population
characteristics, the historical crime density (number of crimes per week from 1/1/2010 –

10
6/30/2014), and if there was an arrest for each offense. The tables are limited to coefficients for
arrests and prior crime density. Appendix A contains a full set of the coefficients for the models.
The presence of an arrest reduces the likelihood of future interpersonal robberies (at pvalue 0.09), but all other direct effects of arrests across the crime types are not statistically
significant. Considering the interaction effects, as the historical crime density increases, the
effect of an arrest gets smaller for both thefts from motor vehicles and burglaries, although the pvalues for those interaction effects are above 0.05. This provides evidence that arrests have a
larger deterrent effect in high crime areas for those two crimes. The interaction effects for
robberies and shootings are positive, suggesting that arrests have a larger deterrent effect in low
crime areas, but again have p-values above 0.05. Overall these results suggest that arrests have
little impact on the probability of a near repeat event, but we graph the estimated reduction in the
probability of arrest conditional on the historical crime density, as the interaction effects are
difficult to intuitively understand.
[INSERT TABLE 3 HERE]
Each of the following four figures contain two graphs; the left hand side of Figures 1-4
illustrates the effect of historical crime density on the probability of a future crime depending on
the presence of an arrest, holding all other control variables at their means, for each of the crime
types under examination. The right hand side graph shows a confidence interval of the difference
between those two predicted probability lines, and a pairwise 95% confidence interval of that
difference in probabilities.
[INSERT FIGURE 1, 2, 3, AND 4 HERE]
In Figure 1, showing the probability of a future robbery within 1,000 feet and 7 days, one
can see arrests decrease the probability of a future crime at low historical crime densities, and
then predict a higher probability of a future offenses and higher historical crime densities.
Examining the difference between these probabilities shows that the confidence interval of the
difference in those probabilities covers 0 for the entire line. Figure 2 for burglaries appears to be
more promising – even though each individual coefficient was not statistically significant at the
0.05 level, the predicted reduction in future burglaries appears to be much larger when taking
into account the interaction effect. At areas with the highest historical crime density in the data,
an arrest results in over a 20% reduction in a future near repeat burglary occurring. Figure 3
(shootings), shows very little difference in the estimated predictions. Thefts from motor vehicles
(Figure 4) shows reductions in higher crime areas, but the confidence interval of the difference
tends to always cover 0.
The prior analysis focused on the crime reduction effects given a specific distance and
time threshold, 1000 feet and 7 days specifically. Given that these thresholds are arbitrary, we
have conducted additional analyses to examine the crime reduction effect of arrests at the
distance thresholds of 500 to 3000 feet (in increments of 500 feet), as well as the time thresholds
of 3, 7, 14, 21, and 28 days. Note these are cumulative thresholds, and so an event with a near
repeat in 500 feet and 3 days will also count as a near repeat within 2000 feet and 14 days. We fit
the same models as previously, controlling for the characteristics of the built environment,
demographic factors, as well as the prior crime density (within the corresponding distance

11
buffer). While we also include the interaction effect of the arrest and prior crime density in these
models (same as before), here we focus on the direct effects of arrests for simplicity.
Figure 5 plots the linear coefficient of the effect that an arrest has on the probability of a
future crime, illustrating the varying effects over different distance (the X axis) and day
(different lines) near repeat events for each crime type under examination. For ease in
interpretation, standard errors are not included on the chart, but coefficients with a p-value of
less than 0.05 have an additional point superimposed on the line. The general patterns for each
crime type show that larger temporal bands (grey to green) tend to show greater crime reduction
effects, and the shorter temporal bands of 3 and 7 days (brown), tend to hover close to the null of
zero crime reductions. Robberies at shorter distances of 500 to 1500 feet tend to show the largest
crime reductions, but for the other crime types larger distances of 2000 to 3000 feet tend to have
the largest reductions in near repeats. The main analysis examining the near repeat reduction
effects at 7 days and 1000 feet then appear to be conservative estimates across all of the different
crime types.
[INSERT FIGURE 5 AND FIGURE 6 HERE]
Thefts from motor vehicles actually show a statistically significant increase in the
probability of a near repeat at the shortest distance and time interval examined (500 feet and 3
days). A potential explanation for this is that the current analysis does not take into account the
timing of when the arrest occurred (that is not available in the open dataset), and so multiple
events in a short period (e.g. someone breaking into five different cars in the same parking lot
over a short time period in a single spree) will result in a near repeat event, but one that is
unactionable from the police departments perspective (Groff & Taniguchi, 2018). If those runs of
many crimes are more likely to result in increased police scrutiny and a subsequent higher
probability of an arrest, our estimate of the reduction of near repeat events outside of the initial
string will be biased upwards. To account for this given the data that is accessible, like Groff and
Taniguchi (2019) we eliminate near repeat events that occur within 24 hours of the initial event
and re-run the same analyses. Those results are displayed in Figure 6.
The results when eliminating near repeat events within 24 hours of the initiating event
generally show that arrests have a larger effect of reducing the probability of a near repeat crime.
The exception to this is burglaries, which show near equivalent patterns to the original results.
Robberies now show the strongest effects at 3 or 7 days and 1500 feet, but have similar effects at
larger time bins and shorter distance bins. Thefts from motor vehicles tend to again show greater
deterrent effects at larger distance and temporal bins, as do shootings. Of those statistically
significant effects, they tend to hover in between coefficients of -0.2 and -0.5 for all crime types,
which when exponentiated correspond to odds ratios of 0.82 and 0.61 respectively. This suggests
a fairly consistent estimate of the reduction of a near repeat crime on the magnitude of 20% to
40% following an arrest, albeit at varying distance and temporal thresholds for each crime type
examined here.
In reference to hypothesis 2, that shootings will have a smaller near repeat reduction
following an arrest, this does not appear to be the case for any of these analyses at varying
distance and time thresholds. Consistent with the prior analysis focusing on 1000 feet and 7 days,
if anything there is weak evidence that arrests following a shooting result in a larger reduction of
a near repeat event than the other instrumental crime types examined. Given the size of the
standard errors, conducting an actual test of the differences in coefficients, the contrasts would

12
rarely show a statistically significant difference between the effects for different crime types over
the majority of the different space and time thresholds. Thus there is no evidence here that arrests
for instrumental crimes result in larger reductions of near repeat crimes than shootings.
Discussion
To recap the findings, we find mixed evidence of the reduction in near repeat crimes
following an arrest across different instrumental and expressive crime types. While the space and
time distances at which reductions were observed varied across the different crime types, in total
the largest reductions tended to be around 20% to 40% for each crime type. This replicates the
findings of prior work only examining shootings and arrests by Wyant et al. (2012), who found
in Philadelphia that an arrest reduced the probability of a near repeat crime by approximately
30% to 50%. Unlike the findings in Wyant et al. (2012) though, the space-time distance of those
effects were observed at larger distance and temporal bins across the crime types, more
frequently at 2,000 feet and 21 days or more, compared to only around 1,000 feet and a few days
for Wyant et al. (2012). This is also counter to the findings in Wu and Wells (2016), who only
find evidence of a deterrent effect on shootings for arrests in a smaller space-time window.
In reference to the importance of the findings towards theory, prior evaluations of macro
and neighborhood level patterns of arrests and subsequent crime declines have tended to produce
mixed findings (Bursik et al., 1990; Chamlin et al. 1992; Levitt, 1998). Examining the reduction
in near repeat crimes provides a way to show a relationship between arrests and subsequent
crime in a more precise way than is possible when examining aggregate level statistics. It is still
the case that one cannot identify the difference between specific incapacitation as opposed to
general deterrent effects with this limited administrative data, but given that we know many
crimes are committed by a few individuals (Ratcliffe & Kikuchi, 2019), focusing on solving near
repeat crimes seems a fruitful tactic for police departments to attempt to improve on.
Unlike hypothesized, we do not find evidence that the arrest effect is larger for
instrumental crimes relative to an arrest for shootings. This is an important finding that not only
replicates prior findings for the deterrent effect of arrests following shootings (Wyant et al.,
2012), but provides evidence that solving violent crimes results in a lower probability of
retaliation (Leovy, 2015). Improving clearance rates for serious violence is not impossible
(Braga & Dusseault, 2018) and is also expected to have downstream effects of improving
perceptions of police as well (Braga, Brunson, & Drakulich, 2019). These estimates of crime
reductions can potentially be used to justify increased detective resources, especially given the
costs associated with serious violence (Hunt, Saunders, & Kilmer, 2019). Beyond policing, it is
possible that community outreach violence interrupters also reduce the probability of retaliatory
violence (Butts et al., 2015), and their effectiveness could be determined in a similar manner to
the analysis we have conducted here.
The same rationale could be applied to devoting more investigatory resources towards
solving instrumental crimes of theft from motor vehicles and burglary, but those crimes tend to
have a much lower cost to the police (Hunt et al., 2019). As prior work suggests police
departments already take quite seriously shootings and near repeat robberies (Haberman &
Ratcliffe, 2012; Wyant, 2014), it may be the case that other cost-effective strategies will be
needed to improve arrest rates to prevent near repeat crimes. Technological solutions can be
potentially used to increase arrest clearances, such as CCTV (Piza, Caplan, & Kennedy, 2014;
Ratcliffe et al., 2019) or street lighting (Chalfin et al., 2019). It may be feasible to move such

13
cameras or lights in response to an emerging chain of near repeats, as opposed to relying on
permanent locations for either.
It may also be the case that police can differentially devote resources to cases that have a
higher probability of a near repeat offense. One way to do this is to identify cases in which there
is a higher probability of a near repeat crime (Garnier et al., 2018; Moreto et al., 2014; Piza &
Carter, 2018), and then devote more detective resources to those events (or prevent them from
being triaged). Another may be to use other automated detection processes to identify if a
particular crime is linked to other crimes (Chohlas-Wood & Levine, 2019; Porter, 2016). Again,
those criminal events within a linked chain should then get higher priority from detectives, as
those individuals have established a prior history that suggests they will commit a future crime.
The findings that arrests reduce near repeats within the range of 20 to 40 percent should
also be taken in light of evidence of the mixed findings of target hardening approaches (Groff &
Taniguchi, 2019; Stokes & Clare, 2019). It is also true that traditional police responses, such as
increased patrol or street stops, may be a mechanism for police to reduce near repeat crime
events (Santos & Santos 2015c; Santos & Santos, 2016; Wooditch & Weisburd, 2016). While
individuals typically have positive perceptions of police undertaking such target hardening
responses to burglaries (Antrobus & Pilotto, 2016; Groff & Taniguchi, 2019), the lack of
consistent evidence showing crime reduction effects undermines their overall utility. It may be
those resources are better spent on general patrol or detective resources to solve crimes.
The findings should be interpreted in light of several limitations for the analysis. A major
limitation of the work is that this is an observational research design. It is possible that arrests are
confounded with other factors that explain their correlation with subsequent reductions in near
repeat crimes. One example in which this could occur would be if less professional individuals
are more likely to be arrested following a crime, and those same individuals are also less likely to
commit another crime in the near future. This would result in a bias that concludes arrests have a
larger deterrent effect on near repeat crimes than they do in reality. We attempt to take into
account potential biases by including covariates for the historical crime density at places, as well
as a host of other crime generator and demographic characteristics (Piza & Carter, 2018). But
absent an experiment or stronger quasi-experimental design this will always be a threat to the
validity of the findings.
The bias could work the other way as well, in that if an individual commits multiple
crimes in a short period, those strings of crimes are likely to gather more police attention
(Haberman & Ratcliffe, 2012), and subsequently have a higher rate of being solved. So arrests
are associated with more crimes in the short term. This is partially solved in the analysis by only
counting near repeats that occur 24 hours post the initial event (Groff & Taniguchi, 2018), and
the evidence indicates this bias occurs for robberies, thefts from motor vehicles, and shootings
given the results, but not for burglaries. Future work could distinguish between the exact
temporal timing of arrests associated with the criminal event. Only particular configurations of
near repeats in which associated events are outside of a certain range are actionable from a police
department’s perspective (Davies & Marchione, 2015).
A second limitation is that given the unknown potential space-time window of where we
should observe a deterrent effect conditional on arrest, we test the deterrent effect given different
space and time thresholds. While here this illustrates that larger deterrent effects are seen at
larger space time windows, it also brings up the possibility that multiple comparisons are a
reasonable explanation for the findings. Despite the large sample sizes, tests of crime reductions
tended to only show a statistically significant crime reduction effect by a small margin. One

14
potential way to account for this in future research is to estimate the decay effect directly, such as
by decomposing the offspring effect in a Hawkes model into two components, crimes with and
without arrests (Achab et al., 2018; Mohler, Carter, & Raje, 2018; Reinhart & Greenhouse,
2018).
The findings here will ultimately need to be tested in the field to prove their worth. As
such, future research should focus on experimental or quasi experimental designs which attempt
to improve arrest rates following crimes. Identifying cases that have a higher probability of
resulting in a near repeat offense and devoting more investigative resources is one way in which
that can be accomplished (Garnier et al., 2018). Another is identifying chains of near repeats and
increasing investigative resources in response (Haberman & Ratcliffe, 2012). In either case the
results here are promising that such initiatives have excellent potential to reduce near repeat
crimes.

15
References
Achab, M., Bacry, E., Gaïffas, S., Mastromatteo, I., & Muzy, J.F. (2018). Uncovering causality
from multivariate Hawkes integrated cumulants. Journal of Machine Learning Research
18(192), 1-28.
Andresen, M.A., Curman, A.S., & Linning, S.J. (2017). The trajectories of crime at places:
Understanding the patterns of disaggregated crime types. Journal of Quantitative
Criminology 33(3), 427-449.
Antrobus, E., & Pilotto, A. (2016). Improving forensic responses to residential burglaries:
Results of a randomized controlled field trial. Journal of Experimental Criminology
12(3), 319-345.
Anwar, S., & Loughran, T.A. (2011). Testing a Bayesian learning theory of deterrence among
serious juvenile offenders. Criminology 49(3), 667-698.
Behlendorf, B., LaFree, G., & Legault, R. (2012). Microcycles of violence: Evidence from
terrorist attacks by ETA and the FMLN. Journal of Quantitative Criminology 28(1), 4975.
Bernasco, W. (2008). Them again? Same-offender involvement in repeat and near repeat
burglaries. European Journal of Criminology 5(4), 411-431.
Block, S., & Fujita, S. (2013). Patterns of near repeat temporary and permanent motor vehicle
thefts. Crime Prevention and Community Safety 15(2), 151-167.
Bowers, K. J. and Johnson, S. D. (2004). ‘Who Commits Near Repeats? A Test of the Boost
Explanation.’ Western Criminology Review 5(3): 12–24.
Bowers, K.J. & Johnson, S.D. (2005). Domestic burglary repeats and space-time clusters: The
dimensions of risk. European Journal of Criminology, 2(1), 67-92.
Braga, A.A., Brunson, R.K., & Drakulich, K.M. (2019). Race, place, and effective policing.
Annual Review of Sociology 45.
Braga, A.A., & Dusseault, D. (2018). Can homicide detectives improve homicide clearance
rates? Crime & Delinquency 64(3), 288-315.
Braithwaite, A., & Johnson, S.D. (2012). Space-time modeling of insurgency and
counterinsurgency in Iraq. Journal of Quantitative Criminology 28(1), 31-48.
Brantingham, P.L., & Brantingham, P.J. (1993). Nodes, paths, and edges: Considerations on the
complexity of crime and the physical environment. Journal of Environmental Pyschology
13(1), 3-28.

16
Bursik, R.J., Grasmick, H.G., & Chamlin, M.B. (1990). The effect of longitudinal arrest patterns
on the development of robbery trends at the neighborhood level. Criminology 28(3), 431450.
Butts, J.A., Roman, C.G., Bostwick, L., & Porter, J.R. (2015). Cure violence: A public health
model to reduce gun violence. Annual Review of Public Health 36, 39-53.
Chainey, S.P., Curtis-Ham, S.J., Evans, R.M., & Burns, G.J. (2018). Examining the extent to
which repeat and near repeat patterns can prevent crime. Policing: An International
Journal, 41(5), 608-622.
Chalfin, A., Hansen, B., Lerner, J., & Larker, L. (2019). Reducing crime through environmental
design: Evidence from a randomized experiment of street lighting in New York City.
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper,
https://www.nber.org/papers/w25798.
Chamlin, M.B., Grasmick, H.G., Bursik, R.J., & Cochran, J.K. (1992). Time aggregation and
time lag in macro-level deterrence research. Criminology 30(3), 377-396.
Cholas-Wood, A, & Levine, E.S. (2019). A recommendation engine to aid in identifying crime
patterns. Informs Journal on Applied Analytics 49(2), 154-166.
Curman, A.S., Andresen, M.A., & Brantingham, P.J. (2014) Crime and place: A longitudinal
examination of street segments patterns in Vancouver, BC. Journal of Quantitative
Criminology, 31(1), 127-147.
Davies, T., & Marchione, E. (2015). Event networks and the identification of crime pattern
motifs. PLoS ONE, 10(11), e0143638.
Elffers, H., Peeters, M., van der Kemp, J., & Beijers, G. (2018). Quasi-experimental evaluation
of near repeat patrolling: the Amestelveen experiment. Netherlands Institute for the Study
of Crime and Law Enforcement.
Farrell, G. & Pease, K. (1993). Once bitten, twice bitten: Repeat victimisation and its
implications for crime prevention. Police Research Group. Paper no 46. London: Home
Office.
Fielding, M., & Jones, V. (2012). ‘Disrupting the optimal forager’: Predictive risk mapping and
domestic burglary reduction in Trafford, Greater Manchester. International Journal of
Police Science & Management, 14(1), 30-41.
Garnier, S., Caplan, J.M., & Kennedy, L.W. (2018). Predicting dynamical crime distribution
from environmental and social influences. Frontiers in Applied Mathematics and
Statistics 4, 13.

17
Groff, E.R., & Taniguchi, T.A. (2018). Micro-level policing for preventing near repeat
residential burglary. Washington, D.C.: Police Foundation.
Groff, E.R., & Taniguchi, T.A. (2019). Using citizen notification to interrupt near repeat
residential burglary patterns: The micro-level near repeat experiment. Journal of
Experimental Criminology, Online First.
Haberman, C., & Ratcliffe, J. (2012). The predictive policing challenges of near repeat armed
street robberies. Policing 6(2), 151-166.
Hirschfield, A., Newton, A., & Rogerson, M. (2010). Linking burglary and target hardening at
the property level: New insights into victimization and burglary protection. Criminal
Justice Policy Review 21(3), 319-337.
Hunt, P.E., Saunders, J., & Kilmer, B. (2019). Estimates of law enforcement costs by crime type
for benefit-cost analyses. Journal of Benefit-Cost Analysis 10(1), 95-123.
Jacobs, B. (2010). Serendipity in robbery target selection. The British Journal of Criminology
50(3), 514-529.
Johnson, D. (2013). The space/time behaviour of dwelling burglars: Finding near repeat patterns
in serial offender data. Applied Geography 41(July), 139-146.
Johnson, S.D., Bernasco, W., Bowers, K.J., Elffers, H., Ratcliffe, J., Rengert, G., & Townsley,
M. (2007). Space-time patterns of risk: A cross national assessment of residential
burglary victimization. Journal of Quantitative Criminology 23(3), 201-219.
Johnson, S.D. & Bowers, K.J. (2004). The stability of space-time clusters of burglary. British
Journal of Criminology 44(1), 55-65.
Johnson, S.D., Bowers, K., & Hirschfield, A. (1997). New insights into the spatial and temporal
distribution of repeat victimization. British Journal of Criminology 37(2), 224-241.
Johnson, S.D., Summers, L., & Pease, K. (2009). Offender as forager: A direct test of the boost
account of victimization. Journal of Quantitative Criminology 25(2), 181-200.
Lantz, B., & Ruback, R.B. (2017). A networked boost: Burglary co-offending and repeat
victimization using a network approach. Crime & Delinquency 63(9), 1066-1090.
Leovy, J. (2015). Ghettoside: A true story of murder in America. New York: Random House.
Levitt, S.D. (1998). Why do increased arrest rates appear to reduce crime: Deterrence,
incapacitation, or measurement error? Economic Inquiry 36(3), 353-372.
Loftin, C. (1986). Assaultive violence as a contagious social process. Bulletin of the New York
Academy of Medicine, 62(5), 550-555.

18

Marchione, E. & Johnson, S.D. (2013). Spatial, temporal, and spatio-temporal patterns of
maritime piracy. Journal of Research in Crime & Delinquency 50(4), 504-524.
Mize, T.D. (2019). Best practices for estimating, interpreting, and presenting nonlinear
interaction effects. Sociological Science 6(4), 81-117.
Mohler, G.O., Carter, J.C., & Raje, R. (2018). Improving social harm indices with a modulated
Hawkes process. International Journal of Forecasting 34(3), 431-439.
Mohler, G.O., Short, M.B., Malinowski, S., Johnson, M., Tita, G.E., Bertozzi, A.L., &
Brantingham, P.J. (2015). Randomized controlled field trials of predictive policing.
Journal of the American Statistical Association 110(512), 1399-1411.
Moreto, W.D., Piza, E.L., & Caplan, J.M. (2014). “A plague on both your houses?”: Risk,
repeats and reconsiderations of urban residential burglary. Justice Quarterly 31(6), 11021126.
Nobles, M.R., Ward, J.T., & Tillyer, R. (2016). The impact of neighborhood context on
spatiotemporal patterns of burglary. Journal of Research in Crime & Delinquency 53(5),
711-740.
Park, S.M., & Eck, J.E. (2013). Understanding the random effect on victimization distributions:
A statistical analysis of random repeat victimizations. Victims & Offenders: An
International Journal of Evidence-based Research, Policy, and Practice 8(4), 399-415.
Parker, J., & Grasmick, H.G. (1979). Linking actual and perceived certainty of punishment: An
exploratory study of an untested proposition in deterrence theory. Criminology 17(3),
366-379.
Piquero, A. R., Paternoster, R., Pogarsky, G., & Loughran, T. (2011). Elaborating the individual
difference component in deterrence theory. Annual Review of Law and Social Science 7,
335-360.
Piza, E., Caplan, J.M., & Kennedy, L.W. (2014). Is the punishment more certain? An analysis of
CCTV detections and enforcement. Justice Quarterly 31(6), 1015-1043.
Piza, E., & Carter, J.G. (2018). Predicting initiator and near repeat events in spatio-temporal
crime patterns: An analysis of residential burglary and motor vehicle theft. Justice
Quarterly 35(5), 842-870.
Porter, M.D. (2016). A statistical approach to crime linkage. The American Statistician 70(2),
152-165.
Powell, Z.A., Grubb, J.A., & Nobles, M.R. (2018). A near repeat examination of economic
crimes. Crime & Delinquency, Online First.

19

Pratt, T.C., & Cullen, F.T. (2005). Assessing macro-level predictors and theories of crime: A
meta-analysis. Crime and Justice 32, 373-450.
Ratcliffe, J.H. (2006). A temporal constraint theory to explain opportunity-based spatial
offending patterns. Journal of Research in Crime & Delinquency 43(3), 261-291.
Ratcliffe, J.H., & Kikuchi, G. (2019). Harm-focused offender triage and prioritization: A
Philadelphia case study. Policing: An International Journal 42(1), 59-73.
Ratcliffe, J.H., Lattanzio, M., Kikuchi, G., & Thomas, K. (2019). A partially randomized field
experiment on the effect of an acoustic gunshot detection system on police incident
reports. Journal of Experimental Criminology 15(1), 67-76.
Ratcliffe, J.H., & Rengert, G.F. (2008). Near repeat Patterns in Philadelphia Shootings. Security
Journal 21(1-2), 58–76.
Ratcliffe, J.H., Taylor, R.B., & Perenzin, A. (2016). Predictive modeling combining short and
long-term crime risk potential. Final Report. U.S. Department of Justice Washington,
D.C.: National Institute of Justice.
Reinhart, A. & Greenhouse, J. (2018). Self-exciting point processes with spatial covariates:
Modelling the dynamics of crime. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series C
67(5), 1305-1329.
Sampson, R.J., & Cohen, J. (1988). Deterrent effects of police on crime: A replication and
theoretical extension. Law & Society Review 22(1), 163-190.
Sampson, R.J., Raudenbush, S.W., & Earls, F. (1997). Neighborhoods and violent crime: A
multilevel study of collective efficacy. Science 277(5328), 918-924.
Santos, R.B. & Santos, R.G. (2016). Offender-focused police intervention in residential burglary
and theft from vehicle hot spots: A partially blocked randomized control trial. Journal of
Experimental Criminology 12(3), 373-402.
Santos, R.G. & Santos, R.B. (2015c). Practice-based research: Ex post facto evaluation of
evidence-based police practices implemented in residential burglary micro-time hot spots.
Evaluation Review 39(5), 451-479.
Santos, R.G. & Santos, R.B. (2015b). An ex post facto evaluation of tactical police response in
residential theft from vehicle micro-time hot spots. Journal of Quantitative Criminology
31(4), 679-698.
Santos, R.B. & Santos, R.G. (2015a). Examination of police dosage in residential burglary and
residential theft from vehicle micro-time hot spots. Crime Science 4(27), 1-12.

20
Shaw, C.R., & McKay, H.D. (1969). Juvenile delinquency and urban areas: A study of rates of
delinquency in relation to differential characteristics of local communities in American
cities. Revised Edition. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Short, M.B., D’Orsogna, M.R., Brantingham, P.J., & Tita, G.E. (2009). Measuring and modeling
repeat and near repeat burglary effects. Journal of Quantitative Criminology 25(3), 325339.
Stafford, M.C., & Warr M. (1993). A reconceptualization of general and specific deterrence.
Journal of Research in Crime & Delinquency 30(2), 123-135.
Stokes, N., & Clare, J. (2019). Preventing near repeat residential burglary through cocooning:
Post hoc evaluation of a targeted police-led pilot intervention. Security Journal, Online
First.
Sturup, J., Rostami, A., Gerell, M., & Sandholm, A. (2018). Near repeat shootings in
contemporary Sweden 2011 to 2015. Security Journal 31(1), 73-92.
Turchan, B., Grubb, J.A., Pizarro, J.M., & McGarrell, E.F. (2018). Arson in an urban setting: A
multi-event near repeat chain analysis in Flint, Michigan. Security Journal, Online First.
Townsley, M., Homel, R., & Chaseling, J. (2003). Infectious burglaries: A test of the near repeat
hypothesis. British Journal of Criminology 43(3), 615-633.
Townsley, M., Johnson, S.D., & Ratcliffe, J.H. (2008). Space time dynamics of insurgent activity
in Iraq. Security Journal 21(1), 139-146.
Youstin, T.J., Nobles, M.R., Ward, J.T., & Cook, C.L. (2011). Assessing the generalizability of
the near repeat phenomenon. Criminal Justice and Behavior 38(10), 1042-1063.
Weisburd, D. (2015). The law of crime concentration and the criminology of place. Criminology
53(2), 133-157.
Weisburd, D., Bushway, S.D., Lum, C., & Yang, S.M. (2004). Trajectories of crime at places: A
longitudinal study of street segments in the city of Seattle. Criminology 42(2), 283-322.
Wells, W., & Wu, L. (2011). Proactive policing effects on repeat and near repeat shootings in
Houston. Police Quarterly 14(3), 298-319.
Wells, W., Wu, L., & Ye, X. (2012). Patterns of near repeat gun assaults in Houston. Journal of
Research in Crime & Delinquency 49(2), 186-212.
Wheeler, A.P. (2012). The moving home effect: A quasi experiment assessing effect of home
location on the offence location. Journal of Quantitative Criminology 28(4), 587-606.

21
Wheeler, A.P. (2016). Testing serial crime events for randomness in day-of-week patterns with
small samples. Journal of Investigative Psychology and Offender Profiling 13(2), 148165.
Wheeler, A.P., & Steenbeek, W. (2019). Mapping the risk terrain for crime using machine
learning. Working paper.
Wheeler, A.P., Worden, R.E., & McLean, S.J. (2016). Replicating group-based trajectory models
of crime at micro-places in Albany, NY. Journal of Quantitative Criminology 32(4), 589612.
Wilson, J.Q., & Boland, B. (1978). The effect of police on crime. Law & Society Review 12(3),
367-390.
Wooditch, A. & Weisburd, D. (2016). Using space-time analysis to evaluate criminal justice
programs: An application to stop-question-frisk practices. Journal of Quantitative
Criminology 32(2), 191-213.
Wu, L., & Wells, W. (2016). A micro-level analysis of firearm arrests’ effects on gun violence in
Houston, Texas. GeoJournal 81(6), 891-905.
Wyant, B.R. (2014). Policing firearm violence: Examining space-time associations between
shootings and firearm arrests to gauge police responsiveness. Policing: An International
Journal of Police Strategies & Management 37(1), 70-86.
Wyant, B.R., Taylor, R.B., Ratcliffe, J.H., & Wood, J. (2012). Deterrence, firearm arrests, and
subsequent shootings: A micro-level spatio-temporal analysis. Justice Quarterly 29(4),
524-545.
Zhang, Y., Zhao, J., Ren, L., & Hoover, L. (2015). Space-time clustering of crime events and
neighborhood characteristics in Houston. Criminal Justice Review 40(3), 340-360.

Table 1: Descriptive statistics for different crime types. Future crime is based on a future crime
occurring within 1,000 feet and 7 days of the initial crime
No Arrest
Crime Type
Total N % Future Crime
Shooting
2,948
5.2%
Interpersonal Robbery
10,206
14.0%
Residential Burglary
25,157
20.6%
Theft From Motor Vehicles 55,354
27.7%

Total N
1,048
1,351
983
1,531

Arrest
% Future Crime
4.7%
12.7%
16.1%
30.7%

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics for Main Independent Variables (excludes linear time trend and
monthly dummy variable counts)
Historical Crimes within 1,000 ft
Distance in Feet to Crime Generators/Attractors
Larger Business Retailers
Smaller food, clothing, drug and item stores
Gasoline Stations
Eating and drinking places
liquor stores
Movie theaters, amusement and entertainment
gyms and hair salons
Motel
Hotel
Shopping Mall
Bank
Check Cashing
Libraries
Middle or High School
Dart Stations
Apartment
Hospital
Mobile Home Park
Demographic Factors
Prop. Non-Hispanic White Population
Prop. Black Population
Prop. Hispanic
Prop. Asian
Total number of population under 17 years old
Prop. Moved in the last year
Prop. in Poverty
Prop. of Female Headed Households with Children
Prop. Unemployed
Prop. with some type of govt assistance

Mean Std. Deviation Minimum
65.65
67.42
0.00
1,989.10
1,385.14
1,802.77
1,692.12
4,890.93
3,301.54
2,142.60
5,769.69
7,626.74
18,949.42
4,369.18
4,111.79
7,062.23
4,601.27
14,363.29
1,568.55
10,349.39
16,998.82

1,663.73
1,281.92
1,414.35
1,434.27
5,458.58
2,354.03
1,638.31
3,980.69
5,143.24
10,201.69
3,242.08
4,236.79
3,442.22
2,479.66
11,959.10
1,790.90
6,450.78
11,573.16

0.82
1.06
0.08
0.60
0.15
3.80
0.79
38.63
30.86
199.92
23.45
0.06
75.24
19.16
42.74
11.39
42.00
21.41

0.27
0.29
0.31
0.03
449.26
0.21
0.22
0.18
0.07
0.19

0.27
0.28
0.25
0.06
361.68
0.16
0.15
0.15
0.06
0.16

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Median Maximum
42.00
552.00
1,596.92
1,082.36
1,574.32
1,351.26
3,031.69
2,714.40
1,737.23
5,009.86
6,644.16
19,127.76
3,593.17
2,945.24
6,888.93
4,390.73
10,502.28
844.21
9,542.01
14,197.65

14,850.78
15,442.71
28,943.31
16,389.59
36,362.80
19,692.86
16,427.69
21,960.28
23,212.31
56,449.71
22,219.07
31,607.41
40,419.50
19,651.62
69,234.24
14,095.16
42,686.42
51,154.96

0.17
1.00
0.20
1.00
0.23
1.00
0.01
0.67
370.00 2,275.00
0.17
1.00
0.20
1.00
0.16
0.88
0.05
0.64
0.17
0.89

Table 3: Logistic regression model predicting whether a future crime occurs within 1,000 feet
and 7 days across different crime types
Coefficient

Std
Error

PValue

Low
OR

High
OR

Interpersonal Robbery
Arrest
-0.24
0.14
0.09
-0.53
0.04
Crime Density
4.13
0.25
0.00
3.64
4.62
Arrest*Crime Density
0.95
0.59
0.10
-0.20
2.10
Theft From MV
Arrest
0.13
0.10
0.19
-0.06
0.31
Crime Density
1.95
0.04
0.00
1.87
2.04
Arrest*Crime Density
-0.25
0.17
0.13
-0.58
0.08
Residential Burglary
Arrest
-0.03
-0.27
0.79
-0.27
0.21
Crime Density
1.46
24.79
0.00
1.34
1.57
Arrest*Crime Density
-0.50
-1.83
0.07
-1.04
0.04
Shooting
Arrest
-0.17
0.26
0.51
-0.67
0.33
Crime Density
9.68
1.78
0.00
6.19
13.16
Arrest*Crime Density
0.72
2.51
0.77
-4.20
5.64
Note: Logit models include control variables for distance to 18 types of crime generators,
demographic characteristics, a linear time trend, and monthly dummy variables. Confidence
intervals for the odds ratios are 95%.

Figure 1: The left hand graph displays the predicted probabilities of a future near repeat robbery
(within 1,000 feet and 7 days) from initial event, for events with and without an arrest given
different historical crime densities per 7 days (within 1,000 feet). The right hand graph displays
the estimated different between those two probabilities with a 95% confidence interval of the
difference.

Figure 2: The left hand graph displays the predicted probabilities of a future near repeat burglary
(within 1,000 feet and 7 days) from initial event, for events with and without an arrest given
different historical crime densities per 7 days (within 1,000 feet). The right hand graph displays
the estimated different between those two probabilities with a 95% confidence interval of the
difference.

Figure 3: The left hand graph displays the predicted probabilities of a future near repeat shooting
(within 1,000 feet and 7 days) from initial event, for events with and without an arrest given
different historical crime densities per 7 days (within 1,000 feet). The right hand graph displays
the estimated different between those two probabilities with a 95% confidence interval of the
difference.

Figure 4: The left hand graph displays the predicted probabilities of a future near repeat theft
from motor vehicle (within 1,000 feet and 7 days) from initial event, for events with and without
an arrest given different historical crime densities per 7 days (within 1,000 feet). The right hand
graph displays the estimated different between those two probabilities with a 95% confidence
interval of the difference.

Figure 5: Coefficient for arrest effect, given different distance and time thresholds for examining
near-repeats. Coefficients that had a p-value of less than 0.05 are given a dot.

Figure 6: Coefficient for arrest effect, only including future crimes that occurred at least 24 hours
after the initiator crime event, given different distance and time thresholds for examining nearrepeats. Coefficients that had a p-value of less than 0.05 are given a dot.

A1
Appendix A: Supplemental Tables
Table A.1: Logistic Regression Results (Personal Robbery and Theft from Motor Vehicle)

Arrest
Historical Crimes within 1,000 ft
Arrest*Historical Crimes within 1,000 ft
Distance in 1.000 Feet to Crime Generators/Attractors
Larger Business Retailers
Smaller food, clothing, drug and item stores
Gasoline Stations
Eating and drinking places
liquor stores
Movie theaters, amusement and entertainment
gyms and hair salons
Motel
Hotel
Shopping Mall
Bank
Check Cashing
Libraries
Middle or High School
Dart Stations
Apartment
Hospital
Mobile Home Park
Demographic Factors
Prop. Non-Hispanic White Population
Prop. Black Population
Prop. Hispanic
Prop. Asian
Total number of population under 17 years old
Prop. Moved in the last year
Prop. in Poverty
Prop. of Female Headed Households with Children
Prop. Unemployed
Prop. with some type of govt assistance
Month
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Julian Date (1/1/2014 as 0.00)
Constant
Note: *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01

Dependent Variable: (Future Crime within 1,000 feet and 7 days)
Personal Robbery
Theft From MV
Coefficient
Std Error Sig
Coefficient
Std Error Sig
-0.24
(0.14)
*
0.13
(0.1)
4.13
(0.25)
***
1.95
(0.04)
***
0.95
(0.59)
-0.25
(0.17)
0.01
-0.02
-0.09
-0.01
0.02
-0.01
-0.01
-0.02
0.00
0.01
-0.20
0.02
0.00
-0.01
0.01
0.01
0.04
-0.03

(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.00)
(0.03)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.02)
(0.02)

0.04
-0.02
-0.03
0.02
0.02
0.00
-0.01
0.00
0.00
0.01
-0.08
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.00

(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.01)

0.26
0.16
0.13
0.80
0.00
1.02
0.39
0.15
-1.09
0.79

(0.33)
(0.26)
(0.29)
(0.61)
(0.00)
(0.26)
(0.32)
(0.23)
(0.49)
(0.32)

(0.10)
(0.10)
(0.10)
(0.21)
(0.00)
(0.08)
(0.13)
(0.09)
(0.22)
(0.14)

**
***
***

**
**

-0.23
-0.40
-0.48
0.01
0.00
0.81
0.33
0.24
-0.70
-0.24

-0.04
-0.20
-0.24
-0.22
-0.17
-0.10
0.10
-0.01
0.03
0.19
-0.06
0.00
-3.21

(0.15)
(0.15)
(0.15)
(0.14)
(0.14)
(0.13)
(0.13)
(0.13)
(0.13)
(0.13)
(0.13)
(0.00)
(0.35)

(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.00)
(0.12)

***

***

-0.14
-0.05
-0.05
-0.02
-0.09
-0.02
0.00
-0.06
-0.04
0.01
0.01
0.00
-1.35

***

***
**
**
***
*

*

***

A2
Table A.2: Logistic Regression Results (Residential Burglary and Shooting)

Arrest
Historical Crimes within 1,000 ft
Arrest*Historical Crimes within 1,000 ft
Distance in 1.000 Feet to Crime Generators/Attractors
Larger Business Retailers
Smaller food, clothing, drug and item stores
Gasoline Stations
Eating and drinking places
liquor stores
Movie theaters, amusement and entertainment
gyms and hair salons
Motel
Hotel
Shopping Mall
Bank
Check Cashing
Libraries
Middle or High School
Dart Stations
Apartment
Hospital
Mobile Home Park
Demographic Factors
Prop. Non-Hispanic White Population
Prop. Black Population
Prop. Hispanic
Prop. Asian
Total number of population under 17 years old
Prop. Moved in the last year
Prop. in Poverty
Prop. of Female Headed Households with Children
Prop. Unemployed
Prop. with some type of govt assistance
Month
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Julian Date (1/1/2014 as 0.00)
Constant
Note: *p<0.10; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01

Dependent Variable: (Future Crime within 1,000 feet and 7 days)
Residential Burglary
Shooting
Coefficient
Std Error Sig
Coefficient
Std Error Sig
-0.03
(0.12)
-0.17
(0.26)
1.46
(0.06)
***
9.68
(1.78)
***
-0.50
(0.27)
*
0.72
(2.51)
0.01
0.05
0.02
-0.05
0.00
-0.01
0.01
-0.01
-0.03
0.01
-0.05
-0.02
0.01
-0.02
0.02
0.00
0.03
-0.02

(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.01)

-0.69
-0.14
-0.54
0.72
0.00
1.26
-0.55
0.34
-0.36
0.14

(0.17)
(0.16)
(0.17)
(0.35)
(0.00)
(0.14)
(0.18)
(0.14)
(0.28)
(0.19)

-0.29
-0.17
-0.13
-0.06
-0.04
-0.13
-0.06
-0.09
-0.07
0.09
0.03
0.00
-1.40

(0.09)
(0.08)
(0.08)
(0.08)
(0.08)
(0.08)
(0.08)
(0.08)
(0.08)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.00)
(0.20)

***
***
**
**
***
***
**

***
**

*

***
***

-0.18
0.07
0.05
0.03
-0.01
0.01
-0.05
0.04
-0.03
-0.02
0.03
-0.03
-0.01
-0.02
0.00
-0.01
0.04
0.05

(0.07)
(0.09)
(0.07)
(0.08)
(0.02)
(0.04)
(0.06)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.01)
(0.07)
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.04)
(0.04)

-0.32
-0.27
-0.77
2.46
0.00
0.62
1.70
-0.93
-0.27
0.08

(1.11)
(0.89)
(0.98)
(2.04)
(0.00)
(0.76)
(0.80)
(0.64)
(0.90)
(0.79)

-0.17
-0.04
0.34
0.26
-0.15
0.19
0.43
0.05
0.28
0.28
0.38
0.00
-3.59

(0.44)
(0.41)
(0.36)
(0.37)
(0.34)
(0.37)
(0.36)
(0.38)
(0.35)
(0.36)
(0.36)
(0.00)
(1.10)

**

**

***

Appendix B: Knox Tables

Distance (feet)

Table B.1: Near Repeat Shootings, P-Value
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
0 X X ... ... X X ... X X ...
100 X X ... ... ... ... ... ... ... X
200 ... X ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
300 ... X ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
400 X ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
500 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
600 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
700 ... X ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
800 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
900 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
1000 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... X ...
1100 ... ... X ... ... ... X ... ... ...
1200 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
1300 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
1400 ... X ... ... ... ... X ... ... ...
1500 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
1600 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
1700 ... X ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
1800 ... X ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
1900 ... ... ... ... X ... ... ... ... ...
2000 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2100 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2200 ... ... ... ... X ... ... ... ... ...
2300 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2400 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2500 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2600 ... ... X ... X ... ... ... ... ...
2700 ... ... ... ... ... X ... ... ... ...
2800 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... X
2900 ... ... ... ... X ... ... ... ... ...
3000 ... ... ... ... X ... ... ... ... X
Note: X indicates p-value of .05 or lower

10
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

11
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

12
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

13
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

Time (days)
14 15 16 17
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... X
... ... ... ...
... X ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
X ... ... ...
... ... X ...
... ... X ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... X ...
... ... ... ...
... X ... ...
... ... ... ...

18
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...

19
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

20
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

21
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

22
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

23
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...

24
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

25
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

26
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

27
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

28
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

29
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...

30
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

Table B.2: Near Repeat Shootings, Knox Ratios

Time (days)
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
0
1.17 1.78 3.96 3.30 1.74 3.19 3.19 2.52 1.84 2.69
1.78 2.26 1.71
1.64 1.80 1.73 2.91 1.19 0.64 2.24 0.58 1.23 1.92
1.89 1.08 1.86
100
1.37 0.48 1.34 1.02
1.47 2.90 0.94 1.35
1.69 0.42 0.95 1.97 0.42 0.99 1.55 0.46 0.45 1.87 2.07 0.47 0.57 2.00 0.54 0.98
0.94
200
0.76 0.77 0.67 1.42 0.72
1.32 0.72 3.19 2.03 0.74 0.84 0.73 0.72
4.13 2.91 0.80 3.00 1.98 0.70 1.39 0.89
2.38 1.46 1.52 2.36
300
0.76 0.66 1.45 0.85 0.79 1.27 0.83 1.41
2.17 0.82 1.35 0.78 2.20 0.75
1.36 0.71 0.72 0.69 1.60 0.69 1.53
0.79 0.74 0.70
400
0.66 2.39 1.90 0.57 2.32 1.77 1.77
0.61 1.30 1.97 1.31 1.74 3.32
1.17 0.61 1.83 0.55 1.16 0.72 1.69
0.58
3.09 1.16 0.62
500
1.77 1.43 1.19 1.72 1.11 1.70 1.09 0.52 1.82 0.55
1.68 1.13 0.56 2.26
1.27 1.33 1.70 1.73 1.79
0.57
1.14 2.24
1.58
600
1.23
1.68 1.81 0.59 0.52 0.48 1.91 0.49 1.94
1.93 0.52 0.52 1.54 0.54 0.57 0.53
0.62 0.93 1.10 1.09 2.01 0.54 0.54 1.05 0.93
700
0.49 1.06 1.44 1.46 0.98 1.45 1.07 1.45 0.49 1.21 0.47
0.58 1.80 0.51
1.34
0.56 0.54 1.63 2.11 1.37 0.54 0.59 1.06 1.63 2.11 1.46
800
0.59 0.54
1.14 0.61
0.55 1.62 1.41 1.15 1.58 1.43
2.55 1.66 1.08 2.33 1.13 1.81
0.57
1.49 1.20 1.11
0.59
900
0.31 1.84 2.44 1.53 2.06 0.71 1.27 1.08 1.74 0.78 2.40 0.37 0.76 1.54 1.42
1.05 1.45 0.71 1.03 2.53 0.36 0.36 1.88 1.14 1.43 0.33 0.98 2.61
1000
0.36 0.34 0.32 1.83 0.72 1.76 3.64 1.38 2.43 1.87 1.75 0.35 2.44 0.39 0.35 0.34 0.32 1.67 1.26 0.37 0.71 0.76 0.72 1.38 2.12 1.00 0.37 1.05 1.48
1100 0.69 2.36 0.36 0.36 1.08 2.48 0.73 0.33 0.72 0.73 1.41 2.33 0.37 1.97
2.38 1.09 0.80 1.52 0.72 0.75 1.46 0.74 1.96 1.36 1.17 0.40 0.72 1.83 1.52
1200 1.59 0.66 1.20 0.37 0.70 1.78 0.34 1.87 1.45 0.67 0.68 2.17 0.30 1.01 1.25 2.86 1.67 1.43 2.09 0.66 1.55 0.68 1.01 1.05 1.37 0.64 0.66 0.38 0.31 1.27
1300 0.55 1.81 1.54 0.29 1.16
0.61 0.55 1.26 0.99 0.59 1.17 0.91 0.57 0.95
0.63 0.30 0.85 0.61 1.06 0.79 0.31 0.59 1.70 1.17 1.21 1.61 1.12 1.19
1400 2.23 1.45 1.85 0.28 0.87 2.34 0.58 0.55 1.16 0.30 2.34 1.23 1.40 0.53 1.18 0.57 1.36 0.87 0.29 0.88 1.09 0.57 0.29 1.25 2.54 0.79 1.08 1.96 0.58 1.39
1500 1.54 0.57 0.89 0.54 0.56 1.50 1.23 0.32 1.62 2.24 1.19 1.19 1.82 0.91 0.87 1.79 1.48 0.28 1.79 1.21 1.50 0.96 0.87 0.92 2.45 0.67 1.87 1.55 0.58 1.50
1600 0.53 0.62 1.69 0.85 1.19 0.59 0.29 0.61 1.72 0.58 1.42 1.82 0.88 0.54 0.58 1.57 0.59 1.94 0.89 1.96 0.29 1.43
1.43 0.53 1.43 0.31 2.23 2.22 1.15
1700 2.43 1.16 1.48 1.17 0.83 2.09 1.16 0.98 1.65 1.59 0.56 1.16 0.56 1.57 0.95 0.91 1.81 0.83 0.86 2.00 1.43 1.30 0.98 1.85 1.26 0.87 1.83 0.29 2.09 1.64
1800 2.35 0.90 0.92 2.08 1.49
1.37 1.31 0.59 1.14 0.84 0.90 0.57 1.20 1.57 0.83 1.13 1.62 0.55 0.30 0.82 1.28 0.28 1.41 1.42 0.60 0.61 0.88 1.36 2.38
1900 1.40 1.91 0.90 2.99 0.86 1.89 1.06 0.87 1.41 1.23 1.07 0.30 1.11 0.57 1.63 1.72 1.21 0.77 2.11 0.94 1.58 0.77 1.78 1.21 1.99 0.59 0.57 0.30 0.27 0.83
2000 1.14 1.50 0.84 1.57 0.85 0.56 1.66 2.11 0.62 0.92 0.54 1.42 0.79 1.43 1.65 0.93 1.39 0.31 0.54 2.06 1.18 0.87 0.27 0.59 1.08 0.93 0.89 1.07 0.29 1.24
2100 1.03 1.67 1.41 1.48 0.78 1.04 2.10 1.27 1.72 0.51 1.89 1.27 1.52 1.05 0.78 0.79 0.79 0.88 1.87 0.54 1.01 1.43 1.05 0.83 0.80 0.52 2.78 1.36 1.18 1.08
2200 1.45 1.50 0.98 2.30 1.02 0.54 1.14 1.18 1.30 1.18 2.20 1.94 0.51 0.79 0.93 0.94 0.78 0.81 0.55 0.69 2.10 1.26 0.94 1.72 1.02 0.55 0.55 1.45 1.33 2.06
2300 1.79 0.80 0.76 0.26 0.24 2.08 0.24 1.26 0.95
1.21 1.14 0.49 1.77 1.08 1.31 1.47
1.74 0.80 1.46 1.16 1.39 1.31 2.53 0.73 1.05 1.55 0.51 1.29
2400 1.15 0.22 1.65 1.72 1.15 1.15 0.94 0.64 1.64 1.50 1.60 0.76 1.46 1.24 1.21 0.72 0.72 1.13 1.02 1.69 1.62 1.09 2.08 0.71 1.86 1.21 0.50 1.21 1.13 0.47
2500 0.45 0.24 0.89 0.24 0.66 0.23 1.49 1.70 1.44 0.95 1.20
0.47 0.70 1.20 0.25 0.83 0.72 0.25 1.31 0.48 1.60 0.89 1.38 1.62 0.47 1.22
0.49 1.19
2600 1.50 2.32 1.09 1.92 0.19 0.95 1.16 1.13 1.35 0.44 1.07
0.86 0.90 1.62 1.47 0.70 1.18 0.72 0.47 0.62 0.62 0.90 1.80 1.13 1.18 0.76 0.66 0.63 0.67
2700 1.25 0.23 1.18 0.92 2.24 1.60 1.05 1.41 0.65 1.62 0.46 1.07 1.83 0.42 1.60 2.06 0.64 1.89 0.50 0.85 1.11 1.59 0.70 0.93 0.81 2.02 1.18 1.77 2.29 1.54
2800 1.71 0.87 0.85 0.21 0.23 1.16 0.87 0.44 2.07 0.86 0.86 1.51 1.07 1.65 1.42 0.47 1.06 1.56 0.88 0.66 1.90 1.72 1.08 0.22 1.37 1.88 0.45 0.43 1.55 1.06
2900 1.32 1.70 0.66 2.00 1.12 0.68 0.24 0.66 0.90 0.97 0.68 0.70 0.91 1.28 2.14
0.91 1.47 1.01 0.72 1.38 0.99 1.43 0.88 0.99 1.92 0.47 0.22 0.23 1.42
3000 0.87 1.56 1.58 2.51 0.46 0.44 1.35 1.46 2.11 0.87 0.20 1.88 1.93 0.77 1.18 0.23 0.61 0.64 0.46 0.86 1.81 1.93 0.67 1.38 0.69 0.92 1.20 0.93 0.72 0.46

Distance (feet)

1
6.57
4.95
4.64
5.25
2.36
1.13
1.89
3.35
2.33
0.74

Distance (feet)

Table B.3: Near Repeat Interpersonal Robberies, P-Values
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
0 X X X X X X X X X X
100 X X X ... X ... ... X X ...
200 ... X X ... ... X ... X ... X
300 ... X X X ... ... X ... X X
400 ... ... ... X ... X ... ... ... ...
500 ... X X X ... X ... ... X ...
600 ... X ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
700 ... X X ... ... ... ... ... X ...
800 ... ... X ... ... X X ... ... ...
900 ... ... ... X ... X ... ... ... ...
1000 X X ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
1100 ... X X ... ... ... X ... ... ...
1200 ... ... ... ... X ... ... X ... ...
1300 ... ... X ... ... ... X ... ... ...
1400 ... ... ... ... X ... ... X ... ...
1500 ... X ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
1600 ... ... X ... X ... ... ... ... ...
1700 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... X ...
1800 ... ... ... ... X ... ... ... ... ...
1900 ... X ... X ... ... ... ... ... ...
2000 ... X ... ... ... ... ... ... X ...
2100 X X ... ... ... X ... ... X ...
2200 ... X ... ... X X ... ... ... ...
2300 X ... X X ... ... ... ... ... ...
2400 X X ... ... X ... ... ... ... ...
2500 ... X ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2600 ... X ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2700 ... X ... ... ... ... X ... ... ...
2800 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2900 ... ... ... X ... ... X ... ... X
3000 ... X ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Note: X indicates p-value of .05 or lower

10
X
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

11
X
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...

12
X
X
...
X
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

13
X
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

Time (days)
14 15 16 17
X X X ...
... ... X ...
... ... ... ...
... X ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... X
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... X
... ... ... X
... ... ... ...
X ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
X ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
X ... ... ...
... X ... ...
X ... ... ...
X ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... X X
X ... ... ...
X ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...

18
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

19
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...

20
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
X
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X

21
X
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

22
X
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X

23
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

24
X
...
X
...
...
...
X
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
X
...

25
X
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

26
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

27
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
X
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

28
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
X
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...

29
X
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

30
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...

Distance (feet)

Table B.4: Near Repeat Interpersonal Robberies, Knox Ratios

Time (days)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
0
0 99.00 3.19 3.11 2.85 2.51 1.85 2.24 2.04 2.80 2.43 1.97 1.69 1.82 2.02 1.73 2.49 1.69 1.36 1.37 1.28 1.45 2.12 1.94 1.49 1.63 1.61 0.99 2.01 1.32 1.59 1.14
100 99.00 2.40 1.68 1.26 1.69 1.27 1.42 1.47 1.48 1.06 1.43 1.20 1.52 1.39 0.91 0.79 1.88 1.21 0.73 1.04 1.37 1.27 0.99 1.09 1.05 0.87 1.42 1.08 1.29 0.82 1.57
200
2.17 1.78 0.87 1.48 1.75 0.97 2.00 1.21 1.90 1.87 1.16 1.46 1.36 0.49 0.92 1.27 1.31 1.04 0.66 1.43 1.88 1.19 1.25 1.58 0.66 1.07 1.07 1.08 1.08 0.85
300
1.63 2.02 1.67 1.50 1.11 1.85 0.69 1.77 1.84 1.32 1.19 1.78 0.83 0.90 1.71 0.84 1.57 1.35 1.03 0.72 1.30 1.05 0.93 1.35 1.76 1.02 1.16 0.72 1.32 0.78
400
1.47 1.28 1.55 1.46 1.57 1.11 1.28 0.89 1.05 1.28 1.41 1.49 1.91 1.39 0.85 0.74 0.99 1.31 1.35 0.78 1.25 1.32 0.84 1.28 1.09 1.33 1.47 1.09 1.66 1.08
500
1.91 1.44 1.60 1.25 1.41 1.11 1.38 1.45 1.21 1.07 0.93 0.79 1.10 0.93 1.25 1.16 1.72 1.14 1.12 0.80 0.93 1.37 1.03 1.22 1.17 0.88 1.02 1.01 1.02 1.21
600
1.71 1.19 1.13 1.14 0.91 1.02 1.22 1.21 1.22 0.78 1.53 1.21 0.78 0.91 0.92 1.25 1.11 0.99 1.34 0.93 0.96 1.15 1.08 1.39 0.75 1.12 1.02 0.90 1.07 1.19
700
1.44 1.48 1.21 1.11 0.99 1.19 1.34 1.65 1.41 1.18 1.28 0.70 1.29 1.19 1.42 1.38 0.96 1.05 0.97 0.97 1.29 1.30 1.24 1.01 1.16 0.53 1.38 1.61 0.79 0.77
800
1.38 1.55 1.22 1.28 1.61 1.43 1.09 1.17 1.31 1.43 1.26 1.25 1.05 1.22 0.77 0.97 1.39 0.95 1.09 1.41 0.89 1.68 1.30 1.45 1.29 1.28 0.92 1.00 1.35 0.96
900
1.05 0.95 1.34 1.31 1.57 1.11 1.16 1.05 0.88 1.07 1.12 1.08 1.38 0.94 1.02 0.95 1.40 0.81 1.02 0.86 1.74 1.25 1.36 0.86 0.86 0.81 1.02 1.52 1.08 1.33
1000 50.00 1.40 0.74 1.07 0.90 0.98 1.19 1.35 0.97 1.24 1.30 1.27 1.22 0.84 0.79 1.11 0.78 1.11 1.32 1.20 1.33 0.96 1.14 0.92 0.92 1.21 0.72 0.98 1.32 1.14 0.92
1100
1.42 1.34 1.26 1.14 1.16 1.76 0.88 0.91 1.13 1.10 1.27 0.92 0.73 1.44 1.08 1.20 1.00 1.10 0.97 1.08 1.19 1.05 0.85 0.57 0.87 0.81 1.15 1.23 1.25 1.07
1200
1.11 1.27 1.23 1.51 1.23 1.14 1.46 0.90 1.02 0.86 1.13 1.20 0.85 0.60 1.21 1.08 0.92 1.06 1.14 1.10 1.39 0.99 1.08 1.13 1.06 0.82 1.39 1.33 1.18 1.09
1300
1.28 1.47 1.27 1.17 1.05 1.54 1.31 0.98 1.08 0.96 1.38 1.00 1.03 0.99 1.27 0.96 0.99 1.25 1.09 0.77 1.22 0.75 1.33 0.95 1.05 0.64 1.17 0.75 0.97 0.86
1400
1.27 0.96 1.12 1.36 0.58 0.97 1.40 1.29 1.21 0.91 1.26 0.78 1.02 0.82 1.23 1.07 0.83 1.15 0.96 0.95 0.86 1.02 1.25 1.14 1.03 1.13 1.41 1.38 1.00 1.12
1500
1.43 1.05 0.99 1.18 0.84 0.78 1.19 1.01 1.15 1.04 1.20 1.17 0.63 0.70 1.25 0.59 1.25 0.65 1.22 0.87 1.05 1.09 0.98 0.80 0.91 1.36 1.04 0.97 1.12 0.97
1600
1.18 1.62 1.17 1.40 0.79 0.91 1.19 1.17 0.97 1.22 1.13 1.35 0.89 0.97 0.94 1.08 0.83 0.92 1.19 1.52 1.10 1.09 0.96 0.93 1.01 1.27 1.19 1.08 1.38 1.13
1700
1.26 0.83 1.17 0.99 0.96 1.07 1.15 1.30 1.25 1.00 1.09 1.12 0.97 0.93 1.11 1.14 1.12 0.96 1.02 0.93 0.78 0.77 0.80 0.95 1.01 0.85 1.38 0.89 0.86 1.06
1800
0.98 1.23 0.93 1.39 1.04 0.89 1.00 0.90 1.07 1.19 1.23 1.06 1.00 1.14 0.97 1.25 1.23 1.11 1.14 0.75 0.99 0.95 0.60 1.07 1.06 1.02 0.85 0.83 1.30 0.86
1900
1.60 0.85 1.31 0.92 1.24 1.04 1.14 0.96 1.03 0.96 0.77 0.95 0.83 1.36 1.11 1.07 1.03 1.15 1.06 1.37 0.92 0.97 1.41 0.98 0.83 0.98 1.02 1.23 1.12 1.09
2000
1.58 0.85 1.05 1.13 0.76 1.31 1.07 1.33 0.91 1.21 0.88 0.99 0.92 1.21 1.16 1.00 0.82 1.42 1.09 1.28 1.15 1.13 1.13 1.01 0.87 1.31 0.98 1.32 0.75 0.92
2100 33.00 1.31 0.94 0.96 1.02 1.44 1.21 1.27 1.34 1.09 1.08 1.09 1.00 0.98 1.34 1.04 0.91 1.05 0.93 0.78 1.30 1.08 0.99 1.34 0.83 1.18 0.95 1.11 1.00 0.98 1.15
2200
1.43 1.12 1.12 1.43 1.41 0.87 1.11 1.28 0.79 0.99 0.96 0.87 0.88 1.01 1.43 1.31 1.11 1.12 0.84 1.10 1.02 0.85 0.95 0.86 1.24 1.14 0.97 0.84 1.18 1.36
2300 66.00 1.27 1.32 1.52 1.14 1.10 0.83 0.97 1.07 0.98 1.01 1.20 1.27 0.93 1.41 0.97 0.95 1.17 0.69 0.92 0.86 1.11 0.96 1.21 1.08 1.19 0.92 1.23 0.99 0.66 1.10
2400 33.00 1.25 1.07 1.19 1.52 0.90 0.87 0.95 0.77 1.17 0.80 1.01 0.94 0.84 1.45 1.07 0.97 1.00 0.91 0.77 0.63 0.98 1.10 1.22 1.36 0.96 1.12 1.13 1.11 1.14 1.32
2500
1.39 0.92 0.90 1.12 0.89 1.18 0.96 0.95 1.09 0.73 1.11 1.15 1.02 1.21 1.27 1.18 1.09 1.21 0.96 1.10 1.05 1.08 1.15 1.04 1.09 0.89 1.11 1.12 1.13 0.99
2600
1.43 1.19 1.21 0.96 0.96 1.15 0.98 1.03 0.88 1.00 1.41 0.90 0.85 1.10 0.78 1.38 1.25 0.78 0.88 1.14 1.04 1.18 1.22 1.01 1.14 1.05 0.99 0.58 0.94 1.09
2700
1.39 1.13 1.16 1.12 1.03 1.45 0.90 0.86 0.61 1.10 1.23 1.12 1.06 1.28 1.15 1.06 1.12 1.02 1.02 1.01 1.15 1.22 1.20 0.76 1.04 1.20 1.30 1.18 1.28 1.10
2800
1.22 1.19 0.92 1.07 0.86 1.15 1.14 0.82 1.27 0.77 1.08 0.67 1.01 1.43 0.84 1.22 1.04 0.87 1.36 0.81 0.99 1.05 1.20 1.03 1.02 0.93 1.13 1.32 1.16 0.79
2900
1.09 0.93 1.33 0.87 0.89 1.36 1.03 1.11 1.36 1.18 0.84 1.22 1.17 0.95 0.92 1.15 1.12 1.17 0.97 1.10 0.94 1.10 1.15 1.34 0.96 1.15 0.91 0.82 0.84 0.99
3000
1.36 1.01 0.85 0.86 1.11 0.89 0.77 1.21 1.03 0.99 0.91 1.01 0.84 0.78 0.75 1.14 1.03 1.05 0.76 1.36 1.04 1.32 0.97 0.86 0.88 0.94 1.06 1.25 1.04 0.80

Distance (in feet)

Table B.5: Near Repeat Residential Burglaries, P-Values
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
0 X X X X X X X X X X
100 X X ... ... ... ... ... X ... ...
200 ... X X X ... ... X X X ...
300 ... ... ... ... X X ... X X ...
400 ... X X X X X X X X ...
500 ... X X X ... X X ... ... X
600 X X X ... X X X X X X
700 ... X X X X ... X X ... ...
800 ... X ... ... X X X X ... ...
900 X X X ... ... ... X X ... ...
1000 ... X X X ... X X ... ... ...
1100 ... X X ... ... X X X ... ...
1200 ... X X ... X X X ... ... X
1300 ... X X X ... ... ... X X ...
1400 ... X ... X X X ... ... X X
1500 ... X X X ... ... X ... ... ...
1600 ... X X X X X ... ... X X
1700 ... X X ... ... ... X X ... ...
1800 ... X ... ... ... X ... X X X
1900 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2000 ... ... X X ... X ... X X X
2100 ... X ... ... ... X ... ... ... X
2200 ... X X X ... ... X ... ... ...
2300 ... ... X ... X ... ... X ... ...
2400 X X X X ... ... ... ... ... ...
2500 ... ... ... X ... ... ... ... ... ...
2600 ... ... X ... X ... X ... X ...
2700 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... X ... ...
2800 ... ... ... ... ... X ... ... ... ...
2900 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... X
3000 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... X ...
Note: X indicates p-value of .05 or lower

10
X
...
...
X
X
...
X
X
X
X
X
...
...
...
...
X
X
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...

11
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
X
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
X
X
...
X
...
...

12
X
...
...
X
X
X
...
X
X
X
X
...
X
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
X
X
X
X
...
X
X
...
...
X
...

13
X
...
...
...
X
...
X
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
X
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...

Time (days)
14 15 16 17
X X X X
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... X ... X
X X ... ...
... X X X
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... X X
X ... ... X
X ... ... ...
X ... ... ...
X ... ... ...
... X ... ...
... ... ... X
... X ... ...
... ... ... ...
X X ... ...
... ... ... X
... ... X ...
... X X X
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
... X ... ...
... ... X ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
X ... X ...
... X X ...
... ... ... X
... ... ... ...

18
X
...
...
X
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
X
...
...
X
X
X
X
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

19
X
...
...
...
X
X
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
X
X
...
...
...
...

20
X
...
...
X
...
...
X
...
X
X
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

21
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
X
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...

22
X
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
X
...
X
...
X
...
X
...
...
X
X
X
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...

23
X
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
X
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...

24
X
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
X
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X

25
X
...
X
...
X
...
...
...
X
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
X
...
...
X
...
...
...

26
X
...
X
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...

27
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
X
...
...

28
X
...
...
X
...
...
X
X
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
X
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

29
X
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...

30
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...

Distance (feet)

Table B.6: Near Repeat Residential Burglaries, Knox Ratios

Time (days)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
0 115.50 6.55 3.05 2.32 2.55 2.87 2.39 2.32 2.35 2.28 1.66 2.33 2.21 2.06 1.68 2.21 2.06 2.10 1.92 2.05 1.78 1.94 2.15 1.64 1.66 1.86 1.63 1.47 1.72 1.91 1.68
100 27.50 1.91 1.15 1.14 0.95 1.00 1.11 1.27 1.19 1.16 1.02 0.92 1.12 0.90 0.95 1.04 0.82 0.83 1.11 1.11 1.01 0.75 0.86 1.05 0.89 0.79 0.69 0.88 0.84 0.75 0.79
200 7.07 2.24 1.97 1.35 1.25 0.94 1.58 1.75 1.57 1.26 1.07 1.22 1.17 1.23 1.18 0.98 1.27 0.97 1.17 1.23 1.22 1.28 1.30 1.24 0.91 1.45 1.34 1.25 1.07 1.22 1.17
300
1.31 1.26 1.37 1.56 1.42 1.34 2.17 1.56 1.28 1.70 0.87 1.48 1.19 0.93 1.46 1.05 1.79 1.31 0.95 1.35 1.09 1.01 1.12 1.04 1.09 1.20 1.20 1.41 1.54 1.17
400 5.82 1.97 1.76 1.82 1.78 1.77 1.48 1.46 1.35 0.79 1.37 1.09 1.43 1.61 1.31 1.35 1.17 1.23 1.39 1.34 1.07 1.21 1.05 1.03 1.01 1.46 1.01 0.87 1.17 0.91 1.19
500
1.51 1.44 1.55 1.16 1.32 1.40 1.16 1.10 1.36 1.04 0.97 1.29 1.18 1.05 1.23 1.57 1.28 1.06 1.24 1.09 1.19 0.97 1.12 1.13 1.02 1.09 0.94 1.08 1.00 1.24
600 19.80 1.32 1.35 1.17 1.27 1.41 1.24 1.39 1.29 1.22 1.26 1.21 1.14 1.40 0.96 1.08 1.14 1.21 1.14 1.22 1.30 1.13 1.40 1.35 1.33 0.91 1.05 1.05 1.18 1.15 1.17
700 9.00 1.47 1.46 1.46 1.24 1.27 1.27 1.48 1.05 1.12 1.36 1.03 1.45 1.12 1.02 1.07 1.21 0.96 1.23 1.30 1.04 1.02 1.05 1.10 0.98 1.05 1.31 1.22 1.48 1.16 1.10
800 3.67 1.85 1.00 1.12 1.30 1.24 1.37 1.30 1.19 1.21 1.20 1.34 1.25 1.31 1.03 1.14 1.33 1.37 1.19 1.13 1.36 1.23 1.42 1.30 1.23 1.30 1.19 1.22 1.12 1.20 1.17
900 11.00 1.38 1.26 1.11 1.19 1.18 1.30 1.26 1.00 1.18 1.33 1.20 1.27 1.17 1.44 1.09 1.10 1.24 0.90 1.18 1.27 1.07 1.15 1.21 1.02 0.99 1.01 1.12 1.25 1.17 1.07
1000
1.42 1.28 1.31 1.18 1.46 1.50 1.18 1.13 1.05 1.34 1.05 1.22 1.15 1.38 1.09 1.20 1.11 1.09 1.06 1.11 1.15 1.39 1.25 1.15 1.36 1.13 1.18 1.03 1.02 1.29
1100
1.45 1.30 1.18 1.05 1.20 1.33 1.21 1.06 1.20 1.08 1.25 1.10 1.10 1.35 0.97 1.12 1.05 1.06 1.10 0.96 1.25 1.10 1.05 0.97 1.12 1.06 1.14 1.13 1.19 1.17
1200 3.67 1.36 1.31 1.07 1.27 1.21 1.20 1.05 1.03 1.18 1.06 1.15 1.26 1.03 1.19 0.97 0.96 0.95 1.23 1.14 1.16 0.97 1.19 1.06 0.94 1.14 1.16 0.94 0.94 1.05 1.12
1300
1.38 1.24 1.18 0.84 1.13 1.19 1.31 1.43 1.16 1.10 1.15 1.04 1.01 0.94 1.17 0.98 1.12 1.17 1.19 1.23 0.91 1.13 1.05 1.20 0.82 0.95 0.97 0.93 0.91 1.12
1400
1.35 1.04 1.31 1.25 1.32 1.05 1.13 1.18 1.29 0.99 1.15 1.13 1.05 1.06 0.99 1.02 1.20 1.27 1.08 1.17 1.17 1.25 0.99 1.13 0.97 1.03 0.98 1.03 1.17 1.03
1500 2.75 1.36 1.22 1.24 1.10 0.95 1.15 1.10 0.94 1.14 1.18 0.92 1.08 1.18 0.98 1.31 1.08 1.11 1.01 1.10 1.01 1.13 0.96 1.15 1.07 0.99 1.15 1.08 0.97 1.06 1.05
1600
1.39 1.15 1.42 1.24 1.26 1.03 1.14 1.26 1.19 1.22 0.98 1.20 1.13 1.08 1.02 0.99 1.00 1.04 1.11 1.07 1.14 1.04 1.15 1.08 1.07 0.90 1.11 1.25 1.08 1.06
1700 2.61 1.31 1.30 1.11 1.10 1.11 1.15 1.34 1.11 1.03 1.03 1.14 1.08 1.13 1.21 1.31 1.03 1.11 1.22 1.09 1.05 0.99 1.20 1.08 1.16 0.96 1.05 0.90 0.92 1.17 1.09
1800
1.21 1.10 1.07 0.95 1.27 0.93 1.26 1.13 1.19 1.10 0.97 0.90 1.22 1.00 1.01 1.05 1.16 1.25 1.01 1.15 0.97 1.21 1.08 1.02 1.05 1.00 1.07 1.17 1.03 0.99
1900 2.15 1.17 0.96 1.10 0.98 1.02 1.15 1.14 1.14 1.05 1.01 1.06 1.14 1.13 0.95 1.10 1.16 1.07 1.15 1.01 1.13 1.01 1.16 0.97 1.01 1.08 1.05 1.12 0.93 1.13 1.12
2000
1.09 1.18 1.16 1.11 1.18 0.99 1.15 1.19 1.31 1.25 1.03 1.17 1.07 1.11 1.22 1.17 1.18 1.17 1.09 1.12 1.12 1.11 1.12 1.17 1.24 0.99 1.03 0.98 1.00 1.01
2100 2.91 1.14 1.11 1.09 1.09 1.31 1.10 1.11 1.00 1.28 1.01 1.19 1.19 1.05 1.05 0.95 0.96 1.00 1.12 1.17 1.06 1.09 1.08 1.14 1.23 1.08 1.03 1.14 1.06 0.99 1.07
2200
1.17 1.16 1.15 1.09 0.96 1.15 1.01 1.08 0.96 1.03 1.13 1.20 1.22 1.10 1.06 1.10 1.03 1.15 1.04 1.06 1.13 0.94 1.08 1.01 1.10 1.05 1.07 1.06 0.95 0.89
2300 2.11 1.15 1.14 1.05 1.18 1.12 1.11 1.18 0.91 1.09 1.12 0.95 1.23 1.12 1.02 1.16 1.07 1.06 1.20 1.10 1.26 0.99 1.12 1.12 1.05 0.95 1.10 1.08 1.19 1.03 0.94
2400 7.07 1.20 1.19 1.23 1.09 1.11 0.98 1.08 0.96 1.07 0.98 1.08 1.11 0.97 1.00 0.98 1.17 1.01 0.84 0.88 0.97 0.99 1.12 1.00 0.97 1.23 1.12 0.96 1.04 1.09 1.11
2500
1.12 0.95 1.21 1.07 0.86 1.05 1.13 1.17 0.94 1.00 1.16 1.15 1.08 1.03 1.01 1.09 1.09 1.01 1.18 1.04 0.98 1.06 0.82 1.09 0.89 0.91 0.99 1.01 1.08 0.95
2600
1.15 1.19 1.02 1.16 1.11 1.19 1.09 1.18 1.09 1.05 1.17 1.20 1.23 0.98 0.98 1.13 1.04 1.12 1.21 0.98 1.01 1.04 1.03 1.06 1.02 0.91 1.21 1.06 1.16 1.16
2700 1.98 1.02 1.12 1.09 1.09 0.95 1.01 1.19 1.00 1.03 0.95 1.11 1.06 0.94 1.20 0.89 1.14 1.02 1.01 0.98 1.15 1.00 1.06 1.27 1.02 1.24 0.97 1.07 0.92 1.07 1.00
2800
1.10 1.06 0.91 0.98 1.14 1.00 0.98 1.05 0.90 1.04 1.18 1.04 1.05 0.91 1.22 1.17 1.11 0.91 1.06 1.01 1.03 1.12 1.04 1.10 1.09 0.89 1.17 1.11 0.95 1.12
2900
1.11 1.00 1.08 1.10 1.09 1.08 1.10 0.93 1.17 1.14 1.09 1.19 1.10 1.11 0.87 0.98 1.20 1.07 1.12 1.11 1.16 1.04 0.99 0.99 1.03 1.20 0.93 1.05 0.95 1.05
3000
0.98 0.92 1.10 1.07 1.11 0.97 1.03 1.19 0.90 1.10 1.01 1.09 0.96 1.03 1.03 1.09 1.00 1.09 1.08 1.08 1.01 0.95 0.94 1.13 0.93 1.02 0.97 1.13 1.11 0.99

Distance (feet)

Table B.7: Near Repeat Thefts From Motor Vehicles, P-Values
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
0 X X X X X X X X X X
100 X X X ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
200 X X X X ... ... ... X X ...
300 ... X X ... X ... X ... X ...
400 X X ... X ... ... X ... X ...
500 ... X X X ... X ... ... X ...
600 X X X ... X ... X X X X
700 ... X X ... X ... X X ... X
800 X X X X ... X X ... ... X
900 ... X X X ... X ... ... X ...
1000 X X ... X X ... X X ... ...
1100 ... X X X X ... ... X ... ...
1200 ... X X X ... ... X ... ... ...
1300 ... X X X ... ... ... X ... X
1400 ... X X ... X X ... ... ... ...
1500 ... X X X ... ... ... ... X X
1600 ... X ... X ... ... ... X X X
1700 ... X ... X ... ... X X ... X
1800 X X X X X ... ... X ... X
1900 ... X ... X X X X ... ... X
2000 X X ... ... X ... ... ... ... ...
2100 ... ... X X ... X ... X ... ...
2200 ... X ... ... ... ... ... X X ...
2300 ... X X ... X X X ... ... ...
2400 ... X ... ... ... X X ... ... ...
2500 ... X X ... ... ... ... ... X ...
2600 ... X ... ... ... ... ... X ... ...
2700 ... X ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2800 ... X ... ... X ... X X ... ...
2900 X X ... ... ... ... ... X ... ...
3000 ... X X ... ... ... X X ... ...
Note: X indicates p-value of .05 or lower

10
X
...
...
...
X
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
X
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

11
X
...
...
...
...
...
X
X
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

12
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
X
X
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...

13
X
...
...
...
...
X
...
X
...
X
...
X
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

Time (days)
14 15 16 17
X X X X
... ... ... ...
... X X ...
X X ... ...
... ... X ...
X ... X ...
... ... X X
... ... ... X
X ... ... ...
X X ... X
... ... ... ...
... X ... ...
... ... X X
... ... ... ...
X X ... ...
... X X ...
... ... X ...
... X X ...
X ... X ...
X ... X ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...
X ... ... ...
... X ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... X ...
... X ... ...
... ... ... ...
... X ... ...
... ... ... ...
... ... ... ...

18
X
...
X
X
...
...
X
X
...
X
...
...
X
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...

19
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

20
X
...
X
...
X
...
X
...
X
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

21
X
...
X
...
X
...
X
X
X
...
...
X
...
X
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
X
...
...
...
...
X

22
X
...
...
...
X
X
X
X
X
...
X
X
X
...
...
...
X
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

23
X
...
...
X
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
X
X
X
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

24
X
...
...
...
X
X
...
...
X
X
...
...
X
...
...
X
...
...
...
X
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...

25
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

26
X
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
X
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...

27
X
...
...
...
...
...
X
X
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
X
...
X
...
X
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
X

28
X
...
...
...
X
X
...
X
...
...
X
X
...
X
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
X
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...

29
X
...
...
...
X
...
X
...
...
X
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X

30
X
...
...
...
...
X
X
X
...
X
...
...
...
X
...
X
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
X
X
...
...
...
...
...

Distance (feet)

Table B.8: Near Repeat Thefts From Motor Vehicles, Knox Ratios

Time (days)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
0
0 90.75 5.24 2.32 1.84 1.73 1.87 1.93 1.88 1.77 1.66 1.75 1.52 1.59 1.61 1.82 1.75 1.58 1.59 1.56 1.50 1.64 1.63 1.69 1.51 1.51 1.60 1.46 1.55 1.63 1.72 1.68
100 17.16 1.89 1.17 1.01 0.99 0.92 0.83 1.04 1.11 0.87 0.94 0.86 0.91 0.90 1.03 0.96 0.85 0.90 0.81 0.82 0.80 0.78 0.82 0.71 0.75 0.85 0.92 0.89 0.87 0.91 0.88
200 18.00 2.41 1.27 1.49 1.02 1.11 1.12 1.17 1.20 1.17 1.07 1.07 1.10 1.10 0.99 1.29 1.16 1.15 1.20 1.11 1.18 1.23 1.12 0.95 0.97 0.96 1.04 0.91 1.16 1.11 1.12
300 2.20 2.14 1.34 1.16 1.22 1.05 1.23 1.04 1.46 0.96 1.17 1.12 1.07 1.13 1.27 1.28 1.11 1.11 1.24 1.00 1.04 1.06 1.09 1.24 0.92 1.01 1.02 1.18 1.18 1.08 1.15
400 18.68 2.13 1.00 1.41 1.07 1.02 1.25 1.10 1.18 1.09 1.25 1.06 0.93 1.10 1.13 0.97 1.18 1.07 1.07 0.99 1.21 1.29 1.25 0.97 1.18 1.01 1.02 1.06 1.20 1.23 0.98
500 2.96 1.87 1.24 1.25 1.08 1.13 1.07 1.12 1.18 1.09 1.05 1.07 1.06 1.12 1.12 1.02 1.12 1.07 0.99 0.94 1.00 1.01 1.19 0.99 1.16 1.11 1.01 1.00 1.14 0.96 1.17
600 4.95 1.91 1.31 1.13 1.17 1.05 1.29 1.14 1.26 1.15 1.22 1.15 0.96 0.99 1.08 1.09 1.18 1.16 1.13 1.07 1.22 1.13 1.15 1.14 0.99 1.09 1.27 1.15 1.06 1.18 1.11
700 2.20 1.64 1.14 1.06 1.16 1.05 1.25 1.18 1.07 1.10 1.04 1.13 1.16 1.16 1.04 1.10 1.05 1.14 1.13 1.10 1.10 1.18 1.21 1.04 1.02 1.02 1.02 1.16 1.14 1.10 1.17
800 6.42 1.75 1.12 1.17 1.04 1.12 1.19 1.09 1.12 1.11 0.98 1.00 0.99 1.06 1.12 1.07 1.07 1.08 1.06 1.01 1.16 1.16 1.14 1.04 1.17 1.12 0.98 1.01 1.09 0.93 1.03
900 2.52 1.63 1.22 1.14 1.05 1.12 1.09 1.09 1.11 1.04 1.05 1.06 1.06 1.15 1.12 1.15 0.99 1.16 1.12 1.03 1.10 1.05 1.05 0.98 1.11 1.02 1.16 1.06 1.04 1.10 1.11
1000 3.38 1.46 1.08 1.12 1.20 1.06 1.10 1.15 1.04 1.04 0.94 1.08 1.01 1.01 1.06 1.07 1.07 1.03 1.03 0.92 1.02 1.05 1.16 1.02 0.91 1.04 1.13 1.04 1.08 1.10 0.98
1100 1.35 1.58 1.12 1.10 1.11 0.96 1.09 1.12 0.97 0.95 1.08 1.12 1.03 1.10 1.03 1.11 0.92 0.94 1.04 1.03 1.10 1.15 1.10 1.05 0.98 1.07 1.05 1.20 1.10 1.02 1.01
1200 1.39 1.39 1.14 1.18 1.05 1.02 1.12 1.07 0.98 1.08 1.03 1.06 1.07 1.13 1.04 1.08 1.08 1.11 1.14 1.03 1.16 1.00 1.10 0.98 1.12 0.96 1.05 1.09 1.00 1.03 1.00
1300 1.92 1.41 1.13 1.15 1.05 1.05 0.99 1.11 1.05 1.12 1.11 1.03 1.12 0.96 1.02 1.07 1.00 1.09 0.99 1.05 1.08 1.10 1.06 1.17 1.07 1.06 0.95 1.05 1.11 1.00 1.20
1400 2.46 1.39 1.17 1.06 1.08 1.11 0.96 1.08 1.06 0.99 1.10 0.98 1.08 1.05 1.08 1.12 1.00 1.05 1.08 1.05 0.98 1.03 1.06 1.05 1.03 0.98 1.04 0.98 1.02 0.96 1.02
1500 0.99 1.33 1.15 1.12 0.99 0.99 1.06 1.07 1.07 1.12 1.04 1.08 1.03 1.03 1.05 1.08 1.10 1.06 1.04 0.99 1.05 1.11 1.06 1.09 1.14 1.00 1.05 1.11 0.97 0.97 1.12
1600 0.51 1.24 1.07 1.07 1.06 1.04 1.01 1.10 1.11 1.08 0.99 1.01 0.99 0.99 1.07 0.99 1.13 0.98 1.01 1.01 0.99 1.06 1.09 1.11 1.00 1.04 1.05 1.05 1.09 0.98 0.99
1700 2.13 1.22 1.05 1.09 1.07 0.99 1.09 1.17 1.03 1.13 0.98 1.00 1.00 1.07 1.02 1.17 1.10 0.98 0.98 1.10 1.09 1.02 1.03 1.11 1.03 1.02 1.01 1.09 1.06 0.94 1.05
1800 3.45 1.28 1.10 1.07 1.07 0.99 1.01 1.09 1.02 1.09 1.01 1.05 1.07 1.01 1.08 1.04 1.08 1.02 1.03 1.06 0.95 1.01 1.12 1.02 1.01 0.95 1.08 1.01 0.98 1.00 1.05
1900 0.87 1.19 1.02 1.12 1.13 1.09 1.09 1.05 1.00 1.10 1.14 1.10 1.06 1.14 1.09 1.02 1.08 1.03 1.05 1.02 1.01 1.01 1.00 0.99 1.08 1.04 1.00 1.08 1.01 1.02 1.01
2000 3.19 1.17 1.04 1.04 1.09 1.04 1.06 1.01 1.04 1.00 1.01 1.03 1.06 1.00 1.03 1.03 1.02 1.03 0.98 1.11 0.96 1.04 1.04 1.04 1.11 0.99 0.99 1.01 1.02 0.98 1.03
2100 1.78 1.08 1.10 1.08 1.05 1.09 1.05 1.07 1.02 1.02 1.05 0.97 0.99 0.96 1.01 1.02 1.00 1.06 0.98 0.96 1.04 0.97 1.03 0.98 1.03 1.00 1.05 1.04 1.07 1.10 1.03
2200 1.62 1.20 1.03 1.06 1.00 1.05 1.04 1.10 1.07 0.99 0.92 1.02 0.98 1.06 1.10 1.07 1.04 1.01 0.98 1.05 1.00 0.98 1.02 1.09 1.04 1.01 1.04 1.11 1.10 1.03 1.06
2300 0.40 1.18 1.10 1.04 1.09 1.08 1.10 1.02 1.06 1.06 1.04 0.98 0.97 0.90 0.99 1.06 1.04 1.03 1.04 0.98 0.94 1.07 1.02 1.06 0.99 0.97 0.94 1.02 0.98 0.97 1.01
2400 0.84 1.15 1.03 1.06 1.04 1.08 1.08 1.04 1.00 1.04 1.00 1.05 1.06 0.98 1.05 1.06 1.02 1.01 1.02 0.99 1.04 0.98 1.05 1.04 1.00 0.97 1.03 1.06 1.02 1.07 1.07
2500 2.02 1.10 1.07 1.03 1.04 1.04 1.00 1.03 1.07 1.02 1.01 1.04 1.03 1.01 1.02 0.99 1.08 1.02 0.99 1.02 1.02 1.11 1.08 1.05 1.03 1.04 0.99 1.06 1.04 1.02 1.08
2600 0.38 1.10 1.01 1.05 1.01 1.03 0.96 1.08 1.04 0.95 0.92 1.00 1.10 1.04 0.96 1.08 1.00 0.99 0.94 0.97 0.98 0.95 1.05 1.00 1.05 1.03 1.03 1.04 0.99 1.02 1.03
2700 2.29 1.13 1.02 1.02 1.03 0.98 1.00 1.05 1.01 0.99 1.06 0.99 0.97 1.05 1.01 1.05 1.02 1.00 1.01 1.04 1.00 1.02 1.01 1.04 1.00 1.05 0.95 1.04 1.06 1.03 1.04
2800 0.64 1.12 1.01 1.00 1.07 0.94 1.06 1.11 1.00 0.98 1.00 1.00 1.03 1.01 1.00 1.09 1.03 1.04 1.08 0.96 1.02 0.96 1.05 1.00 1.12 1.03 0.97 1.07 0.98 1.05 1.02
2900 3.25 1.15 1.03 1.01 1.04 0.96 1.06 1.07 1.04 1.01 1.05 1.03 1.02 0.97 1.05 1.02 1.05 1.05 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.01 1.02 1.01 1.02 0.97 0.95 1.03 1.07 1.02 1.00
3000 1.00 1.11 1.11 1.03 1.01 0.99 1.06 1.12 1.01 1.02 1.06 0.96 1.03 0.97 1.01 1.01 1.01 1.02 0.99 1.03 1.00 1.05 0.95 1.03 0.97 1.00 1.04 1.06 0.96 1.07 0.99

