FROM LEGITIMACY TO LEARNING – HOW IMPACT MEASUREMENT
PERCEPTIONS AND PRACTICES EVOLVE IN SOCIAL ENTERPRISE-SOCIAL
FINANCE ORGANIZATION RELATIONSHIPS

Voluntas: International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations (2019)
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11266-018-00081-5
Saurabh Lall
Assistant Professor
School of Planning, Public Policy and Management
University of Oregon
slall@uoregon.edu

1

Keywords: Social Enterprise, Impact Measurement, Social Finance, Performance Measurement,
Program Evaluation
ABSTRACT
While the links between the fields of social enterprise and social finance appear apparent,
academic research on the relationship lags behind practice. This study examines how social
enterprises interact with social finance organizations in the context of impact measurement.
Through qualitative research with eight social enterprises and their respective funders, I find
evidence that both sides view impact measurement primarily as a means for establishing
legitimacy prior to engagement, and in the early stages of their relationship. These relationships
are hierarchical and rigid at early stages, but over time evolve into more collaborative
partnerships. Eventually, social enterprises embrace impact measurement as a tool for
organizational learning, and social finance organizations develop more empowering approaches
for impact measurement. The level of flexibility and the closeness of the relationship between
social finance organizations and social enterprises suggests important lessons for the
development of a more enabling use of impact measurement.

INTRODUCTION
The field of social enterprise has become an increasingly important topic of research
(Kerlin, 2010; Terjesen et al., 2016; Schneider, 2017) as nonprofit and management scholars
continue to study the potential of entrepreneurship as a mechanism for social and economic
development. Despite some disagreement at the margins, most scholars agree that social
enterprises have a dominant mission to create social value, while also generating sufficient
revenue to ensure financial sustainability (Young & Lecy, 2014; Dacin et al., 2011; Defourny &
Nyssens, 2010; Kerlin, 2010; Mair & Marti, 2006). In parallel, the field of social finance has
emerged as an approach to drive more capital to social enterprises, using a variety of existing and
new financial instruments such as impact investing (Glanzel & Scheurle, 2017), philanthropic
venture capital (Scarlata & Alemany, 2010) and venture philanthropy (Gordon, 2014). Nicholls
& Paton (2009) describe these fields as interdependent, and argue that they will co-evolve, since
either one can restrain or stimulate the other. Practitioners and policymakers concur with this
2

perspective, often placing their work in both fields. However, despite the growing recognition of
the interconnectedness of these fields, scholarly research appears to mainly focus on one side of
the equation (notable exceptions include Grimes, 2010; Miller et al., 2010; Nicholls & Pharaoh,
2008).
Social enterprise and social finance are intrinsically linked by their use of market-based
principles to achieve social (or environmental) objectives. Thus, producing measurable social
impact lies at the heart of this relationship, as acknowledged by some scholars studying both
phenomena. For instance, Nicholls and Pharaoh (2008) call for more refined impact
measurement practices that combine standardized quantitative reporting with qualitative
frameworks. Similarly, Grimes (2010) argues that “one of the primary ways that funding
relationships within the social sector make sense of organizational identities and come to
agreement about the missions and strategies of the funded organizations is through performance
measurement.” (pp.764).
While the measurement of financial performance is relatively straightforward, measuring
social impact is considerably more complex, and challenging to implement (Arena et al., 2015;
Ebrahim & Rangan, 2014). The topic has been extensively studied in the nonprofit sector (see,
for instance, Newcomer et al., 2013; Carman, 2011; Benjamin, 2010), and is starting to receive
more scholarly interest in social enterprise. Here, much of the literature can be classified into
three categories: (a) development and classifications of impact measurement approaches,
typologies, and toolkits (Arena et al., 2015; Bagnoli & Megali, 2011; Ebrahim & Rangan, 2010;
Bull, 2007); (b) a social accounting perspective (Nicholls, 2018; 2009; Manetti, 2014; Arvidson
et al., 2013); or (c) empirical studies of social enterprises attempting to measure their social
impact (Ormiston & Seymour, 2011; Lall, 2017). The relational aspect of impact measurement,
3

however, remains understudied, and it is to this area that this study aims to contribute. Since both
social enterprises and social finance organizations aim to create positive social impact through
the use of market-based approaches, it is likely that the measurement of this impact will illustrate
critical aspects of their relationships, and deserves at least as much attention as other aspects of
social enterprise and social finance. This study therefore focuses on the following research
question: How do the perceptions and practices of impact measurement among social enterprises
and social finance organizations evolve over the period of their relationship?
Scholars note that historically, social enterprises have been slow to adopt robust and
strong metrics, and measures have typically been less standardized (Lall, 2017; Arena et al.,
2015; Miller et al., 2010). It is argued that social enterprises that develop strong social
performance measurement methodologies are more likely to establish legitimacy and raise
capital from impact investors (Mair & Marti, 2006; Miller et al., 2010). In recent years, impact
measurement has become increasingly common as part of reporting requirements for impact
investors and other social finance organizations (JP Morgan Chase & GIIN, 2015). The practice
of impact measurement in social enterprise has even been a topic of opinion pieces in the popular
press, in outlets as prominent as Forbes (2017), Harvard Business Review (2013), and The
Guardian (2012). As Devin Thorpe, a journalist who covers the social enterprise field for Forbes
suggests, “Accountability, measuring the impact, is how you become an effective one (social
entrepreneur).” However, there is also growing concern over the burden these expectations place
on social enterprises and their ongoing operations (Dichter, Adams & Ebrahim, 2016), as well as
the potential for social enterprises adopting measurement approaches that are not appropriately
aligned with their missions (Ormiston & Seymour, 2011).

4

This study aims to contribute to the broader understanding of the relationship between
social enterprises and their funders through the lens of impact measurement, building on
foundational work by Arena et al., (2015), Nicholls & Paton (2009), Nicholls (2009), Grimes
(2010) and Miller et al., (2010). While research on these relationships remains limited, scholars
have spent considerable effort studying the relationships between nonprofits and donors (for
instance, see Mitchell, 2014; Carman, 2011; Benjamin, 2008; 2010), which offers several lessons
for the study of social enterprise and social finance. I use a multi-case study approach (Yin,
2011; Eisenhardt, 1989a), drawing on qualitative data collected through interviews, reviews of
internal reports and dashboards, and secondary sources, from eight social enterprises in the
energy access sector, as well as their funders. I analyze the data inductively using a temporal
bracketing strategy to look at adjacent periods of the relationship (Langley, 1991; Giddens,
1984) and identify potential mechanisms that structure these relationships at these different
stages. Based on the findings, I propose a process model that can help inform future empirical
and theoretical research.
The findings suggest that prior to engaging with each other, social enterprises and social
finance organizations typically consider only the external purposes of impact measurement, as a
way to appear legitimate to potential funders or stakeholders, or to be accountable to existing
stakeholders. Social enterprises are typically required to adopt some form of impact
measurement when they receive investment from social finance organizations, and the type of
measurement approach usually depends on the type of funder – with grant providers expecting
the most rigorous forms of impact measurement. At these early stages in the relationship, impact
measurement is primarily viewed as an accountability mechanism (Ebrahim, 2003; Eisenhardt,
1989b). Over time, as the relationship matures, social finance organizations start to recognize the

5

possible burden these practices may place on their investees, and social enterprises also feel
more empowered to express their views to their funders. Thus, we see the relationship take on a
more collaborative tone. Finally, we see that social enterprises eventually start to embrace the
use of impact measurement as one of their core organizational functions and integrate these
practices to help them better manage their social and business objectives. The study posits a
dynamic perspective of impact measurement perceptions and practice, that evolves as the
relationship between social enterprises and social finance organizations matures.
This study proceeds as follows: First, I briefly describe the range of impact measurement
approaches (such as program evaluation, performance measurement) commonly practiced by
social enterprises. As part of the literature review, I also synthesize important studies on donorgrantee and other funding relationships and identify key theoretical themes. Second, I describe
the research sample and qualitative approach employed. Third, I discuss my findings and
elaborate a process model based on this study. Finally, I discuss the major contributions of this
study, and provide some implications for research and practice.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Impact Measurement and Related Terms
Discussions on impact measurement have become a constant preoccupation of
practitioners and scholars in a number of social sectors such as nonprofits, philanthropy, and
increasingly, social enterprise (Ebrahim & Rangan, 2014; Gugerty & Karlan, 2018). Here, we
note that much like the concept of social enterprise, there are variations in terminology that
revolve around a core meaning that Ebrahim and Rangan (2014, p. 118), describe as
‘demonstrating results in addressing complex social problems such as poverty and inequality.’

6

Within the social enterprise and social finance sectors, “impact measurement” is the most
commonly used term, along with others like “social performance”, “impact reporting”, and
“social impact accounting” (MacIndoe & Barman, 2012; Ebrahim & Rangan, 2014; Nicholls,
2018). These terms typically cover a range of approaches that have their roots in program
evaluation and performance measurement in the public and nonprofit sectors (Hatry, 2013;
Ebrahim & Rangan, 2014).
While program evaluations attempt to understand causal relationships (e.g., did the use of
a product or service lead to an improvement in the lives of beneficiaries or customers?) using
experimental or quasi-experimental approaches (Gugerty & Karlan, 2018; Ebrahim & Rangan,
2014), performance measurement provides more ongoing operational information on program
activities and outputs (e.g., number of people served, number of products sold, etc.) (Hatry,
2013) To simplify the narrative in this study, I use the term “impact measurement” as an
umbrella term that includes both “program evaluation” and “performance measurement” when
discussing the concepts more generally and distinguish between these approaches in my analysis.
The Relational Nature of Impact Measurement
Early conceptualizations of the use of impact measurement (as previously described) in
organizations tended to be based on the Weberian ideal of bureaucracy, of a purely rational
organization that aims for maximum predictability (Weber, 1978), establishing criteria for
assessment, and measuring performance to make strategic choices for improvement (DahlerLarsen, 2012). In his analysis of what he refers to as the “Evaluation Society”, Dahler-Larsen
critiques this perspective as being useful as an analytical tool, but a largely unrealistic depiction
of organizational behavior. Instead, he proposes two models. The “learning organization” is
characterized by an organization’s emphasis on not just acquiring new information, but also
7

constantly self-correcting based on this information. Organizational actors use impact
measurement to acquire information from external actors and the environment, learn from it, and
adapt or modify their behavior accordingly. Thus, impact measurement is primarily considered a
tool for organizational learning.
The second model is the “institutionalized organization”, which recognizes that
organizations rely on legitimacy, support, and recognition from their external environment
(rooted in DiMaggio & Powell’s description of normative institutional isomorphism). In this
case, the practice of impact measurement takes on a symbolic or legitimizing role (as opposed to
the instrumental purpose of organizational learning), to attract support from, or to appease
powerful actors in the environment. Organizations may not actually use any of the information
collected through impact measurement but recognize the practice as a means of accountability or
a badge of legitimacy, consistent with DiMaggio & Powell’s (1983) description of institutional
isomorphism. Excessive use of impact measurement out of concern for this legitimation may
even undermine the organization’s effectiveness. For instance, a social enterprise may need to
allocate part of its scarce resources to measurement to fulfill a funder’s reporting requirements,
to the detriment of its operational mission. These distinctions are evident in Nicholl’s (2009)
description of ‘Blended Value Accounting’ in social entrepreneurship – corresponding to the
strategic functions of performance enhancement (i.e., the learning function), and acquiring
resources by demonstrating performance to stakeholders (i.e., the legitimacy function). Nicholls
argues that social entrepreneurs may interpret and adopt these different functions according to
the institutional context in which they operate. While these functions and models should not be
considered strict, or mutually exclusive, they serve as useful archetypes for exploring how and
why social enterprises and social finance organizations may use impact measurement in their

8

relationships. Additionally, they lead us to the relational perspective of impact measurement,
which is emerging as an important lens through which these practices can be studied (for
instance, see Newcomer et al., 2013; MacIndoe & Barman, 2012; Carman, 2011; Ebrahim,
2003).
Ebrahim (2003) argues that accountability is a relational concept and does not stand apart
from organizational relationships. Within the framework of nonprofit-donor relationships, the
dominant direction of the relationship is determined by the presence and use of accountability
mechanisms such as evaluation and performance measurement. He suggests that organizational
learning is more likely to occur when information systems are simple and flexible, rather than
elaborate and rigorous, and where the distance between nonprofits and their funders is
minimized, and the relationships less hierarchical. Newcomer et al. (2013) and Carman (2011)
find support for this perspective and find that nonprofits may actively detach the collection of
impact-related information from its use (which is primarily symbolic), consistent with the
institutionalized perspective described by Nicholls (2009) and Dahler-Larsen (2012).
Together, these studies suggest a generally consistent picture of impact measurement in
the nonprofit sector, but I note some important exceptions. While it is generally argued that
external actors (primarily funders) strongly influence the adoption and implementation of impact
measurement practices, recently scholars have criticized the relatively simplistic view of
organizational relations, arguing that it does not automatically extend to organizations that share
common goals and objectives, such as mission-driven nonprofits and funders, or social
enterprises and social finance organizations (Dicke, 2002; Carman, 2011; Bacq & Lumpkin,
2014). For instance, MacIndoe and Barman (2012), Arvidson & Lyon (2014) and Thomson
(2011) find evidence that nonprofit managers often use impact measurement for organizational
9

learning and management. Thus, we start to see a more nuanced perspective of impact
measurement, as both symbolic (to signal legitimacy) and instrumental (to enable organizational
learning).
In comparison to the extensive study of impact measurement in the nonprofit sector, the
topic has received relatively limited attention in social enterprise and social finance. Exceptions
include studies by Ormiston and Seymour (2011), Nicholls (2018; 2009), Lall (2017), and
Ebrahim & Rangan (2014). Ormiston and Seymour (2011) use three case studies from Latin
America and find that social enterprises often face a "mission measurement paradox", in which
their impact measurement approaches are largely driven by the informational demands of
funders, rather than their own informational needs. Nicholls (2018; 2009) examines these
practices through the lens of accounting practices and suggests that while some social enterprises
may use impact measurement to enhance their own performance, others primarily use it as an
accountability mechanism, to report to existing funders, or appear more legitimate to prospective
funders (consistent with DiMaggio & Powell’s description of coercive institutional
isomorphism). In contrast, Lall (2017) finds some evidence that the use of impact measurement
in social enterprise may be more related to the background of the social entrepreneur, and the
influence of peers (consistent with mimetic institutional isomorphism, DiMaggio & Powell,
1983), rather than social finance organizations. Finally, Gugerty & Karlan (2018) and Ebrahim
and Rangan (2014) take a normative approach, arguing that while all social enterprises should
aim to measure their performance in terms of inputs, activities, and outputs, not all should strive
to conduct full-scale program evaluations. They suggest that evaluations (as described
previously), are only valuable when organizations can clearly measure causal links between
outputs and outcomes, and when there is insufficient evidence that these links already exist.

10

Thus, they argue, in cases where there is already strong evidence that providing certain outputs
will lead to outcomes (e.g., provision of vaccines leading to reduced spread of a disease), there is
little additional benefit to be gained by conducting a program evaluation.
A critical dimension that is missing in these studies is the examination of the
relationships between social enterprises and the social finance organizations that fund them (as
most studies focus on either the enterprise or funder level). Additionally, past research has
largely examined impact measurement as a static phenomenon, and disregarded the temporal
dimension of the relationship, which may evolve over time. The goal of this study, which focuses
on how the perceptions and practices of impact measurement in social enterprise and social
finance change over the course of the relationship, is to not only to extend this stream of research
into a new domain, but to also introduce this temporal dimension by developing a process model
of the phenomenon. In the following section, I explain the exploratory approach that builds on,
and contributes to this existing body of literature.
METHODOLOGY
Research Design
Considering the exploratory nature of the research questions, extant research on the
nature of social enterprise-social finance organization relationships, and the intended
contributions of this study, a qualitative, I selected a case-based research design. I employed a
purposive (theoretically-driven) sampling approach (Eisenhardt & Graebner, 2007; Lincoln &
Guba, 1985; Eisenhardt, 1989a). I selected participants with specific characteristics that reflected
similarity in social mission and objectives, but differences in geography, products, business
models, and stage, that would illuminate different types of relationships with social finance

11

organizations. By focusing on a small group of organizations with common objectives, I could
pay more careful attention to the differences in actual practices, and identify nuanced themes of
learning, legitimacy, and relationship management. However, I acknowledge that a possible
limitation of this study is the lack of diversity in the sample, which may lead to possible sources
of positive bias in one direction. Twenty-four semi-structured interviews with social enterprise
founders and staff, funders, and other key stakeholders were used for data collection, and the
responses were transcribed and coded for analysis. Data collected from the interviews were
supplemented by a review of published academic and practitioner literature, as well as social
performance measurement reports, fundraising proposals, and other archival documents shared
by respondents.
Sampling
Recognizing that both social enterprise and social finance span a wide range of sectors
and impact objectives, a theoretically-driven, purposive sampling approach was considered
appropriate. In purposive sampling, participants with characteristics or features that are relevant
to the research questions are selected (Lincoln & Guba, 1985). Specifically, this study focuses on
social enterprises that share a common objective: providing rural off-grid households with access
to renewable energy, to ensure that the general types of impact measurement practices were
comparable.i I started by examining the investment portfolios of social finance organizations
that were members of the Global Impact Investing Network (GIIN), focusing on investors that
had made multiple investments in the access to energy sector. Applying a theoretical sampling
approach (Eisenhardt & Graebner, 2007), I identified twenty social enterprises that would
illustrate different types of relationships with a range of social finance organizations, based on
their geographic location of operations, their stage of operation, and the type of funding they
12

reported receiving. These social enterprises were invited to take part in the study via email. In
addition, I separately invited staff from seven social finance organizations that had invested in
these ventures to participate in the study. Eight social enterprises and four social finance
organizations agreed to participate in the study.
Similar to qualitative research by Grimes (2010) and Ahlstrom & Bruton (2006), the
eight social enterprises in the final sample represented a range of ages (from early-stage startups
to established firms operating for several years), geographies (operating in India, Uganda,
Tanzania, and Ghana), products (solar lanterns, microgrids, solar home systems), and business
models (retail sales, prepaid meters, and consumer financing). Therefore, it was possible to
examine how different social enterprises with a similar social mission managed their
relationships with different types of social finance organizations. Additionally, because these
enterprises were at different stages of development and operated in different locations, the nature
of these relationships (and the use of impact measurement) varied, and I was able to illuminate
certain aspects of these relationships, such as different expectations of grant providers compared
to debt and equity providers. Table 1 provides a summary of the eight social enterprises in this
study. To preserve the anonymity of the respondents, the enterprises are labelled SE1 to SE8.
Table 2 provides a summary of the four social finance organizations, labelled SFO1 to SFO4.ii
----Insert Table 1 about here
-------Insert Table 2 about here
13

---I conducted interviews with CEOs or founders in each venture (4 ventures had multiple
founders), as well as any staff persons in charge of impact measurement. Only two ventures
reported having a person dedicated to this task. Impact measurement was conducted by staff in
other departments, such as sales, marketing, or accounting in the remaining six ventures.
The social enterprises in this sample were supported by both public and private missiondriven investors that have supported them through grants, debt, or equity funding. Nearly all the
ventures had received grant funding at early stages in their development, from private or public
sources. Additionally, some of the larger (and older) ventures had received funding in the form
of debt or equity from social impact investors. As part of my research, I interviewed staff from
these different types of social finance organizations, to compare perspectives from both sides of
the relationship. Specifically, I conducted a total of eight interviews with staff from two private
social impact investors, one public sector grant provider, and one private foundation. Therefore,
the study had balanced representation from both types of social finance organizations – those that
expect some financial return, as well as those that do not expect financial returns. For each of the
funders, I interviewed the staff members that were responsible for the impact measurement and
evaluation activities within the organization and received the data and reports from the ventures.
These mission-driven investors required different levels of reporting on impact measurement
from their investees.
Data Collection
Interviews were conducted in English separately for each person, and each respondent
was assured of complete confidentiality in terms of their responses. I conducted a total of 24

14

interviews between September 2014 and February 2015. Overall, ten interviews were conducted
in person, eleven over Skype videoconferencing, and three over the phone. All 24 respondents
gave their consent to being recorded, so digital audio recordings of each conversation were saved
in a secure hard-drive, to enable detailed transcription of notes. The questions were neutrally
worded to minimize social response bias, and all respondents were ensured that nothing they said
would be attributable to them or the organization that they worked for. It appeared that all the
respondents were quite forthcoming and candid with their responses and seemed eager to discuss
their experiences and challenges with mission-related measurement. In several cases,
respondents volunteered to share internal documents and reports, and were also candid about
their perspectives on the requirements of different types of funders.
Each interview was between 40 and 70 minutes long, resulting in a total of 152 singlespaced pages of transcribed interviews (5-9 pages per interview). Interviews were semistructured, and provided some direction to respondents, but also allowed for additional openended responses to each basic question. Where possible, I triangulated responses provided by the
social enterprise respondents with information provided by their funders, as well as independent
sources, such as academic or practitioner studies and reports on their work. Additionally, six of
the eight social entrepreneurs also shared several internal documents, such as performance data
dashboards, quarterly and annual reports to funders, as well as fundraising documents that
incorporated social performance information. In total, these documents contained 230 pages of
text and tables, which complemented or expanded upon some of their interview responses.
Following guidance on qualitative data analysis by Eisenhardt (1989a), Miles &
Huberman (1994), and Strauss & Corbin (1990), I went back and forth between the data (from
interview transcripts and archival documents) and the emerging theoretical framework through
15

an iterative process, allowing first order themes and concepts to emerge. Taking a temporal
bracketing approach, which is appropriate for developing a process model (Langley, 1991), the
first-order themes related to how the purpose of impact measurement changed over the course of
the relationships between social enterprises and social finance organizations. After identifying
these first-order themes and stages in the relationship, I returned to the literature, and linked
these first-order constructs to the literature, to document the study’s contribution, and see where
they were consistent with past research, and where they diverged. In particular, the themes
related to legitimacy (in terms of projecting legitimacy to external stakeholders such as potential
funders, peers, and existing funders), and learning (in terms of using impact measurement to
inform programmatic decisions) emerged and were mapped across the different stages of the
relationship. Similar to Corley & Gioia (2004), I note that this process was far from linear, and
required multiple iterative steps to allow the dominant themes to emerge across four stages of the
relationship. In the following section, I explain the key themes across each stage, and illustrate
the dynamic nature of impact measurement perceptions and practices.
FINDINGS
The interactions between social finance organizations and social enterprises are complex
and multifaceted, involving several stages and dimensions related to both social and financial
value. I proceed with a discussion of findings, identifying key themes that emerged from the
interviews and archival research, and establishing a process model based on the data. I conclude
this section with some findings based on the overall analysis and discuss the implications for
theory and practice in the following section.

16

Stage 1: Pre-engagement
Before examining the relational aspect of impact measurement, I first examined broader
perceptions of impact measurement among the social enterprises and social finance organizations
in my sample. Several entrepreneurs argued that the inherent social value of the product or
service they provided (access to energy) was proven, and that measuring business indicators such
as sales figures was more important than specifically measuring their social impact. The social
impact was built into the model, and several entrepreneurs preferred a more practical approach
that is consistent with the normative framework proposed by Ebrahim & Rangan (2014):
“So, we are pragmatic. We assume that everyone who has access to energy… that creates
social impact. Now, we do a few things. The core parameter is just, I think, outreach.
How many systems do we install?” (SE6)

Several entrepreneurs remarked that the nature of the social enterprise model, which
included a natural feedback loop on performance from customers meant that additional social
impact measurement may not be particularly valuable. They noted the importance of anecdotes
and qualitative feedback in addition to business outcomes, but generally appeared to be less
enthused by the push for more systematic measurement of social impact, as the following quote
illustrates:
“But there is an element that I really like about all social enterprise models, and forprofit models, where if you’re not providing the customers with something that they value
enough to pay for, then you’ll go out of business. And, so, I really do see our revenue as a
major indicator of impact.” (SE8)

Interestingly, while this sentiment was broadly shared by the majority of entrepreneurs in
the sample, there was one exception. For one social entrepreneur who had previously worked in
17

a credit rating agency, the practice of measuring impact appeared to be a logical step in the
development of his venture. He explained,
“I worked at Standard and Poors (S&P Ratings), so I come from a ratings background, I
understand how benchmarking and clear quantifiable metrics make sense, and the
process can help you assess yourself better, but also position your company better
(competitive advantage) in context of your peers. (SE4)”

On the social finance organization side, perspectives were more nuanced. Several
respondents from these organizations concurred with the perspective that providing access to
energy had its own inherent value, and that the theory of change and the state of evidence linking
outputs to outcomes was much more developed compared to other sectors. For instance,
“I think for energy grantees specifically, there’s a strong theory of change. But I think for
something like private school education in India or Kenya might not. In the energy
sector, (SFO3) believes that we don’t need to measure how much value people are
getting from the lights, we think there’s a value inherent in the product, and the provision
of the product” (SFO3)

While social finance organizations were convinced of the inherent social value of
providing rural households with access to electricity, they also seemed to recognize that
standardization of measurement was important in overall development of the sector, and an
important aspect of legitimacy for the field. Thus, three of the social finance organizations in the
sample did not expect the social enterprises they supported to conduct full-scale program
evaluations and limited their reporting requirements to ongoing performance measurement. Most
respondents said their organizations were using or planning to use the standardized Impact
Reporting and Investment Standards (IRIS) measures developed by the Global Impact Investing
Network (GIIN), an influential industry association in the field. However, their reasons for
18

adopting these performance measures seemed to be mainly related to establishing legitimacy,
and accountability to their own investors, rather than making investment decisions.
“Once we get this data, we share it, for many reasons – accountability to our investors,
and internally for lessons learned… not much is fed back to the companies.” (SFO2)

One exception to this perspective was the prominent public sector social finance
organization, which provided grant financing to early-stage social enterprises. Unlike the other
funders in this sample, that expected some financial return on their investment, in addition to
social impact, the public sector funder provided only grant financing, aimed at helping nascent
social ventures test their operational model, and grow their operations. Therefore, social impact
was at the core of their funding strategy, but they moderated their expectations based on the
stage of the venture, and also the quality of the existing evidence base of the sector.
“The first stage is proof of concept/piloting, to test out your solution. Stage 2 is testing at
a larger scale, which is when we expect that you already have sufficient evidence to back
your impact claims, or are prepared to conduct (program) evaluation… once you have
that evidence, we move to stage 3 to help you scale up” (SFO1)

Overall, as the quotes illustrate, the broader perceptions of impact measurement appeared
to show less interest from the social enterprise side, and more from the social finance
organization perspective. However, even here, it seems like impact measurement had a more
symbolic role, as a legitimizing strategy, rather than anything else. Funders believed they needed
to have some sort of comparable data on their portfolio ventures to appear legitimate. Therefore,
we see that the initial impetus for impact measurement in the sector is driven by funders, who
appear to follow the “institutionalized” model described by Dahler-Larsen (2011). Impact
measurement is considered a necessary practice to appear legitimate in the social enterprise and
19

social finance sectors but did not appear to have as much importance for organizational learning.
Thus, we propose the following proposition:
Proposition 1: Prior to engaging with each other, social enterprises and social finance
organizations perceive impact measurement mainly as a symbolic practice that enables them to
appear legitimate to potential stakeholders, or to be accountable to existing stakeholders.

Stage 2: Hierarchical Relationship
Six of the eight social enterprises in this study were founded during between 2007-2012,
a period of growth in social finance and impact investing (Salamon, 2014; Nicholls & Pharaoh,
2008). Accordingly, most social enterprises first started to consider measuring their impact when
they started seeking financing from these organizations. Therefore, the start of the second stage
was typically triggered by an active exchange of information between a social enterprise and a
prospective funder, as part of the funder’s due diligence. Interviews with founders and staff of
the social enterprises revealed a relatively structured and hierarchical approach in developing
impact measurement approaches during the initial screening and due diligence phase of the
relationship with social finance organizations.
Early-stage social enterprises typically seek grant funding to conduct pilot tests and refine
their models, before seeking other sources of finance, such as debt or equity (Dees, 2008). Since
grant funders (such as the public-sector organization studied here) are purely motivated by a
desire for social impact, they usually require some form of impact measurement (as previously
discussed). The following quote illustrate the social enterprise perspective when initiating this
relationship:

20

“We applied for a grant, and we’re still waiting to hear, and we are very into that, we’ve
written into that grant, that we would hire an M&E officer… I’m not totally sure, at what
point, we would get into doing that without somebody telling us we have to.”

Social finance organizations described impact measurement as one of the initial points of
discussion when initiating a relationship with a potential social enterprise investee. Not
surprisingly, grant-providing social finance organizations also required the highest burden of
proof of social impact, often requiring rigorous impact evaluation studies and ongoing
performance reporting against specific milestones. As one respondent from the public-sector
social finance organization remarked,
“I would say, so we’re guided by a couple of things, when it comes to evaluation. One is
the stage, so what we ask our grantees is very specific to what stage they’re at, we’re not
going to ask for an RCT for stage 1, when they’re still developing their product. We’ll ask
for things at the stage 1 level, like, are there, is the beneficiary using the solution in the
way that you intended, is there good uptake, is there, good feedback loops for you for the
solutions you’re producing. Stage 2 is where we ask for a more rigorous evaluation,
sometimes in the form of an RCT.” (SFO1)

As social enterprises grow, and move past the proof of concept stage, they start to seek
financing in the form of debt or equity investment from other types of social finance
organizations, such as impact investors. While impact investors also typically expect their
investees to report on social performance, their expectations are typically more moderate, since
they also seek financial returns. Impact-related considerations are an important consideration for
these types of social finance organizations when conducting their initial screening and due
diligence, but are often developed in a collaborative manner, compared to the more directive
approach of grant providers. Respondents from impact investing funds described the process of

21

developing impact measurement practices in collaboration with their investees while initiating
these relationships:
“Once the deal gets to a certain stage, that is after it enters research stage and goes into
initial due diligence, and then it comes to me. Then I work with that initial portfolio team
member, outline initial thoughts on impact measurement, and after that deal is approved
by our portfolio leadership team for formal due diligence, we start to prepare out social
impact template – which walks portfolio team through an analysis of the deal’s potential
for impact, on the 3 dimensions of impact that (SFO3) looks for – breadth of impact,
which is scale, and depth of impact, which is at the individual level, how much change do
we expect to have in the lives of the end users, and how much this company focuses on
the poor, our target market in each of the geographies we’re serving.” (SFO3)

Thus, we see that impact investors tend to place considerable emphasis understanding the
operational model of the social enterprises they consider for investment, and also map out
possible measurement approaches when conducting due diligence. The social enterprises
interviewed, described this initial stage as a necessary part of establishing legitimacy with
potential investors.
“Our investors, including potential investors are all impact investors, so they believe in
social impact, you have to show them so it’s required by them. What we do for our
reporting, we have pro-actively done – what are the relevant social impact parameters,
and we have been sending them. The good thing is that impact investors haven’t come
back with long lists of other impact things they want to see” (SE6)

At these stages, the discussions are based more on concerns of oversight and
accountability. There is an expectation that if social enterprises want to receive investment, they
will need to adopt certain impact measurement practices:
“When grantees apply to (SFO1), and they have to fill out a longer full application that
they have to fill out, and we start off by taking things that they said they would do, in that
full application, and matching them to indicators that we think they will need for them to
22

get there. So, for example, if they say they want to sell to 2000 people, obviously the
indicator would be number of sales. because the indicators are pulled from the proposal,
so we don’t get a lot of push back on what the indicators are. I think the number behind
the milestone, maybe they’ll have pushback on, so for example.” (SFO1)

Social enterprises expect this type of engagement in general and accept that they will
need to measure their impact as a pre-condition of receiving funding from social finance
organizations. Several social entrepreneurs also mentioned that while they generally agreed with
their funders on the most relevant measures, there were also some impact-related measures that
they adopted only for reporting purposes. These mandatory reporting requirements were
considered less useful from an organizational learning perspective, and primarily used as a
means of accountability to funders.
“Yeah, there are some things – the gender of the client. Those are the kinds of things the
impact investor wants to see – we don’t use that…. Some other things – CO2 emissions,
megawatts of energy installed…. We just look at number of sales.” (SE4)

We see that the relationship between social enterprises and social finance organizations is
more hierarchical and formal at these early stages. However, despite this structure, it is
interesting to note that these processes are not completely top-down, and social enterprises are
able to negotiate reporting requirements with prospective funders, as this quote illustrates:
“So, when we did our series A round of financing, SFO Y (not interviewed) has its own
investment committee that comprises of social impact arm, so with their help, we zeroed
into 20 odd metrics that we report to all investors. So we’re not reporting different
metrics to all the investors. We did that planning as part of our Series A, that we’re going
to report only on these 20 metrics. It was more of a discussion than a recommendation
that we made to them, than they made to us.” (SE4)

23

In general, however, there is greater evidence of potential mistrust at early stages of the
relationship, prior to the investment and just after the investment has been made. Social finance
organizations tend to place considerable importance on due diligence, and spend time critically
examining the evidence on the theory of change of the potential investee. They also spend
considerable effort in ensuring that the social enterprise will be able to achieve measurable
impact targets, and link future payments to these targets. At early stages of the relationship,
funders often require social enterprises to spend substantial effort and resources to demonstrate
social impact, and the governance approach is more focused on oversight and ensuring that their
goals are aligned. The responses from social entrepreneurs reflected this perspective, and
acknowledged the extra effort required to fulfill reporting requirements:
“Funder SFO1 has approved us for a grant that has different stages, milestones before
they disburse the entire grant. We have to hit certain milestones before we get the next
structured vehicle of funding… roughly every 3 months, we have to give an M&E
(monitoring and evaluation) update. Things like number of total beneficiaries, % of
women, Co2 tonnage reduced through sales, number of clean energy days reduced… So,
we’ve hired an external firm to do that for us. We don’t have the capacity in house…”

It is clear that social enterprises and social finance organizations start to discuss impact
measurement and reporting requirements as soon as they initiate a potential relationship,
signaling its important role in establishing trust and setting up the accountability structure of the
relationship. However, we also note that not all funders are alike in their reporting requirements,
leading us to the following two propositions:
Proposition 2a: Social enterprises initially adopt impact measurement practices when they are
required to do so by socially motivated funders, despite expressing some reservations.
Proposition 2b: Social finance organizations differ in their impact measurement expectations
from the social enterprises they support. Grant providers typically expect more rigorous

24

practices such as program evaluations, while impact investors expect ongoing performance
measurement and reporting.

Respondents from social finance organizations were clear about the need to set
expectations for reporting early in the relationship. While social enterprises were typically able
to negotiate specific measures and targets that would be most relevant to them, funders still
established multiple oversight measures and required ongoing reporting through quarterly or
semi-annual reports. While it may be a step too far to suggest that this demonstrates lack of trust,
the findings show greater caution at this stage. Although funders do provide some flexibility to
their investees in proposing appropriate measures and targets (as discussed previously), reporting
requirements are quite structured, and reports are scrutinized more closely. Social enterprises in
the earlier stages of their investment relationships appeared to face a relatively high burden of
proof in terms of demonstrating their social performance. In stage 3, we see how these
relationships evolve over time, as social entrepreneurs gain confidence and funders become more
responsive and collaborative.
Stage 3: Collaborative Relationship
Since four of the social enterprises in this sample had ongoing, multi-year relationships
with their funders, I also uncovered several interesting longer-term elements of their
relationships. As social enterprises continued to work with their funders, more collaboration and
less hierarchy increasingly characterized these relationships. These longer-term relationships
often included multiple rounds of funding, once social enterprises were able to meet certain
social and financial milestones (as demonstrated through impact measurement and reporting).
The shift in mindsets also reflects a recognition among social finance organizations of the

25

potential burden that reporting requirements may place on their investees. In particular,
respondents noted that they wanted to start using the impact measurement reports as a way to
engage their investees in an ongoing conversation about managing their performance, rather than
purely as an accountability mechanism. As one respondent from a social finance organization
explained,
“We started to use them (impact measurement reports) as a tool in our day-to-day
engagement. We haven’t cut anyone off or anything, but had conversations like, is this
the best expansion strategy, can we rethink this business plan, and really have a back and
forth with them” (SFO3).

We also see social finance organizations shifting from the language of traditional
nonprofit and philanthropic relationships to the use of more business-oriented terms and
approaches. It appears that social finance organizations are more understanding of the preengagement perspective of social entrepreneurs, who often described their social and financial
objectives as intrinsically linked. Recognizing that the social enterprises they support are
primarily for-profit organizations that are selling socially-beneficial products, and rooted in the
institutional logic of the for-profit sector, we see social finance organizations adopting new
tactics to describe and discuss impact measurement:
“I remember very clearly when we were trying to pitch some impact measurement ideas
to one (social enterprise) investee, and I had written up this detailed one-page proposal.
And both our (investment) portfolio associate and manager at the time said that this
proposal wouldn’t fly. We had asked her a few weeks before to put together a wish list of
all the things she wanted to collect on impact, and they said, “we should be going by her
wish list, and trying to see what we can get her on that list and what capabilities we need.
I think if we had gone in from the entrepreneur’s perspective, they would have been more
receptive. They understand phrases like IT support, customer data, customer insights,
testing customer loyalty. So you’ve got to speak in their language about what the impact
work can really do for them.” (SFO2)

26

Additionally, social entrepreneurs appear to become increasingly confident in providing
feedback to their funders, as a form of upward accountability. Reviews of funder reports,
performance dashboards, and other relevant documents offer interesting insights to ongoing
relationship between social enterprises and their funders. For instance, some social enterprises
started to use these reports as mechanisms to provide more feedback to their funders, in terms of
asking for additional support or capacity. One social entrepreneur called for more active
engagement from the funder in an annual performance report (submitted in the third year of the
engagement period):
“An additional way (funder) SFO X (not interviewed) can add value to its investees
would be in taking more active role in the organizations. A condition for an F4 grant
would be for an F4 representative to be an observer on the board of directors. The
representative should then be invited to attend board meetings… the board observer
should be tasked by SFO X to challenge the (investee) organization on its thinking and
ensure the organization is testing assumptions and adequately testing multiple potential
solutions simultaneously…”

These findings suggest that social finance organizations may use impact measurement as
an accountability mechanism for social enterprises at early stages of their relationship, while the
enterprises themselves do not find these practices particularly useful. Once the social enterprisesocial finance organization relationship matures, we see a change in attitudes on both sides.
Social finance organizations demonstrate greater understanding of the potential burdens these
reporting requirements place, and shift to a more enabling and empowering use of social impact
measurement. Additionally, one of the most interesting findings in the more mature investorinvestee relationships was the level of comfort that the entrepreneurs felt with their investment
officers in providing feedback and co-managing their efforts towards shared social objectives.
The third stage of the relationship is triggered by the increased confidence on the part of social
27

enterprises as they start to meet agreed-upon milestones, and greater understanding of investee
perspectives on impact measurement by social finance organizations. The lack of hierarchy and
closeness in a mature relationship leads us to the following two propositions.
Proposition 3a: As the relationship matures, social finance organizations start to acknowledge
the possible burden that certain impact measurement practices may place on social enterprises,
and shift to a more enabling and empowering approach.
Proposition 3b: Social enterprises grow in confidence as the relationship matures and appear to
be more comfortable in providing feedback to their funders, as a form of upward accountability.

Stage 4: Embracing Organizational Learning
A final theme that emerged from the research relates to the shift in opinions on impact
measurement by social enterprise founders and staff over time. As social enterprises start to work
more closely with their funders and integrate these measurement practices into their operations,
they used reports to existing funders to demonstrate stronger legitimacy to other potential
funders. For instance, one entrepreneur negotiated reporting requirements with prospective
funders using the past performance reports with their existing funders.
“We’re taking that data to potential funders, using it for advocacy efforts around solar
tariff reductions with governments, and building partnerships with locally based
organizations (nonprofits and NGOs)” (SE3)

Additionally, multiple social entrepreneurs mentioned how they used several of the
measures required by investors to also balance their social and financial objectives and had
integrated it into existing practices. Social enterprises started to include this information into
managing staff, developing strategy that balanced their social and financial needs, and broader
organizational learning.
28

“One of the measures was the percentage of women working at senior management
levels – we never measured that, so I started to think about it after this (impact
measurement) process. So now I’m proactively trying to recruit more women at senior
level positions because I think it’s important for us as a company.” (SE4)

Respondents that had longer-term established relationships with social finance
organizations noted that they considered impact measurement as a natural part of doing business.
Thus, we see these measurement practices taking on more of an empowering, rather than
monitoring role as social enterprises started to take more ownership and integrate impact
measurement into core business operations.
“I hear from people in my own sector, measurement is not that easy, and it takes time
and money and resources, and yes, it does, but if you can define a set (of measures) that
makes sense from a strategic perspective for your company, that is something you have to
do to succeed. If you don’t measure, how do you know how well you are performing?”
(SE4)

These findings lead us to the final proposition about the evolution of impact measurement
perceptions and practices:
Proposition 4: Eventually, social enterprises integrate and adapt impact measurement practices
required by funders to their own needs, using it for the more instrumental purpose of
organizational learning.

Process Model
Following the approach of Corley & Gioia (2004), I elaborate these different stages into a
process model in Figure 1, illustrating the different stages, and also the factors that may drive the
progression between stages. At the earliest stages, prior to any sort of actual engagement, both
social enterprises and social finance organizations take a legitimacy-driven perspective of impact
29

measurement. There is little-to-no internal use of impact measurement information, and most
social enterprises only start to adopt these practices because they are encouraged or required to
do so by social finance organizations as part of due diligence and as a pre-condition for receiving
funding. The second stage is therefore characterized by downward accountability, with social
enterprises generating impact measurement reports (indicated by the green arrow in stage 2) at
the behest of their funders (including different forms of measurement practice, depending on the
type of funder). However, as social enterprises grow in confidence, and meet certain
performance milestones, they start to exert more upward accountability through impact
measurement reports – often asking their funders for additional resources and support and
justifying these requests using performance reporting. Funders also start to become more
responsive and accommodating, and the third stage is characterized by a more collaborative
relationship (indicated by the green arrows in stage 3). Finally, just as funders acknowledge the
social enterprise perspective in the third stage, social enterprises start to recognize and internalize
impact measurement in the fourth stage. They start to use impact reporting for organizational
management and making programmatic decisions (as indicated by the curved green arrow in
stage 4). Ultimately, we see a shift in perspectives towards organizational learning in the fourth
stage.
-----------------Insert Figure 1 about here
------------------

30

CONCLUSION & DISCUSSION

In light of the rapid and interlinked growth of social enterprise and social finance around
the world, I argue that there is a compelling argument to study both phenomena together and
examine the links between organizations in both categories. Social enterprises increasingly rely
on a diverse range of sources of capital to fund their growth; and social finance organizations
spend considerable effort in identifying, screening, and assessing social enterprises as potential
investment targets. Given the focus on a shared social mission, measuring social impact is a
critical component of this relationship (Glanzel & Scheurle, 2017; Grimes, 2010; Miller et al.,
2010). Understanding how social enterprises and their funders consider and use impact
measurement as a mechanism to develop and manage their relationships, as well as their own
performance can help inform scholarly research as well as practice. This study fills a gap in the
literature by focusing on the relational aspect of impact measurement in the field and including a
temporal dimension that illustrates how the perceptions and practices change.
By examining a sample of eight social enterprises in the energy access sector and the
social finance organizations that fund them, the study finds that social enterprise-social finance
organizations perceive and use impact measurement in different ways across the different stages
of their relationships. Some important themes emerged from this study. First, there is a stark
contrast in perceptions of impact measurement among social enterprises and social finance
organizations prior to engaging with each other, compared to those in more mature relationships.
Initially, both types of organizations tend to view impact measurement primarily as a means to
appear legitimate or credible (i.e., external-facing use), consistent with Dahler-Larsen’s (2012)
depiction of the “institutionalized organization” perspective. In some ways, this is also consistent
with the larger body of literature on nonprofit-donor relations, in which nonprofits may actively
31

detach the collection of impact-related information from its use (Ebrahim, 2003; Newcomer,
2013; Carman, 2011).
However, it is important to recognize that these perceptions do not stay constant. In more
mature relationships, both types of organizations recognize the potential for impact measurement
to inform internal learning and decision-making, consistent with the “learning organization”
perspective. Here, we find evidence that social enterprises and their funders evolve into a less
hierarchical relationship over time, as described in Ebrahim’s (2003) recommendations for
practice. Ultimately, we find that both social enterprise and social finance organizations learn
from each other, and their perceptions are shaped by this closer relationship. Social finance
organizations start to recognize the concerns of social enterprises, while social enterprises
ultimately recognize some of the benefits of impact measurement for their own organizational
learning. While past research has typically assumed that impact measurement was primarily
about either establishing legitimacy or supporting organizational learning, this study contributes
to this body of literature by suggesting that the purpose and perceptions of impact measurement
actually change from legitimacy to learning. The study also finds that these changes are driven
by the evolving relationships between social enterprise and social finance organizations. By
illustrating this process model, the study also argues for a more balanced perspective of impact
measurement in the social enterprise field, that acknowledges the relational aspects of the
phenomenon. Here, we see that while social enterprises and social finance organizations
resemble Dahler-Larsen’s “institutionalized organizations” at the outset, they eventually appear
more consistent with the “learning organization” model at later stages of the relationship, as
social finance organizations use impact measurement in a more enabling way, and social
enterprises gain more confidence in negotiating with their funders. The final stages of the study

32

are consistent with some of the past research on the nonprofit sector (notably Arvidson & Lyon,
2014; Thomson, 2011), but offers a new dimension by illuminating the process model through
which these changes occur.
As is common with many qualitative research projects, this study relies on a small sample
of cases, which limits its generalizability. As discussed, this study focused on eight social
enterprises in one sector, and a small group of funders. Therefore, I caution against generalizing
too strongly to other sectors, or to the broader social enterprise-social finance landscape. Rather,
I suggest this study represents an initial, exploratory step in studying the interactions of social
entrepreneurs and social finance organizations. As a first step in examining this relationship, this
study offers several implications for theory and practice, as well as potential directions for
further research. The findings from this study are therefore not only relevant to the field of social
enterprise, but also the broader study of organizational relationships that demonstrate similar
power dynamics. Additionally, they offer a new critical perspective on impact measurement,
with some lessons for organizational learning.
This study makes two important contributions to practice: First, I note the lack of
involvement by social enterprises in determining the measurement standards against which they
are required to report. In most cases, social enterprises were offered a menu of reporting
measures from which to choose. Therefore, while social enterprises do have some flexibility in
selecting measures that are appropriate for them, it is likely that social enterprises may initially
find the practices burdensome and less relevant for them. As practitioners continue to develop
new measurement practices, as well as update existing ones, I suggest that they make greater
efforts to include social entrepreneurs in the process.

33

Additionally, the study illustrates the collaborative nature of the relationship between
social enterprises and their funders at later stages, which is quite distinct from similar findings in
the field of traditional philanthropy. Purely philanthropic funders tend to provide more top-down
guidance on accountability mechanisms and are less flexible in allowing their grantees to select
measures that are appropriate to them (Newcomer et al., 2013; Benjamin, 2010; Ebrahim, 2005;
2003). These findings suggest that philanthropic funders in the nonprofit sector may learn from
the social finance organizations and their more “empowering” use of social performance
measurement.

34

References
Alkin, M. C. (Ed.). (2004). Evaluation roots: Tracing theorists' views and influences. Sage.
Arena, M., Azzone, G., & Bengo, I. (2015). Performance measurement for social enterprises.
VOLUNTAS: International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations, 26(2),
649-672.
Ahlstrom, D., & Bruton, G. D. (2006). Venture capital in emerging economies: Networks and
institutional change. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 30(2), 299-320.
Bacq, S., & Lumpkin, G. (2014). Can social entrepreneurship researchers learn from family
business scholarship? A theory-based future research agenda. Journal of Social
Entrepreneurship, 5(3), 270-294.
Bagnoli, L., & Megali, C. (2011). Measuring performance in social enterprises. Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 40(1), 149-165.
Baum, J. A., & Silverman, B. S. (2004). Picking winners or building them? Alliance, intellectual,
and human capital as selection criteria in venture financing and performance of
biotechnology startups. Journal of business venturing, 19(3), 411-436.
Benjamin, L. M. (2008). Account space: How accountability requirements shape nonprofit
practice. Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 37(2), 201-223.
Benjamin, L. M. (2010). Mediating accountability: How nonprofit funding intermediaries use
performance measurement and why it matters for governance. Public Performance &
Management Review, 33(4), 594-618.
Bosma, N., Terjesen, S. A., Schøtt, T., & Kew, P. (2016). Global Entrepreneurship Monitor 2015
to 2016: Special Report on Social Entrepreneurship. Available at SSRN.
Carman, J. G. (2011). Understanding evaluation in nonprofit organizations. Public Performance
and Management Review, 34(3), 350–377.
Corley, K. G., & Gioia, D. A. (2004). Identity ambiguity and change in the wake of a corporate
spin-off. Administrative science quarterly, 49(2), 173-208.
Dacin, M. T., Dacin, P. A., & Tracey, P. (2011). Social entrepreneurship: A critique and future
directions. Organization science, 22(5), 1203-1213.
Dahler-Larsen, P. (2011). The evaluation society. Stanford University Press.
Dees, J. G. (2008). Philanthropy and enterprise: Harnessing the power of business and social
entrepreneurship for development. Innovations: Technology, Governance, Globalization,
3(3), 119-132.
Defourny, J., & Nyssens, M. (2010). Conceptions of social enterprise and social entrepreneurship
in Europe and the United States: Convergences and divergences. Journal of social
entrepreneurship, 1(1), 32-53.
Dichter, S., Adams, T., & Ebrahim, A. (2016). The power of lean data. Stanford Social
Innovation Review, Winter.
35

Dicke, L. A. (2002). Ensuring Accountability in Human Services Contracting Can Stewardship
Theory Fill the Bill? The American Review of Public Administration, 32(4), 455-470.
DiMaggio, P., & Powell, W. W. (1983). The iron cage revisited: Collective rationality and
institutional isomorphism in organizational fields. American Sociological Review, 48(2),
147-160.
Ebrahim, A., & Rangan, V. K. (2014). What Impact?. California Management Review, 56(3),
118-141.
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989a). Agency theory: An assessment and review. Academy of management
review, 14(1), 57-74.
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989b). Building theories from case study research. Academy of management
review, 14(4), 532-550.
Eisenhardt, K. M., & Graebner, M. E. (2007). Theory building from cases: Opportunities and
challenges. The Academy of Management Journal, 50(1), 25-32.
Giddens, A. (1984). The constitution of society. Cambridge University Press
Glänzel, G., & Scheuerle, T. (2016). Social impact investing in Germany: Current impediments
from investors’ and social entrepreneurs’ perspectives. VOLUNTAS: International
Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations, 27(4), 1638-1668.
Grimes, M. (2010). Strategic sensemaking within funding relationships: The effects of
performance measurement on organizational identity in the social sector.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 34(4), 763-783.
Gugerty, M. K., & Karlan, D. (2018). The Goldilocks Challenge: Right-Fit Evidence for the
Social Sector. Oxford University Press.
Jing, Y. (2012). From Stewards to Agents? Intergovernmental Management of Public-Nonprofit
Partnerships in China. Public Performance & Management Review, 36(2), 230-252.
Kelly, P., & Hay, M. (2003). Business angel contracts: the influence of context. Venture Capital,
5(4), 287-312.
Kerlin, J. A. (2010). A comparative analysis of the global emergence of social enterprise.
VOLUNTAS: international journal of voluntary and nonprofit organizations, 21(2), 162
Lall, S. (2017). Measuring to Improve Versus Measuring to Prove: Understanding the Adoption
of Social Performance Measurement Practices in Nascent Social Enterprises.
VOLUNTAS: International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit Organizations, 1-25.
Lambright, K. T. (2008). Agency theory and beyond: Contracted providers' motivations to
properly use service monitoring tools. Journal of Public Administration Research and
Theory, 19(2), 207-227.
Langley, A. (1999). Strategies for theorizing from process data. Academy of Management
review, 24(4), 691-710.
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry (Vol. 75): Sage.
36

MacIndoe, H., & Barman, E. (2013). How organizational stakeholders shape performance
measurement in nonprofits: Exploring a multidimensional measure. Nonprofit and
Voluntary Sector Quarterly, 42(4), 716-738.
Mair, J., & Marti, I. (2006). Social entrepreneurship research: A source of explanation,
prediction, and delight. Journal of world business, 41(1), 36-44.
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A.(1994). Qualitative data analysis: An expanded sourcebook: Sage.
Miller, T. L., Wesley, I., & Curtis, L. (2010). Assessing mission and resources for social change:
An organizational identity perspective on social venture capitalists' decision criteria.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 34(4), 705-733.
Mitchell, G. E. (2014). Why will we ever learn? Measurement and evaluation in international
development NGOs. Public Performance and Management Review, 37(4), 605–631.
Mudaliar, A., Schiff, H., & Bass, R. (2016). Annual Impact Investor Survey. In: New York:
Global Impact Investing Network.
Newcomer, K., Baradei, L. E., & Garcia, S. (2013). Expectations and capacity of performance
measurement in NGOs in the development context. Public Administration and
Development, 33(1), 62–79.
Nicholls, A. (2010). The legitimacy of social entrepreneurship: reflexive isomorphism in a pre‐
paradigmatic field. Entrepreneurship theory and practice, 34(4), 611-633.
Nicholls, A. (2008). Social entrepreneurship: New models of sustainable social change: OUP.
Nicholls, A. (2009). ‘We do good things, don’t we?’:‘Blended Value Accounting’in social
entrepreneurship. Accounting, organizations and society, 34(6), 755-769.
Nicholls, A. (2018). A General Theory of Social Impact Accounting: Materiality, Uncertainty
and Empowerment. Journal of Social Entrepreneurship, 9(2), 132-153.
Nicholls, A., & Paton, R. (2009). Emerging resource flows for social entrepreneurship;
theorizing social investment. Oxford: Skoll Centre for Social Entrepreneurship.
Nicholls, A., & Pharoah, C. (2008). The landscape of social investment: A holistic topology of
opportunities and challenges. Oxford: Skoll Centre for Social Entrepreneurship.
Ormiston, J., & Seymour, R. (2011). Understanding value creation in social entrepreneurship:
The importance of aligning mission, strategy and impact measurement. Journal of social
entrepreneurship, 2(2), 125-150.
Salamon, L. M. (Ed.). (2014). New frontiers of philanthropy: A guide to the new tools and new
actors that are reshaping global philanthropy and social investing. Oxford University
Press, USA.
Scarlata, M., & Alemany, L. (2010). Deal structuring in philanthropic venture capital
investments: Financing instrument, valuation and covenants. Journal of Business Ethics,
95(2), 121-145.

37

Schneider, A. (2017). Social Entrepreneurship, Entrepreneurship, Collectivism, and Everything
in Between: Prototypes and Continuous Dimensions. Public Administration Review,
77(3), 421-431.
Shadish, W. R., Cook, T. D., & Leviton, L. C. (1991). Foundations of program evaluation:
Theories of practice. Sage.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of qualitative research (Vol.15): Newbury Park, Sage.
Terjesen, S., Bosma, N., & Stam, E. (2016). Advancing public policy for high‐growth, female,
and social entrepreneurs. Public Administration Review, 76(2), 230-239.
Thomson, D. E. (2011). The role of funders in driving nonprofit performance measurement and
use in strategic management. Public Performance and Management Review, 35(1), 54–
78.
Thorpe, D. (2017). How Social Entrepreneurs Begin To Measure Impact. Forbes. Retrieved from
https://www.forbes.com/sites/devinthorpe/2017/02/26/how-social-entrepreneurs-beginto-measure-impact/#5b0f0b3b5787 on June 20, 2017
Van Puyvelde, S., Caers, R., Du Bois, C., & Jegers, M. (2012). The governance of nonprofit
organizations: Integrating agency theory with stakeholder and stewardship theories.
Nonprofit and voluntary sector quarterly, 41(3), 431-451.
Van Slyke, D. M. (2006). Agents or stewards: Using theory to understand the governmentnonprofit social service contracting relationship. Journal of Public Administration
Research and Theory, 17(2), 157-187.
Weber, M. (1978). Economy and society: An outline of interpretive sociology (Vol. 1). Univ of
California Press.
Yin, R. K. (2011). Applications of case study research. Sage.
Young, D. R., & Lecy, J. D. (2014). Defining the universe of social enterprise: Competing
Metaphors. VOLUNTAS: International Journal of Voluntary and Nonprofit
Organizations, 25(5), 1307-1332

38

Table 1: An Overview of Social Enterprises in the Study
SE1
1994

SE2
2007

India
(Southern)

India
(Northern,
Eastern)

Technology

Solar Home
Systems

Solar
Lanterns

Business
Model

Sell
households
systems with
credit from
local banks

Sell lanterns
through rural
distribution
and retail
network

Sell lanterns
through rural
distribution
and retail
network

Founding
Team

1 local,
(educated in
US)

2 expatriate
(US)

Types of
Funders

Foundations,
Public
Sector
Funder

1 expatriate, 2
local
(educated in
US)
Private Social
Impact
Investors,
Private forprofit investor

Year of
Founding
Operating
Geography

2008

SE3
2008

2011

SE6
2011

SE7
2012

2014

Global (India,
Africa, Latin
America,
Southeast
Asia)
Solar Lanterns

India (Bihar),
Africa
(Uganda,
Tanzania)

India

Uganda

India

Ghana

Biomass and
Solar
Microgrids
Charge
households
and
microbusiness
es monthly fee
for electricity
access
All local
founders,
educated in US

Solar
Microgrids

Solar Home
Systems

Solar Home
Systems

Solar Home Systems

Charge
households and
microbusinesses
monthly fee for
electricity
access

Provide
credit to
households
to purchase
solar home
systems

Provide credit
to households
to purchase
solar home
systems

Provide credit to
households to
purchase solar home
systems

2 expatriate
(US), 1 local

1 expatriate
(Dutch)

3 expatriate
(US/Canada)

2 expatriate (US,
Australia)

Foundation,
Public Sector
Funder

Public Sector
Funder,
Foundations

Foundations,
Public
Sector
Funder

Private Social
Impact
Investor,
Foundations

Foundations, Private
Social Impact
Investor

Public Sector
Funder,
Private Social
Impact
Investors,
Foundations,

SE4

SE5

SE8

39

Table 2: An Overview of Social Finance Organizations in the Study

Operating
Geography

Type of Funding
Offered to Social
Enterprises
Type of
Organization

SFO1
Asia, Sub-Saharan
Africa, Latin
America

SFO2
India, East Africa,
West Africa, Latin
America

SFO3
Global (India, SubSaharan Africa, Latin
America, Southeast Asia)

SFO4
Global (India, SubSaharan Africa, Latin
America, Southeast Asia)

Grants

Equity Investments,
Debt Investments

Equity Investments, Debt
Investments

Public Sector
(Bilateral Funding
Agency)

Social Impact
Investing Fund

Social Impact Investing
Fund

Grants, Program Related
Investments (Equity or
Debt)
Private Foundation

40

Figure 3: Process Model for Impact Measurement Perceptions and Practices

i

“Access to Energy” (IRIS, 2016) is one of the older and more prominent areas of social enterprise and social finance activity (with over $7 billion in invested),
second only to microfinance (Mudaliar et al., 2016).
ii
Due to the small sample and the relatively high profile of the funders, I am unable to provide too much information about their organizations without
revealing their identities.

41

