Rationality of the Capital Market: Capitalistic System vs. Islamic System

Md. Mahmudul Alam*
School of Economics, Finance & Banking (SEFB)
College of Business (COB)
Universiti Utara Malaysia (UUM)
06010 UUM Sintok, Kedah, Malaysia
E-mail: rony000@gmail.com
Tel: +601-82467050

Chowdhury Shahed Akbar
Southeast Bank Limited
Eunoos Trade Center
51-52 Dilkusha C/A, Dhaka, Bangla-desh
Email: akbar.chowdhury@yahoo.com

* Corresponding Author

Citation Reference:
Alam, M.M., Akbar, C.S. 2015. Rationality of the Capital Market: Capitalistic System
vs. Islamic System, International Journal of Behavioural Accounting and Finance.
Vol. 5(3-4), pp. 279-297. [Online Link]

This is a pre-publication copy.
The published article is copyrighted by the publisher of the journal.

1

Rationality of the Capital Market: Capitalistic System vs. Islamic System
Abstract
Efficient Market Hypothesis (EMH) is founded on the theory of expected rationality but the
theory of behavioural finance concludes that stock market investors are quasi-rational.
Therefore, under the capitalistic system, the efficient markets have already failed to protect
the rights of investors that have led to chronic capital market crashes and failure to achieve
efficiency, justice, fairness, accountability, fair distribution of benefits, and a rational
behaviour among investors. However, recently, Islamic financial institutions and markets
have been emerging, which stand on the Shariah provision – the guided way to behave
rationally or guided rationality. Based on the empirical experiences and evidences of both
market systems, this paper discusses and compares the performances of the markets under the
theoretical arguments of “rationality”, “quasi-rationality”, and “guided rationality”. This
paper suggests that capital market based on guided rationality under the Islamic System can
be a better alternative over the conventional market system.
Key Words: rational expectation; efficient market hypothesis; EMH; random walk model;
behavioural finance; guided rationality; quasi-rationality; Islamic capital market;
Islamic finance; Shariah; Mudaraba; sukuk; zakaah
JEL Classification: G11; P1; P47; P5
1. Introduction
The theory of adaptive expectations states that the expectations about a variable are based on
the past values of that variable and it changes slowly over time. In the 1960s, economists
assumed that adaptive expectations are the foundation of decision among the economic
agents. However, in reality, people consider all relevant data when deciding on an
expectation about a variable because the variable may be affected by many other variables.
Moreover, expectations are not fixed, but vary and change very quickly. Thus, most of the
economists believe in a more realistic model of expectations, rational expectations, and not
adaptive expectations. Rational expectations are formed using all available information to
make the best possible forecast which is also known as the optimal forecast.
There is a strong implication of rational expectations in the capital market. In the
market, a better expectation gives better decisions to beat the competition. The theory of
Efficient Markets Hypothesis (EMH) is based on the theory of rational expectations which
assumes that asset or stock prices reflect all available information of the company. People
who trade in stocks have an incentive to use all of the past information to forecast future
earnings, sales, market share, new products, etc. to make a profit. Thus, the price set by
buyers and sellers reflects all of this information. Moreover, under the theory of EMH, a
stock price always returns to an equilibrium point that reflects the expected future earnings
and risks. If the stock is earning an abnormally high return, people will buy the stock and bid
up the price until the price drives down the returns to an equilibrium level. Similarly, if the
stock is earning an abnormally low return, people will sell the stock and drive down its price
until the price returns back to an equilibrium level. However, expectations are not always
rational. Whilst making decisions, people rarely pause to gather background information thus
they are not always informed about the alternative options available to them. The EMH also
considers this issue and argues that in the market, it is not necessary for everyone to use all
the available information to determine the price of a security, but that if enough buyers and
2

sellers are behaving rationally, the price will reflect that. Thus, the market has a near perfect
reflection of stock prices indicating correct market fundamentals. The one rational individual
in the market always overwhelms the influence of the irrational ones on the stock prices.
On the other hand, starting in the 1970s, a group of researchers discovered some
return patterns in the stock markets that were inconsistent with the EMH. This is known as
the theory of behavioral finance which typically weakens rationality assumptions with a view
towards explaining "market anomalies." In contrary to the assumptions of EMH, the theory of
behavioral finance assumes imperfect capital markets and uses looser notions of rationalitynot complete irrationality but "quasi-rationality". The assumptions of imperfect capital
markets also create the possibility that quasi-rationality will have a real impact on the market
phenomena. Thus, behavioral finance explains how stock market investors are irrational and
shows that future stock price movements are at least partly predictable from past behavior. If
markets are efficient, stock prices become unpredictable, or follow the “random walk
model.” Any technical analysis, such as looking for past price patterns to predict future prices
are useless. However, the behavioral finance theory stands on the basis of finding many
inconsistencies in the market, which are referred to as anomalies; such as small-firm effect,
January effect, day-of-the-week effect, over-reaction of stock prices to news (good or bad),
excess volatility pattern, macro variable relationship, information adjustment delay, private
information, etc. These anomalies help to get extra returns from the market.
The debates between the behavioral finance theories and EMH are now the central
dispute in modern financial theory. One view of rationality, where the rational overwhelms
the influence of the irrational through perfect capital markets, is competing against another
view of rationality where imperfect capital markets have the real influence on quasirationality. It is interestingly noted that both EMH and behavioral finance deals with the issue
of rationality under the capitalistic system. At the same time, recently, another aspect of
rationality – “guided rationality” gives a new dimension of arguments to the central modern
financial theory. Islamic financial institutions and markets are emerging based on the “guided
rationality” which stands on the “Shariah principles”. The Shariah principle is considered the
guided way to behave rationally against the capitalistic system. The capitalist system is
considered the unguided way to behave rationally. Thus, the theory and form of rationality
and its performances under both the market systems are considered eminently testable.
This paper is an attempt to look at the issue of rationality under both conventional
capital markets run by a capitalistic system, and the Islamic capital market run by the guided
principles of religion. Thus, this study is an initiative on the debate on rationality under two
market systems and compares the experiences and performances of both market systems
based on the evidences of theory of “rationality”, “quasi-rationality”, and ‘guided rationality’.
2. Failure of Rationality in the Capital Market under the Capitalistic System
EMH states that there are three forms of measuring stock market efficiency: the “weakform”, the “semi-strong form”, and the “strong form”. The weak form of market efficiency
uses information based on historical or past prices. This form claims that all past prices of a
stock are reflected in today’s stock price. Therefore, technical analysis cannot be used to beat
the market as it uses past values of the index to forecast the current values. The semi-strong
form makes use of past information as well as all publicly available information. This implies
that all public information is incorporated into a stock’s current share price and that neither
fundamental nor technical analysis can be used to achieve superior gains. The strong form
3

holds if the market incorporates all information, both public and private (insider information).
Therefore, any information known to the public or a private source should be fully reflected
in the security’s current price for the Efficient Market Hypothesis (EMH) to hold. Generally,
the markets in developing and less developed countries or emerging markets are not efficient
in the semi-strong form or strong form.
Early findings on market efficiency differ among researchers. Working (1960), Fama
(1965), and Samuelson (1965) used the random walk model and found that the market was
efficient. Branes (1986) demonstrated Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange as being weak-form
efficient. Shiller (1989) revealed that stock prices follow a random walk and explained the
reason behind the behavior of the stock prices. In recent findings, one group of researchers
who found weak-form efficiency are Chan, Gup, and Pan (1992) (on major Asian markets),
Dickinson and Muragu (1994) (on the Nairobi Stock Exchange), and Ojah and Karemera
(1999) (on four Latin American countries market) despite the problems of thin trading.
However, several early studies also rejected the random walk model, such as
Niederhoffer & Osborne (1966). Poterba & Summers (1988) argued that there is little
theoretical basis for strong attachments to the null hypothesis that stock prices follow a
random walk. Lo & MacKinlay (1988) investigated the sampling distributions of variance
ratios over different sampling intervals and found that stock returns do not follow a random
walk. Among recent studies, many researchers are also supporting the rejection of EMH.
Cheung, Wong, and Ho (1993) claimed that the stock markets of Korea and Taiwan are not
efficient in the weak-sense. Harvey (1993) stated that stock returns of emerging countries are
highly predictable and have low correlation with stock returns of developed countries. He
concluded that emerging markets are less efficient than developed markets and that higher
return and low risk can be obtained by incorporating emerging market stocks in investors’
portfolios. Claessens, Dasgupta, and Glen (1995), in a World Bank study, reported significant
serial correlation in equity returns from 19 emerging markets and suggested that stock prices
in emerging markets violate the weak form of EMH. Similar findings are reported by Harvey
(1994) for most emerging markets. Balaban (1995), Urrutia (1995), Grieb & Reyes (1999),
and Kawakatsu & Morey (1999) demonstrated the non-randomness of stock prices for
emerging markets. Poshakwale (1996) found evidence of non-random stock price behavior
and market inefficiency (excluding weak-form efficiency) in the Indian market. Khababa
(1998) examined the behavior of stock price in the Saudi Financial market seeking the
evidence for weak-form efficiency and found that the market was not weak-form efficient. He
explained that the inefficiency might be due to delay in operations and high transaction cost,
thinness of trading, and illiquidity in the market. Uddin and Alam (2007), Alam et al. (2007),
and Alam et al. (2011b) also showed that the Dhaka Stock Exchange (DSE) is not weak-form
efficient by analyzing the randomness of market return, market risk-return relationships, and
the frequency of the market depth or liquidity and impacts of policy changes. Alam and
Uddin (2009) worked on 15 developed and developing countries and concluded that none of
them were weak-form efficient.
While working on a single market, surprisingly, researchers found different types of
results. While working on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE), Jammine and Hawkins
(1974), Hadassin (1976), Roux and Gilbertson (1978), and Du Toit (1986) rejected the weakform efficiency, but Affleck-Graves and Money (1975), Gilbertson and Roux (1978), and
Alam et al. (2011a) found weak-form efficiency; Knight and Afflect-Graves (1983) rejected
semi-strong form efficiency, but Knight, Afflect-Graves and Hamman (1985) revealed semistrong form efficiency; Gilbertson (1976) found evidence supporting strong-form efficiency,
4

while Knight and Firer (1989) rejected the strong-form efficiency. Given the mixed evidence
on the efficiency of JSE, Thompson and Ward (1995) showed that there are some share price
dependencies but they were too small to be profitably exploited and concluded that JSE is
“operationally efficient”, which means only a small group of investors are able to outperform
the market. Similarly, some studies (Balaban 1995, Urrutia 1995, Grieb & Reyes 1999,
Kawakatsu & Morey 1999) supported non-randomness of emerging markets’ stock prices,
whilst some other studies related to these same markets (Butler & Mailaikah 1992, and Panas
1990) did not support the notion.
On the whole, the findings on EMH are mixed and in most cases it does not hold,
especially for the markets of developing counties. Under this circumstance, these real life
experiences indicate a failed case of rationality in the capital market under the current
capitalistic system. Moreover, though few evidences of market efficiency are available from
developed countries, the recent financial crash around the world shows that the EMH or
quasi-rationality behavioral theories were not enough to protect stock market crashes among
the most efficient or inefficient markets.
The capital market is considered one of the most important economic indicators of a
country. It represents the industrial growth and economic health of a nation. From the
perspective of the overall economy, Ologunde (2006) mentioned that the capital market
makes it possible for the economy to ensure long-term commitments in real capital. Mankiw
(1999) stated that, “Whenever the stock market experiences a substantial decline, there is
reason to fear that a recession may be around the corner.” Under the unguided capitalistic
market system, when efficient markets, according to the EMH, have already failed to protect
the rights of investors, it is virtually impossible for most of the markets of the world that are
considered inefficient. If it is not possible to secure the rights of investors, it will cause future
chronic financial crisis and stock market crashes around the world. Thus, now everyone is
looking for an alternative form of capital market where investors will be guided to behave
rationally and to consider the interest of others.
3. Capital Market under the Islamic System: A Journey of “Guided Rationality”
It is assumed that the guided principle of Islam (Shariah) generally works as a guideline for
guided rational behavior. The world has observed the superiority of the Islamic principles and
values based on the banking system, generally known as Islamic Banking, in the recent
financial crisis. While standing from the heart of a capitalist world, whilst very big and old
financial institutions collapsed, the Islamic Banking system demonstrated its financial and
moral strength in protecting customers and investors’ rights. As a consequence, researchers
have also pointed out the recent emergence of Islamic economic institutions around the
world. Kuran (1986), for example, highlighted the emergence of Islamic economic
institutions in the MENA region, which is due to the superior principles of the Islamic system
over the Western and Marxist economic principles. Moreover, many conventional banks are
now opening Islamic Banking wings, such as HSBC Amanah, SCB Saadiq, Islamic Account
of Lloyds TSB Bank, J. P. Morgan Islamic Banking Group, etc.
Emphasizing on the desirability and ethical superiority of the profit and loss sharing
principle (Mudaraba) and the Islamic bond (sukuk) for funding development and business
projects, various credible quarters in the North, for example Prof. Rodney Wilson of London
School of Economics, Lord Mayor of the City of London, and the Vatican, recognize and
appreciate the superiority of Islamic banking and financial principles for a viable and stable
5

global financial system (Islamic Finance Expert 2010, The Brussels Journal 2009).
Ultimately, the superiority of the Islamic system attracts investors, scholars, researchers,
policy makers, and the public, both Muslims and non-Muslims. Now, they strongly feel the
necessity of a capital market under Islamic principles and think that it can be an alternative to
the current form of faulty capitalistic system under the capital market (El-Gari 1993).
Islam is a realistic religion that allows all activities of human life within given
guidelines. The guidelines are known as Islamic law or Islamic principles, or Shariah law.
Islamic law permits all areas of the wider Islamic system, which includes economics, finance,
law, politics, government and its integral component parts, social, ethical and religious
aspects, including values and social justice (Asutay 2007, Iqbal 1997, Molla & Alam 2013).
Since Islam considers every single aspect of public and private interests, the guidelines about
the capital market have already been in place by Shariah. Al-Kasani (1983) and Zaman
(1986) pointed out that the traditional jurists have agreed upon partnership business and
Mudarabah contracts, which was widely practiced during the pre-Islamic period and also
practiced by many companions of the Prophet Muhammed (S). Al-khaiyyat (1989) further
emphasized the issue and mentioned that there is no prohibition in Shariah in forming share
companies or a partnership company or selling shares to anybody. According to Al-Khaiyyat
(1989), Fahd (2007), and Osmani & Abdullah (2009), a stock market is perfectly legal and
there is no prohibition for establishing the capital market in Islam. Recently, Khatkhatay &
Nisar (2007) again pointed out that portfolio investment equities in stock market is close to
the Islamic profit and loss sharing paradigm, which conveniently opens the main investment
avenue to ordinary Muslims.
Thus, a fundamentally capital market is allowed in Islam, but Shariah provision sets
out certain rules and regulations which differentiate the Islamic capital market from the
capitalistic market, and provides a guideline regarding investment approaches and guided
rational behavioral approaches of investors based on nature, types, characteristics, and
operations of the business. The guidelines are summarized below.
3.1 Characteristics of the Company
i. Nature of the Business of the Company
Share means ownership, and shareholder means owner of the company. When an investor or
trader buys shares of a company, he becomes a partial owner of the company. The investors
as well as the sponsors or founders are the long term shareholders who are mostly responsible
for the characteristics of the company. However, the ownership of traders, who are not
investors in nature but frequently trade in the secondary market to gain short term price gain,
have very little influence on the operations, nature of the business, and strategic decisions of
the company. Therefore, the investors, not traders, are fully responsible for the company’s
overall Shariah provisions, and to avoid the violation of Shariah principles, a trader must
look at the characteristics of the company.
Shariah provides a few guidelines about the nature of the company, mostly focusing
on the religious value and social wellbeing (Al Quran 5:2, 2:188). At the starting point, the
main business of the company must be accepted (halal) according to Islamic principles
(Sahih al-Bukhari, Book 9, Volume 89 (Judgments), Hadith 266). There are some companies
which are involved in completely haram activities, such as the company’s manufacturing,
selling or offering liquors, haram meat like pork, or involved in immoral services like
gambling, discos, prostitution, night club, pornography, pubs etc. Shariah does not permit
6

any Muslims to invest in these companies or the companies where the core income is based
on these activities (Al Quran 5:62).
Secondly, Islam never allows any kind of interest. The divine authority (Allah)
mentions that trade is permitted, but interest is forbidden (Al Quran 30:39, 2:275-281). Along
with this prohibition, the final prophet Muhammad (PBUH) cursed the practice of receiving
and giving interest (Sahih al-Bukhari, Book 7, Volume 63 (Divorce), Hadith 259). According
to Islamic principles, it is not permissible to acquire the shares of the companies which are
directly or indirectly attributed to riba (interest), and also providing financial services on
interest, like conventional banks, insurance companies, finance and leasing companies, etc.
In reality, the world is so complex and interlinked that in many cases, for local or
international business, it is not possible to avoid the transaction from any interest based
banking or any sort of involvement with interest. Furthermore, in cases like mixed business,
where multisectoral companies are involved in both halal and haram activities, the Islamic
jurists from four major school of Islamic thoughts - Hanafi, Maliki, Shafi, and Hanbali agreed on the permissibility of the company under specific conditions (Khatkhatay & Nisar
2007, Jamal et al. 2010). According to the Malaysian Securities Commission’s Shariah
Advisory Council (SAC), mixed types of companies are permitted by Shariah on the
following conditions:
•
•
•

The core activities of companies must be halal and the haram elements must be small
compared to core activities;
Public perception or image of the companies must be good; and
The core activities of the companies should have important benefit to the nation
(maslaha) and the country, and the haram elements - including umum balwa
(common plight and difficult to avoid), uruf (customs and rights of the non-Muslim
community), which are accepted by Islam, must be very small.

According to the Justice Mufti, Muhammad Taqi Usmani, if the main business is
halal, but the company borrows money on interest or places its money into an interest-bearing
account, shareholders should raise their voice against this practice in the AGM of the
company (Usmani 2010). When Muslim shareholders receive dividends, they must ascertain
the proportion of dividend coming from interest-bearing activities and give them to charity.
He also mentioned that Shariah scholars have permitted the investment in stocks of
companies whose income from interest-related activities is less than 5% of the company’s
total income while some have allowed up to 10%. In a broader perspective, the Shariah
Advisory Council (SAC) of the Securities & Exchange Commission Malaysia (2007) set
several benchmarks to determine a tolerable level of permissible and non-permissible
activities such as:
a. The five-percent (5%) benchmark: This benchmark is applied to measure the level of
mixed contributions from the activities that are clearly prohibited such as interestbased companies (e.g., conventional banks, insurances, financing and leasing
companies, etc.), gambling, liquor, pork, pornography, etc.
b. The ten-percent (10%) benchmark: This benchmark is applied to measure the level of
mixed contributions from the activities that involve the element of umum balwa
(prohibited elements affecting most people and difficult to avoid). For example,
interest income from fixed deposit in conventional banks, revenue generated from
tobacco-related activities as a tiny part of an overall Shariah-compliant business.
7

c. The twenty-percent (20%) benchmark: This benchmark is applied to assess the level
of contribution from mixed rental payment from Shariah non-compliant activities,
such as rental payment from the premise that is involved in gambling, sale of liquor,
etc.
d. The twenty-five percent (25%) benchmark: This benchmark is applied to assess the
level of mixed contribution from the activities that are generally permissible
according to Shariah and have an element of maslahah (public interest) to the public,
but there are other elements that may affect the Shariah status of these activities. For
example, hotel and resort operations, share trading stock brokerage house, aeroplane
company, etc., as these activities may involve other relevant activities that are deemed
non-permissible under Shariah.
ii. Nature of the Assets of the Company
Shariah also provides some guidelines on the nature of the assets of the company focusing on
safeguarding investors’ interests and rights. First, it does not permit investing in a company,
which only has liquid assets. If the company does not have any non-liquid assets, it would
only be permissible to trade at the par-value of the shares, because in this case the shares
represented are similar to cash money. Thus, trading above or below the par-value would not
be considered as Riba under Islamic principles. In reality, nearly all the companies have both
liquid and non-liquid assets. In these cases, the jurists have different views towards the ratio
of liquid assets to total assets. The Shafi and Hambali school of thought have set a minimum
of 51%, while scholars from the Hanafi school of thought have opined that the ratio must not
be more than 33% (Jakhura 2010). The Dow Jones Islamic Market Index (DJIMI) allows up
to 33%, whereas the Meezan Islamic Fund Criteria in Pakistan has set the ratio of net illiquid
assets of the investee company as a percentage of the total asset of up to 10% (Khatkhatay &
Nisar 2007).
Moreover, Hanafi scholars also added two mandatory conditions. Firstly, the nonliquid part of the combination should not be in an ignorable quantity. Secondly, the price of
the mixture should be more than the price of the liquid amount contained therein. Usmani
(2010) provided a good theoretical example. A share for $75 cash and some fixed assets
holding the company’s price must be above $75. If the price is set at $70, it is considered as
Riba due to the lesser price than the liquid assets. If the price is set at $75, it is also not
permissible due to insignificance or zero value for fixed assets. As such, any value above $75
is valid due to having a value for the fixed assets. In the real world, it is very difficult to
imagine a situation where a price of the share goes lower than its liquid assets.
iii. Debt to Equity ratio
Ideally in Islam, there should not be any interest-bearing debt. However, based on Islamic
principles, Shariah scholars have allowed investment into a company if debt-financing is not
more than 33%. The Dow Jones Islamic Market Index excludes the companies in which debt
to asset ratio is greater than or equivalent to 33%. Meezan Islamic Fund Criteria in Pakistan
allows up to 45% (Khatkhatay & Nisar 2007). However, the Shariah Advisory Council
(SAC) of the Securities & Exchange Commission in Malaysia did not place any restrictions
on the proportion of debt in the total assets.
3.2 Characteristics of the Investor
i. Nature of the Ownership

8

Shariah allows only common stock to be traded. Common stock holders have voting rights
and are considered the real owners of the company. Selling a common share is like selling a
portion of the share of the company; and it is considered an individual’s property, where the
owner has the right to sell or lend as long as it does not cause harm to other shareholders
(Osmani & Abdullah 2009). On the other hand, preferred shareholders do not have the right
to vote and they are not considered actual partners of the company, and the extra money they
get is like Riba as they take it without sharing the risk of profit and loss (Zaky 1992).
ii. Nature of the Intention
Due to the nature of the conventional stock market, Qimar or gambling is strictly prohibited
(Al Quran 5:90). There are two types of gambling – one way is to try to invest with the
concept of being lucky based on excessive risk, just like spending money in the general case
of gambling (Chapra 1985); and another way is trying to get extra or abnormal profit by
pulling up the price using any type of manipulation such as syndicating, spreading rumours,
etc. (Sahih al-Bukhari, Book 3, Volume 34 (Sales and Trade), Hadith 367). This concept also
covers unusual, illogical, manipulated, and unethical speculation in the stock market, which
refers to trading in the stock market purely for short-term gains, resulting in an uncertainty in
the market and sure losses, or longer term positioning of the share for others. Under the
Shariah provision, the baseline of speculation is founded on the intention or behaviour of the
investors (Sahih al-Bukhari, Book 1, Volume 1 (Revelation), Hadith 1). The decisions must
not be based on uncertainty or generate excessive risk, but be based on the fundamental
analysis with the intention of getting a normal profit from the market.
3.3 Characteristics of the Transaction
i. Nature of the Transaction
The pattern of transaction and its form differs among markets as well as Islamic juries. There
are several trading practices available in the stock market, such as margin trading,
derivatives, options and futures, short-selling, etc. The legality of these issues varies among
markets, conventional laws, and Islamic scholars. Many markets prohibit them because of
their involvement in market manipulation and speculations. Islamic scholars prohibit them
because of their involvement in interest and speculations. According to Osmani and Abdullah
(2009), many scholars disagree on the validity of forwards, future, and options as the sold
commodity and payment of the price are made in a future date resulting in the elements of
gharar (uncertainty) and gambling (Sahih Muslim, Book 10 (The Book of Transactions),
Hadith 3614). Al-Barwari (2002) (cited by Osmani & Abdullah 2009) pointed out that the
council of the Islamic Fiqh Academy of Mecca decided that forward contracts with all of its
categories prevailed in the stock market are invalid, as they sell items that people do not
actually own (Sunan Abu Dawud, Book 23 (The Book of Wages), Hadith 3496). Similarly,
short-selling violates the Shariah principle for the same reason. Chapra (1985) strongly
opposed the existence of short-selling in an Islamic market arguing that such sales are
speculative and involve riba and gharar in the whole transaction whilst also failing to
perform any useful economic function. Naughton & Naughton (2000) observed that the
public masalahah (public interest) is bitterly served by prohibiting short sales.
As opposed to this prohibition, a few scholars have also permitted this type of
contracts based on the tradition of prophet Muhammad (PBUH) where he himself was
involved in a forward contract. Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) purchased a thin weak camel
from Jabir with a price of one gold coin, which he paid later and Jabir also handed over the
camel at a later date (Sahih Muslim, Book 10 (The Book of Transactions), Hadith 3888).
9

Osmani & Abdullah (2009) resolved the issue under the condition that forward, futures, and
options are only valid when both parties agree on the stipulated duration and price without
any uncertainty in the transaction. Based on a similar concept, the SAC legalized this through
regulated short-selling (RSS) with the inclusion of security borrowing and lending (SBL)
principles in Malaysia. According to them, under the RSS, fulfillment of delivery, settlement
of contracts and payment of financial obligations are always guaranteed, monitored and
regulated, which reduces the elements of gharar resulting in short-selling to be Shariahcompliant. However, Dusuki & Abozaid (2008) analyzed this permissibility further and
argued that the SAC should reconsider this position due to the probability of benefiting from
the loan, which refers to riba, but this is still undefended. It is obligatory for Muslims to seek
legitimate (halal) earnings.
ii. Nature of the Zakaah (compulsory tax) Probation
There is compulsory tax gain in many of the conventional capital markets. In Islam, under the
Shariah principles, there is no mandatory tax gain but there is an annual tax, called zakaah,
on the selected assets if it goes beyond a certain level. The zakaah (compulsory tax) on shares
is obligatory for the owners of the shares. The zakaah may be paid by the company or the
shareholder personally. Companies pay it if it is stated in the company’s constitution, or by
law, or management decision, or based on shareholders’ authorizations to pay on behalf of
them.
If the zakaah is not paid by the company, the shareholder needs to pay it individually.
In that case, there are two ways to calculate it, which depends on the nature of the investors.
If the shareholder is a trader in nature, having the intention for price gain and sells the share
anytime when the price increases, every year the zakaah will be calculated on full market
value of the share. If the shareholder is an investor by nature, with no intention to take any
short price gain but invests for dividend gain, every year, the zakaah will be calculated only
on the dividend amount and a one-time zakaah on the full selling price at the time of selling
the share. In the investors’ case, the calculation of zakaah also depends on the nature of the
company, such as:
•

•

•

For manufacturing and service companies that do not engage in any kind of trade,
such as hotels, transportation companies, etc., no zakaah is needed for assets but only
on the profits of these shares, because the value of these shares is based on equipment,
tools, buildings, furnishings and so on, which are needed in order to do the work;
For the companies that engage only in trade, such as distributors, importers, exporters,
international traders, etc., and for the companies that engage both in manufacturing
and trade, such as petroleum companies, textile companies, metal companies,
chemical companies, etc. that extract or buy raw materials, and trade them with some
changes, zakaah must be calculated on the assets of these companies, after deducting
the value of the buildings, tools, equipments, etc., and also on the profit of the share;
and
For the agriculture and livestock companies, zakaah needs to be calculated on the
crops, fruits and livestock beyond a certain level of production, such as 10% if the
crops are irrigated naturally and 5% if they are irrigated artificially when the shares
reach a certain level.

The annual zakaah rate is 2.5% generally for the lunar calendar year (Arabic/ Hijri
calendar) or 2.58% for solar calendar year (any normal calendar such as Gregorian calendar).
The zakaah is mandatory only in the case of when the total share value of the shareholder is
10

either equal or above the price of 595 grams of silver or 85 grams of gold, and it should be in
continuous possession for a period of one lunar year. The calculated value of the zakaah can
be paid from personal cash fund if it is not possible to pay by selling the share at the end of
the year.
Another option is to keep the zakaah due till the time of finally selling the share. In
this way, zakaah is calculated on market value for each year and all due amounts should be
disbursed together from the final selling price. A hypothetical example for the trading case:
holding a share of which the current market price is $100. Thus, (year 1) the due zakaah is:
2.5% of $100 = $2.5. The following year (year 2), suppose the current market price is $200.
As such, (year 2) the due zakaah is: 2.5% of $200 = $5. Now, the total due for two years is
$7.5. If the share is sold at the end of the 2nd year, total zakaah of $7.5 will be paid from the
selling amount. If any dividend is received within the period, zakaah also needs to be
calculated on that gained amount.
The zakaah amount can be distributed personally, or by the government, to eight
categories of people who are eligible to receive zakaah – for example the poor, needy,
employed to collect or administer the Zakat funds, non-Muslim or Muslim who need to be
attracted to Islam (Al Quran 9:60). In addition, one can present the money to free slaves and
captives, to pay off the debt on behalf of an unable person, or to give to those who are
fighting for the sake of Allah including those who are seeking Islamic knowledge.
4. Performance and Prospects of the Journey to “Guided Rationality”
The concept of the capital market was first introduced in France in the thirteenth century, but
the concept of Mudrabah, which resembles the modern capital market concept, can be dated
back to the age of Prophet Muhammad (PBUH) in the sixth century (Al-Barwari 2002, as
cited by Osmani & Abdullah 2009). Researchers also traced the origin of stocks to medieval
Muslim traders (Robertson 1933).
Though Muslims are considered the pioneers of the capital market, the current form of
capital market restricts them from seeking economic bounties from it due to not being able to
satisfy several provisions of the Islamic law or Shariah. As a consequence, in spite of
religious encouragement for Muslims to seek economic opportunities (Al-Quran 2:172), they
cannot engage in trading and investing in the conventional capital market. On the other hand,
the capital market under the shade of Islamic law is not yet focused and matured. There are
only a few capital markets available across the globe, such as the Khartoum stock market
(KSE) in Sudan, the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange (KLSE) in Malaysia, and the Tehran
Stock Exchange (TSE) in Iran, etc., which are operated according to Islamic laws.
Stock markets based on Islamic principles are in the early stage of development as
observed by Naughton and Tahir (1988). In 2002, Tag El-din further mentioned that most of
the stock exchanges in Muslim countries are basically western-style markets with tolerated
practices that do not comply with Islamic principles. Recently, Hearn et al. (2010) mentioned
that due to the limited focus on Islamic finance, there are limited literatures available on the
role and principles of the Islamic stock market. Thus, based on the limited experiences, here,
the researchers provide a few evaluations from past researches on Islamic capital market
around the world.

11

While studying the Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange (KLSE) in Malaysia, Zaky (1992)
outlined the Shariah principles for the stock market and compared the market from both
Islamic and western perspectives, and suggested improvements from an Islamic perspective.
Bacha and Abdullauh (2001) examined halal stock designation and its impact on price and
trading volume in the Malaysian stock market. Their study showed that inclusion in the list of
halal stock by the Shariah Advisory Council (SAC) had a positive impact with an increase in
volume and price while exclusion had negative impacts, which decreased in volume and
price. Their study further explains that in the former case, price impact is gradual with
significant increase in post 30 and 60 days and volume effect is immediate but temporary
while in latter cases, impact on both price and volume is delayed. Muhammad (2001)
investigated the performances of the KLSE Composite index, the KLSE Shariah index, and
the RHBI index in Malaysia during the period of 1992-2000 and found that the movements of
both the conventional and Islamic indices are fairly parallel. Yusof and Majid (2007)
compared the risks and returns volatilities of the Islamic and conventional stock markets in
Malaysia for 1992-2000 and found that the risk as measured by the conditional standard
deviation does not affect stock returns during the period of analysis. Hence, there is no
evidence of significant time varying risk premium for both conventional and Islamic stock
returns. They further examined the stock market volatility of the Islamic and conventional
stock markets in Malaysia based on various monetary policy variables’ impact on stock
market volatility and revealed that interest rate volatility affects the conventional stock
market volatility while Islamic stock market volatility remained unaffected. Sadeghi (2008)
examined the impact of the introduction of the Shariah compliant index by Bursa Malaysia
on the performance and liquidity of included shares and demonstrated that the introduction of
the Shariah compliant index had a positive impact on the financial performance of the
included shares with positive increase in mean cumulative abnormal returns (MCAR) and
trading volume.
While working on the Dow Jones Islamic Stock Market Index (DJIMI) in USA,
Hassan (2002) examined the issues of market efficiency and the risk return relationship in
terms of time variance for the period of 1996-2000. He showed that DJIMI returns are
normally distributed and the DJIMI has remarkable market efficiency. He also examined the
volatility of the DJIMI returns and concluded that there are operational inefficiencies in
DJIMI which needs to be corrected to make the risk behavior of DJIMI stable over time.
Hakim and Rashidian (2002) examined the causality between DJIMI, Wilshire 5000 index,
and the Treasury bill rate over the period of 1999-2002. They found that the DJIMI did not
correlate with either the Wilshire 5000 index or the Treasury bill and was influenced by
factors independent of the broad market or interest rate. Their study also revealed that the
filtering criteria adopted to eliminate non-Shariah compliant companies led to an Islamic
index with unique risk-return characteristics that were not affected by the changes in the
Wilshire 5000 or Treasury bill. Ludwig (2005) adopted a comparative approach towards the
performance of the Amana Islamic Income Fund with the performance of S&P500 and a SRI
fund tracked by Bloomberg. Their study revealed that Amana Fund value increased by 25%
while there was a 9% increase in the S&P 500. However, it was -3.3% for the average SRI
fund tracked by Bloomberg.
Hussein (2004) examined the performance of the FTSE Global Islamic Index and the
FTSE All–World Index from the UK market in two sub-periods, bull period (July 1996 –
March 2000) and bear period (April 2000 - August 2003). He found that the FTSE Global
Islamic index performed as well as the FTSE All-World index over the entire period. He
further explained that the Islamic index yielded statistically significant positive abnormal
12

returns in the bull market period and underperformed in the counterpart index in the bear
market period. He concluded that the application of Shariah compliant screening did not have
an adverse impact on the FTSE Global Islamic Index performance.
Realizing the potential of the Islamic stock market, many large western organizations
have also established their own Islamic subsidiaries and have offered Islamic Financial
instruments. For example, the Dow Jones Islamic Market World Index, which tracks global
shares that meet Islamic investment guidelines and has a market capitalization of $12.8
trillion, climbed 7 percent this year, while the Dow Jones Global Index gained 6.4 percent in
the same period (Muslim Village 2010). The Shariah-compliant assets of Islamic financial
institutions have grown rapidly, such as $230 billion in 2002, and $1 trillion in 2010 (Hakim
& Rashidian 2002, Islamic Finance Outlook 2010).
The broader Islamic view of efficient security markets is close to the concept of social
efficiency as financial markets in general, and capital markets in particular, should be
efficient in supporting social justice, fairness, and the wellbeing of the society (Samuels &
Yacout 1981). Moreover, Islamic investment resembles socially responsible investments as
both prohibit investment in business activities that are harmful to humans and society. Thus,
in any form, the reality of shifting socially responsible investments towards Islamic
investment is now much closer. There has been a good trend in socially responsible
investment in the major financial markets over the last decade. In USA alone, from 1997 to
2000, the size of socially responsible investment doubled from $1.185 trillion to $2.16 trillion
(Hakim & Rashidian 2002).
Recent studies on stock market focused on investors’ rights, ethics, and fairness in the
market. Lev (1988: 1-22) defined ethics and fairness as entitlement to equality of opportunity,
whereby all parties in a fair market are entitled to equal access to information relevant for
asset valuation. Tag El-Din (1996) discussed the traditional concept of market efficiency in
light of the Keynes Theory with the arguments of excessive speculative activities that create
inefficiencies in stock market and emphasized the need for an optimum level of speculative
activities for efficiency in stock market. He further emphasized the necessity of normative
Islamic stock exchange to deal with excessive speculative activities and its adverse impact on
the economy, such as a financial crisis. Using the data from the Canadian Stock Exchange,
Kia (2001) tested whether excessive speculative activities create instability in the market and
wasteful information from the efficiency point of view, and concluded by supporting Tag ElDin’s view of establishment of normative Islamic stock exchange in order to achieve greater
efficiency in stock market.
Obaidullah (2001) mentioned that there is no negative relationship between Islamic
ethics and market efficiency while analyzing ethics and efficiency of Islamic stock market
based on Islamic ethical norms of freedom from riba (interest), gharar (uncertainty), qimar
(gambling), najas, ihtiker (artificial shortage of supply), etc., and the ethical norms in
mainstream finance. He also suggested that attempts to ensure Islamic ethics in the stock
market would lead to the enhancement of efficiency. Tag El-Din (2002) further critically
examined the efficiency criteria of the stock market in light of theories of P. Cootner, P.A.
Samuelson, and J.M. Keynes, and discussed the Islamic point of view. He argued that
exchanges of financial claims are more vulnerable to hazards, lack of information, and
unregulated free markets. Critically reviewing the classical and modern literatures in Islamic
stock exchange, Osmani & Abdullah (2009) observed that the Islamic stock market develops

13

sound and ethically guided securities where many products of the conventional stock market
can be easily incorporated into the Islamic stock markets.
5. Conclusion
The conventional efficient market theory focuses on the rights of the investors and works as a
safeguard from unusual financial crisis and any extraordinary return by any group, which is
not yet ensured since inception under the current form of capitalistic market system. The
research on chronic financial crisis suggests that the market should be run by a system, which
will ensure efficiency, justice, fairness, accountability, fair distribution of benefits, and a
rational behavior among investors. EMH provides the efficiency theory but it cannot ensure
proper regulation, governance, and ethical characteristics of the investors. The theory of
behavioral finance denies EMH but does not suggest anything to achieve rationality or
wellbeing of common investors. The capitalistic format of the capital market including its
efficiency theory and behavioral theory is not able to protect small and less efficient
investors.
In contrary to the above, the Islamic principles of capital market take care of all these
issues, which are ignored by the capitalistic market system. The return of the existing Islamic
markets and funds shows enough competencies and better returns with more efficiency than
conventional markets and funds. Understanding the superiority of the Islamic system, many
countries are starting Islamic capital markets and indexes, such as the ‘Tasis Shariah 50’
index in the Bombay stock exchange (BSE), the ‘Shariah index’ in the Indonesia stock
exchange (IDX), etc. The necessity, reliability, and superiority of the Islamic capital market,
not only for Muslims but also for investors in general, are clear from the view of the Director
of Research and Operations of ‘Tasis Shariah 50’. He boldly mentioned that this index would
unlock the potential for Shariah investments in India, as all the Muslim countries in the
Middle East and Pakistan together do not have as many listed Shariah-compliant stocks as
are available on the BSE (BBC 2010).
In light of the above, it can be suggested that the capital market based on the guided
rationality of the Shariah provision performs better than the theoretical basis of rationality
and quasi-rationality of the capitalistic system. Thus, the capital market under Islamic
principles can be a better alternative to the conventional market system.
References
Affleck-Graves, JF and Money, A.H. 1975. A Note on the Random Walk Model and South
African Share Prices, The South African Journal of Economics 43(3), 382-388.
Alam, M. M., Alam, K. A. and Uddin, Md. G. S. 2007. Market Depth and Risk Return
Analysis of Dhaka Stock Exchange: An Empirical Test of Market Efficiency, ASA
Business Review 1(1), 93-101.
Alam, M.M., and Uddin, M.G.S. 2009. Relationship between Interest Rate and Stock Price:
Empirical Evidence from Developed and Developing Countries, International Journal
of
Business
and
Management
4(3),
43-51.
(Online)
http://www.ccsenet.org/journal/index.php/ijbm/article/download/217/177 (Accessed on
01 July, 2015)
Alam, M.M., Uddin, M.G.S., and Taufique, R. 2011a. The Relationships between Exchange
Rates and Stock Prices: Empirical Investigation from Johannesburg Stock Exchange,
Inventi Impact: Emerging Economics, Vol. 2011, No. 3, pp. 95-102.
14

http://inventi.in/journal/article/impact/28/709/emerging-economies/pi# (Accessed on 01
July, 2015).
Alam, M.M., Yasmin, S., Rahman, M., Uddin, M.G.S. 2011b. Effect of Different Policy
Reforms on Market Efficiency: Evidence from Dhaka Stock Exchange, Economics
Research International, Vol. 2011, Article ID 864940, 8 pages. (Online),
http://www.hindawi.com/journals/econ/2011/
864940/. (Online) http://www.hindawi.com/journals/econ/2011/864940/ (Accessed on 01
July, 2015)
Al-Barwari, S. M. 2002. Bursat Al-Awraq Al-Maliyyah Min Manzurin Islamiy, Darul Fikr,
Damascus.
Al-Kasani, A.A.B.M. 1983. Bada'i` As-Sana'I`, Matba`at al- Imam: Cairo.
Al-Khaiyyat, A. A. 1989. As-Sharikat fi Daw' Al-Islam, Al-Guriyyah: Amman.
Al-Quran. (online) http://quran.com/ (Accessed on 01 July, 2015).
Asutay, M. 2007. Growth and Current Evolution of the Islamic Financial
Industry, International Workshop on Islamic Economics: Theoretical and Practical
Perspectives in a Global Context. Takushoku University, Tokyo, Japan, 21 July.
Bacha, O.I. and Abdullah, M.H. 2001. Halal Stock Designation and Impact on Price and
Trading Volume. The Journal of Accounting, Commerce & Finance: Islamic
Perspective 5(1), 66-97.
Balaban, E. 1995. Day of the Week Effects: New Evidence from an Emerging Stock Market,
Applied Economics Letters 2(5), 139-43.
BBC. 2010. Bombay Stock Exchange launches Islamic index, 27 December, (online)
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-south-asia-12083190 (Accessed on 01 July, 2015).
Branes, P. 1986. Thin trading and stock market efficiency: A case of the Kuala Lumpur Stock
Exchange, Journal of Business Finance & Accounting 13(4), 609-617.
Butler, K.C. and Mailaikah, S.J. 1992. Efficiency and Inefficiency in Thinly Traded Stock
Markets: Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, Journal of Banking and Finance 16, 197-210.
Chan, K.C., Gup, B.E. and Pan, M. 1992. An Empirical Analysis of Stock Prices in Major
Asian Markets and United States, The Financial Review 27(2), 89- 307.
Chapra, M. U. 1985. Towards a Just Monetary System, The Islamic Foundation: Licester.
Cheung, Y.L., Wong, K.A. and Ho, Y.K. 1993. The pricing of risky assets in two emerging
Asian markets- Korea and Taiwan, Applied Financial Economics 3(4), pp.315-324.
Claessens, S., Dasgupta, S. and Glen, J. 1995. Return Behaviour in Emerging Stock Markets,
The World Bank Economic Review 9(1), 131–151.
Dickinson, J.P. and Muragu, K. 1994. Market Efficiency in Developing Countries: A case
study of the Nairobi Stock Exchange, Journal of Business Finance & Accounting 21(1),
133-150.
Du Toit, G.S. 1986. Technical Analysis and Market Efficiency on the Johannesburg Stock
Exchange (Working Paper for D.Com degree, University of Pretoria, Pretoria.
Dusuki, A. W. and Abozaid, A. 2008. Fiqh Issues in Short Selling as Implemented in the
Islamic Capital Market in Malaysia, JKAU: Islamic Economics, 21(2), 63-78.
El-Gari, M.A. 1993. Towards an Islamic Stock Market, Islamic Economic Studies, 1(1), pp.
1-21.
Fahd, B.A.R.A. 2007. At-Takyif Al-Fiqhi Li as-Saham fi Ash-Sharikat Al-Musahamah Wa
'Asruhu, Daru Kunuji Isbilia: Riyadh.
Fama, E. 1965. The Behavior of Stock Market Prices, Journal of Business 38, 34-105.
Gilbertson, B.P. 1976. The Performance of South African Mutual Funds, Johannesburg
Consolidated Investment Company, Report No. F76/84, Johannesburg.
Gilbertson, B.P., Roux, F.J.P. 1978. Some Further Comments on the Johannesburg Stock
Exchange as an Efficient Market, Investment Analysts Journal 11, 21-30.
15

Grieb, T.A. and Reyes, M.G. 1999. Random Walk Tests for Latin American Equity Indexes
and Individual Firms, Journal of Financial Research 22(4), 371-383.
Hadassin, I. 1976. An Investigation into the Bahavior of Emerging and Share Prices of South
African Listed Companies, Investment Analysts Journal 8, 13-24.
Hakim, S. and Rashidian, M. 2002. Risk and Return of Islamic Stock Market Indexes,
Presented at 9th Economic Research Forum Annual General Meeting, Sharjah, UAE.
Harvey, AC. 1993. Time Series Models, Harvester Wheatsheaf: New York.
Harvey, C.R. 1994. Conditional Asset allocation in Emerging Markets, National Bureau of
Economic Re-search, Working Paper No.4623, Cambridge, MA.
Hassan, M.K. 2002. Risk, Return and Volatility of Faith-Based Investing: The Case of Dow
Jones Islamic Index, Presented at Fifth Harvard University Forum on Islamic Finance,
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, US.
Hearn, B.A., Strange, R.N. and Piesse, J. 2010. The Role of the Stock Market in the Provision
of Islamic Development Finance: Evidence from Sudan, SSRN, (online)
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1302935 (Accessed on 01 July, 2015).
Hussein, K.A. 2004. Ethical Investment: Empirical Evidence from FTSE Islamic Index,
Islamic Economic Studies, 12 (1), 22-40.
Iqbal, Z. 1997. Islamic Financial Systems, Finance and Development, 34(2), 42-45. (Online)
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/1997/06/pdf/iqbal.pdf (Accessed on 01 July,
2015).
Islamic Finance Expert. 2010. Islamic Finance: Can it save Western Banks?, 30 June,
(online) http://ifinanceexpert.wordpress.com/2010/06/30/islamic-finance-can-it-savewestern-banks/ (Accessed on 19 April, 2011).
Islamic
Finance
Outlook,
2010.
Standard
&
Poors,
(0nline),
http://www2.standardandpoors.com/spf/pdf/media/Islamic_Finance_Outlook_2010.pdf/
(Accessed on 01 July, 2015)
Jakhura, S. and Mangera, M.D. 2010. Share Trading, December 26, (online)
http://www.albalagh.net/qa/0143.shtml (Accessed on 01 July, 2015).
Jamal, J., Hambali, N. and Ali, H.M. 2010. Islamic Capital Market and Shariah Screening in
Malaysia, presented at International Research Symposium in Service Management,
Mauritius, 24-17 August.
Jammine, A.P. and Hawkins, D.M. 1974. The Behavior of Some Share Indices: A Statistical
Analysis, The South African Journal of Economics 42(1), 43-55.
Kawakatsu, H. and Morey, M.R. 1999. An Empirical Examination of Financial Liberalization
and the Efficiency of Emerging Market Stock Prices, The Journal of Financial
Research 22, 385-411.
Khababa, N. 1998. Behavior of stock prices in the Saudi Arabian Financial Market: Empirical
research findings, Journal of Financial Management & Analysis, Volume 11(1), 48-55.
Khatkhatay, M. H. and Nisar, S. 2007. Shari’ah Complaint Equity Investments: An
assessment of Current Screening Norms. Islamic Economic Studies 15(1), pp.47-48.
Kia, A. 2001. Speculative Activities Efficiency and Normative Stock Exchange, JKAU:
Islamic Economics 13, 31-50.
Knight, E.T. and Firer, C. 1989. The Performance of South African Unit Trusts 1977-1986,
The South African Journal of Economics 57(1), 52-68.
Knight, R.F. and Affleck-Graves, J.F. 1983. The Efficient Market Hypothesis and a Change
to LIFO: An Empirical Study on the JSE, Investment Analysts Journal 21, 21-33.
Knight, R.F., Affleck-Graves, J.F. and Hamman, W.D. 1985. The Effect of Inventory
Valuation Methods on Share Prices: Some New Evidence for the JSE, Investment
Analysts Journal 26, 45-47

16

Kuran, T. 1986. The economic system in contemporary Islamic thought: interpretation and
assessment, International Journal of Middle East Studies 18(2), 135-164.
Lev, B. 1988. Toward a Theory of Equitable and Efficient Accounting Policy, The
Accounting Review 63(l), 1-22.
Lo, A.W. and Mackinlay, A.C. 1988. Stock Market Prices Do Not Follow Random Walks:
Evidence from A Simple Specification Test, Review of Financial Studies 1: 41-66.
Ludwig, M. 2005. Kaiser's Amana Income Beats S&P 500 by Following Islamic Law,
Bloomberg News, 7 July.
Mankiw, N.G. 1999. Macro Economics, 4th Edition, pp.472, UK: Macmillan Press Ltd.
Molla, R.I. and Alam, M.M. 2013. A Third Sector-Led Economic Model: Scopes for Islamic
Entrepreneurship, American Journal of Islamic Social Sciences 30(1): 73-91.
Muhammad, J. 2001. Isu Praktikal Mengenai Pelaburan Dalam Indeks Islam, Seminar
Pelaburan Beretika Menurut Islam: Satu Cabaran, IKIM, Kuala Lumper, 13-14 Feb.
Muslim Village. 2010. Muslim Nations Plan Shariah Complaint Stock Exchange, 28
November, (online) www.muslimvillage.com (Accessed on 01 July, 2015).
Naughton, S. and Naughton, T. 2000. Religion, Ethics and Stock Trading: The Case of an
Islamic Equities Market. Journal of Business Ethics, 23, 145-159.
Naughton, T and Tahir, M.A. 1988. Islamic Banking and Financial Development, Journal of
Islamic Banking & Finance 5(2), 60-76.
Niederhoffer, V. and Osborne, M.F.M. 1966. Market Making and Reversal on the Stock
Exchange, Journal of the American Statistical Association 61, 897-916.
Obaidullah, M. 2001. Ethics and Efficiency in Islamic Stock Markets. International Journal
of Islamic Financial Services 3 (2), pp. 1-10.
Ojah, Kalu and Karemera, D. 1999. Random walks and Market efficiency Tests of Latin
Amaeracan Emerging Equity Markets: A Revisit, The Financial Review 34(2), 57-72.
Ologunde, A.O., Elumilade, D.O. and Asaolu, T.O. 2006. Stock Market Capitalization and
Interest Rate in Nigeria: A Time Series Analysis, International Research Journal of
Finance and Economics 4, 154-166.
Osmani, N.M. and Abdullah, M. F. 2009. Towards An Islamic Stock Market: A review of
Classical and Modern Literatures, International Review of Business Research Papers,
5(5), 121‐130.
Panas, E.E. 1990. The Behaviour of Athens Stock Prices, Applied Economics 22(12), 19151727.
Poshakwale S. 1996. Evidence on the Weak-form efficiency and the day of the week effect in
the Indian Stock Market, Finance India, 10(3), 605-616.
Poterba, J.M. and Summers, L.H. 1988. Mean Reversion in Stock Returns: Evidence and
Implications, Journal of Financial Economics 22, 27-59.
Robertson, H. 1933. Aspects of the Rise of Economic Individualism, Cambridge University
Press: Cambridge.
Roux, F. J. P. and Gilbertson, D. P. 1978, The behavior of share prices on the Johannesburg
Stock Exchange, Journal of Business Finance and Accounting 5(2), 223-232.
Sadeghi, M. 2008. Financial Performance of Shariah-Compliant Investment: Evidence from
Malaysian Stock Market, International Research Journal of Finance and Economics
20, 15-26.
Sahih Al-Bukhari. (online) http://www.sahih-bukhari.com/ (Accessed on 01 July, 2015).
Sahih Muslim. (online) http://www.iium.edu.my/deed/hadith/muslim/ (Accessed on 01 July,
2015).
Samuels, J.M. and Yacout, N. 1981. Stock exchange in developing countries, Savings Dev.,
2, 217-320.

17

Samuelson, P.A. 1965. Proof that Properly Anticipated Prices Fluctuate Randomly, Industrial
Management Review 6, 41-49.
Securities & Exchange Commission Malaysia. 2007. Resolutions of the Securities
Commission Shariah Advisory Council, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
Shiller, R.J. 1989. Market Volatility. MIT Press: Mass.
Sunan Abu Dawud. (online) http://www.salahtimes.com/hadiths/sunanabudawud (Accessed
on 01 July, 2015).
Tag El-Din, S.I. 1996. The stock-Exchange from an Islamic Perspective, JKAU: Islamic
Economics 8, 31-49.
Tag El-Din, S.I. 2002. Towards an Islamic Model of Stock Market, JKAU: Islamic
Economics 14, 3-29.
The Brussels Journal. 2009. Vatican Paper Supports Islamic Finance: France Wants Its Share
of Sharia Banking, March 12. (Online) http://www.brusselsjournal.com/node/3819
(Accessed on 01 July, 2015).
Thompson, A.R. and Ward, M.J.D. 1995. The Johannesburg Stock Exchange as an Efficient
Market: A Review, Journal of Studies in Economics and Econometrics 19(3), 33-63.
Uddin, M. G. S. and Alam, M. M. 2007. The Impacts of Interest Rate on Stock Market:
Empirical Evidence from Dhaka Stock Exchange, South Asian Journal of Management
and Sciences 1(2), 123-132.
Urrutia, J.L. 1995. Tests of Random Walk and Market Efficiency for Latin American
Emerging Markets, Journal of Financial Research 18, 299-309.
Usmani, M.T. 2010. Principles of Shariah Governing Islamic Investment Funds, (online)
http://www.albalagh.net/Islamic_economics/finance.shtml (Accessed on 01 July, 2015).
Working, H. 1960. Price Effects on Future Trading, Food Research Institute Studies 1(1), 333.
Yusof, R.M. and Majid, M.S.A. 2007. Stock Market Volatility Transmission in Malaysia:
Islamic Versus Conventional Stock Market, JKAU: Islamic Economics 20(2), 17-35.
Zaky, N.Z.D.Y.Z. 1992. An Islamic perspective of Stock Market-An Introduction, Dian
Darulnaim Sdn. Bhd: Malaysia.
Zaman, M. R. 1986. The Operation of the Modern Financial Markets for Stocks and Bonds
and its Relevance to an Islamic Economy. American Journal of Islamic Social Sciences
3(1), 125-140.

18

