Social identity and social value orientationsI
Ozan Aksoya,b,∗
a

Department of Quantitative Social Science, University College London, 55-59 Gordon Square, WC1H 0NU, London
UK
b
Nuffield College, New Road OX1 1NF, Oxford UK

Abstract
This study provides an extension of the social value orientation model and a tool, other-other Decomposed Games, to quantify the influence of social identity on social value orientations. Social
identity is induced experimentally using the minimal group paradigm. Subsequently, the weights
subjects add to the outcomes of outgroup others relative to ingroup others and to the absolute
difference between the outcomes of ingroup and outgroup others are estimated. Results are compared to a control condition in which social identity is not induced. Results show that when the
outgroup is better off than the ingroup, the average subject is spiteful: they derive negative utility
from the outcomes of the outgroup other. When the ougroup is worse off than the ingroup, the
average subject attaches similar weights to the outcomes of outgroup and ingroup others. There is
also significant variation across subjects with respect to the level of ingroup bias.
Keywords: Cooperation, social value orientation, minimal groups, social identity

1. Introduction
A quick glance at any major newspaper nowadays will, very likely, show that humans are willing
to incur significant costs to members of outgroups in order to protect or better the outcomes for the
ingroup. Children whose parents are caught crossing the border illegally are separated from their
parents to deter illegal entry to the US.1 Legal and “skilled” immigrants in the UK are required to
pay an annual Immigration Health Surcharge of £400, in addition to the expensive visa fees and the
usual tax contributions to the National Health Service.2 Almost all countries are imposing tariffs
or quotas to certain foreign goods to protect domestic producers.3 There are very strong barriers
to international labor mobility, legal or illegal. All of these show that humans value the outcomes
of ingroup members more than the outcomes of outgroup members. But how much more?
I
I thank John Jensenius III for his help in programming and his comments on the design. I also thank participants
of the CESS Colloquium Series, Akitaka Matsuo, and Wojtek Przepiorka. The experiment reported in this paper
was conducted at Nuffield CESS. This research is supported by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research
(NWO) under grant 446-13-004. The Stata code and the dataset used to produce the results reported in this article
are available for replication at https://osf.io/wxra3/.
∗
Corresponding author
Email address: ozan.aksoy@ucl.ac.uk (Ozan Aksoy)
1
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/us-politics/us-immigration-children-audio-trump-borderpatrol-separate-families-parents-detention-center-a8405501.html
2
https://www.gov.uk/healthcare-immigration-application
3
http://tariffdata.wto.org/Default.aspx?culture=en-US

Preprint submitted to SocArxiv

March 15, 2019

Harvard economist Dani Rodrik asks a simple and related question: “how strong a preference
must we have for our fellow citizens relative to foreigners to justify the existing level of barriers on
international labor mobility” (p13 Rodrik, 2017). After a simple calculation based on a plausible
scenario, he concludes that “we must place a weight on the utility of fellow citizens that is at least
between four and five times greater than the weight we place on foreigners”. Or equivalently, a
foreigner must be worth less than 22 percent of a fellow citizen. In a similar exercise, Kopczuk et al.
(2005) argue that the observed levels of international assistance to developing countries imply that
Americans must value their fellow citizens’ outcomes about six times more than they value foreign
citizens’ outcomes. Or equivalently, a foreign citizen is worth 17 percent of a fellow citizen. It thus
appears that the weight attached to the outcomes of outgroup members is 17 to 22 percent of the
weight attached to the outcomes of ingroup members. But how accurate is this estimate? The
calculations of Rodrik (2017) and Kopczuk et al. (2005) are rather indirect. They use the levels
of barriers on international labor mobility and foreign assistance to estimate the relative weights.
Barriers to labor mobility and foreign assistance are complex policies that are influenced by many
factors, in addition to how much actors weight the outcomes of outgroups.
In this paper, I propose a simple tool to estimate directly how much actors weight the outcomes
of outgroup members relative to the outcomes of ingroup members. I build on the social value
orientation and the minimal group paradigm literatures. The social value orientation literature
investigates how actors value certain outcome allocations between self and others (Griesinger and
Livingston, 1977; McClintock, 1972; Schulz and May, 1989). Cooperative orientation, maximizing the sum of the payoffs for self and others; competitive orientation, maximizing the difference
between the payoffs for self and others in favor of self; equality orientation, minimizing the inequality between outcomes are some of the social value orientations distinguished in the literature.
Numerous methods have been developed to measure social value orientations (e.g., Liebrand and
McClintock, 1988; Kuhlman et al., 1992; Van Lange, 1999; Murphy et al., 2011; Aksoy and Weesie,
2012, 2013). All of these methods involve some form of Decomposed Games in which subjects are
asked to choose a certain outcome allocation between self and others among a menu of possible
self-other allocations.
There is a hidden but strong link between the social value orientation literature and the minimal
group paradigm. The minimal group paradigm is about how actors value outcome allocations
between two others, e.g., one ingroup and one outgroup (Tajfel et al., 1971; Tajfel, 1970). In other
words, as opposed to the social value orientation literature, the minimal group paradigm involves
other-other allocations instead of self-other allocations. In fact, in minimal group experiments selfother allocations are carefully avoided. This is because in minimal group experiments, subjects’
own individual interests should not be at stake to isolate the influence of mere social categorization
from any form of realistic conflict (e.g., Sherif et al., 1961). Because of this omission of self from
outcome allocation tasks, the tools of the social value orientation literature cannot readily be
applied to minimal group settings.
In this paper, I explicitly bridge the social value orientation literature with the minimal group
paradigm. I extend the social value orientation model to other-other allocations (also see Macro
and Weesie, 2016). Moreover, I also show that the classical self-other Decomposed Games of the
social value orientation literature can easily be adapted to other-other allocations, hence to minimal
group setting. Using experimental data, I quantify the influence of social identity on social value
orientations.

2

2. Theory: Social Value Orientations in other-other allocations
In the classical social value orientation model, for an outcome allocation for self (x) and other
(y), an actor i attaches a wi weight to the outcome of other such that (McClintock, 1972; Griesinger
and Livingston, 1977; Aksoy and Weesie, 2012, 2014):
Ui (x, y) ≡ Ui∗ (x, y; wi ) = x + wi y.

(1)

Let’s now assume that there are two types of others, ingroup and outgroup. Let I (O) denote
the set of ingroup (outgroup) others. Consider an other-other allocation situation in which the
ingroup other gets y I , the outgroup other gets y O , and there is no outcome for self, i.e., x = 0. In
this situation, the social value orientation model in (1) can be written as:
Ui (y I , y O ) ≡ Ui∗ (y I , y O ; wiI , wiO ) = wiI y I + wiO y O

(2)

where wiI and wi0 are the weights actors attach to the outcomes of ingroup and outgroup others,
respectively. Because utility is defined up to positive affine transformations, and assuming that
wiI > 0, equation (2) can be written as:
Ui (y I , y O ) ≡ Ui∗ (y I , y O ; θiO ) = y I + θiO y O

with θiO =

wiO
.
wiI

(3)

Equation (3) is now equivalent to the model in equation (1) where the outcomes for self and other
are replaced by the outcomes for ingroup other and outgroup other, respectively. Consequently,
the weight actors attach to the outcomes of outgroup others relative to ingroup others can easily be
estimated using other-other Decomposed Games just as the social value orientations are estimated
with self-other Decomposed Games (e.g., as in Aksoy and Weesie, 2012).
Finally, social value orientation research has shown that some people also consider inequality
in outcomes, such as those with equality or maximin orientations (Schulz and May, 1989; Grzelak
et al., 1977; Aksoy and Weesie, 2012; Macro and Weesie, 2016). These orientations are typically
captured by adding another term in equation (1), the absolute inequality between the outcomes for
self and other. In the other-other allocation case, an equivalent term will be adding the absolute
inequality between the outcomes for ingroup and outgroup others. Thus,4
Ui (y I , y O ) ≡ Ui∗ (y I , y O ; θiO , βi ) = y I + θiO y O − βi |y I − y O |.

(4)

A useful reinterpretation of the model in (4) is the following:

O
 y I + θi +βi y O
I O
∗ I O O
1−βi
Ui (y , y ) ≡ Ui (y , y ; θi , βi ) =
 y I + θiO −βi y O
1+βi

if y I ≥ y O
if y I < y O

(5)

4

When inequality concerns are introduced, in other-other allocations in which self gets zero it can be argued
that actors may take two additional terms into account: the difference between outcomes for ingroup others and
self as well as the difference between outgroup others and self. In this case, the model can be written as U =
O
I
O
x + wiI y I + wiO y O − bIi |y I − x| − bO
i |y − x| − βi |y − y |. Because in other-other allocations x = 0, this alternative
formulation can be re-arranged (assuming y I > 0, y O > 0, and wiI > bIi ) such that U = y I +
which is equivalent to the formulation in equation (4) with

3

wiO −bO
i
wiI −bI
i

= θiO .

wiO −bO
i
wiI −bI
i

y O − βi |y I − y O |,

Equation (4) is mathematically equivalent to (5) when β < 1. My empirical results below will
indeed show that β < 1, hence I will use (4) and (5) interchangeably. The specification in (5) is
easier to interpret than that in (4). In (5) we have two separate terms that represent the weights
attached to the outcomes of the outgroup other relative to the ingroup. When the outgorup is
θiO +βi
worse off than the ingroup this weight is 1−β
. When the outgroup other is better off than the
i
θO −β

i
i
. Hence, while (5) and (4) are mathematically
ingroup other the weight to the outgroup is 1+β
i
equivalent, specification (5) provides an alternative more convenient interpretation.
One could in principle modify the model in (4) by taking not the outcomes for the ingroup or
outgroup, but the utilities for the ingroup and outgroup. For example, one could define Ui0 (y I , y O )
as Ui0 (y I , y O ) = U I (y I , y O ) + θi0O U O (y I , y O ) − βi0 |U I (y I , y O ) − U O (y I , y O )|. That is, replacing
the outcomes of ingroup and outgroup others with utilities for ingroup and outrgroup others.
Alternatively, one could define equality as y I = θy O , and hence replace the term |y I − y O | in (4)
with |y I − θy O |. These alternative formulations are examples of interdependent utility, i.e., actors
are interested in utilities of other actors not just outcomes (Becker, 1993). In this article, I don’t
consider interdependent utility.

3. Method
3.1. Subjects
186 subjects were recruited with the Online Recruitment System for Economic Experiments
(ORSEE; Greiner (2004)). Majority of the subjects were students at the University of Oxford from
a variety of different study fields. Subjects were on average 30 years old (S.D.=14) and 58% of
them were female.5
3.2. Procedure
Subjects participated in one of ten sessions in Hilary Term (February-March) 2014. Subjects
in seven sessions were assigned to the experimental group and in the remaining three sessions to
the control group. Seven sessions were run between 16 and 24 subjects and three sessions were
run between 12 to 14 subjects. Subjects sat randomly in one of the cubicles in the Centre for
Experimental Social Sciences (CESS) lab at Nuffield College, University of Oxford. Subjects could
not see each other or the experimenter during the experiment. This also meant that the subjects
were not fully aware of the total number of subjects in the experiment, though they might have a
rough guess about the session size (the median session size was 20). The experiment was carried
out on computers using z-tree (Fischbacher, 2007).
3.2.1. Experimental group
After general instructions, subjects in the experimental group were shown five pairs of paintings
by Wassily Kandinsky and Paul Klee. For each pair, subjects chose the painting they liked more.
50% of subjects in a session were classified as Kandinskys, and the remaining 50% as Klees, based
on subjects’ relative preferences. Each subject was privately informed about his/her group.
5

The experiment reported here is embedded in a larger study which included additional unrelated tasks. These
additional tasks were administered after the procedure described here took place and were analyzed elsewhere. See
Aksoy (2015) for details of these additional tasks.

4

After classification, a collective quiz in which subjects guessed the painters of two paintings
(Klee or Kandinsky) was administered. Subjects earned £0.8 if at least 50% of their group correctly
guessed the two painters. Subjects earned a further £0.8 if their group correctly answered as many
questions as the other group. Quiz results were shown only after the experiment was completed.
After the collective quiz, subjects made decisions in 10 other-other Decomposed Games shown in
the appendix. The order of these 10 games was varied in two factors. These 10 games were modified
versions of the self-other Decomposed Games used by Aksoy and Weesie (2012).6 Recipients in these
Decomposed Games were a randomly selected ingroup member and a randomly selected outgroup
member. At the end of the experiment, one Decomposed Game was selected at random, and two
actual other subjects received the tokens based on a subject’s decision (20 tokens = £1). Similarly,
each subject was a recipient for a randomly selected other subject.
3.2.2. Control group
The control group followed the procedure above but without inducing group identity. Subjects
stated their preferences in the same 5 painting pairs. However, they were not classified as Klees or
Kandinskys. They completed the same guessing quiz but they were rewarded for their individual
success: for each correct guess, a subject earned £0.8. Finally, subjects decided in the same 10
other-other Decomposed Games. Different from the experimental group, the two recipients were
two other subjects randomly selected from the session, without any reference to any groups.
4. Results
I follow the estimation procedure described in Aksoy and Weesie (2012). In this procedure, the
outcomes in an other-other Decomposed Game are transformed into utilities via equation (4). In
addition, an additive random utility term  is added to the model to have stochastic behavioral
predictions. The random utility term makes the utility model statistically estimable. How much
a subject i prefers option A relative to option B is the utility difference in options A and B in a
game:
I
I
O
O
I
O
I
O
UAB (y I , y O ; θiO , βi ) = (yA
− yB
) + θiO (yA
− yB
) − βi (|yA
− yA
| − |yB
− yB
|) + (A − B )

(6)

I is the outcome for ingroup other in option A and y O is the outcome for outgroup other
where yA
B
in option B in a Decomposed Game. A subject prefers option A in a Decomposed Game when
UAB > 0. Following Aksoy and Weesie (2012), (θO , β) are treated as bi-variate normally distributed
variables and  is assumed to have an independent normal distribution with zero mean and nonzero
variance. This implies a multilevel probit model in which the dependent variable is a subject’s
preferences in the 10 Decomposed Games and independent variables are the outcome differences
given in equation (6). The distribution of (θO , β), the variance of (A − B ), and the empirical
Bayes predictions (posterior means) of θO and β per subject are estimated with the Stata program
GLLAMM (Rabe-Hesketh et al., 2002). The replication material with the Stata code and the data
are available at https://osf.io/wxra3/.

6

The modifications aimed to improve the statistical precision to estimate the social value orientation parameters
based on the results reported in Aksoy and Weesie (2012) and additional simulations.

5

Table 1 and Figure 1 show the results. When social identity is induced (experimental group),
the estimated mean of θO is 0.2 which is significantly different from both zero and one. This
means that when the inequality between ingroup and outgroup is zero, the average weight subjects
add to the outcomes of outgroup others is only 20% of the weight they add to the outcomes of
ingroup others. The estimated mean of β is 0.39 and significantly different from zero (and one).
This means that while subjects add a small weight to the outcomes of outgroup others relative to
ingroup others, they are still concerned with reducing inequality between ingroup and outgroup
others. There is also a negative correlation between θO and β.
A further noteworthy finding is the significant and large variance of θO in the experimental
group. An estimated variance of 0.34 implies that although on average there is significant ingroup
bias, there is also a significant variation among subjects regarding the level of ingroup bias. A
minority of subjects in fact have θO values very close to, but never exceeding one (see Figure 1-a).
These subjects could be described as “multicultural” as they add very similar weights to ingroup
and outgroup others’ outcomes. On the other hand, quite a few subjects (about 36%) add not
only lower but negative weights to the outcomes of outgroup others, displaying a very high level of
ingroup bias.
In the control group in which social identity is not induced θO is estimated as virtually 1. This
shows that without any difference in group identities, equal weights are added to the outcomes
of two random others. This finding adds confidence to the estimation method because any value
significantly different from 1 would hint at a methodological artifact and cast doubt on the validity
of the results. Also, the difference between the means of θO in the experimental and control groups
is highly significant (p 2-sided < 0.001). In the control group, the estimated variance of θO is
insignificant and the mean of β is estimated as 0.235. The difference in average βs in the control and
experimental groups is not very large and in fact statistically marginally insignificant (p 2-sided =
0.06). Similar to the variance of θ, the variance of β in the control group is statistically insignificant.
Finally, the variance of the error term (A −B ) is virtually identical in the experimental and control
groups.
A θ0 = 0.2 is a remarkably similar estimate compared to the indirect estimates of Rodrik (2017)
and Kopczuk et al. (2005). The utility weight that subjects attach to the inequality between ingroup
and outgroup (β), however, is an argument that Rodrik (2017) and Kopczuk et al. (2005) omit.
The existence of the β term somewhat complicates the interpretation of θ0 . This is because the
actual weight one attaches to the outcome of outgroup others is affected by the inequality between
ingroup and outgroup. For a more convenient interpretation, I will now use the alternative and
equivalent specification of the utility function given in (5). In this alternative interpretation we can
define two weights attached to the outcomes of outgroup others relative to that of ingroup others
when (i) the outgroup is worse off than the ingroup and (ii) the outgroup is better off than the
ingroup.
These weights are obtained using the β and α parameters (see equation 5). More precisely,
when the outgroup is worse off than the ingroup (i.e., y I − y O > 0) the net weight one adds to the
0 +β
outcomes of outgroup others relative to ingroup others is θ1−β
. Substituting the estimated means
0.2+0.39
0
of θ and β gives us an estimate of 1−0.39 = 0.97. In other words, when ougroup others are worse
off their outcomes are worth 97% of the outcomes for the ingroup, for an average subject. This
means that an average subject will be somewhat indifferent to a policy that redistributes outcomes
from the ingroup to the outgroup, when the outgroup is worse off. When the outgroup is better off
than the ingroup the net weight one adds to the outcomes of the outgroup relative to the ingroup

6

Table 1: Social value orientation estimates for the experimental and control groups. θO =“outgroup cooperative
orientation parameter”; β =“equality orientation parameter”; A , B = evaluation error. For the variances, p-values
are derived from the correct boundary tests using the mixture distribution (see Self and Liang, 1987).

Experimental Group
Parameter
mean(θO )
mean(β)
var(θO )
var(β)
cov(θO , β)
var(A − B )
N(Subject)
N(Decision)
log-likelihood

Control Group

Coeff.

S.E.

Coeff.

S.E.

.200∗∗∗
.389∗∗∗
.327∗∗∗
.050∗∗∗
-.099∗∗∗
.021∗∗∗

.059
.032
.087
.020
.038
.002

1.003∗∗∗
.235∗∗
.095
.063
-.073
.021∗∗∗

.154
.094
.073
.062
.058
.005

146
40
1460
400
-723.762
-140.875
∗∗∗ p 2-sided<0.001;∗∗ p 2-sided<0.01

0

−β
. Substituting the estimated means gives us 0.2−0.39
is θ1+β
1+0.39 = −0.14. This implies that when
the outgroup is in a better position than the ingroup, the average subject is spiteful: they derive
negative utility from the outcomes of the outgroup other. Figure 1-b shows the scatter plot of these
two weights. An interesting finding is the positive correlation between the two weights. The figure
also shows that there is precisely one subject who adds a negative weight to the outcomes of the
outgroup even when the outgroup is worse off than the ingroup. When the outrgoup is better off
than the ingroup, the majority of subjects are spiteful toward the outgroup.

5. Conclusions
In this study I bridge the social value orientation literature with the minimal group paradigm.
I extend the social value orientation model to other-other allocations, particularly to the case in
which the two recipients are an ingroup member and an outgroup member. Moreover, I provide a
set of other-other Decomposed Games. Using these games and inducing social identity via minimal
groups, I estimate the weights subjects add to the outcomes of outgroup others relative to ingroup
others and to the absolute difference between the outcomes of ingroup and outgroup others. I
compare these results to a control condition in which social identity is not induced. This method
quantifies clearly the effect of group identity on social value orientations.
Results show that the average weight subjects add to the outcomes of outgroup others relative
to ingroup others is negative when the outgroup is better off than the ingroup. In other words, the
average subject is spiteful toward the outrgoup when the outgroup is in an advantageous position
compared with the ingroup. When the outgroup is worse off than the ingorup, the average subject
weights the outcomes of ingroup and outgroup others similarly. There is also a significant variation
among subjects with respect to the level of ingroup bias. While a substantial number of subjects
show high levels of ingroup bias, a minority of “multicultural” subjects display little bias. This

7

Figure 1: Scatter plots of utility weights in the experimental group for the two alternative interpretations of the social
value orientation model.

0

.5

θ (weight to outgroup/ingroup)

1

(a) θ and β

-1

-.5

(ρ=-0.77)

0

.2

.4

θ O +β
1−β

and

.8

θ O −β
1+β

0

.5

1

1.5

(b)

-.5

(r=0.72)

-1

Weight to outgroup/ingroup if O < I

.6

β (weight to |ingroup - outgroup|)

-1

-.5

0

.5

1

Weight to outgroup/ingroup if O > I

8

1.5

variation is an interesting finding and future research should focus on identifying subject level
characteristics that explain this variation.
The method I present here is very easy to implement. The 10 other-other Decomposed Games
can easily be embedded in a survey or an experimental study. Also the social identities of the two
recipients in these 10 items can be adjusted depending on the researcher’s interests. For example,
the recipients could be from two different real social (e.g., ethnic) groups. The method I describe
here gives a clear quantitative estimate of average ingroup bias. Furthermore, it captures individual
differences in the level of ingroup bias. These individual-level estimates can be outcome variables
themselves. Alternatively, the researcher can use these estimates to predict an outcome variable of
interest.
How much an average actor weights the outcomes of outgroups relative to ingroups affects
important macro-level decisions. Barriers to international labor mobility (Rodrik, 2017), foreign
assistance to poor countries (Kopczuk et al., 2005), redistributive tax policies in ethnically heterogeneous contexts (Rueda, 2018), intergroup trust and cooperation (Aksoy, 2015; Simpson, 2006),
collective action in a competitive environment (Simpson and Aksoy, 2017) are among the many
social outcomes that are directly influenced by the extent of ingroup favoritism. The current study
shows that a relatively minor minimal group identity treatment with a highly educated subject pool
(the majority of the subjects were Oxford University students) is enough to create strong levels of
ingroup favoritism. One could easily imagine that the extent of ingroup favoritism would be higher
when real groups and less selected subject pools are considered. It is thus not surprising to see
widespread support to hostile policies toward foreigners in almost all countries. Furthermore, the
current study shows that ingroup favoritism is much stronger when the outgroup is better off than
the ingroup. This may explain why low income groups are more likely than high income groups to
favor policies that reduce the outcomes of outgroups, such as “Brexit”. This is because compared
with high income groups, low income groups are more likely to be worse off than the outsiders.
Moreover, stressing that the outsiders are well educated and skilled may not change the opinion of
the insiders. On the contrary, better off outsiders might trigger stronger ingroup favoritism from
the insiders.
References
Aksoy, O., 2015. Effects of heterogeneity and homophily on cooperation. Social Psychology Quarterly 78 (4), 324–344.
Aksoy, O., Weesie, J., 2012. Beliefs about the social orientations of others: A parametric test of
the triangle, false consensus, and cone hypotheses. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology
48 (1), 45–54.
Aksoy, O., Weesie, J., 2013. Hierarchical Bayesian analysis of biased beliefs and distributional social
preferences. Games 4 (1), 66–88.
Aksoy, O., Weesie, J., 2014. Hierarchical bayesian analysis of outcome-and process-based social preferences and beliefs in dictator games and sequential prisoners dilemmas. Social Science Research
45, 98–116.
Becker, G. S., 1993. A treatise on the family. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

9

Fischbacher, U., 2007. z-tree: Zurich toolbox for ready-made economic experiments. Experimental
Economics 10 (2), 171–178.
Greiner, B., 2004. The online recruitment system ORSEE 2.0 a guide for the organization of
experiments in economics. Working Paper Series in Economics 10, 1–15, mimeo, University of
Cologne.
Griesinger, D. W., Livingston, J. J., 1977. Toward a model of interpersonal orientation in experimental games. Behavioral Science 18, 173–188.
Grzelak, J. L., Iwinski, T. B., Radzicki, J. J., 1977. Motivational components of utility. In: Jungermann, H., de Zeeuw, G. (Eds.), Decision making and change in human affairs. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Kopczuk, W., Slemrod, J., Yitzhaki, S., 2005. The limitations of decentralized world redistribution:
An optimal taxation approach. European Economic Review 49 (4), 1051–1079.
Kuhlman, D. M., Brown, C., Teta, P., 1992. Judgements of cooperation and defection in social
dilemmas: the moderating role of judge’s social orientation. In: Liebrand, W., , Messick, D. M.,
Wilke, H. A. M. (Eds.), Social dilemmas, theoretical issues, and research findings. Oxford: Pergamon.
Liebrand, W., McClintock, C., 1988. The ring meaure of social values: a computerized procedure for
assessing individual differences in information processing and social value orientation. Europoean
Journal of Personality 2, 217–230.
Macro, D., Weesie, J., 2016. Inequalities between others do matter: evidence from multiplayer
dictator games. Games 7 (2), 11.
McClintock, C. G., 1972. Social motivation—a set of propositions. Behavioral Science 31, 1–28.
Murphy, R. O., Ackermann, K. A., Handgraaf, M. J., 2011. Measuring social value orientation.
Judgment and Decision Making 6 (8), 771–781.
Rabe-Hesketh, S., Skrondal, A., Pickles, A., 2002. Reliable estimation of generalized linear mixed
models using adaptive quadrature. Stata Journal 2 (1), 1–21.
Rodrik, D., 2017. Is global equality the enemy of national equality? Harvard University working
paper.
Rueda, D., 2018. Food comes first, then morals: Redistribution preferences, parochial altruism,
and immigration in western europe. The Journal of Politics 80 (1), 225–239.
Schulz, U., May, T., 1989. The recording of social orientations with ranking and pair comparison
procedures. European Journal of Social Psychology 19, 41–59.
Self, S. G., Liang, K.-Y., 1987. Asymptotic properties of maximum likelihood estimators and likelihood ratio tests under nonstandard conditions. Journal of the American Statistical Association
82, 605–610.
Sherif, M., Harvey, O. J., White, B. J., Hood, W. R., Sherif, C. W., et al., 1961. Intergroup conflict
and cooperation: The Robbers Cave experiment. Vol. 10. University Book Exchange Norman,
OK.
10

Simpson, B., 2006. Social identity and cooperation in social dilemmas. Rationality and Society
18 (4), 443–470.
Simpson, B., Aksoy, O., 2017. Cumulative advantage in collective action groups: How competition
for group members alters the provision of public goods. Social Science Research 66, 1–21.
Tajfel, H., 1970. Experiments in intergroup discrimination. Scientific American 223 (5), 96–102.
Tajfel, H., Billig, M. G., Bundy, R. P., Flament, C., 1971. Social categorization and intergroup
behaviour. European Journal of Social Psychology 1 (2), 149–178.
Van Lange, P. A. M., 1999. The pursuit of joint outcomes and equaility of outcomes: an integrative
model of social value orientation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 73, 337–349.

11

Appendix A. Other-other Decomposed Games
Table A.2: 10 other-other Decomposed Games used in the study. The last three columns include percentages of
subjects choosing option B in experimental and control groups and a t-statistics for the difference between the
experimental and control groups, respectively (N=146 in the experimental group and N=40 in the control group).

Option A

Option B

game

(ingroup)
other gets

(outgroup)
other gets

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

9
10
10
10
10
10
10
11
11
11

10
9
9
10
10
11
14
9
10
11

(ingroup)
other gets

(outgroup)
other gets

Data
% B choices
Exp. Control

difference
t-value

11
10
.884
.925
0.747
10
11
.651
.900
3.124∗∗
11
11
.884
.975
1.738+
12
7
.404
.025
-4.794∗∗∗
15
6
.616
.300
-3.671∗∗∗
12
10
.849
.775
-1.115
12
8
.575
.025
-6.910∗∗∗
10
11
.500
.925
5.155∗∗∗
10
11
.103
.200
1.659+
9
10
.089
.100
0.212
∗∗∗ p 2-sided<0.001;∗∗ p 2-sided<0.01;+ p 2-sided<0.1

12

