Waqf as a Tool for Rendering Social Welfare Services in the Social Entrepreneurship
Context
Shawon Muhammad Shahriar
Masters Student
Institute for Environment and Development (LESTARI)
National University of Malaysia (UKM),
Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia
E-mail: shawon.shahriar@gmail.com
Md. Mahmudul Alam *
Senior Lecturer
School of Economics, Finance & Banking (SEFB)
College of Business (COB)
Universiti Utara Malaysia (UUM)
Sintok, Kedah, Malaysia
E-mail: rony000@gmail.com
Jamaliah Said
Associate Professor
Accounting Research Institute
Universiti Teknologi MARA
Shah Alam, Malaysia
Email: jamaliah533@salam.uitm.edu.my
Mohammad Monzur-E-Elahi
Associate Professor
Department of Islamic Studies
National University
Gazipur, Bangladesh
E-mail: drmanzurelahi@gmail.com
*

Corresponding Author

Citation Reference:
Alam, M.M., Shahriar, S.M., Said, J., & Elahi, M.M. (2018). Waqf as a Tool for
Rendering Social Welfare Services in the Social Entrepreneurship Context. Global
Journal
Al-Thaqafah,
Special
Issue,
87-98.
(online)
http://www.gjat.my/gjat2018si/SI2018-06.pdf

This is a pre-publication copy.
The published article is copyrighted by the publisher of the journal.

1

Waqf as a Tool for Rendering Social Welfare Services in the Social Entrepreneurship
Context
Abstract
The concept of Islamic entrepreneurship centers on ensuring community well-being as the
priority, which is one of the important objectives (Maqasid) of the Islamic Shari’ah.
Historically, waqf played a significant role in the Islamic economic system, particularly in
rendering exemplary welfare services in the areas of healthcare, education, social welfare,
environmental, and other community-based programs. However, only a few success stories in
recent history have institutionally utilized the properties of waqf under proper management to
achieve its substantial objectives. This study uses the literature review as basis to analyze the
reasons behind the successful utilization of waqf as an effective tool to ensure social welfare
services in the past, as well as how this model can be replicated by considering current
contexts. This study will assist Islamic value-centric entrepreneurs, regulatory authorities,
investors, and researchers to gain an overall insight into the potentials of waqf as a tool for
rendering commendable social welfare services.
Keywords: waqf; Islamic entrepreneurship; social entrepreneurship; social welfare; thirdsector economy.
Introduction
Adam Smith, the father of modern economics, defined the discipline as a subject that involves
the effective utilization of society’s resources for the well-being of mankind (Smith, 1937).
Since then, this discipline has grown and thrived tremendously to achieve the fundamental goal
of ensuring the well-being of mankind. Its disciplinary development has been pursued through
two ideologically and operationally different dominant modes, namely, the market (private
sector) and state (public sector) economic systems. An individual is assumed to know what is
best for himself/herself; thus, the private sector economy relies on methodological
individualism and “maximization of profit” for individuals to ensure cumulative social wellbeing by facilitating the well-being of its individual members (Hillebrandt, 1985). Moreover,
maximizing the individual’s well-being with the objective of maximizing society’s collective
well-being places the former’s benefit at the center; this idea is based on free market
competition that follows the Darwinist social philosophy of “survival of the fittest” (Pirson and
Lawrence, 2010). By contrast, the public sector economy relies on the philosophy that society
knows what is best for it collectively and for all its elements individually. Accordingly, when
society maximizes its benefits, it necessarily maximizes the individual member’s benefit as
well. By maximizing society’s well-being to maximize that of individuals, society is
methodologically placed at the center (Bailey and Bailey 1995). The strengths and limitations
of these two systems eventually made them determine their respective strong places to play
their roles in the different sectors of the mainstream economy (Molla and Alam, 2011, 2013).
However, the private and public sector economies, popularly called the first and second
sector economies, respectively, have been determined incapable and inadequate in ensuring the
well-being of nations and societies (Shirley and Walsh, 2000). To compensate for the
deficiencies of these two systems, several non-conventional approaches, which are collectively
called the third sector economy (e.g., cooperatives and social enterprises, social cum
microfinance enterprises, social business, and public-private partnership projects, among
others), have been moved and promoted to ensure the well-being of mankind in an organic
2

manner (Molla and Alam, 2011, 2013). Given the disappointing outcomes of the two dominant
economic models, the third sector economy is highly expected to play an important and
dominant role in poverty alleviation and economic growth in the near future. Stiglitz (2009)
noted that a new balance needs to be struck among governments, markets, and other players,
including not-for-profits and cooperatives, to establish a plural economic system with several
pillars.
Within the third sector, social entrepreneurship, which comprises the non-profit and forprofit enterprises, is one of the major forms of operations. These entities are “social missiondriven” organizations that apply market-based business approaches to serve several social
needs and ensure their own economic sustainability (Defourny, Borzaga, and Defourny, 2001).
The main philosophy of social entrepreneurship may be interpreted as running any for-profit or
non-profit organization to achieve several philanthropic goals by applying capitalistic
principles (Borzaga and Santuari, 2003). Social entrepreneurship is not outright a charity
function; however, it is based on the principle that can be described as “doing charity by doing
trade” rather than “doing charity while doing trade” (Molla and Alam, 2011, 2013).
Entrepreneurs in the Islamic mold are guided by Islamic etiquettes (ethics) in their
search for how to best serve the cause of mankind. The motivating factor for these
entrepreneurs is the well-being of mankind and the pleasure of Allah, the Creator. Given that
community well-being is the priority for an Islamic value-centric entrepreneur, the concept of
Islamic entrepreneurship fits substantially into the third sector economic model structure.
Consequently, this third sector economic model can grow and expand to its required size by
applying the principles of Islamic value-centric entrepreneurship, thereby enabling it to
determine numerous similar business entities that operate in the mainstream and emerging
sectors of the economy. However, most entrepreneurs in many countries may currently lack
Islamic conviction and spirituality. In particular, entrepreneurs in the majority of non-Muslim
cannot be expected to completely conform to Islamic norms with regard to the religious and
material aspects of entrepreneurship; thus, they cannot reasonably be called fully Islamic
entrepreneurships (Molla and Alam, 2011, 2013). Under these circumstances, if an enterprise
completely conforms to all the material aspects of Islamic entrepreneurship and its communitycentric spirit, such enterprise may be loosely called an Islamic style enterprise even though it
may not fully conform to all the ethics of Islamic entrepreneurship. Output maximization, profit
maximization, and employee benefits, among others, are subject to community well-being
considerations in an Islamic style enterprise, where shareholders’ profits and employee benefits
are considered residual matters. Therefore, this mode of entrepreneurship may be the most
suitable and beneficial for the successful operation of a social business, which aims to seek
development with social justice, particularly in developing countries. The unique ethical and
motivational structure of Islamic entrepreneurship prioritizes community considerations over
the individual benefits of other agents. Similar to the motives of social enterprises/businesses,
Islamic entrepreneurship places the community as the primary stakeholder of the output of any
entrepreneurial action (Azid, Asutay, and Burki, 2007).
Waqf is a unique system of philanthropy recommended in Islam (Zuki, 2012; Salarzehi,
Armesh, and Nikbin, 2010; Çizakça, 2000) that is substantially suited with the concept of the
third sector economy. Historically, waqf played a significant role in the Islamic economic
system in rendering exemplary social welfare services (Kahf, 2003; Abuarqub and Phillips,
2009). In the modern contexts, many scopes for utilizing the properties of waqf, apart from
opening the doors of social entrepreneurship, are available to achieve its significant objectives.
The current study attempts to look at the reasons behind the successful utilization of waqf as an
3

effective tool to ensure social welfare services in the past, as well as how this model can be
replicated by considering current contexts.
Islamic Economic Philosophy of Social Entrepreneurship
The Islamic economic system is founded on the principle of the realization of Maqasid alShari’ah (goals and intents of Shari’ah) rather than profit maximization (Dusuki and
Bouheraoua, 2011). This system differs from all other existing economic systems by an “ethical
factor.” This difference is fundamental because ethics characterizes (epitomizes) the common
values of a society and determines the preference structures of the members of such society.
The Islamic ethical system is balanced, fair, just, and benevolent, as well as seeks to respect the
rights of primary and derivative stakeholders without allowing any exploitation, nepotism, and
other human ills. Islam advocates a tiered, multi-fiduciary stakeholder approach to enable
various stakeholders of a business to receive in proportion to their inputs. The responsibility of
each stakeholder is morally anchored because it is based on the concepts of trust, equity,
balance, fairness, benevolence, and excellence (Hassan and Shahid, 2010).
The well-being of all human beings, that is, the fulfilment of the material and spiritual
aspects of their needs, is the principal objective and goal of Islam because of its considerable
commitment to justice and brotherhood (Chapra, 1993, pp. 6–7). Therefore, instead of mere
maximization of the total output, the goal of a Muslim society should be the maximization of
outputs accompanied by initiatives that are directed to ensure the spiritual health of its
members. Moreover, an economic development should be considered realized only when the
following results are achieved: need–fulfilment for all, equitable distribution of income and
wealth, full employment, and environmental protection. Given that the Islamic economic
system is founded on the Maqasid and goal-oriented principle rather than profit maximization,
ethics dominates economics in Islam and not the other way around. Hence, the Islamic system
differs from all other economic systems by an “ethical factor” (Naqvi, 1981, pp. 12–18), which
is Maqasid based in all sphere. This deep-seated difference in value has a substantial impact on
the ground because ethics epitomizes the common values of any particular society, thereby
defining the preference structures of its individual members. Given that ethics dictates the tone
of economics in the Islamic discourse, economics and ethics cannot run parallel and
independently to each other in this system. On the contrary, economic behavior in the Islamic
discourse is derived from the ethical norms of Islam to ensure the well-being of the individual
members of a society. This ethics-based system aspires to establish a just and balanced social
system, that is, “a social environment that brings a sense of community and fellowship in
human relationships.” This system recognizes and respects the dignity and equitable treatment
of human beings, establishes social justice, and strikes a balance between utilization of
technology and preservation of the natural environment. Economic growth and prosperity
achieved through the “efficient allocation of resources” alone is insufficient to attain such a
balanced and harmonized social environment. Hence, this system supports Myrdal’s view of
economic development as an upward movement of the entire social system. That is, growth
accompanied by a positive change in the redistribution of income of the lower income groups
to avoid economic dualism. However, the Islamic discourse considers economic development
as one of the many elements of social well-being because it contributes to the upliftment of the
members of a society in the spiritual, material, and social spheres. The Islamic philosophy of
entrepreneurship aspires to expand beneficial production for the benefit of the human
community and enhance the quality of life, thereby enabling the enjoyment of basic necessities
and reasonable amount of luxuries without indulging in extravagance (Molla et al., 1988, pp.
199–200).
4

The Islamic economic system recognizes two obligatory and voluntary mechanisms in
the distribution of income and wealth: (1) functional distribution of income and wealth and (2)
income (re)distribution through transfer payment institutions (Pryor, 1985). The first
mechanism conducts the distribution through market mechanism, whereas the second
implements the distribution through various instruments, such as zakah, infaq, sadaqah, and
waqf (Tohirin, 2010). Given that waqf in Islam is a socio-religious and public welfare system, it
can be used as a tool for social- and community-based services.
By contrast, a social enterprise/business is a “cause-driven” entrepreneurship that
applies commercial strategies to maximize improvements in human well-being rather than
maximize profits (Huybrechts and Nicholls, 2012). By definition, a social business allows
investors to recoup the amount of money invested over a certain amount of time but does not
allow them to take any dividend beyond that point. The reason is that the sole purpose behind a
social enterprise’s existence is supposed to be achieving at least one social objective(s) through
its own operation. In reality, social enterprises are “social mission driven” organizations that
comprise for-profit and non-profit enterprises and apply market-based business approach in
their operations to achieve social objectives (Austin, Stevenson, and Wei‐Skillern, 2006).
Social business is a new paradigm and is expected to fill in the gap of the public and
private sectors to achieve their socio-economic goals. This type of business also resembles the
Islamic economic system because community benefits, rather than individual benefits, are the
prime motive.
Concepts of Waqf
In Islamic terminology, waqf refers to the act of holding a property and preserving it so that its
fruits, revenues, or usufructs are used exclusively for the benefit of an objective of
righteousness while prohibiting any of its use or disposition outside its specific objective (Kahf,
2012a). Waqf is a form of continuous charity (Sadaqah Jariah). It refers to the gift of money,
property, or other items of charity, which has been held and preserved for the confined benefit
of certain philanthropy (Sadeq, 2002; Salarzehi, Armesh, and Nikbin, 2010). Waqf is created
by giving away an asset that has the feature of perpetuity on a permanent basis (Ismail, 2013).
The rewards for this type of charity continue even after the donor’s death, that is, for as long as
the society continues to benefit from the waqf (Krafess, 2005). The waqf property is prohibited
from being used or disposed of outside of the specific purpose for which it is held (Hassan and
Shahid, 2010). Given that the definition of waqf implies a perpetual nature, this act applies to
non-perishable properties, the benefits of which can be extracted without consuming the
property itself (Assi, 2008). This type of property includes real estate, stocks, cash money, and
books, among others.
Waqf is an Arabic word that literally means “Al-habsu wal Man’u” (to hold and to
prevent). Waqf is considered a permanent Infaq fi sabilillah (spending for the cause of Allah).
Infaq is mentioned several times in the Quran, which are proof on waqf, in the following
passages.
1. “By no means shall you attain piety, unless you spend (in Allah’s cause) of that which
you love; and whatever of good you spend, Allah knows it well.” (Al-Quran 3:92)

5

2. “They ask you (O Muhammad), what they should spend, Say: Whatever you spend of
wealth must be for parents and kindred and orphans and the needy and the wayfarer,
and whatever you do of good deeds, truly Allah knows it well.” (Al-Quran 2:215)
3. “O you who believed, spend of the good things which you have lawfully earned.” (AlQuran 2:267)
Sunnah is also substantially specific in describing waqf. The Muhammad, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon him, emphasized on the charity and dedication of one’s wealth in
anticipation of earning its reward in perpetuity by saying the following words: “When a person
dies, all his good deeds ceases except three: the establishment of continuous welfare, the
benefitting knowledge and the pious children who will pray for them” (At-Tirmizi). To set
examples, the Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, built a social
infrastructure based on waqf and encouraged his companions to make waqf (Mahmud and
Shah, 2010).
In economic terms, waqf can be explained as diverting resources from consumption and
investing them in productive assets that provide either usufructs or revenues for future
consumption by individuals or groups of individuals. The surplus income of waqf can be placed
into operation that combines the acts of saving and investment. It consists of taking certain
resources off consumption and simultaneously placing them in the form of productive assets
that increase the accumulation of capital in the economy to increase the future output of
services and incomes (Lahsasna, 2010).
Categories and Management of Waqf
Before the advent of Islam, waqf was a religious exercise when a rich person used to donate a
property to the temple, thereby enabling the monks to benefit from it in the form of temple
expenses, helping the poor and destitute, or even for religious educational purposes (Allam,
2008). However, the history of Islam suggests that since the era of the Prophet Muhammad,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, the Islamic concept of waqf has been one of civil
societal institution. Islamic historians suggest that the first waqf in history was the sacred site of
the Ka’bah in Makkah because the Quran (3:96) mentions that it is the first house ever built for
worshipping God (Kahf, 2012a).
In the recorded history of the Prophet Muhammad, peace and blessings of Allah be
upon him, the first known waqf was the mosque of Quba on the outskirts of Madinah, which
was built in 622 upon the Prophet’s migration from Makkah to Madinah. The Prophet’s
Mosque was built six months later in the center of Madinah. Both mosques are examples of
religious waqf (Kahf, 2012a), which refers to any real estate or asset confined for providing
revenue to be spent on the maintenance and other expenses of religious institutions. Religious
waqf immensely contributes to the social welfare of a community because it assists to satisfy
the religious needs of the people and substantially reduces the burdens of cost from the
shoulders of the future generations.
Philanthropic waqf, which aims to support the downtrodden segment of society, is the
second category of waqf. Any activity that is of interest to the well-being of the community
(e.g., construction and maintenance of public utilities, helping the poor and needy, providing
and facilitating education and research, providing healthcare services, financing small
businesses, even caring for animals) is under the jurisdiction of this category. Precedents of
philanthropic waqf are evident during the lifetime of the Prophet Muhammad, peace and
6

blessings of Allah be upon him. When the Prophet and his companions migrated from Makkah
to Madinah to escape persecution on account of their religion, drinking water was scarce in
Madinah. Consequently, the people had to pay a high price for drinking water, which was
beyond the means of many of these poor migrants to the city. The Prophet, peace and blessings
of Allah be upon him, witnessed this ordeal of the people and called on them to purchase the
well and make it into a waqf so they may have free access to drinking water. `Uthman ibn
`Affan purchased the well and assigned it as a waqf as per the guidelines of the Prophet, peace
and blessings of Allah be upon him. In the fourth year of the Islamic calendar, the Prophet,
peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, took hold of an orchard, which was willed to him by
one of his companions, made its outputs a waqf after meeting his household expenses from it.
`Umar ibn al-Khattab also followed this example of the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah
be upon him, by assigning his palm orchard of Khaibar as a waqf for the poor and the needy as
per the advice of the Prophet. By the time the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him, died, many of his companions followed suit by making a portion of their properties as
philanthropic waqf (Kahf 2012a).
A third category of waqf, posterity or family waqf, started during the reign of `Umar ibn
Al-Khattab, the second successor of the Prophet, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him.
When `Umar was about to document his waqf of Khaibar in writing, he invited few
companions of the Prophet as witnesses. When the news broke out, many real estate owners
assigned several portions of their properties as waqf. However, a few of them provided a
condition that a certain portion of their fruits and revenues must be assigned for their own
children and descendants and the remaining portion should be spent as waqf.
A property should have the following characteristics to be considered a waqf.
i.

Perpetuity: Once a property is dedicated as a waqf, it retains its waqf characteristic of
perpetuity. Islamic jurists have laid down several difficult and lengthy procedures to
eliminate the waqf status off a property. They stipulate that a waqf property can be
exchanged for another property of equivalent value, which should yield the equal
benefits for its initial intended objectives, provided that it is approved by a local court.
Once the exchange of the property is completed following these rigorous procedures,
the new property must be dedicated for the same purpose and for the benefits of the
same group of beneficiaries as the previous one.

ii.

Permanence of stipulations of the waqf founder: Waqf is a voluntary act of charity by an
individual or a group of individuals from their own properties with a few stipulated
specific conditions. These conditions should be followed to the letter as long as they
comply with Shari’ah rulings. Consequently, a waqf property should be exclusively
used for the purpose for which it was made a waqf by the founders. Islamic jurists
stipulate that no management, supervisory authority, or court has any right to change
the conditions stipulated by the founders as long as it can be feasibly executed.
However, if a waqf project becomes infeasible over a period of time for several valid
reasons, then the revenues and fruits should be spent on a closer purpose available.
Otherwise, such revenues should be spent on the poor and needy because they are
supposed to be the default beneficiaries of waqf unless specified otherwise. The
purpose, revenue distribution, management structure, supervisory authority, and all
other stipulations by the founders are classified as permanence of stipulations (Kahf,
2012a).

7

In Islam, waqf is a civil institution, which has its own legal frameworks, documentation
of objectives, regulations for management, and stipulations for beneficiaries, instead of a
religious one. This classification provides the founders complete freedom to determine its
management, usage, and distribution within the confines of Shari’ah, thereby leaving no room
for the religious hierarchy to tamper with it. Historically, these stringent conditions of the
property management of waqf left no room for the Imams, preachers, or other religious leaders
to make any decision regarding a waqf property based on their own preferences. Consequently,
waqf was institutionalized as a civic charity organization that was able to serve society in
general to fulfil its numerous needs in a sustainable manner (Kahf, 2012a). In addition, the
civic organization nature of waqf contributed positively to expand its scopes beyond religious
activities, that is, by covering education, public utility services, and other areas of social
services.
As per Islamic jurisprudence, the waqf founder has the complete freedom to determine
the management structure of his/her waqf. The custodian of the waqf property, often known as
mutawalli, nazir, or qayyim, is responsible for managing and administering the waqf property
for the best interest of its beneficiaries. Apart from preserving the property, the mutawalli is
responsible for maximizing the revenues from the property for the benefit of its intended
beneficiaries. The mutawalli is compensated for his services based on the provisions of the
waqf document. If no mention of compensation for the mutawalli is included in the document,
then he/she may either volunteer for the waqf or may seek an allotment of compensation from
the court. Appointment of the custodians by the waqf founders implies that every waqf
estate/property should have its own autonomous management (Kahf, 2012a).
Roles of Waqf in Providing Social Welfare Services
Waqf has been legislated to establish various social- and community-based services in Muslim
society. It has diversified benefits and roles (Intisar, 2007). Waqf has good contributions in the
field of the necessary items of Shari’ah (Al-Hajiyyaat). One of the significant objectives of
waqf is to cover the necessities of various types of people (i.e., poor, needy, sick, travellers,
widows, and students, among others. Apart from serving the essential needs, waqf successfully
generates employment scopes through its various activities. In the field of Shari’ah-approved
embellishments (Al-Tahsiniyyat), waqf has a good access in playing successful roles in
managing and organizing waqf-based concerns, particularly those that are business-oriented. In
this manner, the waqf activities can promote development in various sectors, such as the local
economy, industrial sector, and other financial sectors. Moreover, waqf has played an immense
role in the field of the protection of the five essentials (Al-Daruriyaat al-Khams): protection of
the religion and religious activities; protection of life on the essentials; protection of the human
intellect with sound and harmonious development of mind, body, and soul through educational
services; protection of orphans and widows; and protection of wealth and reallocation of wealth
and income through economic and financial activities.
The permanent nature of waqf results in the accumulation of the waqf properties. These
properties are devoted to provide capital assets that produce an ever-increasing flow of
revenues/usufructs to serve its objectives in diversified fields that support widespread social
welfare activities. Certain historical experiences should clarify how waqf can contribute to the
welfare and sustainable development of a society. The archived registers of waqf in Jerusalem,
Istanbul, Cairo, and other major Muslim cities indicate that the lands of waqf were used to
cover a considerable proportion of the total cultivated areas in the Muslim territories. For
example, a survey conducted in Egypt in 1812 and 1813 indicated that waqf represented
8

600,000 feddan out of a total cultivated land of 2.5 million feddan. In Algeria, there were 543
waqf deeds in 1841 for the benefit of the grand mosque of the capital Algiers. In Turkey,
approximately one-third of the lands were waqf. In Palestine, 233 waqf deeds contained 890
properties in the middle of the 16th century as opposed to 92 private ownership deeds that
contain 108 properties (Kahf, 2012b). Under normal productivity assumptions, these properties
alone are sufficient to provide huge amounts of revenues for benevolent activities and to raise
the quality of life in each of these countries.
With regard to the spending of waqf revenues, spending on mosques, particularly in the
form of payment of salaries for imams, teachers and preachers, and carpeting, cleaning, water
supply and oil for the lights, was the most frequently used purpose. This independent source of
financing enabled religious leaders and preachers to take positions in various social and
political issues independent of that of the ruling class. This situation is the reason why the
French colonial authority took control of the waqf properties of Algeria upon their occupation
of the land in 1831, that is, to suppress the religious leaders who rebelled against the occupation
(Kahf, 2012b).
Although religious education used to be covered by waqf on mosques, general
education used to be the second largest recipient of waqf benefits. Apart from receiving waqf
revenues since the beginning of Islam in the early seventh century, education also used to
attract funds from other voluntary charities. For government-financed education projects,
schools were often constructed and then certain properties were assigned as waqf for spending
on it, such as the waqf during the Ayubite (1171–1249) and Mamalik (1249–1517) eras in
Palestine and Egypt, respectively. Historical sources indicate that 64 schools funded by the
waqf properties located in Palestine, Turkey, and Syria were disseminating education in
Jerusalem at the beginning of the 20th century, of which 40 schools were made waqf by the
Ayubite and Mamalik rulers and governors. The university of Al-Azhar, which was founded in
Cairo in 972, also used to be financed by waqf revenues until the government of Egypt took
control of this property in 1812. In the early years of the Islamic empire, educational projects
financed by waqf properties often covered books, libraries, salaries for teachers, and other
relevant personnel and stipends for students. This independent approach of financing for
education facilitated the creation of an educated class beyond the rich and ruling class of
society. At times, the majority of Muslim scholars used to come from the downtrodden
segments of society. This situation created an extremely significant process of dynamic social
change in Muslim society that was unprecedented in the history of humanity (Kahf, 2012b).
Accordingly, offering waqf-financed education meant that the poor had an equal opportunity
with the rich in acquiring education. This situation contributed immensely to the dynamics of
leadership change and wealth circulation in Muslim society, circulated power and wealth, and
eliminated the opportunity of creating an aristocratic class that monopolized wealth and
political power.
The third biggest beneficiaries of waqf were the poor, needy, orphans, and prisoners.
Healthcare service, including the construction of hospitals, as well as spending on physician,
apprentices, patients, and medicines, was another significant beneficiary of the waqf revenues
(Kahf, 2012b). In addition, the waqf revenues were spent to help people go to Makkah and
Madinah to perform pilgrimage, to assist girls getting married, and numerous other
philanthropic causes.
Conclusions

9

The concept of waqf indicates that the Islamic economic system recognizes the roles of the
non-profit sector in social and economic development, as well as provides the necessary legal
and institutional protection for them (Lahsasna, 2010). This act creates a permanent,
cumulative, and continuously increasing capital base that sustains growth, as well as expands
the scope of benevolent activities apart from zakah and charities. Waqf carries the functions of
benevolence to reach all areas of social welfare and even sectors that many contemporary
economists and political sociologists consider a part of the domain and responsibility of
governments (e.g., health, education, and defense) (Kahf, 2012c).
In the Islamic legal system, waqf makes an early version of the concept of modern
corporations (Kahf, 2012c). Although economic corporations are no more than funds utilized to
generate profits for their owners, the waqf properties are funds utilized for the benefit of their
beneficiaries. The management that is necessary for waqf is one which is similar to that of
economic corporations, provided that a method is provided to motivate this management to
relate to the interests of the beneficiaries and the local community. Historically, the institution
of waqf rendered exemplary welfare services in the areas of healthcare, education, social
welfare, environment, and other community-based programs. Consequently, expectations run
high in Muslim society that the waqf system should take over more responsibilities to solve
contemporary social problems. At present, the majority of the waqf institutions cannot play
their expected roles due to lack of essential resources that they need to function properly.
The concept of waqf, as we observed, entails generous applications in the direction of
developing the non-profit or for-profit non-governmental sector and increasing the quantity of
welfare services that aim to improve the socio-economic welfare of society. The engagement of
far-sighted entrepreneurs and philanthropists, clarity of the vision, formation of modern
corporation-style management, recruitment of competent human resources to run the
enterprises, and partnerships with best possible philanthropy projects and social activists are the
keys to move forward. That is, to revive the roles of waqf as a tool for rendering exemplary
social welfare services that it used to contribute to in the early days of Islam. Beyond the
contemporary usage of waqf in dedicating the properties for ritualistic causes only, if the waqf
system is intellectually handled based on the Maqasid and objectives of the Shari’ah, as well as
fiqh of priority, it can play a substantially effective and successful role in the society.
References
Abuarqub, M., & Phillips, I. (2009). A brief history of humanitarianism in the Muslim
world. Birmingham, England: Islamic Relief Worldwide.
Allam, S. (2008). Islamic Foundations (waqf) in Egypt (Back into Pharaonic Times). Journal of
the American Research Center in Egypt, 105-112.
Assi, E. (2008). Islamic waqf and management of cultural heritage in Palestine. International
Journal of Heritage Studies, 14(4), 380-385.
Austin, J., Stevenson, H., & Wei‐Skillern, J. (2006). Social and commercial entrepreneurship:
same, different, or both?. Entrepreneurship theory and practice, 30(1), 1-22.
Azid, T., Asutay, M., & Burki, U. (2007). Theory of the firm, management and stakeholders:
An Islamic perspective. Islamic Economic Studies, 15(1), 1-30.
Bailey, S. J., & Bailey, S. J. (1995). Public sector economics: theory, policy and practice.
Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Borzaga, C., & Santuari, A. (2003). New trends in the non-profit sector in Europe: The
emergence of social entrepreneurship. The Non-profit Sector in a Changing Economy,
31-59.
10

Chapra, M. U. (1993). Islam and economic development: A strategy for development with
justice and stability (Vol. 14). Islamabad: International Institute of Islamic Thought
(IIIT).
Çizakça, M. (2000). A history of philanthropic foundations: The Islamic world from the seventh
century to the present (pp. 2-10). Istanbul: Boğaziçi University Press.
Defourny, J., Borzaga, C., & Defourny, J. (2001). From third sector to social enterprise (pp. 128). London: Routledge.
Dusuki, A. W., & Bouheraoua, S. (2011). The framework of maqasid al-shari'ah and its
implication for Islamic finance. Islam and Civilisational Renewal, 2(2), 316.
Hassan, A., & Shahid, M. M. A. (2010). Management and development of the awqaf assets.
In Seventh International Conference—The Tawhidi Epistemology: Zakat and Waqf
Economy, Bangi (pp. 309-328).
Hillebrandt, P. M. (1985). Economic theory and the construction industry (pp. 12-19). London:
Macmillan.
Huybrechts, B., & Nicholls, A. (2012). Social entrepreneurship: definitions, drivers and
challenges. Social entrepreneurship and social business, 31-48.
Intisar, A.J. (2007). Al-Maqasid Al-Tashri’iyah lil-awqaf al-Islamiyah. University of Jordan,
Sirya.
Ismail, A.M.M. (2013). Financing through cash-waqf: a revitalization to finance different
needs. International journal of Islamic and Middle Eastern finance and
management, 6(4), 304-321.
Kahf, M. (2003, January). The role of waqf in improving the ummah welfare. In International
seminar on Waqf as a Private Legal Body, Islamic University of North Sumatra,
Indonesia (pp. 6-7).
Kahf, M. (2012a, January 4). Role of waqf in Sustainable Development (P. 1): Kinds and
Objectives
of
Islamic
waqf.
Retrieved
from
http://www.onislam.net/english/shariah/contemporary-issues/islamic-themes/452483kinds-and-objectives-of-the-islamic- waqf.html (accessed: March 5, 2013).
Kahf, M. (2012b, January 11). Role of waqf in Sustainable Development (P. 2): waqf and
Sustaining
Economic
Development.
Retrieved
from
http://www.onislam.net/english/shariah/contemporary-issues/islamic-themes/452593waqf-and-sustaining-economic-development.html (accessed: March 5, 2013).
Kahf, M. (2012c, January 11). Role of waqf in Sustainable Development (P. 3): Reforming the
waqf Institution. Retrieved from http://www.onislam.net/english/shariah/contemporaryissues/islamic-themes/452731-reforms-enabling-islamicwaqf-play-its-role.html
(accessed: March 5, 2013).
Krafess, J. (2005). The influence of the Muslim religion in humanitarian aid. International
Review of the Red Cross, 87(858), 327-342.
Lahsasna, A. (2010). The role of cash waqf in financing micro and medium sized enterprises
(MMEs). In Seventh International Conference–The Tawhidi Epistemology: Zakat and
Waqf Economy (pp. 97-118).
Mahmud, M.W., & Shah, S.S. (2010). Optimization of Philanthropic Waqf: The Need for
Maqasid-based Legislative Strategies. Shariah Law Reports, 2, 45-29.
Molla, R. I., & Alam, M. (2011). Mainstreaming third sector economics by adopting islamic
principles of entrepreneurship. Dialogue and Alliance, 25(2).
Molla, R. I., & Alam, M. M. (2013). A Third Sector–Led Economic Model: Scopes of Islamic
Entrepreneurship. American Journal of Islamic Social Scieces, 30(1), 73-91.
Molla, R.I., Moten, A.R., Gusau, S.A, & Gwandu, A.A. (1988). Frontiers and Mechanics of
Islamic Economics. University of Sokoto: Nigeria.Musa, A. (2010). Malaysia can
promote Islamic entrepreneurship. The Star Online, April 10. (accessed: 5th March
11

2013)
<http://biz.thestar.com.my/news/story.asp?sec=business&file=/2010/4/10/business/2010
0410083304>
Naqvi, S.N.W. (1981). Ethics and Economics: An Islamic Synthesis. Islamic Foundation: UK.
Pirson, M. A., & Lawrence, P. R. (2010). Humanism in business–towards a paradigm
shift?. Journal of Business Ethics, 93(4), 553-565.
Pryor, F. L. (1985). The Islamic economic system. Journal of Comparative Economics, 9(2),
197-223.
Sadeq, A. M. (2002). Waqf, perpetual charity and poverty alleviation. International Journal of
Social Economics, 29(1/2), 135-151.
Salarzehi, H., Armesh, H., & Nikbin, D. (2010). Waqf as a social entrepreneurship model in
Islam. International Journal of Business and Management, 5(7), 179-186.
Shirley, M. M., & Walsh, P. P. (2000). Public versus private ownership (Vol. 2420). World
Bank Publications.
Smith, A. (1937). The wealth of nations [1776].
Stiglitz, J.E. (2009). Moving beyond market fundamentalism to a more balanced economy,
Annals of Public and Cooperative Economics 80(3): 345-360.
Tohirin A. (2010). The Cash waqf for Empowering the Small Businesses. Seventh International
Conference – The Tawhidi Epistemology: Zakat and waqf Economy, 6-7 January, 2010,
Bangi, Malaysia.
Zuki, M.S.M. (2012). Waqf and its role in socio-economic development. ISRA International
Journal of Islamic Finance, 4(2), 173-178.

12

