Paper published in the Journal of International and Comparative Social Policy, 2018
The publication is available at: https://doi.org/10.1080/21699763.2018.1526696

To cite this article: Gibrán Cruz-Martínez (2018): A Bottom-up picture of intra-national
welfare regimes: the case of marginalised communities in Puerto Rico, Journal of
International and Comparative Social Policy, DOI: 10.1080/21699763.2018.1526696

A Bottom-up picture of Intra-National Welfare
Regimes: The case of Marginalised Communities in
Puerto Rico
Gibrán Cruz-Martínez
Institute of Public Goods and Policies, CSIC
gibran.cruz@csic.es

Abstract:
The main purpose of this article is twofold: (1) an examination of welfare regimes using a bottom-up
approach, which enables a comprehensive analysis of welfare production based on recipients perceptions;
and (2) an examination of more than one type of welfare-mix coexisting inside the national level across policy
sectors. A classification of welfare regimes is carried out following a bottom-up approach and relying on the
basis of the importance of welfare providers to satisfy social risks and promote well-being. Three traditional
(e.g., state, market, family) and one alternative welfare provider (e.g., community) are considered. Data is
collected through twenty semi-structured interviews in seven marginalised communities of Puerto Rico. The
results show five configurations of intra-national welfare-mixes across the following welfare areas: housing,
nourishment, health, education, maternity/paternity, disability, work-unemployment and older-age. This
paper contributes to the theoretical proposals of intra-national welfare regimes, and alternatives providers in
the welfare-mix.
Keywords: welfare-mix, social risks, welfare state, social policy, Latin America and the Caribbean

1

Introduction
Esping-Andersen’s (1990) welfare regime theory has been highly praised and criticised in the academia.
Scholars working on high-income countries have confirmed the validity of the three welfare regime models
(Powell and Barrientos, 2004), and complemented the tripartite classification (Aspalter, 2006; Mishra, 1994;
Yu, Chau, and Lee, 2015). Regarding the geographic area of interest in this paper, scholars have incorporated
Latin America as a model (Barrientos, 2004), and have gone beyond by identifying intra-regional differences
in the classification of Latin American welfare regimes (Barba Solano, 2003; Filgueira, 1999; Marcel and
Rivera, 2008; Martínez Franzoni, 2007). Martinez-Franzoni and Sanchez-Ancochea (2013, 2016) have
examined universalist regimes, highlighting universalism as an achievable policy output in Latin America
and the Global South using a combination of coverage, generosity and benefits. However, students of Latin
American social policy have concentrated their efforts in examining the national picture of welfare regimes
following a top-down approach. This raises two limitations in the welfare regime literature, which this paper
addresses.
First, the literature draws upon what welfare providers claim to do rather than on what the population reports
as actually having access. To solve this limitation, this paper delivers a counterpoint between a traditional
top-down approach and a bottom-up approach of Puerto Rico´s welfare regime. Especially, analysing the role
of traditional welfare providers (e.g., state, market, family) and an alternative welfare provider (e.g.,
community) in the allocation of resources and distribution of social risks according to the perception of
residents in marginalised communities of Puerto Rico. The community is considered as part of a broader
‘institutional responsibility matrix’ acting as a fourth institutional actor to the state–market–family trinity in
producing livelihoods and distributing welfare (Gough, 2013: 211). What is the role of the state, market,
family and the community in the production of welfare and allocation of social risks in marginalised
communities of Puerto Rico? What is the dominant locus of solidarity in the policy areas of housing,
nourishment, health, education, maternity/paternity, disability, work-unemployment and older-age?
A second limitation in the scholarship is the scarce literature on intra-national variations of welfare regimes
to show territorial dynamics of social policy. Welfare regimes in countries with robust welfare states, such
as those examined by Esping-Andersen (1990), report important variations across social policy sectors.
Gough (2013: 207) made this evident when highlighting that the so-called “liberal Britain still retains a
universal National Health Service”. Ratigan (2017) recently showed a systematic subnational variation with
distinct worlds of welfare across Chinese provinces. Based on the experience of marginalised communities,
this paper asks if it is possible to identify a social policy fragmentation in Puerto Rico with different intranational welfare regimes across social policy sectors. Moreover, confirms if national welfare regime patterns
might, in reality, be programme-specific (Gough, 1999).

2

Income generating strategies of individuals are too diverse and complex to be sufficiently explained by
quantitative research methods (Budowski, Tillmann, Keim, and Amacker, 2010). Moreover, welfare
provision and resource allocation strategies in the welfare-mix are complex as well, thus in-depth qualitative
approach is required for its understanding. In this paper, data is collected through twenty semi-structured
interviews conducted in seven marginalised communities of Puerto Rico. A classification of welfare regimes
is carried out following a bottom-up approach and relying on the basis of the importance of welfare providers
to satisfy social risks and promote well-being in the eight policy areas considered in this research.
This paper proposes an intra-national welfare regimes theory portraying different welfare-mixes across policy
areas. The bottom-up characterisation of Puerto Rico´s welfare regime shows different types of welfaremixes co-existing inside the national level. Residents from marginalised communities evidence five
configurations of intra-national welfare-mixes across the eight policy sectors mentioned above.
The paper is organised as follows. The next section briefly addresses the theoretical framework with an
emphasis on the intra-national welfare regimes and the community as an alternative welfare provider. The
research design is presented in the following section, describing the selection of communities, interviewees
and the structure of the interviews. The fourth section presents the main research findings (i.e., the bottomup picture of intra-national welfare regimes according to marginalised communities in Puerto Rico). The
article finishes with a discussion and a general conclusion.
Theoretical Framework
During the last three decades, a significant group of scholars has been examining the historical experience
and development of Latin American welfare systems and welfare regimes. The welfare systems in Latin
America and the Caribbean has been grouped as emerging welfare states (Huber and Stephens, 2012), welfare
states in development (Cruz-Martinez, 2017b, 2017d), institutional-redistributive welfare states (Sanchez de
Dios, 2015), welfare states in transition (Esping-Andersen, 1996), and developmental welfare states in the
making (Riesco, 2009), meaning that their welfare programmes and institutions are not yet as
developed/institutionalised as their counterparts in Europe. However, these broad classifications do not show
the different worlds of welfare across the Latin American region.

Instead of referring to the welfare state, scholars have been using the term welfare regime to depict the
distribution of social risks between providers of welfare. According to the pioneer and path-breaking work
of Esping-Andersen (1999, pp. 34-35), a welfare regime could be defined as the interdependent way in which
the state, market and family (i.e., welfare actors or welfare providers) combine to allocate risks and produce

3

well-being.1 And the welfare-mix – another concept that will constantly be used in the following pages – is
the articulation of the welfare actors in the welfare production.
Gough (2013), in his own words, “reconceptualise the welfare regime paradigm developed within Northern
social policy studies to understand the nature and diversity of social policies in the South”. Based on previous
research with Geoff Wood, he proposes an informal (in)security regime for the Global South as an analogue
ideal-type welfare state regime model (Gough and Wood, 2004; Wood and Gough, 2006). More recently,
three meta-welfare regimes were identified in the Global South: proto-welfare state regimes, informal
security regimes and insecurity regimes (Sharkh and Gough, 2010).2 This is one of the multiple frameworks
that allow us to consider specificities and commonalities across the Global South without imposing
frameworks developed in (and using countries from) the Global North. Barrientos (2004) follows a similar
logic to Gough (2013) expanding Esping-Andersen’s approach to include Latin America. His main argument
is that “there is enough commonality in welfare provision across Latin American countries to argue that they
share a common welfare regime” (2004, p. 122). He argues that the Latin American welfare regime shifted
from a conservative-informal to a liberal-informal welfare regime due to changes in economic and social
institutions after the Washington Consensus on the origins of the neoliberal era. This liberal shift brought an
increased reliance on the market for welfare provision as well as a greater burden on the individual, and a
reduction of welfare benefits linked to class and status (i.e., social insurance as an employment protection).
Barrientos argues that the lack of a basic safety net (i.e., social protection floor) add-up the ‘informal’
characterisation to both regime classifications.
Latin American Welfare Regimes and the Need to Overcome State-Centric and Top-Down Approaches

Moreover, a similar critique applies to the global south welfare regimes mentioned above: grouping the
welfare systems does not make justice to show the intra-regional disparities. Complementing Mesa-Lago's
(1989) pioneering work, Filgueira (1999) proposes a welfare regime typology showcasing the intra-regional
variety of welfare-mixes. His typology results in three regimes. The stratified universalism exhibits a central
role of the state, with a relatively high level of social protection coverage (universalism) and a differentiated
quality and access to welfare benefits across class (stratified). The main difference between the remaining
two regimes is the degree of the population excluded from the welfare programmes, being around half of the
population in the dual regimes and the vast majority in the exclusionary regimes (Molina, 2006).

1

The state, family and market are traditional actors that provide one or more rationales for the production and
allocation of resources. There are multiple papers in the welfare regime literature conceptualising the state, market and
family as ‘actors’ in the welfare-mix (Heuer et al., 2016; Longo et al., 2015; Marcel and Rivera, 2008). ‘Welfare
actors’ and ‘welfare providers’ are used interchangeably in this paper.
2 The main difference among regimes resides in its welfare outcomes and the dominant locus of solidarity. Protowelfare state regimes have the highest outcomes, and the dominant welfare provider is the state. Informal security
regimes have intermediate outcomes and individuals go to the community and family to meet their needs. The
insecurity regimes have the lowest welfare outcomes and there are not even stable informal security mechanisms.

4

According to Barba Solano (2009) the welfare regime scholarship has generated a consensus portraying the
Latin American regime – during the state-led industrialisation era – very close to the European conservative
regimes although more exclusive (i.e., a difference in the degree of stratification but not on the nature of the
welfare regime). Nonetheless, like Filgueira, Barba Solano (2003) finds out three welfare regimes developed
under the umbrella of the social security paradigm: the universalist, the dualist and the exclusionary. The
differences between the welfare regimes are mainly in the degree of coverage and quality of welfare benefits,
rather than in the nature of the welfare programmes.

Huber and Stephens (2005) identify five clusters of social policy regimes in Latin America and the Caribbean.
They examined the coverage, magnitude, rules for entitlements and mode of financing of social welfare
programmes providing cash transfers and benefits in kind. In line with Barba Solano and Filgueira, the main
difference between clusters is the degree of coverage and effort – declining from the first to the fourth.
However, the main novelty was the inclusion of English speaking Caribbean countries, which were grouped
in the fifth cluster, and alongside Costa Rica – from the first cluster – showed a difference in nature with the
first four clusters (i.e., stronger importance on health and education expenditure relative to social security).
More recently, Pribble (2011) identified four social policy regimes 3 using proxy measures along two
dimensions of the coverage of social protection policies [i.e., risk prevention (social investment in education
and healthcare) and risk coping (pension coverage of workers in the formal and informal sector). Even though
Filgueira, Barba Solano, Pribble, Huber and Stephens identified different welfare regimes in the region, in
reality, these portray differences in the degree of coverage, expenditure and welfare outcomes and not
necessarily differences in nature. Therefore, the previous researchers have all considered Latin American
welfare regime under the Bismarckian welfare tradition. This broad picture helps us understand the
generalisations in the welfare provision by the multiple actors in the welfare-mix. However, it does not make
justice to present the different worlds of welfare across/inside countries.

Martinez-Franzoni (2008) goes beyond distinguishing countries based on the different degrees of coverage,
social expenditure, and welfare outcomes to proof empirically qualitative different roles played by actors in
the welfare-mix. Her welfare regimes examined the interaction and allocation of resources between public
policy, labour market and family/unpaid work. Following Rudra (2007), Martinez-Franzoni takes into
account the role played by public policy in welfare production by promoting access to the market or
protecting people from the market. In addition, Martinez-Franzoni also considers Orloff’s (1996) arguments
on the role of the family in unpaid care-taking provision. Martinez-Franzoni distinguishes three welfare
regimes: the state-productivist, where public policy emphasise productivity in the labor market (i.e., emphasis
in the commodification of labour work with state-targeted provisions); the state-protectionist, where public
policy provides welfare mainly via social protection linked to formal employment (i.e., emphasis in the
3

The “mobilizing incorporation-industrialist,” the “corporatist incorporation-industrialist,” the
“interrupted incorporation-agrarian,” and the “exclusionary-agrarian” social policy regimes.

5

decommodification of welfare with state-stratified provisions); and the non-state familialist, where there is a
weak or inexistent role of public policies to provide welfare and thus a high level of dependence on the family
(i.e., emphasis in the defamilialisation of welfare with targeted, conditional and basic social assistance
programmes).
Martinez-Franzoni overcomes the state-centric limitation by incorporating the role of the family in the unpaid
work care-taking. However, the top-down approach still persists in her cutting-edge work. A large part of the
literature on welfare regimes in Latin America – and the world – rely on what the state claims to do (i.e.,
state-centric approach) via social expenditure, coverage and outcomes, what the market and family claims to
do, as well as what individuals are entitled. However, this does not inform on what the population reports as
actually having access to, and more importantly, it does not describe how each actor provides welfare to
individuals. This is why a bottom-up approach is much needed to confirm, deny and/or clarify the valuable
messages derived from aggregated national statistical data. The bottom-up approach provides a much-needed
framework enabling a comprehensive analysis of welfare production based on recipients perceptions.
Role of Alternatives Actors in the Welfare-Mix
Multiple actors are involved in the production, consumption and distribution of goods, services and welfare
policies. Marcel and Rivera (2008) proposed an alternative-mixed welfare regime typology where two
alternative actors (i.e., informality and businesses) join the welfare-mix alongside the three traditional welfare
providers (i.e., state, market, family). This novel approach expands the generic concept of the ‘market’ into
three actors. Informality refers to the welfare provided by the wages generated in the informal sector. Firms,
on the other hand, provide benefits in kind to their employees as part of the so-called corporate social
responsibility, regardless of the wages they pay. Markets then refer to the provision of a salaried job for
workers in the formal market.
Marcel and Rivera proposes a typology with nine welfare regimes: social democratic (state is the main
provider), proto-welfare state (state shares a complementary role with family, firms or market), liberal
(market is the main provider or it shares a complementary role with firms or family), conservative
(complementary provision between family and firms), conservative-corporatist (firms are the main provider),
conservative-familiarist (family is the main provider), dual (informality shares an exclusionary role with
firms or market), informal-destatised (complementary provision between informality and family), and finally
the informal regime (informality is the main provider).
When examining the construction process of social citizenship, Filgueira (1998) considers there are still
categories and central actors missing from the dominant theories. Marcel and Rivera’s framework highlights
the importance of evaluating alternative welfare providers. Taking into consideration the population
addressed in this research, it is of utmost importance to consider the community as a potential alternative
welfare provider. The term community could be defined as a group of people with a common identity and

6

concerns, with social and psychological ties to a delimitated geographical space and its inhabitants (Chanan,
2002; Mattessich and Monsey, 2004).
The neoliberal shift in the post-1980s brought a transformation of the state-society relationship and to social
policy. “Through policies of decentralisation, welfare [started to be] provided through seeking cooperation
and co-financing from local communities” and other alternative welfare providers (Roberts, 2001, p. 5). The
particularity in the case of Puerto Rico is the top-down approach followed by the government to empower
communities and promote their role as alternative welfare providers. From the beginning of the XXI century,
the Government of Puerto Rico started to rescue4 previous efforts to encourage the self-management of
marginalised and impoverished communities. The Government also began to train community leaders, and
with the statewide Special Communities Programme, it took an official stance to spread the organisational
and self-management movement over a large part of Puerto Rico’s marginalised communities.5
According to Colón Reyes (2003, p. 15), the Special Communities Programme was developed following the
social capital theoretical perspective. The vision was to promote economic development while guaranteeing
general well-being and social redistribution amongst residents. The Puerto Rican Government promoted
social policy innovation through what Evans (1996) labels as complementarity and embeddedness. Both the
government and the communities had a common interest in a successful outcome and each actor was able to
provide what the other needs but did not had (i.e., complementarity). Embeddedness refers to the relationships
of trust between the government and community members bolstering common interest in the policy outcome
and thus facilitating complementarity (Roberts, 2001, p. 10).
Even though the welfare regime’s literature do not regularly consider the community and other alternative
actors as welfare providers, this paper includes this alternative actor in the examination of the welfare-mix,
especially because the target population in this research are organised communities with regular assemblies,
active participation, self-government and with a clear motivation to promote community development 6. The
community can participate in the allocation of social risks and welfare production by improving collective
well-being and quality of life7. Martínez Franzoni (2008a) recalls Polanyi’s (1944) identification of four
resource allocations practices by which actors provide welfare to individuals within a welfare-mix: first,
following a self-sufficient logic (i.e., communities living exclusively on their production); second, symmetric

4

For example, the movement to organise and develop marginalised communities in the mid-XX century through the
education sector (DIVEDCO), the group of land takeovers as a bottom-up distribution of land, as well as the
Programme of self-help and self-effort (“Programa de Ayuda Mutua y Esfuerzo Propio”).
5 See Ribas and Ghoshal (2013) for a better understanding of how the Puerto Rican state “simultaneously help give rise
to [the community] social movements and shape the emergent oppositional consciousness of movement leaders” (p.
404).
6 Community development is “a process of developing and enhancing the ability to act collectively and an outcome: (1)
taking collective action and (2) the result of that action for improvement in a community in any or all realms: physical,
environmental, cultural, social, political, economic, etc.” (Phillips and Pittman, 2009, p. 6)
7 See Lee, Kim, and Phillips (2015) for a theoretical discussion on community well-being, community development and
societal well-being.

7

structures following a gendered-division of labour to allocate resources based on reciprocity within the
framework of personal kinship relationships; third, a state-centric structure allocating resources in a top-down
approach both in quantity and criteria, based on the logic of collective allocation of resources; fourth, market
structures allocating resources from the commercial exchange (i.e., individuals gain access to goods and
services in exchange for selling their labour-power).
Examining welfare regimes using a bottom-up approach, and conceptualising welfare regimes as alternative
or mixed is not enough to present the reality of resources allocation and welfare production. Traits of more
than one ideal welfare regime may coexist within the same country, even though countries could be classified
as closer to one specific ideal model. In the same manner that Martinez-Franzoni and Marcel Rivera found
intra-regional different welfare regimes, it could be possible to find important variations in the welfare
production across policy sectors. This paper questions the possibility of identifying different welfare regimes
across policy areas.
Research design
This research takes Marcel and Rivera alternative framework – but with two modifications – to examine the
role of the state, market, family and the community in the welfare-mix of Puerto Rican marginalised
communities. First, the market is considered as a trinity in itself (i.e., formal labour market, informal labour
market and firms). Even though there is undeniable valuable usefulness of treating each of the ‘market’ actors
separately, the ‘market’ welfare provider in this research considers the income and benefits generated by any
means. Second, the community is included as an alternative welfare provider.
Semi-structured interviews were conducted in marginalised communities to learn how various actors satisfied
the basic needs and social risks of residents across eight policy areas. Interviews were kept flexible and
dynamic, and the questions were open and customisable, according to the responses provided by the
interviewees. The interviewer collected details on specific issues and social risks by creating an informal
atmosphere in the conversation – between equals (Taylor and Bogdan, 1987) – and guided the interview
according to the interviewees’ responses.
The Selection of Communities
All seven communities in the sample are part of the so-called Special Communities Programme. The first
law signed by the former Governor Sila Calderon (Act No. 1 of March 1, 2001) was the Law for the Integral
Development of the Special Communities of Puerto Rico. This law created the Office for the Special
Communities of Puerto Rico (OCEPR for its acronym in Spanish), a welfare institution that was under the
executive power of the Office of the Governor. Its primary objective was to promote the residents
involvement in the communities and thus encourage self-management and community empowerment.

8

The OCEPR identified 686 ‘special communities’ with a high level of disadvantages on a set of
socioeconomic variables, which means they presented a degree of marginalisation and income poverty
compared to other communities in the archipelago. The project defined a special community "as a
geographically delimited area with low-income families and unequal access to the benefits of economic and
social development enjoyed by other sectors of the population " (Colón Reyes, 2003, p. 11).
Selecting communities from the Special Communities Programme facilitated the identification of
interviewees. Several of these communities remain organised with identified leadership and a community
assembly. It was, therefore, more feasible to contact this population, present the research proposal and find
those who were willing to take part in the research.
At the time of the fieldwork, the Office of the General Coordinator for Socioeconomic Financing and SelfManagement (OFSA for its acronym in Spanish) grouped so-called ‘special communities’ into seven regions,
known as the: Mayagüez/Aguadilla Region, Ponce Region, Metro Region, Central/Eastern Region. Guayama
Region, Fajardo Region and North Region (See Figure 1). The research design took into account this division
by selecting one community per region. This geographic representation aims to present the reality of various
families in marginalised communities from the seven regions identified by OFSA. While these realities can
be representative of the general population of the communities, the sample does not allow us to extrapolate
the results.
Purposeful sampling – a non-probabilistic sampling – was implemented in this research. According to Patton
(2002, p. 230):
“the logic and power of purposeful sampling lie in selecting information-rich cases for study in depth.
Information-rich cases are those from which one can learn a great deal about issues of central importance to
the purpose of the inquiry, thus the term purposeful sampling. Studying information-rich cases yields insights
and in-depth understanding rather than empirical generalisations”.

The selection of the communities for the sample was based on the suggestions of scholars, community
activists and the OFSA. In addition to the logic of geographical representation, the level of representativeness
in terms of community organisation was also another factor taken into consideration. The final sample
includes communities from the seven regions, with varying degrees of self-management and selfsustainability, and with active and inactive assemblies. The following communities were included in the
sample:
•

Dulces Labios, located in the municipality of Mayagüez and representing the Mayagüez/Aguadilla
region

•

San Antón, located in the municipality of Ponce, and representing the Ponce region

9

Figure 1: Map of Puerto Rico that presents the grouping of municipalities in 7 regions according to the OFSA

Office of the General Coordinator for Socioeconomic Financing and Self Management (OFSA)
Distribution of Regions (7 Regions)

Toro Negro
Tras Talleres

Aguadilla

Quebradillas
Isabela
Camuy

Moca
Aguada
Rincón

San Sebastián

H
a
t
i
l
l
o

Las Marías

Dulces Labios

Morovis

Corozal
Naranjito

G
B
u
a Cataño
a
y
y
a
n
m
a
ó
b
n
o

Loíza
San Juan

Carolina
Canóv
a-nas

Trujillo
Alto

Río
Grande

Luquillo
Fajardo

Gurabo
Aguas

Ceiba

Comerío
Jayuya

Orocovis

Barranquitas

Adjuntas
Villalba
Yauco
Peñuelas

Juncos
Buenas
Cidra

Naguabo

Caguas
San
Lorenzo

Aibonito
Coamo

Sabana
Grande
Cabo
Rojo

Toa
Baja
Toa
Alta

Utuado

Maricao
San
Germán

Vega
Alta

Florida

Mayagüez

Hormigueros

Vega
Baja

Manatí

Arecibo

Ciales

L
a
r
e
s

Añasco

Barcel
-oneta

Cataño

D
o
r
a
d
o

Las
Piedras

Humacao

Cayey

Ponce

Yabucoa
Patillas

Guaya
-nilla

Lajas

Daguao

Juana Díaz
Maunabo

Guánica

Santa Isabel

Salinas

Guayama

Arroyo

Playita Cortada
San Antón

El Rabanal
Culebra

Vieques
Mayagüez/Aguadilla Region

Central/Eastern Region

Ponce Region

Guayama Region

Metro Region

Fajardo Region

Source: Provided by the OFSA

North Region

10

•

Tras Talleres, located in the municipality of San Juan, and representing the Metro region

•

El Rabanal, located in the municipality of Aibonito, and representing the Central/Eastern region

•

Playita Cortada, located in the municipality of Santa Isabel, and representing the Guayama region

•

Daguao, located in the municipality of Naguabo, and representing the Fajardo region

•

Toro Negro, located in the municipality of Ciales, and representing the North region

The Selection of Interviewees
The sampling of interviewees also followed a purposeful sampling logic. Efforts were made to have a
representation of gender (male and female), age range (young, adult and older-age population) and
participants with varying degrees of involvement in the community.
The recommendations and expertise of the community leader were taken into account 8 to identify a balanced
group of individuals with the characteristics mentioned above. The leader was advised of the suitability of
selecting between two to four cases per community, to have a manageable number of interviews at the end.
The first contact with the prospect interviewee was held at the communities, accompanied by the community
leader. The research project was then briefly presented to the community resident, and – if interested – a
meeting was arranged to conduct the interview at the respondent's preferred time and place 9.
On the interviews
A total of twenty interviews were conducted with twenty-three individuals throughout the seven
communities. The number of respondents was not the same as the number of interviews because three
interviews involved a couple of relatives. The respondents agreed to participate in this unremunerated
research, were guaranteed anonymity, and gave their verbal consent beforehand to use the information in
future publications. The interviews were conducted in person in six of the seven communities during the
research stay in Puerto Rico, while the interviews in the seventh community were agreed in Puerto Rico but
conducted overseas by phone. That is, eighteen of twenty interviews were carried out in the respondent's
community, specifically in the domicile of the interviewee, a public square, community centre or another
community area. The purpose of conducting the interview in the community was to make sure the interviewee
felt as comfortable, secure and confident as possible.10
The main research questions were: how do the following four welfare providers (state, market, family and
community) ensure your well-being and, that of your family, by satisfying your needs and social risks? Which

8

The selection method of the interviewees in the Toro Negro community followed another logic. I (i.e., the
interviewer) presented the research project to the community at a community assembly, and as a result, three residents
volunteered to be interviewed.
9 The research design considered the accompaniment of the community leader during the first visit as a way to build
trust and empathy with the potential interviewees.
10 The interviews were carried out between March 27 and July 21, 2013.

11

actor do you consider as the main responsible for securing your well-being? These questions were asked on
each of the selected areas of welfare. Also, the interviewee was encouraged to elaborate on the aspects that
s/he considered appropriate, bearing in mind the main purpose of this research (See Table 1 for a list of guide
questions used in the semi-structured interviews).
Table 1: Guide questions and social risks and needs being evaluated during the semi-structured interviews
Social risks and needs being
Welfare area
Question
evaluated
Do you have your own house?
Housing

Maternity/Paternity

At the time of acquiring your home, how did the four
actors respond to your risks and needs?
Do you have children? (If answered negatively, the
following questions are made from the point of view of
a relative in the household.)
At the time of pregnancy, how did the four actors
respond to your risks and needs?
From birth until your children were able to go to school,
how did the four actors respond to your risks and needs?
Do you or your children go to public or private school?

Education

Do you have schools in the community? If yes, at what
levels?
How did the four actors respond to your (your children)
education-related risks and needs?
Where do you usually buy your food?

Nourishment
How did the four actors respond to your (your children)
nourishment-related risks and needs?
Do you have health-care coverage? What kind of healthcare coverage, public or private?
Health

Workunemployment

Disability

Older-age/pension

At the time of sickness (i.e., needing health-care), how
did the four actors respond to your risks and needs?
At the time of needing medications, how did the four
actors respond to your risks and needs?
Are you employed?
Are you covered by unemployment insurance?
At the time of unemployment, how did the four actors
respond to your risks and needs?
Have you or any family member suffered from a shortterm or long-term disability?
If yes, how did the four actors respond to your (his/her)
risks and needs?
Are you or a member of your family retired?
How did the four actors respond to you or your family
older-age related risks and needs?
Did you pay contributions to the national social
insurance programme? Are you eligible for a pension?
Does your workplace provide (contributes) a (towards a)
private retirement scheme?

Access to a rooftop, incomesecurity to pay rent/loan,
housing in good repair

Care-taking, nourishment, advise
on the responsibilities and role
of parents, maternity/paternity
leave

Receive a quality education that
ensures equal opportunities,
school drop-out, drugs at school,
care of children after school,
availability of resources to pay
for university studies
Food security, nutritious and
balanced diet, food-production at
home

Have medical coverage,
economic resources to face
copayments/deductibles in
hospitals, specialists and
medicines, care-taking of sick
family members

Income-security, employment,
work-related insurances

Income-security, work-related
insurances

Income-security, care-taking,
mobility to attend medical
appointments, go to
supermarkets, and visit
family/friends, leisure time
Elaborated by the author

12

Housing, maternity/paternity, education, nourishment, health, disability, work-unemployment, and old-agepension are the welfare dimensions considered in the study. Each of the welfare dimensions were developed
with varying depth, depending on the personal circumstances of the interviewee and his/her degree of
openness on the different topics. The main welfare provider in every policy area was recorded for each of the
interviewees. The actor considered by the majority of interviewees as the main welfare provider is labeled as
the dominant welfare provider. At the end of the interview, respondents completed a brief questionnaire to
draft a sociodemographic and socioeconomic profile (see Appendix for a brief aggregated summary of these
characteristics).
Research findings
Residents in marginalised communities of Puerto Rico considered the family, state and the market as the
dominant welfare providers. The market was perceived as the dominant actor in the areas of housing,
nourishment and health, while the state was the dominant actor in the areas of education, disability, workunemployment and older-age. Finally, the family was considered the dominant welfare provider, allocating
resources in the areas of housing and maternity/paternity.
Table 2 shows a bottom-up picture of the perceived worlds of welfare in eight policy areas. The table does
not indicate frequency or intensity, instead it maps the mix of actors considered by the sample of 23
interviewees as the main welfare providers in each of the policy areas. There is an ‘X’ to show the variety of
perceived main welfare providers in each policy area. For example, at least one interviewee considered the
state and the family as the main welfare providers in the maternity/paternity area. However, none of the
interviewees considered the market or the community as the main welfare providers in the maternity/paternity
area. The dominant welfare providers are underlined and in bold (i.e., those that were mentioned the most
number of times as the main welfare provider). Following the previous example, the family was considered
the dominant welfare provider in the maternity/paternity policy area, even though a smaller number of
interviewees considered other actors as their main providers (e.g., state, state + family, family + community).
Marcel and Rivera (2008, pp. 172-173) argue that it is common to have multiple welfare providers in highly
stratified societies; however when two or more actors coexist in the same policy area it is relevant to
distinguish if they are doing so in a complementary or exclusive manner. There is an ‘E’ or ‘C’ in Table 2
when two or more actors are considered as the main welfare providers (E refers to exclusionary actors and C
to complementary actors). For example, in the nourishment area some interviewees considered both, the state
and the market, as their main welfare providers. The state and the market complemented each other to satisfy
a specific interviewee’s social risks. On the contrary, in the education policy area the state and market had
an exclusionary role as welfare providers (i.e., the state and market did not work together to satisfy an
interviewee’s social risks). The remaining part of this section explores the results shown in Table 2 and
proposes a classification of intra-national welfare regimes.

13

Table 2: A bottom-up welfare-mix: Map of actors perceived as the main welfare providers for the interviewees

One main welfare provider

State

Housing

Market

X

Maternity/
Paternity

X

Education

X

Nourishment

X

Family

Two main welfare providers

Community

X

State
+
Market

C

X

X

X

State
+
Family

Market
+
Family

C

C
X

E

X

C

Family
+
Community

Three main welfare
providers
Family
Family
+
+
State
Market
+
+
Market
Community
C

Dominant locus
of solidarity
Family & Market

C

Family
State

C

E

C

Market

Dominant mode of
solidarity
Individual via wages;
kinship via
inheritances
Reciprocity/kinship
via care-taking and
advice
Universal
Individual via
commercial exchange

Individual via
commercial exchange
Corporatism via
Disability
X
C
C
State
collective allocation of
resources
Corporatism via
WorkX
X
X
C
State
collective allocation of
unemployment
resources
Corporatism via
Older-age /
X
X
X
X
C
C
State
collective allocation of
pensions
resources
Notes: Housing is the only welfare area with two dominant welfare providers (see text for explanation). An ‘X’, ‘C’ or ‘E’ signals the perceived main welfare provider(s) in each area. The dominant
welfare provider is underlined and bold. ‘C’ refers to a complementary provision among actors and ‘E’ an exclusionary provision among actors.
Elaborated by the author
Health

X

X

X

Market

14

A Bottom-Up Picture of the Welfare-Mix
The market and the family were considered the dominant welfare providers in the housing dimension,
allocating resources through wages received in remunerated employment (market) and the inheritance of
houses (family). The following quote describes the role played by both actors according to the perception of
an interviewee:
“[the house] was made of wood, it was from an aunt of my husband and cousins, who built it on my husband's
land. (...) he (husband) bought it from his aunt and his cousins, I do not know if it was in 2 thousand dollars,
the wood, because in fact, the land was his. So we fixed it, we conditioned it, and we started living there (...)
then we started to rebuild it with concrete, (...) it has been almost 12 or 13 years since we rebuilt it with concrete
and it is ours with a lot of effort, with great care, with a lot of tenacity (...)”. 11

The state was perceived as a subsidiary actor useful when it provided subsidies to repair and/or rebuild
houses. A respondent supports this by adding, “Working, definitively. And partly because they gave my mom
some government's benefits like material, in the beginning, to build it”. Residents in one of the communities
proposed a project to relocate several families who were living in a slum. According to an interviewee, the
mayor intervened and paralysed the relocation project from the slum towards apartments because of partisan
political intentions.
Residents considered the family as the dominant welfare provider in the maternity/paternity dimension. It
addressed social risks and satisfied needs associated with pregnancy, as well as risks arising in the early age
of newborns by providing care and guidance. The second main actor was the state, which ensured the wellbeing of some interviewees through targeted and conditional welfare programmes, providing health care and
nutrition advice to mothers and infants, as well as daycare in the infant early years. The exclusionary role of
the state becomes evident when a resident considers her family as the main welfare provider “because as I
worked, I did not qualify for government benefits”. The community plays a complementary role with the
state. One interviewee highlights how the community manages an "Early Head Start so that single mothers
and workers have where to [go] to take care of their children”. The community applied for government funds
and is now running an early child care centre for children who meet targeted eligibility criteria.
All interviewees studied in public schools – at least – part of their education. "Yes, everyone studied in public
schools a bit far away, but around here", a respondent confirms. Therefore, the state was perceived as the
dominant provider in this dimension. It guaranteed the well-being by providing free and universal public
education between the ages of 4-18 years. The market collaborates with the state to secure specific risks not
covered by the targeted welfare programmes. The market was perceived as an exclusionary actor, satisfying
the risks to infants aged 0-4 from families with earnings above the income poverty line or who do not qualify
to the public infant care programme (i.e., Early Head Start and Head Start). The market also satisfied risks
11

The author translated this and the remaining quotes from Spanish to English.

15

by providing private higher education. Although not considered as a dominant welfare provider, many
interviewees mentioned family as an actor present in the welfare-mix providing care to infants while their
parents finished their daily work. Most of the communities visited have community centres, which provide
students with a place to do their homework, access the internet, access books or encyclopedias and in some
cases print for a fixed cost. The Special Communities Project provided computers initially, but they were not
renewed at the end of its operational lifetime.
"Well, there were crops of rice, beans, corn, pigeon peas, (…), there was everything. And now to get all those
things you have to go to the supermarket." The previous quote is one of the multiple portraying the market
as the dominant welfare provider in the dimension of nourishment. Interviewees face risks associated with
this dimension through wages earned in salaried formal and informal jobs. The state participated in the
welfare-mix providing income through social security (for the older-age population) or the Nutritional
Assistance Programme.12 A resident remarked she buys food at the supermarket. “Now, [the money I spend
comes from] my pension, my years of work and from the social security." The family is still portrayed as an
important actor although it has lost a starring role in the nourishment dimension because fewer agricultural
products are now harvested in the gardens of their domiciles. One of the communities was starting to
experiment with a community garden, which shortly could provide residents with organic products at a low
cost, and at the same time finance the community project (i.e., following a self-sufficient resources allocation
logic). At the time of the visit, they were about to collect the first plantain harvest, and they were
experimenting with potatoes, culantro, avocado and other minor fruits.
In the health dimension, the market was perceived as the dominant welfare provider. The social risks
associated with this dimension were secured primarily by private health insurances funded by the
interviewees' salaries. When asked about the way they satisfy their healthcare needs, an interviewee pointed
out: "Usually it's been with private healthcare, I've almost never had the public [healthcare]. Again, normally
everyone in my family work (emphasising with the finger)". The state was perceived as the second main
welfare provider in this dimension by guaranteeing sick days for employees, and healthcare provision for
individuals with income below the income poverty line. This explains why there was a portion of the
population without healthcare coverage (i.e., respondents with income above the poverty line have healthcare
coverage if they can afford it in the market). The family was again perceived as a provider of care for the
sick. Community development in one of the communities visited has allowed them to provide subsidised
health care. A medical doctor goes to the community, acting as a general practitioner. The community
assumes the copayment as a social responsibility for those considered as 'indigent'.
The state was perceived as the dominant welfare provider in the disability dimension. Although many of the
interviewees do not have any disability, they presumed the state’s disability programme (SINOT by its

12

Known in the United States of America as ‘food stamps’.

16

Spanish acronym,) would guarantee their well-being if they become disabled in the future. A respondent in
a rural community describes the role of the state to allocate resources in this area.
“At least I'm not disabled, my husband is, unfortunately. I say unfortunately because he likes to work, he likes
to provide, he does not like to stand still. At this time, he has no option, unfortunately, because he has herniated
discs, and a sciatic nerve injury (...) he had to apply for social security income through the [State Disability]
Fund (...) We spent almost three years fighting to get it. You know, that was an injustice because then if there
is a condition, there are some "records"; you know it was frustrating to see your partner, crawling, bending.”

As in the health area, the family was considered a welfare provider satisfying risks through family care.
The dominant actor in the work-unemployment dimension is the state. According to most of those
interviewed, income security provided by the unemployment benefits was the main source of well-being
related to this dimension. However, according to the interviewees, the cash benefits from these programmes
were not working correctly. Two individuals mentioned they were not able to receive cash benefits when
unemployed – even though they contributed on a monthly basis – because the former employer did not paid
his part of the contributions, and thus they did not appear in the state-registry of the unemployment institution.
The family was considered the second main provider, satisfying needs by giving financial assistance to
unemployed relatives. The market was regarded as a possible welfare provider by the self-employed, through
individual financial provisions and savings. This was the only area where a group of interviewees mentioned
that none of the actors allocated resources to face unemployment-related risks.
The state was also perceived as the dominant welfare provider in the old-age dimension. Many of the
interviewees mentioned the social insurance pension is– or will be –the main source of income security. "I
only have about 5 years left to receive social security” an interviewee claims. He goes on saying that the
“social security will be my main economic means, although, for a few years, the company I worked for had a
retirement plan, it was like an "incentive" (...) [to provide additional income] for the employees and also to
make them feel part of the company. But it turns out that due to bad luck, the company I worked for was sold,
(...) after a few years, 5 or 6 years, the new owner said (...) that [the retirement plan] was incompatible so we
were given the money back."

Meanwhile, former state employees considered state pensions as their main source of well-being. The family
was also part of the welfare-mix providing care and income-transfers to older-age relatives. The market was
present in some cases with individual economic provisions, such as savings, investment plans or long-term
savings. The community was also active in this area. A group of community leaders was working on a
proposal to transform the actual commercial use given to a room in the communal centre, to a day-centre
where older-age residents could access food, care and leisure.

17

The interviews ended with a personal evaluation of the satisfaction towards the role played by each of the
four actors in the welfare-mix. The maximum possible score was 10, which meant the actor satisfied all the
interviewee’s social risks, and zero, which implied it did not meet any social risks. According to the
respondents, the state received an average score of 3.92, the market 5.22, the community 5.33, and the family
8.38. This result shows the family as the most valued welfare provider and the state as the worst valued.
A Classification of the Intra-National Welfare Regimes
Table 3 shows the welfare regime classification in each policy area using the methodology proposed by
Marcel and Rivera (2008). The initial classification takes into account only the dominant welfare provider,
and the final classification rectifies the picture by considering the distances in respect with secondary welfare
providers and the degree of complementarity.
Results show intra-national variations of welfare regimes across policy areas. The market and the family
played a central role in the distribution of social risks associated with the housing area (i.e., evidencing a
liberal welfare regime). The market played a central role in the nourishment and health area. However, the
state intervenes with a residual role using targeted social assistance programmes. This is why the initial
classification of liberal welfare regime for the nourishment and health area is rectified as liberal-residual.
The family played a central role in the Maternity/Paternity welfare area, with a care-taking role (i.e.,
showing a conservative-familialist welfare regime).
The state had a dominant role in the remaining four areas: education, disability, work-unemployment, and
older-age. In the education area, the provision was universal and free in the elementary, intermediate and
high school. Meanwhile, in the other three areas the corporatist role of the state was evident as only those
working in the formal sector and meeting the eligibility requirements related to contributions were able to
become beneficiaries of disability, pension and unemployment programmes. Even though there is active
participation of the state in various welfare areas, public welfare policies cannot be considered as promoting
equality of the highest standards, but rather equality of minimal needs (Esping-Andersen, 1990, p. 112;
Hernes, 1987). This is the main reason to consider welfare regimes in the state-dominant areas as proto-social
democrats rather than social democratic (i.e., not to be confused with the social democratic Nordic welfare
states). Therefore, a modified welfare regime typology is proposed in Table 3: a liberal welfare regime in the
area of housing, a liberal-residual regime in the nourishment and health areas, a conservative-familialist
regime in the maternity/paternity area, a corporatist regime in the disability, work-unemployment and olderage area, and a proto-social democratic regime in the education area.

18

Table 3: A bottom-up welfare-mix: Classification of intra-national welfare regimes and the role of welfare providers in the welfare-mix

Welfare regime typology
- initial classification

Welfare regime typology final classification

Liberal

Liberal

Housing

Role of the
State

Role of the
Market

Role of the
Family

Role of the
Community

Decommodification
of welfare

Defamilialisation of
welfare

Marginal

Central

Central

Marginal

Minimal

Minimal

Subsidiary

Maternity/
Paternity

Conservative-familialist

Conservative-familialist

(for incomepoor)

Marginal

Central

Subsidiary

Low

Minimal

Education

Social democratic

Proto-social democratic

Central
Subsidiary

Marginal

Marginal

Subsidiary

High

High

Nourishment

Liberal

Liberal-Residual

(for incomepoor)

Central

Subsidiary

Subsidiary

Minimal

Low

Health

Liberal

Liberal-Residual

(for incomepoor)

Central

Subsidiary

Subsidiary

Minimal

Low

Disability

Social democratic

Corporatist

Central

Marginal

Subsidiary

Marginal

High (for workers in

Low

Social democratic

Corporatist

Central

Marginal

Subsidiary

Marginal

Social democratic

Corporatist

Central

Marginal

Subsidiary

Marginal

Subsidiary

Workunemploymen
t
Older-age /
pensions

the formal market)

High (for workers in
the formal market)

High (for workers in
the formal market)

Low
Low

Notes: We can speak of the de-familialisation of welfare when the social risks are fulfilled by reducing the dependence that exists in the family to ensure the individual’s well-being. When social risks
are satisfied by lowering market dependency, then we can speak of the de-commodification of welfare (Esping-Andersen, 1999). According to Marshall (1950), the process of decommodification
weakens the economic linkage between welfare and participation in the labour market. When the state has a major role in ensuring the population’s well-being, then we can speak of a state-centric
welfare regime (i.e., corporatist and proto-social democratic) while a regime that targets welfare to a specific population is considered a residual welfare regime (i.e., liberal residual welfare regime).
Elaborated by the author

19

In the areas of housing, nourishment, health and – to a lesser degree – maternity/paternity there is a high level
of commodification (for individuals with income above the poverty line) with public residualism (for persons
with income below the poverty threshold). This creates a dualism between residents with earnings above the
poverty line – who usually satisfy social risks in these areas through the market – and residents with earnings
below the poverty line – who typically satisfy social risks in these areas through the targeted and highly
stigmatised social assistance programmes. There is a high degree of familialism in the four areas. In the areas
of maternity/paternity and housing, the family plays the dominant role in the allocation of social risks and
production of well-being. The family is also present in the areas of nourishment and health through the
provision of care and income transfers.
In the areas of disability, unemployment and old age, this research found a high degree of state-centrism, a
marginal role of the market, with a subsidiary role of the family. This again creates a dualism of benefits
between residents working in the formal sector – who contribute monthly to the welfare institutions and thus
can become beneficiaries of disability, unemployment and old age welfare programmes – and residents
working in the informal sector who does not have access to contributory welfare programmes (i.e., rights are
attached to class and status). Social risks that are associated with education have a high degree of statecentrism, with the highest degree of decommodification and defamilialisation of welfare in the policy areas
examined.
Discussion and Conclusion
Even though it is possible to identify the main actors allocating resources and providing welfare, residents
confirmed they go to a multiplicity of actors in all eight welfare areas. The bottom-up picture shows a
complex and diverse welfare-mix, difficult to simplify in one national ideal welfare regime. This section
briefly discusses three issues derived from the previous section: the difference between the top-down versus
bottom-up approach to present the Puerto Rican welfare regime, the role played by alternative welfare actors
to allocate resources in the welfare-mix, and the need to address the intra-national variations of welfare
regimes across policy areas.
It is difficult to frame Puerto Rico’s welfare regime as state-productivist, state-protectionist or any other
regime addressed in the Latin American welfare regime scholarship. The Latin American country has been
excluded from most – if not all – typologies. However, using Esping-Andersen (1990) typology as a reference
and following a top-down approach, the Puerto Rican welfare regime could be seen as a liberal-residual one.
Puerto Rico’s welfare system shares a significant similarity with the United States' welfare state (CruzMartinez, 2017c; Morrissey, 2006). This is expected because Puerto Rico is one of the colonial possessions
of the United States of America (See Ayala and Bernabe, 2009; Caban, 2002; Cruz-Martinez, 2017a;
Developments in the Law, 2017; González-Cruz, 1998; Pantojas, 2005). “Political and economic dependency
on the United States [of America] has had a significant impact on the development of the [Puerto Rican]

20

welfare system” (Seda, 1990, p. 202). Colón Reyes (2002, p. 27), notes that “public assistance policies in
Puerto Rico are determined economically, socially and politically by federal [United States of America]
policies”. A large part of the institutions and welfare programmes in the archipelago are administered and/
or funded partly by the United States of America. However, Puerto Rican’s residual welfare state has its
peculiarities, institutions and agendas, and faces a different social, political and economic reality than its
metropolis. Working in the shadows of both Latin America and the United States of America, Puerto Rico
shares from both the high degree of stratification stemming from income inequality in the most unequal
region in the world and the most unequal country of the high-income economies.
Therefore, a top-down approach would portray Puerto Rico following the United States’ ideal regime (i.e.,
the modal example of the liberal-residual welfare regime). In this kind of regime, individuals need to ensure
their well-being through the market (liberal), and only those "incapable" of accessing private welfare
programmes are granted targeted and/or conditional social assistance programmes (residual). Nonetheless,
an institutionalised social insurance programme is embedded in the Puerto Rican welfare regime providing
coverage to individuals working in the formal sector.
Barrientos’ and Gough’s welfare regimes have been criticised for the “overgeneralization that positions all
Latin American countries together under one single welfare regime” (Martínez Franzoni, 2008b, p. 71). In
the same manner, a new critical reflection is needed because of another overgeneralisation in the welfare
regime literature. A large part of the literature considers that one ideal welfare regime is enough to portray
the diverse and complex process of resources’ allocation among welfare providers, and the various way
individuals – from different social classes and neighbourhoods inside a national boundary – go to a varied
mix of welfare providers to satisfy their social risks.
The interconnected and complex welfare-mix seen in the bottom-up approach followed in this paper does
not display one single welfare regime in Puerto Rico. On the contrary, there is a variety of actors in the
welfare-mix of each welfare dimension; each one providing welfare and allocating resources through
different means, modes and combinations. Specifically, the bottom-up approach shows five welfare
regimes perceived by residents in the marginalised communities of Puerto Rico (see Table 3).
The bifurcation model that Skocpol (1988) attached to the United States social policy is also confirmed in
the perception of residents in Puerto Rican marginalised communities. With the massive expansion of US
assistance policies and institutions to the archipelago after the 1970s crisis and the US 'War on Poverty', a
bifurcation process of the Puerto Rican social policy began to flourish. On the one hand, social security
programmes (e.g., unemployment benefits, disability benefits and pensions) are guaranteed for workers in
the formal sector. These social security programmes are conceptualised as ‘legitimate’ and ‘earned’ welfare
programmes. On the other hand, targeted and means-tested social assistance programmes (e.g., nutritional
assistance programme, public health care ‘Mi Salud’) are available only for residents meeting the income
poverty criteria. Interviewees depict recipients of these social assistance programmes as ‘lazy’, ‘dependent’

21

and/or incapable of satisfying their social needs by their owns means in the labour market.
Interviewees portrayed the community as an alternative actor – main or complementary– providing welfare
in five of the eight welfare areas. It may not be producing well-being via orthodox social policy (i.e., social
insurance and social assistance programmes), but its role as an alternative actor providing ‘social policy by
other means’ should not be overlooked. For example, (1) in the organisation and provision of communal
spaces for medical care, (2) by subsidising the medical care costs for residents in extreme income poverty in
exchange for community work, (3) by creating and maintaining educational spaces where students can access
books and a computer with internet, (4) by establishing and maintaining community vegetable gardens to
provide residents with organic products at a low cost and at the same time fund the community project. Also,
most of the interviewees considered that their well-being and quality of life has improved since the
community has been organising and practising self-management. The interviews showed the positive impact
of the community actor in the improvement of the quality of life of the population in the following areas:
drug abuse problems, education about civic responsibility, agriculture, recreation, economic development,
health and infrastructure.
The intra-national welfare regimes theory portraying different welfare-mixes across policy areas needs to be
explored further with a more significant sample of residents and of marginalised communities, as well as the
inclusion of other sectors of society. Interesting will be to confirm if we are able to distinguish different
welfare regimes not only across policy sectors but also across social classes inside the national boundary.
Future research could also further examine the role played by alternative welfare actors in the intra-national
welfare regimes of Puerto Rico and other Latin American countries, as well as include the other two main
variables in the welfare regime scholarship (i.e., welfare outcomes and social stratification) to the one
considered in this paper (i.e., the role of the welfare actors).
References

Aspalter, C. (2006). The East Asian welfare model. International Journal of Social Welfare, 15(4), 290-301.
doi:10.1111/j.1468-2397.2006.00413.x
Ayala, C. J., and Bernabe, R. (2009). Puerto Rico in the American Century: A History since 1898. Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Barba Solano, C. (2003). El nuevo paradigma de bienestar residual y deslocalizado. Reforma de los
regímenes de bienestar en la OCDE, América Latina y México. (PhD Social Science), Universidad
de Guadalajara, México.
Barba Solano, C. (2009). Los regímenes de bienestar latinoamericanos y la reforma social. In C. Barba
Solano, G. Ordoñez Barba, and E. Valencia Lomelí (Eds.), Más allá de la pobreza: Regímenes de
bienestar en Europa, Asia y América (pp. 327-370). Guadalajara: Universidad de Guadalajara, El
Colegio de la Frontera Norte.
Barrientos, A. (2004). Latin America: Towards a Liberal-Informal Welfare Regime. In I. Gough and G. Wood
(Eds.), Insecurity and Welfare Regimes in Asia, Africa and Latin America: Social Policy in
Development Contexts (pp. 121-168). Cambridge: Cambridge University press.

22

Budowski, M., Tillmann, R., Keim, W., and Amacker, M. (2010). Conceptualizing ‘precarious prosperity’:
Empirical and theoretical elements for debate. International Journal of Comparative Sociology,
51(4), 268-288. doi:10.1177/0020715210368840
Caban, P. A. (2002). Puerto Rico: State Formation in a Colonial Context. Caribbean Studies, 30(2), 170-215.
Chanan, G. (2002). Community development foundation measure of community: A study for the active
community unit and research. London: Development and Statistics Unit of the Home Office.
Colón Reyes, L. (2002). Neoliberalismo, Globalización y Pobreza en Puerto Rico. In F. E. Martínez and F.
A. Catalá (Eds.), Ensayos sobre la pobreza en Puerto Rico (pp. 19-53). Puerto Rico: Publicaciones
Puertorriqueñas / Unidad de Investigaciones Económicas.
Colón Reyes, L. (2003). El Pais Posible: Modelo de Apoderamiento y Autogestión para las Comunidades
Especiales de Puerto Rico. San Juan: Oficina para el Financiemiento Socioeconómico y la
Autogestión.
Cruz-Martinez, G. (2017a). The end of colonialism in Puerto Rico? Evaluating the options in the 2017
political
status
referendum.
LSE
LAC
Blog.
Retrieved
from
http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/latamcaribbean/2017/05/05/the-end-of-colonialism-in-puerto-ricoevaluating-the-options-in-the-2017-political-status-referendum/.
Cruz-Martinez, G. (2017b). Is there a Common Path that could have Conditioned the Degree of Welfare State
Development in Latin America and the Caribbean? Bulletin of Latin American Research, 36(4),
459-476. doi:10.1111/blar.12556
Cruz-Martinez, G. (2017c). Produciendo Bienestar. Una mirada desde las Comunidades Marginadas en
Puerto Rico. Madrid: Dykinson.
Cruz-Martinez, G. (2017d). Welfare State Development, Individual Deprivations and Income Inequality: A
Cross-Country Analysis in Latin America and the Caribbean. Social Indicators Research, 134(3),
955-979. doi:10.1007/s11205-016-1465-4
Developments in the Law. (2017). The U.S. Territories - The International Place of Puerto Rico. Harvard
Law Review, 130(6), 1616-1656.
Esping-Andersen, G. (1990). The three worlds of Welfare Capitalism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Esping-Andersen, G. (1996). Welfare States in Transition: National Adaptations in Global Economy.
London: Sage Publications.
Esping-Andersen, G. (1999). Social Foundations of Post Industrial Economies. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Evans, P. (1996). Government Action, Social Capital and Development: Reviewing the Evidence on Synergy.
World Development, 24(6), 1119-1132.
Filgueira, F. (1998). El nuevo modelo de prestaciones sociales en América Latina: residualismo, eficiencia y
ciudadanía estratificada. In R. Brian (Ed.), Ciudadanía y Política Sociales. San José de Costa Rica:
FLACSO/SSRC.
Filgueira, F. (1999). Tipos de Welfare y reformas sociales en América Latina: Eficiencia, residualismo y
ciudadanía estratificada. In M. Melo (Ed.), Reforma do Estado e Mudanca Institucional no Brasil.
Recife: Fundacao Joaquim Nabuco.
González-Cruz, M. (1998). The U.S. Invasion of Puerto Rico:Occupation and Resistance to the Colonial
State,
1898
to
the
Present.
Latin
American
Perspectives,
25(5),
7-26.
doi:10.1177/0094582x9802500502
Gough, I. (2013). Social policy regimes in the developing world. In P. Kennett (Ed.), A Handbook of
comparative social policy (pp. 205-224). Cheltenham UK: Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd.
Gough, I., and Wood, G. (2004). Insecurity and Welfare Regimes in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hernes, H. (1987). Welfare State and Woman Power. Oslo: Norwegian University Press.
Heuer, J.O., Leruth, B., Mau, S. and Zimmermann. K. (2016). Attitudes towards the welfare mix: How
citizens in Germany and the United Kingdom attribute responsibilities for social welfare to state,
market, and family – and why? Paper for the 2016 Annual ESPAnet Conference, 1-3 September
2016, Erasmus University Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Huber, E., and Stephens, J. (2005). Successful Social Policy Regimes? Political Economy, Politics, and the
Structure of Social Policy in Argentina, Chile, Uruguay, and Costa Rica. Paper prepared for the
Conference on Democratic Governability Kellogg Institute, University of Notre Dame, October 78, 2005.

23

Huber, E., and Stephens, J. D. (2012). Democracy and the Left. Social Policy and Inequality in Latin America.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Lee, S. J., Kim, Y., and Phillips, R. (2015). Community Well-Being and Community Development.
Conceptions and Applications. Switzerland: Springer.
Longo, F., Notarnicola, E., and Tasselli, S. (2015). A framework to assess welfare mix and service provision
models in health care and social welfare: case studies of two prominent Italian regions. BMC Health
Services Research, 15, 152. http://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-015-0800-9
Marcel, M., and Rivera, E. (2008). Regímenes de bienestar en América Latina. In E. Tironi (Ed.), Redes,
Estado y Mercado. Soportes de la Cohesión Social Latinoamericana. Santiago de Chile: Uqbar
editores.
Martinez-Franzoni, J., and Sanchez-Ancochea, D. (2013). Can Latin American Production regimes
complement universalistic welfare regimes? Implications from the Costa Rican Case. Latin
American Research Review, 48(2), 148-173.
Martinez-Franzoni, J., and Sanchez-Ancochea, D. (2016). The Quest for Universal Social Policy in the South:
Actors, Ideas and Architectures. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Martínez Franzoni, J. (2007). Regímenes del bienestar en América Latina. Documento de Trabajo, 11,
Fundación
Carolina-CeALCI:
http://www.fundacioncarolina.es/esES/publicaciones/documentostrabajo/Documents/DT11.pdf.
Martínez Franzoni, J. (2008a). Arañando bienestar? Trabajo remunerado, protección social y familias en
America Central. Buenos Aires: CLACSO / CROP.
Martínez Franzoni, J. (2008b). Welfare regimes in Latin America: Capturing Constellations of Markets,
Families, and Policies. Latin American Politics and Society, 50(2), 67-100.
Mattessich, P., and Monsey, M. (2004). Community building: What makes it work. Minnesota, USA: Wilder
Foundation.
Mesa-Lago, C. (1989). Ascent to Bankruptcy: Financing Social Security in Latin America. Pittsburgh:
University of Pittsburgh Press.
Mishra, R. (1994). Typologies of the welfare state and comparative analysis: The “liberal” welfare state.
Journal
of
International
and
Comparative
Social
Welfare,
10(2),
90-106.
doi:10.1080/17486839408414907
Molina, C. G. (2006). Universalismo básico: Una nueva política social para América Latina. Washington
D.C: Banco Interamericano de Desarrollo / Editorial Planeta.
Morrissey, M. (2006). The Making of a Colonial Welfare State: U.S. Social Insurance and Public Assistance
in Puerto Rico. Latin American Perspectives, 33(1), 23-41. doi:10.2307/27647904
Orloff, A. (1996). Gender in the Welfare State. Annual Review of Sociology, 22, 51-78.
Pantojas, G., Emilio. (2005). The Puerto Rican Paradox: Colonialism Revisited. Latin American Research
Review, 40(3), 163-176.
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative research and evaluation methods. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage.
Phillips, R., and Pittman, R. (2009). Introduction to community development. London: Routledge.
Polanyi, K. (1944). The Great Transformation. New York: Rinehart.
Powell, M., and Barrientos, A. (2004). Welfare Regimes and the Welfare-Mix. European Journal of Political
Research, 43(1), 83-105.
Pribble, J. (2011). Worlds Apart: Social Policy Regimes in Latin America. Studies in Comparative
International Development, 46(2), 191-216. doi.org/10.1007/s12116-010-9076-6
Ratigan, K. (2017). Disaggregating the Developing Welfare State: Provincial Social Policy Regimes in
China. World Development, 98, 467-484. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2017.05.010
Ribas, V., and Ghoshal, R. A. (2013). States Make Movements? The Material and Discursive Influence of
State-Sponsored Community Organizing in Puerto Rico. Sociological Perspectives, 56(3), 403-437.
doi:10.1525/sop.2013.56.3.403
Riesco, M. (2009). Latin America: a new developmental welfare state model in the making? International
Journal of Social Welfare, 18, S22-S36. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2397.2009.00643.x
Roberts, B. R. (2001). The new social policies in Latin America and the development of citizenship: An
interface perspective. Paper for Workshop on Agency, Knowledge and Power: New Directions
Wageningen 14th-15th December. .
Rudra, N. (2007). Welfare States in Developing Countries: Unique or Universal? The Journal of Politics,
69(2), 378-396.

24

Sanchez de Dios, M. (2015). La reforma de los regímenes de bienestar en Costa Rica, Chile, Argentina, Brasil
y
Uruguay.
Política
y
Sociedad,
52(3),
661-690.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.5209/rev_POSO.2015.v52.n3.45377
Seda, R. M. (1990). Puerto Rico. In J. Dixon and R. P. Scheurell (Eds.), Social Welfare in Latin America (pp.
202-248). New York: Routledge.
Sharkh, M. A., and Gough, I. (2010). Global Welfare Regimes:A Cluster Analysis. Global Social Policy,
10(1), 27-58. doi:10.1177/1468018109355035
Skocpol, T. (1988). The Limits of the New Deal System and the Roots of Contemporary Welfare Dilemmas.
In M. Weir, A. S. Orloff, and T. Skocpol (Eds.), The Politics of Social Policy in the United States
(pp. 293-312). New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Taylor, S. J., and Bogdan, R. (1987). La entrevista en profundidad Introducción a los métodos cualitativos
de investigación: La busqueda de significados (pp. 100-132). Barcelona: Editorial Paidós Iberica
S.A.
Wood, G., and Gough, I. (2006). A comparative welfare regimes approach to global social policy. World
Development, 34(10), 1696-1712.
Yu, S., Chau, C. M., and Lee, K. M. (2015). Using defamilisation typologies to study the Confucian welfare
regime.
Journal
of
International
and
Comparative
Social
Policy,
31(1),
74-93.
doi:10.1080/21699763.2014.992457

25

Appendix: Aggregated socio-economic and socio-demographic characteristics of interviewees
Age range
0-17

18-24

25-34

35-44

45-54

55-64

65-74

75-84

85+

0

0

1

4

4

3

4

2

0

Woman
8

Man
10

Other
0

DK/NA
2

Married
9

Single
5

Widowed
0

Divorced
1

Consensual union
2

Separated
1

DK/NA
2

Total
20

Bachelor
degree

No
schooling

DK/NA

Total

4

1

2

20

DK/NA
(Don't
Know/No
Answer)
2

Total
20

Gender

Marital status

Schooling
Preschool
1
Employment status
Full time

Elementary

Intermediate

High-School

0

2

3

Part-time

Unemployed

Out of the
labour force

Homemaker

Retired with
social
security

Retired
with
pension

0

3

1

2

3

Disability
with
social
security
2

1000-1499
4

1500-1999
5

2000-2499
2

+2500
2

DK/NA
2

Total
20

1000-1499
6

1500-1999
3

2000-2499
0

+2500
5

DK/NA
3

Total
20

Financial Aid
Programme

Electricity
Payment
Subsidy

Nutritional
Assistance
Programme
(PAN)

Medicaid

Scholarship

1

0

0

2

0

DK/NA

Total

2

20

5
2
Monthly personal income (US dollars)
1-499
500-999
1
4
Monthly household income (US dollars)
1-499
500-999
1
2
Welfare benefits of the interviewee (*)

Public
healthcare

6
Housing Conditions

Associate degree
(occupational or
technical
programme)
7

House and land
owner

House and land
tenant

18

0

Homeowner
on
government's
land
0

Homeowner
without title
deed
0

Supplemental
Nutrition
Programme for
Women, Infants,
and Children
(WIC)
0
Half of the land
with title deed,
another half
without title
0

Student

DK/NA

Total

0

2

20

Social
Security

Telephone
Payment
Subsidy

None

DK/NA

7

0

6

3

26

Infrastructure problems of the house (*)
Roof and walls
have water
leaks
4
None
5
Problems in the community (*)
Illegal dumps
and junkyards
6
Flooding area
5
Social problems (*)

House needs
repair
4
DK/NA
7
Lack of
recreational
and sports
facilities
7
Shortage of
schools
0

Electrical
wiring is old
or damaged
frequently

Water pipes
are old or
damaged
frequently

4

2

Housing in
poor
condition
9

Empty
dwellings
(public
nuisances)
6

Not enough
bedrooms

Does not
have sewage
service

Does not
have water
service

0

2

0

Air pollution

Need of
sewers

Vacant
land: Need
of housing

1

3

Does not
have
electric
power
service
0

Missing
roof
ceiling

Damaged
doors

Ceiling
plastering
falls

0

1

1

Noise
pollution

Road in
poor
conditions

Houses are
prone to
landslide

Water
pollution

4

4

5

0

3

Teenage
pregnancy

School
dropouts

Alcohol
abuse

Juvenile
Delinquency

Vandalism

DK/NA
4

Drug abuse

Unemployment

Poor security

Agglomeration
of houses and
people

Criminal activity

9

13

7

0

4

Inadequate or
non-existent
public
transportation
5

7
6
6
5
4
Sexual
Fights
Lack of school
Mental
Domestic
Contagious
OlderChild abuse
Prostitution
abuse /
between
DK/NA
transportation
illnesses
violence
diseases
age abuse
rape
groups
2
3
0
1
0
0
0
3
1
4
Notes: The number refers to the number of times each item was marked/considered. Interviewees could mark more than one option in the four questions with the asterisk (*). In interviews with a couple
of relatives, only one interviewee completed the questionnaire. Results are displayed in aggregated form to comply with the anonymity agreement and avoid the identification of any interviewee.

27

