This is a pre-print, author-produced version of a contribution for an edited volume following up on the
ESRC STEPS Centre Symposium “The Politics of Uncertainty: Practical Challenges for Transformative
Action”, 3-5 July 2019, at the University of Sussex
Pre-Print Version (January 2020)

"The assault of finance’s ‘present futures’ on the rest of time"
DOI: 10.31235/osf.io/8dyq2
Timo Walter

Leon Wansleben

University of Edinburgh

Max-Planck-Institute for the Study of Societies, Cologne

timo.walter@graduateinstitute.ch

lw@mpifg.de

Abstract:
The title of our contribution refers to Alexander Kluge’s movie, “Der Angriff der Gegenwart auf die
übrige Zeit” (“the assault of the present on the rest of time”). The question we ask is how
financialized capitalism shapes and formats the politics of the future. Our central tenet is that, far
from providing an engine ’imagining’ futures that substantively guide (collective) actions, finance
‘consumes’ forecasts, plans, or visions in its present coordination process. While the “oscillation”
between present futures and future presents has been identified as a defining feature of modern
conceptions of contingency, freedom, and choice (Luhmann; Esposito), these two temporal
modalities are collapsed in contemporary financial markets in an ongoing ‘pricing in’ of various
possible future states. Projected futures do not substantively shape collective paths towards them or
instruct social learning, but are calculatively assimilated to improve coordination between present
prices. Fatally, central banks have been at the forefront of “synchronist” (Langenohl) finance,
believing that as long as numeric calibration of their own and the markets’ expectations as
expressed in prices align, they have rendered capitalism governable. Under this regime, central
banks really do not govern inflation, but inflation expectations as expressed in the “yield curve” and
built into interest rate derivatives. We argue that financial techniques built on the efficient market
hypothesis and the Black-Scholes-Merton formula, as two theoretical articulations of this modern
“synchronist” (Langenohl) temporality of finance, allow central banks to ignore possible “random”
fluctuations in actual inflation and concentrate on the internal calibration of present futures as the
sole criterion for monetary policy success. We show that the resultant “assault” on “future presents”
was an important factor in the run-up to the crisis of 2007-9. Central banks deliberately attempted to
eliminate uncertainties in markets about the future course of monetary policies. For that purpose,
shared fictions about the underlying logics of Western economies (real interest rates, NAIRU etc.)
were rigidly built into the structures of asset prices. Moreover, since central banks and market actors
aligned their expectations over real interest rates, market actors could act as if their uncertainties
about future liquidity needs could be neglected, since current money market and official lending
rates were supposed to already define the price of liquidity tomorrow. In the last part of the
contribution, we will extend this argument to contemporary quantitative easing, to show how it
reinforces the pitfalls of generating expectations of economic prosperity and stability via the
contemporary financial system.

0

Introduction
In Alexander Kluge’s movie, “Der Angriff der Gegenwart auf die übrige Zeit” (“the assault of the
present on the rest of time”), people live in a “distended present” (Kluge, Evans, and Liebman 1990,
passim): faced with uncertain (personal and societal) futures, they are unable to make lasting
decisions and remain trapped in an unending present. In this contribution, we discuss another
“assault on the rest of time” that was just in the making when Kluge’s film appeared in 1985 –
namely, the ways in which finance shapes and formats the politics of the future. Our central tenet is
that, far from providing an engine for imagining substantive futures that guide (collective) actions,
finance “consumes” forecasts, plans, or visions. They serve as mere signals (Langenohl and Wetzel
2011) fueling an increasingly short-term (Montagne 2009), febrile hunt for novelties from which
profit can be generated by beating others to it.
In (economic) theory, prices will oscillate (more or less) evenly around its expected ‘intrinsic’ value
in response to incoming signals, so that “the time average of an observable [is] equal to its
expectation value” (Peters 2019, 1216). Based on this statistical premise of “ergodicity”, there can
be no fundamental discontinuity between future, on the one hand, and past and present, on the other
– so that rational intertemporal calculation and expectations become possible. (Beckert and Bronk
2018: 18-20).1 As the formal models and calculative devices through which economic agents
project and imagine the future are built from these assumptions, the ergodic continuity between
past, present and future effectively becomes part of the background frame in terms of which signals
about the future are given meaning and translated in the present. We thus suggest that the
temporality of contemporary finance is at odds with modernist conceptions of futurity as involving
an epistemic “back and forth” between a given present and an open future, out of which emerge
contingency, freedom and choice (Luhmann 1976; Esposito 2004). The ‘future’ toward which
finance is oriented (Arrow 1978) is constantly collapsed into the present through an ongoing
process of ‘pricing in’ the future and rendering it calculable according to an a-temporal space of
possibilities. For modern finance, the future has become a useful means for acting in the present,
rather than an ontologically distinct state which we imagine and construct based on joint
imaginations as we proceed towards it from the present. We develop this point by discussing the
case of derivatives markets. We show how derivatives markets depend directly on the assumption of
a “synchronicity” of present and future, built directly into the central valuation device on which the
functioning of these markets depends – the so-called Black-Scholes-Merton formula. We extend this
1

In technical terms, “[e]rgodicity is fulfilled, if the time average of a system or process equals its ensemble
averageThe time average is the average of one observed trajetory or realisation of a process (one time series). The
ensemble average is the average over every possible state of a system.” (Kirstein 2015: 1). The assumption of ergodicity
is crucial for predominant formalizations of economic dynamics as “the ergodic case is much easier to handle
mathematically”, although in principle “non-ergodicity is a necessary property of a mathematical model, if the model is
supposed to describe trajectoryoccurences of endogenous novelties and change” (ibid.),

1

argument in the second part of our contribution, where we describe how central banks have
developed a finance-oriented and finance-based “governmentality” (Foucault 2007[1978]). Under
this regime, central banks really do not govern future inflation, but present expectations of future
inflation as expressed in the “yield curve” and built into interest rate derivatives. We suggest that
the use of Rational Expectations models that construe the future as ‘conserved’ within an ergodic,
a-temporal world allows central banks to ignore possible ‘random’ fluctuations in actual inflation
and concentrate on the internal calibration of present expectations of future inflation as the sole
criterion for monetary policy success. We show that this “assault” of present expectations on a
future that never becomes actualized was an important factor in the run-up to the crisis of 2007-9.
Central banks have facilitated forms of financial valuation that rely on key fictions of an ergodic
world (in particular the “natural” interest rate), by stabilizing the expectational parameters which
manifest these fictions, and have thus helped to black-box uncertainties.The crisis itself, and postcrisis interventions, have not led to a “reckoning” with a different temporality, but activated various
support mechanisms and new policy tools (e.g. “forward guidance”) that shield and maintain this
‘practical fiction’ and “infrastructure” (Star and Ruhleder 1996) of anergodic world for
contemporary finance. What has become clearer, though, is that the particular constellations
between policy institutions and financial markets found in contemporary capitalism do not support
economic prosperity and sustainability for society as a whole.

The ergodic world of “quantitative” finance
Compared to the embedded, “boring finance” of the 1950s to the 1980s, in the contemporary
financial system, the contingency of all financial activity on the future has become much more
visible. In particular, the “openness of the future” (Beckert 2015: 35ff. and the problem that an open
future is necessarily contingent and therefore “fundamentally uncertain” (Knight 1921) has moved
centre-stage in discussions about contemporary finance. Whereas in the “golden age of capitalism”
(Marglin and Schor 2000), finance lived well by the “3-6-3” rule (charging a three percent mark-up
on credit over the three percent interest paid out on deposits, and be off to the golf course at 3 p.m.)
(Walter 2006), the de-regulation and financial innovation that started in the 1970s (Helleiner 1994)
has turned the future into an explicit epistemic problem. As a result, financial (and economic)
activity has become much more directly dependent on the elaboration of “imagined futures” and
calculative “instruments of imagination” for the coordination of expectations (Beckert 2016:
216ff.). Since the liquidity and stability of markets hinges directly on the continuity of valuations
(and the knowledge underpinning them) (Carruthers and Stinchcombe 1999), this means that these
epistemic practices and calculative instruments, and the joint expectations of the futures that they
help construct, have become central to the functioning of contemporary finance.
2

It has therefore become common for both practitioners and observers to understand contemporary
finance as revolving around the problem of mitigating the fundamental epistemic uncertainty of a
future that is open and contingent. In this view, finance has become a primary site for Acting in an
Uncertain World (Callon, Lascoumes, and Barthe 2009), where market participants learn to forecast
and imagine such futures through calculative devices and/or hedge against uncertainties using
various financial tools. Finance thus seems to derive its societal role and significance as the
institution of modernity to cope, manage and live with an uncertain future and to render this open
future as a space of possibilities – for speculation, investment, hedging, insurance, betting etc.
There is, however, some reason to be cautious about the notion that uncertainty in finance is
(primarily) a function of the irreducible gap between present futures and actual future presents. The
historian Reinhart Koselleck (1989) has theorized this gap as a result of historical experiences that
have led actors to distinguish these two distinct forms of “future”: the future as imagined in the
present (‘present future’), and and future presents, i.e. future states of the world when they (have)
become present, or actualized. However, this decidedly modern form of temporality is not the one
that reigns in contemporary finance.
To argue this point, we need to look at precisely how epistemic accuracy of expectations about the
future-present matters in finance. As John Maynard Keynes and Hyman Minsky have pointed out
long ago, the openness of the future manifests itself as an ‘economic survival constraint’: False or
inaccurate present-futures are costly, or even life-threatening to economic units, if investments fail.
For that reason, Keynes and Minsky thought that as uncertainty becomes more directly and
intensively felt, economic units avoid tying down their wealth in risky investments and protect
themselves against adverse risks by stocking up on liquid reserves.
The key characteristic of this uncertainty – the uncertainty of having enough liquid means to meet
upcoming obligations – is that it cannot readily be made measurable: It depends on the behavior of
various other actors (e.g. money market lenders) and the various feedback processes by which one’s
own and others’ decisions (e.g. asset sales) affect the state of the financial system as a whole.
However, as central banks have encouraged and supported financial markets’ reliance on ‘ergodic
fictions’ for valuation and risk management, this uncertainty has ceased to feature in the regular
calculations and strategies of financial actors and in the structures of the financial system, giving
way to a world in which actors act most of the times as if market liquidity and stable asset prices
will be indefinitely maintained. To understand how and why, we need to understand the role played
by Rational Expectations (as both a category of practice and a theory) in contemporary finance.
Discounting expected future returns to calculate an asset’s present value requires knowledge of the
future development of macroeconomic variables (such as growth, interest rates or inflation, etc.)
which, in models and formulas derived from Rational Expectations Economics, shape this present
3

value, as joint expectations about such parameters become widely embedded in valuations (Bryan
and Rafferty 2006). Such parameters come to define a “normality” as background to and condition
of asset valuations, with market actors closely tracking any anomalies that might affect asset values
(Zaloom 2009; Christophers 2017). This ‘normality’ has become an intrinsic background for the
joint structures of knowledge that secure the continuity of valuations and market transactions, and
thus undergird the liquidity and stability of “market-based finance” (Hardie and Howarth 2013).
This background establishes a (calculative and epistemic) continuity between the present and the
future, built directly into the fabric of financial markets, against which more narrow present-futures
can be elaborated, processed, adopted or discarded. The intense concern with the future in
contemporary finance is thus made possible by this “synchronist” (Langenohl 2018) background,
which anchors the impressive array of instruments of imagination in an a-temporal skeletal structure
on which the validity of any calculation of present futures depends.
This ergodic conception of time (Kirstein 2015) derives its importance for contemporary finance
particularly in those contexts in which the respective parameters are directly incorporated into the
markets’ valuation devices. A case in point are the derivatives markets, which do not value and trade
normal financial assets (such as stocks or currencies), but which are based on contracts through
which parties directly wager on future prices of underlying assets in relation to specific future
events. Derivatives wager on (clearly circumscribed) imagined futures and the valuations they
imply (through discounting), without the need to possess or actually trade underlying assets. This
might suggest that, if anywhere, it is in the derivatives markets that actors care for whether their
present futures actually become future presents at some point in time. But this is not how valuation
and pricing works in these markets, which are based on the common valuation infrastructure that
relies on the Black-Scholes-Merton formula ( Watson 2007; MacKenzie and Millo 2003; Black and
Scholes 1973). With this formula, traders no longer focus on particular events and future-presents as
they arrive, but instead trade what is called “volatility” – a measure of the variability of prices over
time that is dependent on such variation remaining ergodic (Davidson 1982). Using this calculative
tool, participants thus engage in a market process in which particular events and risks are subsumed
with regards to a ‘synchronic’ background system of valuation and pricing.
The Black-Scholes formula thus premises its validity and applicability on this assumption of a
fundamentally static and continuous world that does not undergo any fundamental substantive
changes. In this world, present-futures are nothing but short-lived inputs or signals that generate
possibilities for arbitrage but do not affect the static background continuity that undergirds the
system. However, in the case of “Black Swan” events (Taleb 2007), that is when highly improbable
“tail-end” events in a probability distribution occur, a system of valuations premised on ergodicity
becomes incoherent, leading markets to freeze. As Donald MacKenzie (2004; MacKenzie and Millo
4

2003) has shown, the 1987 stock market crash drove home the limits of this ergodic depiction of
temporality, and practitioners adjusted their Black-Scholes pricing ad hoc and modified the price
curve for options so that longer-termed options now include an uncertainty premium (the so-called
“volatility smile” or “skew”) on top of their ‘ergodic’ price.
Derivative markets thus highlight particularly clearly how the synchronist background against
which financial valuation operates mitigates uncertainty, not by encouraging actors to reckon with
an uncertain future, but by excluding the possibility that the future might be discontinuous with the
present (in aggregate terms), in any radical sense. For the continuous functioning of financial
markets, it is more important to uphold a stable background of expectations than to know the future
accurately. The synchronist frame operatively decouples actions taken in reaction to and in terms of
present-futures from the actual future-present(s) that come to pass.
Many observers and practitioners have noted how this separation from this calculative background
has made the sequential processing of transitory present-futures at the ‘surface’ of the market almost
ritualistic (e.g. LiPuma 2017; Ayache 2016). The unfolding of present-futures is largely irrelevant to
and does not feed into the static expectations about the future encoded in the background, which is
re-asserted or “performed” anew with every transaction that makes use of instruments of valuation
or calculation derived from Rational Expectations models (cf. LiPuma 2017). Derivatives markets
thus form the extreme end of a continuum, but highlight the logical conditions of why the liquidity
and stability of modern financial markets depends on this calculative background. They illustrate
why the accuracy of expectations is not actually put to the test (or least only idiosyncratically, for
individual traders) as long as markets can operatively hold onto this “useful” fiction of a
continuous, normal and ergodic world. As a result, for modern finance, the future itself is
continuously absent (Law and Urry 2004): it is a horizon of possibilities that provides inputs for
arbitrage, but must remain invisible at the level of the constitutive fiction of the never-changing
future on which market stability rests.
The modern financial system is thus based on ‘willful’ or “strategic ignorance” (McGoey 2012) of
the future present as a constitutive principle: excluding the possibility of substantive discontinuities
between present and future is what prevents uncertainty and secures the possibility of action in
markets in the present. As market coordination increasingly depends on the construction, projection
and diffusion or present-futures, this common background has gained in importance. It allows
translating present-futures into numeric prices, and thus is central to securing the congruence of
expectations (about present and future prices) in markets. The financial system’s ability to process
information about the future thus depends on the continuous operative denial of the openness of this
very future. Whatever individual actors might think privately, at the level of the market-public,
uncertainty must not be allowed to manifest itself, but must continuously be absorbed and
5

neutralized – as a precondition for the system’s ability to process any signals about the future that
might entail (limited) re-valuations and price changes at all.
Evidently, excluding the possibility of a fundamental discontinuity of the economic present and
future mathematically does not protect financial actors from suffering the consequences of being
(collectively) wrong. However, Minsky has shown with his now famous “financial instability
hypothesis” (Minsky 1980), if central banks are actively working to protect markets from a
breakdown of the fictional continuity and the ‘normal market conditions’ it enables, they are
effectively removing the survival constraint on financial institutions. In other words, they protect
them from ever having to face fundamental discontinuity, allowing them instead to continue
processing present-futures without concerning themselves with their accuracy. As he pointed out, by
continuously neutralizing the effects of fundamental dissonances about the future, and shoring up
‘normal’ assumptions about the future in order to secure the ‘normal’ operations of the system, one
also abolishes any incentives to look out for, and be prepared for, the possibility of fundamentally
different futures, blanking out underlying systemic uncertainties.
The more market actors are assured that normal market conditions will continue (indefinitely) into
the future, the more the future becomes a “useful fiction”, that is continuously presupposed but
never actually must affect the normal operations of the system. As we shall see in the next section,
central banks’ efforts to gain “infrastructural power” (Walter and Wansleben 2019; Braun and Gabor
2019; Braun 2018a), by seeking to develop technologies for influencing financial markets (and the
economy) by “governing through expectations” (Wansleben 2018; Braun 2015), have become
directly complicit with this specific temporality of modern finance.

Hegemonic futures in financialized capitalism
The role of an ergodic world as a calculative background for market coordination has gained
general societal and economic importance through processes of financialization. Financialization
can be used as a descriptive term, to depict how the size of finance has grown compared to the rest
of the economy (Stockhammer 2008); how corporations shift their sources of profit from production
to financial activities (Krippner 2005); and/or to capture how households in Western economies
have become increasingly entangled in financial markets, as mortgage holders, employees with
private pension plans, owners of life insurance products and the like (van der Zwan 2014; Davies
2009). We use the concept here in a related, but somewhat different sense. Our interest is in how the
logics of coordination reliant on particular conceptions of futurity become dominant for the ways in
which capitalist democracies are rendered governable. We are thus interested in reconstructing a
particular “governmentality” that is not exhaustively described with regards to shareholder value,
speculative identities or even particularistic elite interests, but concerns the fundamental ways in
6

which capitalism is thought to be governable and controllable tout court. This sounds like a rather
grand claim. But we believe there is strong evidence for the rise of finance as a new
governmentality that is closely associated with the emergence of central banks as the most powerful
governors in contemporary capitalist regimes.
The proposition that we make therefore is that central banks have contributed to transcending the
role of contemporary finance by tying their own practices of macroeconomic policy making to this
particular realm (Krippner 2011). We will here limit this discussion to the symbolic-communicative
dimension of central banks’ governing practices - a topic that has raised much interest in
sociological (Braun 2015) and anthropological research (Holmes 2013). The innovation identified
by these scholars is that central bankers have learnt to govern monetary developments by
communicating how they plan to intervene in order to “govern” the future (from the present); the
markets, reacting to such signals then adapt accordingly, performatively bringing about the effects
that the central banks hope to obtain. The point that we want to elaborate on here is that such
“performative” central banking is not a neutral strategy to achieve legitimate political objectives
like low inflation and stable growth. These practices of governing rather require that central banks
align their interventions with the structure of financial markets and with the particular mechanisms
that rely upon and re-inscribe ergodicity within them.
This firstly entails a subtle, but important, shift in the very object of governing. The sociological
argument underlying the idea of “expectational governance” is that central banks can control pricesetting in the economy by influencing the expectations that economic actors have over changes in
the inflation rate (Beckert 2016). When these actors – like wage bargainers - expect inflation to
remain stable, they will be more moderate with their wage claims and their mark-up pricing and
thereby produce the low inflation rates that they assume to prevail. This self-confirmatory logic is
intuitive. But surveys have shown time and again that the general public’s expectations are
relatively fickle and that inflation rates can be influenced by various factors, not all of which are
expectational (Lombardelli and Saleheen 2003). Central bankers have resolved these uncertainties
and problems with their governing by redefining what they actually control: Not inflation itself, but
inflation expectations as incorporated into financial markets’ calculations and operations. The
assumption is that, as long as these remain stable, it does not matter that prices actually fluctuate
somewhat or that most people do not have a good understanding of how inflation will evolve.As a
consequence, cognitive and normative expectations inherent in markets, rather than the demands,
claims, and ideas from broader society, become the linchpin for assessing central bankers’ success
and for orienting their macroeconomic policies. Financial market expectations thus have become
central banks’ primary objects of governing; all that matters is that financial market prices –
primarily long-term interest rates – reflect expectations that inflation will remain stable and low.
7

This re-orientation to markets was well articulated by Ben Bernanke, an architect of inflation
targeting, who claimed that “monetary policy is a cooperative game. The whole point is to get
financial markets on our side and for them to do some of our work for us” (cited in Mallaby 2017:
612, our emphasis). In other words, central banks rely on financial markets to assume a hegemonic
role in defining economic futures more generally, and they reinforce this hegemony by aligning
their communications with the specific logics of these markets.
This brings us to a second dimension of such finance-oriented expectation coordination – the
ficticious elimination of radical uncertainty and the simulation of an ergodic socio-economic system
with stable parameters within which financial expansion can unfold. To illustrate this point, let us
imagine a central bank that has some expertise on finance and the economy, but only imprecisely
and ‘with uncertainty’ knows how the economy will evolve going forward – what the level of
employment will be, how much output is going to be produced, how such employment level and
output are going to relate to the productive capacities of an economy, how such interactions will
affect the price level – not to speak of the uncertainties arising from developments in asset and
credit markets that affect banking, household wealth, productive facilities, consumer spending etc.
With the introduction of inflation targeting since the late 1980s, it became imperative to eliminate
these uncertainties and impose a rigid framework in which the respective developments are
articulated in precise terms (Walter and Wansleben 2019). In essence, this new framework rests on
’new neo-classical’ Keynesian models (Goodfriend 2002) that construe an economy that tends
towards general equilibrium – a state at which levels of employment are just enough to use the
economy’s full capacity without causing excessive inflation and at which the “natural” interest rate
prevails, which equilibrates demand and supply for capital (Woodford 2009). Based on this
conception, central banks and markets then coordinate their expectations about how the central
banks ought to bring the nominal short-term interests in line with these imagined equilibrium
properties of the system – with some allowance for short-term interventionism as a result of
“nominal rigidities” (e.g. due to fixed contracts). Such coordination becomes institutionalized
through ritual decision procedures and communications that confirm assumptions about presentfutures that are being incorporated in market rates. Accordingly, what inflation architects saw a key
feature and advantage of inflation targeting was that it created ever “fewer occasions on which the
authorities’ behaviour - as opposed to the underlying economic developments - causes uncertainty
in the markets” (Butler and Clews 1997: 48).
In other words, the tools and techniques of macroeconomic policy championed by central banks
have enhanced and strengthened the ‘normality expectations’ undergirding valuations in financial
markets. This has then reinforced the expansionary dynamics of finance, leading to a proliferation
of contracts (e.g. of securitized assets), market relations and balance sheets that presuppose an
unchanging macroeconomic background structure upon which financialization rests (Nesvetailova
8

2015; Mehrling 2011). Particular features of financialization, such as the interrelated expansion of
asset and money markets, rely on these normality expectations and more generally on the notion
that central banks will maintain stability in all major macroeconomic variables (inflation, interest
rates) relevant for financial markets.As the transatlantic financial crisis of 2007-9 has brought
home, the “success” of central banks to coordinate with finance should not be confused with the
development of reliable ways to govern capitalist democracies. Indeed, the events in these years
rather demonstrated that the self-validation between policy makers and market actors had become
dissociated from the actual socio-economic structures – precarious labour market situations, debt
pyramids etc. – to which their macroeconomic models and valuation practices purported to refer
(e.g. Fligstein, Stuart Brundage, and Schultz 2017). However, this has not led to a fundamental
questioning of the governmentality regime associated with financialization. Rather, central banks’
“unconventional” expansionary monetary policies since 2009 reflect a reinforcement of a financeoriented and finance-centred policy making (Braun 2018b). Their central aim is to reinstall
confidence within finance about the indefinite continuity of “normal” patterns of output, inflation,
interest rates etc., with the intended effect of inducing market actors to re-engage in investments
and credit provision that are believed to generate growth. Finance thus remains at the centre of
macroeconomic governance and thus maintains its privileged role in “mature” capitalism.
To be fair, there has been some criticial discussion amongst expert economists about the adverse
consequences of such regimes. For instance, Tobias Adrian and Nelly Liang write that:
Monetary policy works though financial conditions on expected economic outcomes, but
risks to financial stability involve potential tail risks. The tail risks to future macroeconomic
outcomes manifest only in some states of the world, when adverse shocks are realized.
These dimensions are important because they greatly complicate efforts to incorporate
financial stability in the determination of monetary policy. Policy makers would need to
look beyond expected conditions for downside risks that arise with uncertain probability in
the future (2016: 4).
Yet there seem to be little appetite amongst policy makers to take seriously these adverse financial
stability effects, not to speak of the broader societal problems, that arise from the current financeoriented governance regime.

Conclusion
Up until now, the highly problematic “politics of the future” entailed by the characteristic
temporality of modern finance, and its widening implications due to financialization, have- by-andlarge passed under the radar (but see Adkins 2018; Langenohl 2007; 2018). While our focus in this
9

essay has been on the role of technological and epistemic infrastructures in lending this temporality
durability and a degree of invisibility, the concerns we would like to raise are related to these (for
the most part, sociological and anthropological) “diagnostics of the present”.
To be sure, the fragilities in the financial system that result from the continuous need to stabilize the
‘discounted’ fictive future values in the present have been widely noted (e.g. Mehrling 2011;
Nesvetailova 2007), but only rarely linked to the peculiar temporalities of modern finance (but see
LiPuma 2017). More commonly, financial fragility is instead interpreted as an issue of complexity –
to be addressed by increasing the transparency of markets, and in particular by reducing the
epistemic uncertainty that this complexity generates with regard to the system’s own future (e.g.
Gräbner and Kapeller 2015; Cooper 2011).
Following from our argument, the present attempts, through regulation and monetary policy, to
manage and contain the complexity of contemporary finance may, paradoxically, contribute to
instability if the main aim remains to stabilize the working fiction of an ergodic, ‘timeless’
temporality on which financial markets are premised. This ergodic normality has become the very
foundation of the calculability of financial values (Peters 2019), its commensurability across assets
and markets and thus the liquidity and stability of those markets themselves. This is all the more the
case as there has been a marked, global trend towards market-based finance (Murau 2017; Gabor
2016) in which the ability to shift assets in markets has become the basis of liquidity (Mehrling
2011), increasing the systemic risk entailed by disruptions to this frame of calculability.The need to
protect this temporality, the frame of calculability and structure of valuations it undergirds, forces
central banks into continuing their role of reinsurer of systemic risk and market-maker of last resort
that had already contributed to the 2007-2009 crisis, backstopping the value of a widening pool of
(only seemingly) ‘liquid’ assets (Mehrling 2011; Borio and White 2004). The “unconventional”
monetary policies of quantitative easing pursued by central banks around the world since 2008 even
carry the rationality of restoring and safeguarding the technical presuppositions of ‘normal’ forms
of governability in their name. Likewise, the “macro-prudential” financial regulation that has come
to dominate regulatory debates (Coombs 2017; Baker 2013) attempts to correct the fragilities
created by the ‘distended present’ of modern finance by increasing the transparency of risks (e.g.
through stress tests), raising buffers and facilitating ‘efficient’ risk sharing within the financial
system. Despite some undeniable innovations at the levels of technical frameworks and instruments
at its disposal since 2008-08, monetary policy thus continues to be geared towards ergodicity as its
operative framework. ‘Macro-pru’ and unconventional policies aim, first and foremost, at restoring
and protecting normal conditions in financial markets, as a platform for effective monetary policy.
This normality is conceived of in ergodic terms and observed through (mathematical) models
premised on ergodicity. Deviations from normality thus become an impediment to be neutralized in
10

order to secure the inter-temporal consistency and effectiveness of monetary policy – rather than as
(potentially) indicative of (fundamental) uncertainties of which market actors (and central banks!)
would need to take heed and which might require adjustments to their calculative strategies. Instead,
central banks proactively seek to restore ‘quasi-ergodic’ conditions in financial markets, by
reducing what they perceive as market imperfections that prevent the even inter-temporal
dissemination of monetary policy signals. However, in combating manifestations of uncertainty as
anomalies that stand in the way of monetary policy operations premised on the ergodicity of finance
and the economy, central banks are sterilizing the very signs that the future may indeed
substantively differ from past and present. Their interventions provide financial markets with a
working fiction of an ergodic world, and, rather than removing vulnerabilities, they counteract the
very processes through which collective sense-making could solidify into effectively constraining
price signals – until, that is, the next crisis...
.

11

References:
Adkins, Lisa. 2018. The Time of Money. Currencies. Stanford, California: Stanford University
Press.
Adrian, Tobas and Nellie Liang. 2016. Monetary Policy, Financial Conditions, and Financial
Stability. FRBNY Staff Reports No. 690.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1978. “THE FUTURE AND THE PRESENT IN ECONOMIC LIFE.” Economic
Inquiry 16 (2): 157–69. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1465-7295.1978.tb00278.x.
Ayache, Elie. 2016. The Medium of Contingency: An Inverse View of the Market.
https://nls.ldls.org.uk/welcome.html?ark:/81055/vdc_100059902958.0x000001.
Baker, Andrew. 2013. “The New Political Economy of the Macroprudential Ideational Shift.” New
Political Economy 18 (1): 112–39. https://doi.org/10.1080/13563467.2012.662952.
Beckert, Jens. 2015. “Re-Imagining Capitalist Dynamics. Fictional Expectations and the Openness
of Economic Futures.” In Re-Imagining Economic Sociology, edited by Patrik Aspers and
Nigel Dodd, 57–78. Oxford University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198748465.003.0003.
———. 2016. Imagined Futures: Fictional Expectations and Capitalist Dynamics. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Beckert, Jens and Richard Bronk. 2018. An Introduction to Uncertain Futures. In: Uncertain
Futures: Imaginaries, Narratives, and Calculation in the Economy, ed. by J. Beckert and R.
Bronk. Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1-36.
Black, Fischer, and Myron Scholes. 1973. “The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities.”
Journal of Political Economy 81 (3): 637–54.
Borio, Claudio, and William R White. 2004. “Whither Monetary and Financial Stability? The
Implications of Evolving Policy Regimes.” BIS Working Papers 147. Basel: Bank for
International Settlements.
Braun, Benjamin. 2015. “Governing the Future: The European Central Bank’s Expectation
Management during the Great Moderation.” Economy and Society 44 (3): 367–91.
https://doi.org/10.1080/03085147.2015.1049447.
———. 2018a. “Central Banking and the Infrastructural Power of Finance: The Case of ECB
Support for Repo and Securitization Markets.” Socio-Economic Review, February.
https://doi.org/10.1093/ser/mwy008.
12

Braun, Benjamin. 2018b. “Central Bank Planning? Unconventional Monetary Policy and the Price
of Bending the Yield Curve.” In Uncertain Futures: Imaginaries, Narratives, and
Calculation in the Economy, edited by Jens Beckert and Richard Bronk, 31–37. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Braun, Benjamin, and Daniela Gabor. 2019. “Central Banking, Shadow Banking, and Infrastructural
Power.” Preprint. SocArXiv. https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/nf9ms.
Bryan, Dick, and Michael Rafferty. 2006. Capitalism with Derivatives: A Political Economy of
Financial Derivatives, Capital and Class. Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire ; New York:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Butler, Creon and Roger Clews. 1997. "Money market operations in the United Kingdom." BIS
Conference Papers 3 (Implementation and tactics of monetary policy): 45-70.
Callon, Michel, Pierre Lascoumes, and Yannick Barthe. 2009. Acting in an Uncertain World: An
Essay on Technical Democracy. Inside Technology. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Carruthers, Bruce G., and Arthur L. Stinchcombe. 1999. “The Social Structure of Liquidity:
Flexibility, Markets, and States.” Theory and Society 28 (3): 353–82.
Coombs, Nathan. 2017. “Macroprudential versus Monetary Blueprints for Financial Reform.”
Journal of Cultural Economy 10 (2): 207–16.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17530350.2016.1234404.
Cooper, Melinda. 2011. “Complexity Theory After The Financial Crisis: The Death of
Neoliberalism or the Triumph of Hayek?” Journal of Cultural Economy 4 (4): 371–85.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17530350.2011.609692.
Christophers, Brett. 2017. “The Performativity of the Yield Curve.” Journal of Cultural Economy
10 (1): 63–80. https://doi.org/10.1080/17530350.2016.1236031.
Davidson, Paul. 1982. “Rational Expectations: A Fallacious Foundation for Studying Crucial
Decision-Making Processes.” Journal of Post Keynesian Economics 5 (2): 182–98.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01603477.1982.11489355.
Davis, Gerald F. 2009. Managed by the markets : how finance reshaped America. New York,
Oxford University Press.
Esposito, Elena. 2004. “The Arts of Contingency.” Critical Inquiry 31 (1): 7–25.
Fligstein, Neil, Jonah Stuart Brundage, and Michael Schultz. 2017. “Seeing Like the Fed: Culture,
Cognition, and Framing in the Failure to Anticipate the Financial Crisis of 2008.” American
Sociological Review 82 (5): 879–909. https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122417728240.
13

Foucault, Michel. 2007[1978]. Security, territory, population: lectures at the Collège de France,
1977-78. Basingstoke ; New York, Palgrave Macmillan.
Gabor, Daniela. 2016. “The (Impossible) Repo Trinity: The Political Economy of Repo Markets.”
Review of International Political Economy 23 (6): 967–1000.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09692290.2016.1207699.
Goodfriend, Marvin. 2002. “Monetary Policy in the New Neoclassical Synthesis: A Primer.”
International Finance 5 (2): 165–91. https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-2362.00093.
Gräbner, Claudius, and Jakob Kapeller. 2015. “New Perspectives on Institutionalist Pattern
Modeling: Systemism, Complexity, and Agent-Based Modeling.” Journal of Economic
Issues 49 (2): 433–40. https://doi.org/10.1080/00213624.2015.1042765.
Hardie, Iain, and David J. Howarth, eds. 2013. Market-Based Banking and the International
Financial Crisis. First edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Helleiner, Eric. 1994. States and the Reemergence of Global Finance : From Bretton Woods to the
1990s. Ithaca NY: Cornell University Press.
Holmes, Douglas R. 2013. Economy of Words: Communicative Imperatives in Central Banks.
Chicago, University of Chicago Press.
Kirstein, Mark. 2015. „From the Ergodic Hypothesis in Physics to the Ergodic Axiom in Econom
ics“. In: Diskussionspapier. 7. Wintertagung ICAE, Linz, 4.-5. Dez 2015.
Kluge, Alexander, Tamara Evans, and Stuart Liebman. 1990. “The Assault of the Present on the
Rest of Time.” New German Critique 49 (Winter): 11–22.
Knight, Frank H. 1921. Risk, Uncertainty and Profit. Boston; New York: Houghton Mifflin.
Koselleck, Reinhart. 1989. Vergangene Zukunft. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Krippner, Greta R. (2005). "The financialization of the American economy." Socioeconomic
Review 3(2): 173-208.
Krippner, Greta R.2011. Capitalizing on crisis: the political origins of the rise of finance.
Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.
Langenohl, Andreas. 2007. Finanzmarkt Und Temporalität: Imaginäre Zeit Und Die Kulturelle
Repräsentation Der Gesellschaft. Qualitative Soziologie, Bd. 7. Stuttgart: Lucius & Lucius.
———. 2018. “Sources of Financial Synchronism: Arbitrage Theory and the Promise of Risk-Free
Profit.” Finance and Society 4 (1): 26–40. https://doi.org/10.2218/finsoc.v4i1.2737.

14

Langenohl, Andreas, and Dietmar J. Wetzel. 2011. “Finanzmärkte Und Ihre Sinnformen:
Handlungskoordination Und Signalkommunikation.” Berliner Journal Für Soziologie 21:
539–59.
Law, John, and John Urry. 2004. “Enacting the Social.” Economy and Society 33 (3): 390–410.
https://doi.org/10.1080/0308514042000225716.
LiPuma, Edward. 2017. The Social Life of Financial Derivatives: Markets, Risk, and Time.
Durham: Duke University Press.
———. 2004. “The Big, Bad Wolf and the Rational Market: Portfolio Insurance, the 1987 Crash
and the Performativity of Economics.” Economy and Society 33 (3): 303–34. https://doi.org/
10.1080/0308514042000225680.
Lombardelli, Clare and Jumana Saleheen. 2003. Public expectations of UK inflation. Bank of
England Quarterly Bulletin, Autumn 2003, 281-290.
Luhmann, Niklas. 1976. “The Future Cannot Begin: Temporal Structures in Modern Society.”
Social Research 43 (1): 130–52.MacKenzie, Donald, and Yuval Millo. 2003. “Constructing
a Market, Performing Theory: The Historical Sociology of a Financial Derivatives
Exchange.” American Journal of Sociology 109 (1): 107–45.
Mallaby, Sebastian. 2017. The man who knew: the life and times of Alan Greenspan. London,
Bloomsbury.
Marglin, Stephen A., and Juliet B. Schor, eds. 2000. The Golden Age of Capitalism: Reinterpreting
the Postwar Experience. Reprinted. WIDER Studies in Development Economics. Oxford:
Clarendon Press [u.a.].
McGoey, Linsey. 2012. “Strategic Unknowns: Towards a Sociology of Ignorance.” Economy and
Society 41 (1): 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1080/03085147.2011.637330.
Mehrling, Perry. 2011. The New Lombard Street : How the Fed Became the Dealer of Last Resort.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Minsky, Hyman. 1980. “Capitalist Financial Processes and the Instability of Capitalism.” Journal of
Economic Issues 14 (2): 505–23.
Montagne, Sabine. 2009. “Short-Termism as a Rule : The Effects of Portfolio Management
Delegation.” Revue d’économie Financière 9 (Hors-Série: Sovereign Wealth Funds): 381–
95.
Murau, Steffen. 2017. “Shadow Money and the Public Money Supply: The Impact of the 2007–
2009 Financial Crisis on the Monetary System.” Review of International Political Economy
24 (5): 802–38. https://doi.org/10.1080/09692290.2017.1325765.
15

Nesvetailova, Anastasia. 2007. Fragile Finance : Debt, Speculation and Crisis in the Age of Global
Credit. Basingstoke [England]; New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
———. 2015. “A Crisis of the Overcrowded Future: Shadow Banking and the Political Economy of
Financial Innovation.” New Political Economy 20 (3): 431–53.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13563467.2014.951428.
Peters, Ole. 2019. “The Ergodicity Problem in Economics.” Nature Physics 15 (12): 1216–21.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-019-0732-0.
Star, Susan Leigh, and Karen Ruhleder. 1996. “Steps Toward an Ecology of Infrastructure: Design
and Access for Large Information Spaces.” Information Systems Research 7 (1): 111–34.
https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.7.1.111.
Stockhammer, E. 2008. "Some Stylized Facts on the Finance-Dominated Accumulation Regime."
Competition & Change 12(2): 184-202.
Taleb, Nassim Nicholas. 2007. The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable. 1st ed. New
York: Random House.
Walter, John R. 2006. “The 3-6-3 Rule: An Urban Myth?” Economic Quarterly 92 (1): 51–78.
Walter, Timo, and Leon Wansleben. 2019. “How Central Bankers Learned to Love Financialization:
The Fed, the Bank, and the Enlisting of Unfettered Markets in the Conduct of Monetary
Policy.” Socio-Economic Review, March. https://doi.org/10.1093/ser/mwz011.
Wansleben, Leon. 2018. “How Expectations Became Governable: Institutional Change and the
Performative Power of Central Banks.” Theory and Society 47 (6): 773–803. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11186-018-09334-0.
Watson, Matthew. 2007. “Searching for the Kuhnian Moment: The Black-Scholes-Merton Formula
and the Evolution of Modern Finance Theory.” Economy and Society 36 (2): 325–37. https://
doi.org/10.1080/03085140701254340.
Woodford, Michael. 2009. “Convergence in Macroeconomics: Elements of the New Synthesis.”
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 1 (1): 267–79.
https://doi.org/10.1257/mac.1.1.267.
Zaloom, Caitlin. 2009. “How to Read the Future: The Yield Curve, Affect, and Financial
Prediction.” Public Culture 21 (2): 245–68. https://doi.org/10.1215/08992363-2008-028.
Zwan, N. van der. 2014. “Making Sense of Financialization.” Socio-Economic Review 12 (1): 99–
129. https://doi.org/10.1093/ser/mwt020.

16

