Visual Style in Two Network Era Sitcoms
Taylor Arnold, Lauren Tilton, and Annie Berke
07.19.19
Peer-Reviewed By: Richard Rogers
Clusters: Data
Article DOI: 10.22148/16.043
Dataverse DOI: https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/S84TSX
Journal ISSN: 2371-4549
Cite: Taylor Arnold, Lauren Tilton, and Annie Berke, “Visual Style in Two Network
Era Sitcoms,” Journal of Cultural Analytics. July 19, 2019.

Extensive scholarship in media studies has established how formal elements of
moving images—such as camera angles, sound, and framing—reflect, establish,
and challenge cultural norms. Prior computational analyses attempting to analyze these elements have primarily relied on summarizing relatively low-level features. Beginning with the early work of Barry Salt, one particularly prominent
metric is the distribution of median shot lengths.1 Works on shot length include
Yuri Tsivian’s Cinemetrics project,2 Arclight,3 and Jeremy Butler’s ShotLogger.4
Other computational analyses examine the aggregation of language and average
1 Barry
2 Yuri

Salt, “Statistical Style Analysis of Motion Pictures,” Film Quarterly 28, no. 1 (1974): 13.
Tsivian and Gunars Civjans, Cinemetrics: Movie Measurement and Study Tool Database,

2005.
3 Charles R Acland and Eric Hoyt, The Arclight guidebook to media history and the digital humanities (Reframe Books, 2016).
4 Jeremy Butler, “Statistical Analysis of Television Style: What Can Numbers Tell Us About TV
Editing?” Cinema Journal 54, no. 1 (2014): 25-44.

1

Taylor Arnold, Lauren Tilton, and Annie Berke

Cultural Analytics

shot color,5 image compositions,6 and analysis of film scripts.7 These projects
have demonstrated the feasibility of distributing extracted metadata from copyrighted materials and the power of computational techniques in accessing useful
information over a large collection of moving images. However, there is much to
be learned from other extractable metadata beyond shot detection and much to
be studied in audiovisual media that can only be discovered through computer
vision.
This essay shows how face detection and recognition algorithms, applied to
frames extracted from a corpus of moving images, can capture formal elements
present in media beyond shot length and average color measurements. Locating
and identifying faces makes it possible to algorithmically extract time-coded
labels that directly correspond to concepts and taxonomies established within
film theory. For example, knowing the size of detected faces, for example,
provides a direct link to the concept of shot framing.8 The blocking of a
scene can similarly be deduced by knowing the relative positions of identified
characters within a specific cut. Once produced on a large scale, these extracted
formal elements can be aggregated to explore visual style across a collection of
materials. It is then possible to understand how visual style is used within the
internal construction of narrative and as a way to engage broadly with external
cultural forces. The method is an example of an approach to large scale image
analysis that Arnold and Tilton have termed distant viewing.9
Distant viewing is a methodological and theoretical framework for studying large
image collections. Because of the way that images make meaning and how computers process these forms, Arnold and Tilton argue that we must teach the computer how to “view,” which requires constructing a representation of elements
contained within the visual material, often in the form of a metadata schema and
algorithm. Using computational methods, the methods call for the automatic extraction of semantic elements such as facial recognition and shot breaks, which
are important to this study of visual style.
The following analysis is split into two sections. In the first section, we focus
5 Manuel Burghardt, Michael Kao, and Christian Wolff, “Beyond shot lengths using language data
and color information as additional parameters for quantitative movie analysis,” 2016.
6 Kevin L Ferguson, “Digital Surrealism: Visualizing Walt Disney Animation Studios,” DH and
Media Studies Crossovers 11 (1 2017).
7 Joel Burges, Nora Dimmock, and Joshua Romphf, “Collective Reading: Shot Analysis and Data
Visualization in the Digital Humanities,” DH and Media Studies Crossovers 3 (3 2016).
8 Common framing types include ‘wide-shots’ and ‘close ups’.
9 Taylor Arnold and Lauren Tilton, “Distant viewing: analyzing large visual corpora,” Digital Scholarship in the Humanities, (2019). For more, also visit the Distant Viewing Lab at the University of
Richmond at distantviewing.org.

2

Cultural Analytics

Visual Style in Two Network Era Sitcoms

on the general methodology for applying computer vision techniques to capture
visual elements within moving images. Understanding the context of the algorithms is important because most of our work would have been impossible only
a few years ago. In order to establish that the results are valid, predictive metrics
from our own hand-coded datasets are presented. While much of the computer
science literature focuses on only a single focused task, our methodology establishes how elements extracted from existing tools can be combined to study a
corpus of moving images as a whole object.
The second section applies our technique for extracting formal elements to a corpus of moving images containing every broadcast episode of two Network Era
sitcoms: Bewitched (1964-1972) and I Dream of Jeannie (1965-1970). This corpus
includes 393 episodes and over 150 hours of material. We present techniques for
aggregating and visualizing the computed time-based metadata. We then show
how these analyses establish the way that visual style constructs character centrality and the formation of narrative structure. Specifically, we illustrate how formal
elements serve to differentiate the role of the female characters within each series.
Across every metric analyzed, Samantha is distinctively positioned as the leading
character on Bewitched. Jeannie, however, is consistently shown to be visually
and narratively dominated by Tony. The differing nature of Samantha and Jennie within their respective series challenge existing feminist and queer readings
that often equate the two sit-coms with one another.10 Our analysis provides a
path for understanding suburban feminism in 1960s America through two differing perspectives.

Method

Computer vision
Computer vision research has evolved considerably over the past decade. Advances have come in part by utilizing custom hardware in the form of graphical
processing units (GPUs) and the use of convolutional neural networks. While full
replication of the entire human visual system remains an ambitious open task, image processing algorithms can now perform as well as or better than manual expert annotations on narrowly focused tasks. A recent medical study, for example,
10 Morris Meyer, “I Dream of Jeannie: Transsexual Striptease as Scientific Display”, TDR 25, no. 1
(1991). Karen M. Stoddard, “Bewitched And Bewildered,” Journal of Popular Film and Television 8,
no. 4 (1981).

3

Taylor Arnold, Lauren Tilton, and Annie Berke

Cultural Analytics

produced an algorithm for classifying skin lesions as malignant or benign that
was shown to be at least as good as predictions of 21 board-certified dermatologists.11 Similar results include the accurate prediction of diabetic retinopathy,12
lymph node metastases in breast cancer patients,13 and pneumonia diagnoses
from chest x-rays.14
Much of the work in computer vision has been driven by concrete industry applications. Examples include facial recognition algorithms for security applications
and object localization methods for use in self-driving cars. Guided by these applications, academic research groups have built open source software libraries
for efficiently applying deep learning models to image corpora.15 Within these
frameworks, computer vision researchers have also published models that can be
applied off-the-shelf to common image processing tasks.16 These public models
are frequently chained together, adapted to specific needs through the process
of transfer learning, and packaged as user-facing applications. Consumers constantly interact with such computer vision algorithms; facial recognition is central to both the iPhone FaceID feature (unlocking a mobile device) and the internal Facebook algorithms for the semi-automatic tagging of friends in uploaded
photo albums.
Despite recent advances and available software, there remain substantial barriers in the application of state of the art computer vision methods to the analysis
of cultural materials. There are limited end-to-end tools that take images as inputs and directly extract useful semantic information as outputs, and a significant
amount of code is required to glue together all of the constituent elements. Analyzing moving images demands additional work; most computer vision software
frameworks and models can be applied only to still images. Code is needed to extract frames from digitized video files, apply models to each frame, and sensibly
aggregate the output.17 Additionally, computer vision algorithms are typically
11 Andre Esteva et al., “Dermatologist-level classification of skin cancer with deep neural networks,”
Nature 542, no. 7639 (2017): 115.
12 Varun Gulshan et al., “Development and validation of a deep learning algorithm for detection
of diabetic retinopathy in retinal fundus photographs,” Journal of the American Medical Association
316, no. 22 (2016): 2402-2410.
13 Babak Ehteshami Bejnordi et al., “Diagnostic assessment of deep learning algorithms for detection of lymph node metastases in women with breast cancer,” Journal of the American Medical
Association 318, no. 22 (2017): 2199-2210.
14 Pranav Rajpurkar et al., “CheXNet: Radiologist-level pneumonia detection on chest x-rays with
deep learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05225, (2017).
15 Such as the popular TensorFlow library: Martin Abadi et al., “TensorFlow: a system for largescale machine learning.,” in OSDI, vol. 16 (2016), 265-283.
16 The Caffe “model zoo” hosted on GitHub is one example of a source for many of the most commonly used pre-train models.
17 Extracting frames from video files is relatively easy with existing libraries but figuring out how

4

Cultural Analytics

Visual Style in Two Network Era Sitcoms

trained on modern, color, high-resolution datasets. There is no guarantee that
they will perform well on historic materials (black and white images; grainy film
stock; material digitized at a low resolution).18 They must also be interrogated
for the social and cultural assumptions that are built in with special attention to
the problematic assumptions that can be built into data and algorithms.19 Extensive data creation as well as testing and tuning of computer vision algorithms is
often required to achieve acceptable results.20
The method presented in this article extracts structured information from moving images in order to analyze production and editing style and is a type of distant
viewing. Our focus is on the application of facial recognition algorithms to locate
and identify characters with a shot. Details regarding framing, shot blocking, and
narrative structure can be inferred directly from information about the characters. We refer to the description of who and where characters are in a shot as shot
semantics. Our goal is to build algorithms that are able to extract these semantics
automatically from a corpus. Shot semantics provide features that are of a higher
complexity relative to shot breaks and color analysis. By incorporating a more
nuanced view of the moving images, our analysis not only provides a deeper understanding of the formal decisions made by actors, writers, camera operators,
directors, and editors but lays bare those meanings that are not necessarily intended but are still articulated through form and style.
Establishing a semantics for shots within a television episode involves several
steps. We first split an input video file into individual shots, then locate faces
within every frame, identify the faces in a frame, and finally put all of the information together to cluster shots based on camera angles and distances. Each of
these steps have their own challenges; we address these in the following subsections.

to sensibly combine frame-level semantic information across shots and scenes is a difficult question
that has received relatively little attention within the computer vision community.
18
19 Examples of such work includes Meredith Broussard, Artificial Unintelligence: How Computers
Misunderstand the World (The MIT Press, 2019); dana boyd and M.C. Elish, “Situating Methods in
the Magic of Big Data and Artificial Intelligence”, Communication Monographs, (2017); Sofia Noble,
Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce Racism, (New York University Press, 2018);
Jessica Marie Johnson, “Markup Bodies: Black [Life] Studies and Slavery [Death] Studies at the Digital
Crossroads”, Social Texts 137 (2018): 57-79.
20 As anecdotal evidence of this, we experienced trouble applying what were at the time (2014) state
of the art face detection algorithms to photographs from the 1930’s. The algorithms were not able to
detect the majority of people wearing hats because hats were far less common in the modern training
data used to build the model.

5

Taylor Arnold, Lauren Tilton, and Annie Berke

Cultural Analytics

Shot boundary detection
One of the first tasks in understanding a video file is to break up the sequence
of frames into distinct units known as shots—or uninterrupted footage between
cuts—in a process known as shot boundary detection.21 Because the problem of
computationally detecting shot boundaries is challenging, there are several competing algorithms and software for detecting shot breaks for varying applications
and available computing power.
In general, the problem of computationally detecting shot boundaries is quite
challenging. Fortunately, the vast majority of cuts in most film and television
episodes consist of abrupt transitions between alternative camera shots. These
are both easy to define and relatively easy to detect. The algorithm we use in our
analysis uses a combination of histogram differences and down sampled pixel intensities. Our method functions by measuring the extent to which two successive
shots are different from one another in terms of the general color palette and the
distribution of brightness over the frame. If these differences fall above a specified threshold, we indicate the presence of a cut.22 We also added special logic
to avoid erroneous cuts during fade-in and fade-out events. Performance is very
good on our two series, with a precision of 98.7% and recall of 97.2% (F1 score:
0.979), when tested on a hand-coded set of 10 episodes from each series. Most
of the detected errors were the result of difficult crossfades (false negatives) or
bright strobe lights used in special effects (false positives).

Face and people detection
A substantial understanding of the visual style implicit in the production, directing, and editing of television can be identified by knowing where specific characters are in each frame, as the sitcom narrative is one that consistently advances
through character dialogue and action. The task of identifying the location of
characters in an image can be split into two subsequent tasks. The first, face detection, attempts to find the location of all faces present in a given image. Once
faces are located, the process of face recognition predicts which person is associated with a given face.
21 Owing to the centrality of this task in video processing, there are a number of competing terms
used in the literature, including “shot transition detection,” “shot detection,” and “cut detection”.
22 More specifically, we down sampled the image to a 32-by-32 grid, converted to hue, saturation, and value space, and computed the 40th percentile of the absolute deviation between successive frames. We also computed 32-bins per channel histogram counts on the original size image in
RGB-space. A cut was coded whenever both of these values passed beyond a manually tuned hard
threshold. Detected cuts within 12 frames of one another were merged together.

6

Cultural Analytics

Visual Style in Two Network Era Sitcoms

Relatively fast and accurate face detection algorithms have existed to detect
well-framed faces for over two decades. These include the original Haar-wavelet
method for general purpose object detection,23 the Viola-Jones object detection
framework,24 and the histogram of oriented gradients (HOG) detector.25 All
of these methods identify faces by, approximately, finding portions of an image
that are shaped like a face. This makes the algorithms robust to lighting, skin
tone, and adaptable to multiple shot widths. These methods, particular the
HOG detector, continue to be popular and are often provided in modern image
processing libraries.26 The downside of shape-based estimators is that they
are not able to easily extend to faces in profile. On television shows, wide
shots frequently display multiple characters turned inwards as they engage in
conversation. This is particularly true of sitcoms, which are primarily driven by
dialogue, as opposed to action sequences or special effects.
As with many other areas of computer vision, the use of neural networks has
enabled a great improvement in the performance of face detection models. Two
prominent examples are Faster R-CNN and FAREC-CNN.27 Figure 1 shows an
example of the faces detected by a neural network model compared to the shape
based models. Notice that all of the faces in profile that are missed by the HOG
detector are found with the neural network model.
The neural network-based face detection algorithms performed very well on
our television corpus. We applied the FAREC-CNN to every ten frames in six
episodes of each of our two series. We then labelled where the algorithm had
mistakenly identified objects as positive faces or had failed to detect faces when
present. For the latter, we only considered a face as being “missed” if at least one
eye of a face was present in the frame and excluded any “extras” who were in the
far background and removed from the main action.28 Overall, we ended with
23 Constantine P Papageorgiou, Michael Oren, and Tomaso Poggio, “A general framework for object detection,” in: Sixth international conference on Computer Vision (IEEE, 1998), 555-562.
24 Paul Viola and Michael Jones, “Rapid object detection using a boosted cascade of simple features,” in Proceedings of the 2001 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, Vol. 1 (IEEE, 2001).
25 Navneet Dalal and Bill Triggs, “Histograms of oriented gradients for human detection,” in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2005. (IEEE, 2005), 886-893.
26 For example, a trainable HOG detector algorithm is provided by the popular OpenCV library,
dlib library, and the scikit-image Python package.
27 Xudong Sun, Pengcheng Wu, and Steven C.H. Hoi, “Face detection using deep learning: An
improved faster RCNN approach,” Neurocomputing 299 (2018): 42-50; S Sharma, Karthikeyan Shanmugasundaram, and Sathees Kumar Ramasamy, “FAREC: CNN based efficient face recognition technique using Dlib,” in Advanced Communication Control and Computing Technologies (ICACCCT),
2016„ 192-195.
28 The latter condition was rarely used in our labelling; these two sitcoms are set primarily in a
personal home or office with a minimum of scenes containing characters in the background.

7

Taylor Arnold, Lauren Tilton, and Annie Berke

Cultural Analytics

Figure 1: Figure 1. Faces detected using a HOG detector (blue) and a neural
network (orange) from screen shots of I Dream of Jeannie and Bewitched.

8

Cultural Analytics

Visual Style in Two Network Era Sitcoms

a precision of over 98.3% and a recall of 95.1% (F1 Score: 0.967). Almost all of
the false negatives came from wide shots where a character’s face was partially
obscured. The majority of false positives were edge-cases where the algorithm
detected the face in a painting or statue. For comparison, the HOG detector had
an overall recall of only 55.2%. Given the centrality of the face detection results
to our analysis, this is strong evidence of the importance that recent advances in
computer vision have had to our work.

Face recognition
After detecting where faces exist in individual frames, the next step is to identify
which characters are associated with each face. The widespread use of neural network in face recognition preceded its applications in detection by several years,
largely due to the presence of large training datasets and the relatively small size
of the images involved. Open source libraries with neural network based recognition algorithms include OpenFace and OpenBR.29 Both libraries are reasonably
popular and their respective methods are widely cited. These algorithms, as well
as most other face recognition methods, require a preprocessing step whereby a
detected face is aligned such that key reference points (such as both eyes, the nose,
and mouth) and standardized. This approach works well for the high-quality
faces detected by algorithms optimized for finding front-oriented faces. Trying
to align the faces in profile, such as the middle panel in Figure 1, is impossible
given that only part of the face is visible.
In our analysis, we have made use of the VGGFace2 face recognition model.30
Unlike other recognition algorithms, this approach does not require the input
images to be aligned and was particularly built to handle faces that can only be
seen in a low resolution or in profile. We hand labelled faces from the top four
characters in five episodes of each of our two series and compared these results
to the VGGFace2 predictions.31 Defining precision as the proportion of assigned
faces that were correctly identified and recall as the proportion of main characters
correctly identified, Figure 2 gives a precision and recall curve for varying cut-off
29 Brandon Amos, Bartosz Ludwiczuk, and Mahadev Satyanarayanan, OpenFace: A generalpurpose face recognition library with mobile applications, technical report (CMU-CS-16-118, CMU
School of Computer Science, 2016); J. Klontz et al., “Open Source Biometric Recognition,” Biometrics:
Theory, Applications and Systems, 2013, 42- 50.
30 “VGGFace2: A dataset for recognising faces across pose and age,” in IEEE Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (IEEE, 2018).
31 The algorithm can be applied to faces that are not in the training set by supplying a single reference
image for every character of interest. The algorithm returns which faces in the dataset appear to be
the same as one of the reference images.

9

Taylor Arnold, Lauren Tilton, and Annie Berke

Cultural Analytics

Figure 2: Figure 2. Face recognition testing results for accurate detection of 4 primary characters in Bewitched using varying cut-off scores. Precision is measured
as proportion of correctly labelled faces as a ratio of all faces determined to be
one of the main characters. Recall is the proportion of main characters that are
correctly identified. The orange dot [A] shows the optimal F1 score; the purple
dot [B] shows a model with 99% precision.

scores in the algorithm. Using the cut-off value with the maximal F1 Score (0.898)
yields an overall precision of 92.8% and recall of 87.0%.32 Similarly, a precision
of 99.0% can be achieved while maintaining a recall of only 67%.
Our current use of the VGGFace2 model for face detection works very well for
the subsequent analysis of Bewitched and I Dream of Jeannie. Importantly, the
key results are unchanged regardless of whether we use the high-precision model
cut-off value or attempt to achieve the optimal F1 Score. One important hole in
the current application is the difficulty of VGGFace2 to successfully identify children. Our initial intention was to include the character Tabitha from Bewitched;
however, the precision of this task across all available face recognition algorithms
made this unworkable.33
32 For comparison, our original attempt using the ResNet-32 model achieved on F1 Score of only
0.516. See the following for the basis of this original model: Kaiming He et al., “Deep residual learning for image recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (2016), 770-778.
33 When applying this algorithm to other corpora it would be prudent to conduct some manual
testing in order to find other potential holes in the dataset. For example, other face recognition
software has frequently failed when applied to datasets with non-white actors. See this article for a
synopsis of racial biases in face recognition algorithms: Joy Buolamwini and Gebru, Timnit, “Gender
shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commercial gender classification,” Proceedings of Machine Learning Research: Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency 81 (2018): 1-15.

10

Cultural Analytics

Visual Style in Two Network Era Sitcoms

Shot classification
By using the placement of faces in a shot, we have hypothesized that we will be
able to offer a classification of shot semantics. That is, we want to use the extracted
data about faces and automatically determine features of a specific shot within a
video file. In this final step we no longer work directly with the visual materials
and build a meta-algorithm that takes detected shot breaks and faces as input and
outputs categorical predictions for each shot.34
There are several specific types of shots commonly described within film and media studies. Typically, these depend on the relative size of characters within a
frame, the number of characters, the orientation of the characters, and the angle
of the camera. Many of these specify something about a particular frame, however, they do not describe in aggregate multiple elements at the shot level. For
example, how should we classify a single shot that pans from a close-up of one
character to an establishing shot of a building? If one character is standing over
another character at a table, is this a medium long shot (most but not all of one
character is in the frame) or a medium close up (as only the seated character’s
upper half is visible)?
In order to algorithmically classify shot types, we need precise definitions with
which to build a testing dataset. After carefully parsing through many extracted
scenes, we settled on the following:
• close-up: Only one character is present in the foreground of the entire shot
and the waist of this character is never shown. Further, if the character is
sitting, we can infer that the shot is framed close enough that they would
leave the shot if they were to stand up.
• close two-shot: Exactly the same as a close-up, but there are two characters
present in the shot and at some point we see each character’s face.
• group shot: Any shot that contains at least three characters.
• over-the-shoulder: Two characters are shown in the shot but one of the
two characters (the one closest to the camera) has their back to the camera
and no face showing. This type of shot is likely to arise in the context of a
shot-reverse shot editing sequence in which the camera follows a conversation between two or more characters.
34 We are aware of only one prior attempt to offer an algorithmic taxonomy of film shots. The
presented taxonomy mostly relates to camera movement in action films, and was not very relevant to
the features we are interested in classifying. Hee Lin Wang and Loong-Fah Cheong, “Taxonomy of
directing semantics for film shot classification,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video
Technology 19, no. 10 (2009): 1529-1542.

11

Taylor Arnold, Lauren Tilton, and Annie Berke

Cultural Analytics

Figure 3: Figure 3. Shot type examples from the Bewitched episode “The Short,
Happy Circuit of Aunt Clara” (Season 3, Episode 9).

12

Cultural Analytics

Visual Style in Two Network Era Sitcoms

Figure 3 shows examples of these four shot types from an episode of Bewitched.
We refer to any shot that is neither a close-up nor a close two-shot as a long
shot. This includes shots that show characters from the waist up—in other studies
referred to as a “medium shot”—or the entire body.
To detect these shot types from the data, we built a hand-constructed algorithm
based on the number of detected faces, the placement of the faces, and the size of
the faces. Then, the shots in 8 episodes were hand labelled and compared with the
results from the algorithm. Close shots were identified with a precision of 99.0%
and recall of 93.5% (F1 Score: 0.962); group shots were classified with a precision
of 98.25% and recall of 95.73% (F1 Score: 0.969); and over-the-shoulder shots
had a precision of 88.24% and recall of 95.74% (F1 Score: 0.918). The majority of our analysis focuses on the timing and presence of close shots, for which
the precision is particularly high as a result of conservatively chosen logic in our
algorithm.

Analysis

Corpus
The Network Era of American television (1952-1985) was controlled by just three
competing networks: ABC, CBS, and NBC. By the early 1960s, the majority of
American households owned a television and had access to the affiliate station
from all three major networks. With extensive market penetration and high user
engagement, there was little doubt that millions of Americans watched television
programming on any given evening. The goal for each of the established networks in the oligopoly was to the attract the most viewers to their programming
over the competition.35 These market forces caused networks to push out content with a wide appeal in order to attract the largest number of viewers, and in
turn the largest percentage of the advertising revenue. The result was a relatively
uniform stream of programming aimed primarily at white suburban middle class
families.36
The situational comedy, or “sitcom,” has been one of the dominant narrative
forms of television shows from the early years of the Network Era. Sitcoms focus on a fixed set of characters, unlike sketch comedy and vaudeville, and usually
35 Gary Edgerton, The Columbia History of American Television (Columbia University Press, 2007).
36 Amanda

Lotz, The Television Will Be Revolutionized (NYU Press, 2014).

13

Taylor Arnold, Lauren Tilton, and Annie Berke

Cultural Analytics

consist of self-contained episodes. Within each episode, the cast of characters
are presented with a new problem that is resolved by the episode’s conclusion.
While major plot events, such as extended romances, may be referenced across
episodes, the structure of the sitcom makes it easy for a viewer to follow the series
even if they miss a particular week’s show.37
These features made sitcoms an attractive programming choice during the Network Era. Prior to the advent of consumer VHS recording technologies in the
1980s, Americans had to watch their favorite programs when they aired or risk
missing them entirely. There was also no way to fast-forward through commercial breaks, as has become possible with VCRs, DVRs, and streaming services.
These viewing patterns dictated the three-act structure and self-contained narratives that characterize network era programming.38 The familiar recurring characters served as a draw for viewers; the fixed cast and sets kept production costs
low; and, the formulaic narrative assured that consumers would not lose track of
the show if they missed an episode.
We now turn to two popular American sitcoms from the 1960’s. In line with the
genre and time period, both feature a small, all white cast living in generic suburban neighborhoods. Each week’s plot follows a formulaic model: a problem
arises that threatens the status quo at home or in the workplace, the first several attempts to address it fail in some comic fashion, until ultimately a happy
resolution presents itself at the episode’s conclusion. Yet, we will show that the
narrative and editing of these series is far from formless. There are distinct visual
elements that serves to challenge and reinforce the narrative structures present
in each show.
The sitcom Bewitched premiered on ABC in the Fall of 1964 and ran for a total of eight seasons. Its main premise focuses on the marriage of the ordinary
Darrin Stevens to the supernatural witch Samantha. Samantha does her best to
live a “normal” American life but difficulties from her magical world crop up
to make this process difficult. The main cast is completed by Samantha’s meddling mother Endora, Darrin’s boss Larry Tate, and (from Season 3 onward) the
Stevens’ magically gifted daughter Tabitha. Bewitched proved remarkably popular. It was the second-highest rated show across all three networks in its first
season and enjoyed wide syndication from 1972 to the early 2000s.39
In order to understand the typical structure of an episode of Bewitched, it is instructive to walk through the plot of a specific example. We can then see how this
37 Umberto Eco concisely describes this phenomenon as “a plot which does not ‘consume’ itself.”
Umberto Eco, “The Myth of Superman,” Diacritics 2, no. 1 (1972): 17.
38 See Amanda Lotz, The Television Has Been Revolutionized.
39 Walter Metz, Bewitched (Wayne State University Press, 2007), 14-16.

14

Cultural Analytics

Visual Style in Two Network Era Sitcoms

Figure 4: Figure 4. Example of the detected characters and narrative breaks from
one episode of Bewitched.

plot is reflected through the data computationally extracted from its visual contents. Figure 4 shows all of the detected character faces in the episode “Business,
Italian Style,” the seventh episode in the show’s fourth season, which first aired
on September 21, 1967. In the opening scene Darrin and Larry meet with the
assistant of a potential new client, an Italian businessman trying to expand into
the U.S. market. Through a comic misunderstanding, Larry asserts that Darrin
will be able to speak to the assistant’s boss in his primary language. Following
the credits, Darrin returns home and describes the situation to his wife Samantha, who then confides in her mother Endora. Endora casts a spell that causes
Darrin to only speak in Italian, which the Stevens’ notice the next morning over
breakfast around the midway point of the episode. After the commercial break,
Larry shows up at Darrin’s home to find that he can no longer communicate in
English. After several mishaps, Endora reverses the spell, the business is saved,
and all is well with the main characters. The final scene ends with a dinner party
that brings together Darrin, Samantha, Larry, and the Italian businessmen, reinforcing the successful conclusion of the episode.
In response to the success of Bewitched, in the Fall of 1965 NBC debuted I Dream
of Jeannie.40 The show features a 2,000-year-old female genie, referred to as “Jeannie,” discovered by the astronaut Tony Nelson, whom she refers to as her “master.” The main cast also includes Tony’s friend and fellow astronaut Roger Healey
40 Metz,

Bewitched, 17.

15

Taylor Arnold, Lauren Tilton, and Annie Berke

Cultural Analytics

and the NASA psychologist Dr. Alfred Bellows. A recurring plot device involves
Tony and Roger attempting to fulfil their job responsibilities, while hiding from
and dealing with Jeannie’s magical antics. In later seasons, Jeannie and Tony become romantically involved and later marry. I Dream of Jeannie did not enjoy
the same level success as Bewitched, running only five seasons and failing to win
any major awards.
Scholarship on Bewitched and I Dream of Jeannie has in large part focused on the
depiction of two prominent female characters during the early days of secondwave feminism. Often the context of these two shows are combined together,
typically in a negative light, such as Stoddard’s analysis on the role of magic and
feminism:
Both Samantha and Jeannie are unusual women with extraordinary
powers, powers which they promise to curtail at the insistence of
the men they love. Samantha’s husband, a mere mortal, expects her
to perform tasks in a human, rather than supernatural, manner…
Similarly, Jeannie the genie is “found” by a mortal, who becomes
her “master.” With crossed arms and the blink of her eyes, Jeannie
has the power to control everything around her. At the insistence
of her master, however, she busies herself keeping his house orderly
and catering to his wishes in as human a manner as possible.41
Others offer different readings of the show’s gender and sexual politics. Lynn
Spiegel noted that in Bewitched “the woman’s alien powers serve to invert the
gender relations of suburban domesticity, and with this, the consumer lifestyles
that characterize the suburbs are also parodied.”42 While the male characters
are attempting to subvert the powers of the female characters, at the very core
of each show’s premise is that women’s magic or power cannot be contained and
periodically “escapes” domestic or marital constraints. Bewitched can also be read
as a queer metaphor, in which “mortal” norms takes the place of heteronormative
thought.43
These two shows form an excellent set for our study of form in television, as Network Era sitcoms have small casts and a small repertoire of sets, making both relatively easy to analyze computationally. The prominence of both shows and their
repeated presence in television studies research speaks to the cultural importance
41 Karen M. Stoddard, “Bewitched and Bewildered,” Journal of Popular Film and Television 8, no. 4
(1981): 50.
42 Lynn Spigel. Welcome to the Dreamhouse: Popular media and Postwar Suburbs (Duke University
Press, 2001), 132.
43 Patricia Fairfield-Artman, Rodney E Lippard, and Adrienne Sansom, “The 1960s Sitcom Revisited: A Queer Read,” Taboo: The Journal of Culture & Education 9, no. 2 (2005): 27.

16

Cultural Analytics

Visual Style in Two Network Era Sitcoms

of both shows and allows our work to engage with broader conversations about
the medium and genre. Even better, the scholarly disagreements over the relationship between the shows and their feminist (or not) representation of women
makes our analysis all the more revealing in broader conversations about television, genre, and gender.

Dominant character
An open question regarding these two series is to understand which characters
are considered the “main” characters of the show. Elizabeth Montgomery
(Samantha) and Barbara Eden (Jeannie) are certainly the most well-known
actors in our corpus and feature prominently in the shows’ marketing materials,
but it is not immediately clear to what extent this visibility and name recognition
translates into centrality in the narratives of their respective series. For example,
a large proportion of plot lines revolve around the careers of their romantic
counterparts. To what extent are these less-recognized male characters the true
central points of the show? The series’ titles even hint that this may be the
case by establishing agency with the ordinary, career-oriented male characters:
Darrin is “bewitched” by Samantha, and Tony is the one “dreaming”’of Jeannie.
How does visual style reflect or potentially undermine narrative centrality across
these series?

Figure 5: Figure 5. Average minutes per episode for which a character is visible.
Error bars with 95% confidence intervals for the mean of each group.
One straightforward way to assess to what extent visual style correlates to character centrality is to quantify the frequency that each actor appears on screen,
17

Taylor Arnold, Lauren Tilton, and Annie Berke

Cultural Analytics

a type of shot semantics. For every shot in our corpus, we calculated every detected character face that appeared at least once. These numbers were aggregated
together with shot lengths to compute the average minutes per episode that each
character was visually present.44 Figure 5 shows the computed averages along
with confidence intervals. Bewitched’s Samantha and Darrin share the lead with
an average of 7 minutes of screen time per episode, suggesting not only that their
marriage lies at the heart of the show but that theirs is an equitable and egalitarian coupling. At just under 11 minutes per episode, Tony is by far the most
visually present character across both shows. On I Dream of Jeannie, Jeannie,
seen for less than an average of 4 minutes per episode, is the least visually displayed major character. This inequality is a point in favor of Jeannie’s retrograde
feminism: while she may act out and rebel in these episodes, the form of the
show often transforms or screens her (and her controversially costume that was
seen by some audiences as too sexy for TV) from the viewer. By contrast, Tony’s
coworker—Roger (6 minutes) and Alfred (4.5 minutes)—are seen for longer average durations than Jeannie.
These results highlight a significant difference between the two shows and raise
a host of related questions. The character relationships on Bewitched are more
balanced, indicating the show’s twin focus on work and home. Larry is Darrin’s
boss but Endora is Samantha’s mother. That said, throughout the series, Samantha is absent from the workplace and Darrin is often absent from the magical and
family plot elements. Tony’s persistent visual presence in I Dream of Jeannie underscores how all of the lead characters are connected to him, not to one another:
Roger is Tony’s best friend, Alfred Tony’s boss and psychiatrist, and Jeannie his
genie. As a result, the majority of the action, both within the work and domestic
spheres, usually involves Tony in a substantial way.
Understanding when within an episode each character is most likely present indicates how the narrative structure reinforces character centrality. Each episode
can be broken into four parts. The first part, a “cold open,” occurs from the start
of the episode until the title sequence and lasts approximately 2-3 minutes. The
main actions that build and resolve the plot occur in two longer blocks of time,
interrupted by a mid-episode commercial, lasting around 10 minutes each. We
refer to these as Act 1 and Act 2. Following the final commercial break, a final
short resolution scene reaffirms the successfully resolved plot and subsequent
return to normalcy.45 We show the proportion of episodes for which each char44 The character of Darrin on Bewitched was played by two actors: Dick York (seasons 1-5) and
Dick Sargent (season 6-8). We created separate face detection algorithms for both actors. However,
in this and all other results we have combined them to their common character.
45 This four-part structure roughly follows the chart provided by Jeremy G Butler, Television: Visual Storytelling and Screen Culture (Routledge, 2018); and very accurately matches the structure of

18

Cultural Analytics

Visual Style in Two Network Era Sitcoms

Figure 6: Figure 6. Number of episodes for which a character was seen.

acter was detected in each narrative part in Figure 6. By narrative part, Tony’s
presence dominates the other I Dream of Jeannie characters. Most notably, he
is almost always present during Act 2. Samantha is also shown to be present in
more acts that Darrin, particularly in the cold open. Though their overall screen
time may be similar, we rarely go too long without seeing Samantha.46
One way to establish the importance of a particular character is to make a character the first person seen in the opening of an episode. From the opening shot,
all of the subsequent actions and characters are linked to the perspective of this
starting character. This effect is closely related to the cognitive bias of anchoring
in which a set of potential options in a decision-making process are all judged in
relationship to the first option presented.47 The results in Figure 7 tabulate the
number of times each character was the first detected face in an episode.48 Tony
our two series. We were able to automatically extract the narrative parts through the chapter breaks
encoding in our DVD materials.
46 A common trope on the show involves fast cuts between Darrin and Samantha as they talk over
the telephone between the office and home.
47 Muzafer Sherif, Daniel Taub, and Carl I Hovland, “Assimilation and contrast effects of anchoring
stimuli on judgments.,” Journal of Experimental Psychology 55, no. 2 (1958): 150.
48 Only 1.04% of the dataset started with a shot containing multiple faces; in these cases neither
character was counted.

19

Taylor Arnold, Lauren Tilton, and Annie Berke

Cultural Analytics

Figure 7: Figure 7. Number of episodes where each character is associated with
the first face detected in an episode.

(81 episodes) and Samantha (153 episodes) are overwhelmingly the most likely to
be first seen in an episode; Darrin is about half as likely to be featured first relative
to Samantha. All of the remaining characters, including Jeannie, are featured at
the start of less than 20 episodes. For I Dream of Jeannie, this further reinforces
the centrality of Tony in the show. It also re-establishes the overall narrative:
the show chronicles the life of the astronaut Tony Nelson, as his world becomes
disrupted by the sudden and unwelcome intrusion of Jeannie. (This is echoed
by the show’s opening animated credits, in which Tony is introduced first, then
Jeannie.) In Bewitched, while the show in many ways focuses on both characters,
Samantha takes center stage more frequently than her mortal husband. To what
extent that allies viewers with Samantha, inviting them to root for her subversion
of her husband’s will, is a question we can begin to address through the presence
of close-ups.
Close-up shots are yet another visual tool for establishing characters’ centrality
and subjectivity. In the mid-1960’s, television was distributed in standard definition, television sizes were substantially smaller, signals were sent through noisy
analogue radio transmission, and many households watched television in black
and white. Viewers could only get a good view of an actor only in tightly framed
shots that reveal the character’s sometimes private thoughts, feelings, and reactions. Figure 8 shows the average duration per episode that each character is
shown in a close-up shot. Tony once again dominates the other I Dream of Jeannie characters, but overall, the longest duration (1.36 minutes) across both shows
comes from Samantha. Along another dimension, Samantha dominates the visual space, Darrin playing a more prominent role compared to the other characters.
20

Cultural Analytics

Visual Style in Two Network Era Sitcoms

Figure 8: Figure 8. Average minutes per episode for which a character is visible
in a close shot. Error bars with 95% confidence intervals for the mean of each
group.
Taken together, these analyses of shot semantics provide insight into the prominence of the characters in our corpus. Tony appears as the center of the narrative structure, and this centrality is reinforced through the visual style— time on
screen, close shots, and presence at the start of the episode—of the series. Surprisingly, the titular Jeannie is far from being the most central character, she is
no more visually dominant than Roger or Alfred. On Bewitched, there are approximately the same number of scenes featuring either Samantha or Darrin.
However, visual elements, such as screen time and the number of close-up shots,
establish Samantha as the most important character. While the show focuses on
the couple as a whole, Samantha is pictorially featured as the leading star character.49

Shot distribution and plot
The extracted locations of faces can be further used to examine how visual style
communicates or complicates narrative. Tracking stylistic elements throughout
each episode makes it is possible to investigate if and how producers and editors
use visual elements to further the plot as it progresses from the cold open all
the way through to the episode’s denouement. These patterns, if present, provide
further evidence of the visual complexity within the style of Network Era sitcoms.
49 It

is unclear from this analysis whether this is due to the magical abilities of Samantha Stevens

21

Taylor Arnold, Lauren Tilton, and Annie Berke

Cultural Analytics

Figure 9: Figure 9. Percentage of all shots classified as “close” as a function of
narrative act and series. Error bars with 95% confidence intervals for the mean
of each group.

Figure 10: Figure 10. Percentage of all shots classified as group shots with three
or more characters present, as a function of narrative act and series. Error bars
with 95% confidence intervals for the mean of each group.

22

Cultural Analytics

Visual Style in Two Network Era Sitcoms

One way to explore shot semantics is by shot type. The distribution of shot types
changes between narrative acts in both Bewitched and I Dream of Jeannie. These
distributions also differ between the two series. Figure 9 gives the proportion
of close shots for each narrative act and Figure 10 provides the proportion of
group shots. The proportion of close shots is lowest in the Introduction and Denouement for both series, though the drop-off is noticeably larger for I Dream of
Jeannie. This likely speaks to how these acts function as “establishing” sequences
and book-ending the conflicts that characterize the drama of Acts 1 and 2. On
Bewitched, there is also a significant drop in the proportion of close shots between Act 1 and Act 2; there is almost no difference between Act 1 and Act 2 in
this metric on I Dream of Jeannie. One possibility for this is that Act 1 involves
the women characters using their magic powers (as an instigating event) and Act
2 centers on the complications that arise from their meddling. Samantha wiggles her nose to do magic, typically revealed to the audience through a close-up
on Montgomery’s face; Jeannie’s magic, triggered when she crosses her arms and
nods her head, is better framed by a medium or long-shot, which is why we might
not expect more close shots in the first act.
Across all narrative acts, the proportion of group shots on I Dream of Jeannie is
higher compared to Bewitched. The rate of group shots increases for both shows
from the Introduction to Act 1 and again from Act 1 to Act 2. Group shots are
less common in the Denouement on Bewitched, but are at the highest observed
level in I Dream of Jeannie. Overall, these results indicate that, as the plot builds,
a larger proportion of wide shots are utilized. These wider shots help to convey
the complexity of the conflict. For example, in the example “Business, Italian
Style,” wide shots are used throughout Act 2 to capture the interaction of Darrin,
Larry, and their two business clients. In terms of the workplace scenes, wide shots
provide the opportunity to show NASA as grand and impressive in comparison
to Samantha’s middle-class home or Darren’s office in Bewitched. In particular, Act 2 in Jeannie has a significantly larger proportion of wide shots in which
three or more characters present. In both shows, however, these shot changes
serve to visually reflect the increasingly complicated relationships unfolding in
the episode. The initial problematic in Bewitched may involve only two characters, such as Darrin and his boss Larry, but throughout the episode, additional
characters are drawn in, creating additional strain and opportunity for comedy.
These either extend the problem to other relationships, such as in the episode
“Business, Italian Style,” or signal failed initial attempts to resolve the plot. The
increase in wide shots serves to visually represent and contain these increasingly
involved plot lines.
or the star power of Elizabeth Montgomery. Likely both contribute in some way.

23

Taylor Arnold, Lauren Tilton, and Annie Berke

Cultural Analytics

Figure 11: Figure 11. Median shot length for each series separated into close
shots, two shots, and long shots. 95% confidence intervals for the median are
given for each group.

There is a noticeable difference between the median shot lengths across each narrative act, but this relationship is deceiving; from our analysis, we can see that
median shot length is closely related to shot type. There have been several studies
that investigate median shot lengths in television series. It would not be surprising to find that shot lengths increase in Act 2 to capture an increasingly complex
plot or, conversely, decrease in Act 2 to heighten the drama and speed of the storyline.50 In Figure 11, the median shot lengths for each shot type are shown.51
Shot lengths are very strongly tied to shot type in that even small differences in
shot distribution can affect the median shot length. Regression analysis can be
used to detect how strongly various factors influence median shot length. Predicting shot length as a function of series yielded an R2-value of only whereas
a regression model using shot type provided an R2-value of .52 The type of shot
explains two orders of magnitude more variation in shot length than series. It
seems, therefore, that shot lengths are not an ideal metric to use without first
accounting for shot type.
The shot type chosen for the first and last shot of Act 1 and Act 2 reveal distinctive
50 They actually decrease slightly, from a median of 3.3 seconds in Act 1 to a median of 3.17 in Act
2 when aggregated across both shows.
51 Exact confidence intervals for the median are performed using a non-parametric sign test. Jean
Dickinson Gibbons and Subhabrata Chakraborti, Nonparametric Statistical Inference (Chapman /
Hall/CRC, 2010); Andri Signorell, DescTools: Tools for Descriptive Statistics, R package version 0.99.24
(2018).
52 Following prior work on shot lengths, we assume that shot length follows a log-normal distribution and ran each regression of the logarithm of each shot length. Barry Salt, The Metrics in Cinemetrics, 2011.

24

Cultural Analytics

Visual Style in Two Network Era Sitcoms

Figure 12: Figure 12. Percentage of shots that were classified as close or close two
from both Act 1 and Act 2 as function of whether the shot was the first in the
act, last in the act, or somewhere in the middle. 95% confidence intervals for the
proportion are given.

Figure 13: Figure 13. Median shot length of long shots for Act 1 and Act 2 as
function of whether the shot was the first in the act, last in the act, or somewhere
in the middle. 95% confidence intervals for the median are given.

25

Taylor Arnold, Lauren Tilton, and Annie Berke

Cultural Analytics

stylistic decisions. All four of these shots occur on the boundary of a commercial
break; the opening shots attempt to draw the viewer in and the closing shots try
to keep viewers sticking around until the next act. Figure 12 gives the proportion
of close and close two shots used in these opening and closing shots, as well as the
proportion of other Act 1 and Act 2 cuts for comparison. While overall, across
both series, over 40% of shots are framed closely, less than 20% of the first and
last shots are closely framed. Figure 13 shows how these first shots also tend
to have significantly longer durations. Overall, shot type and duration establish
and continue the narrative by expanding the gaze of the viewer: at the start of
each act, this widening establishes the mise-en-scène, in particular situating the
characters in the spaces of work and home, and at the ends of each act, the wider
view increases tension by gesturing to all of the characters and scenarios that
remain to play out.

Magical and feminine gaze
As mentioned, the Samantha and Jeannie characters are similar or parallel characters, both magically gifted women trying to fit into stereotypical white suburban
neighborhoods in the 1960’s. As we have shown, a closer analysis reveals that
Samantha and Jeannie actually function in dramatically different narrative roles
within their respective shows. These differences, in turn, affect the way that each
is visually portrayed. Despite these divergent roles, are there stylistic similarities
between these two characters? To answer this question, we investigated those
metrics that look at relative relationships between visual style tropes, rather than
overall tabulations, as with the character centrality analysis.
The proportions of time each main character spent in close shots relative to the
time seen in all shots are shown in Figure 14. By taking the relative proportion
of close shots, a new pattern emerges. The three magical female characters all
have a significantly larger proportion of their total screen time in close shots. The
overall ratios for Bewitched characters are higher than those in I Dream of Jeannie,
and Alfred is slightly more likely to be a close shot than both Tony and Roger.
Given that the pattern here diverges from those seen in the character dominance
metrics, it seems likely that the close shot ratios are enforcing a different visual
characteristic and achieving a different narrative objective.
While there is a clear signal in the data identifying a visual aesthetic uniting
Samantha, Endora, and Jeannie through the high proportion of close shots, it
is not possible within this corpus to offer a confident hypothesis regarding the
specific meaning of this effect. The high representation of close shots might be
26

Cultural Analytics

Visual Style in Two Network Era Sitcoms

Figure 14: Figure 14. Proportion of time for which each character is shown in a
close up shot as a ratio of the total time they are present in the show. Error bars
with 95% confidence intervals for the mean of each group.
a common trope for the representation of feminine characters, a method for simultaneously capturing feminine beauty and grace. As the three main magical
characters, this style may instead be an attempt to represent their “otherness,” the
close shots giving the viewer a chance to gawk at the magical incantations and
garish costumes while the narrative sets them apart as different, even isolated by
their own powers. Another, perhaps more positively empowering reading would
be that these magical women co-opt the screen, “stealing” the show from their
male counterparts. Then again, the large proportion of close shots could simply
be a direct function of the popularity of each actor, Montgomery and Eden being
the leading ladies and Moorehead being a star in her own right. Indeed, all of
these possibilities are plausible. To distinguish between them would require taking into account a larger corpus of material to isolate each hypothesis. We include
this analysis because while distant viewing offers new knowledge, the insights in
this section are shaped by and in conversation with the range of methodological
approaches from film and media studies. Distant viewing may not always answer
questions, but it can direct avenues of inquiry.

Conclusion
In many ways, the study of American television is indebted to David Bordwell,
Janet Staiger, and Kristin Thompson’s formulation of “classical Hollywood cinema,” in which all aspects of film form are in service of conveying narrative and
27

Taylor Arnold, Lauren Tilton, and Annie Berke

Cultural Analytics

“character-centered… causality is the armature of the story.”53 Put another way,
all elements of film form—from editing to sound—follow character action, which
in turn motivates story. The hidden complexities of Hollywood classicism have
been examined in numerous cinema studies accounts: to what extent does the
“invisible” style of Hollywood film allow for ideological inconsistencies, generating tensions between benign storylines and quietly subversive forms?
Through the use of facial recognition software, we bring these questions to the
study of the American television sitcom, itself a character-driven dramatic form
and one typically dismissed as middle-brow commercialism, lacking in formal or
stylistic rigor. As Jeremy Butler writes, “all television programs employ conventions of the medium,”54 and we ask what tensions, contradictions, and paradoxes
are buried in these seemingly facile conventions. The “schema” of the situation
comedy—the “bare-bones, routinized devices that solve perennial problems,” to
borrow Bordwell’s language—can be the vehicle for messages that belie the content of the story, speaking to the fissures and frictions that characterize Bewitched
and Jeannie’s fraught second-wave feminisms.55 Given that Network Era sitcoms
are often dismissed as formless middle-brow fluff, it is striking to find that the
visual elements show noticeable difference between these two series and serve
to reinforce character relationships and gender politics. Shot semantics offer an
exciting way to analyze visual elements.
There are several avenues for extending the analysis presented here to a wider
set of scholarly questions surrounding the computational analysis of moving images. The corpus, for one, could be greatly expanded in order to analyze the
same features within and across time and genre. Methodologically, it is also possible to expand on the set of available features. In the visual field of the television screen, computational methods could be developed to assess aspects such
as scene changes, character emotions, camera movement, camera angles, and to
automatically identify minor and one-off characters. There is also the potential
to incorporate audio features ranging from sound effects, music identification,
and speaker resolution.
Putting all of these extensions together, the results presented here serve as an
example of the possibilities for distant viewing.

53 David Bordwell, Janet Staiger, and Kristin Thompson.
The Classical Hollywood Cinema
(Columbia University Press, 1987): 13.
54 Jeremy Butler, Television: Visual Storytelling and Screen Culture (Routledge, 2018): 369.
55 Butler, Television, 374.

28

Cultural Analytics

Visual Style in Two Network Era Sitcoms

Unless otherwise specified, all work in this journal is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.

29

