Multiplatform MOOC Analytics:
Comparing Global and Regional Patterns in edX and Edraak
1

José A. Ruipérez-Valiente1 , Sherif Halawa2 , Justin Reich1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge (MA), 02139, USA
2 Edraak, 300 King Abdullah St, Amman, Jordan
jruipere@mit.edu, shalawa@qrf.org, jreich@mit.edu

ABSTRACT

While global massive open online course (MOOC) providers
such as edX, Coursera, and FutureLearn have garnered the bulk
of attention from researchers and the popular press, MOOCs
are also provisioned by a series of regional providers, who
are often using the Open edX platform. We leverage the data
infrastructure shared by the main edX instance and one regional Open edX provider, Edraak in Jordan, to compare the
experience of learners from Arab countries on both platforms.
Comparing learners from Arab countries on edX to those
on Edraak, the Edraak population has a more even gender
balance, more learners with lower education levels, greater
participation from more developing countries, higher levels
of persistence and completion, and a larger total population
of learners. This “apples to apples” comparison of MOOC
learners is facilitated by an approach to multiplatform MOOC
analytics, which employs parallel research processes to create joint aggregate datasets without sharing identifiable data
across institutions. Our findings suggest that greater research
attention should be paid towards regional MOOC providers,
and regional providers may have an important role to play in
expanding access to higher education.
ACM Classification Keywords

K.3.1 Computers and education: Computer Uses in Education:
Distance learning; H.1.2 Information Systems: User/Machine
Systems: Human factors; J.1 Computer Applications: Administrative Data Processing: Education
Author Keywords

MOOCs; Learning Analytics; Cross-institutional
Collaboration; Large-scale Analytics; Cultural Factors.
INTRODUCTION

When the first university-based MOOC providers emerged in
2012, MOOC advocates argued that large-scale online learning could dramatically extend the reach of higher education

institutions around the world, especially to places with limited
access to elite universities [9]. However, some studies have
suggested that instead of decreasing the ‘educational gap’,
MOOCs have been primarily attracting learners with high educational attainment, thus widening educational disparities [12].
Among global providers, disparities in MOOC participation
and persistence remain for females, learners with low levels
of educational attainment, and among countries with low development levels, as measured by the United Nations Human
Development Index [6]. Many (though not all) of the courses
on the largest global MOOC providers, such as Coursera, edX
or FutureLearn, are produced by Anglo-American universities. For learners not fluent in English or not familiar with
Anglo-American higher education, language and cultural barriers may compound the challenges of learning independently
online. Numerous studies have pointed to the importance of
considering cultural factors when designing inclusive online
learning experiences [16, 14, 11].
English language MOOC providers that have aimed to attract global audiences are complemented by a set of regional
MOOC providers that have been emerging over the past years
with a focus on serving learners in their regions. Some examples include the Ibero-American initiative MiriadaX 1 , the
Chinese initiative XuentangX 2 , the Italian Federica.EU 3 , the
German OpenHPI 4 , the French platform France Université
Numérique (FUN 5 ) or the Arab initiative Edraak 6 . Several
of these initiatives (Edraak, XuentangX and FUN) use Open
edX 7 –edX’s collaborative open source initiative–as the underlying software to run MOOCs. By focusing on more specific
communities with a more broadly shared language and culture,
these initiatives may be able to play a complementary role
to MOOCs aiming at a global, primarily English-language
audience.
While several observers have noted that the global providers
have recently put a greater focus on professional, postBaccalaureate degrees and programs [18, 17, 3], these shifts
1 https://miriadax.net/en/
2 https://www.xuetangx.com/
3 https://federica.eu/
4 https://open.hpi.de/
5 https://www.fun-mooc.fr/

PRE-PRINT VERSION.
Accepted for publication in Learning @ Scale 2019.
Copyright is held by ACM.

6 https://www.edraak.org/
7 https://open.edx.org/

do not appear as pronounced in the regional providers, suggesting that regional MOOC providers may play a different
role in higher education ecosystems than the larger, global,
English-language entities. Understanding similarities and differences in learner behavior and experiences between global
and regional platforms may help provide a more comprehensive picture of global learning with MOOCs.
At present, MOOC studies have focused on elite global
providers over the regional providers. Prior studies focus on a
detailed analysis of one or few MOOCs (e.g. [4]), a longitudinal study with many courses from one single MOOC provider
(e.g. [6, 8], or a literature review of MOOC analytic studies [23]. Small MOOC studies have limited generalizability,
longitudinal studies from one single institution do not capture variation across MOOC providers and literature reviews
cannot make cross-study comparisons due to the different
methodologies employed. In response to these challenges, we
propose multiplatform MOOC analytics, which replicates the
same analyses using a common script in different MOOC environments. This work aligns with calls for methodologies that
promote open education science [22] and replication studies
in the social sciences [2].
For this case study, we focus on learners in the Arab World,
where equitable access to educational opportunity and overall
educational achievement remain substantial challenges with
potential for improvement [21]. Also, the Arab World has
significant information technology and e-learning gaps compared to the developed world [1] and as a region, has lower
participation and completion metrics in MOOCs compared
to other regions [19]. Additionally, the Arab World countries
rank in the “very low” category on the EF English Proficiency
Index, a global measures of English proficiency [24]. A 2018
report from the International Labour Organization has brought
up the low levels of female participation in labour markets,
especially in regions such as the Arab States and Northern
America, where unemployment rates for Arab women can be
twice as high as men’s [13]. Researchers have found correlations between the levels of unemployment of a region and
MOOC demand [20].
To facilitate a comparison between MOOC learners from
Arab states on edX (with data from MITx and HarvardX)
and Edraak, we organize the data from these providers into a
common framework analyzed with a shared body of analytic
code. Our overarching study question explores the extent to
which MOOC trends are universal versus context-dependent.
To this end, we examine the following research questions:
1. Do regional MOOC providers help narrow educational and
gender gaps for the local population?
2. Do regional MOOC providers have higher levels of engagement, participation and completion for the local population,
compared to global providers?
The remainder of the paper is organized with a description
of the methodology in next Section 2, a presentation of the
results in Section 3 and we close the study with a discussion
of future work in Section 4.

METHOD

This section describes the methodology in the context of
MOOC providers Edraak and edX in Subsection 2.1, a description of the dataset, sample and measures in Subsections
2.2, 2.3 and 2.4 respectively. We end with an overview the
multiplatform MOOC analysis methodology in Subsection
2.5.
Context

This work leverages commonalities between MOOC providers
Edraak and edX: (1) both institutions aim to spread free education (although Edraak with a more regional focus), and
(2) both providers use the Open edX platform as the underlying software for their Learning and Content Management
Systems. The fact that both institutions use the same software
environment to host their MOOCs facilitates comparisons in
two important ways: (1) it is easier to establish a common
data processing pipeline to put the data into the same format,
and (2) both providers use a similar, Open edX-based learning
management system (though Edraak is modified for rightto-left languages), limiting some of the variation in learner
experience.
EdX was founded in 2012 by the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and Harvard University. More than 100 schools,
companies and other institutions have joined this initiative as
partners to teach free courses to a global audience. Open edX
is being used by numerous institutions around the world to
deliver their open or private courses, which has exponentially
increased the impact of the initiative. From this platform,
we focus on MITx and HarvardX, the institutional units that
produce and teach the edX courses from each university.
Edraak was founded in 2013 by the Queen Rania Foundation
for Education and Development. Edraak’s inception was a
response to the language barrier that prevents a substantial
population in the Arab world from learning online in English.
Edraak’s mission is to fulfill these learners’ needs by providing
high-quality educational content in Arabic, although some
courses are also available in English.
Edraak participated in the localization of Open edX for the
Arab world by providing Arabic translation for the platform
and enhancing the support for right-to-left (RTL) languages.
Edraak produces all of its courses in Arabic, except for courses
teaching foreign languages, and hosts them on its locallyadapted Open edX platform. Edraak’s courses span multiple
categories, including STEM, business and workforce development skills, health, arts, and language. Course content is
designed in collaboration with regional experts from academia
and industry. Edraak performs all remaining course development and management tasks internally, such as media production, content upload, course marketing, and course operations.
Dataset

MITx and HarvardX data contain 565 MOOC iterations, 12.67
million course registrations from over 5.63 million unique
student accounts, and we are able to detect country of origin of
4.48 million accounts. Most of the courses taught in MITx and
HarvardX are in English. Edraak’s data contain 231 MOOC
iterations with a total of 3.77 million registrations to these

courses from 1.5 million unique student accounts. We are
able to identify the country of origin of 1.48 million of these
student accounts. Most of the courses in Edraak are in Arabic
(except for few courses licensed from edX).
We collected all MOOC data from MITx and HarvardX from
2012 to May 2018, and all data from Edraak from June 2014
to September 2018. The data from each provider include
self-reported variables by students from site registration and
pre-course surveys and the Open edX tracking logs, that contain every action performed in each course by each account.
Part of the multiplatform MOOC research methodology that
we establish for this case study involves having a common
data format, as we explained in Subsection 2.5. Additionally,
since both institutions are using the same software, the data
processing to create the common format does not entangle any
problematic transformations between the two environments.
The data follows a person-course structure, where every row
represents the data from the registration of a student to a
course.
Analytic Sample

To enable comparison between cohorts across the study we
define the following three populations of participants, where
participants are defined as learners that registered for and then
viewed a course at least once:
• Edraak: Participants who connected to Edraak from Arab
countries (N = 589,817). The small number of learners who
connected to Edraak from outside Arab countries in Edraak
are not included, as our research questions are focused on
the effect of regional providers on local populations (N =
12,203).
• MITxHx Arab: Participants who connected to MITx or HarvardX courses from Arab countries (N = 120,868).
• MITxHx Rest: Participants who connected to MITx and
HarvardX courses from outside Arab countries (N =
3,267,199).
Noteworthy trends about the Edraak and MITxHx Arab cohorts include the relative size of each cohort: Edraak reaches
almost five times more learners from the Arab World compared to MITx and HarvardX courses. In the 4 section, we
synthesize study findings to form a hypothesis about the role
of Edraak as an effective regional competitor and weigh in on
the extent to which there are unobservable factors contributing
to this trend.
Measures

For this study, the inputs to our multiplatform analytic infrastructure is a person-course file, where each row represents one
course registration for one learner. The fields in this input file
are as follows:

• Nationality: Country of origin of each account computed
based on the modal IP address from the tracking logs of the
student.
• Level of education: Qualitative variable with the selfreported level of education of the account.
• Gender: Qualitative variable with the self-reported gender
identification of the account.
• Viewed: Boolean variable that indicates if the account accessed the course at least once.
• Explored: Boolean variable that indicates if the account
viewed at least half of the chapters of the course.
• Completed: Boolean variable that indicates if the account
achieved a passing grade in the course.
We also also use the Human Development Index (HDI) provided by the United Nations (UN) in 2018 as a proxy for the
country level of socioeconomic status 8 .
Finally, we use a high level categorization of courses established by previous work [6] with the following four broad categories: Government, Health, and Social Science (GHSS), Humanities, History, Design, Religion, and Education (HHRDE),
Computer Science (CS) and Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM). The distribution of course
category in each platform is as follows:
• Edraak (N=231): 31.17% GHSS, 47.19% HHRDE, 5.19%
CS and 16.45% STEM.
• HarvardX and MITx (N=565): 26.55% GHSS, 27.07%
HHRDE, 7.8% CS and 38.58% STEM.
Multiplatform MOOC Analytics

Much of MOOC research over the past five years has been
conducted in studies of single higher education institutions,
and even the largest studies have aggregated data from within a
single MOOC provider. One of the most promising initiatives
in this area is MORF framework [10], a platform that enables
institutions to securely deposit their MOOC data and allows researchers to execute Docker containers for data analysis while
maintaining full privacy of the data. In this study, we propose
a methodology that we denote as multiplatform MOOC analytics, which leverages commonalities across MOOC learning
and content management systems to allow research teams to
create common data formats, agree upon analytic methods,
and then generate aggregate data, produced through identical
processes, that can allow for “apples-to-apples” comparisons
between different MOOC platforms. The goal is to, as closely
as possible, conduct the same analysis within the two MOOC
environments. This is increasingly important in the field of the
social sciences, since human factors can add a great variability
in the outcomes of each study [2]. We used the following
procedure:

• User id: A unique identifier for each user account.

1. Both institutions shape their data into the same format (see
Subsection 2.4).

• Course id: A unique identifier for each course iteration in
the course (note one course can be run multiple times).

8 http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/
human-development-index-hdi

Cohort
Edraak
MITxHx Arab
MITxHx Rest

Year of Birth
Median Mode
1992
1995
1991
1994
1988
1992

Table 1. Median and mode of the year of birth by cohort.

Elementary School’ or ‘Other’. Around 13% of the learners of
Edraak have a Master or Doctorate, compared to the 19.6%
of MITxHx Arab and the 25.5% of MITxHx Rest.
Regional and Global Providers Attract More Younger
Female Participants from Arab Countries Compared to
Younger Females from Other Countries

2. We collaboratively generate a common Jupyter notebook
that is expecting the common data format. This script outputs aggregate data from both institutions that is merged
together for the joint analysis. This greatly alleviates the
logistical and privacy concerns of sharing student-level information.
3. We conduct the joint data analysis of both MOOC platforms
together.
For MITx and HarvardX data we use edx2bigquery [15] framework to transform the raw edX logs into this person-course
format. Edraak uses a simplified and adapted version of this
process to transform the Open edX log files from their platform
into this same person-course file. For analysis, we then input
these person-course files into identical Jupyter notebooks, and
then compare the aggregated output.
Our overarching study question examined the extent to which
MOOC trends are universal versus context-dependent. We
examined a host of metrics organized around two principal
research questions. To answer research question 1–looking
at the degree to which regional MOOC providers narrow educational and gender gaps–we compare the distribution of the
level of education, year of birth and gender of each one of the
cohorts. To answer research question 2–comparing engagement, participation and completion metrics among regional
and global providers–we present participation metrics by country, perform an analysis of the “funnel of participation” of each
cohort, compare engagement metrics of Edraak-produced and
edX-licensed courses that has been offered in Edraak, and
finally we report differences in engagement depending on the
course category.
RESULTS

We organize the results by research question, based on summary statistics of the demographics of the participants in each
cohort (research question 1) and the participation and completion, and retention trends (research question 2). In discussion
section, we draw conclusions about the extent to which trends
in the MOOCs examined are universal or context-dependent.
Regional Provider Edraak Reaches Regional Population
with Lower Levels of Formal Education

On average, HarvardX and MITx participants from outside the
Arab world have higher levels of educational attainment than
fellow participants from within the Arab world. Participants
from Edraak have lower average levels of education than both.
Below, we present an overview of the level of education of
participants in each cohort. Figure 1 shows on the left a boxplot visualization with the distribution of level of education by
each cohort. The levels of education are ‘Doctorate’, ‘Master’,
‘Bachelor’, ‘Associate’, ‘High School, Junior High School or

Our demographic analysis by gender revealed a higher participation of younger female Arab participants than older in both
Edraak and MITxHx Arab, or an older population of both
genders in MITxHx Rest.
In Figure 1 on the right, we display a boxplot visualization
with the distribution by gender in each cohort. Edraak cohort
reaches a higher population of female than male (50.67%
female and 48.93% men), compared to MITxHx Arab (27.85%
female and 71.89% male) and MITxHx Rest (34.09% female
and 65.26% male).
In addition, Table 1 shows median and mode of the year of
birth per cohort. With a median as year of birth of 1992 for
Edraak, 1991 for MITxHx Arab and 1988 for MITxHx Rest,
Edraak enrolls younger learners than both cohorts from edX.
Finally, in Table 2 we show the percentage of participants by
cohort by cross-tabulating gender and age group. In Edraak
there was only one course that was targeted to female participants, a course about Fashion Design. Removing this course
only changes the gender gap by 1%, suggesting that the findings are not sensitive to course type.
Edraak Effectively Targets Local Learners and Participation is More Distributed in All Arab States

Examining Arab learners’ participation across both platforms,
we found a noteworthy difference in the representation of
learners in Jordan in Edraak (15.27%) compared to MITxHx
Arab (3.52%). In Table 3, we display the participation of the
Arab World by country and cohort, showing the percentage of
representation by country and number of learners per million
inhabitants (which enables a better between-country comparison). The relatively higher representation of Jordan among
Arab learners is attributed to three factors: 1) The stronger
networked growth in Jordan (e.g. word of mouth, local press,
as people consider it a national pride project as well), 2) Universities in Jordan have adopted Edraak as a blended learning
platform quickly, unlike the other Arab countries, 3) There are
some activation projects happening in Jordan to serve Edraak
courses in Refugee camps with councils such as the Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC) and the Danish Refugee Council
(DRC). There has been similar initiatives in the context of
edX for example the MIT ReACT Hub, that aims to educate
refugees 9 .
In general, Edraak caters to a higher number of learners across
all countries except for Somalia, which might be related to
specific online learning and MOOC initiatives from MITx and
HarvardX in the country. There are other slight differences
in the level of participation by country, which might be related to the HDI level of each country. In fact, we find in
9 https://react.mit.edu/

Figure 1. Distribution of gender and level of education by cohort.

Cohort
Edraak
MITxHx Arab
MITxHx Rest

<18
Female Male
3.57% 2.24%
0.83% 1.90%
0.86% 1.69%

>= 18 & <30
Female
Male
34.95% 30.35%
17.90% 45.74%
16.02% 33.55%

>= 30 & <45
Female
Male
10.97% 14.06%
7.42% 20.65%
11.33% 21.98%

>= 45 & <65
Female Male
1.30% 2.40%
1.37% 3.94%
4.93% 7.43%

>= 65
Female Male
0.08% 0.07%
0.06% 0.19%
0.83% 1.38%

Age
Gender

Table 2. Demographic distribution of participants based on age intervals and gender by cohort.

MITxHx Arab cohort a moderate-high Pearson Correlation
in of 0.69 (p < 0.001) between the HDI index of the country and the number of learners per million inhabitants, that
declines in Edraak cohort with a value of 0.26 (p = 0.23).
Another conclusion that we can get from this distribution is
that the participation by country is more uniformly distributed
in Edraak.

Edraak Participants Demonstrate Higher Completion
Rates Compared to Their Arab Peers in EdX

Comparing completion rates between edX and Edraak reveals
a more desirable “funnel of participation” [7] in Edraak cohort, where the percentage of courses completed triples the
value of MITxHx Arab and doubles that of MITxHx Rest. As
always when comparing completion rates, it is worth noting
that learners take MOOCs for numerous reasons [5], and that
the “funnel of participation” is not necessarily a proxy for
MOOC quality or success. Nonetheless, comparisons of completion can help identify whether populations of learners have
different goals or differential levels of success in meeting their
goals. Table 4 presents completion trends in terms of percentage of courses explored and completed, by cohort. We see a
similar, although attenuated trend, in the percentage of courses
explored by cohort. Similar to what we saw in terms of correlations in Subsection 3.3, we find a moderate correlation of 0.55
(p = 0.007) by country within MITxHx Arab between the percentage of completed courses and the HDI, that becomes lower
within Edraak with a value of 0.45 (p = 0.03).

Higher Engagement in Edraak-Produced Courses Compared to Local edX Licensed Courses

Additionally, there were eight courses taught in Edraak that
were licensed directly from edX. Table 5 shows a comparison
between those courses and the standard courses produced by
Edraak in Arabic. The data show 11 times more completion in
courses produced by Edraak compared to those licensed from
edX, around three times more exploration and higher number
of enrolments per course.
This contrast in engagement emerged despite Edraak’s attempt
to locally-adapt the edX-licensed courses as much as possible.
Edraak translated all textual content in the courses to Arabic,
including course information, announcements, and assessment
questions. Images and visualizations were edited to change
any English text to Arabic. The most challenging element
to Arabize was the visual and audio content of videos. As a
work-around, Edraak provided Arabic transcripts that learners
can read alongside the videos. The challenge learners most
commonly reported on the course forums is their split attention
between watching the video and reading the transcript. This
was not an issue in Edraak’s home-produced content since the
instructors speak Arabic and all video content is in Arabic.
Differences in Engagement Persist after Controlling by
Course Category

The nature of the courses that are being offered by each platform can definitely have an impact in the patterns of engagement that we find (note course categories and distribution
were presented in Subsection 2.4). We break down the results
that we found in Table 4 by course categories draw from the

Egypt

Edraak
Percentage of Arabs
from total
29.27%

Learners per million
inhabitants
1,737

MITxHx Arab
Percentage of Arabs
from total
31.52%

Learners per million
inhabitants
383

Jordan

15.27%

9,093

13.9%

2,444

8.65%
8.51%

1,410
1,195

Egypt
Saudi
Arabia
United Arab
Emirates
Morocco
Algeria

12.31%

443

12.25%

1,552

10.59%
5.17%

354
149

5.25%

3,244

Tunisia

3.77%

391

5.08%

5,933

Jordan

3.52%

430

4.26%

1,376

Lebanon

2.91%

578

2.1%
1.88%
1.51%

429
282
214

2.86%
2.62%
2%

1,284
76
61

Tunisia

1.44%

729

1.93%

127

Libya
Oman

0.91%
0.5%

832
605

1.84%
1.54%

531
385

Kuwait

0.39%

554

1.22%

292

Lebanon
Qatar
Bahrain
Somalia
Mauritania
Comoros
Djibouti

0.39%
0.26%
0.18%
0.11%
0.08%
0.02%
0.02%

379
580
694
42
109
119
104

Qatar
Sudan
Iraq
The Syrian
Arab Republic
Kuwait
Oman
State of
Palestine
Bahrain
Somalia
Yemen
Libya
Djibouti
Mauritania
Comoros

1.15%
1.09%
0.72%
0.6%
0.25%
0.12%
0.01%

890
87
30
111
315
32
11

Country

Saudi
Arabia
Morocco
Algeria
United Arab
Emirates
State of
Palestine
Syrian Arab
Republic
Yemen
Iraq
Sudan

Country

Table 3. Distribution of learners by country from the Arab World.

Cohort
Edraak
MITxHx Arab
MITxHx Rest

Percentage
explored
34.72%
15.86%
19.43%

Percentage
completed
10.66%
3.15%
4.85%

Table 4. Percentage of courses explored and completed from participants by cohort.

Licensed
from edX?
No
Yes

Enrolments
per course
16,363
15,009

Percentage
explored
35.28%
9.25%

Percentage
completed
10.94%
1.03%

Table 5. Participation and completion comparison of courses produced
by Edraak (N = 223) from those courses licensed from edX (N = 8).

HarvardX/MITx annual reports [6] in Table 6. In general for
both platforms, we see that Computer Science (CS) and Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) courses
have lower percentage of completion than Global Health and
Social Science (GHSS) and Humanities, History, Religion,
Design, and Education (HHRDE) course, suggesting the difficulty of STEM classes. Except for STEM category, we can
see that for CS, GHSS and HHRDE the funnel of participation
shows a better trend in Edraak than for both MITxHx Arab
and MITxHx Rest. The only exception is STEM, where the
trend of Edraak is better than MITxHx Arab, but not than the
rest of the learners in MITxHx Rest.
Substantive subhead

Year-over-year learner retention, analogous to year-by-year
client retention used in business anlaytics, can be used to
evaluate the degree to which learners return to a platform for
multiple courses. We define cohorts by the year of their first
activity in the platform (i.e. registration year) and see how
many of those learners remain in the platform during subsequent years. In Figure 2, we display the attrition rate, with
the left plot for Edraak and MITxHx Arab. As an example,
the ‘2014-2015’ cohort of Edraak had 34,024 learners that
participated in at least a course during the academic year ‘20142015’, 32% of those learners participated in at least one course
during ‘2015-2016’, 22% in ‘2016-2017’ and 16% during
‘2017-2018’. Edraak and MITxHx Arab have similar rates
Course
category
CS
GHSS
HHRDE
STEM

Cohort
Edraak
MITxHx Arab
MITxHx Rest
Edraak
MITxHx Arab
MITxHx Rest
Edraak
MITxHx Arab
MITxHx Rest
Edraak
MITxHx Arab
MITxHx Rest

Percentage
explored
25.6%
9.87%
11.76%
40.09%
19.44%
22.57%
35.08%
17.42%
21.59%
18.75%
18.46%
23.73%

Percentage
completed
6.91%
1.20%
2.74%
13.40%
5.59%
6.41%
10.54%
5.86%
7.38%
3.61%
2.33%
4.22%

Table 6. Percentage of courses explored and completed by cohort and
course category

of attrition. This trend, consistent with other recent MOOC
studies [18], exemplifies a challenge that MOOC providers
have in retaining learners year after year.

DISCUSSION

In this study we present “Multiplatform MOOC Analytics”–
combining analysis based on a methodology to reproduce
a research procedure with data from Edraak and two edX
providers, MITx and HarvardX. The goal of the study was
to analyze the how learners from the Arab states participate
differently in these two platforms.
Our initial findings indicate that the educational gap that we
find commonly in MOOCs, which is particularly salient among
Arab learners in edX, is smaller in the regional setting of
Edraak. This evidence suggests that Edraak is effectively
at reaching less educated learners, which aligns with one of
the original missions of MOOCs. We also found in Edraak
a reduced gender gap, since the percentage of female learners (50.6%) is even higher than the number of male learners.
Moreover, with high unemployment among women in the
Arab World [13] and given that a previous study found a positive relationship between MOOC demand and unemployment
[20], we hypothesize that this could be one of the reasons
favoring a more equitable gender balance. The inclusion of
more women in the workforce in the Arab world can have
numerous positive outcomes in the development of the region
[21].
It is noteworthy that the difference in gender distribution between Edraak and edX is not the result of gender-targeted
marketing. Edraak performed targeted marketing to females in
one course, but that course’s contribution to the gender gap is
than 1%. Previous work has reported lower enrolments from
female population in courses related to CS and STEM, the
lower proportion of courses in these topics when compared
to HarvardX and MITx can also be one of the reasons of the
better gender balance found in Edraak [6]. Understanding
the cause behind this difference is an interesting direction for
future study. The difference in education level distribution is
another interesting future study direction. However, it may be
partially attributed to Edraak’s age-targeted marketing. Edraak
focuses on the age bracket from 18 to 40 years old in marketing
most of its courses. Another possible factor is the correlation
between pursuing graduate studies and English proficiency. A
perception survey study conducted by Edraak and the Queen
Rania Foundation in 2017 has shown that learners with higher
educational attainment levels are more familiar with English
MOOC platforms including edX.
In terms of participation, we observed a much higher number
of Arab learners in Edraak, we also found a strong, significant
correlation between the number of learners per million inhabitants and the HDI of the country in MITxHx Arab, but this
relationship did not hold in the Edraak cohort. These results
might indicate the existence of barriers impeding Arab population accessing courses from global partners, we hypothesize
that some of these barriers can be related to language, but also
related to culture and pedagogy.

Figure 2. Retention of learners year by year with cohorts determined by registration year.

The completion trends differences were also noteworthy with
a completion percentage 3 times higher in Edraak than for
MITxHx Arab learners; and greater differences between the
licensed courses from edX in Edraak (1% vs. almost 11%
completion) and a higher number of enrolments in Edraakproduced courses. Therefore, the participation and completion
levels are much lower for the Arab World for edX than for
Edraak in the global context than in the regional one. These
findings can be affected by some differences in the course
category distribution of each platform, where MITx and HarvardX have a slightly higher percentage of courses on STEM
and CS topics whilst Edraak has a slightly higher percentage of courses on GHSS and HHRDE. Therefore, as learners
struggle more to complete technical courses, course categories
might be having an effect on the overall trends of each platform. However, further and deeper qualitative analysis on the
courses of each platform will be required to establish a better
estimation of the importance of this difference.
Despite higher completion rates in Edraak courses, we found
similar retention rates of learners across the years in both
MOOC platforms. We might have anticipated that the platform with the higher completion rate would have higher yearover-year retention, as learners might have felt encouraged to
continue completing courses in the platform. But, it may be
that for many learners, even though who complete courses,
individual courses are of more interest than developing an
ongoing habit of learning within a single MOOC platform.
The contrast in engagement between Edraak’s edX-licensed
courses and its home-produced courses sheds light on an importance of localizing educational content. The difficulty that
Edraak’s learners in edX-licensed courses reportedly faced
signals increased extraneous cognitive load due to split attention between the video and transcript. Educational content
that does not require students to synchronize multiple separate
sources of information naturally avoids this effect.

Our results are suggestive of the promise of local MOOC
providers in achieving the goal of MOOCs to provide broadly
accessible learning experiences for diverse learners, particularly for those learners with limited access to traditional
higher education. The participants in Edraak are more genderbalanced, are more likely to have lower levels of education,
are more likely to come from less developed countries, and are
more likely to persist through and complete courses, and there
are more total learners from the Arab world than on MITx and
HarvardX. Multiple factors from marketing to course design
to course rigor to the disciplinary makeup of course offerings
to instructional quality could be responsible for some of these
differences. Future work should explore the effect of Edraak’s
support for Arabic language (and for right-to-left languages
more broadly), instructional materials created by Arab subject matter experts, and course design and marketing focused
on Arab countries on MOOC learners’ outcomes. While research and popular discussion has generally focused on the
English-language, global providers, it may be that more attention should be paid to the regional, non-English providers and
their efforts to expand online learning among cultural and language groups. Regional providers may be uniquely positioned
to expand access to diverse learners.
One way to advance this line of work is to continue to expand
research collaborations across multiple MOOC providers, extending the multiplatform MOOC framework demonstrated
here from two platforms to many. As next steps we are developing a consortium of MOOC providers from across the
globe to engage in a larger multiplatform project with an expanded list of several global and regional partners. The goal
of this larger project is to identify global, longitudinal trends
in MOOC usage and develop a deeper understanding of more
universal and more context-dependent trends and to effectively
compare MOOC learning in global and regional contexts.

REFERENCES

1. Kamal Abouchedid and George M Eid. 2004. E-learning
challenges in the Arab world: Revelations from a case
study profile. Quality Assurance in education 12, 1
(2004), 15–27.
2. Yehuda Amir, Irit Sharon, and others. 1990. Replication
research: A" must" for the scientific advancement of
psychology. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality
5, 4 (1990), 51.
3. Rose Baker, David L Passmore, and Brian Martin
Mulligan. 2018. Inclusivity Instead of Exclusivity: The
Role of MOOCs for College Credit. In Enhancing
Education Through Open Degree Programs and Prior
Learning Assessment. IGI Global, 109–127.
4. Lori Breslow, David E Pritchard, Jennifer DeBoer,
Glenda S Stump, Andrew D Ho, and Daniel T Seaton.
2013. Studying learning in the worldwide classroom
research into edX’s first MOOC. Research & Practice in
Assessment 8 (2013), 13–25.
5. Gayle Christensen, Andrew Steinmetz, Brandon Alcorn,
Amy Bennett, Deirdre Woods, and Ezekiel Emanuel.
2013. The MOOC phenomenon: Who takes massive open
online courses and why? (2013).
6. Isaac Chuang and Andrew Ho. 2016. HarvardX and
MITx: Four years of open online courses–fall
2012-summer 2016. (2016).
7. Doug Clow. 2013. MOOCs and the funnel of
participation. In Proceedings of the Third International
Conference on Learning Analytics and Knowledge. ACM,
185–189.
8. Alexandra I Cristea, Ahmed Alamri, Mizue Kayama,
Craig Stewart, Mohammad Alshehri, and Lei Shi. 2018.
Earliest predictor of dropout in MOOCs: a longitudinal
study of FutureLearn courses. (2018).
9. Tawanna R Dillahunt, Brian Zengguang Wang, and
Stephanie Teasley. 2014. Democratizing higher education:
Exploring MOOC use among those who cannot afford a
formal education. The International Review of Research
in Open and Distributed Learning 15, 5 (2014).
10. Josh Gardner, Christopher Brooks, Juan Miguel L
Andres, and Ryan Baker. 2018. MORF: A Framework for
MOOC Predictive Modeling and Replication At Scale.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.05236 (2018).
11. Elizabeth E Grandon, Khaled Alshare, and Obyung
Kwun. 2005. Factors influencing student intention to
adopt online classes: A cross-cultural study. Journal of
Computing Sciences in Colleges 20, 4 (2005), 46–56.

12. John D Hansen and Justin Reich. 2015. Democratizing
education? Examining access and usage patterns in
massive open online courses. Science 350, 6265 (2015),
1245–1248.
13. International Labour Organization. 2018. World
Employment Social Outlook: Trends for Women.
Technical Report. Geneva. 7–8 pages.
https://www.ilo.org/global/research/global-reports/
weso/trends-for-women2018/WCMS

14. Xiaojing Liu, Shijuan Liu, Seunghee Lee, and Richard J
Magjuka. 2010. Cultural differences in online learning:
International student perceptions. Educational
Technology & Society 13, 3 (2010), 177–188.
15. Glenn Lopez, Daniel T Seaton, Andrew Ang, Dustin
Tingley, and Isaac Chuang. 2017. Google BigQuery for
Education: Framework for Parsing and Analyzing edX
MOOC Data. In Proceedings of the Fourth (2017) ACM
Conference on Learning@ Scale. ACM, 181–184.
16. Catherine McLoughlin and Ron Oliver. 2000. Designing
learning environments for cultural inclusivity: A case
study of indigenous online learning at tertiary level.
Australasian Journal of Educational Technology 16, 1
(2000).
17. Laurie Pickard, Dhawal Shah, and JJ De Simone. 2018.
Mapping Microcredentials Across MOOC Platforms. In
2018 Learning With MOOCS (LWMOOCS). IEEE,
17–21.
18. Justin Reich and José A Ruipérez-Valiente. 2019. The
MOOC Pivot. Science 363, 6423 (2019), 130–131.
19. José A Ruipérez-Valiente and Justin Reich. 2018.
Participation of the Arab World in MOOCs. In 2018
Learning With MOOCS (LWMOOCS). IEEE, 47–50.
20. Tingting Tong and Haizheng Li. 2018. Demand for
MOOC-An Application of Big Data. China Economic
Review 51 (2018), 194–207.
21. United Nations Development Programme. 2016. Arab
Human Development Report. Technical Report. New
York. 74 – 78 pages. http://arab-hdr.org/
22. Tim van der Zee and Justin Reich. 2018. Open education
science. AERA Open 4, 3 (2018), 2332858418787466.
23. George Veletsianos and Peter Shepherdson. 2016. A
systematic analysis and synthesis of the empirical MOOC
literature published in 2013–2015. The International
Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning 17,
2 (2016).
24. Wikipedia. 2019. EF English Proficiency Index. (2019).
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EF

