China Media Research, 15(2), 2019

ISSN: 1556-889X

Digital Disinformation and Communalism in Bangladesh
Md. Sayeed Al-Zaman
Jahangirnagar University, Savar, Dhaka, Bangladesh
Abstract: Traditional society of Bangladesh has been enduring explicit transformation. Individuals’ increasing
income, flourishing consumer culture, and security in social life as a cumulative force smooths the scope of modern
global amenities to come in and grow up amid this changing society. Of them, new age digital communication is vital
one. Digital media is encompassing people’s everyday life. Process of acquiring information has also changed
remarkably: instead of searching to get one, people now struggle to look for reliable information due to ample
information. Cyberspace becomes the cornucopia of fluid information that often baffles the surfers by providing
distorted information. Bangladesh has been experiencing digital media-initiated disinformation from the beginning of
2010s. Interest groups are playing with digital disinformation conjoining religious sentiment. As a result, incidents of
assault on religious minorities based on digital (dis)information have become frequent. Considering the importance
of digital disinformation instigating communalism in Bangladesh, this study explores the nature of contemporary
digital communalism and violence on religious minorities. It has been seen that beyond mere religious sentimentalism
and sensationalism, historical and political along with several other factors significantly contribute to these atrocities.
Keywords: disinformation, religion, communal violence, social media, digital communalism, minority
[Md. Sayeed Al-Zaman. Digital Disinformation and Communalism in Bangladesh. China Media Research,
15(2):68-76]
Introduction
In October 2017, Israeli police mistakenly arrested a
Palestinian construction worker after the Artificial
Intelligence (AI) of Facebook mistranslated a post. The
man posted his photo leaning against a bulldozer with a
caption “yusbihuhum” in Arabic (Hern, 2017), which
should be translated as “good morning” in English.
However, Facebook’s automatic translation system Bing
converted it as “hurt them” in English and “attack them”
in Hebrew. The police officers were suspicious as
bulldozer has been used in hit-and-run attack upon them
beforehand. Hence, they suspected the man is threatening
them. Consequently, they arrested him immediately, and
afterwards, realized their mistake (Berger, 2017). Such
intentional and unintentional as well as unexpected
incidents, and promulgation of falsified information are
increasing in the 21st Century due to the mushrooming
usage of digital media and intense communication.
Every interaction is a process of exchanging
information. Digital communication produces an
unimaginable quantity of information in guise of
digital data. Although quality of these information is
questionable since everyone can be a producer of
information in online. Cyberspace, a vast “ocean of
information”, works like a magnificent repository of
information: authentic, distorted, and even
fabricated. Abundant but unfiltered information does
not always bring merry but catastrophe too.
Corrupted information derived from digital media
may deceive individuals which could lead toward
social unrest. Impact of digital information is highly
influential and navigational in such society where at
least three characteristics are present: (a) total

http://www.chinamediaresearch.net

number of digital media user is large enough, and the
growth is continuing; (b) beyond mainstream media,
digital media works as a primary source of
information for a significant portion of population;
and (c) the users take the information for granted
without cross checking. Interestingly, Bangladesh as
a developing and economically thriving country is
having all these features.
Bangladesh is fostering a fast-growing community
of “netizens” (Hauben, 1995) that already has included
83.141 million digital media users (BTRC, 2018). These
online denizens work as potential informants who use
online media either to receive and diffuse or produce and
disseminate information. From the previous few years,
Bangladesh has been experiencing incidents of digital
disinformation those are enabling serious communal
disharmony, distrust, even violence along with religious
line. Co-cultural, more precisely, religious minorities are
enduring suppression and marginalization not only in
physical society but also in cyberspace. Hindu (8.5%)
and Buddhist (0.6%) as the largest religious minority
groups in Bangladesh are also the most vulnerable to
digital communalism and contempt. Therefore, this study
explores four specific queries: how digital media is (a)
impeding the peaceful coexistence of religious
communities; (b) playing role in inciting aggressive
behavior of Muslims, the dominant religious group,
against other religious minorities; (c) increasing the
communal tension between religious factions; and (d)
successfully staging communal violence along religious
fault lines. To comprehend the whole ambience,
contemporary digital communalism and communal
violence on Bangladesh Hindu and Buddhist

68

editor@chinamediaresearch.net

China Media Research, 15(2), 2019

ISSN: 1556-889X

communities, more precisely, two most influential
selected cases have been meticulously analyzed along
with other remarkable socio-political propensities.
Extrapolating “Digital Disinformation”
Information is the matured stage of data. Data is a
symbol set, raw facts, quantified and/or qualified.
Information is the data that is processed and meaningful,
and able to create knowledge (Zins, 2007). The DIKW
hierarchy (Data > Information > Knowledge > Wisdom)
defines how raw data eventually produces information,
knowledge, and lastly, wisdom (Rowley, 2007).
Misinformation and disinformation, though
pronounced simultaneously, are quite different from
semantic aspect. Misinformation is the circulation of
false information without intension. In other words, lack
of information and knowledge gap cause misinformation.
Disinformation is also the dissemination of inaccurate
information that is deliberately constructed and disguised
to gain intended result.
“Disinformation is simply misinformation
purposefully conveyed to mislead the receiver
into believing that it is information.” (Floridi,
2011:260)
The prefix “dis-” generally means “not” (disagree,
disable) and/or the opposite (disestablish, disaffection)
both having a negative connotation (G. & C. Merriam
Co., 1961). The term “disinformation” was mainly
originated from Russian dezinformatsiya, and borrowed
as well as polished by the department of black
propaganda of KGB in 1950s (Bittman, 1985). Joseph
Stalin coined the term to sound it French to demand
falsely its Western origin (Pacepa & Rychlak, 2013).
In our lives, we alone cannot acquire all the
information and knowledge we need so that we must rely
on others (Hume, 2007). Thus, defected information
succeeds. Besides, debate exists whether information,
misinformation, and disinformation are the same thing or
not, and whether information should be true, or merely

Religious Community
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Christian
Others

1951
76.9
22
0.7
0.3
0.1

meaningful data. However, disinformation by its nature
is different from information and misinformation.
Floridi (1996, 2005, 2011) proposed three different
accounts on disinformation: (a) the process of
information is defective; (b) the source is aware of its
nature; and (c) it is purposefully conveyed to mislead.
Therefore, disinformation, as a conscious act, is
purposively dissemination of the defected information to
misled people. After the so-called “4th Industrial
Revolution” or AI Revolution, the world in fact has
become a hyper-networked place. Six Degrees of
Separation postulates “we are all linked by the chains of
acquaintance, you are just six introductions away from
any other person on the planet” (Smith, 2018). Recently,
the world’s largest social networking site Facebook,
having more than 2 billion users, announced that “each
person in the world” is separated from another by “an
average of three and a half other people” (Bromwich,
2016). The world is shrinking at a rapid pace in terms of
interaction, especially with the gift of new age
communication technology, through which production
and distribution of information (and disinformation) has
become much easier than ever.
Religious Minorities in Bangladesh
Four major religious communities constitute most of
the Bangladesh population: Muslim, Hindu, Buddhist,
and Christian. After the Indian partition in 1947, many
Bengali Hindus immigrated from Bengal to India, and a
flood of Indian Muslims crossed the border and settled in
Bengal. Hindu community is the largest and most
persecuted religious minority in contemporary
Bangladesh where Islam is the dominant religion. Even
Islamic sects like Ahmadi and Shi’a Muslims also face
oppressions by the majority Sunnis. A comparative
illustration of religious communities based on population
percentage in every census year (Table 01) shows the
decreasing share of religious groups in total population
of the country.

1961
80.4
18.5
0.7
0.3
0.1

1971
85.4
13.3
0.6
0.3
0.2

1981
86.7
12.1
0.6
0.3
0.3

1991
88.3
10.5
0.6
0.3
0.3

2001
89.7
9.2
0.7
0.3
0.2

2011
90.4
8.5
0.6
0.3
0.1

Table 01: Composition of Bangladesh religious communities (%) from 1951 to 2011
Source: Minority Rights Group International (2016). Under Threat: The challenges facing religious
minorities in Bangladesh. Sweden: Minority Rights Group. p. 07
The total percentage of Muslim population has been
increasing (from 76.9% in 1951 to 90.4% in 2011)
whereas Hindu community has been getting smaller
http://www.chinamediaresearch.net

(from 22% in 1951 to 8.5% in 2011) after the partition.
Two tendencies are influencing these percentages: (a)
Hindu families are shifting in India on a regular basis.
69

editor@chinamediaresearch.net

China Media Research, 15(2), 2019

Daily migration rate of Hindus was 512 in 1971-81 and
it reached at 774 in 2001-11. It has been contemplated
that, following this rate of exodus, there would be “no”
Hindus in Bangladesh after 30 years (Hassan, 2016). The
repulsion accelerated under few circumstances, such as
oppressions and strategic vandalism, marginalization and
psychological torture, legalization and operationalization
of the anti-Hindu laws (e.g. Enemy Property Act 1968,
later known as Vested Property Act); and (b) fertility rate
and annual growth rate of Muslims are higher than any
other religious communities.
Between 1965 and 1990 the total number
of people on earth rose from 3.3 billion to 5.3
billion, an annual growth rate of 1.85 percent.
In Muslim societies growth rates almost always
were over 2.0 percent, often exceeded 2.5
percent, and at times were over 3.0 percent.
(Huntington, 1996: 117)
Buddhist minority including Marma, Chakma, and few
others cliques residing in Chittagong Hill Tracts (CHT)
for decades has been being suppressed and ousted by the
state-initiative Bengali influx and settlement there. As a
result, the ratio of indigenous and Bengali in CHT has
been transformed conspicuously from 91:9 in 1951 to
50:50 in 1991 (Mohsin, 2003).
Remaining minority communities are less hammered
than the Hindu and Buddhist. A range of religiopolitical
reasons determine the interrelationships among the
religious groups in Bangladesh. However, a new wave of
“religious revivalism” among Muslims is being
perceived nowadays, and the outcomes are evident:
religious intolerance, rise of Islamic fanaticism as well as
militant groups, and promulgation of Islamic sentiment
in social life, Islamization of education and mushrooming
madrasa, etc.
Communalism: Bangladesh Context
To examine and perceive the nature of Bangladesh
communalism and religious orthodoxy, it is imperative to
study historical background of the religious politics in
Bengal as well as Indian subcontinent. The
confrontational politics was enacted between the two
major religious communities: Hindu and Muslim by the
British rulers in colonial regime, chiefly after Sepoy
Mutiny in 1857. “Divide and Rule” policy sanctioned by
the British facilitated communal tension; the motive was
simple: to exploit the both groups. Emergence of the
Muslim League based on religious nationalism
countering the stance of Congress was a massive blow in
the communal history of the subcontinent. But its
popularity only began in 1930s. Bengal as a province was
comparatively secular, and the Nikhil Bharat Krishak
Proja Party as a secular political party led by A.K. Fazlul
Haque secured huge support from Bengal (Sarkar, 2016).
The reluctance of the Congressmen in forming coalition
with Haque compelled him towards Muslim League,
http://www.chinamediaresearch.net

ISSN: 1556-889X

which has been considered as one of the foremost
tragedies in the history of Bengal (Rafique, 2015).
Afterwards, people of Bengal positioned behind the
Muslim League led by Muhammad Ali Jinnah and thus
an important shift in politics has begun: Bengal too
plunged into the politics of separatism and thrived to
achieve Pakistan. After the omega of colonial rule, a
utopian state of “Pakistan” came into being in 1947, and
a new struggle of East Pakistanis had started.
East Pakistan waged a war owing to 23-years’
disparity and oppression led by West Pakistan rulers. A
dreadful nine months war in 1971 brought a prestigious
victory for the Bengal people, and “Bangladesh” has
been emerged as a sovereign nation-state. Tajuddin
Ahmed for the first time declared democracy, socialism,
and secularism as the base of the newly formed
Bangladesh (Hasan, 1986). With the consent of Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman, the four fundamental principles:
democracy, nationalism, socialism, and secularism were
added in the first Constitution (Part II: Fundamental
Principles of State Policy) of the country in 1972 (Govt.
of Bangladesh, 1972). Nevertheless, the essence of
secularism as a spirit and principle of Liberation War had
been tarnished in the very decade of its promulgation:
firstly, by Ziaur Rahman (inclusion of Bismillahir
Rahmanir Rahim at the starting of the constitution), and
then Hussain Muhammad Ershad (declaration of Islam as
the state religion). Islamist parties’ active role in current
Bangladesh politics also denotes the demise of
secularism and the impossibility of peaceful co-cultural
coexistence.
Rise of Digital Communalism
The demolition of the historical Babri Masjid by
fanatic Hindus in 1990 in Gujrat had prepared a stage of
religious disunity in Bangladesh. Islamic extremists in
Bangladesh caused a great damage to the local Hindus
afterward the attack in India (Azad, 1998). Such practice
of retaliation is still ongoing, but the dimensions have
been changed to a great deal due to the free and massive
flow of information.
In earlier days, information was not so abundant so
that people had to rely on traditional information sources.
The inception of digital media has opened a vast territory
of information, and people often unable to choose the
reliable one and can be misguided. Following the same
strategy, by throwing off distorted information, a large
portion of religious community can easily be mobilized
against other communities what Bangladesh has been
experiencing. Social media during any communal tension
is overflowed with fake information and doctored photos
(e.g. burning Tibetan activist, Chinese earthquake
victims, African accident victims) those have enough
potential to excite the mobs (Adhikary & Habib, 2016).
Even the Counter-Terrorism and Transnational Crime
(CTTC) cyber unit has identified almost 2,500 Facebook
70

editor@chinamediaresearch.net

China Media Research, 15(2), 2019

pages those are currently circulating communal hatred
and religious extremism in Bangladesh (Hasan, 2017).
The pattern, motive, and characteristic of two
representative (one against Hindus, and another against
Buddhists) digital communal violence are being
analyzed.
Assault on Hindu minority in Nasirnagar:
In the afternoon of 30 October 2016, nearly 3000
fierce people shattered 17 temples, and vandalized and
looted around 100 houses in several villages of
Brahmanbaria’s Nasirnagar (Chakraborty, 2017b). More
than hundred people were injured and six families left the
country right after the incident. The driving force behind
such two-hour long atrocity was merely an alleged
Facebook post “defaming” Islam and a Hindu illiterate
fisher named Rasraj Das was convicted for this act.
Although being perplexed, he pleaded his innocence
denying this “false” allegation (Sakhawat, 2016).
Despite of demanding his guiltlessness, Rasraj was
beaten heavily and submitted to jail. However, further
investigation and Vox-pop of the locals delineate a
parallel picture of how the violent mob was constructed,
incited, and thereafter unleashed upon the Hindu
minorities of the surrounding areas. The local mosques
protested the “defamatory Facebook post by a Hindu” in
Norpur, Asurain, Phulpur, Pandao, Capartala, Kaliuta,
Guniag, and Bolapur villages; of them, some are the
stronghold of radical Islamists.
The radical Islamist groups Ahle Sunnat Wal Jamaat
and Hefazat-e-Islam organized and conducted the
violence. Islamic radicals use mosque to unite Muslims
to administrate mayhem upon local Hindus. Evidences
show the involvement of Chhatra Shibir, a student wing
of Jamaat-e-Islami in spreading hate speeches and posts
using social media which later causes series attacks on
Hindu temples and Puja pavilions in at least seven
districts including Brahmanbaria (Sarker & Miazee,
2016).
What about the Facebook post which triggered one
of the country’s largest communal attack? The
Information Communication Technology (ICT)
specialists within three days of the mayhem had hinted
about the possibility of digital disinformation. Some of
the prominent ICT experts from BUET, CounterTerrorism and Transnational Crime (CTTC) and
Criminal Investigation Department (CID) expressed the
plausible chance of hacking of Rasraj’s Facebook
account to circulate communal hatred (Khan & Siddique,
2016). After investigation, it was clear enough that
someone else than Rasraj did the job to arise communal
hatred among local Muslims against Hindus to perpetrate
such savagery.
After few days of the mayhem, “Dewan Atikur
Rahman alias Ankhi, Chairman of Haripur Union
Parishad and prime suspect of the attacks on Nasirnagar
http://www.chinamediaresearch.net

ISSN: 1556-889X

Hindus, confessed to paying for the truck that carried the
attackers” (Chakraborty, 2017a). Several accounts of
villagers along with Fisheries Minister Sayedul Haque
opined that Rasraj did not generate the defamatory
Facebook post because of being illiterate. He also hinted
about secret plot behind this abominable incident
(Sakhawat & Hasan, 2016). Nevertheless, how exactly
the disinformation came about is still unknown.
However, it is palpable that this planned act of
vandalism and circulation of disinformation was to
instigate and mobilize people to perform violence
Attack on Buddhist minority in Ramu:
On 29 September 2012, 12 Buddhist monasteries
and at least 100 houses in Ramu were destroyed and
looted because of an alleged desecration of the Quran in
a fake Facebook account using the name of Uttam Barua,
a Buddhist youth (“25,000 Muslim”, 2012, “Extremists
linked,” 2012). The violence later spread to Ukhia and
Teknaf in Cox’s Bazar, and Patiya in Chittagong. An
estimated 25,000 people participated in the violence in
Ramu (“Rioting mob”, 2012).
The group of attackers was allegedly comprised
of local pro-Awami League leaders, BNP men,
madrasa students, common people, and some
Rohingyas. However, the much-talked Facebook
photo of “Uttam’s feet on Quran” was nothing but a
deliberate and deceptive disinformation, and the
accused was only tagged in the photo. Some
Bangladesh journalists “saw the picture, shows
white feet—wearing nail polish—on the Quran”
(Ahmed & Manik, 2012b).
Tofail Ahmed, chair of Naikhangchhari upazila
of Bandarban was arrested in connection with
attacking and vandalizing of a Buddhist temple at
Ramu (“SC cancels”, 2014). His nephew Muktadir
instigated Ramu locals by showing fake photo (Manik,
2013) doctored by Omar Faruk, an ex-member of
Chhatra Shibir.
The way the mob gathered also indicates something
not spontaneous but plotted. On the 29th evening, at most
hundred-people started procession and rallies against the
Ramu’s Buddhists. However, the mob grew to around
6,000 overnight, in which most of the vandals were
outsiders (Ahmed & Manik, 2012a). Kaberi Gayen has
identified the role of political figures of the affected area:
This is for the first time in Bangladesh
history, irrespective of political affiliation, that
local leaders were involved in a communal
attack on a minority population. Either they
took part in agitating people leading the early
processions, or they took part in arson and
vandalism themselves, or they did not play the
roles they had taken oaths for. (Gayen, 2012)
The demolishers came from the surrounding areas but not
the local people, spectators commented. Then, who are
71

editor@chinamediaresearch.net

China Media Research, 15(2), 2019

they, why they came, and who did influence them to
conduct mayhem? It is yet to uncovered. With this
tragedy, a culture of violence on Bangladesh minorities
through digital disinformation has started, and the legacy
we saw in Joypurhat (Chowdhury, 2017), Rangpur
(“Mayhem over”, 2017), and few other places of the
country.
Why Digital Disinformation and Communalism
Digital communication system would have narrow
down the information gap across the globe and provide a
new democracy. Then, why communal disintegration due
to digital disinformation is happening at a large scale in
Bangladesh is a fundamental question. To answer,
historical perspective, contemporary geopolitics and
socio-political environment, and behavioral psychology
need to be taken into account.
Counter-hatred:
India surrounds Bangladesh from three sides
considering the geographical landscape. Interdependency
happens between neighboring countries, especially
between those who share borders. Historically, India and
Bangladesh have many pleasant and bitter memories in
common. It is sooth to say that the partition of 1947 is
still haunting the people of both countries. The seed of
socio-political separation and animosity along religious
line is very much alive to date, but the basic difference is:
contemporary religious hatred is quite explicit,
expressive, immense, and multilayered than the past with
the aid of digital communication.
After independence, an anti-Indian sentiment had
been developed due to manifold socio-political reasons
during Mujib’s regime. It forced to revive the “Muslim
identity” and compelled Bengali Muslim community
towards an Islamic revivalism that was about to die after
the fall of undivided Pakistan (Ahmed, 2014). Zia and
Ershad during 1975-90 reinforced the religious sentiment
among Muslims due to political achievement. Thereby,
anti-Indian sentiment, to some extent, was converted to
anti-Hindu feeling. Recent trend is showing religious
hatred and despise against local Buddhist community
after the “genocide” and repulsion of Rohingya Muslims
in Myanmar (Mahmud, 2017). Even the Hefazat-E-Islam
having headquarter in Chittagong nearby Rakhine
threatened to wage a war against Myanmar’s inhumanity
against their “Muslim brothers” (Joehnk, 2017). The
counter-religious detestation is an “eye-for-eye” game: if
you hurt my faith-mate in your country, I will hurt yours
in my place.
Communal language and digital contempt:
Nobody other than co-cultural communities in any
country understands the language of eyes and
expressions of dominant culture. Dominant religious
communities throughout the world tend to search for
http://www.chinamediaresearch.net

ISSN: 1556-889X

suitable ways to suppress other religious minorities by
any means to sustain their supremacy. In Bangladesh,
Muslims spontaneously humiliate Hindus in digital
platform addressing them “Malaun” or “Malu”, a
derogatory term originated from Arabic means
“accursed” or “deprived from God’s mercy” (XY, 2014).
Often Hindu people are scorned to leave Bangladesh as it
has a Muslim majority and here is no place for Hindu
“pagans”. Following this logic, India is largely
considered as “Hindu country” by the average Bengali
Muslims. It is a post-partition legacy and thoughtprocess. Such detrimental ideation colonizes the mind of
Bengali Hindus and coerces them to emigrate. Besides,
Buddhists are often designated as infidel because
Buddhism carefully ignores the concept of “God”.
Rumor as information:
Rumor can be so powerful to shake the
establishment, history is witness. The transmission of
rumor has some distinctive features. A receiver of rumor
tends to: (a) carry the most important parts of the rumor,
dropping off the irrelevant; (b) detect misinformation in
the rumor and eliminate it (Buckner, 1965); (c) transmit
the rumor without changing it if he can detect no
irrelevant or false information (Schachter & Burdick,
1955). In Bangladesh, the impact of rumors is seemingly
high because of this third feature.
We can demonstrate three major explanations
behind this: (a) as a least developing country, Bangladesh
is nurturing poor quality of population who have limited
level of knowledge to distinguish what might be right or
wrong; (b) in the age of information liquidity, individuals
are bombarded thousands of information every
consecutive day, thus people get confused about
information quality and accuracy, and transmit them to
others; (c) historically Bangladesh society is fostering
traumas and fears within, and some rumors are favorable
to instigate such hidden elements. Professor Dr.
Salimullah Khan explains why Bangladesh people buy
rumors from another point of view:
“Our minds are hungry, or thirsty if you
prefer. If you are not going to feed them with
the right stuff, they are going to purchase the
wrong…Rumors spread the truth in a fictional
way.” (Yusuf, 2014)
People love stories those are weaved perfectly. Lacan
(1977) opined that “truth is structured like a fiction” (p.
306). The digital dis-informants construct erroneous
stories intentionally in a fictional style to allure more
audience and cause more impact. A rumor becomes
successful when it can play with public anxiety, trauma,
fear, and interest. People then consume, get addicted, and
therefore driven by rumor. Information nowadays is
easier to receive, (mis)interpret, disseminate, deceive,
and achieve desired effects. Thus, a rumor that cause
communal crisis at one tiny place in one country can
72

editor@chinamediaresearch.net

China Media Research, 15(2), 2019

engender severe counter-hatred and religious bellicosity
in another place of another country.
Weaponization of digital public sphere:
Ali Riaz (2015) argued the emergence of a new Islamic
public sphere in Bangladesh in recent years comprising
Islamic fiction (e.g. novel, story etc.), and Islamic study
group (e.g. Halaqa and Taleem). What he failed to
hypothesize is the emergence of new age “digital Islamic
public sphere” and its weaponization against local
religious and ethnic minorities. The “digital publics” as
radical Muslims postulate and deny the legitimacy of the
religious minorities in different manners. However, many
corrupt politicians and interest groups in Bangladesh and
India are using the digital platform to stage exclusive
religiopolitical game.
Propagating communalism is a vicious but foolproof
weapon to extract or achieve desired outcomes, most
suitably, on the political context of the Indian
subcontinent. Politicians here know that political
maneuver using religious sentiment is so successful than
anything else, and fanatics are too powerful to make
anything happen. Russel extrapolated why and how
fanatic creeds win over others:
“…a nation of united fanatics has more
chance of success in war than a nation
containing a large proportion of sane men.”
(Russel, 2004)
Bangladesh secularism has been impeded due to
numerous political reasons, and legacy of religion-based
politics continues as most people still misinterpret
political play as “holy conquest”. Previous two incidents
of digital communalism prove that digital public sphere
has now become a convenient instrument to organize and
unleash ferocity either to accomplish self-interest or to
incriminate the opposition.
Communalism and modes of digital power:
Power is having intended effects on others. It has
many
forms:
economic,
political,
religious,
communicative, technological, physical, etc. Digital
cyberspace as a unique form of modern tool of power is
getting its preference and becoming a game changer.
Unlike anything in the world, digital cybersphere for the
first time offers a realm of “pseudo-reality” to its users,
thus attain immense power. Cyberspace has some
distinctive features regarding information and
communication: speediness, ubiquity, effectivity and
interactivity, easy accessibility, and availability of
alternatives. For these reasons, information in cyberspace
is more fluid than any other communication channel.
Besides, information can be diffused to a larger audience
within the least possible time and cost. On the other hand,
religion usually dwells on the most sensitive part of
believers’ emotion so that it is easy to incite a devotee
using his faith. The combination of digital information
http://www.chinamediaresearch.net

ISSN: 1556-889X

and religion can simultaneously be peaceful and
catastrophic based on its management and usage. If
healthy information is disseminated through digital
media, it will bring peace and association; and if not, then
the opposite is bound to happen. Thus, using cyberpower,
religious disinformation hampers social serenity.
Cyberpower,
in
context
of
Bangladesh
communalism, has two distinctive faces: (a) authority;
and (b) coalition those exert significant impact.
Authoritative power over information in digital platform
bespeak about its usage: if the information-holder is a
wrong-doer then he will misguide people with the
“engineered information” or disinformation. A unique
nature of digital disinformation is a single body can
mobilize a large community with greater force within the
least possible time just with a tiny piece of information;
the previous social-media instigated violence has already
proven this statement. On the other hand, coalition plays
a substantial role in executing vandalism. No isolated
person can able to flare and devastate a community,
rather it needs a motivated coalition. United manpower
(e.g. Facebook-incited mob) is responsible for the
damages.
Conclusion
Digitality is encaging individuals’ public and private
lives in Bangladesh rapidly and radically. The pace of
digitalization seems simultaneously unusual and
imbalanced. For this reason, information management
and regulation are often impeded. It has nothing to do
with “freedom of speech” but the ethical accommodation
and transmission of information. When unprecedented
information surrounds an individual, assuredly he needs
to struggle to find out the right one. It is tough job though.
Hence, most of the individuals usually find out the
shortest route, derive and learn the information from the
nearest possible source, and react. Thus, disinformation
along with information find its extraordinary way of
being succeed.
Digital disinformation to be successful, a range of
factors play important role: the demographic nature
(education, socialization, social orientation, and income),
culture and belief (nature of belief, religious motivation,
and practices), political atmosphere and nature of
politicians (preference of religion in politics, and
politician’s morality), and measurement of digital knowhow (reach of digital culture, nature and number of
digital dwellers, and source of information). When the
material culture of society changes rapidly but the nonmaterial one is not so it tends to resist the material
change, according to cultural lag (Ogburn, 1957).
Communication technology as a material culture has
been penetrating and revolutionizing the existing picture
of Bangladesh society, but the prior belief and morality
can not cope up with the material change, so it would, to
some extent, try to defend the modernization process.
73

editor@chinamediaresearch.net

China Media Research, 15(2), 2019

Digital disinformation can be an expression of this
propensity.
Meanwhile, the communal politics and fanaticism
that is yet to eradicate from this land already has found
its nest in digital hub. Malefactors have discovered a new
way to fuel public outcry. To protect not only Bangladesh
religious minorities but other co-cultural communities,
digital disinformation must have to be prevented either
by laws or by new strategies. It is imperative to cultivate
technological benefits and grow digital culture amid
Bangladesh society as an indication of social
development and advancement. Though having demerits,
digital communication is the ultimate gift of modernity.
The appropriate management, supervision, and control
over digital space and information would not only expel
communal disinformation but also would accumulate
more boons to the lives of religious minorities in
Bangladesh.
Correspondence to:
Md. Sayeed Al-Zaman
Jahangirnagar University
Savar, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
Email: ovi.sayeed@yahoo.com
References
“25,000 Muslim rioters torch Buddhist temples, homes in
Bangladesh” (2012, September 30). RT. Retrieved
from https://www.rt.com/news/buddhist-templestorched-bangladesh-342/
Adhikary, Tihin Shubhra, & Habib, Wasim Bin (2016,
November 26). Fake photos trolling. The Daily Star.
Retrieved from https://www.thedailystar.net/
frontpage/fake-photos-trolling-1320613
Ahmad, Mohiuddin (2014). Jashoder Utthan Poton
Osthir Somoyer Rajniti. Dhaka: Prothoma
Prokashan.
Ahmed, Inam, & Manik, Julfikar Ali (2012a, October
02). Attack on Buddhists preplanned: Tearing out
the soul. The Daily Star. Retrieved from
https://www.thedailystar.net/news-detail-252079
Ahmed, Inam, & Manik, Julfikar Ali (2012b, October
03). Attacks on Buddhist temples: A hazy pictures
appears. The Daily Star. Retrieved from
www.thedailystar.net/news-detail-252212
Azad, Salam (1998). Why Hindus are leaving
Bangladesh? Kolkata: Shatantra Prokashani. pp. 4041. Retrieved from https://view.publitas.com /
liberationwarbangladesh/hindu-smprdaayy-ken-deshtyaag
-krche-saalaam-aajaad/page/1
Bangladesh Telecommunication Regulatory
Commission (BTRC) (2018). Internet Subscriber in
Bangladesh November. Retrieved from
www.btrc.gov.bd/content/internet-subscribersbangladesh-february-2018

http://www.chinamediaresearch.net

ISSN: 1556-889X

Berger, Yotam (2017, October 22). Israel Arrests
Palestinian Because Facebook Translated ‘Good
Morning’ to ‘Attack Them’. Hareetz. Retrieved
from
www.haaretz.com/israel-news/palestinianarrested-over-mistranslated-good-morningfacebook-post-1.5459427
Bittman, Ladislav (1985). The KGB and Soviet
Disinformation: An Insider's View. London:
Pergamon Press.
Bromwich, Jonah Engel. (2016, February 04). Six
Degrees of Separation? Facebook finds a smaller
number. The New York Times. Retrieved from
www.nytimes.com/2016/02/05/technology/sixdegrees-of-separation-facebook-finds-a-smallernumber.html
Buckner, HT (1965). A Theory of Rumor Transmission.
Public Opinion Quarterly, 29 (1), 54-70. doi
10.1086/267297.
Chakraborty, Ujjal (2017a, January 07). Nasirnagar
attack: Chairman Ankhi confesses paying for
vandals’ truck. Dhaka Tribune. Retrieved from
www.dhakatribune.com/bangladesh/crime/2017/01/
07/nasirnagar-attack-chairman-ankhi-confessespaying-vandals-truck/
Chakraborty, Ujjal (2017b, October 29). One year of
Nasirnagar attack: Rasraj is yet to get past the thin
blue line. Dhaka Tribune. Retrieved from
http://www.dhakatribune.com/bangladesh/lawrights/2017/10/29/one-year-nasirnagar-attackrasraj-yet-get-past-thin-blue-line/
Chowdhury, Md. Alamgir (2017, February 03). Another
Nasirnagar-like plot in Joypurhat? Dhaka Tribune.
Retrieved from https://www.dhakatribune.com/
bangladesh/crime/2017/02/03/now-joypurhat-hinduyouth-blamed-blasphemy/
“Extremists linked”. (2012, October 01). The Daily Star.
Retrieved from http://www.thedailystar.net/newsdetail-251955
Floridi, Luciano. (1996). Brave.Net.World: The Internet
as a disinformation superhighway? The Electronic
Libra., 14. doi: 10.1108/eb045517.
Floridi, Luciano (2005). Is Semantic Information
Meaningful Data? Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research, 70. doi:10.1111/j.1933-1592.2005.tb00531.x
Floridi, Luciano (2011). The Philosophy of Information.
London: Oxford University Press.
G. & C. Merriam Co. (1961). Webster’s Seventh New
Collegiate Dictionary (14th ed.). Massachusetts: G.
& C. Merriam Company Publishers.
Gayen, Kaberi (2012). A Known Compromise, A Known
Darkness: ‘Ramu-nisation’ of Bangladesh. Forum: A
monthly publication of The Daily Star, 06 (11).
Retrieved from http://archive.thedailystar.net/forum/
2012/November/known.html
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
(1972). The First Constitution of the People’s
74

editor@chinamediaresearch.net

China Media Research, 15(2), 2019

Republic of Bangladesh. Dhaka: Govt. of
Bangladesh. Retrieved from https://constitute
project.org/constitution/Bangladesh_2011.pdf
Hasan, Kamrul (2017, November 16). 2,500 Facebook
pages spread communal hatred in Bangladesh.
Dhaka Tribune. Retrieved from https://www.
dhakatribune.com/bangladesh/2017/11/16/hundreds
-facebook-pages-spreading-communal-hatredbangladesh/
Hasan, Maidul (1986). Muldhara ’71 (2nd ed.). Dhaka:
The University Press Limited. Retrieved from
https://www.liberationwarbangladesh.org/2014/07/
blog-post_67.html
Hassan, Md. Kamrul (November 20, 2016). “No Hindus
will be left after 30 years”. Dhaka Tribune. Retrieved
from https://www.dhakatribune.com/bangladesh/
2016/11/20/abul-barkat-632-hindus-left-countryday
Hauben, Michael F. (1995, November). The Netizens and
Community Network. Paper presented at the Hyper
Network ’95 Beppu Bay Conference, Japan.
Hern, Alex (2017, October 24). Facebook translates
‘good morning’ into ‘attack them’, leading to arrest.
The Guardian. Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.
com/technology/2017/oct/24/facebook-palestineisrael-translates-good-morning-attack-them-arrest
Hume, David (2007). Of Liberty and Necessity. Millican,
Peter (ed.). An Enquiry Concerning Human
Understanding. London: Oxford University Press.
Huntington, Samuel P. (1996). The Clash of Civilization
and the Remaking of World Order. New York:
Simon & Schuster.
Joehnk, Tom Felix (2017, October 06). How the
Rohingya crisis is changing Bangladesh? The New
York Times. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/
2017/10/06/opinion/rohingya-bangladeshmyanmar.html
Khan, Mohammad Jamil, & Siddique, Mohammad Abu
Bakar (2016, November 02). Cyber sleuths probing
FB post that sparked anti-Hindu violence. Dhaka
Tribune. Retrieved from http://www.dhakatribune.com/
bangladesh/crime/2016/11/02/cyber-sleuthsprobing-bbaria-fb-post/
Lacan, Jacques (1977). Écrits: A Selection (Alan
Sheridan, Trans.). London: Tavistock Publications.
Mahmud, Tarek (2017, September 19). Rohingya crisis:
Security amped up at Buddhist temples. Dhaka
Tribune. Retrieved from https://www.dhakatribune.
com/bangladesh/nation/2017/09/19/rohingya-crisissecurity-buddhist-temples/
Manik, Julfikar Ali (2013, November 28). Mastermind of
Ramu attacks arrested. Dhaka Tribune. Retrieved
from
https://www.dhakatribune.com/law-andrights/2013/11/28/mastermind-of-ramu-attacksarrested/

http://www.chinamediaresearch.net

ISSN: 1556-889X

“Mayhem over Facebook post” (2017, November 11).
The Daily Star. Retrieved from https://www.
thedailystar.net/frontpage/mayhem-over-facebookpost-1489402
Minority Rights Group International (2016). Under
Threat: The challenges facing religious minorities in
Bangladesh. Sweden: Minority Rights Group.
Mohsin, A. (2003). The Chittagong Hill Tracts,
Bangladesh: On the difficult road to peace. London:
L. Rienner.
Ogburn, W. F. (1957). Cultural lag as theory. Sociology
& Social Research, 41, 167-174.
Pacepa, I. M., & Rychlak, R. J. (2013). Dis information:
Former Spy Chief Reveals Secret Strategies for
Undermining Freedom, Attacking Religion, and
Promoting Terrorism. New York: WND Books.
Rafique, Ahmad (2015). Deshbibhag: Fire Dekha (2nd
ed.). Dhaka: Anindya Prakash.
Riaz, Ali (2015). How Did We Arrive Here? Dhaka:
Prothoma Prokashan.
“Rioting mob torches temples in Bangladesh” (2012,
September 30). ABC News. Retrieved from
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2012-09-30/rioterstorch-buddhist-temples-in-bangladesh/4288598
Rowley, Jennifer (2007). The wisdom hierarchy:
representations of the DIKW hierarchy. Journal of
Information and Communication Science, 33 (2),
163-180. doi: 10.1177/0165551506070706
Russel, Bertrand (2004). Power: A New Social Analysis.
London: Routledge.
Sakhawat, Adil (2016, November 02) Nasirnagar attacks
driving away Hindus. Dhaka Tribune. Retrieved
from http://www.dhakatribune.com/bangladesh/
crime/2016/11/02/nasirnagar-attacks-driving-awayhindus/
Sakhawat, Adil, & Hasan, Kamrul (2016, November 05).
Minister Sayedul: Rasraj too undereducated to post
on Facebook. Dhaka Tribune. Retrieved from
http://www.dhakatribune.com/bangladesh/2016/11/
05/rasraj-illiterate-post-facebook/
Sarkar, Monayem (2016). A Brief History of Bangladesh
(3rd ed.). Dhaka: Agami Prokashani.
Sarker, Probir Kumar, & Miazee, Manik (2016,
November 05). Shibir-run website incites
Nasirnagar attacks. Dhaka Tribune. Retrieved
from http://www.dhakatribune.com/ bangladesh/
crime/2016/11/05/shibir-website-incitesnasirnagar-attacks/
“SC cancels key Ramu attacker’s bail” (2014, May 12).
The
Daily
Star.
Retrieved
from
https://www.thedailystar.net/sc-cancels-key-ramuattacker-s-bail-23781
Schachter, S, & Burdick, H. (1955). A Field Experiment
in Rumor Transmission and Distortion. Journal of
Abnormal and Social Psychology, 50 (3), 363-371.
Doi: https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/h0044855
75

editor@chinamediaresearch.net

China Media Research, 15(2), 2019

Smith, David. (2008, August 03). Proof: Just six degrees
of separation between us. The Guardian. Retrieved
from https://www.theguardian.com/technology/
2008/aug/03/internet.email
XY, Charlie (2014). Urban Dictionary. Retrieved from
https://urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=Mala
un
Yusuf, Ananta (2014, January 24). The origins of
communalism. The Daily Star. Retrieved from

ISSN: 1556-889X

http s://www.thedailystar.net/the -origins -o fcommunalism-7950
Zins, Chaim (2007). Conceptual Approaches for
Defining Data, Information, and Knowledge.
Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology, 58 (4), 479-493. doi:
10.1002/asi

3/28/2019

http://www.chinamediaresearch.net

76

editor@chinamediaresearch.net

