Nurturing Project Organizations: A Mode 2 Mission for the University?
Peter L. Freeman1*†, Isobel H. Marr2, Andrew J. Millar3, Fumi Kitagawa4.

Running title: Nurturing project organizations
1

Roslin Institute, University of Edinburgh, Easter Bush, EH25 9RG, UK.

2 Research

Support Office, University of Edinburgh, 5 Roxburgh St, Edinburgh, EH8 9TA, UK

3 SynthSys

and School of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, EH9 3BF, UK.

4 University

of Edinburgh Business School, Edinburgh, EH8 9JS, UK

* Corresponding Author.
† Present Address: Innogen Institute, Old Surgeons' Hall, Edinburgh, EH1 1LZ, UK
All authors’ ORCID, e-mail:
Peter L. Freeman, 0000-0002-1496-9969, peterfreeman46@gmail.com
Andrew Millar, 0000-0003-1756-3654, Andrew.millar@ed.ac.uk
Isobel Marr, 0000-0002-0378-8580, Isobel.Marr@ed.ac.uk
Fumi Kitagawa, 0000-0003-0013-372X, Fumi.kitagawa@ed.ac.uk

Keywords: Mode 2; transdisciplinary knowledge production; academia; university mission;
organizational studies; research on research; research management.

Abstract
Recent changes in UK research funding priorities have led to the emergence of large
challenge-led, societally embedded research opportunities. We used semi-structured
interviews with 27 academic, management and professional staff at the University of
Edinburgh to explore the life cycles of selected projects and centres from planning and
preparation through to decommissioning. We observed the degree to which pursuit of
challenge-led opportunities induced the emergence of new project-level organizational
forms or changed academics’ modus operandi from “Mode 1” research to “Mode2”
knowledge production. We further explored the levels of management input and
administrative support expected and received by the project organization from its host

1

Nurturing project organizations
academic schools, colleges the university. We found that the size, complexity and
disciplinary, interdisciplinary or transdisciplinary scope of the initiatives influenced their
emergence as autonomous project organisations. “Role strain” affected many respondents
as they sought to balance Mode 1 academic and Mode 2 leadership and management roles
in their project organizations. Further exploration of the distribution of leadership
management and professional support functions among project organizations and the
support structures of academic schools, colleges and the university is warranted. We
suggest that the university might usefully act as a boundary organization and adopt a Mode
2 knowledge exchange mission in support of multi-stakeholder projects.

1 Introduction
The emergence of “big research”, notably in the fields of science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM), has given rise to a variety of organizational environments (e.g.,
powerful research “labs”, collaborative research projects and inter-disciplinary centres) that
complement and transcend the traditional discipline-based administrative structures of
academia. The quantity, quality and impact of academic research enabled by these
organizational units contribute to their institution’s overall reputation as a “research
university”. The reputational narrative of the research university, in turn, foregrounds the
individual achievements of established and aspirant academic researchers while assigning
organizational infrastructures to the administrative hinterland of “research support”.
Government funding agencies (e.g., research councils) have heretofore aligned with this
narrative, awarding resources to meritorious academics who are in turn supported and
regulated by the administrative structures of their departments and schools. In this
depiction, universities and funding agencies co-operate as intermediaries in the state
patronage of individual academics in the expectation of eventual societal benefit from their
research activities. Since the formation of UK Research and Innovation (UKRI) as a
“federation” of research councils and other agencies in 2018, funding vehicles such as the
Global Challenges Research Fund (GCRF), Industrial Strategy Challenge Fund (ISCF) and
Strategic Priorities Fund (SPF) have been making large awards (£10 million and upwards per
project) available for challenge-led, societally embedded research. This UK change mirrors
similar shifts in EU funding and in awards made by global philanthropic organizations such
as the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. In this paper we explore the organizational
2

Nurturing project organizations
implications for a UK research university seeking to adapt to the scale and scope of research
and knowledge exchange activity predicated by the new funding patterns. We “unbundle”
the terminology of academia and the university and position the latter as a “boundary
organization” (Guston 1999) seeking to satisfy the interests of multiple stakeholders in the
evolving research and knowledge exchange landscape. We assume that the scale and scope
of the new challenge-led awards will favour their assignment to specific project
organizations rather than to individual academics. We hypothesise a role for project
organizations and their university hosts in accommodating disciplinary or interdisciplinary
“Mode 1” research in an emerging transdisciplinary “Mode 2” model of knowledge
production (Gibbons et al, 1994). Our qualitative study is focused on the individual
experiences of university-based academic, management and professional staff involved in
large collaborative research projects and centres. Our narrative is structured as follows:
Section 2 introduces the conceptual frameworks that inform our research. Section 3
describes the objectives and design of our study. Section 4 presents the findings, which are
discussed in Section 5, followed by concluding remarks in Section 6.

2 Conceptual Frameworks
Throughout this paper we take the position of reflective practitioners (Schӧn, 1983) wishing
to effectively integrate Mode 1 and Mode 2 challenge-led, societally embedded knowledge
production. We follow the advice of Christensen and Raynor (2003) to seek out good
circumstance-contingent theories that will help us to better understand and improve
research and knowledge exchange practices and enabling infrastructures in the institutional
setting of the university. The conceptual frameworks outlined below are selected from a
wide-ranging literature review based on our perception of their value to our study.

2.1 Academia and the University
We begin by making heuristic use of a semantic distinction, which we shall maintain
throughout this paper, between the terms “academia” (loosely understood as a shared
culture or community of researchers, educators and scholars) and “university” (understood
as an institutional arrangement or environment closely associated with academia). The fact
that the two terms are often used as synonyms attests to that close association, with
universities often described as “academic institutions”. An example of the potentially
3

Nurturing project organizations
misleading conflation of the two terms is provided by Etzkowitz and Leydesdorf (2000), who
introduced the metaphor of the “Triple Helix of university–industry–government relations”
while simultaneously alluding to the “network of relationships among academia, industry,
and government” (our italics added). Van Waart et al (2015) usefully extend the triple helix
metaphor to a quadruple helix by adding civil society as a fourth domain, and Calzada and
Cowie (2017) present a penta-helix framework that includes a fifth stakeholder domain
spanning the boundaries of the other four. The latter authors populate the fifth helix with
an eclectic mix of boundary-spanning social entrepreneurs, activists, ‘bricoleurs’ and
assemblers. Adopting the penta-helix metaphor while avoiding academia-university
conflation allows us to position the university in the boundary-spanning domain, as shown
in Figure 1.

Fig 1 The University as a Boundary Organisation
(Based on Calzada and Cowie, 2017)

4

Nurturing project organizations
2.2 The University as a Boundary Organization
We have drawn a distinction between Academia and the University, and now position the
latter as a boundary organization (Guston, 1999) in relation to four stakeholder domains
(Figure 1). Boundary organizations can be seen as pluralistic organizations whose modes of
strategizing and organizing are shaped by internal and external stakeholders with divergent
goals and interests (Jarzabkowski and Fenton, 2006). As boundary organizations, universities
can act strategically to adopt, adapt, re-interpret, resist, outsource or otherwise redistribute
the missions thrust upon them by their stakeholders.

2.3 Project Organizations
We note that, given a policy-driven shift in emphasis towards complex, challenge-led,
societally embedded research, there may be a “tipping point” where the scale, scope or
complexity of funded projects demands their articulation as organizations in their own right
(Freeman and Millar, 2017). The “project organization”, as defined by Ratcheva and
Simpson (2011) can be seen as a temporary knowledge organisation (Sbarcea and Martins,
2003) in which knowledge is co-constructed by participants working across “multiple
boundaries and knowledge paradigms”, consistent with the ideals of Mode 2 transdisciplinary knowledge production (Gibbons et al., 1994). Ratcheva and Simpson (2011)
highlight the distinction between project organisations (such as in “one-off” movie
production), where the organisation ceases to exist on completion of the project, and more
enduring “project-based organisations” (such as construction firms), which use projects as a
way of working. We conceptualise project organizations (or, on a larger scale, centres and
hubs) as potential boundary organizations which, like the university itself, must respond to
the influential “pushing and pulling” of multiple internal and external stakeholders
(Koppenjan and Klijn, 2004). As project-based organizations, centres and hubs may be no
less temporary than their constituent project organizations, but their nomenclature
suggests at least the possibility of sustainability.

2.4 Project Organizations and Mode 2
The focus of the study described below is on the project organization’s response to a
perceived funder-driven shift in emphasis from Mode 1 research towards Mode 2
knowledge production. In this conception we are immediately confronted by a terminology
5

Nurturing project organizations
that separates research from knowledge production. We instead choose the heuristic
approach of considering Mode 1 as knowledge production via research and Mode 2 as
knowledge production by other means, such as “knowledge exchange”. This heuristic
ignores both the many conflicting notions of what knowledge exchange actually entails and
the fact that research might also be considered a knowledge exchange process. It does,
however, allow us to think of Mode 1 and Mode 2 as complementary knowledge production
processes to be accommodated by the project organization.

3 Objectives and Design of the Study
An opportunity to test the conceptual frameworks, outlined above, arose in 2018 when we
were asked to undertake a project with the working title “Nurturing Cross-Disciplinary
Research”, in which the main research question was framed as follows:
How do participants involved in large (> £5m award value) collaborative research projects
and centres perceive:


Their role(s) at different stages in the life cycle of their exemplar initiative(s)



Their identity and sense “belonging” in the various organizational units involved in
the initiative



The support needed, and received, from the relevant “professional bureaucracies”
(Mintzberg, 1979, as cited in Musselin, 2006) across the university

The institutional setting for the study was the University of Edinburgh, one of the largest
research-intensive universities in the UK. The most recent Research Excellence Framework,
a research ranking used by the UK government to determine future research funding,
ranked Edinburgh 4th in the UK for research power. The University’s research income for
2017/18 was £280m. We addressed the research question using a qualitative approach,
conducting semi-structured interviews with individuals involved in organizing large projects
and/or centres, and performing research within them. While the study examined
collaborative research projects and centres, the restriction of the sample set to large awards
was designed to uncover projects that are beyond the normal scope of single investigator
research and potentially enter the realm of Mode 2 knowledge production in pluralistic
settings.

6

Nurturing project organizations
A purposive approach was employed to select an interviewee panel composed primarily of
principal investigators (PIs) and management and professional staff drawn from the
academic community and from the University’s professional bureaucracies. While the
overall panel was balanced in terms of gender, its composition was dominated by senior
academics (holding the rank of professor) who tend to be more strongly represented as PIs
in large (cross-disciplinary, inter-institutional) projects than academics or management and
professional staff who are judged to be too junior, or who lack formal authority, to apply for
external research funding. Approval for the study was obtained from the relevant
Departmental Ethics Committee. Thirty five invitees were contacted and data was collected
from twenty seven participants over a period of four months. Each respondent provided
written consent to participation in the interviews and (with one exception) to the recording,
transcription and analysis of the interview content. All data collected from participants
were anonymised in the discussion of findings. Interview questions were framed around
the assumption that large projects can be considered as “research infrastructures”, broadly
understood as encompassing not just generic physical resources and technologies, but also
interchangeable forms of capital (in the sense introduced by Bourdieu, 1986), including the
ideas, money, people and practices that enable the processes of research and knowledge
production. Framing our questions around infrastructures also provides a contextual link to
studies of knowledge infrastructures, open access and the information commons (Benkler,
2016). Prior to each interview, we explained this approach to the interviewee, referring to
the linear sequence of “Research Infrastructure Key Stages” (Royal Society, 2018, p. 13),
which identifies planning, preparation, construction, operation and decommissioning as key
events in the research infrastructure life cycle.

3.1 Interviews
Interviewees were first asked how they identify emerging project opportunities and choose
those in which they wish to become involved. Each interviewee was then asked to
nominate one or more exemplar projects in which they participated, outlining the scale,
scope and perceived purpose of the initiative from their own and other’s point of view (e.g.,
those of funders, project teams, and host institutions). We then asked a series of questions
on the strategies and institutional support structures perceived to be relevant at each stage
in their exemplar project’s life cycle.
7

Nurturing project organizations

4 Findings
4.1 Project identification and selection
Responses to our opening questions revealed a range of proactive and reactive approaches
to identifying and pursuing research opportunities. Our respondents generally adopted the
same lens (that of the PI) in pursuit of the same objective (maintaining an individual
academic research trajectory) as reported in a similar study by O’Kane et al (2015). Most of
our respondents were clearly seeking to fit their individual or group research plans to
emerging funding opportunities, or vice versa. Their focus at the point of initial opportunity
generally prioritized Mode 1 disciplinary or interdisciplinary academic research over Mode 2
transdisciplinary knowledge production. Nevertheless, when it came to nominating
exemplar projects for later discussion, our heuristic approaches of selecting a minimum
award level of £5m, and using the infrastructure metaphor to explore the processes of
acquiring and deploying resources, proved reasonably effective in focusing our study on
larger projects and centres involving multiple stakeholders, institutions and academic
disciplines. At this point a distinction began to emerge between those who see a project or
centre as a rewarding performance venue in which to generate new knowledge in their own
field, and those seeking to act as impresarios, designing and directing broad coalitions to
deliver change across multiple stakeholder domains. Tensions can arise between performers
and impresarios. Several of the social scientists in our study, for example, expressed
frustration at being engaged as “bolt on” additions to projects (e.g., in medical science),
which fail to offer them adequate intellectual or financial recompense for their efforts. A
further challenge is that the institutional support structures of academic departments and
schools, and of the university itself, can come under strain in trying to administer initiatives
that span multiple stakeholder domains, cultures and geographies. Many such tensions and
challenges emerged in our exploration of the life cycle stages of large research
infrastructures.

4.2 Life Cycle of Research Infrastructures
The idea of a simple linear sequence of life events in the history of a research infrastructure,
with clearly distinguishable stages of planning, preparation, construction, operation and
decommissioning, did not resonate with all of our interviewees. We acknowledged in our
8

Nurturing project organizations
exchanges that the infrastructure life cycle is often more fluid and iterative than suggested
by the guide document (Royal Society, 2018, p. 13) and have grouped the stages below with
that in mind. Findings at each life cycle stage are further categorized with reference to (i)
strategies and (ii) institutional support structures and identities.

4.2.1 Planning and Preparation
Strategies
Respondents generally considered the distinction between planning and preparation of
research infrastructures to be somewhat blurred, as noted above. One interviewee,
however, perceived an important distinction between an "academic, intellectual argument
for research funding" (for example, to the European Research Council), where preparation
will follow if the argument is accepted, and making an infrastructural argument (e.g., for a
large centre) where the two stages are combined in a single business case. Another
respondent also distinguished between conceptual (academic) planning and the preparation
of the resulting research proposal, while a third noted the difference between internal
planning and preparation (deciding “what we want to be” as an organization) and external
planning and preparation (deciding “how we wish to engage” with the world). It was further
noted that, in today’s funding climate, large consortia have no time to assemble and to plan
a call response from scratch. They must be pre-formed and ready to respond with preplanned “shovel-ready” projects.
Institutional Support Structures and Identities
We asked our interviewees to describe the roles played by the institutional support
structures of their schools, and of the university and its colleges, during the planning and
preparation phase of their exemplar initiatives. We also asked them how they personally
identified with these different structures. Most PIs identified primarily with specific
“academic tribes and territories” (Becher and Trowler, 2001) and with the institutional
support structures of their schools. Management and professional staff directly employed
in school support roles also identified with those units, while those directly employed in
(often fixed term) roles on specific projects were more likely to identify with the project as
their organizational home.
Views of institutional support structures appeared to vary with the disciplinary reach of
their project and the diversity of its external stakeholders’ cultures and geographies.
9

Nurturing project organizations
Academic researchers from the same or adjacent disciplinary communities (in terms of
subject specialisms and social norms) were generally content with the level of institutional
support received through their schools. Those planning and preparing more complex
interdisciplinary or transdisciplinary efforts, particularly those involving overseas partners,
were less sanguine. There was a sense, most forcefully expressed by academics holding
senior appointments at college or university level, that more needs to be done at that level
to support large, complex projects (as opposed to supporting individual PIs seeking to lead
them). Some project leaders, however, while acknowledging that school support structures
struggle to effectively assist complex projects and their external partners, note that any
form of institutional support external to the project team will be insufficiently “up to speed”
on the project and its needs, and therefore unable to add significant value to its planning
and preparation processes. Rather, these respondents see a need for “small, coherent, well
integrated teams” operating as specific project organizations. This degree of project
autonomy may not be easily granted by school support structures, and is more likely to be
legitimized, if at all, at college and university levels.

4.2.2 Construction and Operation
Strategies
Study participants in less complex projects tended to see these “post-award” phases as a
resumption of their normal activities, albeit with new funding. The continuity of work going
on in well-established research groups insulates them from awareness of project
construction, as they go about their agreed tasks and as their schools focus bureaucratic
attention on financial accountability to funders. In contrast, leaders of more complex
interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary projects were concerned with assembling their project
organizations and constructing the “delivery space” in which to achieve immediate project
goals and potentially to undertake future initiatives. An important aspect of the
construction phase of more complex infrastructures was to establish “rules of access” to the
resources – including the empowerment of stakeholder coalitions to influence the ongoing
direction of the initiative and the composition of its “leadership constellation” (Denis et al.,
2001).
Institutional Support Structures and Identities

10

Nurturing project organizations
Many of the insights provided for the planning and preparation stages were reiterated for
construction and operation. Participants’ sense of belonging to their academic tribe or
organizational unit did not change, though there were some changes in levels of
engagement with the exemplar projects themselves. One respondent noted that, as the
operational phase of the project continues, its tightly knit starter community, having
achieved its goal of winning the resources they set out to grasp, may disengage to some
degree, or move on to plan and prepare for their next opportunity. It was also noted that
school level support, may be less visible at this “post-award” stage of the project. Overall
there is a sense of institutional support structures playing a more obscure “behind the
scenes” role at these stages. Only one respondent offered the view that the university
needs to be more engaged in the operational phase of large grant funded initiatives, so that
it can make sensible decisions around their decommissioning or sustainability.

4.2.3 Decommissioning
Questions on the topic of decommissioning elicited more divergent responses than similar
questions posed for other stages in the research infrastructure life cycle. Interviewees
differed in their views as to whether decommissioning marks the natural end of life of a
project or merely a stage in a continuous cycle of renewal, kick-started by further rounds of
planning and preparation.
Strategies
Academic attitudes to decommissioning diverged between those whom we earlier
characterized as either research performers or impresarios (Section 4.1, above). Research
performers generally treated their projects as transient funding events that contributed to
the trajectory of their ongoing research. The narrow view of projects as finite grants rather
than potentially enduring organizations leads to tacit acceptance of their demise.
Respondents whom we identified as impresarios, on the other hand, were more likely to
take the view that “a project that fails to view decommissioning through a sustainability lens
is a failed project”. Predictably, the leadership constellation of a proactive project
organization is more likely to seek routes to sustainability over the course of its operational
phase than an individual research performer. Not all projects need to be sustained,
however, and respondents see little value in continued engagement in an initiative which
they think has run its course and no longer provides a rewarding intellectual or
11

Nurturing project organizations
organizational home to its members. An interesting strategic observation is that more
proactive project or centre leadership teams actively seek to cultivate their “coalitions of
the willing” during earlier life cycle stages, and then manage a “revolving door”
decommissioning and recommissioning process in order to emerge with an evolved
membership, mandate and funding base. These proactive project organizations often
engage with their original funders at an early stage in order to establish support for their
recommissioning strategy.
Institutional Support Structures and Identities
Interviewees provided a wide array of observations and exhortations on current and future
roles of institutional support systems in solving what they saw as problems of
decommissioning and/or sustainability in large research infrastructures. Perceived
problems included those of retention and protection of project data and facilities, effective
communication and translation of project achievements for general audiences and, most
frequently, the retention or “bridging” of project-specific academic and management and
research professionals beyond the funded life of the project. Loss of the embodied
knowledge of these staff, which needs to be acquired from scratch with new teams
following funding “gaps” between projects, was seen as a particularly pressing issue. It was
interesting to note that many respondents assigned these problems to the overall university
system, with little speculation as to which institutional level (for example schools, colleges
or the central university) should be dealing with different problems. This was in contrast to
earlier stages of the project life cycle, where responsibilities at different institutional levels
were more clearly discernable. An important observation made by one interviewee was
that school infrastructures are set up to support discipline-based academics and not geared
to sustaining management and professional staff that do not necessarily have academic
aspirations. This point was echoed by another respondent who identified as an early career
researcher (ECR). This interviewee did not regard themselves as also being an early career
academic (ECA), and therefore saw little prospect of a fulfilling research career in a system
geared to disciplinary academics. This suggests that, within the university, the institutional
home of transdisciplinary management and professional staff, and of at least some research
staff, lies outside the organizational hierarchies of disciplinary schools. Finally, three
interviewees conceptually detached the institutional level of the university and its colleges
from that of academic schools. Two of these suggested that the central university and its
12

Nurturing project organizations
colleges might contribute “end to end” strategic support to large research infrastructures,
while the third (school-based) respondent noted that a focus on “PI-driven” academic
support systems excludes the strategic vision available at the college and university level.

5 Discussion
5.1 Mode 2 Projects and Academia
An increased policy emphasis on Mode 2 knowledge production places new demands on an
academic system that is equipped to support individual academics’ pursuit of Mode 1
research, which may be either narrowly disciplinary or widely interdisciplinary, but retains
its academic setting, as the account of Van Rijnsoever and Hessels (2011) suggests.
Academics who engage with the Mode 2 dynamic are not being asked to abandon their
Mode 1 orientation or their research reputations and careers but are being incentivised to
also contribute their disciplinary expertise in Mode 2, which is “socially distributed,
application-oriented, trans-disciplinary, and subject to multiple accountabilities” (Nowotny
et al., 2003). From the participating academic’s point of view, Mode 2 can be seen as both
post-disciplinary and pre-disciplinary. The environment is post-disciplinary in the sense that
disciplinary knowledge input is converted into other, derived forms in Mode 2, and predisciplinary in the sense that academics will expect to abstract new disciplinary knowledge
from the Mode 2 setting. The risk taken by an academic in committing their disciplinary
expertise in broad transdisciplinary coalitions must be mitigated by their ability to extract
conventional academic value (e.g., reputation, revenue, publications) from their Mode 2
involvement. A further risk is the requirement to bring not only their disciplinary expertise,
but also their time commitment and know-how as leaders, managers and communicators
into the Mode 2 environment. Although we did not overtly discuss Mode 2 with our study
participants (i.e., we did not challenge the “research” paradigm), these risks to academic
integrity surfaced regularly during interviews. We mentioned above the frustration
expressed by social scientists unable to extract disciplinary value from their engagement in
large medical science projects, while leadership and management demands were variously
resisted, ignored, outsourced or embraced by respondents. Several interviewees remarked
on the "role strain" (Boardman and Bozeman, 2007) inherent in trying to be simultaneously
a “cutting edge” academic and a leader, manager and ambassador in a large project. This

13

Nurturing project organizations
strain was eased if the initiative achieved the scale of a relatively autonomous project
organization with its own management and professional staff in place.

5.2 Mode 2 Projects and the University
We have already asserted that, as boundary organizations, universities can act strategically
to adopt, adapt, re-interpret, resist, outsource or otherwise redistribute the missions thrust
upon them by their stakeholders. Academia, at least in the UK, has long had a dominant
role in ensuring that the university supports and represents its evolving interests and
missions to external communities. It is therefore of interest to consider how the university
should work with academia to accommodate the policy emphasis on Mode 2 being
transmitted through government funding agencies. The funding agencies are also boundary
organizations, and work closely with universities in translating policy initiatives into funding
calls prior to their delivery to academia. Our findings suggest that Mode 2 project
organizations or, on a larger scale, centres or hubs, are salient units for delivery of Mode 2
missions. We further suggest that these organizational units differ from the more familiar
(Mode 1) research projects and centres already supported by the disciplinary school-based
institutional support structures of academia. Youtie et al (2006), for example, have shown
how research centres represent an institutional link in the “epistemic evolutionary chain”
leading from tentative, interdisciplinary experiments to new scientific fields and disciplines,
and are therefore a good fit with academic schools. In contrast, Mode 2 project
organizations are more concerned with coordinating multiple knowledge inputs in what is
essentially a product design and development process (Postrell, 2002), where the products
may include policy advice or societal interventions, for example. We suggest that universitybased Mode 2 project organizations are best supported in the boundary organization space
of the university and its constituent colleges, rather than in the hierarchies of academic
schools. Here, the University might usefully take the position of a “meta-organization”
(Ahrne and Brunsson, 2005; Gulati et al., 2012) whose Mode 2 mission is seen in terms of
“orchestrating” its portfolio of project organizations and project-based organizations
(centres, hubs) and of managing the resource flows between Mode 1 and Mode 2
configurations. This might include the creation of “hybrid spaces” (Perkmann et al., 2019) in
which Mode 1 communities of academics can engage in Mode 2 and ensure that new
initiatives and directions evolve along both Mode 1 and Mode 2 axes.
14

Nurturing project organizations
6 Concluding remarks
The conceptual planning for our study was based on a clear separation of the roles of
academia and the university in research and knowledge production. Positioning the
university and the project organisation as boundary organizations further emphasised their
broker roles in relation to stakeholders in academia government, industry and civil society.
We used this clear conceptual framing to hypothesise a role for project organizations and
their university hosts in accommodating Mode 1 research in an emerging Mode 2 model of
knowledge production. The limitations of our study are that our interview panel was drawn
almost exclusively from the academic stakeholder domain, and that the projects discussed
were selected based on the monetary value of the award, rather than on the basis of the
purpose and structure of the project organization or its Mode 1 or Mode 2 characteristics.
Bearing these limitations in mind, our findings did reinforce the sense of a tipping point in
scale and complexity at which research projects gain salience as autonomous project
organizations. At this point their leaders begin to come to terms with the role strain
between their academic trajectories and their leadership and management roles and
identities. The dynamics of productively combining Mode 1 and Mode 2 elements within
single project organizations received less attention from the panel. While there was general
agreement that the hierarchies of academic schools and those of the university and its
colleges need to align better with the needs of emerging project organizations, the
conceptual placement of these support structures into separate academic and university
(boundary organization) domains was not explored in any depth. Further research should
focus on specific case studies of project organizations where the Mode 1, Mode 2 or
“mixed” purpose can be established in advance, and seek input from relevant actors outside
the academic domain, including those such as research councils that operate in the putative
boundary organization domain. Given the association between Mode 2 and knowledge
exchange, the salience of a fully articulated Mode 2 mission for the university could also be
further explored.

Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge funding from the Wellcome Institutional Strategic Support Fund
(204804/Z/16/Z), the Schools of Chemistry and of Biological Sciences, and the Research

15

Nurturing project organizations
Support Office at the University of Edinburgh, and the input of our colleagues across the
University through interviews or insightful discussion.

Author contributions
Conceived project and funding: AJM;
Designed research: PLF, IHM, AJM;
Performed research: PLF, IHM;
Analysed results: PLF, FK;
Wrote the paper: PLF, AJM, FK.

References
Ahrne, G. and Brunsson, N. (2005). Organizations and meta-organizations. Scand. J. Mgmt.,
21, 429–449
Becher, T. and Trowler, P. (2001) Academic Tribes and Territories: Intellectual enquiry and
the culture of disciplines. Buckingham: The Society for Research into Higher Education and
Open University Press.
Benkler, Y. (2017). Open access and information commons. In F. Parisi (Ed.). The Oxford
Handbook of Law and Economics: Volume 2: Private and Commercial Law. Oxford: Oxford
University Press. Retrieved from
http://www.benkler.org/Open Access Commons Oxford Handbook Prepub.pdf
Boardman, C. and Bozeman, B. (2007). Role strain in university research centers. The Journal
of Higher Education, 78(4) 430-463
Bourdieu, P. (1986). The Forms of Capital. In J.E. Richardson (Ed.). Handbook of Theory of
Research for the Sociology of Education. Connecticut: Greenwood Press.
Calzada, I. and Cowie, P. (2017). Beyond data-driven smart city-regions? Rethinking
stakeholder-helixes strategies. Regions 308(4), 25-28.
DOI:10.1080/13673882.2017.11958675.
Christensen, C.M., Raynor, M.E., 2003. Why Hard-Nosed Executives Should Care About
Management Theory. Harvard Business Review, 81 (9).
Denis, J-L., Lamothe, L. and Langley, A. (2001). The dynamics of collective leadership and
strategic change in pluralistic organizations. The Academy of Management Journal, 44(4),
809-837
16

Nurturing project organizations
Etzkowitz, H. and Leydesdorff, L. (2000). The dynamics of innovation: from national systems
and ‘‘Mode2’’ to a triple helix of university–industry–government relations. Research Policy
29, 109–123.
Freeman, P.L. and Millar, A.J. (2017). Valuing the project: A knowledge-action response to
network governance in collaborative research. Public Money and Management, 37(1).
https:doi.org/10.1080/09540962.2016.1241577
Gibbons, M., Limoges, C., Nowotny, H., Schwartzman, S., Scott, P., Trow, M., 1994. The New
Production of Knowledge: The dynamics of science and research in contemporary societies.
London: Sage Publications.
Gulati, R., Puranam, P. and Tushman, M. (2012). Meta‐organization design: Rethinking
design in interorganizational and community contexts. Strategic Management, 33(6), 571586
Guston, D., 1999. Stabilizing the boundary between politics and science: the role of the
office of technology transfer as a boundary organization. Social Studies of Science, 29, 87111.
Jarzabkowski, P. and Fenton, E. (2006). Strategizing and organizing in pluralistic contexts.
Long Range Planning 39, 631-648
Koppenjan, J. and Klijn, E.-H. (2004). Managing Uncertainties in Networks: A Network
Approach to Problem Solving and Decision Making. Oxford: Routledge.
Musselin, C. (2006). Are universities specific organizations? In G. Krücken, A. Kosmützky and
M. Torka (Eds.). Towards a Multiversity? Universities between Global Trends and National
Traditions (pp. 63-84). Bielefeld: Transcript
Nowotny, H., Scott, P. and Gibbons, M. (2003). ‘Mode 2’ revisited: The new production of
knowledge. Minerva, 41, 179–194
O’Kane, C., Cunningham, J., Managematin, V. and O’Reilly, P. (2015). Underpinning strategic
behaviours and posture of principal investigators in transition/uncertain environments.
Long Range Planning, 48(3), 200-214.
Perkmann, M., McKelvey, M. and Phillips, N. (2019). Protecting scientists from Gordon
Gekko: How organizations use hybrid spaces to engage with multiple institutional logics.
Organization Science,30(2),298-318.
Postrel, S. (2002). Islands of shared knowledge: Specialization and mutual understanding in
problem-solving teams. Organization Science 13(3), 303-320.

17

Nurturing project organizations
Ratcheva, V. and Simpson, M. (2011). Temporary organizations: Implications for knowledge
work. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1853546
Royal Society. (2018). A snapshot of UK research infrastructures. Retrieved from
https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/publications/2018/research-infrastructures-uksnapshot/
Sbarcea, K., Martins, R., 2003.The temporary knowledge organisation as viewed from a
complexity perspective: An enrichment of the traditional organisational project
management paradigm. Retrieved from
https://thinkingshift.files.wordpress.com/2010/05/tempknoworg.pdf
Schön, D.A. (1983). The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in action. New York,
NY: Basic Books
Van Waart, P., Mulder I.J., and De Bont, C.J.P.M. (2015). Participatory prototyping for future
cities. Proceedings of the Participatory Innovation Conference. Retrieved from
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/276290920_participatory_prototyping_for_futu
re_cities
Youtie, J., Libaers, D., Bozeman, B. (2006). Institutionalization of university research centers:
the case of the National Cooperative Program in Infertility Research. Technovation 26 (9),
1055–1063

18

