AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies, Volume3, Number3. August 2019

Pp.130-140

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no3.10

Translation Challenges of Arabic Built-in-Language Repetition into English

Haitham (Mohd Khair) Ahmad ALYousef
Translation for professional department, School of Languages, Literacies and
Translation, Universiti Sains Malaysia
Penang, Malaysia
Tengku Sepora Tengku Mahadi
Translation for professional department, School of Languages, Literacies and
Translation, Universiti Sains Malaysia
Penang, Malaysia

Abstract
The present paper investigates Arabic built-in-language repetition that the researchers select from
speeches delivered by the late president of Egypt Jamal Abdul Nasser, and the frequency of this
phenomenon. The sample consists of 16 examples taken from chosen speeches. To ensure
maximum accuracy, the researcher enlists the help of a professional translator to translate the
study’s samples. The study aims at detecting and shedding some light on translation’s problems
that the translator face when translating political texts. The results of the study indicate that builtin-language repetition exists in the Arabic translated text, and the use of repetition, in general, is
more frequent in Arabic. The results also suggest that the translator should be fully aware of the
Arabic and English linguistic systems as well as its culture to be able to convey the proper meaning.
Keywords: built-in-language repetition, problems, political discourse
Cites as: ALYousef, H. A., & Mahadi, T. S. T. (2019). Translation Challenges of Arabic Builtin-Language Repetition into English. Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary
Studies, 3 (3) 140 -150. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no3.10

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 |www.awej-tls.org

130

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Translation Challenges of Arabic Built-in-Language
ALYousef & Mahadi
Introduction
A translation is a matter of equivalence between the source language text (SLT) and the
target language text (TLT). The translator has to seek optimal translation by trying to preserve
both the form and function of the source text. In this respect, Catford (1965) defines translation as
“the replacement of textual material in one language (SL) by equivalent textual material in another
language (TL).” (p.20).
Every language features specific uses and structures that reflect the convictions, values,
beliefs, and intentions of its producers. This study investigates and analyzes the linguistic
phenomenon of repetition in speeches delivered by Jamal Abdul Nasser with particular reference
to their translation into English.
The present research relies heavily on previous studies and in particular, Shunnaq’s (1989)
categorization of built-in-language repetition, which the speakers usually employed due to the lack
of choices. Whereas Shunnaq’s research is concerned with repetition in general, this study
investigates ‘built-in-language repetition’ in Nasser’s speeches.
The researchers explain and discuss repetition challenges in greater depth; so translators
are aware of its importance in general, and specifically the significant role it plays in political
discourse. This study aims at examining the phenomenon of built-in-language repetition by
exploring its various functions and types in political speeches. It is a device which produces the
desired effect on the recipients through persuasion and emphasis. The user needs to use it in the
appropriate place to be effective; otherwise, it will be devoid of sense. This study investigates and
discusses repetition in Nasser’s speeches focusing on the goals behind this repetition whenever
employed and the challenges it causes for translators.
The present study can be assistance to both translators and linguists by showing some
challenges in translating repetition in Nasser’s speeches. It also reveals the importance of being
aware of this phenomenon while translating political speeches from Arabic into English.
Political Discourse
Lyons (1991) observes:
The notion of communication is used to express feelings, moods, and attitudes. Language is
used to perform many communication functions, and the most essential function language is
the communication of views and information, the value of the use of language is to convey
messages embodied in the cultural form (p.32).
Al-Hammed (1999, p.34) defines political discourse as a form of reflecting the living
situation at a certain period, time. The reflection is in the form of words, expressions, idioms, and
the structure that indicates specific goals that the speaker hopes to fulfill within that particular time
and place. For further illustration, consider this Quranic verse:
‫)َسورةَص‬20(َ‫ب‬
َ ‫َو‬
ْ ‫َو َف‬
َ َ‫َوآتَ ْينَاهَُا ْل ِح ْك َمة‬
َ ُ‫ش ََد ْدنَاَ ُم ْل َكه‬
ِ ‫صلََا ْل ِخ َطا‬
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

131

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Translation Challenges of Arabic Built-in-Language
ALYousef & Mahadi
PT: We strengthened his kingdom, and gave him wisdom and sound judgment, in speech and
decision. (Ali, 2008, p.1934)
In this example, the word (‫ )خطاب‬is used to give the meaning of speech. The verse itself
tells us that Allah gives prophet David the grace of persuasive and convincing speech. In our
context, speech is written to promote an opinion or attitude of the general public toward an issue
addressed. According to Larson (1998, p.6), the emotional reaction or response of SL or the
dynamics of the text are untranslatable; since Muslim feelings towards the Quran are not the same
as those of non-Muslims. Consequently, loss of meaning is inevitable on unavoidable at best.
Nasser’s speeches talked about economics, politics, religion, and culture.
Al-Hammed (1999, p.41) considers that socio-political discourse concerns addressing the
society in its different conditions. This kind of speech usually discusses the social conditions of
people from different classes and the difficulties they face in their daily life, in light of what the
contemporary society witnesses the current developments.
Political discourse has its distinguishing jargon. Connolly (1993, p.2) points out the terms
of political discourse refer to the vocabulary employed in political thought and the ploys adopted
by politicians so that their words convey a unique and particular connotation.
Shunnaq (2000) indicates that a researcher should take into consideration the semantic
phenomena in political discourse, such as emotiveness, figures of speech, and collocations. He
specifically mentions that because translators should pay strict attention to these phenomena in
both the source and target texts when translating between Arabic and English.
Newmark (2008, p.146) believes that because we are living in an age of cultural diversity
as well as linguistic and psychological transformation, the translation of Arabic political discourse
has come to the fore.
Review of related literature
Shunnaq (1989, 1992, 1993, 1994, and 2000) dwells on the phenomenon of repetition, its
types, functions and its relevance to translation, discussing repetition in Arabic political discourse
(concerning translation). He (1989) distinguishes three kinds of repetition: built-in-language,
functional and unnecessary and a repetition which exists by use of “word-strings,” a term used to
refer to “two or more different lexical items strung together to constitute one group, roughly
showing the same meaning” (1992, p.6). He (1994) deals with semantic redundancy in both Arabic
and English, by discussing forms of repetition such as “‫إطالة‬,” “‫ ”إطناب‬and “‫إتباع‬,” ‘tautology,’
‘pleonasm,’ and ‘binominals.’ Hassan (2015) examines the translation of verb repetition from
Arabic into English, where most translators avoid it. The repetition of a verb in Arabic indicates
an assertion, a specific situation, or a reminder of a previous event. Hassan works on translation
media and literary texts. He concludes that the deletion of repetition of the Arabic verb is best in
English. Fathi (2004) examines repetition as a method of emphasis or reinforcement to speech in
both languages’ Arabic and English. Repetition is used in different fields to pay the attention of
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

132

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Translation Challenges of Arabic Built-in-Language
ALYousef & Mahadi
the listener or reader. The study shows this phenomenon through the differences and similarities
between the structures in Arabic and English. AlAubaidi (2013) considers the rhetorical function
of repetition of sentences. It concludes that different methods of repetition indicate to varying
features as assertion and the effects which emphasis adds to the sentence. Persson (1974) uses
emphatic repetition to refer to all kinds of repetition that reinforces a concept such as a kind of
repetition with emphatic, emotive, assertive, or connotative force (e.g., forget all about it. It’s a
false alarm, a false alarm). Ghazala (2012) recommends that translators should follow the writer
whenever he repeats, even when repetition has no function, which is a view that the present
researcher finds it challenging to agree.
Johnston (1991) investigates repetition as an emphatic style in most cases in Arabic
discourse and regards it as a persuasive device. She discusses two kinds of repetition at the
morphological level as follows: (a) repetition of patterns and (b) repetition of roots as in the
cognate accusative. She concludes that repetition in English is a deviation from the norm, while in
Arabic, it is not ornamental because it affects the structure of Arabic discourse.
The Study
This paper is a qualitative descriptive study examines the translation of Arabic built-inlanguage repetition as a stylistic device employed in the Arabic language system. The study
consists of 16 examples taken randomly from selected speeches delivered by Nasser. A
professional translator of political discourse translates these examples. The researchers classify
them into a main category and two other subcategories. A main group is: built-in-language
repetition, which has two different subcategories: (a) phonological level and (b) morphological
level. The first subcategory includes the continual repetition of sounds and syllables. The second
provides repetition created by case, number, and gender, which divides into six subcategories. A
comparison between Arabic and English texts are made to analyze the collected to shed light on
the problems that face the translator. Several Arabic built-in-language repetition examples are
collected, and they comprise the corpora for the classifications of built-in-language repetition. The
illustrative examples of each category are chosen purposefully from the speeches and discussed.
Finally, the study suggests the reasons for the erroneous of translation in the discussion, and then
the researchers propose suggested translations of the source language.
Findings and Discussions
The findings of the present study relate to Arabic built-in-language repetition and its
categories and the problems that face the translator of the examples. The discussion focuses on the
erroneous of translation where the translators have failed to render Arabic built-in-language
repetition clauses to quite adequately in English; thus, the researcher proposes suggested
translations.
1. Built-in-language Repetition
Repetition is a double-edged device; while it is a rhetorical device to create effectiveness,
textual cohesion, and clarity, it can simultaneously produce redundancy. Repetition is also a vital
process which may involve any unit of a text, such as morphemes, words, phrases, and even
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

133

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Translation Challenges of Arabic Built-in-Language
ALYousef & Mahadi
sentences (Nida, 1990, p.150). The speakers often use it more in spoken than in written discourse.
This type of repetition is embedded in the language system, occurs in ordinary speech, and can be
observed at different levels.
1.1 Phonological level
Newmark (2009, p.58) notes that translators should consider sound-effect, even at the level
beyond the sentence, not only in poetry but also in jingles. The continual repetition of sounds and
syllables such as -ing and -ed words and interjections has a powerful effect. In the following two
examples, the repetition of the same sounds and morphemes appear clearly. Cruse (1991) defines
homophone the repetition of the similar case ending in adjacent words or words in a parallel
position.
‫( مثال‬1) .‫ ومسؤوليته تتساوى مع مسؤولية كل فرد من الحكومة من اجل بناء المجتمع الذي نريده‬،‫ كل فرد منا مسؤول‬:
.)342‫ ص‬،‫ القسم الثاني‬،‫(عبدالناصر‬
PT: Everyone of us is responsible, and; his responsibility is equal to that of every member of the
government for the sake of building the society we want.
ST: Everyone of us is responsible; his responsibility is equal to the responsibility of each
member of the government for the sake of building the society we want.
The researcher states that professional translation (PT) initially ignores “the
responsibility,” although it is essential in clarifying and emphasizing the full meaning of the
sentence. The repetition is of the same sound /s/ in the four words: ‫ مسؤولية‬،‫ تتساوى‬،‫ مسؤولية‬،‫مسؤول‬
in the repetition of the letter (‫)س‬.
The repetition of the same morphemes (‫ )كم‬and (‫ )تم‬appears at the end of the words in the
following example:
،‫القسم االول‬-‫ الجزء الثالث‬،‫ (عبدالناصر‬.‫ انكم تنكرتم ألمتكم وتنكرتم لتاريخكم وتنكرتم لقوتكم وتنكرتم لمجدكم‬:)2(‫مثال‬
.)1958‫ص‬
PT: You ignored your nation, your history, your power, and your glory.
ST: You denied your nation, history, power, and glory.
In the above example, the sounds of the last pronoun in Arabic (‫ )كم‬and (‫ )تم‬in the verbs
give the rhythm of the speech. Neither PT nor ST involves the same repetition of those two
morphemes in the English rendering. This example is sufficient to convince the reader that the
Arabic version is more emotive and has a stronger impact than the English version due to the effect
of the repetition of the same sound.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

134

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Translation Challenges of Arabic Built-in-Language
ALYousef & Mahadi
1.2 Morphological Level
Morphology is a grammar branch that considers the forms, the structure, and the classes of
words. Koch (1981) stresses the importance of the morphological system in Arabic as follows: The
morphological system of Arabic is both linguistically and culturally the keystone of the language.
The system is highly productive and easily accessible to the speakers of the language. Arabic
speakers are very much aware of the system and use it in planning and in creating aphorism. A
foreign learner of Arabic finds one of his first tasks to be learning lists of morphological patterns,
since Arabic dictionaries are arranged alphabetically by roots rather than by word-initial letter.
(p.90)
The present study shows that case, number, gender, definiteness and indefiniteness, and
the nisba suffix in Arabic are morphological features of built-in-language repetition and have the
function of conveying meanings like Shunnaq’s previous studies.
1.2.1

Repetition created by Case, Number, and Gender
1.2.1.1 Masculine Singular
)1970‫ ص‬،‫ (ثورة عبدالناصر‬.1952 ‫ وذلك ألنني عشت مع النضال العربي منذ سنة‬. . . ‫ انني أشعر باألمل‬:)3( ‫مثال‬
PT: I am hopeful . . . Because I have been living with the Arab struggle since 1952.
The adjective (‫ )العربي‬agrees in gender (masculine) and number (singular) with the noun (‫)النضال‬
which it modifies. In this case, the inanimate (‫ )النضال‬does not change, as it would if it were
animate (‫)الرجل العربي‬.
)1958‫ص‬،‫القسم األول‬-‫ عبدالناصر (الجزء الثالث‬.‫ اليوم اتحد الشعب العربي في سوريا‬:)4( ‫مثال‬
PT: Today, the Syrian Arab nation has unified.
ST: Today, the Arab people in Syria have unified.
Firstly, the researcher would like to correct the translation because it is unsuitable. The speaker
did not mean the nation, but he said the people in Syria. Anyway, we can see there is no
difference between this example and the previous one, both showing agreement of gender
(masculine) and number (singular).
1.2.1.2 Feminine Singular
)1952‫ ص‬،‫ عبدالناصر (ثورة عبدالناصر‬.‫ ولكننا ال نريد ديمقراطية زائفة‬:)5( ‫مثال‬
PT: But we do not want a pseudo democracy.
Here, the adjective (‫ )زائفة‬agrees in gender (feminine) and number (singular) with the
noun democracy (feminine, singular). It also appears in the following example:
)1955‫ ص‬،‫ عبدالناصر( ثورة عبدالناصر‬.‫ الحياة القومية الصحيحة هي حياة ديمقراطية صحيحة‬:)6( ‫مثال‬
PT: True national life is a truly democratic one.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

135

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Translation Challenges of Arabic Built-in-Language
ALYousef & Mahadi
This example shows how the two adjectives (‫ )ديمقراطية‬and (‫ )صحيحة‬agree in gender
(feminine) and number (singular) with the noun (‫)حياة‬.
1.2.1.3 Feminine Dual
)1956‫ص‬،‫ (ثورة عبدالناصر‬.‫ انجلترا وفرنسا‬. . ‫ الدولتان الكبيرتان‬:)7( ‫مثال‬
PT: The two great powers . . . England and France.
ST: The two great states . . . England and France.
The choice od diction of the word ‘state’ is more proper than ‘powers.’ As a result of a
gender-number agreement, the dual morpheme -aan is twice repeated. The following example also
shows the same agreement in gender and number, but with a different repeated morpheme -ain,
i.e. the accusative form, it is unknown in English.
)1952‫ ص‬،‫ (ثورة عبدالناصر‬.‫ يجب أن يكون الحكم والشعب قوتين متعادلتين‬:)8( ‫مثال‬
PT: Government and people should be two balanced powers.
It is meant to show a unique Arabic language system as different from that of the English
language.
1.2.1.4 Masculine Dual
)1958‫ ص‬،‫ (ثورة عبدالناصر‬.‫ انجلترا وفرنسا‬:‫ البلدان اللذان لم يعترفا بدولتكم هما‬:)9( ‫مثال‬
PT: The two countries which haven’t recognized your country are England and France.
The number and gender (masculine and dual) in the relative pronoun (‫ )اللذان‬agrees the noun
(the two countries) which is both masculine and dual. Besides, the morpheme -aan is repeated as
a result of the number-gender agreement.
)1964 ،‫ (ثورة عبدالناصر‬.‫ يجب أن نفرق بين شيئين أساسيين‬:)9( ‫مثال‬
PT: We must distinguish between two basic things.
The number-gender agreement also appears in the following example, but in the
morpheme -ain. The translation in TL does not have the same morpheme.
)1964 ،‫ (ثورة عبدالناصر‬.‫ وردا عليه قائلين‬:)10( ‫مثال‬
PT: They answered him, saying:
However, their English renditions do not look the same. For instance, the translator
translates the dual in Arabic as plural in English. The translator should add an expression such
as “both” or the “two of” to make his translation more exact.
1.2.1.5 Feminine Plural
)1955،‫ (ثورة عبدالناصر‬.‫ وغدا نرى عشرات الصناعات‬:)11( ‫مثال‬
PT: Tomorrow, we will see dozens of industries.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

136

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Translation Challenges of Arabic Built-in-Language
ALYousef & Mahadi
The repetition of the plural feminine morpheme -aat which is a suffix to the noun
(‫)الصناعات‬, and its adjective (‫ )عشرات‬agree in number and gender, whereas the English version
does not present these same characteristics. Therefore, the translator should be aware of the
linguistic differences between two languages which influence the meaning equivalence.
1.2.1.6 Masculine Plural
)1954 ،‫ (ثورة عبدالناصر‬.‫ سنسير يدا واحدة متعاونين متضامنين‬:)12( ‫مثال‬
PT: We will move hand-in-hand, cooperatively, and in solidarity.
In this example, the number-gender agreement creates the repetition of the two plural morphemes
-een suffixed to nouns in Arabic. The repetition of sounds in this example adds to the meaning,
whereas it’s English correspondence does not carry the same.
1.2.2 Repetition forced by ‘definiteness and indefiniteness.’
Beeston (1990, p.24) discusses definiteness in Arabic and contrasts it with that in English.
He points out that the Arabic definite article /al-/ has two quite distinct functions as follows: ‘the
particularizing function’ and ‘the generalizing function.’ Only the context determines which is
appropriate in the above two cases. While in English, usage fluctuates between zero article ‘a,’
and ‘the.’ The article /al-/* is used more prolifically in Arabic than the definite article ‘the’ in
English. Consider the following example to explain this point:
)1968،‫ (ثورة عبدالناصر‬.‫ الحرية االجتماعية هي المدخل الوحيد والصحيح للحرية السياسية‬:)13( ‫مثال‬
PT: Social freedom is the only appropriate entry to political freedom.
In Arabic, the definite article /al-/ is repeated seven times, whereas in English, the definite
article is only used once. The above example shows how /al-/ in Arabic has prefixed adjectives
and how a series of English nouns may be defined by one ‘the.’ The repetition of the morpheme
/al-/ is also shown in the following example.
. . .‫ موقفها معنا‬:)14( ‫مثال‬
)1964،‫ (ثورة عبدالناصر‬. . . ‫وتساندنا بكل الوسائل السياسية والعسكرية واالقتصادية‬
PT: It stands by us . . .
It supports us politically, militarily, and economically.
The morpheme /al-/ appears four times as a prefix, whereas, in English, the definite article
is not used; despite this, the translator faithfully conveys the meaning of the Arabic sentence in
English. Therefore, the use of the definite article is more prevalent in Arabic than in English.
1.2.3 Repetition created by nisba suffix
The present study uses morphemes (-iyya and -i) at the end of nouns to illustrate a
morphological repetition.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

137

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Translation Challenges of Arabic Built-in-Language
ALYousef & Mahadi
‫ نريد كشفا لحساب األرباح والخسائر‬:)15( ‫مثال‬
‫ (ثورة‬.‫ سياسيا وعسكريا وحضاريا‬. .‫ مصريا وعربيا ودوليا‬. . . ‫األرباحةوالخسائر ماديا وبشريا‬
)1961،‫عبدالناصر‬
PT: We want a disclosure of gains and loses.
Financial and human gains and loses . . . in Egypt, in the Arab world and international . . .
political, martial and cultural levels.
The repetition of the nisba suffix (-i) in this example shows agreement between the word
(‫ )كشف حساب‬and the adjectives (‫ )ماديا وبشريا ومصريا وعربياودوليا وسياسيا وعسكريا وحضاريا‬following it in
number and gender. This repetition appears in eight words in Arabic, but it does not appear at all
in English. It is axiomatic that there are differences between Arabic and English. The researcher
points out these differences to enlighten translator about them. The following example also shows
similar repetition but with a different nisba suffix (-iyya).
)1953،‫ (الجزء األول‬.‫ ولكننا نبغي نهضة بشرية‬،‫ إننا ال نبغي فقط نهضة عمرانية أو صناعية أو عسكرية‬:)16( ‫مثال‬
PT: We are not only after development in the construction, industry, or military fields; rather, we
are after human development.
The repetition of the nisba suffix (-iyya) in four words shows agreement in number and
gender, whereas there is nothing similar in English; anyone translating from Arabic into English
should be aware of this difference.
Conclusion
This study concludes that built-in-language repetition phenomenon exists in Arabic more
than in English. Any repeated word, expression, or idea in source language text should be dealt
with and rendered carefully into the target language as it might serve a specific function. The
translator of this kind of repetition should be fully aware of linguistic differences between the two
languages which make the translation challenges.
Acknowledgments:
I wish to express my profound appreciation and love to my spiritual father and MA supervisor late
Prof. Dr. Abdullah Shunnaq for his encouragement, support and assistance. (24/10/2017)
About the Authors:
Haitham ALYousef is a Ph.D. student in School of Languages, Literacies and Translation at
Universiti Sains Malaysia. He is interested in teaching linguistic and translation courses. His
research interests in interpreting, intercultural communication, language, and culture. More
specifically, his work examines the linguistic aspects of translating humor. ORCID ID:
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7495-3563

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

138

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Translation Challenges of Arabic Built-in-Language
ALYousef & Mahadi
Professor Dr. Tengku Sepora Tengku Mahadi is a teaching staff at MA Translation for
Professional Department in School of Languages, Literacies, and Translation. Universiti Sains
Malaysia. She was the former dean for the school. Her research interests are in linguistics and
translation fields. She has many types of researches in the fields. ORCID ID:
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3302-0078

References
AL-Hammed, M. (1999). Political Discourse Analysis: An Arabic-English Contrastive Case Study
(Unpublished master's thesis). Yarmouk University: Irbid, Jordan.
ALAubaidi, N. H. (2013). A Rhetorical Study of Emphasis in English with reference to Arabic.
ADAB AL-FARAHIDI, 15, 60-78.
Ali, A. Y. (2008). The Quʼrān = Al-Quʼrān. Beltsville, MD: Foundations Library.
Beeston, A. F. (1990). Written Arabic: An approach to the basic structures. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Catford, J. C. (1965). A Linguistic Theory of Translation. London: Oxford University Press.
Connolly, W. E. (1993). The terms of political discourse. Oxford: Blackwell.
Cruse, D. A. (1991). Lexical semantics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fathi, Y. H. (2004). Reinforcement by repetition in English and Arabic. ADAB AL-RAFIDAYN,
38, 23-46. Retrieved from http://search.mandumah.com/Record/660334.
Ghazala, H. S. (2012). Translation as problems and solutions a textbook for university students
and trainee translators. Jeddah: Konooz Al-Marefa.
Hassan, A. (2015). Translating Arabic Verb Repetition into English. Arab World English Journal,
6(2), 144-153. doi:10.24093/awej/vol6no2.11
Johnstone, B. (1991). Repetition in Arabic discourse. Amsterdam: J. Benjamins Pub.
Koch, B. J. (1981). Repetition in Discourse: Cohesion and Presentation in Arabic Argumentation
Prose (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of Michigan.
Larson, M. L. (1998). Meaning-based translation: A guide to cross-language equivalence.
Lanham: University Press of America.
Lyons, J. (1991). Introduction to theoretical linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Newmark, P. (2008). About translation. Vancouver: Crane Library at the University of British
Columbia.
Newmark, P. (2009). A textbook of translation. London: Prentice Hall.
Nida, E. A. (1990). The role of rhetoric in verbal communication. Babel, 36(3), 143-154.
doi:10.1016/0271-5309(90)90022-4
Persson, G. (1974). Repetition in English: Part 1, sequential repetition. Uppsala: Universitatis
Upsaliensis.
Shunnaq, A. T. (1989). Repetition in Arabic With Special Reference to Political Discource
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). The Victoria University of Manchester.
Shunnaq, A. (1992). Functional Repetition in Arabic realized through the use of word-string with
reference to Arabic-English Translation of Political Discourse. Translation, 1(2), 5-31.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

139

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Translation Challenges of Arabic Built-in-Language
ALYousef & Mahadi
Shunnaq, A. (1993). Patterns of Repetition in Arabic forced by Morphology with reference to
Arabic-English Translation. Papers in Studies & Contrastive Linguistics, 28, 89-99.
Shunnaq, A. (1994). Semantic Redundancy and Translation from Arabic into English. Turjuman,
3, 103-120.
Shunnaq, A. (2000). Arabic‐English translation of political speeches. Perspectives, 8(3), 207-228.
doi:10.1080/0907676x.2000.9961389
‫المراجع العربية‬
.‫القرآن الكريم‬
‫ الجزء األول‬،‫ بيروت – مركز دراسات الوحدة العربية‬،‫المجموعة الكاملة لخطب وأحاديث وتصريحات جمال عبدالناصر‬
.‫ بناء الثورة في مصر‬1954 ‫ الى‬1952
– ‫ الجزء الثالث‬،‫ بيروت – مركز دراسات الوحدة العربية‬،‫المجموعة الكاملة لخطب وأحاديث وتصريحات جمال عبدالناصر‬
.‫ سنوات الوحدة‬1959 ‫ الى‬1958 ‫القسم األول‬
،‫ القسم الثالث‬،‫ بيروت – القاهرة – وزارة االرشاد القومي‬،‫مجموعة خطب وتصريحات وبيانات الرئيس جمال عبدالناصر‬
.1960 ‫ الى يناير‬1958 ‫فبراير‬

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

140

