"x"
"1" "Beyond the Camps: Beijing's Grand Scheme of  Forced  Labor, Poverty Alleviation and  Social Control in Xinjiang"
"2" "A  Preliminary Account of New Research F indings"
"3" "Adrian Zenz"
"4" "Independent Researcher"
"5" "July 12, 2019"
"6" "Abstract"
"7" "After recruiting  a hundred or more thousand police forces, installing massive surveillance systems, and interning vast numbers of predominantly Turkic minority population members, many have been wondering about Beijing's next step in its so-called \"war on Terror\" in Xinjiang.  Since the second half of 2018 ,  limited but apparently  growing numbers of detainees have been released into di fferent forms of forced labor. In this report it is argued based on government documents that  the state's long-term stability maintenance strategy in Xinjiang is predicated upon a perverse and extremely intrusi ve combination of forced  or at least involuntary training and  labor ,  intergenerational separation  and social control over family units.  Much of this is being implemented under the heading and guise of \"poverty alleviation\"."
"8" "Below, the author identifies three  distinct  flow schemes by which the state seeks to place the vast majority of adult Uyghurs and other minority populations, both men and women, into different forms of coercive or at least involuntary , labor-intensive   factory  work .  This is achieved through a combination of internment camp workshops, large industrial parks, and  village-based   satellite factories.  While the parents are  being herded  into full-time work, their children are put into full-time (at least full day-time) education and training settings.   This includes children below preschool age (infants and toddlers), so that ethnic minority women are being \"liberated\" and \"freed\" to engage in full-time wage labor.  Notably, both factory and educational settings are essentially state-controlled environments that facilitate ongoing political indoctrination while barring religious practices.  As a result, the dissolution of traditional, religious and family life is only a matter of time.  The targeted use of village work teams and village-based satellite factories means that this grand \"poverty alleviation\" and social re-engineering scheme penetrates into every corner of ethnic minority society  with unprecedented pervasiveness ."
"9" "Consequently, it is argued that  Beijing 's grand scheme of forced education, training and labor in Xinjiang  simultaneously achieves at least five  main  goals in this core region of the Belt and Road Initiative  (BRI) : maintain the minority population in state-controlled environments, inhibit intergenerational cultural transmission, achieve national poverty reduction goals, promote economic growth along the BRI, and bring glory to the Party by achieving all of these four aims an a way that is ideologically consistent with the core tenets of Co mmunist thought -  using labor to transform  religious minority groups towards a  predominantly  materialist worldview, akin to the Reform Through Labor  ( 劳 改 )  program.  Government documents outline that the transformation of rural populations from farming to wage labor should involve not just the acquisition of new  skills, but also a thorough identity and worldview change in line with Party ideology.  In this context, labor is hailed as a strategic means to eradicate \"extremist\" ideologies."
"10" "The  dome stic and global  implications of this grand scheme, where internment camps form only one component  of a society-wide coercive social re-engineering strategy, are dramatic.  Through the mutual pairing assistance program, 19 cities and provinces from the nation's most developed regions are pouring billions of Chinese Yuan  (RMB)  into the establishment of factories in minority regions. Some of them directly involve the use of internment camp labor, while others are used to make Uyghur women leave their children in educational or day care facilities in order to engage in full time factory labor.  Soon, many or most products made in Chi na that rely at least in part on  low-skilled, labor-intensive manufacturing, could contain elements of involuntary ethnic minority labor  from Xinjiang.  Government documents  blatantly  boast about the fact that  the labor supply from the vast  internment camp  network  has been  attracting many Chinese companies to  set up production in  Xinjiang,  support ing   the economic  growth goals of  the BRI."
"11" "The findings presented below call for  nothing less than  a  global  investigation of supply chains involving Chinese products or product components , and for  a greatly  increased  scrutiny of  trade flows along  China's  Belt and Road .  They also warrant a strong response from the international community in regards to China's intrusive coerced social re-engineering practices among Turkic minorities."
"12" "This report represents a preliminary  account  of  key  aspects of  new  researc h findings. It  will be followed up with more detailed rese arch reports and related analyse s."
"13" "Winning The  \"War Against Poverty\" : Industry-Based Poverty Alleviation"
"14" "In line of Xi Jinping's goal to eradicate poverty and establish a moderately prosperous society (MPS) in the entire nation by 2020, poverty alleviation has become an urgent goal  in Xinjiang .  According to government documents, the region's   \" war on poverty \"   in 2019  has reached  a crucial phase. The urgent aim is to achieve the complete eradication of p overty  in time  for 70th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China.  In all this, the c entral government  is putting  special attention to winning  the  war against poverty in southern  Xinjiang .  Another report states that poverty alleviation is commensurate with a \"military command\", and that \"the southern four regions and prefectures are the main battle field\" in the war against poverty.     In this  relentless  \"battle\",  e very administrative level is to put pressure on  each successive  lower level  in order  to  \" implement the poverty  alleviation responsibility with full pressure\"."
"15" "Other parts of China  are implementing very  similar  poverty alleviation  schemes,  and  poverty alleviation through higher-income work is at first  glance a positive development. The i ssue in Xinjiang is that  this scheme  is  specifically targeting predominantly Muslim ethnic minorities on a massive scale, and is  coupled with penetrating social control , a  pervasive surveillance state, an unprecedented  extrajudicial internment campaign,  and a deeper social re-engineering intention  on the side of the state  that  effectively  amounts to  targeted  cultural genocide."
"16" "Poverty alleviation comes in different forms, at times through improved farming. But  the main  key focus in Xinj iang 's ethnic minority regions   has recently shifted to  so-called \"industry-based  poverty  alleviation\"   ( 产业扶贫 ) .  Since the past few years, this  has been involving a systematic  training  of so-called  rural surplus laborers  in order to place  them in low-skilled factory work. Most recent ly, this has involved the large-scale construction of so-called \" poverty alleviation workshops \" ( 扶 贫车间 ), which are smaller-scale   \" satellite factories \" ( 卫 星工厂 ).  The main purpose of satellite factories is to  move as many rural dwellers into factory-based wage labor by   \" sending work to  homes \" ( 岗 位 送 到家 )  and   \" letting  villagers take up jobs  at their  home's  doorstep \" ( 让村民家门口就业 ) ."
"17" "At least since 2018, Xinjiang's primary poverty alleviation and stability maintenance method has been to promote wage labor among all ethnic minority  adults . Every household must have at least one person in stable employment, although  numerous local level reports indicate that the trend is very much to also push women into factory work .   Between 2016 and 2020, Xinjiang  was scheduled  to  lift 2.61 million persons out of poverty.  O f these, 1.74   m illion  are  considered  able to work and  are expected to \"get  out of poverty \"   through  different forms of  training and employment.  Much of this new stable employment is to be provided in the form of labor-intensive manufacturing.  The other 0.87 million will be taken care of  through social welfare  systems  and  related  subsidies ."
"18" "Consequently, t he process of   Xinjiang's  \"industry-based  poverty alleviation \" follows this basic flow scheme that also indicates the highly schematic and essentially involuntary nature of state-mandated poverty alleviation  ( see  figures  2 to 6   for  a visual impression of what this  often  look s  like in reality) :"
"19" "\"Train a person, send off a person, employ a person, re scue a household from poverty\"  ( 培训一人，输出一人；就业一人，脱贫一户 )."
"20" "The strategy for moving vast numbers of rural minority populations into wage labor is predicated upon   low-skilled, labor-intensive industries that only require a limited amount of job training .  In particular, this centers around   the manufacturing of  textile s  and garment s , electr ical products, shoes, furniture and so on .  Among these, textile and garment production are the main focus.   By 2023, Xinjiang wants to have 1 million workers in textile and garment industries , with  650,000  of them coming  from the southern Uyghur majority regions ."
"21" "Importantly, government documents often demand that Xinjiang's poverty-alleviation efforts must be \"fine-grained\". \"Fine-grained poverty alleviation\" ( 精准扶 贫 ) means that the entire scheme  is all-encompassing and involves literally every single citizen.     Besides continually emphasizing the \"fine-grained\" nature of   all  poverty alleviation  efforts,  they  also  must achieve \"full coverage\" ( 全盖 )  in every respect .   N o one is  to be  missed ,  and  there are detailed files and databases that show the status of  every person  and their family.   This is coupled with statements that  win ning  the fight against poverty  requires solving ideological problems. Notably, it is said that the attitude of minority citizens must be changed  from \"I am asked to get rid of poverty\" to   \"I want to get rid of poverty\" ( 变 “ 要我脱 贫 ” 为 “ 我要脱 贫 )."
"22" "Clearly, \"industry-based poverty alleviation\" is not voluntary but mandatory. Those who resist being \"alleviated\" from their \"poverty\" are subjected to ideological education so that their thinking aligns with the state's goals. After all, p lacing people into wage labor is not only and not even primarily an economic  goal. Rather, it is very much an i deological  goal ."
"23" "In sum, the  author argues that Beijing's grand scheme of m andatory education or training and  subsequent  labor   under the guise of  \"pover ty alleviation\"  achieve s  five  major  goals:"
"24" "T he  ethnic  minority population  is being moved  in to closed, surveilled and  state-controlled  training and work  environments that facilitate on-going indoctrination ."
"25" "This setup effectively i nhibit s  the intergenerational tr ansmission of culture, religion and  language by reducing  joint  family times and  instead drastically  increasing  parents' and children's  exposure to state teaching and training ."
"26" "It a chieve  Xi Jinping's  na tional poverty reduction goals  through  (supposedly) higher incomes from  wage  labor ."
"27" "It b oost s Xinjiang's  total GDP and income figures, which legitimizes the CCP 's  presence in Xinjiang and brings glory to the  core region of the  BRI."
"28" "The achievement of all of the above through labor is highly consistent with CCP ideology. Labor is imputed with a transformative power that transforms \"backward\" minorities and \"unproductive\" religious figures with their otherworldly worldviews and non-materialist (i.e. spiritual) preoccupations to \"useful\" members of society. Economic growth not  only promotes social stability but also  provides  an  ideological justification of a materialist worldview. As a result, the Party can claim the credit for improving everyone's material conditions, and rightfully demand \"gratefulness\" and wholehearted support from all  citizens ."
"29" "Powered by digital information systems and financed by central government poverty alleviation budgets, the author believes that this scheme represents Beijing's long-term solution to establish ultimate social control and in-depth generational change towards CCP ideology in this restive region. As men and women are herded into factories while their children are moved into (increasingly full-time) educational facilities, the dissolution of traditional, religious and family life is only a matter of time."
"30" "Chinese Terms for Vocational Training Internment Camps (VTICs)"
"31" "Below, Xinjiang's  \"Vocational Skills Education Training Centers\"  ( 职业 技能教育培 训 中心 ) are referred to as \" Vocational Training Internment Camps \"  (VTICs).  This terminology acknowledges that these facilities offer some form of vocational training, although this \"training\" only constitutes a relatively small part of the whole indoctrination package. At the same time, this terminology clarifies that these facilities function in a prison-like internment fashion."
"32" "In Chinese, VTICs are  often abbreviated as \"Education Training Centers\" ( 教培中心 ).    These are the only types  of extrajudicial forms of internment whose existence Beijing has officially acknowledged, although it argues that they have a legal basis."
"33" "In Xinjiang, the abbreviated form \"Education Training Centers\" ( 教培中心 )  very consistently refers to the \"Vocational Skills Education Training Centers\"  ( 职业 技能教育培 训 中心 ) . An alternative spelling is \"Education Training Centers\" with all characters spelled out ( 教育培 训 中心 ).  Another common use is the term \"Vocational Education Training Center\"  ( 职业 教育培 训 中心   ) which leaves out the word \"skills\"."
"34" "Generally, VTICs in Xinjiang can typically be distinguished from other vocational facilities by the ending \"center\" ( 中心 ).  If a facility or institution ends with the word \"school\", as in \"Vocational Skills School\" ( 职业技术学校 ) , then it is typically not a VTIC. This distinction is for example evident from a document that   lists the \"Lop County Vocational Skills School\" next to the  \"Education Training Center\"  ( 洛浦县职业技术学校和教培中心 ) .  However, the term  \"Education Training Center\" ( 教育培 训 中心 ) by itself is commonly used in Xinjiang and elsewhere for other types of training, including teacher training, cadre training, or for private learning institutions. It can denote a VTIC, but this must be established from the context."
"35" "Flow Schemes  Overview"
"36" "The author has identified three major flow schemes by which minority citizens in Xinjiang are  put  through   training and subsequent employment ."
"37" "Flow 1 pertains to persons in  VTICs . They are \"released\" into fully coercive forms of labor. Flows 2 and 3 pertain to persons in general society  outside the internment  camp  network ."
"38" "Flow 1:  VTIC internment ->  forced labor at camp factories or nearby industrial parks -> forced labor at  local satellite factories  in home regions (or other industrial sites)"
"39" "The Chinese flow terminology for this is coded as:"
"40" "教育培训中心 + 发展纺织服装等劳动密集型产业试点  (VTIC plus developing textile, garment etc. labor-intensive industry pilot [projects])"
"41" "Alternative spellings  for 教育培训中心 +  are :   教培中心+ ,   JP+  or 职业技能培训中心"
"42" "The flow scheme can also be coded as  教培中心+   扶贫车间 ."
"43" "The workers in this flow are referred to as \"trainees\" ( 培 训 人 员 )  or \"persons in re-education\" ( 教 转 人 员 ).  These  VTIC   \" trainees \"  can end up in  factories  on  VTIC  compounds ,  in  industrial parks ( 产业 区 ) which can be  located  near VTICs  (or VTICs in them) , or rural or  village satellite factories  ( 卫 星工厂 ).   T he employing company also provides the training ( despite the supposed \"vocational\" training in the camps), and receives a government subsidy in exchange. VTIC workers who are trained must also be employed. After a certain time period, they may then be transferred to their home regions, where they may be put to work in local satellite factories."
"44" "Flow 2 :  Rural surplus laborers  ->  centralized  training  ->   employment"
"45" "The   Chinese flow terminology  for this is  often  coded as:"
"46" "Train a person, send off a person, employ a person, re scue a household from poverty"
"47" "培训一人，输出一人；就业一人，脱贫一户"
"48" "Alternative coding:  Unified sending off, unified classes, enterprise, centralized training, centralized employment"
"49" "统 一 输 送、 统 一开班、企 业 冠名、集中授 课 、集中就 业"
"50" "Flow 3 : V illage work teams -> establish satellite factories and childcare facilities -> all who can work are put into training and work ( especially  women)"
"51" "The Chinese flow terminology for this is coded as:"
"52" "Company head office (or company or base) -> sat ellite factory"
"53" "总 部+卫星工厂 or   企业 + 卫星工厂 or 基地+卫星工厂+贫困户  or   公司 + 卫星工厂 + 农户 or   龙头企业 + 卫星工厂"
"54" "While all three flow schemes operate on different levels of coercion, with flow 1 representing the highest coercion level, all of them share significant similarities. They all serve a primary stability maintenance goal by  implementing \"de-extremification\" and  transform ing  people 's minds. All three conduct thought education, political indoctrination, and end up placing  minorities into  controlled, full-time labor environments.  The result is greater state control, reduced family interaction  and influence , and reduced intergenerational cultural, linguistic and religious transmission."
"55" "Flow 1:  Forced labor Schemes for  VTIC  Detainees"
"56" "VTIC forced labor is not primarily about economic gain or growth, but has stability maintenance as its core focus. In a document issued by the XUAR Development and Reform Commission, the VTIC+ labor intensive manufacturing model is explicitly listed as a  key component of the stability maintenance infrastructure , along with social management,  surveillance systems, central control systems, peaceful city systems  and network security.  Other documents likewise indicate that VTIC labor primarily serves \" government social stability needs \" ( 政府出于维稳的需求 )."
"57" "E vidence of the widespread  implementation of forced labor for VTIC \"graduates\" can be found at several administrative levels."
"58" "The probably most blatant admission that VTIC labor has  increasingly become  a major economic  driver  for the entire region comes from a December 2018 statement issued by the Xinjiang Development and Reform Commission on the region's economic state. To quote:"
"59" "With  VTIC s  as the carrier, [Xinjiang] has attracted a large number of coastal enterprises from the mainland to invest and build factories, which has  powerfully  expanded  employment and promoted  increase d incomes."
"60" "This statement is apt, because Xinjiang has implemented extensive promotional policies to attract companies from other parts of China to become involved in VTIC-related manufacturing.  Numerous documents indicate that the  establishment of comprehensive ,   labor-intensive manufacturing sites in Xinjiang is intended to boost the economic dynamics behind the BRI."
"61" "For example,  an  April 2018  notice  on  promoting the textile and garment industry  features its own  policy  secti on on   \"promoting  VTIC plus developing textile and garment manufacturing\".  This   section   states that the construction of \"VTIC plus\" production factories is to be supported.  The key Uyghur majority population regions of  Kashgar, Hotan and Kisilzu Prefectures,  along   with  Kalping and Wushen Counties  in Aksu Prefecture ,  are to  support the  \" VTIC plus \"  developme nt of labor-intensive industries .  Specifically,  local governments  are  mandated  to  invest  in  the construction of  labor-intensive manufacturing near VTICs by  granting appropriate subsidies."
"62" "More specific  government  implementation  documents  leave no doubt that this forced labor scheme explicitly pertains to \"persons in re-education\".  In order to   \" thoroughly implement \"   the above-mentioned notice from Apri 2018 , the  prefecture (here the  Ili Kazakh Autonomous Prefecture) promotes  the Yili Prefecture -  Jiangsu  Province  Textile and  Garment Industrial Park  as  the base for the  VTIC  plus model, with the aim to provide  employment to these \" persons in re-education \"  ( 教转人员 )     .  Another Yili Prefecture report uses similar  terminology with highly  incriminating  potential, referring to  a  systematic employment provision for  \"VTIC persons\" ( 教培人员 )."
"63" "In the same vein,  a report by  Ma Xiongcheng, the vice chairman of Xinjiang's Political Consultative Conference ( 自治区政协副主席 )  not only confirms that putting VTIC detainees to work in factories is a Xinjiang-wide policy, but also that this strategy explicitly fulfills political re-education goals:"
"64" "All  local  regions  are  to focus  on the overall goal of social stability and long-term  enduring  peace , and through the development of characteristic industries, the establishment of satellite factories ...  increase farmers' incomes and promote poverty alleviation. In particular,  satellite factories   are to  be built  in the  vocational skill s  education training center s , so that people affected by terrorism and extreme thoughts can learn the  nation's  common language,  study  law, and understand the right and wrong. They can also learn skills, be come  able to work, and increase their income s . All  these  bring hope ,   especially  to  poor families .  (emphasis added)"
"65" "In a similar vein,  a  Moyu  (Karakax)  County  (Hotan Prefecture)  government directive regarding the promotion of VTIC plus schemes   emphasizes how this scheme both seeks to focus on re-education (thought transformation) and employment promotion among VTIC detainees :"
"66" "Strengthening  vocational skills education training ,  focusing on   thought transformation .... Continue to expand the  \" VTIC plus \"  model, get more  [VTIC] trainees  to take up  employment ."
"67" "Several other government documents outline  the precise subsidies awarded to companies that participate in the  \"VTIC plus\" model  and train and employ VTIC detainees.  Besides  a  5,000 RMB subsidy  given  over 3 years, companies that employ \" persons  in re-education \" ( 教 转 人 员 )  in labor-intensive industries can get a shipping cost subsidy equivalent to 4 percent of their sales volume, and  receive a 1,800 RMB subsidy for  each re-education worker for  trai ning them in the relevant skill .   Consequently, this and numerous other documents clearly indicate that the supposed \"vocational training\" implemented in the VTICs does not at all suffice to prepare the detainees for future e mployment. Rather, the actually  needed skills training is conducted by the participating companies, which is the reason why the government offers them financial compensation for doing so."
"68" "In  2018,  Kashgar Prefecture  alone  intended to  put 100,000  VTIC graduates  to labor  in ind ustrial parks.     Within that quota,   Kashgar 's  t extile and garment   manufacturing, with production based in industrial parks,  was scheduled to   employ  50,000 VTIC  detainees , while  related  satellite factories  were to   employed another 20,000. For  each employed detainee ,  the factories  were to receive  the standard  5,000 RMB subsidy, split over three years.  For  2018,  the subsidy amount was 2,000 RMB.   The 2018  subsidies  for textile and garment-related VTIC labor  alone   were  expected to cost the prefecture 126 million  RMB , which would translate to the employment of 63,000 trainees  ( just below the stated  50,000 plus 20,000) .  By comparison,  in 2018   the p refecture   received  666   m illion  RMB  in food subsidies for VTIC detainees,  which could be enough  to feed   anywhere between 166,000 and 405,000 VTIC detainees  throughout that whole year .   This indicates  that only select detainees are  placed or  \"released\"  into forced labor."
"69" "In some instances, VTICs are directly located within industrial parks. For example, a  d ocument pertaining to the Lop Coun t y  (Hotan Prefecture)  Industrial Park  states  that the park's north campus has a vocational training camp ( 教培中心 ), and together with the vocational training school there are 7,000 persons in these two facilities .   Overall, the park hosts 155 companies .   This also means that  these companies   very likely  recruit a mix of VTIC and non-VTIC labor, representing different levels of coercion, and, in some instances,  potentially  no coercion."
"70" "A particularly pertinent   example of forced labor  comes from  the Xinhe County (Aksu Prefecture) Industrial P ark.    In June 2018, an  unnamed garment making company  set up  a textile voca tional training camp work base  ( 服饰教培实训基地 )  in the park in order to providing employment for  500  VTIC trainees. All of the company's workers  are  said to be  from the Xinhe County  VTIC ( 新和县教培中心 ) ,  and  the government provides police forces and  special  instructors  so that the factory is run in  a \"semi-military style management\"  fashion  ( 半军事化管理 ).   This latter fact is highlighted in the project's description as a \"project benefit\" , likely because it might appease the security concerns of enterprises  over  having to   deal with  hundreds of internment camp detainees ."
"71" "By participating in this \"stability maintenance\" project,  the participating company  secures significant financial benefits. It  gets free use of  the  factory for two years,  and  after that for half  of  the  regular  market price.  Of the total investment of  15 million RMB, the local gover n ment provided  10 million.  The  three factories  come  with security and guard equipment.  The government also pays  the usual  1,800 RMB  subsidy  per  VTIC  worker for the training that they get at the factory, and a 5,000 R MB subsidy per  employed worker ( split over three years ) ."
"72" "A second example of forced VTIC labor comes from a company  from  Shenzhen  that prides itself of having\"   transferred 3 , 000 Uyghurs from  the  stove to  (textile making)  the  machine \".   This slogan refers to minority women who would  traditionally  be responsible for running their households.  The founder of   Jinfuyu Clothing Corporation  ( 金富婕服装有限公司 )  spent  16 years in the Xinjiang army. In his own wor d s, t his experience \"in the army's large furnace\" made him the man who he is today, and in 2015 he proudly returned to Xinjiang. His company is  a   \" military-civilian mixed style  company \" ( 军民融合典型企业 )  and considered a model poverty alleviation company.   Overall ,  Jinfuyu has  trained  6,000 villagers in 287 villages and  established  2  satellite factories with 370 workers . I n September  2018 , it  established  a  factory in  the  Kashgar  VTIC ( 喀什教培中心 ),  providing training and work for  560  VTIC detainees .   In order to speed up the transformation of workers from farmers to factory laborers, from the stove to the machine, from the very first day that they  enter the factory the company  strictly implement s  a combination of  \"worldview education +  Chinese  language study + skills training\"  ( 观念培育 + 国语学习 + 技能培训 ) .  This approach presumably applies to both VTIC and non-VTIC workers."
"73" "Importantly, government-sponsored factories that utilize VTIC labor are typically funded from  \" poverty alleviation  and development  funds \"  ( 扶贫发展资金 ).  For example,   the  Shule County  government established a  19,920sqm factory  in the Shule County Industrial Park  with 39.8 million RMB from  such  funds. This was done  in order to \"solve the employment pro blem of poor VTIC households\". The p roject 's  administration  involved  various authorities, including the  Education and training B ureau ( 教培中心 )  that overseas the VTICs,  and the poverty alleviation office."
"74" "Likewise ,  Akto County  funded the constru ction of seven  \"poverty  alleviation workshop s\"  ( 扶 贫车间 ) through  the  \" VTIC plus \"  model ( 教培中心+ ), all from the   poverty alleviation and development fund.  With a combined  13,080sqm  of  floor space,  the workshops were expected to provide  jobs for 1,320 persons,  at a  total cost  of  26.2 million RMB.  Similarly,  Pishan County's (Hotan Prefecture)  2019 poverty alleviation projects  list featured a \" VTIC standardized factory park \"  ( 皮山县教培中心标准化厂区 ).     As implied in the same, this factory park was to be constructed directly on  the VTIC  compound ,  with the   Education and Training B ureau  ( 教培局 )   being the project's administrative authority .   This project was budgeted to invest 46 million RMB for  16 factory buildings with  a total of  31,070sqm floor space.  I t   was expected to  provide employment for 1,560 persons."
"75" "However, VTIC factory work is apparently not necessarily the final destination for VTIC detainees. Rather, as stated in one document, they are sent by the VTIC into factories in order to \"receive training\" ( 进 行 实训 ),  so that afterwards they return home and work in local village satellite factories.     One of the many propaganda pieces on the Hotan County VTIC actually gives a specific example for this very scenario  (Figure 1) ."
"76" "Figure 1: A Hotan County VTIC detainee now works in a satellite factory near her home region"
"77" "Similarly, a 2018 Bayingolin Prefecture poverty alleviation project overview shows a cooperation between a satellite factory construction project  extending over 6 villages  and the local VTIC, and there are numerous similar examples from other regions.   This appears to be the method by which detainees are eventually \"re-integrated into society\".  Forced VTIC factory labor could therefore be a temporary means to this end, although there is no guarantee that this will always be the case."
"78" "The wider implication of this scheme is that eventually, many or most VTIC detainees end up in a place of coercive labor alongside other workers that did not go through the region's extrajudicial internment system.  Consequently, it will soon become impossible to clearly determine whether a labor-intensive manufacturing product in Xinjiang will be made with labor from former detainees  or not. However, even non-VTIC labor involves different degrees of coercion. In Xinjiang's currently extremely securitized social environment, there is very limited  (if any)  space for voluntary choices."
"79" "Flow 2:   The Centralized  Training  of  Rural Surplus Laborers  for Involuntary Labor  Assignments"
"80" "The government has detailed plans and quotas for the  \" training  for the purpose of changing employment\" ( 转 移就 业 技能培 训 )  of \" poor household labor \" ( 贫 困家庭 劳动 力 ).   This training must follow a standardized scheme that includes \"gratefulness to the party education\", law, Chinese language, work discipline and military drills. All  \" rural surplus laborers \" ( 农村富余劳动力 ), meaning those who do not have a \"formal\" or long-term wage labor contract, but rely on a mix of farming and odd jobs,  must go through this training before getting employment.  Companies can implement this training themselves or else have it implemented by local training institutions such as vocational schools."
"81" "A more  detailed  implementation  document on  this type of  vocational skills train ing  for the general rural population   was published by  Kashgar  Prefecture .   The document states that i n order to overcome existing problems with discipline, thinking and perception,  (Chinese)  language communication abilities and employment skills,  the  prefecture will organize centralized training  that includes  military discipline, thought education, ski lls training and language study .  The  military training  phase  must  last  at least one month.  It includes singing red songs and is intended to  increases the workers' organizational discipline and  to \"develop  standardized behavior \" ( 行为规范养成 ) .  Thought education ( 思想教育 ) , including \"gratefulness to the Party education\",  is implemented in order to strengthen laborers' resistance against extremist religious thought.  Overall, the skills t raining  is  takes place in three  phases : military  drill , thought education ,   and lastly  skills training, with Chinese language  teaching   being implemented  throughout all of them.  This system shares many similarities with the re-education performed in VTICs."
"82" "Figure 2: R ural surplus laborers from Yumin County are being sent to textile factory work in Shawan County after having gone through centralized skills training."
"83" "Figure 3: R ural surplus laborers from Hotan are being transferred to work in  Alar  City, a Han Chinese settlement."
"84" "Specifically,  a document outlining the government's 5 year plan for 2016-2020 for the textile and garment industry in Aksu  Prefecture   states that this industry's labor needs are to be met by putting laborers through centralized classes and then centralized employment, teaching them legal regulations, Chinese language, work discipline, military drills and production safety.    In this process, their work attitude is to be changed from \"I am wanted to work\" to \"I want to work\"  ( “要我干”转变为现在的“我要干” ) .  Another document discusses the establishment of centralized training centers ( 技能培 训 中心 ), capable of housing 1,200 vocational training students, who are trained, fed and housed (in dormitories) in a centralized and standardized fashion.  Both the context and the terminology of this skills training indicates that it is mostly likely not part of the VTIC network, but it is clear that the  general  setup and infrastructure of this type of general skills training for rural surplus laborers is not all that different from the region's internment camp system."
"85" "Figures 4 and 5:  442 rural surplus laborers from Kashgar and Hotan are sent  off  to work in an industrial park in Korla  in a \"centralized fashion\" ."
"86" "Figure 6:  Rural surplus laborers  from Moyu County  are sent of f to industrial labor  in a \"centralized\", unified fashion ( 统 一 输 送 )  ."
"87" "From this and numerous other sources, the author suggests that Xinjiang's employment scheme for rural surplus laborers outside the internment system  contains a significant amount of involuntary aspects. In combination, it is very unlikely that any of this type of employment is genuinely voluntary. To the contrary, it may well not be much more voluntary than the employment of VTIC graduates. This important topic will be explored in-depth in subsequent research."
"88" "Another major concern is  the fact that labor from flows 1 and 2 are being combined, making it virtually impossible to distinguish labor involving higher coercion from that potentially involving less coercion."
"89" "For example, Shache County (Kashgar Prefecture) has a  c ooperation between 8 different  educational institutions, including the Kashgar VTIC   ( 喀什教育培训中心 )  and 4  companies or industrial sites , including  the Kashgar Shenzhen Industrial P ark  ( 喀什深圳产业园 ) .   Rather than keeping VTIC and non-VTIC workers strictly separate, the region's goal certainly appears to  flexibly  integrate them, especially once these former VTIC detainees are considered safe to work in regular work environments without extra police protection.  Obviously, any of these work environments will still feature the usual surveillance and securitization features that are increasingly found in any facility in Xinjiang. This includes camera systems, security guards and other preventative measures."
"90" "Flow 3:   Promoting   Universal  Factory Labor Through  Village-Based  Satellite Factories"
"91" "The probably most intrusive social re-engineering of Uyghur and other Turkic minority societies in Xinjiang is achieved by what is called \" sending work to people's doorstep\" ( 送工作到家门口 )."
"92" "According to a government document that originated from the United Front website, \"fine-grained poverty alleviation\" in Xinjiang involves the construction of one satellite factory for every  two villages .     By 2020, Kashgar Prefecture plans to nearly double the number of  its  satellite factories  from 490 to 792 , covering at least 70 pe rcent of impoverished villages and  creating jobs for over 60,000  poor households .   Similarly, Lop County in Hotan Prefecture expected to increase satellite factory employment from 2,630 in mid-2018 to 20,000 in 2020.   The scalability of these massive undertakings is ensured through highly standardized factory designs and unified management procedures."
"93" "Specifically, the satellite factory drive is designed to bring work opportunities to those who are typically unable to leave the village in order to take up non-rural or non-farming jobs. This particularly applies to women  responsible for caring for  children  and elderly family members .  Numerous government documents testify to this fact and indicate that this campaign involves a great deal of \"thought transformation\" in order to convince women to participate. For example:"
"94" "\" We must make overall efforts to promote stability and poverty alleviation, so  that farmers can be freed from their  small amount of land, and go into satellite factories and enterprises for employment. We must take care of the \"empty nest\" old people,  leverage  the role of nur sery schools and kindergartens to  solve the worries of  the  employed people.  ...  Strengthen national language education and skills training, organize poor households to visit and study, and enable them to broaden their horizons, change their concepts, and stimulate  their inner  motivation."
"95" "Another document similarly boasts how  satellite factories liberate  women and combat e xtremism at the same time, leading Uyghur women into an acceptance of \"modern culture\", \"letting women walk out of the courtyard and  integrate into modern economic and social life \".   Numerous other documents talk about the need to \"transform the thinking of women,  let more of them leave the home, enter factories, increase incomes. \""
"96" "Naturally, many women will not suddenly want to put their little children in state-run day care or their elderly ones in centralized elderly care .  Consequently, government reports abound with the \"success stories\" of village work teams, who ceaselessly visit resistant families until they \"agree\" to work.  Often, this is said to require to \"transform the thinking of [the elderly] parents\" until they \"agree\" to let their daughter go to work.  Once people are put to work, they have entered state-controlled environments that may feature different degrees of security. Government procurement bids for rural satellite factories in Uyghur majority regions include security fences, surveillance systems and metal detectors."
"97" "The perhaps most disturbing aspect of \"poverty alleviation\" through rural satellite factories is that it promotes a significant degree of separation of children from their parents - at least during the work days.  The establishment of satellite factories invariably involves the construction of dedicated nurseries for children below the preschool age, often in the factories themselves. For example, a  report about  Lop County states that  a  particular village's   satellite factories  all  hav e nurseries for children aged 0 to  4  years  where children \"eat and live\" , so that the women can  \" work without having to worry \" .     Similar reports are found for many other minority regions.   These nurseries , at times e ven referred to as \"infant care \" ( 婴 幼儿管 护 ) ,  appear to play a key role for promoting women to  take up factory  work.     One county even refers to this scheme as the \"nurseries plus satellite factory model\" ( “ 幼儿托管+ 卫 星工厂”模式 ) ."
"98" "A shocking examples  for this comes   from a village  belonging to  Hotan City. There, one family has  a mother with three young children,  the  youngest  being only 13 months old, and a father who is already away due to working outside the village.     The report states that because the village factory has a nursery, she can now go to work.   The report cites the mother  as saying:  \"[This] solved my problem, now there are people who take care of my children, I can in peace go to work, ... very convenient.\"  ( Figure 7 ).   However, w hat is being praised as progress and development is  arguably  a shocking example  of increasing family separation,  intrusive social control , and  more than  likely some form of involuntary labor ."
"99" "Figure 7 .  The small children (toddlers) of a mother of three are being kept in a nursery while the mother is being put to work in a village satellite factory ."
"100" "Funding From Mutual Pairing Assistance  ( 对 口 援疆 )"
"101" "Particularly problematic is the fact that much of the funding for VTIC factories, industrial parks where VTIC and non-VTIC persons work, and many of the new satellite factories,  is disbursed through  the mutual pairing assistance scheme.     Eastern Chinese cities and provinces are incentivizing their local corporations to participate in Xinjiang's low-skilled, labor-intensive manufacturing drive, and in doing so to further their patriotic duty to promote China's BRI.  Government figures show that in 2018, the total pairing assistance investment into Xinjiang amounted to 16 billion RMB.  In 201 7, this investment stood at 15.2  billion RMB and created jobs for 500,000 surplus laborers.  Both  of these  figures represented a marked increase from the 9.7 billion RMB invested through the pairing assistance scheme in 2016."
"102" "For example , Shanghai's pairing assistance funding funded the construction of 382 satellite factories in four minority counties, involving 237 companies and 12,800 new jobs (in 2018)."
"103" "In a number of instances, mutual pairing assistance moneys directly promote forced labor. A  Xinjiang government report describing the  Guangdong Pairing Assistance Project ( 广东省援疆项目 ) noted that Guangdong Province invested 1.8 5 billion RMB in Xinjiang in 2018.    The report states that b ecause there are many \" VTIC  persons  in re-education \" ( 教培转化人员 ) who need employment, the Guangdong companies who participate in the pairing assistance project with Xinjiang will establish satellite factories in the VTIC, so that more students the re can become self-sufficient. The p lan is to provide 3,000  of such  jobs."
"104" "A   more  specific example  of how the Xinjiang mutual pairing assistance program directly supports forced detainee labor under the guise of \"poverty alleviation\" and \"development\" comes from   a  company  from  Zhejiang Province , called Zhejiang Zhuji Keshang  ( 浙江 诸暨 客商 ) . This company  invested 180 million RMB to establish the Xinjiang Hengrui Textile Company ( 天山恒瑞 纺织 有限公司 ) with an annual production capacity  of  6 million sweaters. It adopted  the  \"industrial park plus VTIC plus  satellite factory model \" , constructing two standardized factories with  a combined floor space of  12,000sqm  that provide work for  1,100 persons. From January to May 2018,  Zhejiang mutual pairing assistance  projects involved a  total investment  of 959 million RMB and established 148 factories ."
"105" "Another, similar examples is the Jinfuyuan garment factory in Kashgar's Tashkorgan County. Set up  by a company from Shenzhen through the mutual pairing assistance scheme,  it can  produce over a million items of clothing per year, which are exported to Europe.   This factory is showcased on a government website that praises the benefits of VTICs for de-extremification and combating terrorism."
"106" "Even if not all of these initiatives  followed the \"VTIC plus\" model  and involve VTIC  detainee factory labor , it is evident that these 19 cities and provinces are spending billions of RMB in order to facilitate different forms of  coerced  labor  throughout Xinjiang's Turkic minority regions ."
"107" "Conclusion:  Ethical Implications for Global Supply C hains"
"108" "Xinjiang's multi-layered schemes of forced or at least involuntary labor , and the increasing blending of VTIC and non-VTIC labor,  have major implications for global supply chains."
"109" "Xinjiang is the designated core region of the BRI, with ambitious  future  production targets for textile and garment production, along with other labor-intensive  manufacturing products . Through substantial subsidies, the government is attracting major companies to establish factories in the region. Often, this takes places through the pairing assistance scheme, whereby major eastern provinces such as Guangdong, Fujian, Jiangsu etc. encourage their  corporations  to establish branches in Xinjiang. This creates close linkages between products made with Xinjiang's forced  (or at least involuntary)  labor, and the entire domestic Chinese market."
"110" "As a result, it is increasingly likely that products from Xinjiang will end up  not only in domestic Chinese but also  in global supply chains.  Before long, it will be up to Chinese companies , and to China as a whole nation,  to prove to other  countries  that their  exported  products do not involve a ny form of coerced  ethnic minority labor.   Until Xinjiang's extrajudicial internment camp network and related factories are not fully shut down ,  and all forms of skills training and related employment in the region are made  completely  voluntary, this will be difficult or impossible to prove."
