AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies, Volume3, Number1. February 2019
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no1. 14

Pp. 178-189

Self-Abdication and Otherness in Philip Roth’s The Human Stain (2000)

Assia Mohdeb
Department of English, Faculty of Arts and Languages
University of Bejaia,, Bejaia, Algeria
Sofiane Mammeri
Department of English, Faculty of Arts and Languages
University of Bejaia, Bejaia, Algeria

Abstract:
Identity, in one of its understanding, signifies a set of characteristics that make up a person’s ethical
faithfulness to, identification with, and pride of one’s origin, tradition, and culture. Remaining true
to one’s identity and being faithful to the core values of one’s culture is a complicated matter when
it comes to a black living in white society like America, where color and racial identity are
rudimentary prerequisites in self-definition and naming. Philip Roth’s novel entitled The Human
Stain (2000) shows how some black figures undress their black identity to wear the prestigious
white one to go onward with life as full selves, to have access to all the privileges the whites enjoy,
and, above all, to live without the specter of race and the decisiveness of epidermal signs. The
novel calls into question and revision such essentialist notions as other, class,andrace by describing
the crises the subject or self undergoes in the light of racial prejudices, center-periphery relations,
and class stereotypes. The present paper, then, addresses the act of self-abdication the protagonist,
Silk Coleman, carries out to overstep the feeling of otherness and to dodge racial discrimination.
The paper looks into the notions of selfhood and Otherness by negotiating the definition of the self
and the distortion it undergoes in its encounter with the Other . The study aims at revealing,
primarily, the effects of Black racial-passing, a common phenomenon in American society of the
first half of the twentieth century, on familial relationships and cultural heritage. It also reveals
the weight of gender and class discrimination in the individual’s identity formation and well-being.
Key words: Other, racial-passing, self, self-abdication, The Human Stain
Cites as: Mohdeb, A., & Mammeri, S. (2019). Self-Abdication and Otherness in Philip Roth’s
The Human Stain (2000). Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies, 3 (1)
178-189. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no1.14

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 |www.awej-tls.org

178

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number1. February 2019
Self-Abdication and Otherness in Philip Roth’s
Mohdeb & Mammeri
Introduction
Otherness is a specter that haunts individuals, communities, whole cultures, and races. It has to do
with inscribing or associating inferior qualities with specific categories of society because of race,
sex, color, or class. The phenomenon manifests itself in the form of bigotry which excludes certain
categories in society from standard definition and prevents them from economic and social
privileges. In her article entitled “ The Representation of the Indigene”, Terry Goldie (1995)
suggests that "since Fanon's Black Skin, White Masks (1952), it has been a commonplace to use
'Other' and 'not-self' for the white view of blacks and the resulting black view of themselves" (p.
233) and that, Goldie, carries on, "presumably the first instance in which one human perceived
another as Other in racial terms came when the first recognized the second as different in color,
facial features, and language’ (1995, p. 235). In this understanding, Otherness is defined in
relationship to the individual’s imperfectability, deficiency, and lack of certain qualities and
values. Besides, it touches upon his ethical bearing as well as his social standing, but more
importantly, considers the individual as an object rather than a subject.
Juxtaposed with Otherness is the notion of the self or the subject. The latter is a form of
identification which is defined in opposition to and conflict with the non-self. In this
understanding, selfhood shows signs of perfection, wholeness, and upward mobility at the cultural
and social levels, and encompasses categories of high ethnical descent and powerful gender
belonging. In the philosophical discourses of enlightenment, the notion of selfhood is confined to
the white European male subject. This favoritism in definition and conceptualization excludes
basic defining elements of human identity including race, ethnicity, class, and sex. On this Mihaela
Dumitrescu (2001), writes:
Modernism, otherwise so obsessive about subjectivity in all its forms, has failed to give
a satisfactory answer to the question “what is the ‘I’, and what exactly makes it what it
is?” Such a failure is easy to understand if we take a broader perspective and consider
the ideological, social framework (modernity), not just its strictly aesthetic correlate
(modernism). The very paradigm of modernity relies heavily on the idea of universal
reason and of social progress achievable through advances in knowledge, as illustrated
by the “grand narratives” (or“grands récits”, Jean-François Lyotard’s terms) of the
Western world….the metanarratives of modernity have one major flaw: they aim –
along the lines of the Enlightenment and of Western philosophical traditions – to define
a generic human nature and destiny without taking into account the individual, the
particular, the local, the different, the Other.(p. 11)
Discussion
Philip Roth’s third novel in The American Trilogy, The Human Stain (2000), delves into the
notions of identity, Otherness, racism, and center-periphery relations. The text is filled with
references to forms of essentialism—race, class, and gender—upon which a struggle for definition,
naming, and equality do emerge. The present paper addresses the notion of identity by highlighting
the relationship between self-making and the socially and culturally constructed identity. It reveals
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

179

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number1. February 2019
Self-Abdication and Otherness in Philip Roth’s
Mohdeb & Mammeri
the struggle for naming and definition for socially and racially disadvantaged groups in white
American society of the first half of the twentieth century.
The Human Stain is set in America of the 1990s, but, through a series of flashbacks, the
narrative regresses in time to the first half of the twentieth century, precisely to New Orange of the
forties. The novel, thus, is conscious of two historical events associated with the two different
periods of time it portrays; the issue of racial-passing characteristic of the forties and the political
correctness typical of the nineties or what the narrator Nathan Zuckerman calls “an enormous piety
binge, purity binge” (Roth,2000, p. 2) in reference to one major event of the decade; the
impeachment of President Bill Clinton followinghis affair with Monika Lewinsky.
The novel tells the life as well as the death story of Silk Colman, an African-American
classics professor and dean at the Athena college of New England, who passes to a white Jew to
live without the specter of race and the authority of skin color. To firsthand appearances, as it
comes out at the outset of the novel, Coleman is a high-status man, well-versed in the classical
literature. Yet, Coleman has been “misjudged, misused, besmirched” (Roth, 2000, p. 20) and
accused of racism by his colleagues at Athena because he referred to two absentees in his class,
who revealed to be of African-American descent, as ‘spooks’. Following this crisis which
destroyed the academic career, Coleman resigns from Athena and resorts to a local novelist,
Nathan Zuckerman, to weave his story. Still, melancholically distressed by the death of his wife
and the loss of his prestigious academic career, Coleman enters into a romantic relationship with
a custodian woman half of his age, Faunia Farley, an affair which Dephine Roux, Coleman’s
college at Athena, has used to unleash rumors to taunt his reputation. The novel ends with the
death of Coleman and Faunia in a car accident caused by Faunia’s ex-husband, Les Farley.
The Human Stain capitalizes upon the protagonist’s tragic demise not only through his
doomed death, his tragic fall into the doomed tartar, but through feigning a white identity that
tarnished his family and his race. Coleman Silk’s racial passing to a white Jew to dodge the
decisiveness of racial discrimination and to live a more liberating and fulfilling life turned against
his expectations and ruined his life dreams; he ends up being considered a racist white man and
dies for his choice of Jewishness at the hands of an anti-Semite, Lester Farley.
The Human Stain opens with an epigraph from Sophocles’ “Oedipus the King,” and thus
it thematically and formally imitates the traditional Greek tragedy. The epigraph reads Oedipus
‘words asking “what is the rite of purification and how shall it be done.” (Roth, 2000, x). As an
answer, Creon replies Oedipus’ question saying “by banishing a man, or expiation of blood by
blood.” (Roth, 2000, x). The epigraphs underscores the essence of Roth’s text, The Human Stain
by referring to the tragic end Silk Coleman has met and the shame he has brought to his family
through his racial-passing. Like Oedipus, the King in Sophocles’ play, Coleman Silk, in Roth’s
The Human Stain, is rewarded the Hawthornian Letter of shame and disgrace as a result of his act
of impersonation. Oedipus Rex believed that he had spared himself the crime of murdering his
father and marrying his mother, only to find at the end that his thought has failed him. Similarly,
Coleman espouses the Greek hubris to conduct a racial passing to white Jewishness, only to die at
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

180

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number1. February 2019
Self-Abdication and Otherness in Philip Roth’s
Mohdeb & Mammeri
the end for such a choice. Both figures, Coleman and Oedipus Rex, have tried to affect their
doomed destiny in pursuit of what Elaine Safer calls “people’s idealist desire for purification,”
(2006,p.124)and have discovered that fate is inescapable and any attempt to change or evade it
results in fatality. Safer, (2006) writes:
Coleman feels that his color stains him in a society where being the other, an AfroAmerican, makes one the object of prejudice. His desire for purification- and thus for
freedom- convinces him to pass as white. Just as Oedipus believes that he has escaped the
destiny of marrying his mother and killing his father, so does Coleman assume that he has
avoided the fate of a black man by passing as white. (p. 124).
In the philosophy of the French modernist philosopher Jean Paul Sartre, the freedom of choice is
the engine that drives and directs the plotline of the individual’s life. Being free, the individual can
affect his destiny and overturn the reality of class, culture, and race conditions granted at birth.
Yet, alongside his assertion of human freedom, Sartre gives the reverse side of that notion in what
he calls facticity’, the factual background upon which, many believe, freedom and choice cannot
be worked out. He begins his section on “Freedom and Facticity” in Being and Nothingness (1956)
with a recognizable statement on determinism, saying:
I am not “free” either to escape the lot of my class, of my nation, of my family, or even to
build up my own power or my fortune or to conquer my most insignificant appetites or
habits. I am born a worker, a Frenchman, an hereditary syphilitic, or a tubercular. (p. 619)
Nevertheless, Sartre argues that the notion of facticity is just an excuse taken for granted by man
to justify his impotence and frailty. For him, the human being is not bound by such background
factual realities as class, race, or language; rather he is endowed with freedom and choice to decide
upon his destiny in life. In another context, in accordance with Sigmund Freud’s notion of the
unconscious recurrence of unwanted and buried experiences, the postmodernist philosopher
Jacques Derrida underscores the uncertainty of the effacement of the stain and its plausible
recurrence after erasure. He (2008), writes:
Granted, every human can, within the space of doxic phenomenality, have the
consciousness of covering its tracks. But who could ever judge the affectivity of such a
gesture? Is it necessary to recall that every erased trace, in consciousness, can leave a trace
of its erasure whose symptom (individual or social, historical, political, etc.) will always
be capable of ensuring its return? (pp. 135-36)
The philosopher seems to agree on the impotence and inability of the human being to exercise
choice in this context. For Derrida, the ability to judge the successful effacement of a trace or stain
oversteps the scope of human knowledge, erudition, and choice. Accordingly, Derrida also seems
to contradict Sartre’s view on free will and determination by emphasizing the interference of
destiny, or the chance of changing the plotline of specific actions and events.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

181

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number1. February 2019
Self-Abdication and Otherness in Philip Roth’s
Mohdeb & Mammeri
Born to an African-American origin, Coleman silk is granted right from birth, in the view
of the white society’s judgment, an inferior race and class and viewed, to use Toni Morrison words,
as “a fabricated brew of darkness and otherness” ( 1992, p. 38).Yet, in the dream of liberating the
self following the Sartrian “exhilarating notion of freedom” (Roth, 2000, p. 138) to challenge predestiny and determinism, Coleman passes to a white Jew and spends the whole of his life feigning
an identity other than his; “he had served out his stint and did his time as a white” (Roth, 2000, p.
182); he also secured a white wife, white children, and a prestigious academic career at Athena
college of New England community.Coleman’s decision to pass to a white Jew has a long history
with his family’s experiences and exposure to bigotry and social exclusion while living in East
Orange in the 1940’s America. Nathan Zuckerman , the novel’s narrator, suggests that “Even in
the East Orange he had not escaped the minimally less malevolent forms of exclusion that socially
separated his family and the small colored community from the rest of East Orange—everything
that flowed from what his father called the country’s Negrophobia” (Roth, 2000, p. 103).
Here, in Coleman’s father’s viewpoint, the notion of ‘Negrophobia’ is accounted for by the
blacks’ skin color and the inferiority of the black race and culture, what he calls “the presumption
of intellectual inferiority. Somehow or other, if not directly by words, then by facial expressions,
by tone of voice, by impatience, even by the opposite—by forbearance, by wonderful display of
humaneness” (Roth, 2000, p. 103).
In his book Totality and Infinity: An Essay on Exteriority (1991), Levinas discusses the
relationship between the self and the Other. Levinas argues that the self and Other do not make
up a collectivity in which the I, the self, can take in the Other to it. For him “the absolutely other
is the Other. He and I do not form a number. The collectivity in which I say ‘you’ or ‘we’ is not a
plural of the I. Neither possession nor the unity of number nor the unity of concepts links me to
the stranger. The stranger who disturbs the being at home with oneself (p. 39). The failure of the
I to include, possess, and absorb the Other into its context is accounted for by “the strangeness of
the other, his irreducibility to the I, to (his) thoughts and (his) possessions…a calling into question
of the exercise of the same” (Levinas, 1991, p. 39).
` As black Others, Coleman and members of his family cannot be embraced, considered,
and accepted by the East Orange white people because, as in Levinas’ understanding, they are
irreducible to each other and “cannot be totalized” (1991, p. 35). Instead of promoting brotherly
love, co-existence ,and attempts towards reconciliation and sympathy, the East Orange academic
and religious institutions have begged off any contact or rapprochement between the two races;
laws decree “prejudice in academic institutions against colored students” (Roth, 2000, p. 86) and
read that :
various services and Sunday schools for the colored (will) be conducted, outside basic
church law, in the colored families’ houses. Later, the swimming pool at the high school
was shut down by the school superintendent so that the white kids wouldn’t have to swim
with the colored kids (Roth, 2000, p. 122).

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

182

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number1. February 2019
Self-Abdication and Otherness in Philip Roth’s
Mohdeb & Mammeri
Almost all members of the Coleman’s family have been victims of racism and bigotry and, in the
vanguard, Coleman’s father, Mr. Silk. After the loss of his optical business in the depression time
of the thirties, Coleman’s father declines to accept the meanest job that is “in no way
commensurate with his professional trainings” (Roth, 2000, p. 86) as a college graduate to meet
the needs of his family; he worked as “a waiter in dining car” (Roth, 2000, p. 93) and there he “had
to put up with insults and prejudicial treatment” (Roth, 20000, p. 103). Like the father, Coleman’s
mother, the most ‘intelligent’, ‘knowledgeable’, ‘reliable’, and capable’ of all the Newark hospital
nurses (Roth, 2000, p. 86) of the New Orange, as the Jewish Dr. Fensterman suggests, was the
least to be respected, valued and to be considered for entitlement to the position of the head of
nurses.
Racial oppression reaches its extended breadth and exaggerated phase with Coleman Silk.
Unlike Mr. Silk, Coleman’s father, who copes with Otherness through ignorance or what Coleman
calls “defenselessness”, Coleman could not accept to be relegated to the background of society
and be judged by the color of his complexion. He even wonders how his father “has taken this
shit? In one form or another taken shit like this in that dining car every single day! In that dining
car every single day!” (Roth, 2000, p. 109). Coleman’s experience of racial discrimination has
started early in his life: as a boy studying at New Orange high school, with all the academic
prowess and the dexterity he shows, being “an enthusiastic, quick-witted boy and a straight–A
student” (Roth, 2000, p. 103), Dr. Fensterman suggests to Coleman to be graduated as
“salutatorian” by getting B’s in the finals in return for “an interest-free , nonreturnable loan of
three thousand dollars” (Roth, 2000, p. 87) and thus giving his son, Bert , the opportunity to be
graduated as valedictorian.Moreover, as a sailor at the Norfolk naval base in Virginia at the close
of World War II, Coleman witnessed firsthand experience with bigotry when he is thrown out of
the navy as “his name didn't give him away as a Jew—because it could as easily have been a
Negro's name”(Roth, 2000, p. 16). Still, at Howard, the black university he attended to fulfill the
dream of his father, Coleman has confirmed that again he is a “Negro” when refused to be given a
hot dog at Woolworth in Washington D.C. Upon this, Coleman concludes that “in the East Orange
high class valedictorian, in the segregated South just another nigger…the impact was devastating.
Nigger—and it meant him” (Roth, 2000, p. 102).Still, while dating the white Icelandic girl, Steena
Pallson, thinking to wed her, Coleman brings her to his parents’ home for dinner, believing that
love outdoes racial prejudice and stereotypes. Yet, on their way back home from the East Orange
to New York, Steena tells Coleman that she “can’t d o it..she raced alone from the train as though
from an attacker and did not phone him or even try to see him ever” (Roth, 2000, p. 125).
Disappointed by Steena’s behavior and tormented by the life of segregation he has
experienced wherever he goes; in the East Orange neighborhood, the East Orange high school,
Washington D. C, at the navy and even at Howard, Coleman makes it up to choose “the future into
his own hands rather than leave it to an unenlightened society to determine his fate—a society in
which more than eighty years after emancipation proclamation, bigots happened to play to large a
play to suit him” (Roth, 2000, p. 120).Coleman undresses his black identity to spare himself the
feelings of Otherness and the process of objectification from the white subjects. Critical race
theorist Cheryl Harris suggests that:
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

183

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number1. February 2019
Self-Abdication and Otherness in Philip Roth’s
Mohdeb & Mammeri
Becoming white meant gaining access to a whole set of public and private privileges that
materially and permanently guaranteed basic subsistence needs and, therefore, survival.
Becoming white increased the possibility of controlling critical aspects of one’s life rather
than being the object of others’ domination. (1996, p. 277)
In his battle for emancipation proclamation, the black historical narrative to attain equality with
the whites and his ownnarrative to shirk the authoritative voice of the ‘weness, Coleman didn’t
spare a means to reach his aim. In the first occasion, as a boxer, Coleman feigns a white Jewish
identity to get a “four year scholarship to Pitt” (Roth, 2000, p. 98) by telling the Pitt Coach that he
is white, he is “neither one thing nor the other. He is Silky Silk. That’s enough” (Roth, 2000, p.
98). Then, in another occasion, Coleman fights an African-American man and was not ashamed to
call him nigger. More important than all these, against his parents’ wish to marry a light-skinned
girl of a prestigious black family, Coleman weds the white Iris Gittelman to carry out his “first
large payment,”(Roth, 2000, p. 136) in invigorating his plan. Nevertheless, Coleman’s racial
passing is not only a decision to undermine Otherness and the feelings of inferiority associated
with his race, rather he aspires towards what Toni Morrison calls “the human freedom—the thing
coveted most of all” (1992, p. 37), and what himself calls “freedom of the raw I,” a liberating
power that refuses to assimilate and respond to the dictates of the ‘We’ and the ‘they’ categories.He
(2000) suggests:
With both bulwarks gone—the big brother overseas and the father dead—he is repowered
and free to be whatever he wants, free to pursue the hugest aim, the confidence right in his
bones to be his particular I. free on a scale unimaginable to his father. As free as his father
had been unfree. Free now not only of his father but of all that his father had ever had to
endure. The impositions, the humiliations. The obstructions. The wound and the pain and
the posturing and the shame—all the inward agonies of failure and defeat. Free instead on
the big stage. Free to go ahead and be stupendous. Free to enact the boundless, self-defining
drama of the pronouns we, they, I. (p. 109)
Here, in the above quotation, Coleman highlights the coming of I on the stage to play its history
and authority against the voices of the other, and praises the promising prospects the subject, the
I, would access and realize. The struggle between the me and the us, in Coleman’s
conceptualization, is the struggle between self-assertion and the socially constructed identity or
self. He seems to support the myth of self making which eulogizes individual potentialities to
craft his lot. He resembles Fitzgerald’s the great Gatsby and Emily Bronte’s Heathclif who has
raised himself from dust and carried their own entitlement to prestigious social belonging and
identities. He carries on saying:
You can’t let the big they impose its bigotry on you any more than youan let the little they
become a we and impose its ethics on you. Not the tyranny of the us and its us-talk and
everything that the wewants to pile on your head. Never for him the tyranny of the we that
is dying to suck you in, the coercive, inclusive, historical, inescapable moral we with its
insidious E Pluribus unum. Neither the they of Woolworth nor the we of Howard instead
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

184

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number1. February 2019
Self-Abdication and Otherness in Philip Roth’s
Mohdeb & Mammeri
the raw I with its agility. Self-discovery. Singularity. The passionate struggle for
singularity. (Roth, 2000, p. 108)
Still, for Coleman, the struggle between the “I” and the “we” and his journey towards freedom and
enlightenment, as it is apparent in other instances in the novel, entails liberating his imprisoned
Eros against the preconceived logistics of tradition, righteousness, and authenticity. Coleman
seems to back up the cathartic exaltation of emotions over the bog of rationalism, morality and a
search for meaning and significance. He suggests:
The obligation to subject my life to hers and its vagaries. Its vagrancy, its truancy. Its
strangeness. The delectationof this elemental Eros. Take the hammer of Faunia to
everything outlived, all the exalted justifications, and smash your way to freedom.
Freedom from the stupid glory of being right. From the ridiculous quest for significance.
From the never ending campaign for legitimacy. The onslaught of freedom at seventy one,
the freedom to leave a lifetime behind—known also as the aschenbachian madness. (Roth,
2000, p. 171)
Following the racial passing act, Coleman effaces the difficulties that bump up his intellectual
progress and he exalts his notion of freedom and self-assertion. It is also met with grievous
consequences. His mother’s warning words reading that “all his attempts to escape will lead him
back to where he begun” (Roth, 2000, p. 140) have come true as late in his life, Coleman was
accused of racism at Athena. Viewing him as a rascal threat to the ideals of freedom, democracy,
and equality following his use of a racial epithet to describes two African-American students in
his class, the intellectuals at Athena force him out of the academe to purify the white race from his
racist thoughts. Still, Coleman’s act of self-invention and cultural effacement have resulted in the
tearing up of the notion of the family, the dissolution of relational ties and the loss of the cultural
heritage as a reference to belonging, naming and identification for posterity. Coleman did not only
kill his mother, preventing her from her grandsons but also killed his sons by his concealment
stories about their grandparents and cousins beings German Jews with whom he lost contact ever.
His children could not understand their father self-invention story about their ancestors which
leave them unconfident, unsure of their present and their past.
The class is another basic element in the constitution of human identity and the continuous
struggle between self and Other. Class, like race, divides society into what Paul Virilio calls the
“haves, and the have-not” (1997, p. 74) and set about discomforts and contradictions in terms of
social advantages, social ease and mobility. Class manifests itself through forms of deprivation,
dispossession and even oppression which is worked out on certain categories of the social order.
In the World of The Human Stain, Faunia Farley, Coleman’s Viagra, represents the dispossessed
category, ‘the wretched of the Earth’, in Fanon’s words. Faunia works as a custodian at the Athena
College and labors in one of the prairies as a part-time farmer to pay the fees of her rent. Faunia
experienced a traumatic childhood, being rejected by her mother and continuously humiliated,
victimized and beaten by her stepfather. In his description of Faunia, Coleman tells Nathan
Zuckerman that she “has been exiled from the entitlement that should have hers. Declassed…a
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

185

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number1. February 2019
Self-Abdication and Otherness in Philip Roth’s
Mohdeb & Mammeri
stepfather undid her, upper bourgeois undid her” (Roth, 2000, p. 28). Escaping the oppression of
her family, Faunia first left home and then married an ex-Vietnam vet in the hopes to change her
destiny, but “all that they had together was trouble” (Roth, 2000, p. 29) and ended in separation
and her two children have been “ asphyxiated in the heater fire” (Roth, 2000, p. 53). In its
reference to the different social classes to which the two lovers Colman Silk, Ex-dean at Athena
College, and Faunia Farley, a custodian at the college door, belong, the text involves, apart from
racial passing, class passing. Roger Ebert writes that The Human Stain “involves two different
kinds of passing: Crossing the race line, and the class line. Coleman and Faunia must deal with
each other despite their lack of common references, education, background, assumptions, manners
of speech, tastes and instinct” (2006, p. 305).
Sex is another form of Otherness in The Human Stain. It manifests itself through the kind
of “social castration”, to use Sandra Gilbert’s and Susan Gubar’s word, that certain women
experience under the marriage institution, through love affairs and as single women exploited by
married males. Barbara and Castellano Turner (1994)affirm that men and women are seen as
different "in personality traits, in physical characteristics, in interests, in occupational roles and
status levels, and in many other ways" (p. 95). In this view then, women are not innately inferior
but society, as Simone De Beauvoir suggests, amounts to their inferiority. She writes:
One is not born a woman but rather becomes a woman. No biological, or economical fate
determines the figure that the human female presents in society; it is civilization as a whole
that produces this creature...only the intervention of someone else can establish an
individual as an other...the child would hardly think of himself as sexually differentiate.
(1994, p. 267)
We have referred above to class as one of the ordeals in Faunia’s miserable life. Yet, Faunia is
also a victim of patriarchy. Because of her miserable situation, men, Coleman suggests, “have
beaten a shit out of her” (Roth, 2000, p. 171); all what Les Farley did “was to make her his
punching bag” and all that the other men did “was to make her whore or one among them” (Roth,
2000, p. 161). In marriage, Faunia was not well off. Lester Farley, she tells Coleman, “regularly
beat her up. Beat her black and blue” (Roth, 2000, p. 29). Still, working as waitress in Florida,
retired businessmen asked her for“ a few nights a week” in return for “ nice apartment, nice cloth
and a nice new Pinto and charge accounts at all the Bal Harbor clothing shops and at the jewelry
store” (Roth, 2000, p. 160).
Professor Delphi Roux, Coleman colleague at Athena, is another oppressed female figure in the
novel. Delphine Roux, according to Nathan Zuckerman, has been graduated from ‘Ecole Normale
Supérieure de Fontenay’ and has “read the entire body of French literature” philosophy, English
language and literary history (Roth, 2000, p. 188). Delphine’s feminist burden, in the text, is to
free herself and her female colleagues and students from the sexist oppression of Coleman Silk.
Identifying him with her ex-classicist professor with whom she had an “impassioned affair” (Roth,
2000, p. 186), but who turned to be “playing seduction against her” (Roth, 2000, p. 187), Delphine
considers Coleman as a menace to her and other female lives. Her trouble with Prof. Silk started
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

186

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number1. February 2019
Self-Abdication and Otherness in Philip Roth’s
Mohdeb & Mammeri
when an attendee of Prof. Silk’s Classical tragedy courses, Elina Mitnick, complains to Prof. Roux
that Mr. Silk’s choice for Euripîdes’ Hippolytus and Alcestis are “degrading to women” (Roth,
2000, p. 184), and calling Mr. Silk to her Office to see into the matter proved to be a failure as he
disregards their feminist perspectives, both of them. The issue is worsened when another student
of Prof. Silk, Tracy Cummings, hurries to Pro. Roux “close to tears, barely able to speak, baffled
at having learned that, behind her back, Professor Silk had employed a malicious racial epithet to
characterize her to her classmates” (Roth, 2000, p. 193). Prof. Roux has forwarded the affair to the
new dean of the faculty because she knows that calling Prof. Silk to her office to discuss the matter
will be useless, simply because any other “upstart female daring to inquire into his conduct, yet
another woman whose concerns he must trivialize should he deign even to address them” (Roth,
2000, p. 193). After Coleman’s resignation from the Athena College, Prof. Roux discovers Mr.
Silk’s love affair with the poor, Faunia Farley, and confirms her doubts about Coleman’s
misogynist intentions. As Zuckerman suggests:
When she read of the illiteracy that limited Faunia to performing only the most menial of
janitorial tasks, she understood that Coleman Silk had managed to unearth no less than a
misogynist’s heart desire: in Faunia Farley he had found someone more defenseless even
than Elena and Tracy, the perfect woman to crush. For whoever at Athena had ever dared
to affront his preposterous sense of prerogative, Faunia Farley would now be made to
answer. (Roth, 2000, p. 194)
Still, thinking over the affair between Coleman and Faunia, Delphine ends up reading Coleman’s
behavior not only as a kind of playing, but also a form of revenge on her. For her, Coleman takes
Faunia as a playing toy to exercise his revenge upon her, suggesting “ seething at the thought of
the viciousness that could make of this dreadfully disadvantaged woman who had already lost
everything a toy, that could capriciously turn a suffering human being like Faunia Farley into a
playing only so to revenge himself on her”( Roth, 2000, p. 195). Greatly intimidated and vexed by
Coleman’s deed, which she reads as defamation and an encroachment upon women, Faunia Farley
and her, Prof. Delphine writes an anonymous, unsigned letter to Mr. Silk which threatens to
denounce him publically and which reads:
Everybody knows you are
Sexually exploiting an abused,
Illiterate woman half your age. (Roth, 2000, p. 38)
Surely Roth’s inclusion and description of Delphine Roux and Faunia Farley is paramount and line
up with the text’s broader theme of otherness, which extends to the female figures in the novel.
Roth painstakingly meticulous focus on Delphine Roux, her status at Athena and her role in the
academe is significant in the context of the political purity characteristic of the American Academy
of the 1990s. .Even though her name is inspired from the Greek priestess of Delphi, Delphine Roux
represents all that the priestess of Delphi is not and her academic community at Athena is far
removed from Plato’s academe at Athena in Greece. Delphine’s active role in condemning
Coleman as racist following his use of a racial slur confirms the political righteousness or
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

187

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number1. February 2019
Self-Abdication and Otherness in Philip Roth’s
Mohdeb & Mammeri
purification typical of the American academe in the nineties and which lead to the impeachment
of the president ,Bell Clinton in the Congress. The issue of purification, of ridding society from
racism and imperfection, in Roth’s understanding, is symbolic as any attempt to work it out results
in failure. Roth wants to suggest, as Faunia confesses at the close of the novel, that “we leave a
stain, we leave a trail, and we leave our imprint. Impurity, cruelty, abuse, error, excrement, semen”
(Roth, 2000, p. 242). He rejects human perfectibility and utopian thinking and behavior: He is
seemingly reconciled to the inevitability stained creatures that we are. Indeed, Roth’s enemies “are
utopian perfectionists in the disguise of rapid anti-communists, frenzied cultural radicals, selfrighteous feminists, puritanical politicians and guardians of political correctness” (Levine
&Papasotiriou, 2005, p. 234).
Conclusion
The Human Stain takes into consideration the issue of identity and comments on such essentialist
concepts as self, other, race, sex, and class. The text as a whole is reading in the way notions of
race, class, and otherness contribute in the formation and the disturbance of the human identity.
While, at some points, the text confirms some individuals’ acceptance, identification, and harmony
with the race, the class, and the gender to which they affiliate, at others, it shows instances and
attempts at dodging and transcending these essentialist notions which become hinders to their
progress in life. Considering racial passing, the narrative exposes the advantages and the
disadvantages associated with the phenomenon. By passing to a white Jew, the protagonist of the
novel, Coleman Silk, closes the door to his past and identity, separates from what he is handed at
birth, and challenges the authority of the “ they and “ we”, to usher , in return, into the realm of
the I and self-dominance. Coleman’s racial passing to a white subject has provided him a future
crowned with a prestigious academic career at the Athena College, middle class social life, and a
white family. Yet, his choice is also met with and paid back by an accusation of racism and bigotry.
Roth wants to suggest that the human stain, which in the text directs at the individual’s rejection
and abnegation of one’s identity and past, is never effaced; its recurrence and re-emergence to
remind you of it, to torment you and, may be, to teach you, is always plausible.
Still, through class and sexism, Philip Roth shows the difficulties and the troubles the
socially disadvantaged groups face daily in their battle for definition and survival. Again, as is the
case with race, class and sexism are forms of Otherness, upon which the aforementioned
categoriesare excluded from standard definition and entitlement to social mobility and equality.
The text is laced with the social ills such as the misery, the deprivation, and the dispossession poor
people endure daily and it makes references to the subjugation and oppression of the female figures
under marriage and through love-relationships.
About the Authors
Assia Mohdeb is Assistant Professor of Literature in the Department of English at Bejaia
University, Algeria. Her research interests include Anglo-American Literatures, African
Literature, Literary Stylistics, and Literary Criticism. She teaches several graduate & postgraduate
courses such as Anglo-Saxon Literature, Culture & Civilization, and Literary Theory. She is
supervising M.A. Theses in Literature & Civilization. Also, she has presented many papers in
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

188

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number1. February 2019
Self-Abdication and Otherness in Philip Roth’s
Mohdeb & Mammeri
national and international conferences and workshops. Similarly, she published some papers in
national and international scientific journals. Currently, Assia is working on a Ph.D. in Postmodern
Literature. https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7935-9961
Sofiane Mammeri is Assistant Professor of Sociolinguistics in the Department of English at the
University of Bejaia, Algeria. His research interests include Sociolinguistics, Theoretical
Linguistics, Discourse Analysis, Supra-segmental Phonology, and Translation Studies. He teaches
several graduate & post graduate courses such as Phonetics & Phonology, Sociolinguistics, and
Discourse Analysis. He is supervising M.A. Theses in Applied Linguistics. Also, he has presented
many papers in national and international conferences and workshops. Similarly, he published
some papers in national and international scientific journals. Currently, Sofiane is working on a
Ph.D. in Sociolinguistics. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0444-2725
References
De Beauvoir, S. (1974). The Second Sex. Trans. H. M. Parshley. New York: Vantage Books.
Derrida, J. (2008). The Animal that therefore I am. Trans .David Willis.New York: Fordham
University Press.
Dumitrescu, M.(2001). “Modernism, Postmodernism, and the Question of Identity.” Dialogos.3.
Ebert, R. (2006). Movie Yearbook 2006. Kansas City: Andrew McMeel pub.
Harris, C. (1996). “Whiteness as Property.” In Crenshaw Kimberlé, Neil Gotanda and Garry
Peller, (Eds). Critical Race Theory: The Key Writings that Formed the Movement. New
York: New York Press.
Goldie, T. (1995).“The Representation of the Indigene.” In Bill Ascroft, Gareth Griffiths & Helen
Tiffin ,(Eds). The Postcolonial Studies Reader. NewYork: Routedge.
Levinas, E. (1991). Totality and Infinity: An Essay on Exteriority. Trans. Alphonso Lingis. Boston:
Kluwer Academic Publishing.
Levine,P.& Papasotirio, H.(2005). America since 1945: The American Moment. New
York: Palgrave Mcmillan.
Morrison, T. (1992). Playing in the Dark: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination.
Cambridge:Harvard University Press.
Roth, P. (2000). The Human Stain. London: Vantage.
Safer, E. B. (2006). Mocking the Age: The Later Novels of Philip Roth. Albany: SUNY Press.
Sartre,J.(1956). Being and Nothingness. New York: Washington Square Press.
Turner, B. &Castellano, T. (1994). "Social Cognition and Gender Stereotypes for Women Varying
in Age and Race. In Barbara Turner and Lillian Troll, (Eds). " Women Growing Older:
PsychologicalPerspective. sMichigan: Sage.
Virilio, P. (1997). Open Sky.Trans. Julie Rose. London: Vantage.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

189

