AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies, Volume3, Number3. August 2019

Pp.151-164

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no3.12

Domesticating the Text: Collocation Patterns and their Significance in the Translated Text

Mansour K. Thajeel Aldanani
Department of Physics
Faculty of Science, University of Sumer
Thi-qar, Iraq

Abstract:
This paper is an attempt to examine, through examples, the significance of collocation patterns for
the translated text. To prove this, a corpus is collected from two translated articles in National
Geographic magazine, Arabic version and their English counterparts. The given examples show
that a great abundance of collocations patterns surfaced in the Arabic target texts (TT). The results
obtained are used to argue that these patterns have cohesive, coherent, and aesthetic functions
in the target text. To produce a translation that can read as much fluently and naturally as possible,
professional translators work painstakingly to domesticate the source text as the magazine, in its
Arabic version, is targeting different readership and culture. To accomplish their task, translators
draw on their language competence especially 'collocation competence' as a domesticating
strategy.
Keywords: collocations patterns, English collocations, Arabic collocations, fluency, naturalness,
domesticating strategy.
Cites as: Aldanani, M. K. T. (2019). Domesticating the Text: Collocation Patterns and their
Significance in the Translated Text. Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary
Studies, 3 (3) 161-174. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no3.12

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 |www.awej-tls.org

151

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

Introduction
Collocations are “are partly or fully fixed expressions that become established through repeated
context-dependent use. Such terms as 'crystal clear,' 'middle management,' 'nuclear family,' and
'cosmetic surgery' are examples of collocated pairs of words." (Wikipedia). The translation
theorist, Hatim (2001), defines collocation as "the way in which words are found together
conventionally" (p.228). A few examples will suffice: commit a mistake, deliver a speech, bright
ideas, strong tea, heavy rain, etc.
1.1 Collocations: a literature review
Since it was first introduced by the British linguist Firth, (1952,1968), as part of the
"collocational meaning", the notion of collocation has been the topic of debate among linguists
and no agreement on one definition seems to be reached. Other opinions followed. The " NeoFirthians" scholars such as Halliday (1966), and Sinclair (1966) also made their attempts to refine
and elaborate on the concept.
In his dictionary, A Grammar of English Words, Palmer (1938, p. iv) defines collocation as a
" succession of two or more words, the meaning of which can hardly be deduced from the
knowledge of their components." According to this definition, words such as "on the other hand,
look for, last but not least are "chunks" to be learned as one unit.
Firth states that the collocation of a word is the " habitual or customary places of the word"
Halliday based his definition on Firth's conceptualization. For him, collocation is " a linear cooccurrence relationship among lexical items which co-occur together." He adds that although the
two adjectives "powerful" and "strong" are the same, the word tea doesn’t collocate with
"powerful" but we can say strong tea ( Halliday, 1966, p.150).
Baker agrees with Sinclair. For her, collocation is "the tendency of certain words to co-occur
regularly in a given language" (1992,p.47). Baker argues that two factors determine the
collocational range of any word in a language. First, the number of senses it has; second, how
specific the word is. That is to say, Baker gives the verb "bury" and "inter." According to her
definition, Baker thinks that the collocational range of "bury" is more comprehensive as it can
collocate with "people, treasure, feelings, memories, and one's head, face" whereas the verb
"inter." has one collocation with the word "people"
Abdul-Raof (2001) stresses the importance of collocational restrictions. He explains that words
are " collocationally restricted" because "they occur and co-exist in conjunction with their mates
in a special linguistic environment." These restrictions can decide and limit the range of
collocations patterns each word has. For example, the adjective "heavy" can collocate with "rain"
but "strong" collocates with "tea"(pp.28-34).

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

152

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

Finally, words have preferences to occur with each other. Cruse (2000) refers to this when he
states that words "tend to have definite preferences and discrepancies" (p.76). This tendency can
clearly be seen in the following example. The intensifier "strong" can come in "strong wind" and
"strong tea" but can't say "strong rain," we say "strong rain" instead.
1.2 Collocations: Classifications in the Arabic Language:
In Arabic, linguists have also discussed this linguistic phenomenon and have come up with
different conceptualizations. Ghazala ( 2004) identifies twenty collocation patterns in Arabic. They
are as follow:
Collocation pattern
1-noun +adjective
3-noun+ noun connected by
the Arabic conjunction (‫) و‬
4-adjective +adjective

English Examples
deep wound
right and wrong wealth and
children glory and might
- quite sufficient
- smiling crying

Arabic Examples
‫جرح عميق‬
‫الخطأ و الصواب‬-‫المال والبنون‬
‫المجد والسؤدد‬
‫–كاف واف‬
‫ ضاحك باك‬-

5- verb + noun (actual
meaning)
6- verb +noun (figurative
meaning)
7- verb+ cognate accusative
(unrestricted object)
8- verb+ adverb
9- verb + preposition + noun
10- verb + relative pronoun+
verb
11- verb + conjunction + verb
12-time /place adverbial+
conjunction +time/place
adverbial
13- prepositional collocation
and it falls in four
subcategories: a-preposition+
noun+ noun, b- preposition
+noun +conjunction+ noun ,
c- preposition + noun +
adjective and d- preposition +
noun + conjunction +
preposition + noun

- to draw a sword

‫ يستل سيفا‬-

- to become strong /grow up

‫ يشتد عوده‬-

- to win emphatically

‫ يفوز فوز‬-

- to bite the dust
- to take into consideration
- as one sows; so will one
reap
- (go) back and forth
- morning and evening

‫ يخر صريعا‬‫ أخذ بعين االعتبار‬‫ حصد ما زرع‬-

- under the seal of secrecy.
- to be most welcomed at
first sight(glance) before and
after

‫ في طي الكتمان‬- ‫على الرحب والسعة‬
- ‫للوهلة األولى‬‫ من قبل ومن بعد‬-

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

‫ يقبل و يدبر‬‫ صباحا ً و مسا ًء‬-

153

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

14- collocations that start
with negative particles
15-noun + verb
16- noun+ preposition +noun
17- collocation that starts
with a particle functioning as
a verb(semi-verb)
18-oath collocations (do not
follow one typical structure
19- cursing collocations (do
not follow one typical
structure)
20- Compliment collocations
(do not follow one typical
structure)

- nothing wrong with it/
faultless
- alive and kicking
- passable with difficulty
- (verily) with hardship goes
ease

‫ال غبار علية‬-

- may I be made your ransom.
I swear by God
- Curse on you/ damn you.
(God) damn you

‫بأبي أنت وأمي‬- ‫ والذي نفسي بيده‬-

- well said God forbid cursing
you

‫ حي يرزق‬‫ سالك بصعوبة‬‫ إن مع العسر يسرا‬-

‫عليك اللعنة‬-‫ تبًا لك‬‫ال فوض فوك‬- ‫ أبيت اللعن‬-

1.3 Collocations and their central importance in Translations
The Language uses several devices to keep the text cohesive. In their argument, Hatim and Mason
(1990) consider collocation as a cohesive link. They stated the point that the “more frequent the
collocational pattern; the more cohesive would be the resulting text.” (p.205). Palmer (1930, as it
cited in Cowie 1999: 52-53), the famous British linguist, stressed the central importance of
collocations when he wrote that: "It is not so much the words of English nor the grammar of
English that makes English difficult…The vague and undefined obstacle to progress … consists
for the most part in the existence of so many odd comings-together-of words"
Following the new developments in corpus research, linguists like John Sinclair (Sinclair
1991), the founder of corpus linguistics, went further to extend the notion of collocations. He
explained:
"A language user has available … a large number of semi-preconstructed phrases that constitute
single choices" (p.110).
With the help of these ‘semi-preconstructed phrases’, which Firth name as "collocation"
language users can communicate with the utmost clarity, naturalness, and economy. Not only that,
there is a strong correlation between frequency in a corpus and typicality, which means that the
use of common collocations contributes to the naturalness of a text. Drawing on Ghazal's model
of Arabic collocation categorization, this study will identify the most frequent and common
collocations patterns used in Arabic.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

154

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

2. National Geographic Magazine
Since was first launched in 1888, National Geographic has gained worldwide popularity as its
articles deal with environmental issues, science, history, and geography. According to Wikipedia,
"the magazine is currently published in 37 local editions around the world."
In 2010, the magazine launched its Arabic version. Chris Johns, the editor-in-chief of National
Geographic magazine, said he hoped the launch of the Arabic title would act as "a bridge of
understanding" between MENA and the rest of the world. "We look at National Geographic as a
bridge across nationalities, cultures, religion, and ethnicity,"
"We want people to connect and understand that they are people who love their children
and many share the same values that we do and, in turn, for Muslims to understand
Christians and Hindus and people of other faiths. "I believe that our work has never been
more important? in the United States right now there is an alarming amount of
misinformation about Islam and Muslims."
The Arabic-language magazine will feature a mix of features on geography, archaeology
and natural science, with more than 20 percent of each issue generated locally.
In his statement, Gavin Dickinson, ADMC's executive director of publishing stated that "We
believe our locally tailored offering will provide readers with a unique opportunity to engage with
and learn about the region's rich geography, habitats and anthropology,"
As for the complex translation task, the Emirates Foundation, in cooperation with a
specialized team of environment experts sponsored by Abu Dhabi Gas Industries Company
(GASCO) handled this excellent task.
3. Data Analysis and Discussion
For the analysis of the selected data, the study draws on Ghazala's categorization of Arabic
collocation patterns as the most elaborate and comprehensive model. The target texts and its
English counterparts have been put in a parallel to point out the collocations patterns used. These
patterns are selected as the most dominant in Arabic since they are partly derived from the Quran
and the other sources of the language.
3.1 Extracts that indicate Fluency and Naturalness in the target text:
In the following extracts, a lot of collocation patterns are used in the target texts in comparison
with the number used in the ST. To produce natural and fluent translations, the translators used
different collocation patterns that are most common and frequent in classical Arabic ( the Quran,
pre-Islamic era poetry, prophets sayings) and also in modern texts. Patterns such as " ‫انتشار النار‬
"‫ يشي مظهرها‬,‫ قيود الرق والعبودية‬,‫فالهشيم‬
Extract # 1
" … its Victorian mansions still beautiful, is at the center of a colossal American health crisis."
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

155

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

".‫ وقصورها التي التزال تحتفظ ببهائها منذ العهد الفكتوري وجدت نفسها في خضم أزمة صحية أميركية كبيرة‬..."
Verb + Noun + Adjective
Extract # 2
" … high rates of obesity, diabetes, high blood pressure, heart diseases: …"
"... ‫ وسجلت فيها معدالت عالية من البدانة‬..."
Verb + Prep. + Noun + Noun Pattern
Extract # 3
" … a crop that brought the ancestors of most Clarksdale residents to this hemisphere in chains."
‫"والمعروف ان السكر محصول زراعي جذب اسالف غالبية من سكان كالركسديل الى المنطقة وهم يرزحون تحت قيود الرق‬
" ‫ يشي‬,‫والعبودية‬
Prep. + Noun, Verb + Relative pronoun+ Verb
Extract # 4
" … she was wearing scrubs- standard Monday dress for teachers, to reinforce the school's
commitment to health and wellness"
‫" وكانت ترتدي وزرة تشبه لباس الممرضين أو الجراحين على غرار ما يرتديه كل المدرسين خالل يوم االثنين لتأكيد التزام‬
"‫المدرسة بالجانب الصحي السليم‬
Noun + Noun
Extract # 5
"Of course, I'm not one to judge,"
".‫ لست في وضع يسمح لي بإطالق أحكام بشأن االخرين‬,‫" بطبيعة الحال‬
Extract # 6
"… where rulers entertained their guests with a plethora of sugar"
"‫"حيث كان الحكام يكرمون وفادة ضيوفهم بتشكيلة متنوعة من الحلوى‬
Verb + Noun + Adjective
Extract # 7
"… a striking 38-year-old, Jones told me she had changed her own eating habits …"
"... ‫" التي ال يشي مظهرها الجذاب بسنواتها الثمانية والثالثين‬
Verb + Conjunction + Verb
Adjective + Prep. + Noun
Extract # 8
" And I say, No, I'm doing it 'cause I want to live and be healthy."
".‫ وأنا أرد عليهم بكوني أريد أن أعيش وأحيا حياة مفعمة بالعافية‬... "
Verb+ Cognate accusative (unrestricted object)
Extract # 9
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

156

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

" It was like throwing paint at a fan: "
"‫" انتشر انتاج السكر كانتشار النار في الهشيم‬
Verb + Noun
Extract # 10
"For years, sugar refinement remained a secret science, passed from master to apprentice"
"‫ ظل تكرير السكر علما خفيا تتوارثه االجيال من أيادي المتمكنين المهرة الى المتمرنين‬,‫" وطوال سنوات عديدة‬
Extract # 11
" It is at this price that you eat sugar in Europe."
"‫" هذه هي الكلفة التي نتجشم عناءها حتى تأكلوا السكر في أوربا‬
(Verb+ Cognate accusative), ( Prep. + Noun + Noun )
Extract # 12
"wherever they went, the Arabs brought with them sugar, the product and the technology of its
production," writes Sidney Mintz in Sweetness and Power, " Sugar, we are told, followed the
Koran"
‫ " كان العرب يجلبون معهم منتج السكر وتقنية‬:‫ جاء في كتاب سيدني مينتز " الحالوة والسلطة" ما يلي‬,‫"وفي هذا السياق‬
"‫ فقد أخبرنا بأن السكر كان يقتفي أثر القران‬.‫انتاجه أينما حلوا وارتحلوا‬
Verb + Prep. + Noun
Extract # 13
"… demonstrated the wealth of the state."
"‫ تشي بثراء الدولة‬..."
Extract # 14
" By 1500, with the demand for sugar surging, the work was considered suitable only for the
lowest of labourers."
‫ أضحى هذا العمل ال يناسب سوى العمال من ذوي المستوى‬,‫ ومع تزايد الطلب على مادة السكر‬1500 ‫" وبحلول عام‬
".‫االجتماعي المتدني‬
(Verb + Prep. + Noun), ( Verb + Noun + Noun)
Extract # 15
" Perhaps the first Europeans to fall in love with sugar were British and French crusaders who
went east to wrest the Holy Land from the infidel"
‫" وربما كان الجنود الصليبيون البريطانيون والفرنسيون أول االوربيون الذين وقعوا في حب السكر عندما يمموا شطر الشرق‬
"‫االسترجاع " االرض المقدسة" من المسلمين‬
3.2 Extracts that reflect the cohesive function in the target text:
Coherence and cohesion are important features of texts. Linguists identified different strategies
texts employ to look cohesive. Adopting appropriate use of collocation patterns can produce
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

157

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

lexically cohesive and coherent texts. Hatim and Mason (1997, p. 47 ), stated that "The more
frequent the collocational pattern, the more cohesive will be the resulting text". As it can be clearly
seen from the following extracts, translators employed different collocations patterns to produce
for their readers a coherent and cohesive translations:
Noun + Adjective
Extract # 16
" … but in this case it won the males a malign reputation"
"‫" نال االسود االربعة سمعة سيئة‬
Prep. + Noun + Noun
Extract # 17
" Eventually, a condition known as metabolic syndrome kicks in, "
"‫ يحدث اضطراب في الجسم يسمى بالمتالزمة االيضية‬,‫" وفي نهاية المطاف‬
collocations that start with negative particles
Extract # 18
" According to Johnson and his colleagues, this misses the point"
"... ‫" ويرى جونسون وزمالؤه أن القول ال يصيب كبد الحقيقة‬
Verb + Prep. + Noun + Noun
Extract # 19
" Yet the portion of America that is obese has grown larger"
"‫" لكن نسبة االمريكيين البدينين ظلت في ازدياد مطرد‬
Noun + Prep. + Noun
Extract # 20
" Life is hard and precarious on this unforgiving landscape, and dead is dead"
"‫ والموت فيها ال يقهر‬,‫" فحياة هذه االسود صعبة ومحفوفة بالمخاطر في هذه البرية التي ال تعرف الرحمة‬
Extract # 21
" For a certain young male, black-maned and robust, known to researchers as C-Boy, the end
seemed to have arrived on the morning of August 17, 2009."
‫ قاب قوسين أو أدنى من مواجهة نفس المصير المحتوم‬,‫بوي‬-‫ معروف لدى الباحثين باسم سي‬,‫" وقد كان اسد قوي ذو لبدة داكنة‬
"2009 ‫ من أغسطس‬17‫في صبيحة ال‬
Prep. +Noun + Noun
Extract # 22
" Now he was four or five years old, just entering his prime."
",‫ أي على مشارف مرحلة الفتوة والنضج‬,‫بوي يومئذ في الرابعة او الخامسة من العمر‬-‫" كان سي‬

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

158

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

Extract # 23
" … as he spun and rolled desperately to escape"
"‫ بينما هو يناور تارة ويزمجر تارة أخرى فيلتف للهروب منهم دون جدوى‬... "
Extract # 24
" … fathering cubs and becoming resident, loosely associated with the pride. They also play an
important role in helping kill prey"
‫ كما يؤدي الذكور دورا مهما أذ يساعدون في‬.‫ دون أن يوطدوا وشائجهم معه‬,‫ فيصبحون أباء لالشبال ويقيمون مع القطيع‬... "
"‫االجهاز على الفرائس‬
Adjective + Noun
Extract # 25
" … as members of another coalition, a group of four ambitious young adults males, notorious in
her record as the Killer"
‫ وقد ونتهم في بطاقات التسجيل لديها باسم‬,‫" أذ كانوا يشكلون حلفا أخر يتألف من أربعة ذكور بالغين ومفعمين بالطموح‬
"‫ " القتلة‬:‫مرعب‬
Verb + Prep. + Noun + Adjective
Extract # 26
" One lion had a bloody tooth, the lower right canine, suggesting a very recent fight"
"‫ ما يشي بخروجه للتو من معركة ضارية‬,‫" كان الناب االيمن السفلي ألحد األسود ملطخا بالدماء‬
Verb + Noun
Extract # 29
" Seconds later, the fight erupted again."
"‫" وما هي اال ثواني معدودات حتى نشبت المعركة من جديد‬
Extract # 30
" … his subsequent book, The Serengeti Lion, became the foundational text"
" ‫ وقد اصبح كتابه الذي ألفه الحقا بعنوان "أسد سيرينغيتي" ركيزة لألبحاث في هذا المجال‬...
Prep. + Noun + Noun
Extract # 31
" One thing that happens is death"
"‫" ويعد الموت على رأس االحداث في هذا الواقع‬
3.3 Extracts that reflect the "Aesthetic and Eloquent" language functions:
Collocation patterns have other functions. It can add an aesthetic aspect to the text. Arabic is well
known for its eloquence. Words such as "‫ وأتلمس لنفسي سبيال‬,‫ حي يرزق‬,‫"نسيا منيا‬. Other eloquent
patterns are also surfaced in the Arabic texts such as ' "... ‫ مشى القتلة الهوينا‬,.. ‫ يعنكف على‬,‫يميط اللثام‬.
They are normally found in literary texts.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

159

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

Verb + Noun + Adverb, Adjective + Noun
Extract # 32
" The Killers strolled off and positioned themselves atop a termite mound, with a commanding
view of the river … while C-Boy slunk away. He was alive, for the moment, but defeated"
‫بوي من ساحة الوغى بكل رفق وهو‬-‫في حين خرج سي‬... ‫" مشى القتلة الهوينا فاعتلوا تلة للنمل االبيض تشرف على النهر‬
"‫ خائر القوة ومثخنا بالجروح‬,‫ لكنه كان يجرجر أذيال الهزيمة‬,‫حي يرزق‬
Verb+ Cognate accusative
Extract # 33
" … killed by the conquering males, … C-Boy was yesterday's favorite, yesterday's stud. This is
the cold arithmetic of lion society"
‫ فتلك هي عقيدة االسود في‬,‫ واليوم اصبح نسيا منسيا‬,‫بوي أسدهن المفضل‬-‫ باألمس كان سي‬... ‫" ربما فتك بهم االسود الجدد‬
"‫مجتمعهم الذي ال سواد فيه للرومانسية اال اذا اقترنت مع السلطان‬
Verb + Noun
Extract # 34
" Other researchers followed. A young English man named Brian Bertram succeeded Schaller
and stayed four years, long enough to begin teasing out the social factors that affect reproductive
success …"
‫ قضى اربع سنوات كانت‬,‫ كان من بينهم شاب انكليزي يدعى بريان بيرترام‬,‫" وبعد شالر جاء عدد من الباحثين الى سيرينغيتي‬
"... ‫كفيلة بجعله يميط اللثام بعض الشئ عن العوامل االجتماعية‬
Verb + Prep.
Extract # 35
" If you are making the first detailed study of any species, he told me recently, you grab what
you can"
"‫ عليك جمع كل ما تصل اليه يد من معلومات‬,‫"وقد قال لي مؤخرا أذا أردت أن تعكف على أول دراسة تفصيلية ألي كائن حي‬
Adjective + Noun
Extract # 36
" They were handsome devils, a quartet of eight-year-old males, resting in a companionable
cluster. They looked forbidding and smug"
‫ وقد كان يعلوهم اهاب‬.‫ يستقرون غالبا في تجمعات مع بعضهم البعض‬,‫ أربعة في عامهم الثامن‬,‫" كان القتلة ذوي وجوه وسيمة‬
"‫المنعة واالعتداد بالنفس‬
Verb + Noun
Extract # 37
" It seems like every time I study an illness and trace a path to the first cause, I find my way back
to sugar"
"‫ أجد أن السبب يعود الى السكر‬,‫" يبدو أنه في كل مرة أدرس مرضا معينا وأتلمس لنفسي سبيال لمعرفة السبب الرئيسي‬
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

160

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

Verb + Noun + Adjective, Verb + Noun + Prep. + Noun
Extract # 38
" C-Boy had made a new life for himself in a new place, with new lioness, and seemed to be
thriving."
‫ وقد بدت الحياة وكأنها قد فتحت له ذراعيها‬,‫بوي قد بدأ صفحة جديدة من حياته في مكان جديد ومع لبؤات أخريات‬-‫" كان سي‬
"‫من جديد‬
Extract # 39
"… so we heard from Nichols, who had seen it.."
"‫" وحسب ما سمعنا من نكوالس الذي رأى االمر بأم عينيه‬
Verb + Noun + Prep.
Extract # 40
" C-Boy had fed on the eland carcass alone, taking choice morsels but not too much,"
"‫بوي وحده يلتهم ما لذ له من قطع بجسد الظبي دون أفراط‬-‫" راح سي‬
Verb + Noun + Verb, Verb + Prep. + Adjective
Extract # 41
" So they were living the good life, those two, with all the prerogatives of resident male lions."
‫" وهكذا بدأت الحياة تبتسم لهذين االسدين اللذين صارا يعيشان على حياة هادئة بجميع االمتيازات التي يحظى بها االسود‬
"‫المقيمون مع القطعان‬
Noun +Prep. + Noun, Verb+ Cognate accusative
Extract # 42
" Rosengren had suspicion- and it was confirmed when, amid the high grass of the riverbank, we
came upon the Killers"
‫" انتاب روزنغرين شك سرعان ما تحول الى يقين عندما التقينا وجها لوجه مع االسود " القتلة" وسط الحشائش الطويلة على‬
"‫ضفة النهر‬
Extract # 43
" … it might even be adaptive for males in some cases, …"
"‫" فقد تكون ضرورة من ضرورات التكيف لدى الذكور‬
Extract # 44
" … but in this case it won the males a malign reputation"
"‫" نال االسود االربعة سمعة سيئة‬
Preposition +noun +conjunction+ noun, Noun + Prep. + Noun
Extract # 45
" Those numerals did seem somehow more concordant with their air of opaque, stolid menace"
"‫" لم تعكس هذه االرقام بطريقة أو بأخرى تلك الهالة من الخطر التي تحفهم‬
Extract # 46
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

161

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

" Less luck, and the loser is killed in a fierce leonine battle, or he limps away, losing blood, may
be crippled, maybe destined to die slowly of infection or starvation"
‫ فأنه سيتولى جريحا ينزف دما او ينزوي مشلوال ليموت ببط من‬,‫" أما أن كان حظه عاثرا فيخسر معركة شرسة مع أسد أخر‬
"‫االصابة او الجوع‬
Noun + Prep. + Noun
Extract # 47
"This allows the formation of crèches, lion nursing groups in which females suckle and protect
not just their own cubs but others too."
"‫" وتسمح تلك العملية بتشكيل "دور" حضانة تطلع فيها اللبؤات بمهام حماية وإطعام أشبالهن وأشبال األخريات ايضا‬
Extract # 48
" He was an eight-year-old lion, healthy and formidable, commanding respect within a pride"
"‫ وقد كان في أتم الصحة والقوة فارضا احترامه و وقاره داخل القطيع‬,‫" بلغ هذا االسد من العمر ثماني سنوات‬
Verb + Noun + Noun
Extract # 49
" Then they set out, all four together, on what looked like a purposeful march."
"‫" ثم بدأ اربعتهم معا ما يشبه مسيرة تضع نصب اعينها هدفا محددا‬
Extract # 50
"Occasionally, during stop, they let their voices rise in another chorus of roar, "
"‫ كان االسود يرفعون عقيرتهم بالزئير جميعا في ما يشبه جوقة موسيقية‬,‫ وخالل توقفنا‬,‫" أحيانا‬
3. 4 Other extracts that support domestication strategy:
Extract #
- "Perhaps the first Europeans to fall in love with sugar were British and French crusaders
who went east to wrest the Holy Land from the infidel "
‫"وربما كان الجنود الصليبيون البريطانيون والفرنسيون أول االوربيون الذين وقعوا في حب السكر عندما يمموا شطر‬
"‫الشرق االسترجاع " االرض المقدسة" من المسلمين‬
Extract #
"They say that cats have nine lives."
"‫" تقول العرب ان للقطط سبعة أرواح‬
Extract #
" When the Arab armies conquered the region, they carried away the knowledge and love of
sugar"
"‫ حمل الفاتحون معهم المعارف المتعلقة بالسكر فضال عن الشغف بهذه المادة‬,‫" وعندما فتحت الجيوش العربية هذه المنطقة‬
Lefevere (1992a, p. 14) proposes that translation is a form of " rewriting altered and produced in
accordance with the socio-cultural, ideological and literary constraints of the target culture
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

162

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

system." On the above extracts, the translators tried to domesticate the source texts and produce
an appropriate version for the Arab readership that fit in well with the target socio-cultural
constraints. Therefore, words such as 'conquered', ' from the infidel' are loaded with negative and
ideological meaning in the minds and memory of Arab readers. They were rewritten and purified
from the all historical ideology to be domesticated as '‫محررين‬, ' ' ‫' المسلمين‬
Also, the whole text 'They say that cats have nine lives' has been domesticated in accordance with
the socio-cultural constraints of the Arab world. It was translated as "‫ "تقول العرب ان للقطط سبع أرواح‬.
These examples clearly demonstrate that translators work as 'filters' that only allow for what
closely conform to the target culture norms.
Conclusion:
The paper has attempted to discuss the significance of collocation patterns in a corpus of (50)
extracts taken from two articles in the world-famous magazine, National Geographic, English and
Arabic versions. It is an attempt to demonstrate that translators exert efforts to present to their
readers as natural, fluent, and eloquent translation as possible. They employ all possible strategies
in their disposal and crunch on their language proficiency to achieve that. Among these strategies
is using appropriate collocations patterns.
Drawing on the framework put forward by Hassan Ghazala in the classification of Arabic
collocations, the paper has presented a comparative study of collocation patterns in a sample of
article extracts from Arabic and English. The focus is to pinpoint the fact that the abundant use of
collocation patterns in the (TL) is a good indicator of the translation quality. The paper has
elaborately argued, through examples, that these patterns give naturalness and fluency to the (TT).
They help produce a natural and eloquent translation for a different readership. All the 'foreignness'
of the source text has been toned down and domesticated to tune in to the new socio-cultural
context. Collocation patterns also worked as cohesive and coherent strategies for translated texts
as they are demonstrated in the extracts from the two articles under study. The translators used a
lot of collocations usually found in the Quran and other registers to ' domesticate' the texts and
give Arab world readers as natural and aesthetic translation as possible. This comparative study of
collocations patterns can also have pedagogical implications for translation teachers and students
as they can compile their glossaries using the collocation patterns relevant to each text and register.
About the Author:
Mansour K. Thajeel Aldanani is an assist. lecturer of English at the University of Sumer. He got
his M.A. from University of Salford in 2011. Currently, he is teaching English at the University
of Sumer. Since 2011, Aldanani has been doing translation and also interpreting at symposiums,
business meetings, and conferences. ORCID ID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7717-5955

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

163

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

References:
National Geographic. https://www.thenational.ae/business/arabic-nationalgeographic-launched-1.598830 ( Accessed on 14.08.2019).
National Geographic https://www.nationalgeographic.com/magazine/2013/08/sugarlove/( Accessed on 14.08.2019).
Abdul-Raof, H. (2001).Arabic Stylistics: A Coursebook. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz
Verlage
Benson, M., Benson, E. & Ilson, R. (2009). The BBI Combinatory Dictionary of
English: A Guide to Word Combinations. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Baker, M. (2017). 2nd edition. In Other Words: A Course book on Translation.
Florence, KY, USA: Routledge.
Brashi, A. S.(2005). Arabic Collocations: Implications for Translators (Doctoral
dissertation, University of Western Sydney, 2005).
Cruse, A. (2000). Meaning in Language: An Introduction to Semantics and
Pragmatics. New York: Oxford University Press.
Ghazalah, H. (2004) Cross-Cultural Link in Translation (English-Arabic). In Ghazalah 68 (Ed.),
Essays in Translation and Stylistics (pp.79-115) Beirut: Dar El-Ilm LilMalayin.
(Reprinted from: International Journal of Translation 14(1), 2002, pp.138-162.).
Halliday, M.A.K. (1966). “Lexis as a linguistic level”. In C. E. Bazell et al (eds) In Memory of
J.R. Firth. London: Longman. 150-61.
Hatim, B. & Mason, I. (1990). Discourse and the Translation. London: Longman
Hatim, B. & Mason, I. (1997). The Translator as a Communicator. London and New York:
Routledge.
Lefevere, André (1992a). Translation, Rewriting and the Manipulation of Literary
Fame, London & New York.
Lewis, M.(2000) Language in the Lexical Approach. In M. Lewis (ed.). Teaching Collocation:
Further Developments in the Lexical Approach (pp. 126-153). London: Commercial
Colour Press plc.
Sinclair, J. McH. (1966). Beginning the Study of Lexis. In C.E. Bazell, J. C. Catford, M. A. K.
Halliday, & R. H. Robins (Eds.),In Memory of J. R. Firth (pp. 410- 430). London:
Longmans, Green and Co Ltd.
Newmark. P. (1981). Approaches to translation. Oxford: New York: Pergamum
Press.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

164

