"x"
"1" "Intimate (Anti-)Racism and White Gay Men:"
"2" "A Psychosocial Approach"
"3" "Andrew Shapiro"
"4" "Ph.D. Student, Department of  Sociolog y"
"5" "The Graduate Center, CUNY"
"6" "Ashapiro3@gradcenter.cuny.edu"
"7" "There are people that will, you know, they want it because it's a fantasy and then there are folks that will not look at you, will not touch you, just because you're Black, you know what I mean? (Quoted in Paul, Ayala, and Choi 2010)"
"8" "This white man and others like him . . . have no way of relating to my Asian brothers except from atop. (Wat 1996:73)"
"9" "Scholars in recent years have increasingly recognized the ways in which race, sex, and romance are fundamentally intertwined (Collins 1990, 2004; Nagel 2003, 2010; Vidal-Ortiz, Robinson and Khan 2018). Historically, claims to a superior, refined, virile sexuality have been central to the logic of white supremacy, allowing whiteness to distinguish itself from \"others\" cast as \"oversexed, undersexed, perverted, or dangerous\" (Nagel 2003:9). These  ethnosexual  constructions have been so significant to the history of the West, and to that of the unlucky peoples who landed upon its radar, that their influence can still be felt today in the ways we relate to one another (Nagel 2003). Racial logics continue to separate the desirable from the undesirable, “encod[ing] people in and out from the possibilities of love” (Gebrial 2017). This and similar phenomena have been described by several names, the most prominent being  sexual racism  (Callender, Newman, and Holt 2015; Robinson and Frost 2018). Henceforth I will use the slightly modified  intimate racism  to better reflect its prevalence in both sexual and romantic contexts. The purpose of this chapter is to investigate how white gay men perpetuate intimate racism in their interactions with queer people of color (QPOCs). More precisely, I will be exploring the psychosocial underpinnings of intimate racism in white gay men so as to better challenge its manifestations in daily life."
"10" "Little social scientific research exists on racism and queer interracial romantic relationships and what does exist has tended to focus more on how romantic couples navigate  external  racism than on the everyday racisms of white partners themselves (Adeagbo 2016, 2018; Steinbugler 2005, 2012). The literature on   sexual   racism, by contrast, is quite robust.  Central to much of the literature is sexual partner discrimination, exemplified by language like “no Blacks, no Asians” on internet profiles (Callender, Holt, and Newman 2012; Han and Choi 2018; Paul et al. 2010; Robinson 2015). Beyond racial exclusions, much scholarship has investigated patterns of fetishized attraction that dehumanize and exoticize people of color (POCs) (Han 2007; Paul et al. 2010; Teunis 2007). In light of heated debates about whether the sexual racism of partner preferences really counts as  racism , Callender, Newman, and Holt (2015) conducted a survey testing the association between partner preference and generic racism, finding that sexual and generic racisms were in fact highly correlated. Much of the literature emphasizes the circulation of erotic capital in economies of desire, making especially productive use of Green’s (2008) notion of sexual fields (Han 2014; Han and Choi 2018; Paul, et al. 2010; Raj 2011). More scarce in the literature are social psychological investigations into the cognitive and emotional processes that underlie white gay racist behavior in intimate contexts. Helpfully, Damien Riggs (2017) begins to address this gap with a volume entitled  The Psychic Life of Racism in Gay Men’s Communities . Although the volume’s myriad contributors do much to flesh out the operations of racialized desire, it nonetheless leaves room for a deeper discussion of  what exactly motivates white gay racism . Motivation is only fleetingly addressed in the volume and in the literature more generally, leaving plenty of room for a deeper exploration into why it is that white gays cling so jealously to deeply racist conceptions of love and sexuality."
"11" "To fully address the roots of white gay interpersonal racism, a  psychosocial approach  is needed. First developed in the UK during the nineties, psychosocial studies is an interdisciplinary field that brings “psychic” and “social” approaches into conversation with one another, usually with a blend of psychoanalytic, sociological, historical, and other perspectives (Association for Psychosocial Studies 2019). For Chancer and Andrews (2014), psychosocial theory provides a  helpful corrective to sociology’s usual inattention to psychic processes and unconscious drives. This inattention, they explain, is a result of an “unhappy divorce” of psychoanalysis and sociology in the mid-twentieth century wherein the conservative, normative biases of many prominent psychoanalytic sociologists (most notably Talcott Parsons) encouraged a new generation of American sociologists to reject psychoanalysis wholesale. As a consequence, sociology in general has lacked a coherent framework for addressing internal conflicts and unconscious processes (Chancer and Andrews 2014; Wrong 1961)."
"12" "This project entails a preliminary intervention into the literature on gay male intimate racism, bringing together theories of race and sexuality from sociology, psychoanalysis, and interdisciplinary perspectives to better account for the racialized conflicts, exclusions, and objectifications found in the existing literature. I begin by theorizing a psychosocial account of white interpersonal racism in the modern West, showing that whiteness has required whites to distance themselves from and assert power over POCs. I then turn to the fraught history of white gays and whiteness, noting how an ambivalent opposition to normative society gave way to a zealous pursuit of white normalcy that has undermined possibilities for cross-racial intimacy. Then, I draw from the literature to illustrate how white gays, unable to relate to QPOCs in a non-oppressive fashion, have tended to either fetishize and dominate racial others or avoid interracial intimacy completely to maintain their unconscious sense of white superiority. Finally, having unpacked some plausible motivations for white gay men’s intimate racism, I theorize what an intimate antiracist politics might look like, one built upon revolutionary love and an ardent rejection of whiteness."
"13" "INTIMATE RACISM IN PSYCHOSOCIAL CONTEXT"
"14" "In  Race, Ethnicity, and Sexuality , Joane Nagel (2003) details how sexual stereotypes have  been employed around the world and throughout history to undergird constructions of racial belonging. Indeed, stereotypes about Asian submissiveness have been used to encourage colonialism in the East while stereotypes of black animalism lent themselves to the advent of the American slave trade, to name some salient examples (Collins 2004; Nagel 2003; Omi and Winant 2014; Said 1978). Importantly, these representations have not disappeared over time, nor have they lost their essential sexual character. As such, the politics of desire, romance, and sexuality are to this day informed by ethnosexual meanings (Chito Childs 2008; Collins 2004; Nagel 2003; Steinbugler 2012)."
"15" "Despite many vital contributions to the study of race, racism, and intimacy, US sociologists often fail to appreciate their non-rational, unconscious aspects (Chancer and Andrews 2014; Wrong 1961). Often overlooked is what psychosocial theorist Stephen Frosh (2013) calls the  excessive  dimension of racist discourse, the “intensity of the racist imaginary [that] is always over and above anything that can be claimed to be in the interests of the oppressing group” (P. 148). Although sociologists have historically sought to understand the excessive dimension (e.g., Adorno and Horkheimer 2000; Adorno, Frenkel-Brunswik, and Levinson 1982; Fromm 1994), the same cannot be said for sociologists in the ‘post-psychoanalytic’ era of the late twentieth century (Chancer and Andrews 2014). Only with the ‘affective turn’ of the new millennium have sociologists begun to widely interrogate once more the non-rational aspects of race relations (Clough and Halley 2007). Eduardo Bonilla-Silva’s (2019) recent theoretical sketch on racialized emotions suggests a certain emergence into the sociological mainstream. Following this return to racism’s inner life, I will now use a psychosocial framework to chart the historical development and contemporary character of intimate racism, drawing upon relevant sociological, psychoanalytic, and interdisciplinary  perspectives to do so."
"16" "Much of the West’s contemporary racist discourse, behavior, and psychic structure can be traced back to the arrival of Europeans in what became known as the Americas, where colonists encountered seemingly unlimited lands and resources and an “inconvenient” native population. Put simply, these settlers deployed a discourse of native inferiority to justify conquests that would be otherwise indefensible from a Christian moral standpoint (Feagin 2000; Glenn 2015; Nagel 2003; Omi and Winant 2014). Soon thereafter, white settlers would use their nascent racial ideology to justify the enslavement of Africans (Collins 2004; Nagel 2003; Omi and Winant 2014). Patricia Hill Collins (2004) explains that objectifying black men’s bodies as “big, strong, and stupid” (P. 56) justified whites’ harsh labor practices; characterizations as wild and undisciplined helped to justify curtailing black freedom (Collins 2004; Omi and Winant 2014). Frantz Fanon (2008) calls this the  Negro myth  of black deficiency, a fantasy that not only serves to legitimize white domination but also projects any guilt feelings that arise onto the victims themselves. This creates a cycle of escalating violence and denigration: the more the white man dominates blacks, the more guilt he projects onto them and the more inclined he is toward further racial domination."
"17" "In  White Racism: A Psychohistory , Joel Kovel (1970) traces this pattern of anxiety, guilt, and projection to early features of the West's cultural psychology. Christianity in particular fostered widespread guilt feelings and preoccupations with purity and filth, light and darkness. It also generated such an intense aversion to wealth that it later gave way to its opposite: an obsessive, if guilty, pursuit of material gain. By the time that European colonists arrived in the Americas, they simultaneously hungered for wealth and hated the impurity, the  blackness , in its acquisition. Black slavery, then, allowed them to mobilize their hatred of blackness in the pursuit  of material prosperity. In this twisted worldview, it is the slaves themselves who are black and evil, not the pure white Europeans who enslave them. This quintessentially western dialectic of ritual purity and filthy behavior necessarily generated its share of contradictions, to which Kovel attests:"
"18" "The slaver in effect said to his slave, “. . . And since I, being a man of the West, value things which are owned above all else, I hold you—or, rather, the owned part of you, your body—in very high regard and wish to retain you as my property forever. On the other hand, since I have a certain horror of what I am doing, and since you are the living reminder of this horror and are subhuman to boot, I am horrified by you, disgusted by you, and wish to have nothing to do with you, wish, in fact, to be rid of you. And since this set of ideas is inconsistent and will stand neither the test of reason nor of my better values, I am going to distort it, split it up, and otherwise defend myself against the realization.” (P. 19)"
"19" "From then on, white racism grows ever upward and outward, gaining potency as it replicates itself like a virus across the collective unconscious of the Western world (Fanon 2008; Kovel 1970, 2000)."
"20" "Frantz Fanon (2008) emphasizes the sexual nature of antiblack racism, arguing that the erotic repression of Western civilization drives whites to yet again project their disavowed urges onto black men. The white man thus equates his own insufferably repressed libido with refinement and black sexual freedom with animalism. In so doing, he fantasizes into existence his worst nightmare, a black paragon of sexual prowess with a mythically large penis irresistible to white women. White men have since needed to defend themselves against fears of losing their white wives to black men by inventing a mythologized ‘black rapist’ whose contacts with white women consist only of sexual violence and never romantic love, a myth used to justify unspeakably brutal lynchings (Collins 2004; Nagel 2003; Steinbugler 2012). Black women, meanwhile, have been similarly cast as hypersexual, rendering them as unsuitable romantic partners and easy targets of sexual violence (Freedman 2013; Nagel 2003; West and Johnson  2013). On the one hand, whites have consistently transgressed the color line through sexual domination, raping black women and ritually enacting sexual sadism in the lynching of black men. On the other, constructions of black people as unfit for intimate relations have historically justified fierce opposition to miscegenation, interracial marriage, and race-mixing in all its forms (Nagel 2003; Steinbugler 2012)."
"21" "Since its inception, white racism has used ethnosexual stereotypes to cast POCs as repositories of its anxieties (Fanon 2008; Frosh 2013; Kovel 1970; Rustin 1991). Derek Hook (2005), working through the Freudian postcolonial theories of Homi Bhabha, explains that racial stereotypes operate as  fetishes  by papering over threatening realities with convenient fantasies. Following Said’s (1978) writings on Orientalist discourse, Hook (2005) and Bhabha suggest that stereotypes of Asians and Middle Easterners as exotic but simple, different but familiar, allow the Western imperialist to  fetishize imagined, knowable differences while disavowing actual, unknowable ones.  These stereotypes, deeply gendered and sexualized, have advantaged whites both psychically and socially by both assuring them of their capacity for and justifying their epistemic, sexual, and colonial conquest. Constructions of ‘Oriental’ women, on the one hand, as both sexually restrained and sexually potent feed into a certain objectifying and exoticizing fascination with the hidden mystique of women from the East (Nagel 2003; Ponzanesi 2005). On the other, notions of Asian men as feminine, weak, and sexually impotent have justified the masculine conquest of land in the East and emasculating immigration controls in the West, all of which serve to maintain the white male fantasy of sexual supremacy (Eng 2001; Espiritu 2010; Nagel 2003)."
"22" "Thus far, it can be seen that white racism is more than a narrowly rational means of asserting social dominance; it also serves to assuage white insecurities by projecting them onto  racialized others (Adorno et al. 1982; Fanon 2008; Frosh 2002, 2013; Kovel 1970). According to Hook (2005), this fantasy of white supremacy develops into a full-fledged narcissistic worldview comparable to what sociologists have called the  white racial frame  (Feagin 2013) or  white habitus  (Bonilla-Silva 2006). As whiteness becomes increasingly constitutive of white subjectivity itself, any challenges to the white racial frame become threats of self-extinction. The white subject, fearing annihilation, thus comes to disidentify all the more fervently with POCs, foreclosing the possibility of  recognition . Recognition, for Fanon (2008) and Jessica Benjamin (1988), means the understanding and acceptance of another person as a distinct, autonomous subject.  Mutual recognition  is a prerequisite for egalitarian relations between two people; without it, Benjamin suggests, the only avenue for intimacy is domination."
"23" "Unable to recognize racialized others without endangering their own whiteness, whites can either relate to them through domination  or  not at all. These two options correspond to what Kovel (1970) respectively names  dominative racism  and  aversive racism.  Dominative racism, the preeminent form of racism in the US South for much of its history, involves directly controlling, humiliating, and abusing racial others. Aversive racism is more historically typical of northern whites who experience dominative impulses but are prevented from acting upon them by their liberal sensibilities. Unwilling to confront their violent inclinations, the aversive racist \"turns away and walls himself off\" from racial others (P. 32). Distinct from the first two is a third, newer form of racism known as  metaracism , wherein the white individual is not especially racist in any direct sense but participates unreflectively in a racist culture. Because metaracism is less observable at the interpersonal level, this chapter will focus primarily on the dominative and aversive types of white racism."
"24" "Faced with the prospect of interracial intimacy, the aversive racist responds with  avoidance where the dominative racist seizes upon the opportunity for intimate domination. Unlike their aversive counterparts, dominative racists are perfectly fine with intimate interracial contact so long as they remain dominant. Black slave women, for instance, could be  used  for intimate pleasures by white southern slavers in what Nagel (2003) calls  ethnosexual conquest , but could not be loved romantically or treated as equitable sex partners. Dominative racism can also be more subtle, as bell hooks (2012) emphasizes with her concept of  eating the other.  For hooks, white people may assuage feelings of inferiority not just through overt violence but also through the consumption of difference, allowing them to think that they are challenging white supremacy when they are really just adding some spice to an otherwise bland white hegemony. This is more or less equivalent to what Nagel (2003) calls  ethnosexual adventuring,  where whites take a brief sojourn with an exotic other only to return home to the security of their whiteness. Especially in these less overt instances of domination, hegemonic ideologies conceal the very fact of domination, allowing whites to satisfy their unconscious impulses without conscious guilt (hooks 2012; Kovel 1970)."
"25" "In this chapter, I argue that dominative and aversive racism reflect the distinct forms of white gay intimate racism. But before we look at examples of these racisms in practice, I must first offer a bit of context for white gay men’s specific place in the larger racial drama of white supremacy."
"26" "WHITE RAINBOWS, AMBIVALENT ORIENTATIONS"
"27" "Although white gays are rightly criticized for upholding white supremacy (Henry 2018; Johnson 2019; Rodriguez 2016), their relationship to whiteness is more historically complicated than might be assumed by a twenty-first-century observer. For much of modern history, gay men  have been categorically excluded from the ideal of normative sexuality that Julian Carter (2007) calls the “heart of whiteness.” Around the turn of the twentieth century, a white, bourgeois philosophy of ‘erotic self-control’ took hold across the Western world, one that emphasized monogamy and moderation to the exclusion of all other expressions of sexual desire (Carter 2007; Foucault 1978; Rubin 2011). Implicitly privileging white, bourgeois heterosexuality, the new heteronormativity effectively stigmatized the poor, POCs, and homosexuals as deviants (Carter 2007; see also Cohen 1997). White and non-white sexual deviants, symbolically linked to perversion, treachery, and disease, were increasingly criminalized and pathologized across the Western world and its colonies (Bersani 1987; Canaday 2009; Foucault 1978; Mosse 1996; Rubin 2011). Even at the peak of the AIDS epidemic, diseased queer bodies were met not just with indifference but with revulsion and moral panic (Bersani 1987; Butler 1992; Gould 2009)."
"28" "Such a decidedly hostile response to homosexuality speaks to what has been the promise of queerness to disrupt and destabilize heteronormative ideologies (Ahmed 2006; Butler 1997; Halberstam 2011; Muñoz 1999). Sarah Ahmed (2006) makes this point in her phenomenological account of queer perspectives. A queer  orientation,  in both the   sexual and spatial sense, serves as a vantage point from which to view reality, allowing one to perceive possibilities that the heterosexually oriented cannot. Here she builds upon Judith Butler (1997), who suggests that heterosexuality is constituted “through the renunciation of the possibilities of homosexuality, as a foreclosure which . . . produces a domain of those whom it would be impossible to love” (P. 146). Queerness, by contrast, can reorient bodies toward foreclosed, disavowed objects of love and desire. Ahmed (2006) encourages us to consider the radically imaginative potential for queer to turn bodies not just against the socially proscribed path of heterosexual masculinity, but against whiteness as well."
"29" "In truth, white queer responses to marginality have been decidedly  ambivalent , oscillating across time, space, and individual between  white  and  queer,  between wanting a “place at the table” of normative society and wanting to flip the whole thing over (Ahmed 2006; Bawer 1996; Hay 1997; Rimmerman 2018). In the psychoanalytic tradition,  ambivalence  toward the objects in our lives is central to the human condition, though it may be especially acute for marginalized groups who most reconcile themselves to a society that devalues them without wholly devaluing themselves (Benjamin 1988; Fanon 2008; Gould 2009; Hook 2005, 2008). Such ambivalence may be exacerbated by the fact that white gays usually grow up in and are deeply influenced by mainstream white heterosexual culture. Early ties to straight culture can be difficult to relinquish, even in the face of rejection (Gould 2009; Seidman et al. 2018). Jessica Benjamin (1988) suggests that rejection can actually intensify identifications with the dominant culture. She argues that those who do not receive recognition in early childhood tend to zealously, self-destructively search for it throughout their lives, sometimes attempting to compensate through masochistic deference to a powerful other. Erich Fromm (1990, 1994) similarly asserts that social outcasts may try to escape their sense of isolation by retreating into the mass of undifferentiated others that is normative society. Through automaton conformity, these individuals relieve their anxieties at the expense of their individual selfhood."
"30" "Like fellow critical theorists Benjamin and Fromm, Herbert Marcuse (1991, 2000) seeks to explain the widespread conformism in Western societies. According to Marcuse, capitalist societies manufacture consent by repressing people’s capacity for oppositional political thought. The result is a system of one-dimensional thought where even those most marginalized by their nation will nevertheless feel some sense of identification with its goals (Marcuse 1991). So narrowed are the parameters of conceivable politics that those with grievances are easily bought  off with small rewards and symbolic gestures. Only a “Great Refusal,” a staunch challenge to domination as usual, will liberate people from their repressed condition. (Marcuse 2000) Roderick Ferguson (2018) applies Marcuse’s framework to the study of queer politics in his aptly named  One-Dimensional Queer . In Ferguson’s view, the Stonewall riots presented a moment of Great Refusal where assimilation seemed all but impossible and a multidimensional commitment to gay liberation was the only conceivable path forward. However, as cross-movement alliances fractured and assimilation came to seem increasingly appealing  and  attainable, white gays succumbed to single-issue, one-dimensional politics (Ferguson 2018; Gould 2009)."
"31" "To fully understand the assimilationist fervor of contemporary gay rights activists, it is first necessary to consider  shame  and its psychosocial effects. According to Thomas Scheff (1988), shame is a decidedly social emotion, a self-conscious response to the real or perceived evaluations of others. Shame is, in Scheff’s view, the emotional force underlying all processes of stigma management, even if Erving Goffman left this point under-theorized in his writings on the subject. By conforming to the social order, we not only stave off the shame that results from public ridicule but we also experience pride as a psychic reward for compliance. In his reflection on gay shame, queer theorist Jack Halberstam (2005) describes shame as a feminized form of abjection, one that women experience frequently and generally know how to process. Men, however, often lack the support systems and the habits of reflection necessary to process shame and diminish its impact, the result of which is repression. He argues that the repression of shame is precisely why “gay pride” is so ubiquitous: it compensates for still-unresolved feelings of shame. Deborah Gould (2009) largely agrees, recognizing pride’s value as a form of resistance to homophobic shaming while also acknowledging how it papers over the shame that never truly disappeared, a shame that is itself shameful in a culture so obsessed with pride."
"32" "With issues of recognition, shame, and conformity in mind, a brief summary of white gay men’s psychosocial condition through LGBTQ movement history will shed light on how queer ambivalence gave way to whiteness. The homophile movement of the fifties and sixties, arguably the first significant manifestation of large-scale LGBTQ activism, began as a multi-issue liberationist movement but quickly turned toward conformism in response to the McCarthyist “Lavender Scare” (Ashley 2015; Hay 1996). The homophile movement maintained its reformist posture long into the sixties, until a new generation of activists, disproportionately black, brown, and trans, kicked off the Stonewall riots and the Gay Liberation movement (Ashley 2015; D’Emilio 1983). After over a decade of fruitless accommodationism, white gay men had little reason to believe that conformity would bring them the recognition and pride they so desired, so they threw their lot in with revolutionary politics (Ferguson 2018; Gould 2009). But their newfound militant pride masked an ongoing shame, a shame that left them susceptible to conformist pressures (Gould 2009). By the early eighties, moderate politics were once again fully ascendant within gay activism, and even as the desperate circumstances of the AIDS crisis “infus[ed] new radicalism into gay politics” (Ashley 2015:3), they did little to change the overall trajectory of the movement."
"33" "White gay men, at once haunted by memories of AIDS-era abjection and tempted by very real possibilities for (limited) mainstream acceptance, have increasingly sought recognition from corporations and nation-states, a trend that continues to this day (Chasin 2001; Duggan 2002; Puar 2007; Ward 2008). Reorienting themselves toward whiteness, white gays have largely excised multidimensional politics from the gay agenda; in so doing, they have effectively erased multiply oppressed people as queer political subjects (Ahmed 2006; Ferguson 2018; Han 2007). ‘White’ and ‘gay’ have become so linked that, in the words of C. Winter Han (2007), “ It’s almost  as if no gay men of color exist outside of fantasy cruises to Jamaica, Puerto Rico, or the ‘Orient’. And even then, they exist only to fulfill the sexual fantasies of gay white men” (P. 53).  Here, Han gestures to the effect of white gays’ embrace of whiteness on  whether  and  how  they engage with QPOCs as objects of desire. Because whiteness forecloses the possibility of recognition across racial difference, normative white gays can only consume, dominate, and/or reject racialized bodies. In the next section, we will look at how these dominative and aversive tendencies operate in the everyday life of intimate racism in queer spaces."
"34" "INTIMATE RACISM IN EVERYGAY LIFE"
"35" "To sum up, white gay men’s recognition  as  white men, so necessary for recuperating the white gay psyche after a history of abjection, is premised on renouncing their identifications with that which is non-white in themselves and others (Benjamin 1988; Butler 1997). It is not possible to simultaneously follow the ‘line of whiteness,’ in Sara Ahmed’s (2006) sense, and maintain bonds of recognition across racial difference (Benjamin 1988; Fanon 2008). Normative white gays will thus try to minimize their interactions with POCs (i.e., aversive racism) and/or interact in ways that maintain social distance (i.e., dominative racism) (Kovel 1970)."
"36" "In this section, I draw upon the existing literature to assess how well my psychosocial framework reflects the operations of intimate racism in queer spaces. My sources consist of secondary interview data and firsthand accounts from scholarly and popular literatures. I find that white gay patterns of interaction do convey a non-recognition of racialized subjectivities, resulting in patterns of dominative and aversive racism. Dominative tendencies can be seen in cases of racialized aggression and the more widespread fetishization of particular racial categories, while aversive racism is most apparent in racialized patterns of sexual rejection and  exclusion."
"37" "Dominative Consumption"
"38" "In the realm of queer sex and romance, dominative racism frequently manifests in a tendency to objectify and fetishize racial Others. This path is aided by the logic of neoliberalism, where race becomes one among any number of choices available for the white gay consumer in his sexual and romantic pursuits (Duggan 2002; Robinson 2015). By consuming or  eating the other  in hooks’ (2012) sense of the phrase, white gays “spice up\" their whiteness. To this end, white gays often use food metaphors to describe their racial tastes, as when Daroya (2017) quotes a Grindr user who is “more into vanilla and spice [whites and Latinos] than chocolate and rice [blacks and Asians]” (P. 73). The sheer callousness of comparing racial minorities to items on a grocery list hints at the depth of dehumanization faced by POCs on sites like Grindr. Latinos, constructed here as “spicy,” may not face the same exclusion as their other racialized counterparts, but they instead have to grapple with their role as the exotic “spice” giving whiteness its flavor (Han 2007; hooks 2012; Robinson 2015). As Miguel Flores describes it, “I hate being a fetish. They don’t see you as a person. Just an object, Latin meat” (quoted in Engardio 1999:7)."
"39" "Racial fetishism takes on a more overtly dominative form when it draws upon existing colonial discourses. This can be seen in the case of so-called “rice queens,”   a subset of gay white men “who have developed a particular ‘taste’ for Asians” (Caluya 2006:2). Drawing upon Orientalist constructions of Asians as passive, weak, and feminine (Eng 2001; Fung 1996; Said 1978), rice queens often cast Asian men as the objects of their domination (Han 2007; Plummer 2007; Raj 2011). Raj (2011), for instance, notes how his “racial phenotype . . . becomes a  commodity” for white men who are “looking to dominate willing GAM [gay Asian male] . . . slaves” (P. 10). Plummer (2007) describes how the will to dominate Asian bodies can become a sort of 'sexual tourism’ wherein the Asian body “becomes the symbolic national body” and having sex with someone from an Orientalized nation means acquiring “notches in the bedpost” (P. 37). As an example, Plummer cites her Asian American interview participant’s account of his conversation with a white rice queen:"
"40" "He was mentioning all the different countries he had visited via having sex with men from those countries. So he had been to, he ‘had done ... Vietnam,’ he ‘had done Thailand,’ he ‘had done India’ ... he had not done the Philippines and ... I remember in my head saying ‘well, you're not gonna visit the Philippines through me’. (P. 37)"
"41" "In this instance, the white man fails to recognize the individual identities of the men he has sex with, instead reconstituting them as their nations of origin and subsequently re-colonizing them. In the place of true recognition, rice queens may only perceive Asian men as submissive objects longingly awaiting their conquest. Indeed, this is immediately evident in Wat’s (1996) description of a friend’s disturbing encounter with a rice queen:"
"42" "When a friend of mine finally convinced a drunken white man who had been forcing himself on him that he did not like playing the submissive role, the white man became disgusted and said, ‘You have completely turned Americanized. Go back to Asia and learn how to be an Asian’. This white man and others like him, sober or inebriated, have no way of relating to my Asian brothers except from atop. (P. 73)"
"43" "Black men, meanwhile, are fetishized not as passive and feminine but as aggressive and hyper-masculine. As Han (2007) explains, “If Asian men are the vassals for white men’s domination fantasies, black men are the tools required for white male submissive fantasies\" (P. 57). Importantly, white gay men's objectification of black men can be seen as dominative even in its outward submissiveness. This is because black men are still required to perform a certain role to satisfy the white man’s desires (McBride 2005; Teunis 2007). In BDSM circles, this  phenomenon is known as “topping from the bottom,” where the ostensible “submissive” attempts to control (i.e., dominate) a sexual encounter (Lindemann 2012:34). In this view black gay men may often adapt their sexual behavior to conform to white partners’ expectations, playing the role of a “top” (insertive partner) even when they would otherwise be “bottoms” (receptive partners) or “versatile” (both insertive and receptive) (Husbands et al. 2013; Lick and Johnson 2015; Teunis 2007). This creates a power imbalance where topping, the symbolic position of power, becomes a position of powerlessness; the white bottom thus becomes “the powerful one in the relationship,  the one who establishes boundaries and expects to receive sexual pleasure, even at the expense of the top, if necessary” (P. 270).  Seen in this light, black men are indeed  the tools  for white men’s pleasure. More specifically, the “tool” of the white man’s pleasure is not the black man himself but his “big black cock” or “BBC” (Orne 2018), that mythical entity fabricated so long ago by slavers and colonizers (Fanon 2008; Kovel 1970; McBride 2005). As Lawrence, a black participant in Jason Orne’s (2018) study of sexual racism in Chicago, lamented, “I’m the big black dildo that they want to play with, and then put in a drawer.”"
"44" "Aversive Exclusion"
"45" "The quantitative literature has shown a robust pattern of white rejection of black and Asian men. Raymond and McFarland (2009), in their survey of sexual partner selection in San Francisco, find that white men expressed the least preference for black men as sexual partners and were most likely to date other white men. Phua and Kaufman (2003) likewise observe that white gay men’s personal ads reflected the highest preference for other whites and the lowest for blacks. White, Reisner, Dunham, and Mimiaga (2014), in their study of online profiles in the Boston area, observe an unexpected preference for Latinos and Blacks over other white men with the lowest preference for Asians. Christian Rudder (2009b) at OkCupid finds that black, Asian and Indian men were the  least likely to get replies from white men after messaging them (32%, 35%, and 35%, respectively), while other white men were the most likely (44%). It is worth noting that this trend of racial exclusion is not unique to queer men: black and Asian men were similarly stigmatized in OkCupid’s opposite-sex dating market (Rudder 2009, 2014). What perhaps most distinguishes white gays from their heterosexual counterparts is the explicitness of their racial aversion (Phua and Kaufman 2003; Robinson and Frost 2018; Steinbugler 2012). As Matthew Rodriguez (2016) puts it, “Gay men brandish their racial dating preferences with all the same unapologetic bravado that straight men reserve for their favourite baseball team.”"
"46" "Indeed, overt forms of racial exclusion are quite common in queer spaces. Rejection, like fetishism, often takes the form of food metaphors like “no rice,” “no sushi,” “not into curries,” and “not into chopsticks” (Daroya 2017:78). Such exclusions are also not limited to online spaces; Gilbert Caluya (2006), for instance, recounts one especially painful experience:"
"47" "I’m in a gay club leaning against the bar waiting for my drink to arrive. . . . A head pops into view. He leans forward to order a drink and then turns my way. In reaction I smile. His left eyebrow rises, his eyes look me up and down, he scrunches his nose and with curled back lips he says, “I don’t do Asians”. He raises his hand to block the sight of me. (P. 1)"
"48" "Noting its theatrical excesses, Caluya suggests there is more to the man’s response than a simple lack of attraction. More than disinterest, this response reflects the man's disgust at his uncomfortable proximity to Asianness. Blocking the sight of him acts as a public statement of aversion that dispels any association between the two bodies, Asian and white. So many cases of racial quality have this excessive quality, cases where people “ will not look at you, will not touch you, just because you're Black\"  (quoted in Paul et al. 2010:9)."
"49" "The visceral quality of racial aversion is further seen in instances where white men move instantaneously from attraction to revulsion at the sight of a non-white face. Caluya (2006)  describes an occasion where a white man is checking him out, “catches sight of my face and suddenly he frowns and quickly diverts his glance away” (P. 8). Tony Ayres (1999) describes a similar experience of someone “coming towards me because they are attracted to my shape or size, but turn[ing] away as soon as they see my face” (pp. 89-90)."
"50" "Racial aversion is not always so blatant. Sometimes, whites men include “White male seeks same” on their dating profiles as a more subtle version of “‘No Blacks’ or ‘No Asians’ or ‘No Latinos’” (quoted in Plummer 2007:38). In his autoethnographic study of Grindr in Australia, Senthorun Raj (2011) observes similar scenarios where white men would describe themselves as “Aussie looking for other Aussie men,” implicitly excluding brown people like him from the national image without any overtly racist language. Subtler still is what might be called the “sexual metaracism” of white gays who never express any hint of racial aversion but nonetheless uphold the dominant racial order with their dating patterns, as in the case of OkCupid users in who reply less often to messages from POCs (Rudder 2009)"
"51" "At the other end of the spectrum is aversive racism so blatant that it becomes dominative. Food metaphors like “not into chopsticks or curries” (Daroya 2017) can be read as dominative by virtue of their callousness, their proverbial ‘twisting of the knife’ in racialized wounds. This dominative rejection escalates quite a bit when white gays replace the food metaphors with racial slurs, as in this account of Paul et al.’s black interviewee:"
"52" "People over email have called me “nigger” and stuff like that, and said “I don't want any, you know, parts of you,” you know. Where they'll talk to me for a while and then, you know, I'll send them a picture and they're like “Oh my god, I can't believe this, blah, blah, blah.” (Paul et al. 2010:7)"
"53" "Then there is the “overt belligerence” that Ayres (1999) sometimes experiences in gay spaces, “the drunk queens who shout in my face, ‘Go back to your own country’; . . . the guys who hissed at me in the back room, ‘I’m not into Asians.’” (P. 89). As distressing as these experiences may be, Ayres  clarifies that they are far less common and less impactful than the “wearing, subtle, almost imperceptible feeling of exclusion” that is his usual experience in the gay scene (P. 89). It seems that QPOCs, unless fetishized, “are either invisible in the space of desire, or castigated for being unappealing” (Raj 2011:8)."
"54" "Even whites who are open to sex with POCs will often draw the line at romantic intimacy, especially with black men (Kulick 2013; Plummer 2007; Paul et al. 2010; McKeown et al. 2010). This is hardly surprising; Western notions of romantic love, even more than sex, were constructed with whites in mind (Carter 2007; Gebrial 2017; Steinbugler 2012). Recall that black men’s alleged hypersexuality discursively marks them as unsuitable for white women’s love (Collins 2004; Nagel 2003; Steinbugler 2012). The same can increasingly be said for white men, who may sometimes enjoy sexual intimacy with black men but remain incapable of recognizing them as potential love objects. According to one of Paul et al.’s black interview participants, white gays “love the idea of a Latin lover, but somehow a Black person is a sexual object. It is something . . . that you fuck, you don't date” (P. 9)."
"55" "* * * * *"
"56" "As the myriad examples above demonstrate, white gay men frequently uphold their racial whiteness in their intimate interactions with QPOCs. Unable to orient themselves toward racial others in all their complexity, white gays can either avoid them entirely or relate to them in a dominative manner that upholds racial hierarchies. Or, as is quite common in the gay community, they may reject racialized others in a manner that is itself dominative and sadistic. I should note that this is of course not the case for all white men, it is the general pattern of those who are consciously or unconsciously caught up in the pursuit of whiteness. Non-exploitive forms of interracial intimacy would still be possible for POCs who pursue “honorary whiteness” on the  one hand and white men who divest from whiteness on the other. In the former case, the white man relates to a racialized other only if the other rids himself of his racial markers, so that his partner becomes an “exception” that proves the rule of white supremacy (Ahmed 2003; Steinbugler 2012; Ward 2008). The latter case will be discussed at length in the following section."
"57" "LOVE AND RECOGNITION AS ANTIRACIST PRAXIS"
"58" "In a context of ‘white supremacist capitalist patriarchy,’ bell hooks suggests that genuine love can be hard to find. Using Fromm and Fanon, hooks argues that  lovelessness  is the structural condition of interpersonal life in the contemporary West, especially for those deemed unlovable (Glass 2009; hooks 2000). If domination and isolation are the primary behavioral models available, it is no wonder then that white gay men would perpetuate these forms of (non)intimacy in their everyday lives (Benjamin 1988; Chabot 2008; Fromm 2006; hooks 2000). Given the depth of Western investment in white race hatred, there is plenty of reason to be skeptical that any sort of loving queer recognition is possible across lines of racial difference. For an unlikely dose of optimism, however, I turn to Fanon (2008), who insists that interracial intimacy is possible: “Today we believe in the possibility of love, and that is why we endeavor to trace its imperfections and perversions” (P. 24). Eduardo Bonilla-Silva helpfully reminds us that racialized subjectivities are contingent and thus transformable (Bonilla-Silva 2019; Frankenberg 1993). As deeply embedded as whiteness may seem in white gay men, it was only last century that we were categorically shut out from the white normative ideal (Carter 2007; Mosse 1996; Rubin 2011). White gays today remain structurally and psychically ambivalent toward the dominant white society, and even though this ambivalent orientation has turned heavily toward  whiteness, there is still room for transformation and contestation (Bonilla-Silva 2019; Ferguson 2018; Gould 2009)."
"59" "Such a radical transformation calls for a politics of what feminist theorist Chela Sandoval (2000) calls “decolonial love.” Decolonial love is a radical approach to intersubjectivity that rejects binary oppositions and colonial distinctions and instead “aims to direct our attention toward decolonial healing, calling us to address the wounds of coloniality by attending to the experiences of those most marginalized in order to make ethical, loving, and human relation possible” (Ureña 2017:99). If colonial domination is, in Benjamin’s (1988) parlance, “a twisting of the bonds of love,” decolonial love is an untwisting of those bonds that enables an intimate antiracist praxis. Various theorists have put forth similarly productive conceptions of love, though Sean Chabot (2008) puts it most succinctly as any relationship of “self (selves) with self (selves)” (P. 809), a relationship between people who work together toward a common goal and acknowledge each other as selves in their own right. Love, in this sense, facilitates what Benjamin (1988) calls  mutual recognition , a recognition that in turn “allows a certain kind of negotiation that seems to disrupt the possibility of domination” (hooks 2006:287)."
"60" "What does a radical politics of  antiracist love  look like in practice? If love requires that we “leave our comfort zone and exert ourselves for other people” (Chabot 2008:16), this is clearly exemplified in acts of what Steinbugler (2012) calls  intimate racework.  In her qualitative analysis of same-sex and opposite-sex black-white couples, Steinbugler uses the term racework to refer to the “routine actions and strategies through which individuals maintain close relationships across lines of racial stratification” (P. xii). Although racework sometimes means papering over racial differences to preserve a white partner’s comfort, it also allows some couples to maintain closeness by acknowledging their differences and working to bridge them  without ‘transcending’ them. This can involve white partners learning to take their black partners’ racialized experiences seriously and validating those experiences even when it risks shattering their own implicitly white worldview. It also means challenging their own unmarked racial perspective to gain a fuller awareness of their racial whiteness, which sometimes leads to a marked shift in their racial identities."
"61" "If Steinbugler (2012) provides detailed examples of racial transformation in the romantic sphere, she has less to say about sexual intimacy, leaving us to speculate further what intimate antiracism would look like in the context of casual sex. Love is also relevant here, not the kind of love born of familiarity but rather a loving orientation toward people (Fromm 2006; Kovel 1970), closer to what Hartman (2013) calls 'bondless love.' Such an orientation entails a commitment to both mutual recognition  and  mutual pleasure, with the understanding that both parties are full-fledged human beings and not caricatures of racial alterity. Another key feature of an antiracist approach to sex is an  openness to desire  wherever it may lead, an unwillingness to contain desire within preconceived racial “preferences.” With this in mind, Caluya (2008) suggests a surprising return to dehumanization, not in the sense of violent objectification but in allowing individual differences and symbolic boundaries to unsettle themselves in a haze of desire, as illustrated in the following anecdote:"
"62" "‘You’re the first oriental I’ve been attracted to’, he says. . . . I retort, ‘you’re the first person who’s called me ‘‘oriental’’.’ He steps back, clearly cut by the comment. ‘Sorry, I didn’t mean it like that’ he apologises. . . . ‘Sorry. I didn’t mean to be so harsh. Let’s just dance’, I offer, and he smiles in response, pulling me closer. As the music reconfigures my body so does it reconfigure his . . . . The zone of proximity intensifies as faces move closer, enabling a becoming-other, which is at once inhuman and depersonalising. In this heightened moment of non-self-awareness, this superhuman, in-between flow of affects, faces bask in their voluptuous nakedness. . . . . Faces are deterritorialised in this becoming-imperceptible."
"63" "This anecdote is far from unproblematic, as Caluya acknowledges. But regardless of whether his  dance partner deserved forgiveness, the exchange between them provides an example of racework in a purely casual context that is used to bridge and ultimately blur distinctions between bodies. Of course, sometimes racial distinctions need to be acknowledged and amplified more than obscured; whiteness, in particular, has a nasty habit of committing its worst deeds in the dark (Bonilla-Silva 2006; Frankenberg 1993)."
"64" "Returning to Ahmed (2006)’s discussion of orientations, an antiracist orientation entails first and foremost a turning away from whiteness, one that allows us to hold our ground in the strange  dis -orientation of queer mixedness, where “bodies gather, getting together, refusing this inheritance of whiteness, refusing to even follow that line” (P. 155). In turning away from a racial frame that “encodes people in and out of the possibility of love,” we orient ourselves toward new possibilities for queer desire (Gebrial 2017). Caluya (2008) asks, “How different might gay spaces be . . . if desires were allowed to do their work of connecting and assembling? . . . Perhaps then our bars and clubs might approach something that more properly deserves the name ‘queer space’” (P. 290)."
"65" "CONCLUSION"
"66" "In this chapter, I have endeavored to flesh out a psychosocial framework for understanding white gay men's patterns of racist behavior in romantic and sexual contexts, or what I have termed  intimate racism . In so doing, I also wanted to show that sociological theories of race and sexuality can be productively blended with the psychoanalytic perspectives of Fanon, Fromm, Kovel, and others to better account for the psychic forces motivating white gay men’s intimate expressions of racism. Specifically, I argued that white gays have been driven by psychohistorical forces to try and claim the psychic advantages of whiteness. In so doing, they have participated in the distancing from and denigration of non-white bodies that are part and  parcel of white subjectivity. Seen in this light, white gays may realize that their investments in whiteness and aversions to its opposite run far deeper than is usually assumed. Only from a place of deep self-understanding can white gays transform their unconscious acts of intimate racism into an intimate antiracist praxis. Such a praxis, I argue, must be grounded in a firm commitment to mutual recognition, a loving orientation, and above all, a firm stance against the trappings of white supremacy."
"67" "REFERENCES"
"68" "Adeagbo, Oluwafemi. 2016. “‘Love beyond Colour’: The Formation of Interracial Gay Men’s Intimate Relationships in Post-Apartheid South Africa.”  National Identities  18(3):241–64."
"69" "Adeagbo, Oluwafemi Atanda. 2018. “Are Same-Sex Relationships Anti-Family?: Investigating Relationship Stability among Interracial Gay Partners in South Africa.”  Journal of Gender Studies  27(2):165–76."
"70" "Adorno, Theodor W., Else Frenkel-Brunswik, Daniel J. Levinson, and R. Nevitt Sanford. 1982.  The Authoritarian Personality . New York: Norton."
"71" "Adorno, Theodor W. and Max Horkheimer. 2000. “Elements of Anti-Semitism: The Limits of Enlightenment.” Pp. 206–11 in  Theories of Race and Racism: A Reader , edited by L. Back and J. Solomon. London: Routledge."
"72" "Ahmed, Sara. 2006.  Queer Phenomenology: Orientations, Objects, Others . Durham, NC: Duke University Press."
"73" "Ashley, Colin P. 2015. “Gay Liberation: How a Once Radical Movement Got Married and Settled Down.”  New Labor Forum  24(3):28–32."
"74" "Association for Psychosocial Studies. 2019. “About Us.”  The Association for Psychosocial Studies . Retrieved December 14, 2019 ( http://www.psychosocial-studies-association.org/about/ )."
"75" "Ayres, Tony. 1999. “China Doll-The Experience of Being a Gay Chinese Australian.”  Journal of Homosexuality  36(3–4):87–97."
"76" "Ayres, Tony. 2000. “Sexual Identity and Cultural Identity: A Crash Course.”  Journal of Australian Studies  24(65):159–63."
"77" "Bawer, Bruce. 1996.  A Place at the Table: The Gay Individual in American Society . New York: Touchstone."
"78" "Benjamin, Jessica. 1988.  The Bonds of Love: Psychoanalysis, Feminism, and the Problem of Domination . New York: Pantheon Books."
"79" "Bersani, Leo. 1987. “Is the Rectum a Grave?”  AIDS: Cultural Analysis/Cultural Activism  43:197–222."
"80" "Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo. 2006.  Racism without Racists: Color-Blind Racism and the Persistence of Racial Inequality in the United States . Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers."
"81" "Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo. 2019. “Feeling Race: Theorizing the Racial Economy of Emotions.”  American Sociological Review  84(1):1–25."
"82" "Bourdieu, Pierre. 2002.  Masculine Domination . Stanford: Stanford University Press."
"83" "Butler, Judith. 1992. “Sexual Inversions: Rereading the End of Foucault’s History of Sexuality, Vol. I.” Pp. 59–75 in  Discourses of Sexuality: From Aristotle to AIDS , edited by D. C. Stanton. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press."
"84" "Butler, Judith. 1997.  The Psychic Life of Power: Theories in Subjection . Stanford: Stanford University Press."
"85" "Callander, Denton, Martin Holt, and Christy Newman. 2017. “Gay Racism.” Pp. 1–13 in  The Psychic Life of Racism in Gay Men’s Communities , edited by D. W. Riggs. Lanham: Lexington Books."
"86" "Callander, Denton, Martin Holt, and Christy E. Newman. 2012. “Just a Preference: Racialised Language in the Sex-Seeking Profiles of Gay and Bisexual Men.”  Culture, Health & Sexuality  14(9):1049–63."
"87" "Callander, Denton, Christy E. Newman, and Martin Holt. 2015. “Is Sexual Racism Really Racism? Distinguishing Attitudes Toward Sexual Racism and Generic Racism Among Gay and Bisexual Men.”  Archives of Sexual Behavior  44(7):1991–2000."
"88" "Caluya, Gilbert. 2006. “The (Gay) Scene of Racism: Face, Shame and Gay Asian Males.”  Australian Critical Race and Whiteness Studies Association E-Journal  2(2):1–14."
"89" "Caluya, Gilbert. 2008. “‘The Rice Steamer’: Race, Desire and Affect in Sydney’s Gay Scene.”  Australian Geographer  39(3):283–92."
"90" "Canaday, Margot. 2009.  The Straight State: Sexuality and Citizenship in Twentieth-Century America . Princeton: Princeton University Press."
"91" "Carter, Julian B. 2007.  The Heart of Whiteness: Normal Sexuality and Race in America, 1880-1940 . Durham, NC: Duke University Press."
"92" "Chabot, Sean. 2008. “Love and Revolution.”  Critical Sociology  34(6):803–28."
"93" "Chancer, Lynn S. and John Andrews. 2014.  The Unhappy Divorce of Sociology and Psychoanalysis: Diverse Perspectives on the Psychosocial . Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan."
"94" "Chasin, Alexandra. 2001.  Selling Out: The Gay and Lesbian Movement Goes to Market . Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan."
"95" "Cheng, Jacks. 2017. “Gay Orientalism.” Pp. 33–48 in  The Psychic Life of Racism in Gay Men’s Communities , edited by D. W. Riggs. Lanham: Lexington Books."
"96" "Chito Childs, Erica. 2008.  Fade to Black and White: Interracial Images in Popular Culture . Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield."
"97" "Chuang, Kent. 1999. “Using Chopsticks to Eat Steak.”  Journal of Homosexuality  36(3–4):29–41."
"98" "Clough, Patricia Ticineto and Jean Halley. 2007.  The Affective Turn: Theorizing the Social . Durham, NC: Duke University Press."
"99" "Cohen, C. J. 1997. “Punks, Bulldaggers, and Welfare Queens: The Radical Potential of Queer Politics?”  GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies  3(4):437–65."
"100" "Collins, Patricia Hill. 1990.  Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge, Consciousness, and the Politics of Empowerment . New York: Routledge."
"101" "Collins, Patricia Hill. 2004.  Black Sexual Politics: African Americans, Gender, and the New Racism . New York: Routledge."
"102" "Daroya, Emerich. 2017. “‘Not Into Chopsticks or Curries’: Erotic Capital and the Psychic Life of Racism on Grind.” Pp. 67–80 in  The Psychic Life of Racism in Gay Men’s Communities , edited by D. W. Riggs. Lanham: Lexington Books."
"103" "Duggan, Lisa. 2002. “The New Homonormativity: The Sexual Politics of Neoliberalism.” Pp. 175–94 in  Materializing democracy: toward a revitalized cultural politics ,  New Americanists , edited by R. Castronovo and D. D. Nelson. Durham, NC: Duke University Press."
"104" "Eng, David L. 2001.  Racial Castration: Managing Masculinity in Asian America . Dutham: Duke University Press."
"105" "Engardio, Joel P. 1999. “You Can’t Be Gay — You’re Latino.”  SF Weekly , April 14."
"106" "Espiritu, Yen Le. 2010. “All Men Are Not Created Equal: Asian Men in U.S. History.” Pp. 17–25 in  Men’s Lives , edited by M. S. Kimmel and M. A. Messner. Boston: Allyn and Bacon."
"107" "Fanon, Frantz. 2008.  Black Skin, White Masks . New York: Grove Press."
"108" "Feagin, Joe R. 2000.  Racist America: Roots, Current Realities, and Future Reparations . New York: Routledge."
"109" "Feagin, Joe R. 2013.  The White Racial Frame: Centuries of Racial Framing and Counter-Framing . New York: Routledge."
"110" "Ferguson, Roderick A. 2018.  One-Dimensional Queer . Medford, MA: Polity."
"111" "Foucault, Michel. 1978.  The History of Sexuality . Vol. 1. New York: Pantheon Books."
"112" "Frankenberg, Ruth. 1993.  White Women, Race Matters: The Social Construction of Whiteness . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press."
"113" "Freedman, Estelle B. 2013.  Redefining Rape: Sexual Violence in the Era of Suffrage and Segregation . Cambridge: Harvard University Press."
"114" "Fromm, Erich. 1990.  The Sane Society . New York: Holt."
"115" "Fromm, Erich. 1994.  Escape from Freedom . New York: Holt."
"116" "Fromm, Erich. 2006.  The Art of Loving . New York: Harper Perennial."
"117" "Frosh, Stephen. 2002. “The Other.”  American Imago  59(4):389–407."
"118" "Frosh, Stephen. 2013. “Psychoanalysis, Colonialism, Racism.”  Journal of Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology  33(3):141–54."
"119" "Fung, Richard. 2005. “Looking for My Penis: The Eroticized Asian in Gay Video Porn.” Pp. 235–53 in  A companion to Asian American studies , edited by K. A. Ono. Malden, MA: Blackwell."
"120" "Gebrial, Dalia. 2017. “Decolonising Desire: The Politics of Love.”  Verso Blog . Retrieved October 15, 2019 ( http://www.versobooks.com/blogs/3094-decolonising-desire-the-politics-of-love )."
"121" "Giddens, Anthony. 2013.  The Transformation of Intimacy Sexuality, Love and Eroticism in Modern Societies . New York, NY: Wiley."
"122" "Glass, Kathy. 2009. “Love Matters: Bell Hooks on Political Resistance and Change.” Pp. 181–99 in  Critical perspectives on bell hooks , edited by M. del Guadalupe Davidson and G. Yancy. New York: Routledge."
"123" "Glenn, Evelyn Nakano. 2015. “Settler Colonialism as Structure: A Framework for Comparative Studies of U.S. Race and Gender Formation.”  Sociology of Race and Ethnicity  1(1):52–72."
"124" "Gould, Deborah B. 2009.  Moving Politics: Emotion and Act up’s Fight against AIDS . Chicago: University of Chicago Press."
"125" "Green, Adam Isaiah. 2008. “The Social Organization of Desire: The Sexual Fields Approach.”  Sociological Theory  26(1):25–50."
"126" "Halberstam, Jack. 2005. “Shame and White Gay Masculinity.”  Social Text  23(3–4):219–33."
"127" "Halberstam, Jack. 2011.  The Queer Art of Failure . Durham, NC: Duke University Press."
"128" "Han, Alan. 2014. “I Think You’re the Smartest Race I’ve Ever Met: Racialised Economies of Queer Male Desire.”  Critical Race & Whiteness Studies  10(2):1–15."
"129" "Han, C. Winter. 2007. “They Don’t Want To Cruise Your Type: Gay Men of Color and the Racial Politics of Exclusion.”  Social Identities  13(1):51–67."
"130" "Han, C. Winter and Kyung-Hee Choi. 2018. “Very Few People Say ‘No Whites’: Gay Men of Color and the Racial Politics of Desire.”  Sociological Spectrum  38(3):145–61."
"131" "Hartman, Stephen. 2013. “Bondless Love.”  Studies in Gender and Sexuality  14(1):35–50."
"132" "Hay, Harry. 1997.  Radically Gay . Boston: Beacon Press."
"133" "Henry, Phillip. 2018. “Dear White Gay Men, It’s Black History Month — Stop Protecting White Supremacy.”  Them. , February 2."
"134" "Hook, Derek. 2005. “The Racial Stereotype, Colonial Discourse, Fetishism, and Racism.”  The Psychoanalytic Review  92(5):701–34."
"135" "Hook, Derek. 2008. “Postcolonial Psychoanalysis.”  Theory & Psychology  18(2):269–83."
"136" "hooks, bell. 2000.  All about Love: New Visions . New York: William Morrow."
"137" "hooks, bell. 2012. “Eating the Other: Desire and Resistance.” Pp. 308–17 in  Media and cultural studies: Keyworks , edited by M. G. Durham and D. Kellner. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell."
"138" "Husbands, Winston, Lydia Makoroka, Rinaldo Walcott, Barry D. Adam, Clemon George, Robert S. Remis, and Sean B. Rourke. 2013. “Black Gay Men as Sexual Subjects: Race, Racialisation and the Social Relations of Sex among Black Gay Men in Toronto.”  Culture, Health & Sexuality  15(4):434–49."
"139" "Johnson, George. 2019. “White Gay Privilege Exists All Year, but It Hurts the Most during Pride.”  NBC News , June 30."
"140" "Kaye/Kantrowitz, Melanie. 2007.  The Colors of Jews: Racial Politics and Radical Diasporism . Bloomington: Indiana University Press."
"141" "Kovel, Joel. 1970.  White Racism: A Psychohistory . New York: Pantheon."
"142" "Kovel, Joel. 2000. “Reflections on  White Racism .”  Psychoanalytic Dialogues  10(4):579–87."
"143" "Kulick, Alex. 2013. “How Gay Stayed White: Millennial White Gay Men and the Production of and Resistance to Racism, Sexism, and Heterosexism.” Senior Honors Thesis, Deparment of Women’s Studies, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor."
"144" "Kuzmanovic, Dejan. 2018. “Queer Race Play: Kinky Sex and the Trauma of Racism.”  At the Interface / Probing the Boundaries  91:71–88."
"145" "Lick, David J. and Kerri L. Johnson. 2015. “Intersecting Race and Gender Cues Are Associated with Perceptions of Gay Men’s Preferred Sexual Roles.”  Archives of Sexual Behavior  44(5):1471–81."
"146" "Lindemann, Danielle J. 2012.  Dominatrix: Gender, Eroticism, and Control in the Dungeon . Chicago: University of Chicago Press."
"147" "Marcuse, Herbert. 1969. “Repressive Tolerance.” Pp. 95–137 in  A Critique of pure tolerance . Boston: Beacon Press."
"148" "Marcuse, Herbert. 1991.  One-Dimensional Man: Studies in the Ideology of Advanced Industrial Society . Boston: Beacon Press."
"149" "Marcuse, Herbert. 2000.  An Essay on Liberation . Boston: Beacon Press."
"150" "McBride, Dwight A. 2005.  Why I Hate Abercrombie & Fitch: Essays on Race and Sexuality . New York: New York University."
"151" "McKeown, Eamonn, Simon Nelson, Jane Anderson, Nicola Low, and Jonathan Elford. 2010. “Disclosure, Discrimination and Desire: Experiences of Black and South Asian Gay Men in Britain.”  Culture, Health & Sexuality  12(7):843–56."
"152" "Mosse, George L. 1996.  The Image of Man: The Creation of Modern Masculinity . New York: Oxford University Press."
"153" "Muñoz, José Esteban. 1999.  Disidentifications: Queers Of Color And The Performance Of Politics . Minneapolis: Univ Of Minnesota Press."
"154" "Nagel, Joane. 2003.  Race, Ethnicity, and Sexuality: Intimate Intersections, Forbidden Frontiers . New York: Oxford University Press."
"155" "Nemoto, Kumiko. 2016. “Interracial Romance: The Logic of Acceptance and Domination.” Pp. 295–303 in  Introducing the New Sexuality Studies , edited by N. L. Fischer and S. Seidman. New York: Routledge."
"156" "Orne, Jason. 2018.“Racist Sex without Racists: The Pleasure of Race and White Control Over the Terms of Sexual Racial Liberation.” Presented at the 113th American Sociological Association Annual Meeting, Philadelphia."
"157" "Paul, Jay P., George Ayala, and Kyung-Hee Choi. 2010. “Internet Sex Ads for MSM and Partner Selection Criteria: The Potency of Race/Ethnicity Online.”  Journal of Sex Research  47(6):528–38."
"158" "Pérez, Hiram. 2015.  A Taste for Brown Bodies . New York: NYU Press."
"159" "Phua, Voon Chin and Gayle Kaufman. 2003. “The Crossroads of Race and Sexuality: Date Selection among Men in Internet ‘Personal’ Ads.”  Journal of Family Issues  24(8):981–94."
"160" "Plummer, Mary D. 2007. “Sexual Racism in Gay Communities: Navigating the Ethnosexual Marketplace.” PhD dissertation, Department of Psychology, University of Washington."
"161" "Ponzanesi, Sandra. 2005. “Beyond the Black Venus: Colonial Sexual Politics and Contemporary Visual Practices.” Pp. 165–89 in  Italian Colonialism: Legacy and Memory , edited by J. Andall and D. Duncan. Oxford: Peter Lang."
"162" "Puar, Jasbir K. 2007.  Terrorist Assemblages: Homonationalism in Queer Times . Durham, NC: Duke University Press."
"163" "Raj, Senthorun. 2011. “Grindring Bodies: Racial and Affective Economies of Online Queer Desire.”  Critical Race and Whiteness Studies  7(2):1–12."
"164" "Raymond, H. Fisher and Willi McFarland. 2009. “Racial Mixing and HIV Risk among Men Who Have Sex with Men.”  AIDS and Behavior  13(4):630–37."
"165" "Riggs, Damien W., ed. 2017.  The Psychic Life of Racism in Gay Men’s Communities . Lanham: Lexington Books."
"166" "Rimmerman, Craig A. 2018.  The Lesbian and Gay Movements   : Assimilation or Liberation?  New York: Routledge."
"167" "Robinson, Brandon Andrew. 2015. “‘Personal Preference’ as the New Racism: Gay Desire and Racial Cleansing in Cyberspace.”  Sociology of Race and Ethnicity  1(2):317–30."
"168" "Robinson, Russell K. and David M. Frost. 2018. “LGBT Equality And Sexual Racism.”  Fordham Law Review  86(6):2739–54."
"169" "Rodriguez, Matthew. 2016. “Here’s One Brutal Truth Every White Gay Man Needs to Hear.”  Mic , June 1."
"170" "Rubin, Gayle S. 2011. “Thinking Sex: Notes for a Radical Theory of the Politics of Sexuality.” in  Deviations: a Gayle Rubin reader , edited by G. S. Rubin. Durham, NC: Duke University Press."
"171" "Rudder, Christian. 2009. “Same-Sex Data for Race vs. Reply Rates.”  OkTrends . Retrieved December 6, 2019 ( https://web.archive.org/web/20120723173606/http://blog.okcupid.com/index.php/same-sex-data-race-reply/ )."
"172" "Rudder, Christian. 2014. “Race and Attraction, 2009–2014.”  The OkCupid Blog . Retrieved October 15, 2019 ( https://theblog.okcupid.com/race-and-attraction-2009-2014-107dcbb4f060 )."
"173" "Rustin, Michael. 1991.  The Good Society and the Inner World . New York: Verso."
"174" "Said, Edward W. 1978.  Orientalism . New York: Pantheon Books."
"175" "Sandoval, Chela. 2000.  Methodology of the Oppressed . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press."
"176" "Scheff, Thomas J. 2006. “Hypermasculinity and Violence as a Social System.”  Universitas  2(2):1–10."
"177" "Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky. 2003.  Touching Feeling: Affect, Pedagogy, Performativity . Durham: Duke University Press."
"178" "Seidman, Steven, Alan Frank, and Alan Frank. 2018.  Psychoanalysis and Contemporary American Men   : Gender Identity in a Time of Uncertainty . New York: Routledge."
"179" "Steinbugler, Amy C. 2012.  Beyond Loving: Intimate Racework in Lesbian, Gay, and Straight Interracial Relationships . New York: Oxford University Press."
"180" "Teunis, Niels. 2007. “Sexual Objectification and the Construction of Whiteness in the Gay Male Community.”  Culture, Health & Sexuality  9(3):263–75."
"181" "Tsang, Daniel C. 1992. “M. Butterfly Meets the Great White Hope.” 3–4."
"182" "Ureña, Carolyn. 2017. “Loving from Below: Of (De)Colonial Love and Other Demons.”  Hypatia  32(1):86–102."
"183" "Vaid, Urvashi. 1996.  Virtual Equality: The Mainstreaming of Gay and Lesbian Liberation . New York: Anchor."
"184" "Vidal-Ortiz, Salvador, Brandon Andrew Robinson, and Cristina Khan. 2018.  Race and Sexuality . Cambridge, UK: Polity Press."
"185" "Ward, Jane. 2008. “White Normativity: The Cultural Dimensions of Whiteness in a Racially Diverse LGBT Organization.”  Sociological Perspectives  51(3):563–86."
"186" "Wat, Eric C. 1996. “Preserving the Paradox: Stories from a Gay-Loh.” Pp. 71–82 in  Asian American Sexualities: Dimensions of the Gay and Lesbian Experience , edited by R. Leong. New York: Routledge."
"187" "West, Carolyn M. and Kalimah Johnson. 2013.  Sexual Violence in the Lives Of African American Women: Risk, Response, and Resilience . Harrisburg, PA: National Resource Center on Domestic Violence."
"188" "White, Jaclyn M., Sari L. Reisner, Emilia Dunham, and Matthew J. Mimiaga. 2014. “Race-Based Sexual Preferences in a Sample of Online Profiles of Urban Men Seeking Sex with Men.”  Journal of Urban Health   : Bulletin of the New York Academy of Medicine  91(4):768–75."
"189" "Wrong, Dennis H. 1961. “The Oversocialized Conception of Man in Modern Sociology.”   American Sociological Review  26(2):183–93."
