Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.28

Pp. 365 -378

Narrowing the Achievement Gap between EFL Students in Oral Expression through
Cooperative Learning
Tarek Ghodbane
Department of English
University of Abou Bekr Belkaid Tlemcen-Algeria
Hafida Hamzaoui El Achachi
Department of English
University of Abou Bekr Belkaid Tlemcen-Algeria
Abstract
Any learning is stimulated by the teaching method or technique adopted. When put in traditional
competitive settings, students worry more about their self-esteem and tend to shy away from
participating in the activities, while, only those with higher level of oral skills volunteer in
answering the questions. This inequity in practice causes a discrepancy in students’ performance
in the oral expression exams and thus, results in a gap in the achievement. This paper suggests
cooperative learning as a means to reduce the achievement gap between high and low achievers in
the oral expression classes. This study is an endeavor to highlight the effectiveness of cooperative
learning in reducing the disparity between high and low achievers and also to accentuate the
benefits of this method in the English as a foreign language (EFL) classroom. The study followed
an experimental pretest-posttest non-equivalent groups design with a sample of 44 second year
EFL students from the University of Khenchela, Algeria. The intervention lasted for a semester.
The results showed that the achievement gap was reduced in the experimental group after using
cooperative learning instructions, while the traditional method, in the control group, failed in
closing the achievement gap between high and low-achievers. As a conclusion, some
recommendations will be given with the aim of promoting the use of cooperative learning in the
EFL classrooms as well as fostering teachers’ awareness of the effectiveness of such teaching
method in improving students’ performance in oral expression.
Keywords: Achievement gap, cooperative learning, effect size, oral skills
Cite as: Ghodbane, T. ,& El Achachi, H. H. (2019) Narrowing the Achievement Gap between
EFL Students in Oral Expression through Cooperative Learning. Arab World English Journal, 10
(2) 365 -378. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.28

365

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019

Narrowing the Achievement Gap between EFL Students I

Ghodbane & El Achachi

1. Introduction
Achievement gap is one of the most common problems faced in the traditional, competitive, EFL
classroom. The greater the gap between high- and low-achieving students the more challenging
and complex is the instructors’ mission and the less promising it is for the learning process to give
its best results. For the high- and low-achievers to have an equal opportunity to advance, some
researchers suggest putting students in small cooperative, heterogeneous groups. Indeed, Johnson
and Johnson (1998) posit that putting high and low-achieving students in the same boat compels
low-achievers to participate in the activities and helps them to emulate and learn from their highachieving partners. Cooperative learning has been a subject of discussion since the 1960’s for it
has proven its effectiveness in terms of motivating and engaging low-achievers in the activities
where there is no chance for hitch-hiking as every member is held accountable and is compelled
to fill his role and take his part in rowing the boat. Based on the above mentioned, this paper
endeavors to answer the following question: Can cooperative learning help bridge the gap between
high and low-achievers in oral expression?
2. Cooperative Learning
Cooperative learning is a teaching method where students are instructed to work together in small,
heterogeneous, groups in order to reach a shared goal or a common end (Johnson & Johnson,
1984). Research into group work and the effectiveness of cooperative learning on students’
learning prove that cooperative learning increases students’ productivity (Shaw, 1932) not just in
terms of quantity but also in terms of quality (Allport, 1924).
In cooperative groups, students’ behavior, as a whole group, differs from the sum of their
behavior as individuals in that students in cooperative groups become more group-centered and
exist as one entity, thanks to the sense of interdependence which amalgamates them together. On
the other hand, students in competitive settings are more self-centered (Deutsch, 1949) and care
less about others’ achievement.
As this section expands, different points will be discussed. First, we will shed light on the
five elements of cooperative learning, then, we will discuss the importance of cooperative learning
vis-à-vis peer-involvement and how it can help in fostering help-seeking among students. After
that, we will go through cooperative learning as a tool to promote self-efficacy. Finally, the
effectiveness of cooperative learning in sharpening students’ oral skills will be highlighted.
2.1. Elements of Cooperative Learning
For a group work to be cooperative, five elements must be fulfilled which according to Johnson
and Johnson (1990) are: Individual accountability, positive interdependence, face to face
(promotive) interaction, interpersonal social skills, and group processing.
Individual accountability is one of the main elements of cooperative learning. When
students feel responsible for their own roles during group work, there can be no room for
passiveness and “free riding” where all members take part in the activity and is obligated to
participate and engage. This sense of accountability represents a step forward toward autonomy.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

366

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019

Narrowing the Achievement Gap between EFL Students I

Ghodbane & El Achachi

The second element of cooperative learning is positive interdependence. This element
represents the glue which sticks students together and puts them in the same boat where the notion
“sink or swim together” (Jolliffe, 2007) turns students into group-centered members and, thus,
responsible for not just their own advancement but for the achievement of the whole group, where
no student is left behind.
The third element is the face to face (promotive) interaction. According to Johnson and
Johnson (1990), this element supports the idea that learning is a social process and that knowledge
can be constructed through interaction, debate and negotiation between peers and socializers.
The fourth element is known as, interpersonal social skills (Johnson & Johnson, 1990).
During the interactions with other group members, students not only gain knowledge but, also,
sharpen their existing social skills, and learn new ones, in the process, which might come in handy
in the future like: conflict-resolution and leadership skills (Kagan, 1986).
The fifth and the last element is group processing. This takes place when students face
problems interacting with each other, so, for them to resolve conflicts, they have to discuss and try
to tackle any obstacle that might threaten the unity of the group in a student-centered fashion.
2.2. Cooperative Learning and Peer Involvement
Since language is a social phenomenon, and since the only way to learn a language is to practice
it, the need for an environment that supports socialization and interaction is, undoubtedly, one of
the main concerns in the EFL classroom. Depending on the situation students are put in, interaction
with peers might have positive or negative effects on their achievement and self-efficacy. In
competitive classrooms, students experience high levels of pressure from peers due to factors such
as, social comparisons, different concerns about their self-worth, and fear of embarrassment. By
contrast, in cooperative settings, in small groups, students tend to show less reluctance and seem
to be less worried about their self-esteem even when asking their partners for help (Nadler, 1998).
Not just on the psychological and cognitive level does cooperative learning prove to be
instrumental, but also, in terms of honing language learners’ oral skills and communicative
competence thanks to different characteristics which distinguish cooperative learning like the fact
that it guarantees equal opportunities and allows more time for students to practice the language,
verbally, as they get more involved with their classmates for “language is acquired not in the role
of spectator but through practice” (Bruner, 1978).
2.3. Cooperative Learning and self-efficacy
The thought of sharing tasks and outcomes and the notion of positive interdependence between
group members, which cooperative learning promotes, open an opportunity for students, whether
they are aware or not, to share the same momentum and motivate each other. When interacting
with one another, students exchange not only ideas but, also, beliefs which might develop into a
shared mindset thanks to positive attributions of feedback from their significant peers, and an
internalization of positive extrinsic influences (through promotive interactions) which can lead
low-achievers to go through a process of becoming more self-efficacious.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

367

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019

Narrowing the Achievement Gap between EFL Students I

Ghodbane & El Achachi

Watching other group members solve and cope with what is assumed to be a difficult task,
allows low-achieving students to learn from their teammates, thus, fathom the content being
studied, but, more importantly, on the psychological level, seeing their partners succeed in a task
makes it seem possible for them to succeed as well, and changes students’ expectations about the
difficulty of the task itself as well as their competence, and this is what Bandura (1995) refers to
as vicarious experiences or modeling.
Vicarious experiences, according to Bandura (1995), are the beliefs about effectance,
which, one can develop from mirroring other people. In other words, when a learner observes his
classmate do well in the activity, witnessing, this positive experience can affect positively his
perception about his likelihood to succeed in the same way his partner did and, furthermore, his
perception about the difficulty of the problem to be solved. This positive influence helps propel
the learner’s confidence and, consequently, his willingness to volunteer and participate in similar
tasks in the future.
During cooperative learning activities, sitting in mixed-ability groups allows the passive
students, who have the tendency to avoid and shy away from certain activities, to find themselves
more accountable and responsible for their share of the work and, also, more tolerant with the idea
of help giving and receiving as they feel safer in front of a smaller group of people than they do in
front of a whole classroom (Rosen, 1983) and, almost, feel that there is less to no threat to their
self-esteem and worth, for, in a student-centered context, learners expect less reactions from the
teacher, which is a threat that they, usually, try to avoid and fear the most (Newman & Goldin,
1990).
Self-efficacious students are considered as the ones who have the meta-cognitive ability
which makes them more aware of their lacks and needs, and since cooperative learning boosts their
sense of belongingness, self-efficacious learners find it easier to interact with and ask for help from
their teammates promising a self-regulated learning, for both high and low achievers, and better
dividends in terms of achievement and competence.
2.4. Cooperative Learning and Oral Skills
In the EFL classroom, the hurdle of being unable to use the language, verbally, for an adequate
amount of time, has been a challenging common problem until the present time. In the traditional
language classrooms, students suffer the inequity in terms of getting the opportunity to practice
what they have learned (Han, 2006). From experience, in the individualistic learning settings,
language learning flows in a teacher-centered manner where the teacher asks the question, while
expecting students to, only, give right answers, causing the students to avoid the potential
embarrassment of giving a wrong answer, as well as fear of losing status among their, alienated,
teammates . In cooperative learning classrooms, on the other hand, group work promotes a more
student-centered way of learning where the teacher’s involvement is limited to a set of roles, and,
at the same time, students’ talk time is maximized and their oral production can be boosted, from
22% to 47%, (Daniels, 2005) as well as their comprehension of concepts and ideas (Willis, 2007).
Following the Vygotskian notion which regards highly the social aspect of learning
(Vygotsky, 1978) cooperative learning not only focuses on students’ oral skills but also on their
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

368

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019

Narrowing the Achievement Gap between EFL Students I

Ghodbane & El Achachi

social skills and the quality of the relationships that bind members of the group, and which
correlate with students’ motivation and achievement.
In the individualistic classrooms, the practice of oral skills is not given the optimum
emphasis, especially when it comes to the lazy students who do not engage in discussions and,
only, watch their teammates answer the questions. This lack of oral expression turns passive
students into spectators (listeners) and causes a neglect of their speaking kills, where anxiety and
reluctance to produce speech builds up leading students to fail to communicate inside and outside
the classroom due to the lack of practice.
When interacting within the group, students develop their interpersonal social skills
(Johnson & Johnson, 1995) which can help them to communicate, easily, with their teammates
and, thus, facilitate the giving (speaking) and receiving (listening) process allowing interlocutors
to use each other as sources of knowledge (thanks to the notion of interdependence) aside from the
teacher, with less anxiety and fear of embarrassment (Nadler, 1998), for, good friendships among
students increase students’ motivation and make learning more enjoyable.
3. The Study
This section deals with the research methodology. It begins by stating the research problem and
the aims of the study, then, it details the sample population and the research tools used to collect
data. The following sub-sections describe and explain the steps followed in the experiment and the
procedure of data analysis.
3.1. Statement of the Problem
In the traditional EFL classroom, where competition between students is what steers the wheel, a
considerable discrepancy in students’ oral skills level causes a disparity in students’ achievement,
as the absence of equity and equal chance to practice affects negatively their performance and
engagement. This investigation suggests cooperative learning as a possible solution to eliminate
some of the factors that cause the gap in students’ achievement.
3.2. Aims of the Study
This study aims at:
• Highlighting some of the benefits of cooperative learning in the EFL classroom.
• Stressing the effectiveness of Cooperative learning in sharpening students’ oral skills.
• Stressing the effectiveness of cooperative learning in reducing the achievement gap
between high and low achievers.
3.3. Methodology
The study was conducted following a pretest/posttest true experimental, non-equivalent subgroups
design, where the data gathered from the pretest and the posttest were collected and treated
quantitatively.
3.4. Participants
The sample population of the study represents a group of 44 second year English students from
the Department of English at the University of Khenchela. Using a simple random assignment, the
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

369

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019

Narrowing the Achievement Gap between EFL Students I

Ghodbane & El Achachi

sample was divided into an experimental group (EG) and a control group (CG). The researcher
opted for second year English students at the University of Khenchela because they experienced
learning under the traditional, individualistic, instruction, and were never exposed to cooperative
learning strategies before.
3.5. Research Tools
As it is common for the experimental design, in this study, the instruments used to elicit data were
a pretest, before the intervention, and a posttest. The two tests were in the same level of difficulty
and had the same criteria and scale for evaluation. In order to evaluate students’ oral skills as
accurately and objectively as possible, the examiner adapted the same method used by the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) testing system, and followed the evaluation
criteria of the English for Aviation Testing System (EALTS) exam except for some modifications
that were made. Indeed the examiner omitted the criteria which pertain to the domain of Aviation
and kept only the ones that were compatible with the objective of the test and that fitted the EFL
context.
The test took the form of a dialogue between two students, where the interlocutors selected
randomly a certain subject, after shuffling a number of small cards. While the students were given
time to interact with each other, the examiner started rating the students’ oral skills by assessing
what the ICAO system refers to as the holistic descriptors, which are, structure, vocabulary,
pronunciation, fluency, comprehension, and interaction. The rating scale includes six levels of
efficiency (from 1 to 6). The researcher worked for a year and a half as an ICAO examiner and
was familiar with the testing and the rating method.
3.6. The Experiment
In order to measure the achievement gap and calculate it before and after the intervention, both the
experimental and the control group had to take a pretest. Depending on their scores in the pretest,
students were put under two categories: the low-achievers which represent students who scored
between level one and level three (1-3) on the evaluation scale, and the high-achievers which
represent students who scored between level four and level six (4-6). After that, the intervention,
which lasted for almost a semester, took place.
During the intervention, students of the experimental group were exposed to a set of
cooperative learning instructions, while, students of the control group were taught using the
traditional, Individualistic, method, i.e. activities such as individual brainstorming and reporting.
Some of the cooperative learning strategies that were used were role-play activities, like dialogues.
We also used Round-Robin, a strategy where students work together in small groups with one
member assigned as a recorder and after the question is asked, students are allowed to think and
prepare their answers individually, then, they are required to share them with their partners, while
the recorder jots them down. Another strategy is Think-Pair-Share; a cooperative learning strategy
where students are asked to work individually on a task, then discuss their responses with a partner,
as pairs, after that, the teacher calls on some students so they can share their ideas in front of the
whole class. Students were also exposed to a cooperative learning strategy called Student TeamAchievement Division (STAD) which is a team learning method where students work together on
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

370

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019

Narrowing the Achievement Gap between EFL Students I

Ghodbane & El Achachi

the lesson and then take a quiz individually, where the higher they score the higher their team ranks
(Slavin, 1985).
After the intervention period which lasted for a semester, students from both groups had to
take the posttest. Afterwards, the data from the pretest and the posttest and the size of the
achievement gap between high and low achievers were calculated and compared separately in both
the experimental and the control groups. The method used to calculate the achievement gap was
an effect-size measure known as Cohen’s d.
3.7. Use of Cohen’s d
The main reason for choosing Cohen’s d as the measurement tool for the achievement gap is
because effect-size measures can help overcoming and avoiding two common threatening
throwbacks for the present experimental study. These two obstacles are the small sample and the
seemingly statistically insignificant difference between the means as effects size measures, unlike
the probability value, deal with the practical rather than the statistical significance. Effect size
measures, and mainly Cohen’s d, are effective when it comes to comparing two means. In fact they
help to interpret the difference as units of standard deviations as it suggests a rule of thumb for
evaluating the effect. According to Cohen (1988), as shown in table 1, the difference d=0.2
represents “small” effect-size, d=0.5 represents “medium”, and d=0.8 a “large” effect-size. So, the
fact that Cohen’s d disregards the size of the sample, gives the results more reliability regardless
of how statistically insignificant the values are.
Table 1
Evaluation of Effect Size d Adopted from Cohen (1988)
Significance

Value

Small

0.2

Medium

0.5

Large

0.8

The formula to Cohen’s d is as follows:
Cohen's d = (M2 - M1) ⁄ SDpooled
Where the formula to calculate the pooled Standard Deviation is:
SDpooled = √((SD1² + SD2²) ⁄ 2)
Where (M) stands for: The mean and (SD) stands for: Standard deviation
To put it in words, the difference is calculated by subtracting one mean from the other and dividing
it by the pooled standard deviation of both groups.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

371

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019

Narrowing the Achievement Gap between EFL Students I

Ghodbane & El Achachi

4. Results
In this section, results from, the experimental and the control settings will be discussed,
separately, and the achievement gap will be measured in both phases, the pretest and the posttest,
and then compared to determine the effectiveness of cooperative learning.
4.1. Measuring the Achievement Gap of the Experimental Group
This sub-section deals with the achievement gap between high- and low-achievers in the
experimental group. In order to evaluate the effectiveness of the intervention, results from the
pretest and the posttest will be treated quantitatively and eventually compared.
4.1.1. The Pretest. After the pretest, subjects from the experimental group were assigned
to two subgroups based on their achievement as it was mentioned before. In order to make it easier
to the reader the abbreviations EGH and EGL are used to describe high achievers and low achievers
from the experimental group in the remainder of this paper. The means and the standard deviations
for both subgroups are shown in table 2.
To measure the statistical significance of the effect-size (achievement gap) between the
high and low-achievers the experimenter had to conduct a paired sample T-test. Results from the
T-test are shown in table 2 and are to be discussed later in the discussion of the results.
Table 2
Results from the Experimental Group’s Pretest
Group
Mean
Number
Std.
Deviation
EGH
4,6000
10
,84327
EGL
2,2500
12
,75378

Sig. (2-tailed)
,000
,000

From the results shown in table 2, values of the means and the standard deviations are
used to calculate the effect-size d where
d= M1 – M2 / spooled
and spooled= √[(s12+ s22) / 2] = √[(0,843272+ 0,753782) / 2]
= 1.22016
Thus: d=4.6-2.25/1.22016
d=1.925
Since our difference d=1.925 and according to the guidelines provided by Cohen (1992) (see table
1), we can say that the effect size is large (d>0.8). Or in other words, the gap in achievement of
the experimental group in the pretest, in terms of their common standard deviation (calculated
from the pretest results) is of a large significance.
4.1.2. The Posttest. After the intervention period, students from the experimental group
had to take a posttest, which is at the same level and follows the same method as the pretest. Once
again, students were assigned into EGH and EGL based on their achievement in the posttest. To
measure the achievement gap between high and low achievers in the posttest, the researcher
followed the same steps used in measuring the gap in the pretest. The results are shown in table 3.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

372

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019

Narrowing the Achievement Gap between EFL Students I
Table 3
Results from the Experimental Group’s Posttest
Group
Mean
Number
Std.
Deviation
EGH
4,8182
11
,87386
EGL
2,2727
11
,64667

Ghodbane & El Achachi

Sig. (2-tailed)
,000
,000

For calculating the effect-size, data from table 3 were used to fill the formula
d= M1 – M2 / spooled
and spooled= √[(s12+ s22) / 2] = √[(0, ,873862+ 0,64667) / 2]
= 1.52027
d=4,8182-2,2727/1.52027 thus:
d=1.674
Since the difference between high and low achievers in the posttest (d=1.674) is larger than
(d=0.8) we can say that the gap in students’ achievement is large.
Table 4
Cohen’s d Interpretation (Experimental Group)
Group/phase

Cohen’s d

Experimental
pretest

1.925

Percentile standing
%
97.1

Common language
Effect Size (CLES)
%
91

Experimental
1.674
94.5
88
posttest
Note. Adapted from Cohen (1988) and Mcgraw and Wong’s (1992) CLES Index
As shown in table 4, displays two different ways for interpreting effect size “d”. Rosenthal and
Rubin (1982) have suggested that, effect sizes can be translated and explained in a simple language
which non-statisticians can understand easily and which they refer to as Common Language Effect
Size (CLES). This statistic represents the probability that a stochastically selected score from EGH
will be higher than a stochastically selected score from EGL. As shown in table 4, the effect size
d=1.92 between high and low achievers in the pretest means that there is a probability of 91% that
the achievement of a randomly selected student from EGH will be higher than the achievement of
a student from EGL (the 4th column). Another way to describe our results is in terms of percentile
standing (the 3rd column). This type of percentile is a measure which indicates where a treated
group member’s score value stands in comparison with the untreated group members’ score values
(Rumsey, 2015). According to Cohen (1988) who stated that there is a risk in using simply “small”,
“medium” and “large” to define an effect size, effect sizes can be regarded as average percentile
standing (of the average participant from EGH, in our case, in comparison with the average of a
participant from EGL). From the results shown in table 4, we can say that at for an effect size of
d=1.92 the percentage of EGL participants who will achieve lower than the average participant
from EGH is 97%. By looking at the results from the posttest, it seems that the effect size, after
the intervention, decreased from d1=1.92 to d2=1.67 and that the percentage of the EGL students
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

373

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019

Narrowing the Achievement Gap between EFL Students I

Ghodbane & El Achachi

who will achieve less than a randomly selected student from EGH plunged from 91% to 88%.
From what has been mentioned the conclusion that can be drawn is that cooperative learning
helped to reduce the achievement gap between high and low-achievers in the experimental group.
4.2. Measuring the Achievement Gap of the Control Group
This subsection deals with the data gathered from the control group results in the pretest and
the posttest. In order to measure the achievement gap, the same method was used as with the
experimental group.
4.2.1. The Pretest. To measure the achievement gap for the control group in the pretest, the
researcher conducted the same procedure, where the subjects were divided into a subgroup of
high achievers (CGH) and a subgroup of low achievers (CGL), according to their achievement in
the test. Results from the pretest and the T-test are shown in table 5.
Measuring the difference d between CGH and CGL pretest results:
d= M1 – M2 / spooled
and spooled= √[(s12+ s22) / 2] = √[(0,68755 2+ 0,750762) / 2]
= 1.43831
d=4,5455-2,1818/1.43831 thus:
d=1.643
Table 5
Results From the Control Group’s Pretest
Group
Mean
Number
Std.
Deviation
CGH
4,5455
11
,68755
CGL
2,1818
11
,75076

Sig. (2-tailed)
,000
,000

The effect-size (achievement gap) between CGH and CGL in the pretest is (d=1.643) significant;
since it is larger than (d=0.8).
4.2.2. The Posttest. After the pretest, subjects from the control group were not exposed to the
independent variable which is the cooperative learning method. In the following steps the
experimenter calculates the effect-size between high and low achievers in the posttest, where
students’ results in the latter as well as the T-test’s are shown in table 6.
Table 6
Results from the Control Group’s Posttest
Group
Mean
Number
Std.
Deviation
CGH
4,8000
10
,91894
CGL
2,1667
12
,71774

Sig. (2-tailed)
,000
,000

To calculate the effect-size between high and low achievers in the posttest the same
method to calculate Cohen’s d in the pretest was followed, where:
d= M1 – M2 / spooled
and spooled= √[(s12+ s22) / 2] = √[(0,91894 2+ 0,717742) / 2]
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

374

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019

Narrowing the Achievement Gap between EFL Students I

d=4,8-2,1667/1.27781

thus:

Ghodbane & El Achachi

= 1.27781
d=2.06

After calculating the difference between CGH and CGL in the posttest it appears that, the gap
between high and low achievers was significantly large where (d=2.06) which is higher than
(d=0.8). By comparing the effect-size between students’ achievement in pretest and the posttest, it
appears that the gap in the control group’s achievement increased significantly from (d=1.643) to
(d=2.06)
Table 7
Cohen’s d Interpretation
Group/phase
Cohen’s d

Control pretest

1.643

Percentile standing
%
94.5

Common language
Effect Size (CLES)
%
87

Control posttest
2.06
98
98
Note. Adapted from Cohen (1988) and Mcgraw and Wong’s (1992) CLES Index
From table (7), it appears that the achievement gap between CGH and CGL in the pretest is
d=1.643 and that the percentile standing represents 94.5%, while the common language effect size
indicates a percentage of 87%. After the posttest, the data show that the effect size between high
and low-achievers increased from d=1.643 to d=2.06 and that the percentage of the CGL students
who will achieve less than the average student from CGH jumped from 94.5% to 98%.
Furthermore, the probability for a randomly selected participant from CGH to achieve higher than
a student from CGL increased from 87% to 92% thus, the traditional method failed to reduce the
achievement gap between high and low achievers in the control group.
5. Discussion
Findings of the study show that the effect size between high and low achievers in the experimental
group in the posttest was smaller than that in the pretest. Also the percentile standing and the CLES
values indicate that the achievement gap between EGH and EGL decreased from a percentile
standing of 97.1% and a CLES value of 91% to a percentile standing of 94.5% and a CLES value
of 88%. The results support the notion made by Slavin (1985) which states that cooperative
learning strategies like STAD and Jigsaw help low achieving students to engage in the activities
and value their contributions in the group. The results obtained have further strengthened our
conviction that cooperative learning is useful in eliminating alienation among students, and that it
helps in tackling a number of social obstacles that disturb the learning environment such as social
comparisons, anti-social attitudes, and lack of help-seeing and transfer of learning between
students. For the shy language learners to practice their oral skills, cooperative learning, in our
case, seemed to be the instruction of choice, for, it not only preserved the students’ self-esteem but
also, helped them to create friendships and develop their pro-social skills in the process, and played
a role in lowering anxiety and fear of embarrassment when students decided to seek help from
their partners. By creating such a supportive environment, cooperative learning fostered a sense of
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

375

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019

Narrowing the Achievement Gap between EFL Students I

Ghodbane & El Achachi

interdependence and enabled the low-achieving students to model their partners and learn from
them.
On the other hand, in the control group, the data show that there is an increase in the gap
between high and low achievers, where the effect size calculated from the posttest results appears
to be greater than the one calculated from the pretest. Also, the CLES and the percentile standing
values jumped from a CLES value of 87% and a percentile standing of 94.5% (from the pretest
results) to a CLES of 92% and a percentile standing of 98% (from the posttest). According to a
great deal of previous research conducted by experts in the field (Johnson, Johnson & Stanne,
2000), our values have been found to be typical of the individualistic teaching method. Researchers
have always seen the individualistic classrooms as an environment where students work alone in
the absence of interaction, where instead of motivating each other, like in our case, students who
are presumed to be high achievers contribute to the factors that cause the achievement gap, between
them and their low-achieving peers, to increase. Such factors are social comparisons,
competitiveness, dull social skills, and the lack of good friendships. Among numerous studies that
compared cooperative learning with the individualistic strategy, our experiment corroborates with
previous results from previously published studies. A good example can be a meta-analysis of
studies which compared the Jigsaw strategy with the individualistic teaching method conducted
by (Johnson, Johnson & Stanne, 2000) where the Jigsaw strategy yielded higher achievement
compared to the one promoted by the individualistic method with an effect size of 0.13 (as detailed
in table 8):
Table 8
Jigsaw vs. Individualistic Method
Methods
Effect Sd
K
Cooperative
0.13
0.29 5
vs.
Individualistic
Note. Adapted from (Johnson, Johnson & Stanne, 2000)
Where: sd= standard deviation and k= number of averaged effect sizes.
Another example that highlights the effectiveness of cooperative learning over the individualistic
method is the one provided by the same authors (Johnson, Johnson & Stanne, 2000) as it is
displayed in table 9, where it shows the effect size between STAD strategy and the individualistic
method outcomes in terms of their effect on achievement where (n) represents the number of
comparisons. As demonstrated in table 9, it appears that the STAD strategy surpassed the
individualistic method with an effect size of 0.29.
Table 9:
Ranking of Cooperative Learning Methods
Methods

Effect

Cooperative vs. 0.13
Individualistic

Sd

K

0.29

5

Note. Adapted from (Johnson, Johnson & Stanne, 2000)
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

376

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019

Narrowing the Achievement Gap between EFL Students I

Ghodbane & El Achachi

If we now turn to our current results, regarding the T-tests results, it seems that the p value
(Probability value, which determines the significance of the result) (Rumsey,2010) is p<0.001,
which means that the findings were highly significant and that the results did not happen by chance,
and based on that, in response to our research question, we can say that our work has led us to
conclude that cooperative learning seems to be effective in bridging the achievement gap between
high and low-achievers in oral expression.
Even though the aims and methodology of our study, which focuses only on the achievement
gap in relation with students’ performance in oral expression, are different from those of the
previously mentioned examples (where previous work have, mostly, focused on the achievement
gap with respect to variables like gender, race and economical status, or targeted different skills
like reading and achievement in math) based on our findings, we can say that there is evidence to
suggest that cooperative learning can be a useful tool when it comes to improving students’ oral
skills and that it seems to be a possible remedy to cure the problem of the achievement gap in the
EFL classroom.
6. Conclusion
Cooperative learning strategies seem to be a key to equity and a great solution to tackle the problem
of the achievement gap. Since, EFL students come in different levels of intelligence and
backgrounds, a best way to celebrate variety in the EFL classroom is through creating small
heterogeneous communities inside the classroom, where, the elements of cooperative learning,
namely, positive interdependence and individual accountability come to play their role in binding
group members and fostering individual responsibility, at the same time, promising less disparity
between high and low achievers, which is the aim of the study at hand. In the light of what has
been said, this study encourages EFL teachers and education planners and motivates them to
implement more cooperative learning activities in their classrooms, for a more learner-centered
learning. It also suggests cooperative learning as a means to avert the consequences of neglecting
the minority of low achievers and, finally, accentuates the effectiveness of such method in terms
of sharpening students’ oral skills.
About the Authors:
TAREK GHODBANE is, currently, a Ph.D student at the University of Abou Bekr Belkaid
Tlemcen-Algeria. Tarek has taught Research methodology and Oral Expression at the English
Department at the University of Abbes Laghrour Khenchela- Algeria. ORCID iD:
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4517-7438.
HAFIDA HAMZAOUI EL ACHACHI is a professor at the University of Tlemcen (Algeria),
Department of English. She is specialized in applied linguistics and TEFL. She is also the head
of the research team “English Language Education Policy” in the ESP Teaching
Laboratory. ORCID iD: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0030-9721
References
Allport, F. H. (1924). Response to social stimulation in the group. Social psychology, 11, 260.
Bandura, A. (Ed.). (1995). Self-efficacy in changing societies. Cambridge university press.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

377

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019

Narrowing the Achievement Gap between EFL Students I

Ghodbane & El Achachi

Bruner, J. (1978). The role of dialogue in language acquisition. The child's conception of language, 2(3),
241-256.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. Hillsdale, N.J: L. Erlbaum
Associates.
Daniels, K. M. (2005). Cooperative learning structures for English foreign language classroom. Journal of
tourism studies, 4(1), 143-149.
Deutsch, M. (1949). A theory of co-operation and competition. Human relations, 2(2), 129-152.
Han, H. S., & Kemple, K. M. (2006). Components of social competence and strategies of support:
Considering what to teach and how. Early Childhood Education Journal, 34(3), 241-246.
Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. T. (1990). Using cooperative learning in math. Cooperative learning in
mathematics: A handbook for teachers, 103-125.
Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. T. (1995). Teaching students to be peacemakers. Interaction Book
Company.
Johnson, D. W., Johnson, R. T., & Smith, K. A. (1984). Cooperative learning. New Brighton: Interaction
Book Company.
Johnson, D. W., Johnson, R. T., & Smith, K. A. (1998). Active learning: Cooperation in the college
classroom. Interaction Book Company, 7208 Cornelia Drive, Edina, MN 55435.
Johnson, D. W., Johnson, R. T., & Stanne, M. B. (2000). Cooperative learning methods: A meta-analysis.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota.
Jolliffe, W. (2007). Cooperative learning in the classroom: Putting it into practice. Sage.
Kagan, S. (1986). Cooperative learning and sociocultural factors in schooling. Beyond language: Social
and cultural factors in schooling language minority students, 231, 298.
McGraw, K. O., & Wong, S. P. (1992). A common language effect size statistic. Psychological
bulletin, 111(2), 361.
Mullen, B. (1991). Group composition, salience, and cognitive representations: The phenomenology of
being in a group. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 27(4), 297-323.
Nadler, A. (1998). Relationship, esteem, and achievement perspectives on autonomous and dependent help
seeking. In S. A. Karabenick (Ed.), Strategic help seeking: Implications for learning and
teaching (pp. 61-93). Mahwah, NJ, US: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
Newman, R. S., & Goldin, L. (1990). Children's reluctance to seek help with schoolwork. Journal of
educational psychology, 82(1), 92.
Paltridge, B., & Starfield, S. (Eds.). (2012). The handbook of English for specific purposes (Vol. 120).
John Wiley & Sons.
Rosen, S. (1983). Perceived inadequacy and help-seeking. New directions in helping, 2, 73-107.
Rosenthal, R., & Rubin, D. B. (1982). A simple, general purpose display of magnitude of experimental
effect. Journal of educational psychology, 74(2), 166.
Rumsey, D. J. (2015). U Can: statistics for dummies. John Wiley & Sons.
Shaw, M. E. (1932). A comparison of individuals and small groups in the rational solution of complex
problems. The American Journal of Psychology, 44(3), 491-504.
Slavin, R. E. (1985). Cooperative learning: Applying contact theory in desegregated schools. Journal of
Social Issues, 41(3), 45-62.
Thibaut, J. W. (2017). The social psychology of groups. Routledge.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Interaction between learning and development. Readings on the development of
children, 23(3), 34-41.
Willis, J. (2007). Cooperative learning is a brain turn-on. Middle school journal, 38(4), 4-13.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

378

