The Artist, the Teacher, the Art Teacher: Purity and performance in the professional project
Working paper, version 0.5, draft 19.03.21
Alison Gerber (alison.gerber@soc.lu.se) and Joseph Klett (jklett@sciencehistory.org)

Sociological research on teaching as a profession often assumes there exists a body of
tasks and specialized knowledge that defines jurisdiction for professional authority. But an
emphasis on knowledge displaces the complex issues faced by those teachers who identify –
or are identified by others – as subject area experts. In this paper we use ethnographic
observations and interviews to understand the professional project of art teachers in the
United States. This data shows how the “in-between” nature of art teaching -- the teacher not
quite an artist committed to their personal craft, nor a pedagogy-centered professional with
well-defined objectives -- is a product of ongoing negotiations over the meaning of their
work. When seen from relational perspective, in-betweenness is a practical outcome that at
one point will color any professional project. In this sense, the troubled category of the art
teacher helps illuminate central concerns in any study of teaching as a profession. Rather
than deliver our own assessment of professionalization in the classroom, we use our data to
illuminate three practical challenges faced by the art teacher. These include the negotiation
of tasks that need doing, debates over the meaning and relevance of purity to the profession,
and the maintenance of roles through an emergent understanding of expertise. As we develop
in the discussion that follows, each dimension of an in-between profession requires an
ongoing performance for multiple audiences.

Introduction
Research on teaching as a profession often assumes there exists a body of specialized
knowledge that defines jurisdiction for professional authority. But this emphasis on
knowledge displaces the complex issues faced by those teachers who identify – or are
identified by others – as subject area experts. Such teachers stand with one foot in pedagogyas-profession and the other in a discipline with its own norms, values, and standards. Multiple
criteria for jurisdiction poses problems for teaching as a profession. These problems are most
acute for the professional project of individual teachers who work to build community, enact
the best pedagogical values, and develop professional standards within their own schools.
Just off an urban thoroughfare, past the double doors and security guard, Justin's
music classroom is the first door off the hallway. Peering in, we see him gesturing
wildly to a group of eight year-olds. This is his 6th year in this school, and his first
teaching job. He is also the school's first music teacher. With near-total authority
over his classroom, Justin makes himself accountable only to students and their
parents. His curriculum has no lesson plans but merely picks up where each class
last left off, as he promotes an even pace but not at the expense of enjoyment. He is a
proponent of unstructured play and explains that teachers should appreciate how
creative work enriches all aspects of learning.
In this paper we focus on art teachers in the United States. As a subset of area specialists, art
teachers are well-represented across educational levels in the US context: music and visual
arts educators work in primary, secondary, and tertiary (post-secondary) institutions. They are
also unique in that their practical experience does not dictate their pedagogical scope: while
1

other subject areas are generally taught by teachers whose expertise correspond to
educational level – elementary school teachers cover English alongside other subjects, high
school teachers may specialize in language arts, and university teaching is carried out by
literature, rhetoric, and composition PhDs – arts teachers across educational levels have both
extensive backgrounds and strong identities in their subject areas. Art teachers thus provide
an ideal case for understanding professions as projects, as they experience the most conflict
between their roles as both experts and teachers (e.g. Bresler 1993; Hargreaves et al. 2007).
Compared to other teachers in the school, Justin appears fair, fun, and exciting. He
makes jokes and clowns for students. During a class discussion about an upcoming
concert, Justin pauses to remind a student that it is time to leave for an appointment.
The student responds, “Thank you, sir.” Justin plays along, “You’re welcome, sir.”
The student flings the classroom door open, taking exaggerated steps and turning
sharply into the hallway where his teacher awaits. Visibly impressed, Justin
exclaims, “Did you see that?? Robocop!” The teacher responds with a sour face,
exasperated, “Every day... I see it every day.”
As evidenced by our ethnographic observations and interviews, the embattled role of the art
teacher provokes us to reconsider existing theories of professions. Conventional perspectives
on professions say that art teachers are “in-between” the two more established referents of
artists and teachers. Though highly professionalized by many measures (markers include a
long and specialized required education, licensure, professional associations, theoretical
practice, and codes of ethics), they are often regarded as second-class artists as well as
second-class teachers, unable to fully participate in either professional world. Their
professional status vis-à-vis the two neighboring poles of art and teaching is daily contested
at best and their transitional status may never lead to a resolution of their roles in this
relationship (Garner and Kaplan 2019; Sinner 2012).
Students are regularly pulled from Justin’s class by other teachers. One in
particular held a student from regular visits to the nurse until it was time for music.
Justin thinks that among other teachers, music is not valued as highly as other
subjects. In fact, he knows it’s not. Thus, while he encourages students to ‘make a
joyful noise’, when the room grows too loud, Justin gestures about the space in
frustration and insists, “This is just like the other classes – you raise your hand
when you want to say something.”
The volatile status of the art teacher is thrown into stark relief when they are reduced to noncreative authoritarians - as “only” teachers - by artists, as well as when they are diminished as
peripheral, non-academic educators by those in the schools where they work. But what if we
reconsider professional status not categorically (Abbott 1981, 1988; Freidson 1986), but
practically, where jurisdiction is never pure and expertise is performative (Larson 1977)?
Using vignettes, we show how individuals enroll multiple audiences and multiple selfunderstandings to create the singular role of ‘the art teacher’. We ask how these subject area
specialists engage with the ever-more-central professionalization of teaching: how do they
negotiate their positions between two stools? How do they manage conflicts that arise
between pedagogical and subject area identities, knowledges, and practice? Always in the
breach of disputes over the boundaries of educational and creative professions, the art teacher
2

demonstrates how a professional project can appear to be less than the sum of its professional
parts.
Method and Materials
To reconsider the relationship between subject area expertise and pedagogical expertise in
teachers’ professionalization projects, we draw on ethnographic observation and interview
data with music and visual arts educators working in the United States. The persistence of the
conflicts playing out in the art teacher’s role suggests a turn towards interaction and practical
relationships in our understanding of the professional project. We look at art teachers as a
case of these in-between, disciplinarily based, problematically professional teachers for
insight into the ways that professionalism and its status and autonomy are constructed.
Rather than debate the applicability of the professional lens, we promote a less rigid
boundary between professions and the rest through attention to practices. This theoretical
spirit lays aside arguments over whether a given occupation is or is not a profession. We
favor questions of how, when, and why people at work engage in professional projects. In
particular, we focus on negotiations about the things they do as teachers, how these activities
are understood as belonging to a pedagogical domain (or not), and what it takes for art
teachers to be considered experts.
The vignettes presented here are drawn from two studies – one focused on the visual arts, the
other on music education. Author 1’s data comes from an ethnographic and interview study
of visual artists active in the United States between 2011 and 2013; the data presented draws
on a subset of those respondents that were at the time of the interview engaged in teaching at
any level – a majority of the 80 artists interviewed. Respondents ranged from part-time and
casual community educators to tenured professors at elite art schools. Taped semistructured
interviews lasted on average 1.75 hours each and were transcribed verbatim and in full and
integrated with fieldnotes (Gerber 2017). Author 2's data comes from a comparative
ethnography of six elementary school music classrooms in New York City and suburban
Connecticut between 2011 and 2012. Each school featured compulsory music education for
grades K through 5, and featured designated music classrooms that were occupied by a single
music teachers. Each classroom was observed for 15 teaching days within a six-week grading
period, for approximately 75 hours of instruction per classroom, and exit interviews were
held with each teacher. We approach our combined data on arts teachers to investigate them
as exemplars of subject area specialist teachers, after independently identifying conflicts
around professional status as a central theme amongst our respondents.
Purity and Performance
From our analysis we have identified three practical dimensions of professionalization for the
art teacher. First, the role is defined through the negotiation of tasks that need doing. Second,
the role is made meaningful by durable yet contingent constructions of purity. Third, the role
is maintained by an emergent understanding of expertise. As we develop in the discussion
that follows, each dimension of an in-between profession requires an ongoing and practical
performance with multiple audiences.
Barb, a sculptor with a long and successful career, recalls first seeing her
daughter’s drawings, which she said “knocked her out.” But she quickly pivots to
3

the subject of her daughter’s professional life: “I just started crying. Because I knew
how hard she was going to have to work to be an artist. I knew that she was
probably going to have to teach and deal with academia or whatever and I just so
know what that is. I just really do. From all my friends and everything. I just… ugh.
I mean how many artists do you know that work in academic environments that do
shit? Or that just do the same old stuff over and over and again and who at the end
of their career stand up for their final little whatever and then they’re out.”
Conventional studies of the professions suggest that specialization is valued most highly and
serves to elevate status within a field whereas practical effectiveness is most valued outside
of it. One classic study begins with this “paradox:” medical doctors value esoteric practice
while the general public values someone approachable with an informed opinion about
everything. For example, within the medical field a surgeon is higher-status than a general
practitioner and a neurosurgeon is higher-status than a sawbones, whereas to non-medical
professionals, the on-call pediatrician is valued much higher than the appointment-only
anesthesiologist. In this model, professions are built around an extant set of tasks, and
further, the professionalizing process is stepwise and apparent to all in the field. In this
framing, authority comes by virtue of knowledge about the things that “need doing”
according to some theoretical structure that emerges progressively. And it is from this
(intraprofessional) notion of expertise that status is derived and challenged (Abbott 1981).
Indeed, this is a popular position to take. Theories of professions have long assumed that
professions rotate around a set of core tasks from which professional mandates and
hierarchies of value emerge. The cultural structure of professionalism is most often described
as coherent and logical for actors (Freidson 1986; Wilensky 1964). Much of the professions
canon focuses especially on doctors and lawyers. Both fields place strong emphasis on
progressive, objective knowledge, unambiguously grounded in canonical texts and “best
practices” which indicate to the appropriate actors to “do things that need to be done.” By
identifying the professional project primarily with these two professions, much professions
research, assumes an extant, delimited, and ordered understanding of what needs to be done.
Gordon has no doubt there exists music teachers who promote experience over
knowledge, but he calls this “do what you feel” approach “a b.s. line.” When
discussing his rather elaborate vision for music education, he states his pedagogy in
terms of the “psychology” and “science” of music theory: rather than teaching
through songs and sound-making, Gordon promotes a “repertoire” as the primary
medium of music. He argues, “You can teach content, and you can teach access to
that content; but without that content, you don’t develop any sort of knowledge.”
Using a language analogy, he further clarifies, “It’s all math. I try to tell these
students that this all works by rules they already understand.”
However, more recent work on professional projects has uncovered the messy procedures
behind the construction of a theoretical knowledge base in the promotion of professionalism
(e.g., Spillman 2012). The assumption that even the classical professions are best understood
as internally consistent is problematic, as we discuss below. In non-classical fields, where
professionalization processes can be contentious, measures of expertise, progress, or
theoretical purity will rarely be clear to either the professional or the analyst.

4

Cultural sociology stresses the constructed nature of objects, institutions, and logics (Battani,
Hall, and Powers 1997; Berger and Luckmann 1967; Collins 2004; Gamson 1991; Meyer and
Jepperson 2000). Increasingly, studies of work, employment, and occupations point to
important elements and processes in the world of work that depend on constructed elements.
These studies show how tasks, as things that “need to be done,” might be constructively
grouped or perhaps constructed entirely (Bourdieu and Boltanski 1981; Brain 1991; Fine
1996; Seccombe 1986). If the core tasks which define a profession are similarly constructed
and malleable, then the assumptions about exclusive boundaries and the sources of
professionalization often indicated by professions researchers may require reconsideration.
Armando entered teaching because he hated his corporate job, taking a twenty-five
thousand dollar pay cut to teach art in the public school system. Eventually, he quit
teaching in the public schools and began teaching privately. “The people at my
school are here by choice. They want to be here. And the public schools, in a class
of 25 kids or so, maybe there'd be one or two that really kind of liked art. And the
rest didn't care at all to be there, they didn't like art, they didn't want to like art, they
didn't want to know how to draw, and they would fight you. And that was really
hard. I was not an art teacher, I was a discipline teacher.” He says it was draining
to act as a disciplinarian, and even more crushing to know how peripheral he was to
the goals and ideals of the other teachers: “I'm not even the math teacher. I'm not
the reading teacher, I'm not teaching you anything that you really, really need in
this life. And when what you do is something that isn't a necessity in this life, it's a
reinforcement that what you're doing is kind of… there will be people in this world
that will always see you as making something that’s useless to them. There are
people who are never going to care.”
Recent scholarship looking at professional cultures inside and outside of the professions
literature have shown how jurisdictions are both constructed and made to appear to
encompass things that already ‘need doing’ by professionals themselves. Berman (2006)
reconsiders medical organization and professionalization with attention to intraprofessional
dynamics, and in her work the distinctions between medical men who claim science as their
ally and those who act politically are clear. Sherman (2010) investigates the development of a
new occupation - the personal concierge - and shows how workers use a cultural frame of
professionalism to legitimate their product and cast themselves as professional actors rather
than lower-status household help. Here, actors bundle together both necessary and frivolous
tasks into a set of things that they argue ‘need to be done’, creating in real-time the ‘core’ of
their profession and arguing that it has market value. In her study of trade associations,
Spillman (2012) complicates our understanding both of professionals’ economic interests and
of business people’s economic interests, and shows how languages of professionalism both
allow for professionalization processes in diverse occupations and orient individuals’
meaning-making around working life. These studies point to newer perspectives on the
professions in which the “pure” core of the historicized professions may be questionable.
At their core, standard bearing analyses find the meaning of professional tasks to approach
something like purity, as if it were capable of objectively measuring how much irrelevant
matter is present in a set of tasks (Abbott 1981, 1988). But the role of the art teacher is
defined in practice through the negotiation of tasks that need doing. This dimension of
professionalization, one realized in interaction, is made meaningful through the construction
of purity - not an objective and measurable quality but an argument made by practitioners.
5

Put differently, the canonical view of the professions prevents a full discussion of actual
professional life, and well-defined jurisdictions prematurely limits our understanding of
contested occupational groups. A concentration on purity, easily operationalized as an
objective measure (e.g., Aili and Brante 2007; Sahin 2010), displaces meaning in the study of
the professions more generally. Indeed, while many contemporary studies of profession
follow the epistemic turn in knowledge production, a persistence of narrow interpretations of
this work today suggests the need for a more process-oriented view to meaning making.
Accounts of epistemology within science studies have shown how progress is discursive and
“never pure” (Shapin 2010); by extension, the bounds and content of expertise are socially
constituted, often among a broad constituency of both professional insiders and outsiders
(Eyal 2013).
As it stands, the approach of a classical professions perspective dispenses expertise to
individuals who contribute to a knowledgeable and progressive “core” for the completion of
tasks, ultimately requiring the sociologist to judge the presence of mastery. But rather than
present “expertise” as an attribution of people called “experts,” Eyal argues expertise should
be distinguished from experts as a sum of practical relations in a network, suggesting instead
the actor-network approach of Latour, which illuminates the eventful “transcriptions” that
constitute the very context for the masterly completion of tasks (Eyal 2013: 871). Where the
work of professionals encounters audiences outside of their practical domain, no amount of
intraprofessional agreement will ensure legitimate status without some support from interand extraprofessional audiences. That is, as great a scholar a sociologist may be, professional
status will not be practically conferred without actual agreement from sociologists outside of
their subfield, or audiences who may benefit from their scholarly work.
Like most public high school art teachers in urban areas, Aaron counts on the
regular appearance of guest “teaching artists”. Bran, this semester’s teaching
artist, commandeers the classroom for four of Aaron’s five teaching periods. He
casts desks into a jumble, gestures wildly and confronts students, bemused but
engrossed, with his simple admonishment to “do something!” Aaron slumps
observing from the doorway, looking on listlessly as Bran shouts, struggles, and
sings with the class, unencumbered by assignments and grade books.
For Aaron the teaching artist program is a mixed blessing. While it brings outside
specialists to a student population that would otherwise go without, the presence of
a “real” artist serves administrators who regard arts education as of secondary
importance, reflected in the allotment of resources and support. Further, the
juxtaposition of Aaron to the guest artist diminishes Aaron’s creative status in the
eyes of his students, who in these moments regard him solely as an enforcer. Aaron
is caught in the tension between the objective measurements of standardized
education on one side, and creativity on the other. He steers a course defined
neither by individual achievement or collective relations, but by one-directional
instruction and grading matrices.
The persistent conflicts plaguing art teachers demonstrates how professional projects
generally find purity elusive. As an estimation of institutional authority or “jurisdiction,”
purity is understood as the relative lack of irrelevant matter from one’s mission and practice.
Purity is performed through the execution of duties, as professionals define their jurisdiction
by engaging in turf battles and fighting for intra- and extraprofessional status (Abbott 1981,
6

1988). The decision to start teaching by a practicing artist may be considered a forfeiture of
purity in that domain. But in the context of liberal arts education from primary school on, art
classes also lack the standardized curricula and tests that define worth for all the other
faculty.
Josh has been inundated by teaching and administrative work, and has just left his
teaching behind for a one-year sabbatical. “I have one staff person, I was constantly
working that person and constantly working myself and then thinking about it all the
time. Qualitatively, organizationally, logistically, like at all times.” He found
himself unable to make artwork at all, saying that his teaching work “destroyed” his
artistic practice. His current sabbatical is “like a resuscitation, character first. Like,
can you stop thinking about other people, can you stop worrying about other things,
can you cut people out of your life because all they do is think about those things so
you can’t get close to them. It’s pretty radical.”
Framing certain professions as “in between” implies purity is a general rule rather than a hard
fought labor of performance. Every discipline was once hotly contested before being
recognized as such (Abbott 2010; Shapin 2010). Analyzing professional projects in a
relational manner allows us to see how disciplines achieve cohesion and consensus
(Emirbayer 1997; Liu and Emirbayer 2016). And it lets us do so without reducing purity to an
objective measure (e.g., Aili and Brante 2007; Sahin 2010). Such measures ignore practices
that cannot be quantified, and risk snuffing the meaning from professional projects more
generally.
According to former students and colleagues, Alan is a good art teacher. But when
he got into teaching he wasn’t driven by pedagogical or communitarian
commitments, but by the desire for a discount: he worked with video, and in the late
nineties artists generally couldn’t do video editing with affordable home computers.
Through word-of-mouth, he found out about a job in a local art school that would
allow him access to the technology he needed. “I could sit there, help students when
they needed help, but I would use the technology to just edit all day. Or work on a
website all day. So I used it as time to learn stuff, get skills, but also to do my work
at work and get paid for it.” Nowadays, having advanced in his teaching career, he
is still deeply pragmatic about art teaching and lets it take a mental backseat to his
own practice.
We have used Larson’s concept of the professional project as a lens through which we can
understand the art teacher - a position that relies on distinct historical and disciplinary sources
of meaning and which encounters interactional and performative challenges in everyday
practice - as a role whose authority is not automatic and whose jurisdiction is constantly
negotiated in concert with diverse audiences.
We ask how teaching and artistic practice interact. Peter laughs, “Well, if this was a
job interview I would say you know, it gets me excited to be in the studio. But it’s
really hard.” He’d like to think that there’s a close relationship between artistic
work and teaching work, but admits this is hard to find. He teaches mainly
foundation-level classes, but hopes to soon teach more advanced students. “[I had]
7

kind of fallen into this rut of like, I didn’t have to prepare, so it was just kind of like,
‘Oh, I’ve got to show up again’. Which was nice because it’s like, oh you get a
paycheck, no matter how small it is, and you’re not really doing anything, you’re
just present. But that, I think, is kind of dangerous.”
The role of the art teacher, having been defined through a specific constellation of tasks, is
made meaningful through increasingly durable constructions of purity both intra- and extraprofessionally. Yet who authors these constructions, and the criteria by which they are
evaluated, is maintained in practice by an emergent understanding of expertise. By
understanding the conditions of possibility in a situation, we may recognize those practical
credits and debits which amount to the abstract quality of professionalism. The meaning of
practices emerges with the cooperation of audiences.
Becka teaches music and band in an elementary school. To develop her pedagogy,
she is taking a distance master’s course designed for performers with teaching jobs.
One morning, she puzzles over the “teaching philosophy” they’ve asked her to
espouse in an essay: “I didn’t even know I had one!” But her career has developed
from part time instruction to a full time teaching position she has held for the last 6
years (“it sure beats retail!”). Becka describes the classic stereotype of the art
teacher – “the flowy type” - who wanders the room, urging experience without
structure. For her, it’s both unproductive for students and exhausting for teachers:
"It's reinventing the wheel every day.” Becka says before she arrived, school
concerts were essentially musicals. The former teacher taught no “musical
language” but performance and dramatic arts, unlike the ‘curricular performance’
model Becka uses to demonstrate to parents how her students learn both songs and
musical theory. We ask if parents miss the musicals of yore, now replaced by
classroom exercises intended to show proficiency, and she suggests only one parent
had a problem: a music educator from another district, who she’s met at
professional conferences and about whom she says, “I have no respect for the way
he does things. He teaches his students no music at all, they don’t know how to read
music or anything.”
Eyal (2013: 876) notes how individual professionals may lose standing through the diffusion
of expertise into a population of savvy citizens (through activism, consumer oversight of
medical practices, and participation in experimentation), but that the network through which
expertise is constituted is only expanded by this inclusion. Audiences, even when sharing a
professional interest in art- or music-making, bring additional criteria by which to determine
one’s professional status. Does this person do work I like? Are they a good colleague? Do
they look and act the way I think someone in their profession should? Given the range of
professional considerations which exceed task-based definitions of a profession, we find
untenable the notion that lower status is afforded to those professionals “who deal with
problems from which the human complexities are not or cannot be removed” (Abbott 1981),
as the complexities of social life abound, and multiple audiences may be enrolled in making
claims to professional status.
With a degree in performance, Adam moved to New York City to become a session
player. He toured a bit with a major American rock band, but when his daughter
8

was born, he took the “quick and affordable option” of getting his teaching degree,
then moved through a series of jobs in the public school system, finally landing at
the middle school where he’s taught music for seven years.
For each class that enters his room, Adam is required to track their "progress" on a
clipboard which includes marks received in other classes. He indicates the
clipboard when students are off-task, and otherwise appeals to their duty to behave
before any creative work can be undertaken. In a moment of levity during an
otherwise tough teaching day, Adam tells a faltering group of seventh graders that
music needs to be about both having fun and learning. On the other hand, he
advises, “Have fun in math class too.” He quickly ponders this, then clarifies, “That
sounds like something Jack Black would say… Do you have fun in math class?” The
group replies with a collective “No!” He smiles and reclaims his ground: “Just
kidding - don’t have fun in math class.”
When a professional can convince others of their expertise, they are allowed many of the
qualities of professional life, especially autonomy. To the extent that such purity does play a
role in professional status, it is when such purity is defined as a constructed remove from the
collectively bounded mess of the world. Art teachers, balanced between two stools, remain
only problematically professional; their interactions are largely with other teachers and with
other artists, neither of which are likely to recognize their expertise as do the students and
parents whom art teaching directly impacts. A central question for a more generous analysis
of the professions that we promote is, as we suggest in our vignettes, the success and failure
of the performance of professionalism. What are the relevant features of a professional
performance, and by what criteria are they constructed as successes and failures?
Justin makes few attempts to coordinate with his fellow teachers. His teaching
schedule leaves him little time to spare, and his work on the arts curriculum and his
professional development courses take place outside the school, allowing for few
opportunities for interaction with other teachers. Though he sometimes takes lunch
in the teacher’s lounge, Justin usually sits quietly between classes, adjusting
instruments or cueing lyrics on the board; for advanced classes he may arrange
parts for practice. Yesterday was the first day he was told, by the teacher in a
neighboring classroom, that the sound from his room was too loud. He shrugs, “you
teach them to sing strongly and play competently, and what else will happen?”
Leaving his school, we pass the teacher's lounge, where laughter peals out over the
regular slam of the microwave door. Approaching the exit, we again encounter
Justin's classroom and peer inside. He hunches in a chair built for a toddler,
strumming his guitar, searching for the right note to teach his first graders a new
song.
Discussion
If the goal of the study of professions is to argue that the working lives, work motivations,
and work values of a few elite and upper-middle class workers (e.g., doctors, lawyers, clergy,
university professors) is forever distinct from those of the rest of the working world, then
attention to just a few classical professions is appropriate (Rueschemeyer 1972). But since the
processes outlined in studies of these professions seem to be taken on by other potentially
9

‘professionalizing’ occupations (elements like extended, particularistic training, certification,
and licensure; service-minded and altruistic statements of purpose; codes of ethics;
autonomy; etc.); and because even lower-status and manual occupations make good use of
the notion of professionalism to discuss the technical, abstract, and theoretical elements of
their work; and because it seems politically suspect to bracket off upper-class, powerful
workers and then discuss their altruism while denying their business interests, it seems to us
as reasonable to reconsider for a moment the professionalization processes outlined in studies
focusing on medical and legal men.
Art teachers negotiate their professional identities in concert with more established
professions of art and teaching. But these negotiations are far from ideal. They are practical
performances that appeal to audiences who enable or obstruct professionalization from
proceeding. We have seen in the vignettes above, how both art and teaching identities are
depleted by the demands of art teaching; how varied motives for professionalization and
models of professionalism make substantiating purity difficult, if not impossible; and how
messily complex the worlds of art teachers can be. By understanding professional status not
as defined by a coherent set of tasks, but through actual practices aimed at actual audiences
and with attention to individual meaning-making, research on professions and
professionalization processes can become more inclusive of empirically-visible working
groups, while jeopardizing the analytical stability of more classically-defined professions. We
agree with Spillman (2012) that, at least as professionalism is enacted, the “theoretical” is at
the heart of the professional project, and it is a core that can be moved, enlarged, and remade
anew by professionals themselves, for display both to intra-professional audiences and the
public at large.
We chose in this paper to focus on art teachers as exemplars of subject area specialists
generally: we expect that the conflicts faced by these in-between actors would be reflected in
the experiences of teachers with other disciplinary backgrounds as well, when their
educational trajectories, professional identities, and daily practices diverge from those of
teachers focused on pedagogy rather than subject area expertise. As we move from primary to
secondary and then university-level education, we would expect these conflicts to be
increasingly pronounced as required subject area expertise increases, since disciplinary
knowledge, commitment, and socialization also increase apace.
We expect that these conflicts will be especially salient in higher education institutions that
promote and enforce reflective pedagogy and approaches like Scholarship of Teaching and
Learning (Boyer 1990) in contexts where promotion and tenure are research-based. Any
resistance to the labor-intensive commitment to remake oneself into an “excellent teacher”
according to definitions drawn from the discipline of pedagogy should be understood not
only as a simple issue of resource constraints but also in terms of the threat to disciplinary
standing and identity such a change can provoke. The impact of pedagogical training and
standards on university-level teachers’ self-image, autonomy, and scientific productivity are
rich arenas for future study.
The relative in-betweenness of art teachers recalls the fact that in-betweenness was once a
feature of the classical professions as well; that such professions now appear so self-confident
is a testament to their power and the power of their allies, not to their status as professions.
The assumption of purity as a prerequisite for the use of the professional lens is then
problematic. This follows as purity relies on internal and external divisions which precede
actual struggles over status. The classical reading assumes that extraprofessional status comes
10

from one form of order - visible command over disorder - intraprofessional status comes from
a separate form of order: removal from disorder, ability to focus, progress. Yet the very idea
of precedent should be rethought, Gieryn (1999) suggests, as the internal/external divide used
to define professional domain is actively constructed by individuals seeking authority over
their work. Such “boundary work” includes making claims to objective facts in the world,
and ways of knowing these facts, for example, how to recognize and ameliorate disorder.
There is no doubt that all professionals strive for autonomy and remove from the mess of the
world. It is this last feature that is discursively referred to in terms like “purity”. These are the
features that distinguish professionals from the rest of working life - but not features which
analysts should use to distinguish professionals. It may be relative success along these lines
that lends a person status, even within each profession or professionalizing project; it is not
uncommon in burgeoning professions to hear the term ‘professional’ bestowed as an honor or
compliment. Analysts should look more closely to the ways that autonomy (from what?) and
theory (about what?) are actively constructed, developed, and maintained by professionals
themselves.
Bibliography
Abbott, Andrew. 1981. “Status and Status Strain in the Professions.” The American Journal
of Sociology 86(4):819–35.
Abbott, Andrew Delano. 1988. The System of Professions: An Essay on the Division of
Expert Labor. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Aili, Carola and Göran Brante. 2007. “Qualifying Teacher Work: Everyday Work as Basis
for the Autonomy of the Teaching Profession.” Teachers and Teaching 13(3):287–306.
Battani, Marshall, David R. Hall, and Rosemary Powers. 1997. “Cultures’ Structures: Making
Meaning in the Public Sphere.” Theory and Society 26(6).
Berger, Peter L. and Thomas Luckmann. 1967. The Social Construction of Reality: A
Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge. Garden City: Anchor.
Berman, Elizabeth Popp. 2006. “Before the Professional Project: Success and Failure at
Creating an Organizational Representative for English Doctors.” Theory and Society
35(2):157–91.
Bourdieu, Pierre and Luc Boltanski. 1981. “The Educational System and the Economy: Titles
and Jobs.” in French Sociology: Rupture and Renewal Since 1968, edited by C. C. Lemert.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Boyer, Ernest L. 1990. Scholarship Reconsidered: Priorities of the Professoriate. Princeton
University Press.
Brain, David. 1991. “Practical Knowledge and Occupational Control: The Professionalization
of Architecture in the United States.” Sociological Forum 6(2):239–68.
Bresler, Liora. 1993. “Music in a Double-Bind: Instruction by Non-Specialists in Elementary
Schools.” Bulletin of the Council for Research in Music Education (115):1–13.
Collins, Randall. 2004. Interaction Ritual Chains. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Epstein, Steven. 1996. Impure Science: AIDS, Activism, and the Politics of Knowledge. 1st
edition. Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press.
Eyal, Gil. 2013. “For a Sociology of Expertise: The Social Origins of the Autism Epidemic.”
American Journal of Sociology 118(4):863–907.
Fine, Gary Alan. 1996. “Justifying Work: Occupational Rhetorics as Resources in Restaurant
Kitchens.” Administrative Science Quarterly 41(1):90–115.

11

Freidson, Eliot. 1986. Professional Powers: A Study of the Institutionalization of Formal
Knowledge. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gamson, William A. 1991. “Commitment and Agency in Social Movements.” Sociological
Forum 6(1):27–50.
Garner, Joanna K. and Avi Kaplan. 2019. “A Complex Dynamic Systems Perspective on
Teacher Learning and Identity Formation: An Instrumental Case.” Teachers and Teaching
25(1):7–33.
Gerber, Alison. 2017. The Work of Art: Value in Creative Careers. Palo Alto: Stanford
University Press.
Gieryn, Thomas F. 1999. Cultural Boundaries of Science: Credibility on the Line. University
of Chicago Press.
Hargreaves, David J., Ross M. Purves, Graham F. Welch, and Nigel A. Marshall. 2007.
“Developing Identities and Attitudes in Musicians and Classroom Music Teachers.” British
Journal of Educational Psychology 77(3):665–82.
Larson, Magali Sarfatti. 1977. The Rise of Professionalism: A Sociological Analysis.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Meyer, John W. and Ronald L. Jepperson. 2000. “The ‘Actors’ of Modern Society: The
Cultural Construction of Social Agency.” Sociological Theory 18(1):100–120.
Rueschemeyer, Dietrich. 1972. “Doctors and Lawyers: A Comment on the Theory of the
Professions.” Pp. 5–19 in Medical Men and Their Work, edited by E. Freidson and J. Lorber.
Chicago: Aldine Atherton.
Sahin, Ali E. 2010. “Professional Status of Elementary Teaching in Turkey: A Delphi Study.”
Teachers and Teaching 16(4):437–59.
Seccombe, Wally. 1986. “Patriarchy Stabilized: The Construction of the Male Breadwinner
Wage Norm in Nineteenth-Century Britain.” Social History 11(1):53–76.
Shapin, Steven. 2010. Never Pure: Historical Studies of Science as If It Was Produced by
People with Bodies, Situated in Time, Space, Culture, and Society, and Struggling for
Credibility and Authority. JHU Press.
Sherman, Rachel. 2010. “‘Time Is Our Commodity’: Gender and the Struggle for
Occupational Legitimacy Among Personal Concierges.” Work and Occupations 37(1):81–
114.
Sinner, Anita. 2012. “Transitioning to Teacher: Uncertainty as a Game of Dramatic Hats.”
Teachers and Teaching 18(5):601–13.
Spillman, Lyn. 2012. Solidarity in Strategy: Making Business Meaningful in American Trade
Associations. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Wilensky, Harold L. 1964. “The Professionalization of Everyone?” The American Journal of
Sociology 70(2):137–58.

12

