Human Capital Accountability and Construct: Evidence from
Islamic Microfinance Institutions in Malaysia

Amrizah Kamaluddin
Accounting Research Institute & Faculty of Accountancy, Universiti Teknologi MARA
43000 Selangor, Malaysia
Tel: +60332587401 Email: amrizah@salam.uitm.edu.my
(corresponding author)

Nawal Kassim
Accounting Research Institute & Faculty of Accountancy, Universiti Teknologi MARA
43000 Selangor, Malaysia
Tel: +60355444952 Email: nawal120@salam.uitm.edu.my,

Md. Mahmudul Alam
School of Economics, Finance & Banking, College of Business, Universiti Utara
Malaysia, Kedah, Malaysia
Tel: +6018-246 7050 Email: rony000@gmail.com

Siti Akmar Abu Samah
Akademi Pengajian Bahasa,Universiti Teknologi MARA 43000 Selangor, Malaysia
Tel: +603-5544 2400 Email: sitiakma@salam.uitm.edu.my

Citation Reference:
Kamaluddin, A., Kassim, N., Alam, M.M., & Samah, A.A. (2018). Human Capital
Accountability and Construct: Evidence from Islamic Microfinance Institutions in
Malaysia. Global Journal Al-Thaqafah, Special Issue, 117-129.
(online)
http://www.gjat.my/gjat2018si/SI2018-08.pdf

This is a pre-publication copy.
The published article is copyrighted by the publisher of the journal.

Human Capital Accountability and Construct: Evidence from
Islamic Microfinance Institutions in Malaysia
Abstract
To identify the human capital construct that significantly relates to the performance of
Islamic organizations, this study obtained data from Islamic microfinance organizations
in Malaysia using the survey questionnaire method. In addition, we interviewed
renowned scholars in the fields of Islamic accounting and Shariah law. Consequently,
this study proposes an extended model of human capital that is applicable to Islamic
organizations. Apart from knowledge and competency, this study includes spiritual
value as another construct of human capital in Islamic organizations. Knowledge
includes ideas that are relevant to the accounting and auditing spectra, as well as
Shariah principles and jurisprudence. By contrast, competency refers to the ability to
innovate unique Shariah-compliant products that are rare and difficult to imitate.
Meanwhile, spiritual values embrace the elements of “Siddiq,” “Amanah,” “Fathonah,”
and “Tabligh.” This study affirms that knowledge, competency, and satisfaction are the
most significant constructs of human capital that explain performance. Factor analysis
indicates that spiritual value is embedded in and forms part of the human capital
construct. Hence, spiritual value is a key element in company culture and contributes
significantly to organizational success. This model can be a platform for human capital
reporting in the relevant Islamic and conventional organizations.
Keywords: Intellectual capital, Human capital; Islamic Organization; Microfinance
Organization; Human spirit.

Introduction
Human capital is vital to organizational success, and is defined as the stock of
competency, knowledge, and personality attributes that is utilized to produce economic
value and enhance firm performance. Human capital is also related to the employee- and
firm-based skill and knowledge components of intellectual capital(Uliana, Macey, &
Grant, 2005). The individual capabilities, knowledge, skills, and experiences of a
company’s employees and managers are crucial to the firm because these factors
contribute to its competitive advantage and facilitate the maximization of profits
(Aradhana & Anuradha, 2005; Kazemian, Abdul Rahman, Mohd Sanusi, & Adeyemi,
2016; Wright, McMahan, & McWilliams, 1994). This idea is consistent with Amrizah
Kamaluddin and Rahman (2013) who concluded that employees’ sustainability and
satisfaction are components of human capital attributes.
Further, Baron (2011)asserted that human capital is generally an element of intellectual
capital. The former could be integrated with social and organizational capital. Social
capital comprises the relationships and networks that permit the creation and transfer of
knowledge, whereas organizational capital includes a firm’s policies, procedures,

patents, and other forms of knowledge owned by an organization. The value of human
capital depends on its potential to contribute toward a firm’s competitive advantage or
core competency. The development of human capabilities and skills significantly
contributes towards economic development (Abdullah, 2012). Human capital can be
developed by improving the skills and competencies of people through education and
effective human resource management. The value of human capital in organizations can
be increased by attracting skilled individuals from the external labor market or by
internally developing the skills of current employees through training and development,
among others (Darus, Mad, & Yusoff, 2014; Kazemian, Abdul Rahman, & Ibrahim,
2014; Paula & Michela, 2010).
Baron (2011) affirmed that a high value of human capital does not consistently translate
to high organizational value. All forms of capital must be evaluated and analyzed in the
context of understanding how people drive business performance. The value creation of
a company, which comprises talented human capital, is not guaranteed if production or
marketing processes (i.e., structural capital) are not well-organized or customers (i.e.,
relational capital) are not reached(Hermans & Kauranen, 2005). Consequently, human
and relational capital requires strong organizational procedures, databases, and
processes (i.e., structural capital) to translate to good firm performance. Human and
relational capital assist in strengthening structural capital, which is proprietary and not
self-renewing (Roos, Roos, Dragonetti, & Edvinsson, 1997).
In the Islamic context, human capital is the ability and experience of a human being to
fulfill one’s objective and responsibility in this world as a trustee of Allah (SWT), as
well as be accountable for all his actions in the Hereafter (Abdullah, 2012; Mohamed et
al., 2013). From the Islamic perspective, a comprehensive model of human capital
development includes moral, ethical, intellectual, and physical development without
neglecting the development of skills and expertise. In addition, the aim of the human
capital development in Islam is for an individual to achieve quality and competency to
the best of his ability to fulfill his responsibilities and duties as a human being. Islam
requires human capital development to realize competency, which can be achieved by
acquiring a variety of knowledge and skills. Consequently, the acquired skills and
knowledge of an employee will further contribute to the core competency and
competitive advantage of his organization, as well as to the development of society.
However, the parties involved in any form of transactions should have unity of mind
and sincerity in their actions. That is, utmost good faith should be observed in all
spheres of dealings because no room or excuse is provided for those who act with a
malicious intent to deceive(Mohd Ma’sum Billah, 2003). The justification of this
principle in the Qur’an (61: 2–3) is translated as follows:
“O you who believe: Why say you that which you do not? Grievously adious is it in the
Sight of Allah (SWT) that you say that which you do not.”
This code is also mentioned in another section in the Qur’an (16:90), which is translated
as follows:
“Verily Allah (SWT) commands justice and the doing of good.”

Hence,
capital is
when
from
the

human
different
viewed
Islamic and

Human capital

Competency

Attitude

Intellectual
agility

conventional perspectives. In Islam, human capital covers all aspects of life. By
contrast, the conventional perspective only focuses on human capital as a tool for
maximizing organizational profit and achieving organizational goals. In addition, the
foundation of Islamic human capital development is based on the Qur’an and Sunnah,
whereas conventional human capital development only refers to ethics based on manmade laws.
Tan Sri Dr. Zeti Akhtar Aziz, the governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (The Global
Islamic Financial Services Industry, 2007), regards the importance of human intellectual
capital from the perspective of Islamic finance as follows:
“…an important factor in sustaining the performance and competitiveness of the
Islamic financial industry. Indeed, the fast pace of innovation in global financial
services in general and in the Islamic financial service sector in particular, demands
new expertise and skills.” (p. 2)
Conventional human capital theory mainly focuses on the development of institutional
education, skills, and expertise. Therefore, this study aims to demonstrate how the
measurement of human capital has facilitated the development of Islamic organizations
and to identify the human capital construct that significantly relates to performance. For
the purpose of this research, Islamic microfinance institutions are taken as the sample.
Literature Review
Human Capital Model
The current model of human capital includes intangible elements, such as competency,
attitude, and intellectual agility, as components of human capital (see Figure 1)(Roos et
al., 1997).

Figure 1. Components of Human Capital

The main components of competency are knowledge and skills. Knowledge refers to
technical or academic knowledge, which is acquired from schools, universities, and
organization field training, as well as the educational level of employees. Knowledge
also covers the theoretical aspect of an employee and is complemented with skills. Skill
is the ability to handle a practical application of knowledge, such as the use of a
computer, which can be accomplished by using information technology literacy (Roos
et al., 1997; Shuhidan, Said, Mokri, & Kazemian, 2016).
Firms require employees with strong character and are able and willing to apply their
knowledge and skills to achieve organizational goals. These factors are influenced by
the attitude of employees. Attitude is affected by motivation, behavior, and
conduct(Roos et al., 1997). Davenport (1999)described human capital as comprising
ability, behavior, effort, and time, all of which are owned and controlled by workers.
To adapt to the –rapidly changing economic environment, firms should have employees
with intellectual agility. Intellectual agility is the ability to transfer knowledge from one
context to another (e.g., the ability to innovate and transform ideas to products and
services, as well as improve knowledge and the company, thereby possibly leading to
successful diversification)(Roos et al., 1997).
The aforementioned definition of human capital is confirmed by intellectual capital
scholars, who claim that human capital is sourced from the talents of
employees(Stewart, 2002) which include skills, brainpower, and tacit knowledge(AlAli, 2003) Thus, human capital is a source of innovation and strategic renewal(Brinker,
2005; Nick, 1998; Seetharaman, Kevin Lock Teng, & Saravanan, 2004). Human capital
is “the collective capability of the firm to extract the optimum solutions from employee
knowledge and is a direct consequence of the sum of workforce expertise, knowledge,
and attitude(Tseng & James Goo, 2005, p. 194).” Hubert (1996)defined human capital
as the capabilities of individuals that are required to provide solutions to or serve
clients.
From the perspective of Islamic finance institutions, the board of directors and Shariah
supervisory board are two independent bodies that play a major role in the intellectual
capital model (see Figure 2). This intellectual capital model, which was proposed by
Nicholson and Kiel (2004), divides intellectual capital into the human, social, and
structural capital components. In this regard, human capital comprises the individual
skills and knowledge that constitute the experiences of the members of the board of
directors and the Shariah supervisory board, as well as assist in their decisionmaking(Nick, 1999). These components are the primary constituents of intellectual
capital, which forms the basis of a board’s functionality(Bassi & Buren, 1999)and
influences the effectiveness of the board members(Castanias & Helfat, 2001).

Figure 2: Intellectual Capital Model of Islamic Financial Institutions

Figure 2 shows that another segment of intellectual capital is social capital, which
covers the diverse stages of social structures inside and outside of the organization. In
this model, social capital comprises three stages, namely, interrelationship between the
board and its external structures, interrelationship within the board, and interrelationship
between the board and its management (Nicholson and Kiel, 2004). Board members are
informed of a firm’s activities that execute their role as members through relationships
and interactions with the firm. However, the human capital development of the board
members and the analysis of the information they receive before moving to the
implementation stage are two of the main functions of company management
(Kazemian, Rahman, Sanusi, & Aedyemi, 2015).
Consequently, the relationships within the board, which constitute social capital, create
awareness among the board members (Adil et al., 2013; Kamaluddin, Rahman, Mara, &
Alam, (2007). Hence, human and social capital are part and parcel of the board, and
structural capital is a function of the board (Castanias and Helfat, 2001). Therefore,
structural capital becomes the building block of an organization through the practices,
strategies, and procedures of the board(Nick, 1999). Accordingly, structural capital is an
integral component of an organization’s board, where members share their implicit and
explicit information by making their knowledge-based information beneficial to the
other group members(Edvinsson & Sullivan, 1996).
Dae-Bong (2009) asserted that the advanced measurement of human capital should
consider the concept of “human development” with emphasis on social capital. An
individual’s social capital is substantially linked to his human capital, which is focused
on the stock of knowledge, such as networking among constituents rather than isolated
situations. The conventional measurement of human capital utilizes proxies (e.g., an
individual’s productivity) and education-related factors (e.g., high-level qualifications,
graduation and enrollment rates, and time and financial investment in education).

Furthermore, Alwi (2001)emphasized the significance of the human spirit among
employees in the extended model of human capital from an Islamic organization’s
perspective by indicating that human capital should possess four values of the human
spirit, namely, “Siddiq,” the commitment to clean business processes, thereby leading to
good corporate governance; “Amanah,” the commitment to company vision, mission,
and goals; “Tabligh,” the formation of personal characteristics; and “Fathonah,” the
creative mindset. These four values create company culture and personality through
good corporate governance, commitment to the needs and satisfaction of stakeholders,
and continuous improvement.
Moreover, Rahman and Rahim (2010)described “Siddiq,” “Amanah,” “Fathonah,” and
“Tabligh” from the perspective of accountants and auditors as follows:
“Siddiq” means trustworthy, which relates to integrity and requires people to be
competent and adequately qualified. The Qur’an (28:26) states that “truly the best of
men to employ is the man who is strong and trustworthy.” Muslims believe that man’s
ownership of anything in this world is not an end in itself but a means to provide a
decent life for himself, his family, and society. Mankind is only a vicegerent of Allah in
this world and will be held accountable for the way he has acquired and used wealth. In
Islamic accounting and auditing, trustworthiness relates to a high degree of integrity,
truthfulness, honesty, probity, and respect for the confidentiality of information.
“Amanah” means sincerity, which is based on the principle of man’s obedience toward
Allah (SWT) in performing his work. An accountant should not subject himself to
external influences or pressures in performing his professional duties. This practice will
lead to performing righteous deeds that enjoin all that are good and forbid all evil deeds.
“Tabligh” means piety, that is, the fear of Allah (SWT) in secret and in public by
observing His commandments and avoiding His prohibitions. Man’s work can become a
form of worship of Allah (SWT) by observing “tabligh.” An accountant should comply
with Shariah laws in all professional duties. His accountability to Allah (SWT) should
be over his accountability to other stakeholders.
“Fathonah” means righteousness. An accountant should not confine himself in
performing his professional duties. Instead, he should strive to attain a high degree of
righteousness and perfection in his work to the best of his ability. In the process, he
should be objective by being fair, impartial, unbiased, free from conflicts of interest,
and independent in fact and appearance.
In the noble teachings of Islam, Allah (SWT) is the sovereign and He has the right to
ordain a path for the guidance of mankind(Mohd Ma’sum Billah, 2003). This teaching
is the reason that Muslims strive to implement the spirit of Shariah, as stated in the
Qur’an (45:18) and translated as follows:
“We made for you a Shariah, so follow it, and not the fancies of those who have no
knowledge.”

To maintain fairness and honesty in any dealing that man may be involved in, Imam
Razi stated the following words (Mohd Ma’sum Billah, 2003, p. 20):
“Take recourse to just balance and weight. Tell the truth in selling commodities and do
not conceal anything.”
Allah (SWT) does not want human beings to suffer difficulties, as stated in the Qur’an
(2:185) and translated as follows:
“Allah (SWT) intends every facility for you; he does not want to put you in difficulties.”
A Muslim community member is obliged to consider the socioeconomic and other
concerns of family members, relatives, neighbors, community, and society. Moreover, a
Muslim is required to consistently strive to purify himself from selfish tendencies
toward others; a Muslim is likewise considered to have no faith if he does not express a
caring attitude toward others (The Colombo Plan, 2007). These teachings reflect the
importance of spirituality from the Islamic perspective.
Thus, we use the preceding discussions and arguments as bases to propose an extended
model of human capital (from an Islamic organization’s perspective) that embraces the
elements of spiritual value in the human capital construct.
Methodology
Research Scope
To understand the human capital accountability of Islamic institutions, this study
focuses on Islamic microfinance lenders in Malaysia and addresses human capital
accountability as the correct or ideal evaluation method for human resources. This
model incorporates the conventional perspectives discussed by Roos et al. (1997) and
the human spirit elements discussed by Alwi (2001). The current study also considers
the advance measurement method proposed by Dae-Bong (2009).
The present study collected data from managers of microfinance institutions (MFIs) in
Malaysia. MFIs are financial institutions that have the social capital (i.e., commitment)
to assist typically poor households and small enterprises in gaining access to financial
services (Molla and Alam, 2011; Alam and Molla, 2012a, b). MFIs are distinguished
from purely commercial, small-scale, and possibly informal financial institutions that
deal with the poor (e.g., village moneylenders, pawnshops, and informal transfer
systems) and from large, possible government-sponsored schemes that may hold small
accounts as by-products of their main business (e.g., national savings schemes and postoffice savings banks) (Hardy, Holden, & Prokopenko, 2002).
Islamic microfinance refers to a system of localized finance arrangements organized as
an alternative source of funds for small, low-income clients who seek credit with the
fulfillment of compliance given by Islamic law and way of life (Alam, Said, & Salwana,
2015; Kamaluddin et al., 2015; Hassan et al., 2015).

Sample and Data Collection
As of January 2013, Malaysia had 21 microfinance institutions classified as
development financial institutions, commercial banks, non-bank institutions, and credit
unions.
A total of 600 questionnaires were distributed among the managers of 120 financial
institutions (main offices and their branches) that offer Islamic microfinance products
and 44 Islamic MFIs (main offices and their branches) in Malaysia. Two to five
questionnaires were sent to each organization and were addressed to the persons who
were knowledgeable on human resources, accounting or finance, business development
(including the marketing and corporate divisions), and organizational processes that
include research and innovation activities.
However, only 60 questionnaires were returned, thereby yielding a response rate of
10%. Data were collected using questionnaires, which were distributed via postal
service. The questionnaires used five-point Likert scales (1–strongly disagree; 5–
strongly agree).
Instrumentation and Validation
The questionnaires comprised 74 items, which were divided into four main parts. Part 1
focused on human resource management and comprised four sections, namely,
recruitment (Section A), selection of employees (Section B), performance evaluation
(Section C), and training and compensation (Section D). Section A had five items,
Section B had nine, Section C had eight, and Section D had seven.
Part 2 was on organizational human capital and comprised three sections, namely,
knowledge and competencies (Section A), employee attitude (Section B), and employee
spiritual value (Section C). Section A had thirteen questions, Section B had seven, and
Section C had nine. Part 3 was concerned with organizational performance and
consisted of seven questions. Lastly, Part 4 was on the profile of the respondents and
comprised nine questions.
Prior to data collection, the instrument was content-validated and tested. The
questionnaire items were adopted from established human capital and formed based on
the information gathered from the interviews conducted previously. The indicators for
human capital were reviewed by four experts, who are scholars in Islamic accounting
and the Shariah board councils of the Islamic financial institutions.

Results and Discussion
Respondent Profiles
Data for this study were collected from the employees of MFIs in Malaysia. Table 1
shows that 37.3% of respondents are male and 62.7% are female.

Table 1: Table of Frequencies for Gender

Gender
Male
Female
Total
N = 59

Frequency
22
37
59

Percent
37.3
62.7
100.0

Table 2 shows the frequencies of job levels among the respondents from MFIs. Most of
the respondents (27 or 45.8%) are from low management levels and followed by those
from middle management levels (20 or 33.9%). A total of 7 (11.9%) of the respondents
are from senior management levels. Finally, 5 (8.5%) of the respondents are from top
management levels.
Table 2: Table of Frequencies for Job Level

Job level
Low management level
Middle management level
Senior management level
Top management level
Total
N = 59

Frequency
27
20
7
5
59

Percent
45.8
33.9
11.9
8.4
100.0

Table 3: Table of Frequencies for Job Specification

Job specification
Finance and accounting
Human resources
Sales and promotion
Research and development
Administration
Others
Total
N = 59

Frequency
19
5
8
4
12
11
59

Percent
32.2
8.5
13.6
6.8
20.3
18.6
100.0

Table 3 shows that respondents hold jobs belonging to six job classifications, namely,
finance and accounting, human resources, sales and promotion, research and
development, administration, and others. Most of the respondents (32.2%) are from the
finance and accounting departments. This group is followed by the respondents in
administration (20.3%) and those from departments in the “Others” category, such as
microcredit (18.6%). Lastly, 13.6%, 8.5%, and 6.8% of the respondents come from sales
and promotion, human resources, and research and development, respectively.
Correlation Test

Table 4 presents the results of the Pearson correlation coefficient analysis, which was
conducted to analyze the degree to which the variables are related(Pallant, 2010)and to
ensure that multicollinearity, which is analyzed via the correlation coefficient r, does
not exist among variables(Mohd. Radzi, 2012).
The results indicate positive and significant correlations among the human capital
constructs. The correlation coefficients are between r = 0.107 and 0.646 and are
significant at p < 0.01. These results indicate that no multicollinearity problem exists
among the variables under study.

Table 4: Summary of the Correlation Analysis Results

No. Items
1
1
Employee
1
knowledge
and
competency
2
Employee
0.646**
governance
3
Employee
0.385**
commitment
4
Employee
0.118
satisfaction

2

3

4

1
0.377**

1

0.107**

−0.034 1

**Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2 –tailed)

Factor Analysis
A principal component analysis was conducted on the 29 human capital items. Table 5
presents the results. A varimax with Kaiser normalization exploratory factor analysis
produced four dimensions (i.e., knowledge and competency, governance, commitment,
and satisfaction), which account for 55.68% of the total variance with all of the factor
loadings above 0.45. The Kaiser–Meyer–Olkin measure of sampling adequacy was
0.724, which was beyond the recommended value of 0.6. The result of the Bartlett’s test
of sphericity was significant, thereby supporting the factorability of the correlation
matrix.

Table 5: Factor’s Value of the Human Capital Constructs

Knowledge and Competency
Item
KC1
KC2
KC3
KC4
KC5
KC6

Descriptive
Are provided with proper Shariah training
Have experience in Shariah banking or matters
Are experts in handling matters pertaining to Shariah transactions
Are able to develop new ideas consistent with the Shariah principles
Possess right vocational training
Possess spiritual or religious character

Coefficient
0.867
0.807
0.747
0.714
0.710
0.702

KC7
KC8
KC9
KC10
KC11
KC12
KC13
KC14

Are self-developed
Previous job experience are related to their current position
Possess right academic qualification
Undergo succession training program
Are highly skilled
Are creative/innovative
Focus on the quality of service provided
Works well in a team

0.679
0.639
0.613
0.608
0.570
0.567
0.508
0.413

Descriptive
Are committed to stakeholders’ needs and satisfaction
Are aware of stakeholders needs’ and satisfaction
Are trustworthiness
Are widely considered the best in our industry
Are knowledgeable in Shariah principles

Coefficient
0.813
0.723
0.665
0.617
0.497

Descriptive
Maintain good relationships with their peers
Are motivated
Are committed to the organization
Committed to achieve organizational mission and vision
Practice teamwork

Coefficient
0.804
0.793
0.789
0.527
0.519

Governance
Item
GV1
GV2
GV3
GV4
GV5

Commitment
Item
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5

Satisfaction
Item
Descriptive
S1
Are satisfied with the job environment
S2
Are generally satisfied working with us
S3
Are satisfied with the performance evaluation system
S4
Are high in turnover
S5
Only work under strict supervision
Extraction Method: Principal Axis Factoring
Rotation Method: Varimax with Kaiser Normalization
Bartlett’s Test of Sphericity: Chi-Square: 1252.630, df = 406, p = 0.00
Kaiser–Meyer–Olkin Measure of Sampling Adequacy = 0.724

Coefficient
0.863
0.837
0.830
0.758
0.370

Reliability Tests
The normality and reliability test results indicate that the data used for this study meet
the levels of reliability required for significant analyses. The Cronbach’s α of human
capital and performance are 0.919 and 0.846, respectively.

Conclusion
This study proposes the definition and measurement of human capital from the Islamic
perspective. The results of the current model suggest that the measurement of Islamic
human capital model comprises four constructs, namely, knowledge and competency,
governance, commitment, and satisfaction. This research discovers that spiritual values,
namely, “Siddiq,” “Amanah,” “Tabligh,” and “Fathonah,” are embraced in all the
constructs of human capital. The factor analysis results reflect that “knowledge” in this

context includes knowledge in Shariah principles and jurisprudence; capabilities include
the ability to innovate and create unique products or services that are consistent with the
requirement of Islamic jurisprudence.
Another construct is defined as “governance,” which signifies that people are committed
to clean business processes (“Siddiq”) that are represented by the indicators “committed
and aware to stakeholders’ needs and satisfaction,” “trustworthiness,” and “considered
the best in the industry.”
The “commitment” construct refers to the commitment of people toward achieving their
organization’s vision and mission, maintaining good relationships with peers, and
applying strong teamwork. This construct is consistent with “Amanah,” which means
sincerity in performing duties. The final construct is “satisfaction,” which reveals the
character, behavior, and conduct of employees.

Human Capital

Knowledge and
Competency

Governance

Commitment

Satisfaction

Figure 3: Human Capital from the Islamic Perspective

Consistent with Abdullah (2012)human capital in Islam is not restricted to the abilities,
competencies, and experiences of human beings but also possesses “Siddiq”
(trustworthy), “Amanah” (sincerity), “Tabligh” (piety), and “Fathonah” (righteousness)
to provide improved services to the community and society. These human elements are
essential for managers of MFIs when serving poor communities by extending
microfinance assistance, thereby enabling recipients to carry out their economic
activities and improve their standard of living.
Allah (SWT) also said the following words, “I will create a vicegerent on earth (2:30),”
which implies that the aim of human capital is as follows:
....is to fulfill the objective of the successor (Khalifah) on the earth. This goal will not be
accomplished unless man is competent enough to fulfill these duties adequately and
potently, thereby qualifying him, raising his abilities, and releasing his powers and
capabilities in different physical, intellectual, psychological, and spiritual aspects
(International Islamic Jurisprudence Academy, 2007; Abdullah, 2012).
The current study offers several contributions to the human capital measurement
literature by extending the conventional definitions of human capital proposed by
previous scholars. Through the lens of Islam, the current study substantiates that the

spiritual values “Siddiq” (trustworthy), “Amanah” (sincerity), “Tabligh” (piety), and
“Fathonah” (righteousness) are components of human capital characteristics. These
characteristics are indispensable for managers to ensure the efficiency and effectiveness
of their roles as leaders in their organizations. The current study proposes that the
human capital construct encompasses human competency and knowledge, as well as
include governance, commitment, and satisfaction. In addition, this study introduces the
measurement of human capital based on indicators. The conventional approach in
measuring human capital is focused on output, cost, and income. To further test the
proposed human capital model, this study should be extended to other Islamic
organizations, such as banks and religious institutions.
Acknowledgment
We would like to thank the Accounting Research Institute of the Universiti Teknologi
MARA and the Ministry of Higher Education Malaysia for providing financial support
to this research project. We are grateful for the grant, without which we would not have
been able to conduct this research.
References
Abdullah, M. F. (2012). The role of Islam in human capital development: a juristic
analysis. Humanomics, 28(1), 64-75.
Al-Ali, N. (2003). Comprehensive Intellectual Capital Management: Step-by-Step. New
Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Alwi, S. (2001). Manajemean Sumber Daya Manusia: Strategi Keunggulan Kompetitif.
BPFE, Yogyakarta.
Aradhana, K., & Anuradha, S. (2005). Managing human resource capabilities for
sustainable competitive advantage: An empirical analysis from Indian global
organisations. Education + Training, 47(8/9), 628-639.
Aziz, Z. A. (2007, 14 May). The global Islamic financial services industry. Speech by
Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Launch of
Kuwait Finance House Research, Dubai. Retrieved from
http://www.bis.org/review/r07015b.pdf
Baron, A. (2011). Measuring human capital. Strategic HR Review, 10(2), 30-35.
Bassi, L. J., & Buren, M. E. V. (1999). Valuing investments in intellectual capital.
International Journal of Technology Management, 18(5-8), 414-432.
Brinker, B. (2005, May ). Intellectual capital: tomorrow's asset, today's challenge.
Retrieved from http://www.cpavision.org/vision/wpaper05b.cfm
Castanias, R. P., & Helfat, C. E. (2001). The managerial rents model: Theory and
empirical analysis. Journal of Management, 27(6), 661-678.
Coakes, S. J. (2005). SPSS version 12.0 for Windows : analysis without anguish.
Milton, Qld.: John Wiley & Sons.
Darus, F., Mad, S., & Yusoff, H. (2014). The importance of ownership monitoring and
firm resources on corporate social responsibility (CSR) of financial institutions.
Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 145, 173-180.
Davenport, T. O. (1999). Human Capital. Management Review, 88(11), 37.
Edvinsson, L., & Sullivan, P. (1996). Developing a model for managing intellectual
capital. European Management Journal, 14(4), 356-364.

Hardy, D. C., Holden, P., & Prokopenko, V. (2002). Monetary and Exchange Affairs
Department. Microfinance Institutions and Public Policy, IMF Working Paper.
Hermans, R., & Kauranen, I. (2005). Value creation potential of intellectual capital in
biotechnology - empirical evidence from Finland. R&D Management, 35(2),
171-185.
Hubert, S. O. (1996). Tacit knowledge the key to the strategic alignment of intellectual
capitalnull. Planning Review, 24(2), 10-16. doi:10.1108/eb054547
Kamaluddin, A., Rahman, R., Mara, U., & Alam, S. (2007). The moderating effect of
organisation culture on intellectual capital and organisational effectiveness
relationships. Paper presented at the International Conference on Intellectual
Capital, Knowledge Management & Organizational Learning.
Kamaluddin, A., & Rahman, R. A. (2013). The intellectual capital model: the resourcebased theory application. . International Learning and Intellectual Capital,
10(3-4), 294-313.
Kazemian, S., Abdul Rahman, R., & Ibrahim, Z. (2014). Measuring level of market
orientation for an Islamic microfinance institution case study of Amanah Ikhtiar
Malaysia (AIM). Qualitative Research in Financial Markets, 6(3), 258-277.
Kazemian, S., Abdul Rahman, R., Mohd Sanusi, Z., & Adeyemi, A. A. (2016). Role of
market orientation in sustainable performance: the case of a leading
microfinance provider. Humanomics, 32(3).
Kazemian, S., Rahman, R. A., Sanusi, Z. M., & Aedyemi, A. A. (2015). Can Market
Orientation Sustain Management of Microfinance Institutions? The Case Study
of Amanah Ikhtiar Malaysia (AIM) A New Paradigm for International Business
(pp. 271-283): Springer.
Mohd Ma’sum Billah. (2003). Modern Financial Transactions under Shariah. Ilmiah
Publishers, Petaling Jaya, Malaysia, 5.
Mohd. Radzi, S. H. (2012). Tax Reporting for Non-Profit Organization in Malaysia.
Retrieved from
Nicholson, G. J., & Kiel, G. C. (2004). Breakthrough board performance: how to
harness your board’s intellectual capital[1]null. Corporate Governance: The
international journal of business in society, 4(1), 5-23.
Nick, B. (1998). Intellectual capital: an exploratory study that develops measures and
modelsnull. Management Decision, 36(2), 63-76.
Nick, B. (1999). Managing Organizational Knowledge by Diagnosing Intellectual
Capital: Framing and Advancing the State of the Field. International Journal of
Technology Management, 18(5-8), 433-462.
Pallant, J. (2010). SPSS Survival Manual: A Step By Step Guide to Data Analysis Using
SPSS Program (4th ed.): The McGraw Hill.
Paula, B., & Michela, C. (2010). Interaction between structural capital and human
capital in Italian NPOs: Leadership, organizational culture and human resource
management. Journal of Intellectual Capital, 11(2), 123-139.
Qfinance. (2009, April). Islamic microfinance. Retrieved from
http://www.qfinance.com/financing-checklists/islamic-microfinance
Rahman, A., & Rahim, A. (2010). An introduction to Islamic accounting theory and
practice. Kuala Lumpur: CERT Publication.
Roos, J., Roos, G., Dragonetti, N. C., & Edvinsson, L. (1997). Intellectual Capital.
Navigating In the New Business Landscape. London: Macmillan Press Ltd.

Seetharaman, A., Kevin Lock Teng, L., & Saravanan, A. S. (2004). Comparative
justification on intellectual capital. Journal of Intellectual Capital, 5(4), 522539.
Shuhidan, S. M., Said, J., Mokri, S. H., & Kazemian, S. (2016). Market orientation
within technological companies: Risk based approach. Paper presented at the
Computer and Information Sciences (ICCOINS), 2016 3rd International
Conference on.
Stewart, T. A. (2002). The Wealth of Knowledge. London: Nicholas Brealey.
Tseng, C.-Y., & James Goo, Y.-J. (2005). Intellectual capital and corporate value in an
emerging economy: empirical study of Taiwanese manufacturers. R&D
Management, 35(2), 187-201.
Uliana, E., Macey, J., & Grant, P. (2005). Towards reporting human capital. Meditari
Accountancy Research, 13(2), 167-188.
Wright, P. M., McMahan, G. C., & McWilliams, A. (1994). Human resources and
sustained competitive advantage: a resource-based perspective. The
International Journal of Human Resource Management, 5(2), 301-326.

