International Studies Quarterly (2019) 63, 1014–1024

How Can We Criticize International Practices?
SEBASTIAN SCHINDLER
Goethe University Frankfurt
AND

TOBIAS W ILLE
Columbia University & Goethe University Frankfurt
In this article, we elaborate two distinct ways of criticizing international practices: social critique and pragmatic critique. Our
argument is that these two forms of critique are systematically opposed to each other: They are based on opposing epistemic
premises, they are motivated by opposing political concerns, and they pursue opposing visions of social progress. Scholars
of International Relations (IR) who want to work with the conceptual tools of practice theory are thus confronted with a
consequential choice. Understanding the alternatives can help them to be more self-reflexive in their research practices
and intervene more forcefully in contemporary political debates. We illustrate these advantages through a discussion of the
scholarly debate on the practices of multilateral diplomacy through which the United Nations Security Council authorized a
military intervention in Libya in 2011.

Introduction
When International Relations (IR) scholars engage with
normativity, they usually do so in an analytical mode. They
seek to understand how norms impact the behavior of international actors and under what conditions norms can
change. Recently, however, a growing number of IR scholars have begun to think about these analytical questions in
conjunction with normative ones. Constructivists have extensively debated how their analytical work on international
norms can inform normative judgments and guide political decision-making (e.g., Price and Reus-Smit 1998; Price
2008; Ralph 2018; Wiener 2018). Similarly, scholarship in
the tradition of the English School has placed a renewed
emphasis on ethical questions (e.g., Cochran 2009; Navari
2017). In this article, we argue that practice theory offers
a distinct vantage point on how the empirical analysis of
normativity and the normative evaluation of political practices can inform each other. As some of the protagonists of
the so-called “practice turn” in IR have pointed out, practice theory can help to bridge the divide between analytical
and normative IR theory (Adler 2005, 26–27) and make IR
scholarship more relevant for political practitioners and the
general public alike (Bueger and Gadinger 2015, 457–58).
In this article, we introduce two distinct ways in which practice theory can achieve these objectives.
We elaborate two ways of studying practices in a normative manner that we refer to as social critique and pragmatic
critique respectively. Social and pragmatic forms of critique
Sebastian Schindler is a postdoctoral researcher at Goethe University Frankfurt’s Cluster of Excellence “The Formation of Normative Orders.”
Tobias Wille is a Marie Skłodowska-Curie Global Fellow at Columbia University’s Saltzman Institute of War and Peace Studies and Goethe University Frankfurt’s Cluster of Excellence “The Formation of Normative Orders.”
Authors’ note: We would like to thank Bud Duvall, Frank Gadinger, Kristina
Lepold, Vincent Pouliot, Hilmar Schäfer, Philip Wallmeier, the anonymous reviewers and the editors of International Studies Quarterly for their helpful comments
on drafts of this article, as well as Ciaran Cronin for editing its final version. The
research for this article has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation program under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie
grant agreement no. 792932. The authors of this article are listed alphabetically
and have contributed equally.

do not merely involve normative statements about practices.
Instead, they both combine empirical analysis and normative judgement, which is why we speak of “critique” in both
cases.1 Our central claim is that these two forms of critique
are systematically opposed to each other. They are based on
opposing epistemic premises, they are motivated by opposing political concerns, and they pursue opposing visions of
social progress. A clear understanding of these differences
can advance contemporary debates on how to reconcile empirical analysis and normative evaluation in the study of international politics. It highlights that there is an important
choice involved in pursuing one or the other form of critique and clarifies what kind of choice this is.
In our elaboration of the two forms of critique, we draw
upon two broad theoretical traditions on which the practice turn in IR builds (Leander 2011; Bueger and Gadinger
2015; Martin-Mazé 2017). On the one hand, IR scholars
have adopted ideas from critical theory and especially from
the works of the French sociologist Bourdieu.2 Through an
in-depth engagement with this first tradition, we reconstruct
what we term social critique of practices. On the other hand,
IR scholars also draw upon a second broad theoretical tradition, namely pragmatism.3 In our engagement with this
tradition, we reconstruct a less well-known, yet equally important form of pragmatic critique of practices. Our reconstruction shows that the two kinds of critique relate in very
different ways to the knowledge that practitioners have of
their own situation. As a result, they arrive at very different conclusions about what is wrong with practices and what
should be done to change things for the better.
1
“Critique” in our understanding is a mode of inquiry in which empirical
analysis and normative evaluation are tightly interwoven (Anderl and Wallmeier
2018, 68–69; Cox 1981, 128–30; Jaeggi 2009, 71–73). As far as our proposed conceptual distinction is concerned, “social critique” is a widely used term; the notion
of “pragmatic critique” is drawn from Cochran (1999, chap. 6).
2
For example, Adler-Nissen (2014, 2014); Bigo (2011); Eagleton-Pierce
(2012); Kuus (2015); Leander (2011); Mérand (2010); Pouliot (2010); Sending
(2015); Villumsen Berling (2015); M.C. Williams (2007).
3
Fore example, Adler (2008); Aradau and Huysmans (2019); Austin (2017);
Best and Walters (2013); Bode (2018); Bueger (2018); Gadinger (2016);
Hanrieder (2016); Niemann (2019); Schindler and Wille (2015).

Schindler, Sebastian, and Tobias Wille. (2019) How Can We Criticize International Practices?. International Studies Quarterly, doi: 10.1093/isq/sqz057
© The Author(s) (2019). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the International Studies Association. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original work is properly cited.

SEBASTIAN SCHINDLER

The proposed distinction between two forms of critique
can help to clarify contemporary debates about international practices. As an illustration, we engage in some depth
with a recent debate among prominent practice theorists on
the diplomatic negotiations surrounding the international
intervention in Libya in 2011. In a much-debated piece,
Adler-Nissen and Pouliot (2014) elaborate a Bourdieusian
analysis of “power in practice.” They show how the socially
recognized competence of diplomats from the three Western permanent member states in the United Nations (UN)
Security Council (the “P3”: France, the United Kingdom,
and the United States) helped them to gain authorization
for a military intervention in Libya in 2011. However, in an
equally well-received contribution, Ralph and Gifkins (2017,
630) object that Adler-Nissen and Pouliot reify a practice
that “is not fit for purpose.” Ralph and Gifkins criticize that
Adler-Nissen and Pouliot ignore the normative background
constituted by the responsibility-to protect (R2P) against
which the Security Council’s decision was made. In light of
the R2P norm, Ralph and Gifkins maintain, the behavior of
the P3 diplomats was not particularly competent. Our proposed distinction between social and pragmatic critique enables one to see with greater clarity what is at stake in this
debate. In particular, it makes apparent that the problem is
not a lack of normativity on one side or an excess of normativity on the other. Rather, the two approaches allow for two
very different critiques of how the R2P norm is realized in
the practices of multilateral diplomacy.
Our article is structured as follows. It begins with an account of the debate on IR practice theory in which the distinction between Bourdieusian and pragmatist approaches
has recently gained increasing prominence. We then offer a systematic reconstruction of social critique and pragmatic critique, relying on scholarship from social theory
and IR. Following this, we show that both forms of critique provide valuable normative orientation for analyzing
the practices in the UN Security Council that led to its decision to authorize the intervention in Libya in 2011. In
conclusion, we argue that realizing the critical potential
of practice theory requires an awareness of the differences
between the two forms of critique.

Two Approaches to the Study of International Practices
In recent years, scholars of IR have become increasingly
interested in theories of practice from sociology and social theory, which they have adapted in various ways to the
study of international politics. Initially, Neumann (2002)
suggested that a focus on practices could complement the
then-dominant preoccupation with language in postpositivist IR. A more comprehensive turn to practices for the
whole discipline of IR was then advocated by Adler and
Pouliot (2011a, 2011b). They frame practice theory neither
as an addition to the repertoire of postpositivist IR nor as a
new paradigm in its own right, but instead as an approach
that allows for interparadigmatic exchange between all important camps in IR, among them realism, liberalism, constructivism, and poststructuralism. More recently, McCourt
(2016) has identified practice theory as part of the “new constructivism” in IR, while Solomon and Steele (2017) have argued that it is one aspect of a broader move to the “micro” in
the discipline. Our contribution to this general debate over
what practice theory is and what it can contribute to our
understanding of international politics is to highlight that
it offers a distinct perspective on the relationship between
empirical analysis and normative evaluation.

AND

TOBIAS W ILLE

1015

This focus on normative evaluation is timely because, despite the stated hope that the practice turn in IR will give
rise to innovative studies that are both “analytically and normatively” progressive (Adler and Pouliot 2011a, 31), so far
most IR practice theorists have steered clear of the field of
normative analysis. Practice theory is widely understood to
be an analytical and not a normative enterprise. When practice theorists (e.g., Kratochwil 2011; Gadinger 2016) address
the issue of normativity, they do so by analyzing the inherent
normative expectations that structure international practices. These scholars focus on the role normativity plays in
international politics without passing normative judgment
themselves. This stance has been elaborated in a particularly
pointed way by Lechner and Frost (2018) in their outline
of a Wittgensteinian theory of international practice. While
Lechner and Frost’s approach recognizes that norms constitute one analytical component of practice, it contents itself
with describing practices from an internal point of view without passing judgment on them. In their own words, Lechner
and Frost conceive of the task of their “philosophical” theory of practice as being “to describe and not to prescribe or
explain” (Lechner and Frost 2018, 211). In this article, by
contrast, we argue for a critical approach to the ubiquity of
normativity in international politics, rather than a “descriptivist” one in Lechner and Frost’s sense.
In order to recover the potential of practice theory as a resource for critique, it is important to appreciate the heterogeneity of the literature in social theory on which the practice turn builds.4 In this article, we work with a distinction
that has been highlighted by Bueger and Gadinger (2015,
2018) and also features prominently in other contributions
to the debate (e.g., Leander 2011; Martin-Mazé 2017): the
distinction between “critical” and “pragmatist” approaches.
As Bueger and Gadinger (2015) explain, the two traditions
represent two prominent approaches to the study of practices in sociology and, more recently, in IR. They argue that
the critical tradition is “primarily driven by concerns over
power, domination, and resistance” (Bueger and Gadinger
2015, 454) and draws especially on the works of Bourdieu
and Foucault. In contrast, the pragmatist tradition operates with “concepts such as problems, uncertainty, creativity, and situated agency,” and it draws heavily on Dewey and
French pragmatists such as Boltanski and Latour (Bueger
and Gadinger 2015, 455).
Our elaboration of two forms of critique can help to
clarify the distinction between critical and pragmatist approaches. Bueger and Gadinger define the two traditions by
listing authors and central concepts: Bourdieu and Foucault
are critical and are particularly concerned about power,
domination, and resistance, whereas Latour and Boltanski
are pragmatists and are most concerned about uncertainty,
creativity, and agency. This way of distinguishing between
the two traditions of practice theory has the advantage of
shedding light on two distinct approaches to studying practices. However, it obscures the fact that both traditions are
motivated by (albeit quite different) critical concerns. Focusing on the question of critique enables us to clarify what
distinguishes the two traditions of practice theory. As we
will demonstrate below, both critical and pragmatist scholars blend empirical analysis and normative evaluation. Both
camps articulate ideas about what is wrong with practices
and what should be done about this. Therefore, we suggest somewhat different labels: when it comes to criticizing
4
This heterogeneity has been identified by critics of the practice turn
(Kustermans 2016; Ringmar 2014) as an obstacle to the comprehensive theoretical synthesis envisioned by Adler and Pouliot.

1016

How Can We Criticize International Practices?
Table 1. Two ways of criticizing practices

Premise
Concern
Objective

Social critique

Pragmatic critique

Epistemic asymmetry
Naïve trust
Unmasking power

Epistemic symmetry
Excessive mistrust
Empowering practitioners

practices, the choice in our view is between social critique
and pragmatic critique.
One possible objection that needs to be addressed upfront is that the distinction between social and pragmatic
critique may appear less helpful, or even obsolete, in light
of attempts to integrate critical theory and pragmatist social
theory. It is true that some of the most prominent Frankfurt School theorists have worked toward such a synthesis.5
Habermas’s (1987) theory of communicative action represents an attempt to reconcile Marxist social critique with a
pragmatist concern for social life as experienced by participants in social practices. The younger generation of Frankfurt School theorists have followed Habermas’s lead in this
respect (e.g., Joas 1996; Jaeggi 2019). Yet, for the latter authors bridging the divide between critical and pragmatist
theory begins with acknowledging it. This point is made
particularly clear in a recent study by Celikates (2018) who
emphasizes the differences between a theoretical approach
rooted in Marxist thinking and one that builds on pragmatist ideas. Celikates contrasts Bourdieu’s critical sociology with Boltanski’s sociology of critique and searches for a
way to bridge the two approaches. For Celikates as for other
Frankfurt School theorists, however, integrating the two perspectives presupposes an appreciation of their differences.
As we shall demonstrate in the following, appreciating these
differences can also enable us to produce more forceful critiques of international practices.
In the following, we will demonstrate in detail that social
and pragmatic critiques each proceed in a distinct way. They
start from opposing epistemic assumptions, they are motivated by opposing political concerns, and they are informed
by opposing visions of social progress (for a schematic
overview of our argument, see table 1). Social critique starts
from the premise that the knowledge social scientists produce and the knowledge lay actors possess stand in an asymmetric relationship. The researcher can see dynamics that
unfold behind the backs of the social actors that the actors
themselves fail to grasp. Social critique is therefore motivated by a concern to break with the naïve trust that social
actors place in the world; not only do social actors fail to understand what is really happening, they also naïvely believe
that social conditions that in fact lack justification are justified. By unmasking the hidden workings of power, social
critique aims to realize a particular vision of emancipation.
While it is often skeptical about the possibility of overcoming power and domination once and for all, social critique
nonetheless works ceaselessly toward liberating those dominated from their illusions.
Pragmatic critique, by contrast, regards social research as
one practice among many and thus does not accord any a
priori privileged status to the knowledge produced by social
5
Similarly, some IR scholars have tried to find a middle way between critical sociology and pragmatism, either by emphasizing the more dynamic elements
within Bourdieu’s own theory of practice (Cornut 2018; Leander 2011) or by complementing Bourdieu’s theory with ideas from pragmatist authors like Goffman
(Adler-Nissen 2014; Nair 2019). In our view, these attempts to enrich Bourdieu’s
theory of practice with pragmatic elements tend to end up embracing a form of
pragmatic critique.

research. In other words, it assumes that there is an epistemic symmetry between researcher and practitioner. This
assumption is bound up with the basic political concern
that social research is informed by an excessive mistrust in
the critical capacities of social actors, which, according to
proponents of pragmatic critique, is a fundamental obstacle to emancipation. This is not only a problem of academic
theories that proceed asymmetrically, they argue, but more
generally a fundamental normative problem of practices.
Pragmatic critique is therefore motivated by a distinct vision
of social progress that consists in empowering people to act
together.
In the following two sections, we will reconstruct these two
kinds of critique in greater detail, engaging with the arguments of social theorists and IR scholars who have criticized
practices in one or the other way. Our aim in this reconstruction is not to offer a comprehensive account of the work of
specific theoretical schools or of specific theorists. Rather,
our systematization of the two forms of critique should be
read in light of our specific objective of clarifying an important analytical choice between two ways of criticizing international practices and its normative implications.

Social Critique of Practices
Social critique, as we use the term in this article, is a specific kind of critique that is prominent within the tradition
of thought that Bueger and Gadinger have labelled critical
practice theory. Such diverse thinkers as Marx, Durkheim,
Althusser, Bourdieu, and Butler have put forth arguments
that take the form of social critique (Geuss 1981; Celikates
2018), and Foucault and a number of postcolonial theorists
can also be read as proponents of this kind of critique (Allen
2016). Bourdieu’s theory of practice has been particularly
influential among IR practice theorists (e.g., Pouliot 2010;
Adler-Nissen 2014). Butler’s work on practices of gender
(1990) and her more recent writings on war and violence
(2009) have also inspired a number of reflections on international politics (Weber 1998; Wilcox 2015; Abrahamsson
and Dányi 2018), although not by scholars who identify
themselves with the practice turn in IR (see Wilcox 2017).
Rather than trying to provide a comprehensive historical
account of the intellectual tradition of social critique, our
main goal in this section will be to present a systematic account of how social critiques of practices typically proceed.
Premise: Asymmetry

Social critique privileges the knowledge of the researcher
over that of social actors. Durkheim (2013, 39) famously demands of the sociologist in his Rules of Sociological Method
that “he must free himself from those fallacious notions
[that] hold sway over the mind of the ordinary person.” Social scientists need to distance themselves from the practical understandings of social actors because the latter are invested in their activities in a way that systematically precludes
them from understanding what is going on. For example,
Bourdieu examines in his classic study on the Kabyle society how social actors misrecognize economic relations for
gift exchanges (Bourdieu 1977, 1–15; see Celikates 2018,
28–32). Only the social scientist can see that seemingly innocent acts of generosity are embedded in an objective
structure and in fact form part of a complex system of economic exchange. By mistaking an economic exchange for a
question of honor, the Kabyle misrecognize what is really
going on, and thereby unwittingly reproduce a social order that unequally distributes material resources and social

SEBASTIAN SCHINDLER

AND

TOBIAS W ILLE

1017

recognition. Bourdieu (1977, 79) writes in the same study
that “it is because subjects do not, strictly speaking, know
what they are doing that what they do has more meaning
than they know.” As we will show in greater detail below,
Adler-Nissen and Pouliot’s (2014) examination of the international intervention in Libya is based on the same premise.
They tell us a story in which diplomats ascribe authority to
each other because they believe that their counterparts are
competent in the art of diplomacy. Only the theorist can see
that the mutual ascriptions of authority disguise an underlying struggle over competence that reproduces the pecking
order of a stratified international society (see also Pouliot
2016).
The methodological implication of this assumed epistemic asymmetry is that the common sense of the social actors is unreliable. The scientific observer must make a clear
“break” with common sense, because “the social fact is won
against the illusion of immediate knowledge” (Bourdieu,
Chamboredon, and Passeron 1991, 13). However, not only
are the commonsense conceptions of the social actors misguided, they are also very persistent. It takes hard work
on the part of the social scientist to perform the break
with common sense and achieve an objective perspective on
the misguided subjective understandings of social actors. As
Bourdieu and his coauthors (1991, 12) phrase it, “everyday
notions are so tenacious that all the techniques of objectification have to be applied in order to achieve a break that
is more often proclaimed than performed.” The idea that
practitioners’ accounts cannot be taken at face value is a
strong theme in the history of sociological thought that can
be traced from Durkheim through Bachelard to Althusser
and Bourdieu (Celikates 2018, 20–28). It is also a truism that
many IR scholars have been taught as students in their social
science methods classes.
With his outline of a “sobjectivist”6 methodology, Pouliot
(2007) has tried to translate the methodological imperative
of the break with common sense into a recipe for research
in IR. “Sobjectivist” research moves from reconstructing the
subjective knowledge of social actors toward contextualizing this knowledge and then toward tracing the trajectories
of practices through time (Pouliot 2007, 372). Pouliot thus
imagines the distancing from common sense more like a
continuous process and less like an abrupt break. He also
points out that the three steps should not be conceived as a
“linear pathway,” but rather as an iterative process of moving back and forth (Pouliot 2007, 372). Nevertheless, his
method is clearly premised on the assumption of an epistemic asymmetry that is characteristic of the tradition of social critique. The further the researcher moves away from
the common sense of the social actors, the more objective
becomes his or her knowledge of the social world.

sciousness that is both “objectively necessary and necessarily false” (Celikates 2012, 162). As Celikates (2012, 162) explains, this implies not only that social actors “do not know
what they are doing,” but also that they “do not, and indeed
cannot, understand how what they are doing and thinking
contributes to the reproduction of the social order.”7 In
Bourdieu’s work, the same intuition that false beliefs reproduce the social order is captured by the notion of habitus
(Bourdieu 1984; see Celikates 2012, 164). As a set of dispositions that are formed through past experiences and incline social actors to behave in such a way that their conduct
suits their social position, habitus is a self-fulfilling prophecy
that tends to reproduce the social order. While Bourdieu introduced the concept of habitus not least to overcome an
earlier ignorance of practices in theories of ideology, in
an important sense this concept fulfills a similar theoretical function to the concept of ideology. For social critics, whether they use the term ideology or the concept of
habitus, the central problem is the naïve trust social actors
display vis-à-vis the world. It is this naïve trust that reproduces the social order and makes the social actors—or at
least those among them who are held in subordinate social
positions—accomplices of their own domination. The notion of ideology and the Bourdieusian concept of habitus
both provide a theoretical explanation for the puzzling and
politically concerning observation that the exploited and
marginalized more often than not accept their positioning
in the social order.
A strong concern with naïve belief in the legitimacy of
the social order is also evident in some contributions to the
IR literature that draw on Bourdieu, Butler, and Foucault.8
Hopf (2010, 555), for example, notes critical theory’s concern with “social structures that lay behind individuals unintentionally reproducing their own subordinate places in
society.” He argues that a critical approach to IR should try
to reveal how these structures “emerged, how they are maintained, and whose interests they serve” (Hopf 2010, 555).
Hopf, for whom Bourdieu is an important theoretical resource, leaves no doubt that domination is an effect of social structures unknown to the dominated actors and that
it is the task of theory to reveal precisely how these structures work. He also describes what he sees as the objective
of such critical inquiry, namely, to unsettle the naïve trust
placed by individuals in the world around them. As Hopf
(2010, 555) notes, “breaking habits requires reflection,” yet
“getting people to reflect, when they are comfortably situated in institutions that protect them from any dissonant
voices, is difficult and rare.” Indeed, while the unmasking of
domination is the central objective of social critique, many
social critics view the prospects for emancipatory change in
a rather dim light.

Concern: Naïve Trust

Objective: Unmask Power

The central concern of social critique is that social actors
place a naïve trust in the world around them that enables
the reproduction of unequal social relations. Traditionally,
this concern has been expressed through the notion of ideology. When social critics speak of ideology, they do so as
part of a research program that “is initiated by the observation that agents in the society are deluded about themselves, their position, their society, or their interests” (Geuss
1981, 12). To be caught in an ideology in this sense means
to be confined to a “false form of consciousness”—a con-

The two claims that social scientists have privileged knowledge about the forces that really shape society and that social actors hold beliefs that are necessarily wrong imply that
there is a pressing political problem. How can social actors
be made aware of what is going on so that a more just society can be achieved? The problem can be illustrated with the
work of Bourdieu (Schindler and Wille 2015, 334–38). For
him, precisely because sociological reflection reveals what is

6
Pouliot’s notion of “sobjectivism” refers to a methodology aimed at reconciling subjective and objective knowledge of the social world.

7
For a well-known example of this kind of analysis of ideology, see Althusser’s
(2014) essay on “ideological state apparatuses.”
8
For example, Hopf (2010, 2018); Jabri (2016); Shapiro (2002); Wilcox
(2017).

1018

How Can We Criticize International Practices?

going on behind the back of social actors, it can play a positive role for social change. “If ‘there is no science but of the
hidden,’ it is clear why sociology is allied with the historical forces, which, in every epoch, oblige the truth of power
relations to come into the open, if only by forcing them to
mask themselves yet further” (Bourdieu and Passeron 1990,
xxi). At the same time, Bourdieu seems doubtful whether
the problem of ideology can ever be fully overcome. Perhaps all we can achieve is that power relations get unsettled
and then mask themselves even better. Bourdieu’s political
activism clearly bears witness to the fact that he ultimately
believed that positive change was achievable, but he was also
clearly concerned that field dynamics are not easily overcome and certainly not by simply speaking out the truth.
For one social field, Bourdieu has explicitly spelled out
how the false consciousness engrained in the habitus can be
overcome: the field of academia. Here the political problem
of emancipation becomes an acute methodological problem
(Bourdieu and Wacquant 1989; see Swartz 1997, chap. 11).
If the beliefs and convictions people hold are primarily determined by struggles for privileged positions in social fields,
how then can the sociologist—himself or herself positioned
in a field, the field of academia—ever gain objective knowledge of these struggles? For Bourdieu, the solution is a “sociology of sociology” (i.e., a reflection on the conditions
under which sociological inquiry takes place). As a matter
of fact, for Bourdieu, “the sociology of the social determinants of sociological practice is the only possible ground for
a possible freedom from these determinations” (Bourdieu
and Wacquant 1989, 55).9 Bourdieu thus appears mildly optimistic that the prejudices of common sense can be overcome in the particular setting of academia.
Another example for social critique aimed at unmasking domination can be found in Butler’s (1990) work on
the performativity of gender identities. Butler argues that
to be recognized as a gendered individual is important for
us because it is a precondition for being an intelligible subject. What the subjects, in particular those with heterosexual gender identities, cannot see, however, is that their practices contribute to the reproduction of a social order that
excludes other identities, which are cast as unintelligible.
Thus, “the recognition as female or male serves social functions behind the backs of those who participate in these exchanges of recognition” because “the recognition as female
and male is . . . implicated in the reproduction of the binary
gender order and the violent exclusion of alternative genders from the social realm” (Lepold 2018, 481).10 Butler’s
work also directs our attention to the fact that epistemological asymmetry is only the starting point of social critique
and ultimately something the critique seeks to overcome,
however difficult this may be. For Butler (1990, 147), the
ultimate task of feminist critique is not to establish a point
of view outside practice, but to provide opportunities for intervention and change by “participating in precisely those
practices of repetition that constitute identity.”
Discussing a range of texts from social theory and IR research, we have identified three elements of social critique:
the premise of a break with common sense, the concern
about naïve trust in the social order, and the goal of unmasking power. The procedure of social critique associated
with these three elements is very common in critical social
9
Bourdieu’s reflexive sociology has served as a crucial resource for IR scholars who aspire to make the practices of IR scholarship more reflexive (EagletonPierce 2011; Hamati-Ataya 2013; Leander 2002).
10
A similar argument can be made about the “white ignorance” that underpins a “refusal to recognize the long history of structural discrimination that has
left whites with the differential resources they have today” (Mills 2017, 28).

theory. Indeed, it may almost seem as if any kind of critique always had to go through these three moves in order
to count as proper “critique.” However, our objective in the
next section will be to elaborate a form of critique that is systematically opposed to social critique and that nonetheless
constitutes a way of criticizing practices. Our discussion of
pragmatic critique will emphasize the differences from social critique in order to make clear that with regard to all
three aspects—premise, concern, and objective—there is an
important choice to be made.

Pragmatic Critique of Practices
The pragmatist tradition in social thought is varied and complex. As Cochran (1999, 174; quoting Bernstein 1995, 55)
observes, pragmatism constitutes a “plurality of conflicting
narratives,” a point that equally applies to the adaptations of
pragmatist thought in IR. Our aim in this section is not to
offer an authoritative account of pragmatism for IR, but instead to argue that one particular way of criticizing practices
features prominently in the pragmatist tradition. A structured contrast of pragmatic critique with its social counterpart demonstrates that pragmatic critique is based on a different premise, is motivated by a different political concern,
and has a different emancipatory objective from social critique. As will become clear, a wide range of authors, among
them Boltanski, de Certeau, Dewey, and Latour, have formulated arguments of this pragmatic form.
In IR, pragmatist ideas have mostly been used to criticize
the discipline’s dominant practices of theory (Friedrichs
and Kratochwil 2009; Hanrieder 2016; Grimmel and Hellmann 2019). The main target of these pragmatic critiques
thus has been IR (the discipline), not international relations (the subject matter). Specifically in Kratochwil’s (2011,
2018) work on practices, it often appears as though the concrete doings of practitioners needed to be defended against
a misguided, Cartesian theory. Yet, a small number of IR
scholars have also drawn on pragmatist authors to formulate incisive critiques of political practices. Cochran (1999)
early on made an explicit case for a “pragmatic critique”
of international politics based on the works of Dewey and
Rorty. More recently, Gadinger (2016, 187) has highlighted
Boltanski’s contribution to the “critical project of emancipation,” and Ralph (2018) has drawn on Dewey to address
the question of what states should do in face of mass atrocity such as in the current Syrian civil war. In this section, we
will build on these diverse attempts to bring pragmatic ideas
to bear on IR to articulate an account of the distinct way in
which pragmatic critics combine empirical analysis and normative evaluation in the study of international practices.
Premise: Symmetry

Pragmatic critique takes a different stance on the knowledge
of practitioners from social critique. While social critics such
as Bourdieu are skeptical about whether practitioners can
fully know their own situation and see their task as being to
unmask concealed domination, pragmatic critics are doubtful about the superiority of their own knowledge and stress
the similarity of academic and lay knowledge. This initially
more sympathetic perspective on what practitioners know
does not imply that pragmatists have no standards for distinguishing better from worse knowledge—we will specify the
pragmatic sense of this distinction below. However, it does
imply that, at the outset of their inquiries, pragmatic critics
have more confidence in practitioners’ capacities to know
their own situation. Indeed, Bourdieu’s student Boltanski

SEBASTIAN SCHINDLER

broke with his mentor precisely because he realized that the
subjects of Bourdieu’s studies were capable of exercising the
very kind of critique Bourdieu had reserved for the scientific
observer. As Boltanski (2014, 21) stresses, “human beings
are eminently critical, because they have been misled and
lied to.” Where Bourdieu treats human beings as victims of
misinformation and lies, Boltanski treats them as critics who
themselves worry about misinformation and lies. Boltanski
thus identifies a symmetry between the view of the scholarcritic and the views of the subjects of research (Celikates
2018, 94–106; Gadinger 2016, 191).
A symmetric perspective on academic and lay practices of
critique is also one of the main starting points of Boltanski’s
magnum opus On Justification, which he coauthored with
Thévenot. As Boltanski and Thévenot (2006, 1) explain at
the outset of their monumental study, in which they attempt
to account for the main forms of justification and critique
in Western societies, the same “operations of qualification”
mark both scientific activity and social interaction. There is
a “similarity between the way a person accounts for his behavior through associations with other persons he views as
equivalent and the way a researcher assigns disparate individuals to a single category so as to explain their behavior by
a single law” (Boltanski and Thévenot 2006, 4). The ways in
which a researcher qualifies the objects of his or her study
thus resembles how these “objects” themselves qualify the
world around them. The implication of this observation is
that social actors are critics of their own situation. They are
not, to quote a famous phrase from ethnomethodologist
Garfinkel (1967, 67), “judgmental dope[s].” On the contrary, “like scientists, ordinary people never stop suspecting,
wondering, and submitting the world to tests” (Boltanski
and Thévenot 2006, 37).
The symmetry of scientific and lay knowledge is a premise
of pragmatic critique in the sense of a starting point, a point
where the investigation begins (see Celikates 2012, 164).
Pragmatists are not relativists (see Lechner and Frost 2018,
182–89; Cochran 1999, 194–95); they do not argue that all
beliefs have the same epistemic status or that they are all
equally adequate or true. However, they hold that critique
must be directed at scientific and practitioner knowledge
alike. Sometimes, pragmatists even invert the hierarchy that
the tradition of social critique has established between scientific and nonscientific knowledge. Like de Certeau (1984,
vi), they celebrate the “ordinary man” or woman on the
street. Among IR practice theorists, Lechner and Frost place
particular emphasis on the epistemic value of the practitioners’ perspective. In their view, “a social scientist who
attempts to understand a practice that is not yet understood must adopt the standpoint of a practice participant”
(Lechner and Frost 2018, 182).11
Concern: Excessive Mistrust

While social critics are particularly concerned about the
naïve trust ordinary people place in the social order, pragmatic critics see an excessive mistrust in the judgments of
those people as the larger problem. For pragmatic critics, this mistrust has its roots in a problematic theory of
knowledge. Dewey (1930), for example, argued that a misguided notion of knowledge has plagued Western thinking
11

The celebration of practitioners’ knowledge can go beyond the premise of
symmetry. It then establishes an asymmetry that favors practical over academic
knowledge. Our concern is that if taken to the extreme, such a perspective risks
abandoning all leverage to criticize actual practices. In Bernard Williams’ (2005,
35) words, radical internalism “involves an undiscriminating acceptance of whatever conceptual resources of the society actually exist.”

AND

TOBIAS W ILLE

1019

since Plato. In the Platonic tradition, knowledge is associated with the invariant and unchanging and is thus defined
in opposition to the realm of practice, which is a realm of
change. This theory of knowledge has “bequeathed the notion, which has ruled philosophy ever since the time of the
Greeks, that the office of knowledge is to uncover the antecedently real, rather than, as is the case with our practical judgments, to gain the kind of understanding [that] is
necessary to deal with problems as they arise” (Dewey 1930,
19–20). The idea that certain knowledge can be found only
in the “antecedently real” is problematic from a pragmatic
viewpoint, since it stands in opposition to how we actually
solve problems and thus may hinder our capacity to do so.
Many pragmatist IR scholars share this concern. Friedrichs
and Kratochwil (2009, 702), for example, argue that common scientific methods “do a poor job when it comes to the
decisive purpose of human cognition: the efficient and efficacious production of useful knowledge.”
While Dewey as well as Friedrichs and Kratochwil cast
their objection as a critique of academic practices, the political concern at the core of the pragmatic kind of critique
is broader. In order to understand this political concern, it
is useful to return once more to the point where Boltanski breaks with Bourdieu. As described above, Boltanski
became concerned about Bourdieu’s excessive mistrust in
people’s common sense. Boltanski, in contrast, found that
practitioners themselves were capable of articulating precisely the same doubts as Bourdieu himself. Tracing the historical origins of the doubt that motivates social critique,
Boltanski (2014, 39) shows that, “from the late nineteenth
century to our own day, the very same type of anxiety has
permeated a popular literary genre [the crime novel], led
to the invention of a new mental illness [paranoia], invested
a discipline with scientific pretensions [sociology], and penetrated countless—if not all—human minds.” What is this
anxiety? In Boltanski’s (2014, xvi) own words, it is an anxiety about the “reality of reality,” a doubt whether reality as
we experience it is really real.12 It is precisely this sort of
doubt that Bourdieu entertained about the experiences of
the people he studied.
Not all pragmatist IR scholars have restricted their critique to the academic practices of their own discipline. Just
as Boltanski did in sociology, some of them have begun to
articulate a more comprehensive pragmatic critique of practices outside academia. Ralph and Gifkins (2017), whose
argument we will discuss in greater detail below, problematize the mistrust created through specific practices in the
UN Security Council, a theme that also features prominently
in a more recent article by Ralph (2018). Cochran’s work on
the governance of nuclear weapons also addresses mistrust
as a problem that pragmatic critique seeks to overcome. As
she writes, the outcome of inquiry in the spirit of Dewey is
“action that resolves a doubt within a particular social practice” (Cochran 2013, 177). These pragmatic critics in IR
seek to facilitate a productive engagement with doubt. Indeed, the vision of social progress expressed in their pragmatic critiques is the idea of a world in which people deal
productively with the problems they face.
Objective: Empower Practitioners

As elaborated above, social critics aim at enlightening people about the role that their common sense plays in reproducing domination. In contrast, pragmatic critics seek to
12
Latour (2004, 227) also argues that “excessive distrust” is a crucial political
problem with which critical theory needs to engage.

1020

How Can We Criticize International Practices?

enable people to improve the functioning of their common
sense. In other words, while social critics assume that a free
unfolding of common sense would lead not to less but to
more domination, the goal of pragmatic critics is precisely
to remove potential barriers to such a free unfolding of our
practical capacities. In her discussion of Dewey’s theory of
valuation, Cochran highlights this goal. Dewey’s criticism,
she writes, “facilitates the self-realization of individuals” and
fosters virtues that “enable processes of growth and learning”; it is “the means by which individuals actively engage the
best in themselves, their capacities for self-development and
autonomy” (Cochran 1999, 182–83). This particular emancipatory agenda is certainly specific to Dewey, who may perhaps be called a humanist pragmatist.13 Nonetheless, a focus
on enabling the common sense of common people, on empowering them, systematically follows from the premise and
the concern of pragmatic critique that we have elaborated
so far.
Pragmatic critique seeks to empower practitioners to
solve the problems with which they are confronted. However, this does not mean that it aims at the permanent resolution of all problems. Cochran (1999, 201) writes that
the impetus for pragmatic critique is rooted in the fact
that “contradictions arise, unleashing doubts that need to
be transformed and settled.” Social progress means to develop the virtues and capacities that allow us to deal productively with these contradictions and the resulting doubts. As
Boltanski (2011, 160) asserts, the emancipatory role of the
social sciences consists in helping “society—that is, people,
the people who are called ‘ordinary’—deliberately maintain
themselves in the state of constant imbalance in the absence
of which, as the direst prophecies announce, domination
would in fact seize hold of everything.” From a pragmatist
viewpoint, a state of constant imbalance is a state of emancipation, because without imbalances there is no creativity,
no productive unfolding of our practical capacities. Consequently, it is an important task for the pragmatic critic to
work toward maintaining such a state.14 The pragmatic critic
plays a double role as both analyst and participant. As an analyst, he or she helps practitioners to see the problems they
are confronted with more clearly, elaborating, among others, the norms and rules that are at stake in a specific situation. Yet, at the same time, and indeed through the same
work, the pragmatic critic also brings about a new reality. He
or she changes the world through his or her intervention by
creating a situation in which practitioners are empowered
to see their own situation more clearly and act more adequately.
It is important to stress that pragmatist thought is not
“problem-solving theory” that “takes the world as it finds it”
and merely seeks to make its arrangements “work smoothly
by dealing with particular sources of trouble” (Cox 1981,
128–29). Even though pragmatist thinkers deliberately and
frequently speak of attempts to solve problems, they do
not think of these attempts as instrumental interventions
by social technicians. Instead, what is at stake is reflexive
change effected in political life by the participants themselves. Dewey (1927, 166) was convinced that “the prime
condition of a democratically organized public is a kind of
knowledge and insight [that] does not yet exist.” He strove
to further the emergence of this peculiar kind of knowledge
and insight through experimental pedagogy, among others
13
Cochran (1999, 182) is skeptical about the possible foundationalism inherent in Dewey’s thinking.
14
For Hegel (1977, 51; quoted in Cochran 1999, 201), critical thinking also
involves a constant unsettling of “unthinking inertia.”

by founding a much-celebrated laboratory school. Dewey’s
foremost goal was to encourage people to trust their own
capacities of judgment. There is thus a fundamentally democratic ethos built into pragmatic critique, an ethos evident in
Dewey’s emphases on pedagogy, deliberation, and participatory democracy. Pragmatic critique is critical in that it problematizes the world as it is and aims at realizing a world not
yet in existence.
In the last two sections of this article, we have discussed
the respective premises, concerns, and emancipatory objectives of two distinct ways of criticizing international practices. We do not claim that these are the only two ways of
practicing critique, and we readily acknowledge that an account that can be represented by a two-by-three matrix will
hardly do justice to the diverse and complex ideas of the
various authors we have discussed. But we hope to show in
the remainder of the article that the heuristic we have developed can facilitate a better understanding of what is at stake
in contemporary debates on normative questions in IR.

Two Ways of Criticizing Practices of International
Intervention
A range of publications could be discussed to highlight the
opposed logics of social and pragmatic critique as they bear
on current debates in IR, among them Pouliot’s (2016)
Bourdieu-inspired work on international pecking orders
and the pragmatic critique of international nuclear governance formulated by Cochran (2013). In the following,
however, we will focus on one particular academic debate,
namely that on the practices of multilateral diplomacy in the
UN Security Council that made possible the authorization of
the Libya intervention in 2011. We focus on this debate because its participants—Adler-Nissen and Pouliot (2014), on
the one hand, and Ralph and Gifkins (2017), on the other—
each stand in one of the two traditions we have discussed in
the previous sections. Adler-Nissen and Pouliot rely on Bourdieusian ideas to study the workings of power in practice,
while Ralph and Gifkins draw on pragmatic thinkers such
as Dewey to study practical competence from a normative
angle. Contrasting their arguments will allow us to further
clarify what it means to criticize international practices in
one or the other way.
Ralph and Gifkins (2017, 630) charge that Adler-Nissen
and Pouliot’s account reifies practices that are “not fit for
purpose.” In their critique, they focus in particular on the
practice of pen-holding, which enables one Council member to steer the drafting of a resolution—metaphorically
speaking, its diplomats hold the pen with which the resolution is written. In Adler-Nissen and Pouliot’s account, this
practice helped the P3 in the negotiations to achieve the
outcome they desired: the authorization of a military intervention in Libya through Resolution 1970. Specifically, the
British delegation, which acted as the penholder on this resolution, was widely recognized “for its superior skills in the
many legal technicalities that often bog down the Council”
(Adler-Nissen and Pouliot 2014, 898). Together with their
French colleagues, the UK diplomats relied on these skills
to influence the negotiation process: “British and French
negotiators basically took control of the pace of the diplomatic process” (Adler-Nissen and Pouliot 2014, 898). Less
experienced delegations were overwhelmed by the speed
with which the two Western allies proceeded. The accelerated pace of the negotiations prompted these delegations to
make moves “they might otherwise not have done” (AdlerNissen and Pouliot 2014, 898). Through the skillful use of

SEBASTIAN SCHINDLER

the practice of pen-holding, “reputation for competence
was cashed out in concrete influence” (Adler-Nissen and
Pouliot 2014, 898). This figure of argument is at the core of
the understanding of how power works in the practice that
Adler-Nissen and Pouliot propose. The social recognition of
practical competence allows some actors to assert their will
against the will of others.
Ralph and Gifkins argue that Adler-Nissen and Pouliot’s
analytical account of “power in practice” obscures the distinct normative commitments of the negotiators in the Security Council. As they emphasize, the negotiations about
the Libya intervention took place against a specific normative background, that of the R2P. Ralph and Gifkins (2017,
632) explain that they want to reintroduce the “normative
purpose articulated in R2P to the study of the Libyan intervention.” In doing so, they find that the skillful use of
pen-holding weakened rather than strengthened the R2P
norm, since it threatened the normative consensus in the
Security Council. As Ralph and Gifkins (2017, 633) summarize, P3 diplomats may have “demonstrated competency as
‘pen-holders’ and through their ability to control the international response, but their practices also made the hard
task of constructing and sustaining a consensus underpinning R2P even harder.” The reckless use of diplomatic competence to achieve certain political ends undermined other
Council members’ trust in the P3’s genuine commitment
to the R2P. It threatened a core aspect of the R2P agenda,
namely the cultivation of a collective responsibility among
international decision-makers. The loss of trust became evident when the Council began debating a possible intervention in Syria later in 2011. In the “context of mistrust created by its Libya intervention,” the P3 were no longer able to
transform competence into power (Ralph and Gifkins 2017,
643). This is why, according to Ralph and Gifkins (2017,
647), Adler-Nissen and Pouliot are wrong when in their account “competence is equated with ‘victory’ in the struggle
to determine the agenda.”
However, this charge to a certain extent misconstrues the
argument Adler and Pouliot make. In their analysis, the kind
of competence that the P3 diplomats possess and that they
use to achieve their political ends is not simply taken for
granted. Adler-Nissen and Pouliot (2014, 896) demonstrate
in detail how socially recognized skills allow actors to place
themselves above others and be “masters” in the game that
is played. This is how, in their view, power works in practice. Ralph and Gifkins are right when they point out that
such a conceptualization of practice has the consequence of
depicting strategies of domination as “competent,” but they
are wrong when they imply that Adler-Nissen and Pouliot’s
analysis yields no resources for criticizing this kind of behavior and the standards of competence that legitimize it.
After all, Adler-Nissen and Pouliot show in great detail that
the arguments powerful actors use to justify their privileged
position and preferred course of action are in fact cynical
power moves. However, precisely because they do not render the normative implications of their approach explicit,
they invite the criticism articulated by Ralph and Gifkins.
Nonetheless, Adler-Nissen and Pouliot’s analysis to a certain
extent already formulates a critique. It does not reify standards of competence in the sense that it treats these standards as natural and inevitable. Rather, even though they
do not make this explicit in their article, Adler-Nissen and
Pouliot’s argument can serve as a resource for those who
want to challenge the standards of competence recognized
at the Security Council.
Adler-Nissen and Pouliot’s analysis of “power in practice”
builds on the critical insight that the social recognition of

AND

TOBIAS W ILLE

1021

competence disguises a situation that is in reality marked
by profound power inequalities. The P3 diplomats use their
socially recognized competence to achieve certain outcomes
that are in their particularistic interest. However, taking into
account Ralph and Gifkins’ own empirical findings, it becomes apparent that the P3 representatives may have miscalculated the consequences of their actions. In fact, as Ralph
and Gifkins show, their reputation as savvy diplomats has
suffered due to the Libya intervention. There is a growing mistrust in the Council about the motives of the P3: Is
“regime change” in Libya not what they had been aiming
for all along? And is it not also what they want to achieve
in Syria? In other words: Is it not geopolitical power that
the P3 are striving for, rather than protecting people from
atrocities, as they claim? Interestingly, this is exactly what
some of Ralph and Gifkins’ interviewees suspect. Referencing six interviews with practitioners, the two authors observe
that “there are grounds for arguing, with some qualification, that P3 diplomats were more interested in claiming
the moral high ground than in negotiating a collective response” (2017, 645). At least six interviewees of Ralph and
Gifkins thus level precisely the charge against the P3 that
is implicitly also raised in Adler-Nissen and Pouliot’s scholarly analysis, namely that the P3 used their “ability to display
the moral high ground” for strategic purposes (Adler-Nissen
and Pouliot 2014, 902). Thus, practitioners at the Council themselves articulate a Bourdieusian critique of competence as a disguise of power.
The results of our discussion of the practice-theoretical
debate on the Libya intervention can be summarized as follows:
1) Adler-Nissen and Pouliot base their analysis on the assumption of asymmetry. They know what at least some
actors in the Council are unaware of, namely that socially recognized skills serve as a tool of domination.
Ralph and Gifkins, in contrast, draw on interviews with
practitioners to show that the P3’s use of their diplomatic skills was seen as controversial even within the
Council itself and that this contestation later had grave
consequences for decision-making in the deliberations
on Syria. As far as this aspect of their argument is concerned, one can thus say that Ralph and Gifkins establish epistemic symmetry: they weigh the judgments
of practitioners against scholarly arguments made by
Adler-Nissen and Pouliot. These statements show (a
point that is not made explicit by Ralph and Gifkins)
that practitioners articulate the same kind of critique
of competence that can also be found in Adler-Nissen
and Pouliot’s Bourdieusian analysis.
2) Adler-Nissen and Pouliot’s analysis is concerned with
“power in practice.” They argue that socially recognized competence is a tool used by international actors
to influence political outcomes. Unless one equates socially recognized competence with influence on outcomes (an assumption that would render the argument tautological), this implies that there is a form of
misrecognition: the Council members recognize something as competent in the behavior of the P3 diplomats that in fact serves as a tool of domination. The
explicit concern of Adler-Nissen and Pouliot’s analysis
is to demonstrate that competence can be a resource
of power, but there is clearly also an implicit concern
with how competence is merely recognized for what it
appears to be and not for what it really is. Unlike AdlerNissen and Pouliot, Ralph and Gifkins emphasize
the normative commitments of the Security Council

1022

How Can We Criticize International Practices?

and how they can be realized. In their argument, one
can recognize a deeper, pragmatic concern about mistrust that arises from the suspicion that claims to “competence” are really only a tool of domination. This
mistrust is built into Adler-Nissen and Pouliot’s Bourdieusian argument, but it is also a political problem
the Council has to face when some of its members no
longer trust the P3 after they have used their diplomatic skills to manipulate the Council in a way that in
retrospect appears to many to be illegitimate.
3) This leaves us with the question of the objective of
critique—in this case, of how Security Council practices should be transformed. Ralph and Gifkins are
more explicit on this point than Adler-Nissen and
Pouliot. In fact, Adler-Nissen and Pouliot’s article lacks
any explicit argument about how things could be
different at the Council. Elsewhere, however, AdlerNissen (2015, 135) makes clear that in her view, if analyzed properly, “diplomacy cannot keep the innocence
or detachment that some of its practitioners (and theorists) would want it to keep.” Once the workings of
power have been unmasked, we cannot continue in
our practices as we have done before. For Ralph and
Gifkins, the normative goal of their analysis is arguably
to help make practices at the Council become “fit for
purpose” (i.e., better able to live up to the promise
of the R2P norm). However, Ralph and Gifkins also
emphasize that the challenge does not merely consist
in the task of choosing the right means for a given
aim. Rather, there is a “plurality of normative commitments” that practitioners and scholars need to reconcile in their judgments (Ralph and Gifkins 2017, 648).
In a later article Ralph (2018) further elaborates what
this alternative perspective entails. Spelling out how IR
constructivism can further a “pragmatic” ethic that assesses norms by how well they help “ameliorate lived
social problems,” he argues that as “pragmatic constructivists,” we “can maintain faith in R2P as a norm
that sets out a process for ameliorating the problem
of atrocity in the context of political pluralism” (Ralph
2018, 174, 194). For Ralph and Gifkins, the problem
thus is not so much that social processes that unfold
behind the back of the actors bring about undesirable outcomes. Instead, the problem is that actors in
a world of plural moral standards fail to engage in a
constructive discourse, which would be the prerequisite for collective action on the problem of atrocity.
When we interpret the debate over the intervention in
Libya in this way, it may transpire that both sides have an
important critical point to make. On the one hand, AdlerNissen and Pouliot offer a compelling account of the workings of a stratified international order. They help us understand how socially recognized standards of competence
cement inequalities by strengthening the position of those
who are already in possession of various sources of social
and material capital. On the other hand, Ralph and Gifkins
are concerned that the suspicion that competent practices
merely serve power—a suspicion that at least some practitioners at the Security Council share with Adler-Nissen
and Pouliot—distracts from normative commitments that
should play an important role in the deliberations of the
Council. Ralph and Gifkins therefore foreground the critical capacities of social actors themselves and seek to assist
practitioners in engaging in collective action that aims at
solving the social problem of how to protect vulnerable populations from atrocities.

Conclusions
In this article, we have elaborated a clear distinction between two ways of criticizing international practices. As our
discussion of the theoretical debate surrounding the international intervention in Libya has illustrated, one obstacle
to realizing the critical potential of practice theory lies in
the fact that scholars do not fully appreciate the differences
between the two options for critique. Without a clear understanding of the two alternatives, scholars however risk talking past each other. In the particular case of the Libya intervention, we have seen that each of the two ways of criticizing practices offers valuable insights into what is wrong with
diplomatic practices at the UN Security Council. A social critique of these practices can uncover how socially recognized
competence serves as a tool of domination and perpetuates
social inequalities. Conversely, a pragmatic critique of the
same practices brings into focus how mistrust poses a political problem and hinders collective action. But what are the
implications of this observation? What does it mean that the
two perspectives on practices are opposed and nonetheless
both offer important insights?
One significant implication of our argument is that the
two perspectives cannot easily be reconciled or transcended.
Our argument instead implies that there is a genuine choice
to be made. Social critique and pragmatic critique stand
in opposition to each other. While social critique begins
with the premise of asymmetry between academic and lay
knowledge, pragmatic critique starts from the premise of
symmetry. While social critique tries to uncover the naïveté
of practitioners’ trust in the rules of the social game, which
in reality is a game of domination, pragmatic critique is
concerned about excessive mistrust in our practical capabilities that establishes barriers to the proper functioning
of our common sense. While social critique unmasks the
hidden workings of power, pragmatic critique empowers
practitioners and enables collective action. A choice thus
needs to be made between these options, since it is—with
respect to these three traits—impossible to have both, to
proceed both symmetrically and asymmetrically, to criticize the same common sense for being too naïve and too
skeptical, and to unmask the same common sense as a
tool of power while enabling it to function better. We do
not rule out the possibility that one can use one kind of
critique in one situation and another in another situation.
As they stand, however, the two kinds of critique represent
mutually exclusive options for practicing critique. One will
thus have to decide which one is more adequate, useful,
and important for one’s scholarly and political purposes.
However, this does not mean that one can simply embrace
one perspective to the exclusion of the alternative. The continuous reflection on the choice between the two options for
critique is essential if practice-theoretical research—no matter along which of the two options it ultimately proceeds—is
to be critical. If one begins to approach every social situation based on the premise of asymmetry, then the Bourdieusian critique of common sense ceases to fulfill its critical purpose. The mistrust of common sense becomes so
excessive that one can hardly imagine how social change
can take place. This excessive mistrust is a problem that
can be revealed through pragmatic critique. Conversely, the
pragmatic agenda of looking at everything in symmetrical
terms can also become excessive (see Koddenbrock 2015).
The trust it places in practitioners’ common sense risks becoming naïve when it simply takes every statement and every opinion at face value and thus loses the ability to distinguish between more or less appropriate forms of knowledge.
This naïve trust can in turn be criticized by means of social

SEBASTIAN SCHINDLER

critique. The two options of critique thus rely on each other.
Or at least they rely on an awareness that there is a choice
and that specific reasons speak for one or the other alternative. This means that critique has to be self-reflexive. One
ultimately is not critical simply because one relies on a specific premise, is motivated by a specific concern, or aims at
realizing a specific objective. Rather, what makes practice
theory critical is the reflexive awareness that its theoretical
choices are indeed genuine choices—choices that reflect a
specific stance toward what is going on in the world. To realize its critical potential, practice theory needs to cultivate
what Cox (1981, 128) has called a “perspective on perspectives,” a perspective on the alternative ways in which we can
criticize international practices.

References
ABRAHAMSSON, SEBASTIAN, AND ENDRE DÁNYI. 2018. “Becoming Stronger by Becoming Weaker: The Hunger Strike as a Mode of Doing Politics.”
Journal of International Relations and Development (online first).
ADLER, EMANUEL. 2005. Communitarian International Relations: The Epistemic
Foundations of International Relations. London: Routledge.
———. 2008. “The Spread of Security Communities: Communities of
Practice, Self-Restraint, and NATO’s Post-Cold War Transformation.”
European Journal of International Relations 14 (2): 195–230.
ADLER, EMANUEL, AND VINCENT POULIOT. 2011a. “International Practices.” International Theory 3 (1): 1–36.
———, eds. 2011b. International Practices. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
ADLER-NISSEN, REBECCA. 2014. Opting Out of the European Union: Diplomacy,
Sovereignty, and European Integration. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
———. 2015. “Conclusion: Relationalism or Why Diplomats Find International Relations Theory Strange.” In Diplomacy and the Making of World
Politics, edited by Ole Jacob Sending, Vincent Pouliot, and Iver B. Neumann, 284–308. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
ADLER-NISSEN, REBECCA, AND VINCENT POULIOT. 2014. “Power in Practice: Negotiating the International Intervention in Libya.” European Journal of
International Relations 20 (4): 889–911.
ALLEN, AMY. 2016. The End of Progress: Decolonizing the Normative Foundations of
Critical Theory. New York: Columbia University Press.
ALTHUSSER, LOUIS. 2014. On the Reproduction of Capitalism: Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses. London: Verso.
ANDERL, FELIX, AND PHILIP WALLMEIER. 2018. “Modi Der Kritik Des Internationalen Regierens: Ein Plädoyer Für Immanente Kritik.” Zeitschrift für
Internationale Beziehungen 25 (1): 65–89.
ARADAU, CLAUDIA, AND JEF HUYSMANS. 2019. “Assembling Credibility: Knowledge, Method and Critique in Times of ‘Post-Truth.’” Security Dialogue
50 (1): 40–58.
AUSTIN, JONATHAN LUKE. 2017. “We Have Never Been Civilized: Torture and
the Materiality of World Political Binaries.” European Journal of International Relations 23 (1): 49–73.
BERNSTEIN, RICHARD. 1995. “American Pragmatism: The Conflict of Narratives.” In Rorty and Pragmatism: The Philosopher Responds to His Critics,
edited by Herman J. Saatkamp, 54–67. Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University Press.
BEST, JACQUELINE, AND WILLIAM WALTERS, eds. 2013. “Forum: ‘Actor-Network
Theory’ and International Relationality: Lost (and Found) in Translation.” International Political Sociology 7 (3): 332–49.
BIGO, DIDIER. 2011. “Pierre Bourdieu and International Relations: Power of
Practices, Practices of Power.” International Political Sociology 5 (3): 225–
58.
BODE, INGVILD. 2018. “Reflective Practices At the Security Council: Children
and Armed Conflict and the Three United Nations:” European Journal
of International Relations 24 (2): 293–318.
BOLTANSKI, LUC. 2011. On Critique: A Sociology of Emancipation. Cambridge:
Polity Press.
———. 2014. Mysteries and Conspiracies: Detective Stories, Spy Novels, and the
Making of Modern Societies. Cambridge: Polity Press.
BOLTANSKI, LUC, AND LAURENT THÉVENOT. 2006. On Justification: Economies of
Worth. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

AND

TOBIAS W ILLE

1023

BOURDIEU, PIERRE. 1977. Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
———. 1984. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
BOURDIEU, PIERRE, AND JEAN CLAUDE PASSERON. 1990. Reproduction in Education,
Society, and Culture. Revised ed. London: Sage.
BOURDIEU, PIERRE, JEAN CLAUDE CHAMBOREDON, AND JEAN CLAUDE PASSERON. 1991.
The Craft of Sociology: Epistemological Preliminaries. Berlin: Walter de
Gruyter.
BOURDIEU, PIERRE, AND LOIC WACQUANT. 1989. “Towards a Reflexive Sociology:
A Workshop with Pierre Bourdieu.” Sociological Theory 7 (1): 26–63.
BUEGER, CHRISTIAN. 2018. “Territory, Authority, Expertise: Global Governance
and the Counter-Piracy Assemblage.” European Journal of International
Relations 24 (3): 614–37.
BUEGER, CHRISTIAN, AND FRANK GADINGER. 2015. “The Play of International
Practice.” International Studies Quarterly 59 (3): 449–60.
———. 2018. International Practice Theory. 2nd ed. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
BUTLER, JUDITH. 1990. Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity.
New York: Routledge.
———. 2009. Frames of War: When Is Life Grievable? London: Verso.
CELIKATES, ROBIN. 2012. “Systematic Misrecognition and the Practice of Critique: Bourdieu, Boltanski, and the Role of Critical Theory.” In Recognition Theory and Contemporary French Moral and Political Philosophy: Reopening the Dialogue, edited by Miriam Bankovsky and Alice Le Goff,
160–72. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
———. 2018. Critique as Social Practice: Critical Theory and Social SelfUnderstanding. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
CERTEAU, MICHEL DE. 1984. The Practice of Everyday Life. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
COCHRAN, MOLLY. 1999. Normative Theory in International Relations: A Pragmatic
Approach. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2009. “Charting the Ethics of the English School: What ‘Good’ Is
There in a Middle-Ground Ethics?” International Studies Quarterly 53
(1): 203–25.
———. 2013. “Hedley Bull and John Dewey: Two Middle Grounders and a
Pragmatic Approach to the Nuclear Dilemma.” In Ethical Reasoning in
International Affairs: Arguments from the Middle Ground, edited by Cornelia Navari, 158–81. Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan.
CORNUT, JÉRÉMIE. 2018. “Diplomacy, Agency, and the Logic of Improvisation
and Virtuosity in Practice.” European Journal of International Relations 24
(3): 712–36.
COX, ROBERT W. 1981. “Social Forces, States and World Orders: Beyond International Relations Theory:” Millennium - Journal of International Studies
10 (2): 126–55.
DEWEY, JOHN. 1927. The Public and Its Problems. New York: Henry Holt and
Company.
———. 1930. The Quest for Certainty: A Study of the Relation of Knowledge and
Action. 1929. London: Allen & Unwin.
DURKHEIM, ÉMILE. 2013. The Rules of Sociological Method and Selected Texts on
Sociology and Its Method. Edited by Steven Lukes. Houndmills: Palgrave
Macmillan.
EAGLETON-PIERCE, MATTHEW. 2011. “Advancing a Reflexive International Relations.” Millennium - Journal of International Studies 39 (3): 805–23.
———. 2012. Symbolic Power in the World Trade Organization. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
FRIEDRICHS, JÖRG, AND FRIEDRICH KRATOCHWIL. 2009. “On Acting and Knowing:
How Pragmatism Can Advance International Relations Research and
Methodology.” International Organization 63 (4): 701–31.
GADINGER, FRANK. 2016. “On Justification and Critique: Luc Boltanski’s Pragmatic Sociology and International Relations.” International Political Sociology 10 (3): 187–205.
GARFINKEL, HAROLD. 1967. Studies in Ethnomethodology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
GEUSS, RAYMOND. 1981. The Idea of a Critical Theory: Habermas and the Frankfurt
School. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
GRIMMEL, ANDREAS, AND GUNTHER HELLMANN. 2019. “Theory Must Not Go on
Holiday: Wittgenstein, the Pragmatists, and the Idea of Social Science.”
International Political Sociology 13 (2): 198–214.
HABERMAS, JÜRGEN. 1987. The Theory of Communicative Action. Boston, MA:
Beacon Press.
HAMATI-ATAYA, INANNA. 2013. “Reflectivity, Reflexivity, Reflexivism: IR’s ‘Reflexive Turn’ - and Beyond.” European Journal of International Relations
19 (4): 669–94.

1024

How Can We Criticize International Practices?

HANRIEDER, TINE. 2016. “Orders of Worth and the Moral Conceptions of
Health in Global Politics.” International Theory 8 (3): 390–421.
HEGEL, GEORG WILHELM FRIEDRICH. 1977. Phenomenology of Spirit. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
HOPF, TED. 2010. “The Logic of Habit in International Relations.” European
Journal of International Relations 16 (4): 539–61.
———. 2018. “Change in International Practices.” European Journal of International Relations 24 (3): 687–711.
JABRI, VIVIENNE. 2016. “Critique, Analysis and Ethics.” In Ethical Security Studies:
A New Research Agenda, edited by Jonna Nyman and Anthony Burke,
17–31. Milton Park: Routledge.
JAEGGI, RAHEL. 2009. “Rethinking Ideology.” In New Waves in Political Philosophy, edited by Boudewijn Paul de Bruin and Christopher F. Zurn, 63–
86. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
———. 2019. On the Critique of Forms of Life. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
JOAS, HANS. 1996. The Creativity of Action. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
KODDENBROCK, KAI JONAS. 2015. “Strategies of Critique in International Relations: From Foucault and Latour Towards Marx.” European Journal of
International Relations 21 (2): 243–66.
KRATOCHWIL, FRIEDRICH. 2011. “Making Sense of ‘International Practices.’” In
International Practices, edited by Emanuel Adler and Vincent Pouliot,
36–60. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2018. Praxis: On Acting and Knowing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
KUSTERMANS, JORG. 2016. “Parsing the Practice Turn: Practice, Practical
Knowledge, Practices.” Millennium - Journal of International Studies 44
(2): 175–96.
KUUS, MERJE. 2015. “Symbolic Power in Diplomatic Practice: Matters of Style
in Brussels.” Cooperation and Conflict 50 (3): 368–84.
LATOUR, BRUNO. 2004. “Why Has Critique Run Out of Steam? From Matters
of Fact to Matters of Concern.” Critical Inquiry 30 (2): 225–48.
LEANDER, ANNA. 2002. “Do We Really Need Reflexivity in IPE? Bourdieu’s
Two Reasons for Answering Affirmatively.” Review of International
Political Economy 9 (4): 601–9.
———. 2011. “The Promises, Problems, and Potentials of a BourdieuInspired Staging of International Relations.” International Political
Sociology 5 (3): 294–313.
LECHNER, SILVIYA, AND MERVYN FROST. 2018. Practice Theory and International
Relations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
LEPOLD, KRISTINA. 2018. “An Ideology Critique of Recognition: Judith Butler
in the Context of the Contemporary Debate on Recognition.” Constellations 25 (3): 474–84.
MARTIN-MAZÉ, MÉDÉRIC. 2017. “Returning Struggles to the Practice Turn: How
Were Bourdieu and Boltanski Lost in (Some) Translations and What
to Do about It?” International Political Sociology 11 (4): 439.
MCCOURT, DAVID M. 2016. “Practice Theory and Relationalism As the New
Constructivism.” International Studies Quarterly 60 (3): 475–85.
MÉRAND, FRÉDÉRIC. 2010. “Pierre Bourdieu and the Birth of European Defense.” Security Studies 19 (2): 342–74.
MILLS, CHARLES W. 2017. Black Rights/White Wrongs: The Critique of Racial Liberalism. New York: Oxford University Press.
NAIR, DEEPAK. 2019. “Saving Face in Diplomacy: A Political Sociology of Faceto-Face Interactions in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.”
European Journal of International Relations (online first).

NAVARI, CORNELIA. 2017. “The Terrain of the Middle Ground.” In Ethical Reasoning in International Affairs: Arguments from the Middle Ground, edited
by Cornelia Navari, 1–20. Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan.
NEUMANN, IVER B. 2002. “Returning Practice to the Linguistic Turn: The Case
of Diplomacy.” Millennium - Journal of International Studies 31 (3): 627–
51.
NIEMANN, HOLGER. 2019. The Justification of Responsibility in the UN Security
Council: Practices of Normative Ordering in International Relations. Milton
Park: Routledge.
POULIOT, VINCENT. 2007. “‘Sobjectivism’: Toward a Constructivist Methodology.” International Studies Quarterly 51 (2): 359–84.
———. 2010. International Security in Practice: The Politics of NATO-Russia Diplomacy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2016. International Pecking Orders: The Politics and Practice of Multilateral Diplomacy. New York: Cambridge University Press.
PRICE, RICHARD. 2008. “Moral Limit and Possibility in World Politics.” International Organization 62 (2): 191–220.
PRICE, RICHARD, AND CHRISTIAN REUS-SMIT. 1998. “Dangerous Liaisons?: Critical
International Theory and Constructivism.” European Journal of International Relations 4 (3): 259–94.
RALPH, JASON. 2018. “What Should Be Done? Pragmatic Constructivist Ethics
and the Responsibility to Protect.” International Organization 72 (1):
173–203.
RALPH, JASON, AND JESS GIFKINS. 2017. “The Purpose of United Nations Security Council Practice: Contesting Competence Claims in the Normative
Context Created By the Responsibility to Protect.” European Journal of
International Relations 23 (3): 630–53.
RINGMAR, ERIK. 2014. “The Search for Dialogue As a Hindrance to Understanding: Practices As Inter-Paradigmatic Research Program.” International Theory 6 (1): 1–27.
SCHINDLER, SEBASTIAN, AND TOBIAS WILLE. 2015. “Change in and Through Practice: Pierre Bourdieu, Vincent Pouliot, and the End of the Cold War.”
International Theory 7 (2): 330–59.
SENDING, OLE JACOB. 2015. The Politics of Expertise: Competing for Authority in
Global Governance. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
SHAPIRO, MICHAEL J. 2002. “Bourdieu, the State and Method.” Review of International Political Economy 9 (4): 610–18.
SOLOMON, TY, AND BRENT J. STEELE. 2017. “Micro-Moves in International Relations Theory.” European Journal of International Relations 23 (2): 267–91.
SWARTZ, DAVID. 1997. Culture and Power: The Sociology of Pierre Bourdieu.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
VILLUMSEN BERLING, TRINE. 2015. The International Political Sociology of Security:
Rethinking Theory and Practice. Milton Park: Routledge.
WEBER, CYNTHIA. 1998. “Performative States.” Millennium - Journal of International Studies 27 (1): 77–95.
WIENER, ANTJE. 2018. Contestation and Constitution of Norms in Global International Relations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
WILCOX, LAUREN. 2015. Bodies of Violence: Theorizing Embodied Subjects in International Relations. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
———. 2017. “Practising Gender, Queering Theory.” Review of International
Studies 43 (5): 789–808.
WILLIAMS, BERNARD. 2005. In the Beginning Was the Deed: Realism and Moralism in Political Argument. Edited by Geoffrey Hawthorn. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
WILLIAMS, MICHAEL C. 2007. Culture and Security: Symbolic Power and the Politics
of International Security. Milton Park: Routledge.

