Data Cultures, Culture as Data – Special Issue
of Cultural Analytics
Amelia Acker and Tanya Clement
04.10.19
Clusters: Data, Infrastructure
Article DOI: 10.22148/16.035
Journal ISSN: 2371-4549
Cite: Amelia Acker and Tanya Clement, ”Data Cultures, Culture as Data - Special
Issue of Cultural Analytics,” Journal of Cultural Analytics. April 10, 2019.

Data have become pervasive in research in the humanities and the social sciences. New areas, objects, and situations for study have developed; and new
methods for working with data are shepherded by new epistemologies and (potential) paradigm shifts. But data didn’t just happen to us. We have happened
to data. In every field, scholars are drawing boundaries between data and humans as if making meaning with data is innocent work. But these boundaries
are never innocent. Questions are emerging about the relationships of culture to
data—urgent questions that focus on the codification (or code-ification) of social
and cultural bias and the erosion of human agency, subjectivity, and identity.
For this special issue of Cultural Analytics we invited submissions to respond to
these concerns as they relate to the proximity and distance between the creation
of data and its collection; the nature of data as object or content; modes and contexts of data circulation, dissemination and preservation; histories and imaginary
data futures; data expertise; data and technological progressivism; the cultivation
and standardization of data; and the cultures, communities, and consciousness
of data production. The contributions we received ranged in type from research
or theory articles to data reviews and opinion pieces responding to the theme of
“data cultures”. Each contribution asks questions we should all be asking: What is
1

Amelia Acker and Tanya Clement

Cultural Analytics

the role we play in the data cultures/culture as data we form around sociomaterial
practices? How can we better understand how these practices effect, and affect,
the materialization of subjects, objects, and the relations between them? How can
we engage our data culture(s) in practical, critical, and generative ways? As Karen
Barad writes, “We are responsible for the world in which we live not because it
is an arbitrary construction of our choosing, but because it is sedimented out of
particular practices that we have a role in shaping.”1 Ultimately, our contributors
are focused on this central concern: where is our agency in the responsibility of
shaping data cultures? What role can scholarship play in better understanding
our culture as data?

What is a data culture?
According to information philosophers, “data are relata.” That is, all data are related, indexical, built up, organized, named, understood in relationship to other
data, things, phenomena, or human processes in the world. But as the following contributions show, data is often characterized as a natural resource out in
the wild to be discovered and sourced, with all the requisite taming of nature, including the frontierism metaphors of cowboys, lumberjacks, and gold rush miners. For most formal definitions of information, information cannot bewithout
data.2 In fact, for some information scientists, there can be no data-less information.3 The problem with defining information with data related to other data illustrates the difficulty that scholars have in apprehending the concept of data
itself, in its apparent ubiquity and seeming ahistorical nature. But we know that
data is not just given, it is taken up by people and given forms, standards, names,
putting it into relationships with cultural practices.4 Data is not nature, waiting
to be tamed; it is always already a cultural product.5
1 “Getting Real: Technoscientific Practices and the Materialization of Reality,” differences: A Journal of Feminist Cultural Studies, June 22, 1998, 102.
2 Luciano Floridi, ”Semantic Conceptions of Information,” in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed. Edward N. Zalta, Spring 2017 (Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2017).
3 Donald O. Case, Looking for Information: A Survey of Research on Information Seeking, Needs,
and Behavior: 4th Edition, ed. Lisa M. Given, 4th New edition edition (Bingley, UK: Emerald Group
Publishing Limited, 2016).
4 Johanna Drucker, “Humanities Approaches to Graphical Display,” Digital Humanities Quarterly005, no. 1 (March 10, 2011); Geoffrey C. Bowker et al., “Raw Data” Is an Oxymoron, ed. Lisa
Gitelman (Cambridge, Massachusetts ; London, England: The MIT Press, 2013).
5 Sherry B. Ortner, “Is Female to Male as Nature Is to Culture?,” Feminist Studies 1, no. 2 (1972):
5-31, https://doi.org/10.2307/3177638.

2

Cultural Analytics

Data Cultures, Culture as Data

Yet, shouldn’t we distinguish between data and ‘data culture’? In their critical
study on mobile dating and hook-up apps, Albury et al. define data cultures
through four lenses: cultures of production; the cultivation of data; datafication;
and cultures of use.6 Here we propose a fifth avenue for scholars researching critical and empirical aspects of the impact of data infrastructures—as collections of
data. While many efforts at critical data studies have begun with the historical
significance, origins and stabilization of the definition of data (or how it becomes
data), works in this special issue instead focus on data cultures or cultures as data,
with a particular focus on the becoming of cultures of data. Understanding data
cultures as underwritten by collections of data (as relata) means understanding
data cultures as phenomenon shaped by ideas about the cultivation and production of data that reflect epistemologies about, for example, ordering, classification, and standards. Like an underpainting, data is an initial layer, a starting
point against which the authors look at the cultures that have been painted in
the background of data collecting and collections. Seeing collections of data as
they shape and are shaped by human life, perspectives, and experience, these authors provide alternative histories as well as possible futures for the cultures that
develop in these sociotechnical landscapes.
Always a part of culture, data’s contemporary position is undeniable. We are in
a new “era of data” with sensor networks and 5th generation mobile networks, as
personal computing devices and internet saturation become tighter and tighter
in our homes, institutions, and public spaces. Now we are all data subjects as collections of data assemblages have become broader in reach and precision.7 Data
about ourselves—our selves—are collected, organized, archived and preserved
for use and reuse in our daily lives. While ‘big data’ and algorithmic technologies
continue to be the central focus of social sciences,8 feminist Science and Technology Studies,9 and digital media research,10 the epistemic impact of data cultures
6 Kath Albury et al., “Data Cultures of Mobile Dating and Hook-up Apps: Emerging Issues for
Critical Social Science Research,” Big Data & Society 4, no. 2 (December 1, 2017): 2, https://doi.org/
10.1177/2053951717720950.
7 Rob Kitchin and Tracey Lauriault, ”Towards Critical Data Studies: Charting and Unpacking Data
Assemblages and Their Work,” SSRN Scholarly Paper (Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network, July 30, 2014).
8 Christine L. Borgman, Big Data, Little Data, No Data: Scholarship in the Networked World (Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2015); Borgman.
9 Elizabeth Losh, “Selfies| Feminism Reads Big Data: ‘Social Physics,’ Atomism, and Selfiecity,”
International Journal of Communication 9, no. 0 (May 15, 2015): 13; Koen Leurs, “Feminist Data
Studies: Using Digital Methods for Ethical, Reflexive and Situated Socio-Cultural Research,” Feminist
Review 115, no. 1 (March 1, 2017): 130-54, https://doi.org/10.1057/s41305-017-0043-1; Rosemary
Lucy Hill, Helen Kennedy, and Ysabel Gerrard, “Visualizing Junk: Big Data Visualizations and the
Need for Feminist Data Studies,” Journal of Communication Inquiry 40, no. 4 (October 1, 2016): 33150, https://doi.org/10.1177/0196859916666041.
10 Jose van Dijck, “Datafication, Dataism and Dataveillance: Big Data between Scientific Paradigm

3

Amelia Acker and Tanya Clement

Cultural Analytics

as data collections remains understudied and under-theorized.
The history and development of how we became data subjects in cultures of data
are just now beginning to be told by historians and sociologists.11 Like many of the
pieces include in this special issue, this literature begins to interpret the meaning
and impact of data collections, datafication and cultivation as a legitimizing tactic
of expertise, professionalism, or technological proficiency or civic participation.
Many of these cultures of expertise are built upon data collections and data sets
built with data infrastructures from the contemporary moment and the recent
past, revealing legacy errors and what counts as worthy of counting.
This special issue of Cultural Analytics confronts the emergence of data cultures
through data collections, how they are addressed, investigated, analyzed, and interpreted. In particular each piece takes different approaches on questions of
what can be called data, relied upon as data, and the new kinds of cultural analysis that can be applied to public, private, and historical data collections, both
digital and analog. The contributions include articles, opinion pieces, and critical data reviews that interpret data and assess datafication and the making of data
culture and cultures of data. Pieces in this special issue draw on a wide range of
areas of study and expertise including information science, media studies, STS,
libraries and archives. Collections of data are defining and defined by cultures
—ranging from systems of trust,12 relationships to information communication
technologies and self representation,13 even what it means to authentically participate in public discourse or be human.14 All of the pieces articulate data cultures
and the impact of datafication on our lives, but some central themes for better
understanding data cultures have emerged across all the pieces including a closer
look at the social and institutional infrastructures of data practices, data agency.
and Ideology,” Surveillance & Society12, no. 2 (May 9, 2014): 197-208, https://doi.org/10.24908/ss.
v12i2.4776; danah boyd and Kate Crawford, ”Six Provocations for Big Data,” SSRN ELibrary, September 21, 2011; Bernie Hogan, “The Presentation of Self in the Age of Social Media: Distinguishing
Performances and Exhibitions Online,” Bulletin of Science, Technology & Society 30, no. 6 (December
1, 2010): 377-86, https://doi.org/10.1177/0270467610385893.
11 For example, see recent special issues themes such as data shadows, political histories of technoscience, and the history of data: Sabina Leonelli, Brian Rappert, and Gail Davies, “Data Shadows:
Knowledge, Openness, and Absence,” Science, Technology, & Human Values 42, no. 2 (March 1,
2017): 191-202, https://doi.org/10.1177/0162243916687039; ”Political Histories of Technoscience |
Radical History Review,” accessed January 31, 2019; Soraya de Chadarevian and Theodore M. Porter,
“Introduction: Scrutinizing the Data World,” HIST STUD NAT SCI 48, no. 5 (November 1, 2018):
549-56, https://doi.org/10.1525/hsns.2018.48.5.549.
12 Helen Nissenbaum, ”Contextual Integrity Up and Down the Data Food Chain,” Theoretical Inquiries in Law 20, no. 1 (January 23, 2019).
13 Lee Humphreys, The Qualified Self: Social Media and the Accounting of Everyday Life, 2018.
14 van Dijck, “Datafication, Dataism and Dataveillance”; José van Dijck, Thomas Poell, and Martijn
de Waal, The Platform Society: Public Values in a Connective World (Oxford University Press, 2018).

4

Cultural Analytics

Data Cultures, Culture as Data

and alternate imaginaries of data histories.

The Social and Institutional Infrastructures of Data
Practices
Many of the pieces included in this special issue discuss the social structures and
institutions being built around data reduction and production or the ability to
identify and reduce the analog world to points of data for measurement, analysis,
dissemination, and preservation. Despite the incommensurability and the resistance to quantification, even the most banal things are rendered as data through
data practices that include collecting and measuring uploads and downloads, attitudes or degrees of attentions (“likes”), and tone on public, online forums; panhandling and vagrancy; and the presence of objects and buildings such as public
art works and art centers. In her study of feminist data futures and the quantification of care, Amelia Abreu has written about how data work is so common in
domestic life:
it is a working practice - perhaps even a common art. Everyday data
consumption is, I would argue, the most common and largest proportional working data relationship in existence. Like caring, cooking and cleaning, the task of managing data is something you’ll see
at work in every household. It starts with money and food, the most
banal avenues for data-working.15
Likewise, our contributors theorize about what’s at stake for those things that cannot be quantified, measured, standardized and captured about human life (such
as gender identity or kinship), but they are also deeply concerned with what can
be rendered as visible data work and what remains as invisible labor.
Critical studies of data culture and their infrastructures reveal that some data
ontologies render some phenomena visible while making other forms of human
experience invisible.16 Increasingly, in efforts to “datify” everyday human behaviors from menstruating to learning how to read, we experience the seams and
limits of those ontologies. Indeed, many experiences of datafication bring to the
fore what it means to be an authentic human, when those elisions are located,
15 ”Quantify Everything: A Dream of a Feminist Data Future by Amelia Abreu | Model View Culture,” Model View Culture, February 14, 2014.
16 Geoffrey C. Bowker and Susan Leigh Star, Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its Consequences,
1st ed. (The MIT Press, 1999).

5

Amelia Acker and Tanya Clement

Cultural Analytics

revealed, and don’t fit in the contributions included here, we see new methods
of critique, reflection, and authenticity in the glitch that resists datafication. As
all kinds of behavior become datafied in support of data collections to support
institutions (in markets, decisions, public good, or posterity) we see the solidification and enrollment of authority through efforts of collection. The efforts of
collection perform a sleight of hand. That is, we recognize the institutionalization of public data as it becomes known, read, and put in context, but in comparison, how private data is secured, (almost assuredly) sold to data brokers and
possibly eventually leaked is obscured. Our contributors combat this deception
by demonstrating critical methods that analyze and interpret the power of data
collecting contexts and the trend towards a segmentation of cultures that ignore
outliers and group individuals.

Data Agency
If there is one new thing to our ‘era of data’ and its collections, it is the unprecedented access and the expectation to access to public data, research data, historical and scholarly data. While the limitations to access to these data collections
may be lower, the stakes are higher for critical scholars of data because of the interpolation and collectivization of data subjects into collections that tend to group
culture into clean buckets and segments of interest. Creators’ agency over data
that has been created, collected, and managed is thus central to understanding
the datafication of culture. Indeed, calls for agency over our individual data footprints and practices of collection exist, but more methods for understanding how
individuals are interpolated through sociomaterial practices of data collection as
subjects are still needed.17 Our contributors ask: How can we better understand
how these practices effect, and affect, the materialization of subjects, objects, and
the relations between them? How can we engage our data culture(s) in practical,
critical, and generative ways? Opinion pieces discuss the power of asserting and
attributing agency within collecting pasts, presents, and futures. As such, these
articles are situated in the space that the journal wishes to impact, particularly
new research methods, voices, and topics.

17 Helen Kennedy, Thomas Poell, and Jose van Dijck, “Data and Agency,” Big Data & Society 2, no.
2 (December 1, 2015): 2053951715621569, https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951715621569.

6

Cultural Analytics

Data Cultures, Culture as Data

Alternate Data Histories and Future Imaginaries
“Mathematically, visually, and narratively,” Donna Haraway writes, “it matters
which figures figure figures, which systems systematize systems.”18 Haraway reminds us to focus on process because it matters what matters and how it matters.
This focus on process is not new to histories about Digital Humanities. Indeed, a
concern with the process of knowledge production is an essential aspect of originary stories in DH including those surrounding Father Busa and his index of
St. Thomas Aquinas, an oft-touted “first” DH project. Detailing one of Busa’s
early presentations to a crowd of IBM employees, religions leaders, and humanities academics, Steven Jones describes a presentation that was less about the product of an analysis of Aquinas and more about the analysis itself:
The emphasis on repeated testing, hand-drawn flow charts, experimental punching and handling of punch cards, on the spot, as part of the process, and indeed
on discovering and demonstrating the precise nature of the materiality of the
technology involved at every turn - in all of these ways, rather than just as a focus
on classical texts, the demo of 1952 established certain practices of humanities
computing for the half century to follow, practices that have become even more
important for today’s digital humanities.19
We cite this quote extensively to show that the work of everyday work, the banal
nature of what we do to make what matters, is the matter at hand here too. The
pieces in this issue are describing the history of the seemingly banal work done
to select, curate, process, disseminate, and preserve data collections for the same
reason we cite the history of great men (and women): to see from whence we’ve
come, to foresee where we are going, and to consider where we could have gone
and why we did not arrive just there.
At the same time, analyzing process entails trying to pinpoint a moving target or
taking a cup of water from a stream. We take that sample and we can say something about it and its point in time, but how do we attest for the movement? How
do we distinguish between the shape of water moving across time and space and
the shape of the cup in which we hold it? The present is the only line we can draw
between history and the future. Less about the object of data than the process of
data, these pieces included here are concerned with present cultures of data that
have pasts and portend futures. They are concerned with discovering and uncovering assumptions about data that cultures of discourse use to obfuscate the work
18 “Anthropocene, Capitalocene, Plantationocene, Chthulucene: Making Kin,” Environmental Humanities 6, no. 1 (May 1, 2015): 160, https://doi.org/10.1215/22011919-3615934.
19 Roberto Busa, S. J., and the Emergence of Humanities Computing : The Priest and the Punched
Cards (Routledge, 2016), 96, https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315643618.

7

Amelia Acker and Tanya Clement

Cultural Analytics

of data, and they are concerned with how these obfuscations alter the potentialities of different futures and imaginaries. These authors tell us what matters now
may or may not matter in the future, but they are also asking, quite pointedly,
who’s to say? That is, what of our own agency in that future? Karen Barad notes
that once we understand that “the world and its possibilities for becoming are
remade in each meeting,” then we are to ask: “How then shall we understand our
role in helping constitute who and what come to matter?” These authors, in their
attempt to better understand data in time and over time, are just a few ways to
understand the process of what matters, but their inquiries serve as a collective
call to come in: the water is swift and sure but there are endless entry points along
the bank.

Conclusion
This issue imagines different, alternate, and complementary futures not only for
data and the study of data but for the Journal of Cultural Analytics. The authors
who have submitted to this special issue all work with and think about data and
they have arrived here from disciplines (History, Information Studies, Science
and Technology Studies, Communication and Media Studies) and work places
(government and the libraries) that have not often been represented in the journal thus far. Our intention with this special issue is to facilitate the crossing of the
boundaries of the data cultures that have been presented here. With this special
issue, we are staking some claims for the imagined data landscape that this issue
portends, where the interrogation of metaphors and cultural imaginaries are important; where the processes for normalizing, transforming, and naming data are
at the forefront of investigations; where institutions built on reductive or simplistic assumptions about data are under scrutiny; where new methods that break
down these metaphors, processes, and collections contexts lead to new theories.

8

