1
Neuroscience of morality and teacher education
Hyemin Han
University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa AL, United States
hyemin.han@ua.edu
Introduction

1

Given that teachers become primary fundamental exemplars and models for their students and
the students are likely to emulate the presented teachers’ behaviors, it is necessary to consider
how to promote teachers’ abilities as potential moral educators during the course of teacher
education. To achieve this ultimate aim in teacher education, as argued by moral philosophers,
psychologists, and educators, teachers should be able to well understand the mechanisms of
moral functioning and how to effectively promote moral development based on evidence. Recent
findings in the fields of social sciences that have examined how morality is functioning among
human beings, moral psychology in particular, provide us with the evidence through experiments
and observations. Furthermore, thanks to the development of scientific research methods that
enable researchers to investigate the neural-level nature of human behavior, the researchers now
can examine neural correlates of moral functioning that constitutes the basis of moral behavior
and development. To facilitate the understanding of the field of neuroscience of morality and its
educational implications within the context of teacher education, first, the recent trend in the
field will be reviewed, and second, how it can provide useful insights to teachers and teacher
educations will be discussed.
Neuroscience of morality
Recent studies in the field of neuroscience have provided empirical findings regarding diverse
aspects of human morality including, but not limited to, moral cognition, emotion, intuition,
motivation, behavior, and development. They have discovered not only brain regions associated
with the aforementioned aspects of moral functioning, but also how different neural circuitries
consisting of the brain regions are interacting with each other. For instance, various functional
neuroimaging studies that used moral dilemmas as experimental paradigms have demonstrated
that regions associated with cognition were mainly involved in utilitarian decision making while
those associated with emotion were more likely to be activated during deontological decision
making (see Han (2017) for quantitative review). In addition to this kind of brain localization
studies, Han, Chen, Jeong, & Glover's (2016) study that focused on interactions between neural
circuitries reported that the neural network associated with self-related psychological processes,
such as autobiographical memory processing, significantly interacted with morality-related brain.
In addition to the prior moral judgment neuroimaging studies that have examined the neurallevel mechanisms associated with moral functioning by presenting participants with different
types of moral dilemmas, a recent structural neuroimaging study investigated the relationship
between brain structures and the development of moral reasoning among participants (Prehn et
al., 2015). This study reported that participants’ medial prefrontal cortex gray matter thickness
was positively correlated with their more sophisticated post-conventional moral reasoning.

1

To appear in Peters, M. A., (in preparation). Encyclopedia of Teacher Education. Singapore: Springer.

2

In addition to the neuroimaging studies, there have been recent neurostimulation studies that
attempted to manipulate moral psychological processes among human participants.
Neuroimaging studies were not able to provide any information regarding a causal relationship
among brain regions and specific psychological functionalities because used neuroimaging
methods were correlational, not causal; they were only able to examine correlation or
association. On the other hand, neurostimulation methods, such as the transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS) and transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS), can alter neural activity in
target regions, so they can enable researchers to examine the causal relationship. For instance,
Young, Camprodon, Hauser, Pascual-Leone, and Saxe (2010) showed that the TMS on the
temporoparietal junction can alter participants’ perception on others’ moral belief. In addition,
Ruff, Ugazio, and Fehr (2013) reported that the tDCS on the prefrontal cortex increased or
decreased socio-moral rule conformity. These results identified a causal relationship between the
target region and target psychological functionality in addition to a correlational relationship by
demonstrating activity in the target region altered psychological and behavioral outcomes.
As reviewed above, advances in neuroscience have allowed researchers to investigate the
underlying biological and neural mechanisms of human moral functioning. Without the
developments of neuroscientific research methods, moral psychological processes, such as the
mechanisms of the involvements of cognition and emotion in moral judgment and the association
between self-related processes and moral functioning (Han, 2017; Han et al., 2016), could not be
well examined with scientific evidence. Furthermore, recent research on neurostimulation has
demonstrated that how researchers can alter moral psychological processes, such as the
perception of moral belief (Young et al., 2010) and judgment on socio-moral rules (Ruff et al.,
2013). Given these, educators may consider how to learn from neuroscience of morality to
improve education in practice, particularly that addresses socio-moral development among
students.
Several debates regarding the application of neuroscience in education
Although neuroscience of morality has illuminated many aspects of human moral functioning
that could not be studied without newly developed technologies, how to apply findings from
neuroscience research in educational settings would be a difficult question to answer. From the
perspectives of teachers who might not have sufficient background knowledge in neuroscience,
findings from functional neuroimaging experiments per se might not be able to provide them
with concrete educational implications. For example, a fact that brain regions associated with
emotion are significantly activated when a person is making deontological moral judgment does
not say anything about what kind of educational approaches should be utilized to effectively
promote students’ moral reasoning. If a neuroimaging study reported that the gray matter volume
in the prefrontal cortex is associated with more sophisticated moral reasoning (Prehn et al.,
2015), should teachers utilize invasive neurosurgical or neurostimulation methods to increase the
regional gray matter volume to promote moral development? The answer to this question might
not be “yes.” Hence, it is required to carefully consider how to learn from neuroscience to
improve educational practices in real educational settings.

3
Moreover, a mere understanding of neuroscience and trial to apply it in educational activities
could also be misleading. A recent survey study showed that such an issue existing among school
teachers in general (Howard-Jones, 2014). Howard-Jones (2014) surveyed some misconceptions
regarding the relationship between neuroscience and education. For example, the localization of
psychological functionalities in human brains was pervasively accepted by school teachers
despite findings from recent neuroimaging studies focusing on the interactions among diverse
neural circuitries (e.g., Han et al., 2016). As a result, many of the surveyed teachers believed that
it makes sense to focus on a specific modality of instructional method given that a specific
intellectual functionality is associated with a specific brain region although recent neuroimaging
findings suggested that such a localization is not the only way to understand neural-level
processes. Hence, it would be necessary to promote accurate understandings regarding how
human brains work within the context of moral functioning while avoiding possible
misconceptions among teachers.
In addition, there have been debates about the utility of educational neuroscience as a field that
integrates neuroscience and education to improve education in practice. Bowers (2016) argued
that neuroscientific evidence has not added something brand new to the existing literature of
educational research. According to his argument, the majority of scientific and practical
contributions in educational research has been made by non-neuroscientific psychological
studies, and findings from neuroscientific studies have been somehow redundant and could not
directly contribute to education in practice. Instead, he argued that psychological intervention
studies that are based on traditional non-neuroscientific psychological research can provide
educators with useful insights more directly. Given the issues related to the application of
neuroscience in education, Bowers’s criticism on educational neuroscience is informative while
considering how to learn from neuroscience to improve education. As discussed above, it would
not be possible for educators to attempt to manipulate students’ neural activity based on brain
localization and neurostimulation studies to promote their moral and intellectual development. If
this is the case, then as Bowers criticized, ideas from traditional psychological intervention
experiments, which have been contributed to the development of psychological interventions in
the reality, might be able to provide educators with more practical insights about how to improve
their educational activities in classrooms.
Rethink how to learn from neuroscience of morality to improve education in practice and
teacher education
Given these issues and criticisms, it is necessary to consider how to properly organize the
framework of the application of neuroscience within the context of education in practice and
teacher education. To overcome the issues associated the application of neuroscience in
education, the neuromyths among teachers in particular, reviewing discussions regarding how to
fill the gap between educational research, education in practice, and teacher education can be
informative. A framework proposed by Wortham (2018) might provide some points to be
considered related to this point. Wortham (2018) argued that trials to merely and directly
implement findings from educational research in education in practice could not be successful
unlike the case of the implementation of evidence-based techniques in several other fields, such
as medicine. Instead, it is necessary to share and understand repertories across researchers and
educators. Moreover, Immordino-Yang and Damasio (2007) proposed that research on

4
neuroscience of morality, particularly that focusing on the role of emotion and cognition, can
provide educators with useful and concrete ideas about how to constrain possibilities and set
hypotheses and directions while developing educational activities.
Hence, instead of pursuing the direct implementation of neuroscience of morality in education in
practice, educators may need to consider how to get useful heuristics from neuroscience to
enhance their educational activities. In addition, teacher educators who intend to introduce
neuroscience to educators should carefully consider how to provide the educators with such
heuristics instead of merely referring to findings in neuroscience. By doing so would be a
possible way to share useful ideas proposed by Wortham (2018), the expansion of repertories
across neuroscience researchers and educators, and Immordino-Yang and Damasio (2007),
learning from neuroscience to set new hypotheses and directions in the development of
educational activities, with educators who are interested in the application of neuroscience of
morality in their educational activities during the course of teacher education.
Teacher educators may be interested in understanding how such a framework can work in the
reality with a concrete example in the field in order to provide educators with practical
information. Here is one concrete example that demonstrates how neuroscience of morality can
provide moral education with useful heuristics about how to develop a more effective
educational program. Han, Kim, Jeong, and Cohen's (2017) moral education program that
utilized the stories of moral exemplars was initially inspired by studies in neuroscience of
morality that examined the involvement of self-related processes in the moderation of moral
emotion and motivation. A meta-analysis of previous moral psychological neuroimaging studies
(Han, 2017) and a functional neuroimaging experiment (Han et al., 2016) showed significant
associations among self-related brain regions and morality-related brain regions. Based on these
findings, Han et al. (2017) designed and tested an exemplar-applied moral education program
that used close-other exemplars (e.g., friends, family members) that might have stronger
psychological connectivity with students; their study reported that the aforementioned program
inspired by neuroscience significantly promoted students’ moral motivation. Han et al. (2017)
attempted to directly focus on activity in specific brain regions after reviewing localization
studies. Instead, they tried to get more practical insights (e.g., ideas regarding the association
between self and morality) from neuroscience research and were able to produce concrete
educational outcomes. This example presents educators with how to obtain heuristics from
neuroscience while developing educational activities.
Conclusion
Neuroscience of morality has contributed to the expansion of the understanding of the neurallevel mechanisms of moral psychological processes with scientific evidence. It has enabled
researchers to investigate psychological processes underlying moral functioning with
neuroimaging methods and alter such processes with neurostimulation methods. Although it is
obvious that the contributions of neuroscience of morality to the field are valuable, how to apply
neuroscience of morality in education in practice and teacher education could be a difficult
question to answer given criticisms regarding neuromyths among teachers and utility of
educational neuroscience. To address this issue, some discussions regarding how to fill the gap
between educational research and education in practice have been reviewed with a concrete

5
example showing how educators can learn from findings in neuroscience to improve moral
education. As reviewed, trials to understand and share repertories across different realms and to
get useful heuristics from neuroscience of morality can be more successful compared with mere
implementations of such findings. Teacher education programs that intend to employ
neuroscience as a component may also need to consider these points to avoid the issue of
neuromyths and to help teachers learn how to appropriately develop their educational activities
based on neuroscience.
Reference
Bowers, J. S. (2016). Psychology, not educational neuroscience, is the way forward for
improving educational outcomes for all children: Reply to Gabrieli (2016) and HowardJones et al. (2016). Psychological Review, 123(5), 628–635.
http://doi.org/10.1037/rev0000043
Han, H. (2017). Neural correlates of moral sensitivity and moral judgment associated with brain
circuitries of selfhood: A meta-analysis. Journal of Moral Education, 46(2), 97–113.
http://doi.org/10.1080/03057240.2016.1262834
Han, H., Chen, J., Jeong, C., & Glover, G. H. (2016). Influence of the cortical midline structures
on moral emotion and motivation in moral decision-making. Behavioural Brain Research,
302, 237–251. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2016.01.001
Han, H., Kim, J., Jeong, C., & Cohen, G. L. (2017). Attainable and Relevant Moral Exemplars
Are More Effective than Extraordinary Exemplars in Promoting Voluntary Service
Engagement. Frontiers in Psychology, 8, 283. http://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00283
Howard-Jones, P. a. (2014). Neuroscience and education: myths and messages. Nature Reviews.
Neuroscience, 15(12). http://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3817
Immordino-Yang, M. H., & Damasio, A. (2007). We Feel, Therefore We Learn: The Relevance
of Affective and Social Neuroscience to Education. Mind Brain and Education, 1(1), 3–10.
http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-228X.2007.00004.x
Prehn, K., Korczykowski, M., Rao, H., Fang, Z., Detre, J. A., & Robertson, D. C. (2015). Neural
Correlates of Post-Conventional Moral Reasoning: A Voxel-Based Morphometry Study.
PLOS ONE, 10(6), e0122914. http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0122914
Ruff, C. C., Ugazio, G., & Fehr, E. (2013). Changing social norm compliance with noninvasive
brain stimulation. Science (New York, N.Y.), 342, 482–4.
http://doi.org/10.1126/science.1241399
Wortham, S. (2018). Reimagining Research and Practice in Education. In D. W. Kritt (Ed.),
Constructivist Education in an Age of Accountability (pp. 317–326). Cham, Switzerland:
Springer International Publishing. http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-66050-9_16
Young, L., Camprodon, J. A., Hauser, M., Pascual-Leone, A., & Saxe, R. (2010). Disruption of
the right temporoparietal junction with transcranial magnetic stimulation reduces the role of
beliefs in moral judgments. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America, 107, 6753–6758. http://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0914826107

