Institutional Design and Elite Support for Climate
Policies: Evidence from Latin American Countries∗
Danilo Freire†

Umberto Mignozzetti‡

David Skarbek§

May 27, 2020

Abstract
Which institutional features do Latin American elites favor for local climate change policies?
Climate change mitigation requires active local level implementation, but it remains unclear
which institutional arrangements maximize support for environmental rules. In this paper, we run
a conjoint experiment with elite members of 10 Latin American countries and ask respondents
to evaluate institutional designs drawn from a pool of 5,500 possible local climate governance
arrangements. We find that Latin American elites prefer international organizations to formulate
climate policies, support imposing increasing fines on violators, and favor renewing agreements
every five years. We also find that elites support both international institutions and local courts
to mediate conflicts, but they distrust non-governmental organizations and reject informal norms
as a means of conflict resolution. Our results identify possible challenges in crafting local climate
mitigation policies and offer new insights about how to integrate local and international levels in
environmental agreements.
Keywords: climate change, elites, institutional design, Latin America, regime complex
Word count: 3984
∗ We

thank Nigel Ashford, Fábio Barros, Frans Berkhout, Daniel D’Amico, Guilherme Fasolin, Manoel Galdino, Malte
Hendricks, Stephen Herzog, Christian Hübner, Karina Marzano, Davi Moreira, Emily Skarbek, Paula Vedovelli, and the
participants at the FGV IR Seminar for their valuable comments. Special thanks to Natalia Liberato, Lucas Mingardi,
Ingrid Oliveira, Catarina Roman, Leticia Santana, and Larissa Santos for their excellent research assistance. We would
also like to thank two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments and suggestions. This research received IRB
approval from Brown University (Protocol 2195/2018) and Fundação Getulio Vargas (Protocol 83/2018). We acknowledge
financial support from the Konrad Adenauer Stiftung Latin American Regional Programme for Energy Security and
Climate (EKLA-KAS) and declare there are no conflicts of interest. The data, code, and any additional materials required
to replicate all analyses in this article are available at the Journal of Experimental Political Science Dataverse within the
Harvard Dataverse Network, at: doi:10.7910/DVN/VTA5OA.
† Postdoctoral Research Associate, The Political Theory Project, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, USA,
danilo freire@brown.edu, http://danilofreire.github.io. Corresponding author.
‡ School of International Relations, Fundação Getulio Vargas, São Paulo, SP, Brazil and Wilf Family Department of
Politics, NYU, NY, USA, umberto.mignozzetti@fgv.br, http://umbertomig.com, http://twitter.com/umbertomig.
§ The Department of Political Science and the Political Theory Project, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA,
david skarbek@brown.edu, http://davidskarbek.com, http://twitter.com/davidskarbek.

1

1

Introduction

Despite the emerging consensus about the causes and consequences of global warming, international
climate summits have often fallen short of expectations (Rogelj et al. 2010; Rosen 2015; Victor et al.
2017). Multilateral negotiations have progressed slowly under the guidelines of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), and there is widespread skepticism that
international talks will advance more quickly in the coming years (Cole 2015; Hjerpe and Nasiritousi
2015). As carbon dioxide emissions continue to increase, scientists believe current efforts may not be
sufficient to meet the target of 2◦ C temperature rise above pre-industrial levels (Jordan et al. 2015).
These concerns have motivated a growing debate about which institutional characteristics lead to
successful climate agreements (e.g., Bechtel and Scheve 2013; Bechtel et al. 2017; Keohane and Victor
2011; Mitchell 2006; Ostrom 2014). Climate treaties are incomplete contracts, in which members
purposefully design flexible provisions that take domestic circumstances into account (Bräuninger and
König 2000, 607). For instance, the Paris Agreement relies on Nationally Determined Contributions
(NDCs), a set of greenhouse gas reduction targets each member state voluntarily pledges to achieve
(Winning et al. 2019). This decentralization increases the importance of local stakeholders in climate
negotiations, and studies have shown that the behavior of elite groups – especially that of advocacy
coalitions and political networks – largely explain countries’ climate policy performance (Jahn 2016;
Karapin 2012). Elites can advance or constrain climate agreements using ‘societal steering’ strategies
such as capacity building and rule setting, thus acting as de facto veto players in local environmental
policies (Andonova et al. 2009; Bulkeley et al. 2014).
Although research on public opinion and climate agreements has increased significantly in recent
years (e.g., Aklin et al. 2013; Bechtel and Scheve 2013; Bechtel et al. 2017; Mildenberger and Tingley
2017), elite preferences are not well documented in the literature. This is a significant omission
considering that recent work has stressed the impact of elite coalitions in areas such as global
finance and international banking regulation (e.g, Chalmers 2017; Pagliari and Young 2014). Elites in
developing countries are especially understudied, despite the fact that emerging economies account
for 63% of the world’s carbon emissions (Busch 2015). It is unclear which local climate strategies
face lower internal resistance from these groups, or whether their environmental preferences are
fundamentally different from those of their developed countries counterparts (Aklin et al. 2013, 28).

2

We remedy this gap by assessing which local climate mitigation initiatives Latin American elites
are willing to support. In our survey experiment, we asked 654 respondents – academics, members
of the executive power, legislators, businesspeople, and members of non-governmental organizations
– to select their preferred components for local climate mitigation among seven repetitions of binary
choices. We vary the agreements across six dimensions commonly debated in the climate change
and institutional design literatures: rule-making capabilities (Dubash et al. 2013; Massey et al. 2014);
conflict resolution mechanisms (Huntjens et al. 2012; Ostrom 2014); enforcement methods (Barrett
2008); punishment for repeated violators (Ostrom 1990); cost sharing (Bansak et al. 2017; Bechtel and
Scheve 2013); and agreement duration (Copelovitch and Putnam 2014; Marcoux 2009). Variations
in any of those features can substantially change the outcomes of climate institutions (Bodin 2017;
Ostrom 2014).1
We find that interviewees prefer international organizations to design local climate policies and
are favorable to imposing increasing fines on violators and renegotiating agreements every five years.
Survey participants also want both international institutions and local courts to mediate conflicts, but
they are skeptical about non-governmental organizations and consistently reject informal norms as
an instrument to solve disputes. The results lend support to theories that define climate governance
as a ‘regime complex’ (Colgan et al. 2012; Keohane and Victor 2011), that is, ‘an array of partially
overlapping and non-hierarchical institutions [that] govern a particular issue area’ (Raustiala and
Victor 2004, 279). Moreover, following the spirit of the Paris Accords, the regime complex framework
stresses the role of elite perceptions on the relationship between local and global climate mitigation
efforts. Our findings suggest that Latin American elites embrace the complexity of climate policy
and believe mitigation policies should incorporate several layers of governance simultaneously.
This article contributes to three strands of the literature. First, we add experimental evidence to
studies on institutional design. Our results confirm previous research that stresses the importance of
institutional features on support for climate change policies (Aklin et al. 2013; Bechtel and Scheve
2013; Bechtel et al. 2017). We show that institutional support varies markedly according to elite
type and country of origin, and that this heterogeneity has an important impact on collective choice
and preference aggregation. In particular, we find that climate negotiations may not reach a unique
preferred solution.
1 As we discuss below, we take a parsimonious approach in regards to the number of dimensions included in the
experiment. In the Supplemental Material, we show that these components are commonly debated by Latin American
elites.

3

Second, we contribute to classical theories on international regimes. Abbott and Snidal (2000)
introduce the idea of hard versus soft international law to explain why actors pursue a variety of legal
agreements to foster their interests in the international realm. Mildenberger and Tingley (2017) and
Rosendorff and Milner (2001) posit that when compliance is hard to observe, incomplete contracts
are superior as they avoid unnecessary punishments and improve long-run cooperation stability.
Keohane and Victor (2011), in turn, argue that non-hierarchical international rulings help states avoid
gridlocks by reducing contracting costs and embracing ‘problem diversity’, in which each particular
climate problem requires a specific solution. Our results suggest that flexible regime designs are
decisive to foster international cooperation.
Finally, we also present novel information on Latin American elite behavior regarding climate
institutions. Our findings indicate that elites in Latin America favor agreements that do not fit into
the broad categories of ‘centralization’ or ‘polycentrism’; instead, they prefer a combination of the
two. The results are consistent with the Latin American tradition of heavier reliance on the state
than on self-governed solutions, but respondents also believe that both international and subnational
institutions should play a role in local climate policy design. The data offer new insights on how
Latin American policy-makers can form domestic coalitions and provides a first exploration of how
regional elites understand the nature of climate change mitigation efforts.

2

Data and Methods

We use conjoint experiments to estimate the effect of institutional features on climate mitigation
agreements. A conjoint experiment is a statistical technique that allows individuals to express their
preferences on multiple attributes of a single topic (Bansak et al. 2016; Hainmueller et al. 2014).
Individuals are presented with two hypothetical scenarios, each containing a randomly assigned
series of characteristics a researcher wants to evaluate. The individual selects one of them. As the
attributes are randomized, we can estimate how individuals value each of the conjoined elements
relative to their alternatives.2
2 We note, however, that our research design only allows us to infer the average level of attribute support within the
context of the conjoint experiment. Since our design relies on forced choices, respondents are required to choose 50%
of the agreement bundles presented to them. In this respect, the findings we observe here may be different from what
would see should respondents vote yes or no on a single package, without another agreement bundle for comparison.
We elaborate on this issue in the discussion section and in the Supplementary Material.

4

We focus on Latin American elites for three reasons. First, elites have an important impact on
public decisions, as they are often closer to the policy-making process. Second, Latin American
countries are in a region where extreme weather events are likely to produce substantial damages.
According to Eckstein et al. (2017), Central America alone has four countries in the top ten most
affected by extreme weather events. Lastly, Latin America is the most biodiverse region in the world
and plays a major role in global climate mitigation projects.
We use an original dataset compiled specifically for this study. From October 1 to December
5, 2018, we ran an elite survey with respondents from Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Ecuador, Mexico, Panama and Peru. We started by gathering information on potential
interviewees. For each country, we collected the profiles of 100 members of the executive branch, 100
members of the legislative branch, 150 academics in the energy sector and 150 members of the civil
society. We then sampled these profiles until we achieved a minimum of 10% of responses within
each group. We ran our survey both online and by telephone, collecting information on the climate
change agreements and other related questions in a non-intrusive manner (Loewen et al. 2010). We
had two teams of enumerators, one based in São Paulo and another based in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
composed of Portuguese and Spanish native speakers. Please refer to the Supplementary Material for
more information about the sampling process and descriptive statistics.

Table 1: Attributes and values for climate change mitigation conjoint experiments
Attribute
Who makes the rules?

Values
International organizations; federal government; local government; local community members; nongovernmental organizations

Conflict resolution mechanism

United Nations; government bureaucracy; local
courts; private arbitration; informal norms

Punishment

Imprisonment; fines; blacklist; none

Punishment for repeated violations

More penalty; same; less penalty

Agreement costs

Rich countries pay more than poor countries; proportional to history of emissions; proportional to current
emissions; only rich countries pay

Renegotiation

Never; fifty years; twenty years; five years; one year

5

The hypothetical climate change agreements include six attributes: 1) which organizations define
the rules; 2) how would conflicts be resolved; 3) what punishment should be applied to rule-breakers;
4) how should repeated violations be sanctioned; 5) which countries should bear the costs of the
agreement; 6) how often should the agreement be renegotiated. Table 1 describes the values we
included in each treaty attribute.3
We give no prior indication of whether a certain value is more prevalent in actual agreements to
elicit truthful responses from the interviewees. We also randomize the values to ensure that they all
have the same probability of being selected. In total, there are 5,500 possible value combinations.
Figure 1 illustrates how a typical conjoint element appeared in the respondents’ screen.

Figure 1: Example of conjoint table presented to respondents
In designing the experiment, we attempted to strike a balance between realism and parsimony.
Local implementation of climate agreements may vary among a wide set of dimensions, but including
too many attributes in the conjoint design would significantly increase cognitive load and induce
respondent fatigue (Pullman et al. 1999). Subjects also use decision heuristics when the number of
conjoint attributes is high, such as focusing on the dimensions they care the most or on the ones
they see first. These issues lead to uninformative experimental results (Lines and Denstadli 2004).
In this respect, we decided to restrict the total of categories at the expense of some loss of external
validity. However, if individuals found our choice of attributes too unrealistic, we would expect a
3A

discussion on the theoretical underpinnings of our choice of attributes is available in the Supplementary Material.

6

high number of non-responses in the survey. Our data show that this was not the case. Conditional
on having answered the first task, completion rates for the last task were around 90% across countries
and elite types, which suggests that respondents did engage in the experiment and that the offered
options made intuitive sense to them.
We estimate our models with the cregg package (Leeper 2018) for the R statistical language
(R Core Team 2018). Here we report marginal means instead of average marginal conditional
effects (AMCE) of local climate agreement attributes. Leeper et al. (2018) show that AMCEs can be
misleading in subgroup analysis as model results are sensitive to the choice of reference categories
in interactions. In contrast, marginal means provide a clear description of quantities of interest, in
our case preferences towards agreement attributes, while allowing for easy comparisons between
groups of respondents. Their interpretation is also straightforward: a 50% marginal means estimate
represents that respondents are indifferent when this attribute appears vis-à-vis other attributes.
When the coefficient is lower than 50%, respondents dislike packages with this attribute. Conversely,
when the point estimate is higher than 50%, respondents prefer packages containing a given attribute.
Readers can refer to the Supplementary Material for AMCE estimates.

3

Results

Figure 2 shows our main results. The graph illustrates the preference associated with each attribute of
hypothetical local climate governance schemes. Dots with horizontal bars represent point estimates
and 95% confidence intervals from linear regressions with robust standard errors clustered at the
respondent level.
Respondents prefer international organizations to establish local climate mitigation rules (54%,
SE = 1.2), but they also hold relatively favorable views of local communities (51.6%, SE = 1.25). We
note that Latin American elites support multiple governance levels simultaneously, which suggests
that they are willing to include separate political spheres into a single climate policy design. Local
governments (49.8%, SE = 1.2) and federal governments (48.6%, SE = 1.3) are slightly preferred over
NGOs, yet the difference between the former two is not statistically significant. Non-governmental
organizations are the least preferred option for local climate change rule-making with 45.5% (SE =
1.3).

7

Who makes the rules?
International organizations
Federal government
Local government
Local community members
NGOs
How are conflicts resolved?
United Nations
Government bureaucracy
Local courts
Private arbitration
Informal norms
What punishments do they use?
Imprisonment
Fines
Blacklist
None
How are repeated violations punished?
More penalty
Same
Less penalty
How are costs distributed?
Rich countries pay more than poor countries
Proportional to history of emissions
Proportional to current emissions
Only rich countries pay
How often will the agreement be renegotiated?
Never
Fifty years
Twenty years
Five years
One year
0.40

0.45

0.50

0.55

0.60

Marginal Mean

Figure 2: Relative preferences for institutional attributes in climate change agreements in
10 Latin American countries (pooled data, marginal means)
We see a similar pattern with respect to conflict resolution. Respondents affirm disputes should
be addressed mainly by the United Nations and local courts. These two choices receive 57.3% (SE
= 1.2) and 54.6% (SE = 1.2) relative approval, respectively. Private arbitration comes next with 50%
(SE = 1.3). Government bureaucracy and informal norms lower the chance of selecting a climate
agreement, with 46.4% (SE = 1.3) and 41% (SE = 1.3) of support when compared to the alternatives.
Participants prefer graduated sanctions to repeated offenders (53.2%, SE = 0.9) and they prefer costs
to be be allocated according to the country’s history of emissions (53.6%, SE = 1.1). Note, however,
that the difference between history of emissions and current emissions is not statistically significant.
Moreover, related to the same idea of proportionality, respondents indicate that lawbreakers should
be punished with fines (55.3%, SE = 1.1), which can be increased if necessary. This is in line with the
literature arguing that climate change agreements present a middle ground between rigidity and
flexibility to accommodate domestic demands and increase national and local compliance (Von Stein
2008).

8

Elites believe that Latin American countries should contribute to the global provision of public
goods. We find no evidence that respondents intend to use local agreements to free ride on global
climate change policies, as they position themselves against the idea that rich nations should bear
the costs of climate protection. This is conductive to long-term cooperation as placing the burden
exclusively on rich countries is likely to be off the equilibrium path and would, presumably, not lead
to a stable arrangement.
When we analyze local agreements’ renegotiations, respondents are interested in a balance
between stability and flexibility. Interviewees reject agreements that either cannot be modified or
that last for 50 years. Their preference lies in agreements that can be renegotiated every five years
(59%, SE = 1.2). This is consistent with a concern that agreements should be durable enough to
provide long-term incentives to the parties, yet remain adaptable to unforeseen demands.
Overall, the results do not conform to strictly top-down or bottom-up approaches, but to a
combination of these attributes. While elites favor solutions provided at the macro level, they
are also open to input from other government actors and local groups. Further, the rejection on
non-governmental organizations points to a discredit of self-governing arrangements as a means to
deal with global warming. This result is in line with Latin America’s long reliance on the state to
design and implement policies.
We also examine how our results vary across countries and types of elites.4 Figure 3 displays the
preferred local climate change agreement characteristics for each of the 10 countries in our sample.
The disaggregated data confirm that elites have a generalized preference for international agencies
to solve conflicts, and they dislike informal norms. In addition, the cross-country results show a
preference for a positive role by federal and local governments, and that local community members
should also participate in the deliberation process.
However, some of the regional preferences are a by-product of sample aggregation. Latin American
elites do not have a consensus on which organizations should provide the rules. For example, elites in
Costa Rica prefer local to global rule-making; in Mexico, they prefer global and dislike local, similar to
Peru, Argentina and Brazil; in Colombia, elites favor global and local rule-making simultaneously; and
in Bolivia, respondents prefer local organizations to design local climate rules. This is an important
point and might have far-reaching consequences for environmental policy design. The lack of
4 The number of respondents in each elite subgroups does not vary significantly per country, with the exception of
members of the civil society. Brazil has a higher proportion of that particular group. Please refer to the Supplementary
Material for additional information on our sample composition.

9

Argentina

Bolivia

Brazil

Chile

Colombia

Costa Rica

Ecuador

Mexico

Panama

Peru

0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7

0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7

0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7

0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7

0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7

Who makes the rules?
International organizations
Federal government
Local government
Local community members
NGOs
How are conflicts resolved?
United Nations
Government bureaucracy
Local courts
Private arbitration
Informal norms
What punishments do they use?
Imprisonment
Fines
Blacklist
None
How are repeated violations punished?
More penalty
Same
Less penalty
How are costs distributed?
Rich countries pay more than poor countries
Proportional to history of emissions
Proportional to current emissions
Only rich countries pay
How often will the agreement be renegotiated?
Never
Fifty years
Twenty years
Five years
One year
Who makes the rules?
International organizations
Federal government
Local government
Local community members
NGOs
How are conflicts resolved?
United Nations
Government bureaucracy
Local courts
Private arbitration
Informal norms
What punishments do they use?
Imprisonment
Fines
Blacklist
None
How are repeated violations punished?
More penalty
Same
Less penalty
How are costs distributed?
Rich countries pay more than poor countries
Proportional to history of emissions
Proportional to current emissions
Only rich countries pay
How often will the agreement be renegotiated?
Never
Fifty years
Twenty years
Five years
One year
Marginal Mean

Figure 3: Relative preferences for institutional attributes in climate change agreements by
country (marginal means)

10

coordination on rule-making responsibilities can give rise to decision cycles, lowering the chance
that a single, favorite climate change solution emerges. Nevertheless, these dissensions might be
resolved by decentralization, boosting the idea that flexible regime complexes, such as polycentric
governance schemes, might provide a solution to gridlocks.
Figure 4 shows the results disaggregated by elite type. Academics, members of the civil society
and representatives in the executive and legislative branches hold similar views about how conflicts
should be resolved, what punishment to apply to lawbreakers (fines and blacklisting) and the duration
of the agreements.
Academia

Civil Society

Executive

Legislative

Who makes the rules?
International organizations
Federal government
Local government
Local community members
NGOs
How are conflicts resolved?
United Nations
Government bureaucracy
Local courts
Private arbitration
Informal norms
What punishments do they use?
Imprisonment
Fines
Blacklist
None
How are repeated violations punished?
More penalty
Same
Less penalty
How are costs distributed?
Rich countries pay more than poor countries
Proportional to history of emissions
Proportional to current emissions
Only rich countries pay
How often will the agreement be renegotiated?
Never
Fifty years
Twenty years
Five years
One year
0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6

0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6

0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6

0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6

Marginal Mean

Figure 4: Relative preferences for institutional attributes in climate change agreements by
elite type (marginal means)
Differences emerge in two of the six attributes. Academics and members of the civil society are
skeptical about the role of federal government in local climate policy-making, while members of the
executive and legislative branches — part of the government themselves — have a more positive view
of national institutions. The differences, however, are not large. Second, members of the legislative
branch prefer rich countries to bear the larger part of agreement costs (58.4%, SE = 3.5). This provides

11

evidence for the idea of historical responsibility for climate protection, an argument which developing
countries have recently brought to climate negotiations (Müller et al. 2009; Friman and Hjerpe 2015).

4

Discussion

In this article, we examine which attributes of local climate change mitigation treaties Latin American
elites support. We find that interviewees prefer international organizations to resolve conflicts, are
favorable to imposing increasing fines on violators and renewing agreements every five years. Survey
participants also signal their distrust of non-governmental organizations and informal norms. Taken
together, our evidence suggests that Latin American elites oppose non-governmental organizations
as rule-makers and want legal punishment to agreement violators.
While our results corroborate that Latin Americans prefer the state to conduct local public policy,
they do not match the typical dichotomy of hierarchical versus decentralized climate change regimes.
After disaggregating the data by country and elite type, we find that elites prefer international
organizations to resolve disputes and that federal and local sources of governance should design local
climate mitigation governance schemes. However, we also find large heterogeneity in the responses,
with groups holding different opinions on how competences should be divided.
With regards to environmental policies, we identify that Latin American elites are interested in
incorporating different political actors and in strengthening the role of international organizations
in climate governance. Building on these insights, our study provides novel information to policymakers, as it evaluates which climate agreements are politically acceptable for implementation
in Latin America. Future climate negotiations can achieve better results if they take those local
preferences into account.
We believe our findings can be extended in many ways. The research design we employ here
provides only a first step towards understanding the behavior of local elites and their preferences
regarding climate change policies. Our use of forced choices implies that we could not measure the
overall level of attribute support in the elite population, when respondents can choose any agreement
they prefer without constraints. Moreover, further research could better adjudicate between rules
associated with the global treaty negotiations themselves and those concerning domestic politics. For
instance, future studies may analyze how each country’s specific legal framework imposes constraints
we did not include in our experiment, and thus provide fine-grained information about local attitudes
12

towards climate agreements. Moreover, scholars may employ other types of research designs, such
as vignette experiments or qualitative interviews, to assess the robustness of our results. Lastly,
our analysis can also be extended to examine if the Latin American public has the same opinion on
multilevel arrangements as do the elites; and if not, it would be important to know what explains the
mismatch between groups (Luna and Zechmeister 2005).

Supplementary Material
For supplementary material for this article, please visit http://github.com/danilofreire/climategovernance.

References
Abbott, K. W. and Snidal, D. (2000). Hard and Soft Law in International Governance. International
Organization, 54(3):421–456.
Aklin, M., Bayer, P., Harish, S., and Urpelainen, J. (2013). Understanding Environmental Policy
Preferences: New Evidence from Brazil. Ecological Economics, 94:28–36.
Andonova, L. B., Betsill, M. M., and Bulkeley, H. (2009). Transnational Climate Governance. Global
Environmental Politics, 9(2):52–73.
Bansak, K., Hainmueller, J., and Hangartner, D. (2016). How Economic, Humanitarian, and Religious
Concerns Shape European Attitudes toward Asylum Seekers. Science, 354(6309):217–222.
Bansak, K., Hainmueller, J., and Hangartner, D. (2017). Europeans Support a Proportional Allocation
of Asylum Seekers. Nature Human Behaviour, 1(7):0133.
Barrett, S. (2008). Climate Treaties and the Imperative of Enforcement. Oxford Review of Economic
Policy, 24(2):239–258.
Bechtel, M. M., Genovese, F., and Scheve, K. F. (2017). Interests, Norms and Support for the Provision
of Global Public Goods: The Case of Climate Co-Operation. British Journal of Political Science,
pages 1–23.

13

Bechtel, M. M. and Scheve, K. F. (2013). Mass Support for Global Climate Agreements Depends on
Institutional Design. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(34):13763–13768.
Bodin, Ö. (2017). Collaborative Environmental Governance: Achieving Collective Action in SocialEcological Systems. Science, 357(6352):11–14.
Bräuninger, T. and König, T. (2000). Making Rules for Governing Global Commons: The Case of
Deep-Sea Mining. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 44(5):604–629.
Bulkeley, H., Andonova, L. B., Betsill, M. M., Compagnon, D., Hale, T., Hoffmann, M. J., Newell, P.,
Paterson, M., VanDeveer, S. D., and Roger, C. (2014). Transnational Climate Change Governance.
Cambridge University Press.
Busch,

J.

(2015).

Climate

Change

and

Development

in

https://www.cgdev.org/blog/climate-change-and-development-three-charts.

Three

Charts.

Access:

July

2019.
Chalmers, A. W. (2017). When Banks Lobby: The Effects of Organizational Characteristics and
Banking Regulations on International Bank Lobbying. Business and Politics, 19(1):107–134.
Cole, D. H. (2015). Advantages of a Polycentric Approach to Climate Change Policy. Nature Climate
Change, 5(2):114–118.
Colgan, J. D., Keohane, R. O., and Van de Graaf, T. (2012). Punctuated Equilibrium in the Energy
Regime Complex. The Review of International Organizations, 7(2):117–143.
Copelovitch, M. S. and Putnam, T. L. (2014). Design in Context: Existing International Agreements
and New Cooperation. International Organization, 68(2):471–493.
Dubash, N. K., Hagemann, M., Höhne, N., and Upadhyaya, P. (2013). Developments in National
Climate Change Mitigation Legislation and Strategy. Climate Policy, 13(6):649–664.
Eckstein, D., Künzel, V., and Schäfer, L. (2017). Global Climate Risk Index 2018. Bonn: Germanwatch
Nord-Süd Initiative eV.
Freire, D., Mignozzetti, U., and Skarbek, D. (2020). Replication Data for: Institutional Design and
Elite Support for Climate Policies: Evidence from Latin American Countries. https://doi.org/10.
7910/DVN/VTA5OA.

14

Friman, M. and Hjerpe, M. (2015). Agreement, Significance, and Understandings of Historical
Responsibility in Climate Change Negotiations. Climate Policy, 15(3):302–320.
Hainmueller, J., Hopkins, D. J., and Yamamoto, T. (2014). Causal Inference in Conjoint Analysis:
Understanding Multidimensional Choices via Stated Preference Experiments. Political Analysis,
22(1):1–30.
Hjerpe, M. and Nasiritousi, N. (2015). Views on Alternative Forums for Effectively Tackling Climate
Change. Nature Climate Change, 5(9):864.
Huntjens, P., Lebel, L., Pahl-Wostl, C., Camkin, J., Schulze, R., and Kranz, N. (2012). Institutional
Design Propositions for the Governance of Adaptation to Climate Change in the Water Sector.
Global Environmental Change, 22(1):67–81.
Jahn, D. (2016). The Politics of Environmental Performance. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jordan, A. J., Huitema, D., Hildén, M., Van Asselt, H., Rayner, T. J., Schoenefeld, J. J., Tosun, J., Forster,
J., and Boasson, E. L. (2015). Emergence of Polycentric Climate Governance and Its Future Prospects.
Nature Climate Change, 5(11):977–982.
Karapin, R. (2012). Explaining Success and Failure in Climate Policies: Developing Theory through
German Case Studies. Comparative Politics, 45(1):46–68.
Keohane, R. O. and Victor, D. G. (2011). The Regime Complex for Climate Change. Perspectives on
politics, 9(1):7–23.
Leeper, T. J. (2018).

cregg: Simple Conjoint Analyses and Visualization.

Available at

https://thomasleeper.com/cregg. Access: May 2019. R package version 0.3.0.

Leeper, T. J., Hobolt, S. B., and Tilley, J. (2018). Measuring Subgroup Preferences in Conjoint
Experiments. https://bit.ly/2E5oKSq. Access: May 2019.
Lines, R. and Denstadli, J. M. (2004). Information Overload in Conjoint Experiments. International
Journal of Market Research, 46(3):297–310.
Loewen, P. J., Rubenson, D., and Wantchekon, L. (2010). Help Me Help You: Conducting Field
Experiments with Political Elites. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social
Science, 628(1):165–175.
15

Luna, J. P. and Zechmeister, E. J. (2005). Political Representation in Latin America: A Study of
Elite-Mass Congruence in Nine Countries. Comparative Political Studies, 38(4):388–416.
Marcoux, C. (2009). Institutional Flexibility in the Design of Multilateral Environmental Agreements.
Conflict Management and Peace Science, 26(2):209–228.
Massey, E., Biesbroek, R., Huitema, D., and Jordan, A. (2014). Climate Policy Innovation: The Adoption
and Diffusion of Adaptation Policies across Europe. Global Environmental Change, 29:434–443.
Mildenberger, M. and Tingley, D. (2017). Beliefs about Climate Beliefs: The Importance of SecondOrder Opinions for Climate Politics. British Journal of Political Science, pages 1–29.
Mitchell, R. B. (2006). Problem Structure, Institutional Design, and the Relative Effectiveness of
International Environmental Agreements. Global Environmental Politics, 6(3):72–89.
Müller, B., Höhne, N., and Ellermann, C. (2009). Differentiating (Historic) Responsibilities for Climate
Change. Climate Policy, 9(6):593–611.
Ostrom, E. (1990). Governing the Commons. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ostrom, E. (2014). A Polycentric Approach for Coping with Climate Change. Annals of Economics &
Finance, 15(1):97–134.
Pagliari, S. and Young, K. L. (2014). Leveraged Interests: Financial Industry Power and the Role of
Private Sector Coalitions. Review of International Political Economy, 21(3):575–610.
Pullman, M. E., Dodson, K. J., and Moore, W. L. (1999). A Comparison of Conjoint Methods When
There Are Many Attributes. Marketing Letters, 10(2):125–138.
R Core Team (2018).

R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing.

https://www.R-project.org. Access: May 2019.

Raustiala, K. and Victor, D. G. (2004). The Regime Complex for Plant Genetic Resources. International
Organization, 58(2):277–309.
Rogelj, J., Nabel, J., Chen, C., Hare, W., Markmann, K., Meinshausen, M., Schaeffer, M., Macey, K., and
Höhne, N. (2010). Copenhagen Accord Pledges Are Paltry. Nature, 464(7292):1126.

16

Rosen, A. M. (2015). The Wrong Solution at the Right Time: The Failure of the Kyoto Protocol on
Climate Change. Politics & Policy, 43(1):30–58.
Rosendorff, B. P. and Milner, H. V. (2001). The Optimal Design of International Trade Institutions:
Uncertainty and Escape. International Organization, 55(4):829–857.
Victor, D. G., Akimoto, K., Kaya, Y., Yamaguchi, M., Cullenward, D., and Hepburn, C. (2017). Prove
Paris Was More than Paper Promises. Nature News, 548(7665):25.
Von Stein, J. (2008). The International Law and Politics of Climate Change: Ratification of the
United Nations Framework Convention and the Kyoto Protocol. Journal of Conflict Resolution,
52(2):243–268.
Winning, M., Price, J., Ekins, P., Pye, S., Glynn, J., Watson, J., and McGlade, C. (2019). Nationally
Determined Contributions under the Paris Agreement and the Costs of Delayed Action. Climate
Policy, pages 1–12.

17

