TITLE PAGE
From hunter-gatherers to nomadic pastoralists: forager bands do not tell the whole story of the
evolution of human cooperation
Marius Warg Næss1
1

Norwegian Institute for Cultural Heritage Research (NIKU), High North Department, Fram Centre, N-

9296 Tromsø, Norway.
Corresponding author:
Marius Warg Næss, e-mail: mwnass@outlook.com; marius.naess@niku.no
Abstract: The history of humanity is a story of cooperation. Issues pertaining to the origin of human
cooperation have, however, been characterized by a forager bias, the assumption being that they
have a close link to our evolutionary past. In contrast little effort has been spent on documenting and
explaining cooperative herding among nomadic pastoralists. As the Mongolian empire attest to
nomadic pastoralists—in contrast to foragers—can form large-scale empires. In combination with the
prevalence of small-scale cooperative herding groups, nomadic pastoral societies thus provide a
fertile ground for expanding our understanding of the evolution of cooperation. In this paper I aim to
extend our understanding of human cooperation through a comparison of the most well-known
cooperative herding groups—namely the Mongolian khot ail and the Saami siida—and the most wellstudied forager bands, namely the Hadza camp and Ache band.
Keywords: cooperation; review; hunter-gatherers; nomads; herding groups; bands.

1

INTRODUCTION
Cooperation is an important facet of human society and may be the principal driving force behind
humanity’s success (e.g Francois et al. 2018), but explaining its origin remains a challenge (Smith et
al. 2018, Francois et al. 2018, West et al. 2011). As early as the 14th century, the Arab philosopher Ibn
Khaldun argued that a state could only be organized around a group with high asabiya—meaning a
group which members have a high degree of collective solidarity (Turchin 2007). More generally, it
has been argued that historical dynamics can be understood as a result of competition and conflict
between groups (cf. Carneiro 1970) whereby the domination of one group over another is made
possible through in-group cooperation (Turchin 2007). The history of humanity is thus a story of
cooperation and our remarkable success is to a large degree due to high levels of cooperation among
non-related individuals (Francois et al. 2018). Not surprisingly, there has been a dramatic increase in
the interest in the evolution of cooperation: the number of published articles has increased by a
factor of >50 during the last 25 years (Kantner 2018).

Foragers as an analogy of human evolutionary history
Our understanding of cooperation is, however, limited to only a few societies, namely forager
societies. The assumption being that they have a close link to our evolutionary past—living in an
evolutionary relevant context (Apicella et al. 2014). Hill et al. (2014:1) argue that “[…] modern
hunter-gatherers offer the opportunity to examine features of that lifestyle that may be associated
with important evolved human traits”. In a similar vein, Chaudhary et al. (2015) argue that because
foragers represent most of humanity’s evolutionary history, they offer the best insights into our
evolution.
For anthropology specifically, foragers have had such a prominent place that “[…] we could
almost write the discipline’s entire history in terms of hunter-gatherer ethnology” (Kelly 2013:1).
With respect to cooperation, Apicella and Silk (2019) argue that since most human diversity have a
modern origin, human cooperation is better understood within a forager context. For the Hadza
specifically, Smith et al. (2018:3) argue that they provide an important test case for evolutionary
models of cooperation because “[…] their lifeways more closely approximate pre-Neolithic
populations compared to samples drawn from industrialized settings”. While concerned about
possible bias and the limitations of using present day hunter-gatherer societies as an analogy of
humans’ ancient ancestors, Marlowe (2005:54) nevertheless argues that forager societies are
invaluable for testing hypotheses about the evolutionary foundation of human behaviour (see also
Apicella et al. 2014). In sum, explanations of human cooperation are often made with reference to
the small size and high degree of relatedness of forager groups (Stanford 2019).
2

From forager bands to nomadic herding groups
At the same time, Marlowe (2009) argue that foragers can acquire food without having to solve
serious collective action problems. For example, while the Hadza might discuss the need keep
neighbouring agro-pastoralists out of their area, as soon as they finish agreeing some individuals go
right out and trade with or scrounge from them; in effect undercutting group-solidarity vis-à-vis
outsiders (Marlowe 2009). Similarly, when dealing with free-riders or food hoarders the most
common response is to ‘move away from them’ rather than ‘making them leave’ (Marlowe 2009).
Furthermore, Mathew and Boyd (2011) argue that while studies of contemporary foragers
show that they cooperate extensively in small, face-to-face groups, numerous societies in human
prehistory were larger than those of contemporary foragers. Ethnographic accounts suggest that
such societies could mobilize on large scales (e.g. Turkana`, Nuer) while lacking centralized political
authority, formal law enforcement, or other coercive institutions (Mathew and Boyd 2011). Despite a
heated debate there has been little progress in understanding the transition from cooperation in
small-scale societies to that cooperation in large-scale societies (Powers et al. 2019). Or, with Boyd
and Richerson’s (2009:3281) words “[t]he scale of human cooperation is an evolutionary puzzle”.
In contrast to forager societies, nomadic pastoralists have a historically demonstrated ability
for both small-scale and large-scale cooperation. The capacity for collective action was, for example,
a key factor in the rise of the Mongolian empire (Turchin 2007): In 1242 Europe stood on the
precipice of destruction. Based in Hungary and Serbia, the Mongol armies were poised for
conquering the rest of Europe (May 2007). Only the death of Ögedei—the Great Khan of the Mongols
and son of Chinggis Khan—halted the Mongol advance; sparing Europe from the fate of an inevitable
conquest (Chaliand 2004). Twenty-five years after the withdrawal, the Mongol empire reached its
peak with the establishment of the Yuan dynasty—making it the largest land empire in history
(Chaliand 2004).
My point of departure is that the basic building block of nomadic societies are the household
and the cooperative herding group. Khazanov (1994) argue that the primary kin group is one form of
social organization on which very little comparative work has been done. Similarly, Tapper (1979)
argue that in almost any pastoral society, territorial holding units (e.g. tribe) subdivides into smaller
groups for camping or herding purposes. Tapper (1979), however, argue that herding associations
(e.g. camps) are instable compared larger associations. Among the nomads in the Iran, for example,
herding units are economic in nature and “[…] socially and politically of minor importance compared
with larger groupings” (Tapper 1979:48-9). Addressing the Yomut, Tapper (1979) argue that the basic
community is the oba (a group of households—25-100 households—who together shared joint rights
3

to pasture and water, Irons 1974:640, Irons 1972:92). The cooperative Yomut camp is treated as
somewhat irrelevant, Tapper (1979:56) just term them as fluid herding units of 2-10 tents (usually 45) that camp separately.
I’m arguing differently: despite the instability of the herding units, they are a fundamental
unit for pastoral social organisation because they are concerned with daily cooperation. As I will
demonstrate, the makeup of these groups is more similar cross-culturally than the larger associations
consisting of several herding units (e.g. local exploitation group, consisting of “[…] a set of domestic
and herding units periodically drawn together by a temporary mutual interest” Dyson-Hudson
1972:11). This also translates into settlement patterns: while pastoral households can camp together
in larger groupings for parts of the year, networks of reciprocal help and cooperation develops within
a subset of residential groups. Pastoralism is thus practiced in in a web of potential cooperative
relationships; relationships that can be actualized and discontinued depending on social context and
environment, i.e. cooperative networks can contract or extend depending on circumstance (Bird et
al. 2019 makes a similar point with respect to foragers). Fundamentally, however, it is almost
impossible for individual households to maintain production without cooperative labour investment
and mutual help from other households (Khazanov 1994). Similarly, Næss (2012) has demonstrated
that nomadic pastoralists form cooperative herding groups, consisting of several independent
households, with the explicit aim of sharing and exchanging labour.
Not unlike the locus cooperative behaviour among foragers—meaning the band 1 (Smith et al.
2016, Smith et al. 2018, Bird et al. 2019, Smith et al. 2019)—the cooperative herding group is a social
unit consisting of independent households that flexibly form and reform according to both external
(e.g. pasture) and internal (e.g. population growth) factors. With the ability to form large-scale
empires and the prevalence of cooperative herding groups, nomadic pastoralists thus provide a
fertile ground for expanding our understanding of cooperation. Following Binmore (2006), it could be
argued that increasing and extending our understanding of large-scale cooperation requires an
understanding of how cooperation works in small-scale coordination problems.
In this paper I thus aim to extend our understanding of human cooperation through a
comparison of nomadic cooperative herding groups and forager residential bands. As Ingold
(1999:60) argue, “[i]f one takes "band" to refer to a local group of a particular kind, then there is no a
priori reason why such groups should be exclusive to hunters and gatherers”. The major contribution
of this paper is—by comparing forager bands and cooperative herding groups—to reveal strengths

The use of the word band has shifted over time: from signifying small coresidential group of people sharing a
hunting territory to groupings larger than the family, i.e. an endogamous, land-holding group of some 250
persons (Kelly 2013:290). But more recently, the term has been used to refer to smaller coresidential group of
people found among foragers (Kelly 2013:290). This last usage is the one taken here.

1

4

and weaknesses in our current understanding as well as pinpointing areas where more research is
needed. This I will do through a comparison of the most well-known cooperative herding groups—
namely the Mongolian khot ail and the Saami siida—and the most well-studied forager bands,
namely the Hadza camp and Ache band.

THE EVOLUTION OF COOPERATION: DOMAINS OF COOPERATIVE BEHAVIOUR
Cooperation entails that individuals pays a cost to the benefit of others (Fotouhi et al. 2018) and
cooperative group formation is a widespread phenomenon entailing both benefits, e.g. easier to find
food and costs, e.g. more individuals between whom to divide the food (Mendl and Held 2001).
Cooperation thus comprises a conflict between self-interest and collective rationality due to an
opposition between what is best for oneself—not paying the cost of cooperation—versus what is
best for others—paying the cost of cooperation (Simpson and Willer 2015). In short, collective action
problems stem from the “[…] tension between public nature of benefits yielded by cooperation and
private costs borne by cooperating agents” (Turchin et al. 2013:16384).
Kin selection—donor and the recipient of an altruistic act are genetic relatives—predicts that,
all else being equal, individuals will be more likely to favour kin than non-kin, and close kin over more
distant kin (Alvard 2003, Nowak 2006). In effect, kinship is important and individuals in small scale
societies preferentially aid close kin over more distant kin and non-kin (cf. Allen-Arave et al. 2008).
Kaplan and Gurven (2005) argue that a clear bias of meat distribution towards close kin living in other
families, at the expense of distant kin and unrelated families, has been documented in several
forager societies (see also Bird et al. 2019). On Ifaluk (Western Carolines), Betzig and Turke (1986)
found that that pairs of households sharing food are closely related compared to pairs of households
in the population in general.
Saami reindeer herders in Norway give gifts to genetic relatives: kinship had a small but
positive effect on the odds of gift giving (Thomas et al. 2015). Furthermore, closer kin were more
likely to be named as co-operators compared to distant relatives and non-kin in self-reports (Thomas
et al. 2018). Comparing gift-giving behaviour in Saami and Tibetan herding groups, Du et al. (2019)
found that closer kin were more likely to receive gifts. Furthermore, Næss et al. (2010) found that
kinship had a mediating effect on cooperative production: both labour and kinship had positive
effects on individual herders’ herd size. Moreover, a positive interaction suggested that high levels of
relatedness coupled with a large potential labour pool had an increasingly positive effect on herd size
(Næss et al. 2010).
Nevertheless, while kin selection theory has provided a compelling explanation for helping
behaviour this behavioural pattern is well documented in species that do not live in family groups
5

(Griffin and West 2002). Moreover, one could question it as an organizing principle for cooperation
among humans. Genetically and culturally definition of kin can differ substantially: unilineal descent
groups, for example, underestimate genetic relatedness. Nevertheless, unilineal descent systems are
common among humans: 47% societies (n = 857) are patrilineal while 14% are matrilineal decent
systems (Alvard 2003). In contrast, only 36% societies have bilateral kinship systems (Alvard 2003).
Consequently, it could be argued that individuals may cooperate because it is in their own direct selfinterest and not necessarily because of the benefits indirectly acquired through kin relations (Griffin
and West 2002:20, Alvard 2003).
Among the Ache, for example, kinship had no effect on sharing patterns in forest camps (a
kin bias of between-family sharing is strong in the settlement though, Gurven et al. 2002), supporting
the notion that close kinship is not a prerequisite of effective cooperation (Gurven et al. 2004:40).
Gurven (2006) found evidence of significant contingency in food exchange, especially for fish and
meat, for both Ache and Hiwi (Venezuela). Among the Agta (Philippines), Smith et al. (2019) found
that sharing is based on the recipients’ level of need as well as kin relation and reciprocity—sharing
with individuals that have shared with them previously (see also Smith et al. 2016). Pastoralist
households in Namibia transfer food to others on demand (Schnegg 2015). Despite an inclusive
sharing norm, reciprocal relationships emerged, especially for high-value goods; relationships not
influenced by kinship (Schnegg 2015). Furthermore, while kin relations was important for gift-giving
behaviour among herders in both Norway and Tibet, the most important factor was membership in
the same herding group (Thomas et al. 2018, Thomas et al. 2015, Du et al. 2019). Furthermore, Næss
et al. (2012) found that Saami reindeer herders tailor their strategies in relation to what other
herders are doing: the probability, the amount, and the type of animal slaughtered is to a large
degree influenced by the number of animals slaughtered by neighbouring herders.

COOPERATING IN GROUPS: CASE STUDIES
The Mongolian khot ail
Among Mongolian herders, cooperation, between several households, gave rise to a residential
group known as a khot ail: a socio-economic unit where households cooperate in everyday herding
tasks (Bazargür et al. 1993). Its primary function is to capture economies of scale (Cooper 1993,
Mearns 1996, Upton 2008). For example, one household herding one species for the entire khot ail
reduces the overall labour input required by individual members. In other cases, herding is done
rotationally, leaving others free to pursue alternative activities such as felt and hay-making,
vaccinating livestock, transporting milk for processing, moving, collecting wood, cutting hair and wool
and preparing and mending winter shelters (Cooper 1993, Mearns 1996, Upton 2008). Additionally,
6

cooperative labour investment serves as an important risk minimizing strategy: during periods of
heavy snow a large amount of labour is necessary for bringing animals back to camp shelters quickly
as well as providing watch to keep animals safe. The khot ail also provides an important social safety
net for poor households, e.g. through loaning and exchanging of food and livestock (Cooper 1993).
The word khot means ‘movable animal stalls or the stock fold and the yurt site’, while the
term ail refers to a ‘livestock keeping family possessing its own stock and stock fold’ (Bold 1996:70).
Khot ail thus meaning the ‘union of private livestock keeping families’. Bold (1996) argues that the
khot ail was the main socioeconomic unit in Mongolia from the start of the 18th century until the
1950s. In contrast, Bazargur (1993) argues that it has a much longer history: the khot ail has existed
as socioeconomic units even before the establishment of the Mongolian empire in 1206. Similarly,
Allsen (1994) argue that below the level of the lineage and sub-lineage, the tribes of Mongolia were
organised into ayils. This was the basic production unit, normally consisting of a single extended
family with its own tents and herds. For purposes of cooperative labour or local defence, several ayil
temporarily came together to form an encampment encircled by tents and wagons (Allsen 1994).
According to Potkanski (1993:132) the khot ail consists of 2-8 families, while Simukov (cited
in Sneath 1993:202) found the average size to be around 4-5. The number of families depends on the
prevailing natural conditions, e.g. the number of families belonging to a khot ail is closely connected
to extent of available pasture (Bold 1996, see also Mearns 1996, Upton 2008, Cooper 1993). Notably,
the khot ail changes annually (Potkanski 1993) and seasonally: often being largest during summer
(Sneath 1993, Mearns 1996). According to Mearns (1996), membership is not fixed—individual
households come and go. Often, however, they are formed around a relatively stable, core group of
households who reside together for at least part of the year. Most khot ails have an acknowledged
leader who is usually the most experienced male herder.
Mearns (1996) argues that the khot ail comprises a group of households who are often but
not necessarily consanguineal or affinal relatives. Upton (2008, 2005) describes the khot ail as being
based on kinship while Cooper (1993, see also Bold 1996) distinguish between three types of khot
ails: (1) those comprised of close kin; (2) those comprised of a central core group of closely related
households but with additional unrelated or temporary members; and (3) those made up of loosely
related or unrelated households with no dominant family group. Finally, while animals were pooled
together for herding purposes, they did not constitute a shared herd (Cooper 1993).
The Saami siida
Saami reindeer hunters had a social of unit that was larger than the family, called siida (Lowie 1945).
Its role was primarily economic and where members owned a tract of land; usually closed off by

7

natural lines of demarcation (Lowie 1945). In fact, the hunting siida could refer to the territory, its
resources and the people that utilised it (Ingold 1978, Riseth 2000).
With the transition to reindeer husbandry—at least 400 years ago (cf. Næss and Bårdsen
2013:S1)—the siida was modified. Most notably, the size of the siida contracted (Ingold 1978): in
Norway, the pastoral siida comprises 2-6 families—more often 3—herding their animals together in a
single herd (Lowie 1945:452). In Sweden, Whitaker (1978:167) writes that the siida comprise 5-8
households. While contracting in size, the territory of the siida expanded to incorporate the longer
migration necessary for reindeer pastoralism (Riseth 2000).
The siida has been described as a socioeconomic group whose member are united by kinship,
live close together and pursue a common economic goal: that of successfully herding reindeer
(Pehrson 1954). Moreover, it is flexible: occasionally local conditions, e.g. bad pasture, precludes
families from joining (Lowie 1945). Additionally, changes in composition is often caused by birth,
marriage and death, or by fluctuating fortunes in reindeer holdings (Ingold 1978:154, see also Paine
1994). Moreover, membership changes seasonally and annually: in Norway, the siidas are, for
example, smallest during spring calving and largest during summer (Paine 2009). In Sweden, larger
summer siidas segments into two or more smaller siidas at the onset of winter only to regroup again
in spring (Ingold 1978). Moreover, conflicts can break siidas: if a member is dissatisfied with the
siida’s leader he can chose to herd alone or change siida (Solem 1970).
The siida has also been described in terms of equality: while a herd owner might be the boss
of his family herd; in herding relations he is but one of several partners (Paine 1970). Herd owners
treat each other largely as equals regardless of differences in wealth, age and domestic status (Paine
1970). Herding relationship are thus described as one of mutual dependence and trust between
partners (Paine 1970).
Each siida had a leader, or ised (Solem 1970), meaning “master of the band” (Pehrson
1954:1077). He is not elected; rather wealth (i.e. herd size, Solem 1970) is a necessary, if not
sufficient, condition of leadership (Ingold 1978, see also Pehrson 1954). Leadership is informal with
authority resting on experience and skill (Solem 1970).
According to Pehrson (1964:90) siida is organised so that “[e]ach person in the band is
related to every other person in the band either directly or indirectly through a third person”. A
notable feature is the prevalence of siblinghood, which—according to Paine (2009:5, Pehrson
1954)—is not only biological but also “[…] a social construction of a sense of mutual identity
independent of genealogy”. Sibling solidarity can be extended to include cousins and other affinal
relatives of the same generation (Gjessing 1960). Kinship is defined in such a way that a new siidamember should be found among kin that is at least as close as second cousin. Only if this is
impossible can one look for more distant kin. But this does not stop non-kin from becoming
8

members: helpers can after a while become full members (Jonassen and Kalstad 2003). Pertinently,
the leader of the siida is “[…] always a member of this nuclear or dominant sibling group” (Pehrson
1954:1078).
The Hadza camp
The Hadza live in the rugged hill country of the Eastern Rift Valley in northern Tanzania (Hawkes et al.
1997). At the time of European contact—around the beginning of 20th century—they lived entirely by
hunting and gathering (Hawkes et al. 1997). Since the mid-1960s they have been subjected to a
series of settlement schemes designed to encourage them to become farmers—schemes that have
been unsuccessful where most of the Hadza have returned to the bush within a few months (Hawkes
et al. 1997). Subsistence have been reported to be based almost entirely on wild resources, mainly
meat, honey, fruit, and tubers (Hawkes et al. 1997).
The Hadza live in small camps that average about 30 individuals (Apicella, 2014 #3016:1796,
or around 29 people, Smith et al. 2010:table 3), ranging from around 5 to over 100 (Marlowe
2009:419). They are central-place foragers, meaning that foraged and hunted foods are brought back
to the camp. Camps shift location every 4–6 weeks as resources in the immediate area are depleted
(Apicella et al. 2014, Marlowe 2009). A camp is usually occupied by a core group of individuals;
having a relatively constant size and composition. Nevertheless, visiting between camps occur
frequently and people change residence (Hawkes et al. 1997, Woodburn 1982). While there are
continuities in the camp composition, they do not seriously limit individual freedom of movement
(Woodburn 1982). Camp size and the number of camps vary seasonally: the band is at its smallest
during the rainy season and largest at the end of the dry season (Woodburn 1982). The reason is the
limited number of permanent waterholes which again restricts the number of possible camp sites.
When rain returns, the default is to disperse into smaller groups because smaller groups have less
conflicts (Marlowe 2005).
In general, women gather fruits and dig for underground tubers while men collect honey and
hunt animals of any size; from rats to zebras (Apicella et al. 2014, Marlowe 2009). Men usually hunt
alone (Smith et al. 2010), only recruiting help when tracking a wounded animal (Marlowe 2009). In
contrast, women cooperate in groups of 3-8 individuals when collecting fruit and berries and when
digging for tubers (Marlowe 2009:419).
Hadza economic life is characterized by nearly 100 percent taxation and redistribution and a
high degree of egalitarianism (Apicella et al. 2014). Few capital goods or personal possessions exist,
except for bows and arrows, and a few personal items. If one person has more than his or her share
of a resource, such as two knives, the surplus will be demanded by others who have less (Apicella et
al. 2014). Nevertheless, on average the portion of a hunter’s catch retained in his household is larger
9

than the share distributed to other households (Smith et al. 2010). In terms of sharing, package size
matters: medium-sized and large game is shared widely across households if brought back to camp
but when men bring honey back to camp, it is often shared with those present, but unlike larger
game, it can be concealed and directed to a man’s household (Marlowe 2009)
Individual Hadza identify strongly with areas but, according to Woodburn (1982), anyone
may live, hunt and gather wherever he or she likes, without restriction. While a Hadza band might
take the name of a well-known man it does not indicate leadership (Woodburn 1982). Nevertheless,
older men with large families are likely to have more influence (Woodburn 1982). For Woodburn
(1982) the fluidity of Hadza bands is subversive for the development of authority: individuals can just
move away.
The Ache band
There are four living Ache groups in Paraguay, where the Northern Ache has been the subject of
intensive study since 1980. Prior to meeting outsiders in the 1970s, the Northern Ache were full-time
foragers who practiced no agriculture (Kaplan et al. 1990) and hunters spent almost every day of
their live hunting (Walker et al. 2002).
Currently, they live in settlements; practicing a mixed economy consisting of shifting
cultivation, wage labour and foraging. Most of the of the calories consumed in the settlement comes
from cultigens (~80%, \Gurven, 2004 #599:371} while on forest treks it comes from meat from
various game animals (~78 %, Gurven et al. 2002, Walker et al. 2002, Hawkes et al. 1982). On forest
treks, starchy palm fibre, fruits, and larvae, is acquired by women while men acquire most of the
meat and honey. About 60% of all game is captured by men coordinating their efforts (Gurven et al.
2002:96). Cooperation during hunts are both common and critical for successful hunting: men usually
coordinate search patterns to stay within hearing range of each other, and they often search
together in pairs during part of the day (Hill 2002). Preliminary analyses suggest that forming pursuit
groups increases the total food available to the band (Hill 2002). Nevertheless, cooperative food
acquisition is just one of several cooperative activities: Hill (2002:108) writes that cooperation is also
integral with respect to child rearing, mobility, camp construction etc. The Ache spend about 20% of
their time in the forest on extended travels, ranging in length from a few days to several weeks
(Gurven et al. 2002:96, Gurven 2004:371, Walker et al. 2002).
Traditionally, bands averaged around 43 individuals (Smith et al. 2010:22). They were
predominantly cooperative where members interchangeably adopted complementary roles in daily
food acquisition and food were shared among most members (Smith et al. 2010). The band had no
formal leader (Smith et al. 2010:23) and different bands were generally located at distances of 10–30
km from each other (Hill et al. 2014). Before contact, the Northern Ache lived in about 10-15
10

different residential bands—consisting of 15 to 60 individuals—whose membership was highly fluid
(Hill 2002:109). Furthermore, residential bands split from and joined with other bands regularly (Hill
2002). All adults knew, and occasionally interacted with, all other adults in the Northern Ache
population; outsiders were considered as lethal enemies. Furthermore, bands often split up for a day
or two to forage only to reunite to share the proceeds (Hill 2002).
Bands were ideally organised around a father and his adult sons, but in practice they often
consisted of a core set of brothers, or brothers and sisters, their children as well as some affinal kin
(Smith et al. 2010). Furthermore, Ache frequently refer to non-kin associations and relationships; i.e.
relationships based on mutual aid and assistance are also important (Hill et al. 2011, Supplementary
online material). The mean genetic coefficient of relatedness between adults in 58 precontact Ache
bands have been estimated to be only 0.054 (Hill et al. 2011:1288).
The Ache price food sharing and sharing norms encourage members to share with everyone
present, to give to those in need and to abstain from excessive consumption (Allen-Arave et al.
2008). Consequently, an average household keeps only 20–30% of the food it acquires and shares the
rest with two to three other households (cf. Allen-Arave et al. 2008:308). Households prefer to
distribute food to other households that contain kin and who provide ample food in return (AllenArave et al. 2008). Hunters do not distribute their own kills and no portions are specifically
designated for the hunter's family or kin (Kaplan et al. 1990, Hill 2002). Furthermore, wives and
children of hunters receive no greater portion of meat than any other individual in the band (Hill
2002).

DISCUSSION
The composition of bands and herding groups
Among the Ache bands are ideally organized around a father and his adult sons (Smith et al. 2010:2223) and the most common form of Hadza camp consists of two or three sisters and their families
and—if alive—their mother as well (Smith et al. 2010). More generally, Ingold (1999:59) argues that
bands typically consist of a senior sibling group while Hill et al. (2011) suggest that both bilateral kin
associations and brother-sister affiliation are important characteristics of foraging social structure.
While both the Saami siida and the Mongolian khot ail has been characterized as flexible,
they often form around a relatively stable, core group of households, often siblings. A similar
pattern—the ru skor (encampment)—is found among Tibetan nomads. Referring to people who live
alongside one another and herd their animals together, tents are united on the basis of kinship,
territory and movements (Pirie 2005). Members are often close relatives, e.g. parents and their
married children and brothers establishing new households tend to stay in the same group (Pirie
11

2005). Among the Yomut (Turkmenistan and adjoining parts of Iran and Afghanistan) the core of
most camp groups consists of a cluster of households closely related in the male line: often a father
and his independent sons or a group of independent brothers whose father is deceased (Irons 1972).
Among the Somali the nomadic hamlets—called reer—is the basic unit of movement and is a social
group formed around a nucleus of close male relatives, often brothers, or an extended family (Lewis
1999). The Gabra in Kenya are organised in homesteads or homestead clusters. A homestead consists
of one or more tents—where each tent is ideally occupied by one nuclear family or household—
belonging to a man and possibly to his married brothers and/or father and that live in closely located
tents, pen their herd together, and share herding duties (Torry 1977). A homestead clusters refer to
homesteads that are living in close proximity and are linked by affinal ties (Torry 1977).
While early anthropological studies suggested that forager societies were primarily kin based
(Hill et al. 2014), most individuals in bands are genetically unrelated (Hill et al. 2011). In a study of 32
forager societies, Hill et al. (2011) found bands to be composed of individuals either (1) distantly
related by kinship and/or marriage or (2) unrelated altogether. Surprisingly, primary kin generally
made up less than 10% of a band (Hill et al. 2011). As we have seen, a similar pattern has been
observed for the Ache: a mean genetic coefficient of relatedness of 0.054 and a focus on
relationships described in terms of mutual aid (Hill et al. 2011). Comparing Hadza and Ache interband interaction rates, Hill et al. (2014:7) found “[…] that affinal kinship is about as important as
genetic kinship for interactions between hunter-gatherer adults”. Similarly, Bird et al. (2019) argue
that most nomadic foragers live in groups dominated by links between non-relatives. Among whale
hunters in Indonesia, lineage membership rather than genetic kinship determines hunting group
formation (Alvard 2003, see also Allen-Arave et al. 2008). In a study of six Agta camps and three
BaYaka camps (Congo-Brazzaville), Migliano et al. (2017) found that friendship is important: both
groups had between one and four unrelated ‘close friends’ with whom they interact as frequently as
with close kin. With respect to sharing knowledge, strong friendships are more important than family
ties (Migliano et al. 2017). In sum, Hill et al. (2011) suggest that foraging social structure can be
characterised by (1) bilateral kin associations; (2) brother-sister affiliation; (3) affinal alliances; and (4)
co-residence with unrelated individuals.
While less concerned about quantifying the genealogical relationship between members of
herding groups, a similar pattern is found in nomadic societies. Among reindeer herding districts in
Northern parts of Norway, the average coefficient of relatedness between licensed herders ranged
from 0.0244 to 0.1964 (n = 20 districts, cf. Næss et al. 2010, Næss et al. 2012). And while sibling
groups formed the basis of the siida, siblinghood was not only construed in a biological sense but
could be extended to include cousins and other affinal relatives (Gjessing 1960). Similarly, while
Mearns (1996:313-14) found that in 18 of 30 khot ails kinship was important, in twelve it was not.
12

Moreover, around 50% of the relationships—in khot ails where kin relations were important—
consisted of affinals. As for the Tibetan ru skor: while membership is often based upon kin relations,
this is, however, regarded “[…] as an inevitable product of family division rather than as a
qualification for membership of the group” (Pirie 2005:87). Among the Brahui (Baluchistan), the
khalk (camp) is organised on the basis of both kinship and affinality, but camp formation is mainly
voluntarily, contractual and dynamic (Swidler 1972). Similarly, among the Basseri kin relations are
irrelevant to the composition of herding units. While married sons initially tend to stay in their
father’s group, these bonds are broken at any time and relationship between members is contractual
and characterised by equality (Barth 1961). And while the Yomut camp consist of a father and his
independent sons (or a group of independent brothers whose father is deceased), the core group
often join with non-kin and cooperation is extensive (Irons 1972).
With respect to the formation of the kraal among the Massai in Kenya, some households may
be related to one another but the Maasai hold that a camp should not consist exclusively, or even
predominantly, of members of one clan or smaller descent group (Helland 1977). Similarly, while
kinship seems to be important for the Borana, to become a member of a camp one has to be willing
to work and cooperate; uncooperative or lazy individuals are not welcome, even if they are close
relatives to existing camp members (Dahl 1977). In short, membership in a camp is based on free
alliances and day-to-day cooperation rather than clan affiliation (Dahl 1977).

Finding the balance: flexibility and stability
There is a difference between changing company and changing places. With respect to nomadism,
we mostly mean the second. Thus, nomadic foragers are often tied to places that are continually
occupied—at least seasonally—but where members of each site may change almost from day to day
(Ingold 1999). The ability to move, i.e. change groups, allows would-be co-operators to assort
positively as well as limit the rate at which they are exposed to defectors. There are indications that
simply providing the option to move allows cooperation to persist for a long period of time (Efferson
et al. 2016). There is, however, a frequency-dependent caveat: reciprocal relationships demand a
certain level of group stability. Christakis (2019) argue that the tendency to be helpful or unhelpful
depend on how the social world is organized. In an experiment where individuals could only choose
to cooperate or not, cooperation eventually broke down. Even though people usually started out
being generous, faced with defectors they retaliated. In another version they could choose to
cooperate or not as well as with whom to associate with. Now things went differently: people could
choose to interact with cooperative people and break ties with defecting people. In short, allowing a
certain amount of fluidity in social ties and some control over whom to interact with made all the
13

difference indicating that neither too much rigidity nor too much fluidity is optimal for cooperation
to prevail (Christakis 2019). Among foragers, high mobility poses a problem of how to receive the
benefits of food transfers from others as repeated interactions are less frequent (Smith et al. 2016).
In effect, more stable camps with fewer changes in membership makes it possible for reciprocal
partnerships to develop because the same individuals interact repeatedly with one another over
time, increasing trust and a reputation for sharing (Smith et al. 2016). For example, reservation-living
Ache—with reduced mobility—share meat according to reciprocal partnerships while highly mobile,
i.e. forest-dwelling, Ache distribute meat between all campmates (Smith et al. 2016).
Nevertheless, band membership can be fluid (Smith et al. 2018, Wrangham 2019, Marlowe
2005): families might move to different bands to join family or escape problematic relationships or
individuals can also move back and forth between bands. Furthermore, bands might fuse with other
bands and, two months later, split off again (Marlowe 2005). Among the Hadza, individuals continue
to live with, on average, only one in five of their bandmates from the previous year (Apicella and Silk
2019). Although the most common form of Hadza camp consists of two or three sisters and their
families (Smith et al. 2010), they are not fixed—there is constant movement in and out while a camp
remains at one site (Woodburn 1982).
Among the !Kung (Ju/’hoansi) people can—and do—move from one camp to another and
from one area to another, either temporarily or permanently (13% each year, Woodburn 1982).
Visits between camps is the main source of this fluctuation. Approximately, 35% divides their
residence among two or three different camps which may or may not be within the same area
(Woodburn 1982). The Dobe band of the Ju/’hoansi spent the winter–spring dry season at a
permanent water source. During and after the rains, they break up into smaller subgroups; moving
into the surrounding area where they build short-term camps near seasonal water sources. At each
camp, they exploit nearby food sources until most of the desirable food is consumed whereupon
they move on to another temporary camp (Brown et al. 2010).
Friendship is also important in bands: both the BaYaka and the Agta have at any given time a
few ‘close friends’, resulting in high between-camp mobility. The BaYaka moves between camps on
average every 22.8 days while the Agta moves on average every 12.5 days (Migliano et al. 2017:3).
A similar pattern is found among nomadic pastoralists: the composition of the Somali reer
can be both permanent and temporary (Lewis 1999). The composition of a hamlet is constantly
fluctuating: a man may stay with his brother on one occasion and with another at a different time.
Moreover, while several agnates might decide to move together at one time, at another they might
decide to separate and move with others (Lewis 1999). As for the Massai kraal, differences of opinion
over herd management often cause families to break away and join other camps. Moreover,
although some camps maintain a core set of members over several years, most camps change
14

frequently in composition (Helland 1977). The Borana camp seems to be more permanent: while
Dahl (1977) argue that conflicts over labour allocation, grazing strategies or personal factors may
arise within a camp, it is considered a serious matter for a household to leave because of such a
problem. Among the Gabra, the homestead clusters might keep together for part of a season or up to
several years (Torry 1977). The ru skor has also been described as flexible: they changed as a result of
topography (Ekvall 1968) or because environmental, demographic, political, and social conditions
varied at different seasons and areas. Similarly, as noted above, the khot ail changes annually and
seasonally, being largest during summer. While individual households can come and go, it is often
formed around a relatively stable, core group of households residing together for part of the year
(Mearns 1996). The Saami siida tended towards seasonal aggregation and dispersal where the larger
summer siidas segmented into two or more smaller bands at the onset of winter, and regrouped in
spring (Ingold 1978:151, see also Paine 2009).

Forage parties and dual camp systems
The forager residential band can split into smaller forage parties only to return to the campsite for
sleep (Marlowe 2005). Among the Martu, for example, residential bands are loosely comprised of a
set of hearths—spatially identifiable clusters of individuals who sit and sleep together when in camp.
Nevertheless, it is the foraging group—consisting of individuals from different hearth groups—that is
the unit of production and provisioning (Bird et al. 2019). Among the Ache too, bands often split up
for a day or two to forage for specific resources in known locations, then reuniting to share the
proceeds the food (Hill 2002). More recently, Dyble et al. (2016) found that among the Agta and
Mbendjele (Republic of Congo) there are three levels of social organisation: (1) the household—
defined as the occupants of single dwelling; (2) the cluster—consisting of 3-4 households that share
food among themselves—and (3) the residential camp.
A similar pattern is observed among nomadic pastoralist too: the cooperative herding group
can be made up of a subset of households that reside together. Among the Basseri, for example,
people live and reside together in camps but to facilitate herding, Basseri households within camps
usually unite in smaller herding units (Barth 1961). The members of a herding group usually live
together, since they wish to be close to their animals—kept in mixed herds at milking time and at
night (Barth 1961). Similarly, the Gabra organise themselves on a day-to-day basis into main- and
satellite-camps. Herders place a large portion of their herd in satellite camps, located in areas that
have easy access to water; areas that are often many miles from the main camps (Torry 1976). A
main camp consist of homesteads or homestead clusters. A survey of 30 camps indicated an average
of 14 homesteads in each camp (ranging from 5 to 34, Torry 1977:162, no measure of homestead
15

clusters is provided). This in contrast to the Saami siida and the Mongolian khot ail where herding
and living together is closely connected. So is also the case with the Tibetan ru skor. Ekvall (1968:28)
translates the term as tent-circle, because Tibetan pastoralists traditionally lived in tents and camped
in a circular fashion. This, however, seems to be a pattern for Eastern parts of Tibet. In the western
parts, herders live and reside together in “small groups” (Tibetan: tsho chung). These groups are
separated geographically and are also recognized as distinct groups by the government (Næss 2003).
Nevertheless, only a subset of households herds their animals together. For example, Næss (2003)
demonstrates that among the Aru nomads, one small group—consisting of 13 households living
together—were separated into 6 different herding groups (ranging in size from 1 to 3 households,
Næss 2003:93).
Comparing the camel herding Rwala Bedouins (Arabian Peninsula) with Somali herders, who
in addition to camel also keep sheep and goats, Rubel (1969) argue that different livestock needs to a
large degree explains the adoption of a dual camp system for the Somali. The camel camps are
temporary encampments consisting of camels of closely related agnates. The nomadic hamlets, in
contrasts, comprise groups of related nuclear families were women and children care for the herds of
goats and sheep (Rubel 1969). Among the Rwala, the agnatic core forms the basis for the camp 2;
while among the Somali, we see a dual camp system with camel camps of closely related agnatic
males and nomadic hamlets with up to 32% non- agnatic kin (Rubel 1969). In sum, expanding from
camel herding to also herding sheep and goats increases demand for pasture. Consequently, affinal
ties becomes important as a source for increasing social networks among the Somali. Non-agnatic
ties are very frequently used to gain access to pasture and water for sheep and goats among the
Somali (Rubel 1969).

Group size
Dual camp formation reflects a complicating aspect of designating relevant levels of social
organisation with respect to cooperation; in effect what is the relevant group? The social brain
hypothesis takes as it’s starting point that that primate brain size correlates with group size. Dunbar
(1992), for example, uses the correlation between group size and the size of the neocortex relative to
the rest of the brain to argue that the group size of humans over some evolutionarily significant
period must have been about 150. More recently, it has been argued that human communities have

But among the Rwala, Sweet (1965) argue that the tent cluster, together with its non-member dependents—if
any—is the minimal or real herding unit. The kinsmen of this cluster are likely to be descendants of one
grandfather. There is a level of fluidity: when a man has acquired camels, a tent, and a wife, he is under no
obligation to remain with his father’s, brother’s or uncle’s cluster, but may independently move with others
(Sweet 1965).

2

16

a naturally layered structure—15, 50, 150, 500 and 1500. A pattern suggesting natural fission
whereby groups having distinct sizes that represent optimal values maximising e.g. coherence and
thus stability (Dunbar and Sosis 2018). While optimal community size depends on the socio-ecologic
environment, Dunbar & Sosis (2018) wonders if there are sweet spots at which communities are
likely to be more successful because they map better onto natural grouping patterns.
The forager band usually consists of fewer than 50 people (in a sample of 294 bands from
478 societies the mean and median size of the band was found to be ~48 and ~30 individuals
respectively, Marlowe 2005:table 1), where 10-20 are married adults; around half the population are
children while some adults are unmarried, i.e. either young or widowed (Wrangham 2019). Hill et al.
(2011:1286) report in a study of 32 hunter-gatherer societies an average band size of 28.2 adults.
While nomadic foragers might periodically gather in larger groups, Kelly (2013:172) argue that they
live most of their lives in small groups, often fewer than 25. Using a sample of 339 hunter-gatherer
societies Hamilton et al. (2007) found a cross-cultural regularity in group size: starting with a single
individual, groups seem to increase by a factor of about 4: families consisting of 4-5 people, a
residential groups of about 14-17 people, social aggregation (e.g. during winter camps) of 50-60
people, periodic aggregation of 150-180 people, and an entire population of 730-950 people (see
also Kelly 2013:172). While band size varies, according to Wrangham (2019) they are always small.
In comparison, little systematic and comparative work has been undertaken with respect to
the size of herding groups. According to Levine (1995:70), for example, the ru skor varied in size,
ranging in size between five and ten households (see also Yeh 2003:510). Barth (1961:21-22)
estimates that the size of the Basseri herding units ranges between two to five tents. More
generally, the size of these cooperative herding groups ranges from 1 to 40 households (Table 1).
Apart from the social brain hypothesis, decision-making might influence group size: the larger
the group the more difficult it is to come to an agreement (Kelly 2013). Johnson (1982) argue, for
example, that when there are more than six social units acting together, then a new level of
hierarchy appears to coordinate activities. Among foragers, a group of twenty-five people could
contain about four or five families and so increasing group size beyond this might require leaders to
coordinate the families separate foraging effort (Kelly 2013:172). Pertinently, people accustomed to
an egalitarian social order might respond to a leader by breaking away from: In effect groups
fragment as they grow beyond twenty-five people (Kelly 2013:172). While not concerned with
decision-making, there is evidence pertaining to group fragmentation among Kazakhs. Hudson (1938)
describes that when a Kazakh came of age, he was provided with his own tent and a share of his
father’s livestock. Father and son customarily placed their tents together and continued to graze
together, but over the course of generations pastures became limited for the increasingly large
group. Subsequently, some herders set out for themselves to establish an independent group
17

(Hudson 1938). While the relationship between founder and descendant group might have started
out as close, eventually they became competitors (Hudson 1938). This pattern points to an important
aspect of nomadic pastoralism, namely that population growth must be accounted for through
expansion of grazing area. Hjorth (1981) argue that pastoralism is viable if the population—both
human and animal—stay static, or if population growth can be met with territorial expansion.

The why and how of group living
Socially, nomadic pastoralism is practiced in in a web of potential relationships; relationships that can
be actualized and discontinued depending on social context and environment. Widespread and
diffuse social ties have advantages for a broad variety of nomadic peoples, regardless of environment
or type of livestock herded (Pastner 1971). While organisation might appear rigid—e.g. only agnates
in camel camps—the ever-changing ecological and social circumstances connected with pastoralism
may result in the manipulation, modification, or even contravention of rules or norms (Pastner 1971).
Similarly, Bird et al. (2019) argue that forager group size and composition emerge from histories of
investments to supply resources that support expansive social relationships, in effect foragers are
nested in expansive networks of social interaction in a large and complex society.
The composition of the Basseri herding group, for example, seems to be determined by
considerations of (1) the availability of labour; (2) the sizes of herds; and (3) the distribution of
friendship and mutual trust (Barth 1961). The formation of the khalk among the Brahui is connected
to the constant struggle of creating herds of optimal size relative to grazing efficiency. Shifting camp
membership serve to combine households in order to create a herd which come as close to 500 as
possible. When approaching this number, the camp will no longer accept additional members; and
when numbers are substantially higher a group of households will splinter off and form their own
khalk (Swidler 1972). The homestead clusters of the Gabra enjoys economies of scale and they “[…]
pen their camels together, send their stock to the wells and pastures together, share meat and
exchange milk animals” (Torry 1977:168). More generally, Næss (2012) found that by cooperating
herders reap benefits with respect to economise of scale, i.e. reducing within-household costs of
labour investment though cooperation (Næss 2012). Empirically, cooperative labour investment has
been found to have a positive effect on production—measured as herd size—in Saami reindeer
husbandry (Næss et al. 2010, see also Næss et al. 2009).
Among foragers, Dyble et al. (2016) suggest that different levels of groupings serve to
facilitate different needs, e.g. inter-sexual provisioning, kin provisioning, and risk reduction
reciprocity. Hooper et al. (2015) argue that labour division with respect to sex and age as well as
economies of scale can help explain the size and composition of foraging groups. Practically, the
18

nature and scope of cooperation among foragers is quite variable both within and between groups,
but size and composition are influenced by the social and ecological environment (Hooper et al.
2015). Cooperative hunting is likely to be maintained when coordinated action increases individual
hunting success, prey encounter rates or harvest size obtained, or reduces the costs of search and
pursuit leading to increasing per capita foraging return rates (Smith 1997, Alvard and Nolin 2002, Bird
et al. 2012, see also Kaplan et al. 1990). Alvard and Nolin (2002) found that return rates from
cooperative whale hunting are greater per capita than those from solitary fishing. In contrast, among
the Martu cooperative hunting of sand monitors is, on average, associated with a significant
decrease in per capita foraging returns (Bird et al. 2012). More generally, it is widely recognized that
a beneficial result of pooling hunted game or gathered plant is connected to risk minimisation
(Gurven 2004). Among the Hiwi and Ache, for example, large, high variance food items are shared
more widely than small, easily acquired food items (Gurven 2004:366).

Leadership and decision-making
The pastoral herding groups can be described as mildly hierarchical. Leadership and decision making
have been described as relatively egalitarian: among the Yomut decisions whether to split up or
merge camps are based on discussion and agreements among all the involved household heads
(Irons 1972:92). Among the Somali and the Borana, seniority seems to be important: in the reer
leaders are always referred to as ‘elder’ or ‘old man’ as in the expression ‘elder of the hamlet’ (Lewis
1999:60-1) while male head of the Borana camp is referred to as the ‘father of the camp’, but despite
this most decisions are taken together (Dahl 1977:145). Among the Tibetan ru skor, however, leaders
are elected at meetings attended by most of the adult men. They have the task of coordinating with
local authorities as well as sorting out problems within the group. They also deal with leaders of
other ru skors in the event of disputes and attend the councils of leaders from all the ru skors in the
lineage or clan (Pirie 2005:89). In the Brahui khalk, leadership is arguably settled through the number
of in-laws in the khalk: the man with the most becomes the informal leader (Swidler 1972).
Nevertheless, his control is weak at best since decisions affect every member of the khalk; a leader
thus must mobilise a consensus among household heads (Swidler 1972). Also, as we have seen,
leadership in the Saami siida and the Mongolian khot ail had to do with experience and was not a
formal position. Moreover, among the Saami decisions are often made ad hoc—in response to
unforeseen and unpredictable events—when herding (Paine 1970). In the Maasai kraal, members
feel that the camp should reflect a friendly arrangement where no one has authority to order other
people about (Helland 1977).

19

A similar pattern is found among foragers: bands might have a headman and some men are
respected more than others; usually the elder men of the band (Wrangham 2019). Furthermore,
Wrangham (2019) argue that when a group decision is needed, authority is situational; decisionmaking has a consensual basis (Flanagan 1989). Similarly, Woodburn (1982:444) argues that in
immediate return systems there are either no leaders or leaders who have very limited power.
Nevertheless, older men with large families are likely to have more influence than others (Woodburn
1982:445). A similar situation is described for the !Kung: some individuals can be characterised as
leaders, but in a very limited role (Woodburn 1982). Pertinently, personal ambition for wealth or
power excludes a person for such a leadership role; rather they should be generous, modest and
egalitarian (Woodburn 1982) and the Ju/’hoansi are—according to Smith et al. (2010:24)—“[…] one
of the most thoroughly egalitarian societies known in the ethnographic record” (but in general, Smith
et al. 2010:30 forager societies have a ‘moderate’ level of inequality—most measures of wealth had a
Gini coefficient ranging from 0.1 to 0.4—roughly comparable to that of Denmark).

CONCLUDING REMARKS
To sum up, the cooperative herding group is relatively small (Table 1) and relatively flexible: it
changes in size and composition throughout the season and members are relatively free to change
group affiliation. Moreover, by being based on kinship (both actual and fictional), formed around a
core sibling group the herding groups allows members to maintain face to face communication;
monitor each other; and punish individuals that break rules, i.e. the characteristics that to a large
degree favour the maintenance of cooperation as well as deterring free riding tactics (e.g. Alvard
2003, Griffin and West 2002, Næss et al. 2012). Furthermore, by being informally led by a wealthy
and skilful person but where decision-making is mostly consensual the herding groups are mildly
hierarchical (i.e. characterised by relative egalitarianism). A similar pattern is found in forager
societies.
However, cooperation has been a more explicit task for researchers focusing on foragers
than nomadic pastoralists. Not surprisingly, this is evident in the data material available: while
documentation of cooperative herding groups are more qualitative in nature (exceptions are e.g.
Næss et al. 2010, Næss et al. 2012, Næss et al. 2009, Thomas et al. 2018, Thomas et al. 2015, Du and
Mace 2018, Schnegg 2015); forager studies are more quantitative in nature. Future studies
enhancing our understanding of cooperation should aim at rectifying this. Furthermore, forager and
pastoral studies have focused on different cooperative domains: among foragers most studies are
concerned with cooperative utilisation of produce while among nomadic pastoralist the focus has
mainly been on cooperative production. Hill (2002) argues, for example that little is known about
20

cooperative food acquisition among foragers, at least with respect to quantitative data on
cooperation. This even though food sharing is often argued to follow from cooperative food
acquisition (Hill 2002). Similarly, Kaplan et al. (1990:136) argue that they have come to realise that
the distinction between solitary and cooperative hunting seems void: “[…] most resources exploited
by the Ache are done so within the context of a cooperative acquisition pattern”.
Cooperative herding groups represent a missed opportunity for understanding cooperation
in general as well as providing pertinent information for solving large-scale coordination problems.
Increasing and extending our understanding of large-scale cooperation requires an understanding of
how cooperation works in small-scale coordination problems (e.g. Binmore 2006). The first step
along the way is to broaden our understanding of cooperation by extending our analysis to also
include nomadic pastoralists.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The funding for writing this paper was provided by the Research Council of Norway [HIERACHIES;
grant number 240280] and Nordforsk [ReiGN; grant number 76915].

REFERENCES CITED
Allen-Arave, W., Gurven, M., and Hill, K. (2008). Reciprocal altruism, rather than kin selection,
maintains nepotistic food transfers on an Ache reservation. Evolution And Human Behavior
29(5):305-318. Doi: 10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2008.03.002.
Allsen, T. (1994). The rise of the Mongolian empire and Mongolian rule in north China. In D. C.
Twitchett and H. Franke (eds.), The Cambridge History of China: Volume 6: Alien Regimes and
Border States, 907–1368, vol. 6, The Cambridge History of China, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp. 321-413.
Alvard, M. S. (2003). Kinship, lineage, and an evolutionary perspective on cooperative hunting groups
in Indonesia. Human Nature 14(2):129-163. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12110-003-10015.
Alvard, M. S., and Nolin, D. A. (2002). Rousseau's whale hunt? Coordination among big-game hunters.
Current anthropology 43(4):533-559. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1086/341653.
Apicella, C. L., Azevedo, E. M., Christakis, N. A., and Fowler, J. H. (2014). Evolutionary Origins of the
Endowment Effect: Evidence from Hunter-Gatherers. American Economic Review
104(6):1793-1805. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.104.6.1793.
Apicella, C. L., and Silk, J. B. (2019). The evolution of human cooperation. Current Biology
29(11):R447-R450. Doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2019.03.036.
Barth, F. (1961). Nomads of South Persia: the Basseri tribe of the Khamseh confederacy, Oslo
University Press, Oslo.
Bazargür, D., Shiirevad'ya, C., and Chinbat, B. (1993). Territorial Organization of Mongolian Pastoral
Livestock Husbandry in the Transition to a Market Economy. PALD Research Project No. 1.
IDS, Brighton, England, pp. 14.
Betzig, L. L., and Turke, P. W. (1986). Food Sharing on Ifaluk. Current Anthropology 27(4):397-400.
Doi.
21

Binmore, K. (2006). Why do people cooperate? Politics, Philosophy & Economics 5(1):81-96. Doi:
https://doi.org/10.1177/1470594X06060620
Bird, D. W., Bird, R. B., Codding, B. F., and Zeanah, D. W. (2019). Variability in the organization and
size of hunter-gatherer groups: Foragers do not live in small-scale societies. Journal of
Human Evolution 131:96-108. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhevol.2019.03.005.
Bird, R. B., Scelza, B., Bird, D. W., and Smith, E. A. (2012). The hierarchy of virtue: mutualism, altruism
and signaling in Martu women's cooperative hunting. Evolution And Human Behavior
33(1):64-78. Doi: 10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2011.05.007.
Bold, B.-O. (1996). Socio-economic segmentation - Khot-Ail in nomadic livestock keeping of Mongolia.
Nomadic Peoples 39:69-86. Doi.
Boyd, R., and Richerson, P. J. (2009). Culture and the evolution of human cooperation. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 364(1533):3281-3288. Doi:
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2009.0134.
Brown, C. T., Liebovitch, L. S., and Glendon, R. (2010). Hunter-gatherers optimize their foraging
patterns using lévy flights. In D. G. Bates and J. Tucker (eds.), Human Ecology: Contemporary
Research and Practice, Springer, New York, USA.
Carneiro, R. L. (1970). A Theory of the Origin of the State. Science 169(3947):733-738. Doi:
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.169.3947.733.
Chaliand, G. (2004). Nomadic empires: from Mongolia to the Danube. Empires nomades de la
Mongolie au Danube, Transaction Publishers, New Brunswick, N.J.
Chaudhary, N., Salali, G. D., Thompson, J., Dyble, M., Page, A., Smith, D., Mace, R., and Migliano, A. B.
(2015). Polygyny without wealth: popularity in gift games predicts polygyny in BaYaka
Pygmies. Royal Society Open Science 2(5):150054. Doi: doi:10.1098/rsos.150054.
Christakis, N. A. (2019). Blueprint: the evolutionary origins of a good society, Little, Brown Spark, New
York.
Cooper, L. (1993). Patterns of mutual assistance in the Mongolian pastoral economy. Nomadic
Peoples 33:153-162. Doi.
Dahl, G. (1977). "Kinship and Camp Structure Among the Isiolo Borana," in East African pastoralism:
anthropological perspectives and development needs, pp. 139-158. Addis Ababa: ILCA.
Du, J., and Mace, R. (2018). Parental investment in Tibetan populations does not reflect stated
cultural norms. Behavioral Ecology 29(1):106-116. Doi: 10.1093/beheco/arx134.
Du, J., Thomas, M. G., Bårdsen, B.-J., Mace, R., and Næss, M. W. (2019). Comparison of social
complexity in two independent pastoralist societies. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology
73(1):4. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00265-018-2611-6.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (1992). Neocortex size as a constraint on group size in primates. Journal of Human
Evolution 22(6):469-493. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0047-2484(92)90081-J.
Dunbar, R. I. M., and Sosis, R. (2018). Optimising human community sizes. Evolution and Human
Behavior:106-111. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2017.11.001.
Dyble, M., Thompson, J., Smith, D., Salali, Gul D., Chaudhary, N., Page, Abigail E., Vinicuis, L., Mace,
R., and Migliano, Andrea B. (2016). Networks of Food Sharing Reveal the Functional
Significance of Multilevel Sociality in Two Hunter-Gatherer Groups. Current Biology
26(15):2017-2021. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.05.064.
Dyson-Hudson, N. (1972). The Study of Nomads. In W. Irons and N. Dyson-Hudson (eds.),
Perspectives on Nomadism, E. J. Brill, Leiden Netherlands, pp. 2-29.
Efferson, C., Roca, C. P., Vogt, S., and Helbing, D. (2016). Sustained cooperation by running away from
bad behavior. Evolution and Human Behavior 37(1):1-9. Doi:
10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2015.05.003.
Ekvall, R. B. (1968). Fields on the hoof: nexus of Tibetan nomadic pastoralism. Case studies in cultural
anthropology, Holt Rinehart and Winston, New York.
Flanagan, J. G. (1989). Hierarchy in Simple "Egalitarian" Societies. Annual Review of Anthropology
18:245-266. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.an.18.100189.001333.
22

Fotouhi, B., Momeni, N., Allen, B., and Nowak, M. A. (2018). Conjoining uncooperative societies
facilitates evolution of cooperation. Nature Human Behaviour 2(7):492-499. Doi:
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-018-0368-6.
Francois, P., Fujiwara, T., and van Ypersele, T. (2018). The origins of human prosociality: Cultural
group selection in the workplace and the laboratory. Science Advances 4(9). Doi:
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aat2201.
Gjessing, G. (1960). Circumpolar social systems. The Circumpolar Conference in Copenhagen 1958 /
edited by Helge Larsen:75-81. Doi.
Griffin, A. S., and West, S. A. (2002). Kin selection: fact and fiction. Trends In Ecology & Evolution
17(1):15-21. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0169-5347(01)02355-2.
Gurven, M. (2004). Reciprocal altruism and food sharing decisions among Hiwi and Ache huntergatherers. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 56(4):366-380. Doi.
—. (2006). The evolution of contingent cooperation. Current anthropology 47(1):185-192. Doi.
Gurven, M., Hill, K., and Jakugi, F. (2004). Why do foragers share and shares forage? Explorations of
social dimensions of foraging. In M. S. Alvard (eds.), Socioeconomic aspects of human
behavioral ecology, Research in Economic Anthropology, Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 19-43.
Gurven, M., Hill, K., and Kaplan, H. (2002). From Forest to Reservation: Transitions in Food-Sharing
Behavior among the Ache of Paraguay. Journal of Anthropological Research 58(1):93-120.
Doi: 10.1086/jar.58.1.3631070.
Hamilton, M. J., Milne, B. T., Walker, R. S., Burger, O., and Brown, J. H. (2007). The complex structure
of hunter–gatherer social networks. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences
274(1622):2195-2203. Doi: 10.1098/rspb.2007.0564.
Hawkes, K., Hill, K., and O'connell, J. F. (1982). Why Hunters Gather: Optimal Foraging and the Ache
of Eastern Paraguay. American Ethnologist 9(2):379-398. Doi.
Hawkes, K., Oconnell, J. F., and Jones, N. G. B. (1997). Hadza women's time allocation, offspring
provisioning, and the evolution of long postmenopausal life spans. Current Anthropology
38(4):551-577. Doi.
Helland, J. (1977). "Group Ranch Development Among the Maasai in Kenya," in East African
pastoralism: anthropological perspectives and development needs, pp. 93-115. Addis Ababa:
ILCA.
Hill, K. (2002). Altruistic cooperation during foraging by the Ache, and the evolved human
predisposition to cooperate. Human Nature 13(1):105-128. Doi.
Hill, K. R., Walker, R. S., Božičević, M., Eder, J., Headland, T., Hewlett, B., Hurtado, A. M., Marlowe, F.,
Wiessner, P., and Wood, B. (2011). Co-Residence Patterns in Hunter-Gatherer Societies Show
Unique Human Social Structure. Science 331(6022):1286-1289. Doi:
10.1126/science.1199071.
Hill, K. R., Wood, B. M., Baggio, J., Hurtado, A. M., and Boyd, R. T. (2014). Hunter-Gatherer Inter-Band
Interaction Rates: Implications for Cumulative Culture. PLOS ONE 9(7):e102806. Doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0102806.
Hjort, A. (1981). Herds, Trade and Grain: Pastoralism in a Regional Perspective. In J. G. Galaty, D.
Aronson, P. C. Salzman, and A. Choiunard (eds.), The Future of pastoral peoples: proceedings
of a conference held in Nairobi, Kenya, 4-8 August 1980, International Development
Research Centre, Ottawa, pp. 97-103.
Hooper, P. L., Demps, K., Gurven, M., Gerkey, D., and Kaplan, H. S. (2015). Skills, division of labour
and economies of scale among Amazonian hunters and South Indian honey collectors.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 370(1683):20150008.
Doi: doi:10.1098/rstb.2015.0008.
Hudson, A. E. (1938). Kazak social structure. Vol. no. 20. Yale University publications in anthropology,
Yale University Press, New Haven.
Ingold, T. (1978). The transformation of the Siida. Ethnos 43(3-4):146-162. Doi:
10.1080/00141844.1978.9981157.
23

Ingold, T. (1999). On the social relations of the hunter-gatherer band. In R. B. Lee and H. E. Richard
Daly (eds.), The Cambridge encyclopedia of hunters and gatherers, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, pp. 399-410.
Irons, W. (1972). Variation in Economic Organization: A Comparison of the Pastoral Yomut and the
Basseri. In W. Irons and N. Dyson-Hudson (eds.), Perspectives on Nomadism, E.J. Brill, Leiden,
pp. 88-104.
Irons, W. (1974). Nomadism as a Political Adaptation: The Case of the Yomut Turkmen. American
Ethnologist 1(4):635-658. Doi.
Johnson, G. (1982). Organizational Structure and Scalar Stress. In C. Renfrew, M. Rowlands, and B.
Segraves (eds.), Theory and explanation in archaeology, Academic Press, New York, pp. 38942.
Jonassen, J., and Kalstad, A. S. (2003). Internrettslige betraktninger om reindriften: reindriften i
skjæringspunktet mellom intern organisering og norsk rett, John Jonassen (Advokatfirmaet
Robertsen), Røros.
Kantner, J. (2018). Is Collective Action Cooperative? (Blanton and Fargher's How Humans Cooperate:
Confronting the Challenges of Collective Action). Current Anthropology 59(6):850-851. Doi:
https://doi.org/10.1086/700919.
Kaplan, H., and Gurven, M. (2005). The Natural History of Food Sharing and Cooperation: A Reviewe
and a New Multi-Individual Approach to the Negotiations of Norma. In H. Gintis, S. Bowles, R.
Boyd, and E. Fehr (eds.), Moral sentiments and material interests: the foundations of
cooperation in economic life, MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., pp. 75-113.
Kaplan, H., Hill, K., and Hurtado, A. M. (1990). Risk, Foraging and Food Sharing among the Ache. In E.
Cashdan (eds.), Risk and Uncertainty in Tribal and Peasant Economies, Westview Press,
Boulder, pp. 107-143.
Kelly, R. L. (2013). The lifeways of hunter-gatherers: the foraging spectrum, 2 edition, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Khazanov, A. M. (1994). Nomads and the outside world, 2nd edition, University of Wisconsin Press,
Madison.
Levine, N. E. (1995). "From Nomads to Ranchers: Managing Pasture Among Ethnic Tibetans in
Sichuan." Development, Society and Environment in Tibet, Vienna, 1995, pp. 69-76.
Lewis, I. M. (1999). A pastoral democracy a study of pastoralism and politics among the Northern
Somali of the Horn of Africa. Classics in African anthropology, LIT, Hamburg.
Lowie, R. H. (1945). A Note on Lapp Culture History. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 1(4):447454. Doi: 10.1086/soutjanth.1.4.3628792.
Marlowe, F. W. (2005). Hunter-gatherers and human evolution. Evolutionary Anthropology: Issues,
News, and Reviews 14(2):54-67. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/evan.20046.
Marlowe, F. W. (2009). Hadza Cooperation Second-Party Punishment, Yes; Third-Party Punishment,
No. Human Nature 20:417-430. Doi.
Mathew, S., and Boyd, R. (2011). Punishment sustains large-scale cooperation in prestate warfare.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108(28):11375-11380. Doi:
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1105604108.
May, T. (2007). The Mongol Art of War: Chinggis Khan and the Mongol Military System, Pen & Sword
Military, South Yorkshire.
Mearns, R. (1996). Community, collective action and common grazing: The case of post-socialist
Mongolia. Journal of Development Studies 32(3):297-339. Doi:
https://doi.org/10.1080/00220389608422418.
Mendl, M., and Held, S. (2001). Living in Groups: an Evolutionary Perspective. In L. Keeling, H. W.
Gonyou, and L. J. Keeling (eds.), Social behavior in farm animals, CABI Pub., New York, pp. 732(?).
Migliano, A. B., Page, A. E., Gómez-Gardeñes, J., Salali, G. D., Viguier, S., Dyble, M., Thompson, J.,
Chaudhary, N., Smith, D., Strods, J., Mace, R., Thomas, M. G., Latora, V., and Vinicius, L.
24

(2017). Characterization of hunter-gatherer networks and implications for cumulative
culture. Nature Human Behaviour 1:0043. Doi: 10.1038/s41562-016-0043
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41562-016-0043#supplementary-information.
Nowak, M. A. (2006). Five Rules for the Evolution of Cooperation. Science 314(5805):1560-1563. Doi:
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1133755.
Næss, M. W. (2003). Living with risk and uncertainty: the case of the nomadic pastoralists in the Aru
basin, Tibet. Cand. Polit., University of Tromsø.
—. (2012). Cooperative Pastoral Production: Reconceptualizing the Relationship between Pastoral
Labor and Production. American Anthropologist 114(2):309-321. Doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1548-1433.2012.01427.x.
Næss, M. W., and Bårdsen, B.-J. (2013). Why Herd Size Matters – Mitigating the Effects of Livestock
Crashes. Plos One 8(8): e70161. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0070161.
Næss, M. W., Bårdsen, B.-J., Fauchald, P., and Tveraa, T. (2010). Cooperative pastoral production the importance of kinship. Evolution and Human Behavior 31(4):246-258. Doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2009.12.004.
Næss, M. W., Bårdsen, B.-J., and Tveraa, T. (2012). Wealth-dependent and interdependent strategies
in the Saami reindeer husbandry, Norway. Evolution and Human Behavior 33(6):696-707.
Doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2012.05.004.
Næss, M. W., Fauchald, P., and Tveraa, T. (2009). Scale Dependency and the "Marginal" Value of
Labor. Human Ecology 37(2):193-211. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10745-009-9226-5.
Paine, R. (1970). Lappish Decisions, Partnerships, Information Management, and Sanctions: A
Nomadic Pastoral Adaptation. Ethnology 9(1):52-67. Doi: 10.2307/3772701.
—. (1994). Herds of the Tundra: a portrait of Saami reindeer pastoralism. Smithsonian series in
ethnographic inquiry, Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington London.
—. (2009). Camps of the tundra: politics through reindeer among Saami pastoralists. Instituttet for
sammenlignende kulturforskning. Serie B, Skrifter, Instituttet for sammenlignende
kulturforskning, Oslo.
Pastner, S. (1971). Camels, Sheep and Nomad Social Organisation: A Comment on Rubel's Model.
Man 6(2):285-288. Doi: 10.2307/2798268.
Pehrson, R. N. (1954). The Lappish Herding Leader: A Structural Analysis*. American Anthropologist
56(6):1076-1080. Doi: 10.1525/aa.1954.56.6.02a00080.
—. (1964). The bilateral network of social relations in Könkämä Lapp district. Samiske samlinger 7,
Universitetsforlaget, Oslo.
Pirie, F. (2005). Segmentation Within the State: The Reconfiguration of Tibetan Tribes In China's
Reform Period. Nomadic Peoples 9(1-2). Doi.
Potkanski, T. (1993). Decollectivisation of the Mongolian pastoral economy (1991-92): some
economic and social concequences. Nomadic Peoples 33:123-135. Doi.
Powers, S. T., van Schaik, C. P., and Lehman, L. (2019). Cooperation in large-scale human societies What, if anything, makes it unique, and how did it evolve? OSF Preprints. Doi:
https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/v47ap.
R Core Team. (2017) R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL https://www.R-project.org/. R Foundation for
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria,
Riseth, J. Å. (2000). Sámi reindeer management under technological change 1960-1990: implications
for common-pool resource use under various natural and institutional conditions: a
comparative analysis of regional development paths in West Finnmark, North Trøndelag, and
South Trøndelag/Hedmark, Norway. Doctor scientarium, Norges landbrukshøgskole.
Rubel, P. G. (1969). Herd Composition and Social Structure: On Building Models of Nomadic Pastoral
Societies. Man 4(2):268-273. Doi: 10.2307/2799574.
Schnegg, M. (2015). Reciprocity on Demand-Sharing and Exchanging Food in Northwestern Namibia.
Human Nature 26(3):313-330. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12110-015-9236-5.
25

Simpson, B., and Willer, R. (2015). Beyond Altruism: Sociological Foundations of Cooperation and
Prosocial Behavior. Annual Review of Sociology 41(1):43-63. Doi:
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-soc-073014-112242.
Smith, D., Dyble, M., Major, K., Page, A. E., Chaudhary, N., Salali, G. D., Thompson, J., Vinicius, L.,
Migliano, A. B., and Mace, R. (2019). A friend in need is a friend indeed: Need-based sharing,
rather than cooperative assortment, predicts experimental resource transfers among Agta
hunter-gatherers. Evolution and Human Behavior 40(1):82-89. Doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2018.08.004.
Smith, D., Dyble, M., Thompson, J., Major, K., Page, A. E., Chaudhary, N., Salali, G. D., Vinicius, L.,
Migliano, A. B., and Mace, R. (2016). Camp stability predicts patterns of hunter-gatherer
cooperation. Royal Society Open Science 3(7):160131. Doi: doi:10.1098/rsos.160131.
Smith, E. A. (1997). Inuit foraging groups: some simple models incorporating conflicts of interest,
relatedness, and central place sharing. In L. L. Betzig (eds.), Human nature: a critical reader,
Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 50-69.
Smith, E. A., Hill, K., Marlowe, F. W., Nolin, D. A., Wiessner, P., Gurven, M., Bowles, S., Borgerhoff
Mulder, M., Hertz, T., and Bell, A. (2010). Wealth Transmission and Inequality among Hunter‐
Gatherers. Current Anthropology 51(1):19-34. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1086/648530.
Smith, K. M., Larroucau, T., Mabulla, I. A., and Apicella, C. L. (2018). Hunter-Gatherers Maintain
Assortativity in Cooperation despite High Levels of Residential Change and Mixing. Current
Biology 28(19):3152-3157.e4. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2018.07.064.
Sneath, D. (1993). Social relations, networks and social organisation in post-socialist rural Mongolia.
Nomadic Peoples 33:193-207. Doi.
Solem, E. (1970). Lappiske rettsstudier. Scandinavian university books, Universitetsforlaget, Oslo.
South, A. (2017) rnaturalearth: World Map Data from Natural Earth. R package version 0.1.0.
https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=rnaturalearth.
Stanford, M. (2019). The Cultural Evolution of Human Nature. Acta Biotheoretica. Doi:
10.1007/s10441-019-09367-7.
Sweet, L. E. (1965). Camel Pastoralism in North Arabia and the Minimal Camping Unit. In A. Leeds and
A. P. Vayda (eds.), Man, culture, and animals: the role of animals in human ecological
adjustments, vol. 78, American Association for the Advancement of Science, Washington, pp.
129-152.
Swidler, W. W. (1972). Some Demographic Factors Regulating the Formation of Flocks and Camps
Among the Brahui of Baluchistan. In W. Irons and N. Dyson-Hudson (eds.), Perspectives on
Nomadism, E.J. Brill, Leiden, pp. 69-75.
Tapper, R. L. (1979). Individuated grazing rights and social organization among the Shahsevan
nomads of Azerbaijan. In E. Ecologie (eds.), Pastoral Production and Society, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp. 95-114.
Thomas, M. G., Bårdsen, B.-J., and Næss, M. W. (2018). The narrow gap between norms and
cooperative behaviour in a reindeer herding community. Royal Society Open Science 5(2).
Doi: https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.171221.
Thomas, M. G., Næss, M. W., Bårdsen, B.-J., and Mace, R. (2015). Saami reindeer herders cooperate
with social group members and genetic kin. Behavioral Ecology 26(6):1495-1501. Doi:
https://doi.org/10.1093/beheco/arv106.
Torry, W. I. (1976). Residence Rules among the Gabra Nomads: Some Ecological Considerations.
Ethnology 15(3):269-285. Doi.
Torry, W. I. (1977). Labour Requirements Among the Gabra. In S. B. Westley (eds.), East African
pastoralism: anthropological perspectives and development needs. Papers presented at the
conference, Nairobi, Kenya, 22-26 August, ILCA, Addis Ababa, pp. 159-170.
Turchin, P. (2007). War and Peace and War: The Rise and Fall of Empires, Plume.
Turchin, P., Currie, T. E., Turner, E. A. L., and Gavrilets, S. (2013). War, space, and the evolution of Old
World complex societies. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110(41):1638416389. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1308825110.
26

Upton, C. (2005). Institutions in a Pastoral Society: Processes of Formation and Transformation in
Postsocialist Mongolia. Comparative Studies of South Asia, Africa and the Middle East
25(3):584-599. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1215/1089201X-25-3-584.
Upton, C. (2008). Social capital, collective action and group formation: Developmental trajectories in
post-socialist Mongolia. Human Ecology 36(2):175-188. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10745007-9158-x.
Walker, R., Hill, K., Kaplan, H., and McMillan, G. (2002). Age-dependency in hunting ability among the
Ache of Eastern Paraguay. Journal of Human Evolution 42(6):639-657. Doi.
West, S. A., El Mouden, C., and Gardner, A. (2011). Sixteen common misconceptions about the
evolution of cooperation in humans. Evolution and Human Behavior 32(4):231-262 Doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2010.08.001.
Whitaker, I. (1978). Some changes in Lainiovuoma Sámi reindeer management. Ethnos 43(3-4):163177. Doi: 10.1080/00141844.1978.9981158.
Woodburn, J. (1982). Egalitarian Societies. Man 17(3):431-451. Doi:
https://doi.org/10.2307/2801707.
Wrangham, R. (2019). The Goodness Paradox, Pantheon, New York.
Yeh, E. T. (2003). Tibetan Range Wars: Spatial Politics and Authority on the Grasslands of Amdo.
Development and Change 34(3):499-523. Doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-7660.00316.

27

TABLES
Table 1. Size and distribution of cooperative herding groups. Size refer to number of households.
Sources in main text.
NAME
GROUP
SIZE
COUNTRY
KEY LIVESTOCK
SIIDA
Saami
2-6
Norway, Sweden, Finland
Reindeer
RU SKOR
Tibetan
5-10 China
Yak
KHOT AIL
Mongolian 2-8
Mongolia
Horse
HERDING UNIT Basseri
2-5
Iran
Sheep
CAMP
Yomut
2-10 Turkmenistan, Iran and Afghanistan Sheep
a
HOMESTEAD
Gabra
>=1
Kenya; Ethiopia
Camel
CAMP b
Borana
10-40 Kenya; Ethiopia
Cattle
KRAAL
Maasai
6-8
Kenya
Cattle
KHALK
Brahui
NA
Pakistan
Sheep
REER
Somali
1-6
Somalia
Camel
a
Homestead cluster might be the correct designation since homestead alone do not solve labour
issues, so homestead go together in clusters, changes by season; see main text for discussion.
b

A Borana camp consist of individual ‘homesteads’; a homestead is like a household consisting of a

herd-owner, his wife or wives and their unmarried children, which Dahl (1977:140) designates as the
core household.

28

FIGURES

Figure 1. Old World distribution of nomadic societies who organise herding in cooperative herding
groups. Locations are centroids of countries. See Table 1 and Appendix A for details. Map created in
R (R Core Team 2017) with the use of the rnaturalearth package (South 2017).

29

