From Contradiction to Coherence:
Theory-Building in the Sociology of Culture

Stephen Vaisey
Duke University
DRAFT: January 12, 2010
TYPO FIXES: August 30, 2019

1

“Culture” is one of sociology’s central theoretical concepts. 1 Though cultural explanations of
social phenomena fell out of favor for a time (for a variety of various political and intellectual reasons)
they have returned to a place of prominence in the discipline. 2 Despite this “cultural renaissance,”
however, wide variation in scholars’ use of the term has made it difficult for non-specialists to understand
what role it might play in their research. Moreover, as I have argued elsewhere, some of these different
uses even seem to be logically contradictory, with a minority of scholars regarding culture as defining the
ends of action and a majority regarding it as comprising a means for action. 3
For the past several years, my goal has been to work toward a more accurate theoretical model of
the ways in which culture can be a cause or consequence of conduct, judgment, and choice. The objective
of this paper, however, is not so much to outline a new theory as a fait accompli as to advocate for a
theory-building strategy that has yielded—and I believe will continue to yield—intellectual fruits. I want
to begin the discussion in an unlikely way—by considering an example from physics. 4 Many social
scientists are rightly wary of trying to model social science directly on natural science, so let me assure
any skittish readers that I am not about to indulge in an ugly bout of “physics envy.” Instead, I turn to a
particular historical example in the development of physics because it represents the successful handling

I use the term culture to refer to patterns of meaning that are neither biologically universal nor personally
idiosyncratic. For similar uses, see, among others, Clyde Kluckhohn and Henry Murray, eds., Personality: In
Nature, Society and Culture (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1948); Eviatar Zerubavel, Social Mindscapes: An
Invitation to Cognitive Sociology (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1997); Steven Hitlin, Moral Selves,
Evil Selves: The Social Psychology of Conscience (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008).
2
See e.g., Orlando Patterson, “Taking Culture Seriously: A Framework and an Afro-American Illustration,” in
Culture Matters: How Values Shape Human Progress, ed. Lawrence E. Harrison and Samuel P. Huntington (New
York: Basic Books, 2002), 202-218; Michele Lamont and Mario Luis Small, “How Culture Matters: Enriching Our
Understanding of Poverty,” in The Colors of Poverty: Why Racial and Ethic Disparities Persist, ed. Ann Chih Lin
and David R. Harris (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2008), 76-102; William Julius Wilson, More than Just
Race: Being Black and Poor in the Inner City (New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 2009); Stephen Vaisey, “What
People Want: Poverty, Aspirations, and Educational Attainment,” Annals of the American Academy of Poltical and
Social Sciences (forthcoming).
3
See Stephen Vaisey, “Motivation and Justification: A Dual-Process Model of Culture in Action,” American
Journal of Sociology 114, no. 6 (2009): 1675-1715.
4
For this discussion, I rely primarily on John Gribbin, In Search of Schrödinger's Cat: Quantum Physics and Reality
(New York: Bantam Books, 1984). A technical note: though for simplicity’s sake I confine my brief discussion of
wave-particle duality to light, these same properties apply to all matter. A personal note: I am indebted to Rebekah
Estrada Vaisey for suggesting the analogy between culture and wave-particle duality.
1

2

of the kind of problem that is, I believe, at the core of the conundrum faced by contemporary theories of
culture in action—the problem of having too many “good theories.”

Wave-Particle Duality
In the early decades of the 20th century, physicists were in the undesirable position of needing two
separate, mutually exclusive theories to explain the behavior of light. “Corpuscular” theory, which
regarded light as composed of infinitesimally particles, had been developed by Sir Isaac Newton in the
18th century and dominated for many years. In the early 19th century, however, an ingenious experiment
demonstrated that light behaves in ways explicable only in terms of a wave flowing through some
undetectable ether. The experiment found when a light source shines through two narrow slits, the light
coming through the slits acts just like the waves from two rocks dropped next to each other in a pond.
Like ripples of water crossing paths, the waves amplifying and dampening each other in the process, light
diffracts through each slit and interferes with itself, producing alternating patterns of light and dark bands
on the surface beyond. If light were made up of something like little billiard balls, as Newton had
believed, the observed interference pattern would not occur. The evidence was so straightforward and
compelling that by the end of the 19th century virtually no one took seriously the old particle theory of
light.
No one, that is, until a new set of scholars turned their attention to some areas where the wave
theory of light performed less well and began cobbling together a set of mathematical proofs and
experimental evidence that showed that in some contexts, light could in fact only be understood as made
up of discrete “quanta” or particles (later called photons). 5 In a variety of experiments designed to test this
particle theory, light turned out to behave exactly as if it were composed of infinitesimally small billiard
balls, bouncing into other particles and transferring their energy and momentum. Nevertheless, none of

5

The most well known of these are blackbody radiation and the photoelectric effect.

3

these experiments could overturn the implications of the two-slit experiment, which remained stubbornly
explicable solely in wave-theoretic terms.
Let me emphasize that it was not the case that “some evidence” existed for wave theory and
“some evidence” existed for particle theory. Only wave theory was consistent with the results of the twoslit experiment and only particle theory was consistent with (for example) the existence of the
photoelectric effect. The problem was, of course, that no simple model of physical reality could easily
incorporate these true but seemingly mutually contradictory facts—we can’t envision something being
“wave-like” and “particle-like” at the same time. Thus, in 1924, Einstein concluded that “there are there
therefore now two theories of light, both indispensible … without any logical connection.” 6 Though some
social scientists seem to believe that progress in natural science happens in a straightforward, linear
manner, the overwhelming consensus in 1925 was that, “physics is at the moment very muddled.” 7
How was this seeming paradox resolved? The older generation of physicists (including Einstein,
incidentally) never really came to terms with the implications of these contradictions, and many attempted
to reconcile them using classical (what we now call “Newtonian”) theory. But a new generation of
scholars, unencumbered by training in classical theory, began to realize what was really needed: “not to
decide between two theories … but to find … one theory with the capacity of both.” 8 By abandoning the
idea that “wave” and “particle” were opposite and mutually exclusive options and embracing the inherent
strangeness of the atomic world, this new generation established what is now known as “quantum
theory,” a theory that integrates—at its core—the true but seemingly impossible idea that everything is
both wave and particle at the same time.
None of this means that conflict or debate ceased in physics—they didn’t. My point is that the
shift that enabled progress was accepting that no single simple model nor any single type of empirical
evidence could adjudicate once and for all between these seemingly contradictory theories. Only by
wrestling directly with the seeming paradox of wave-particle duality could new insights be discovered
Gribbin, In Search of Schrodinger's Cat: Quantum Physics and Reality, 85.
Ibid., 99, quoting Wolfgang Pauli.
8
Ibid., 86, quoting W.H. Bragg.
6
7

4

and new problems be addressed. In exactly the same way, I believe sociologists need to wrestle with their
own “two-theory” paradox if they ever want to understand how culture shapes people’s lives.

Two Theories of Culture
Cultural sociology in 2009 is “very muddled” for the same reasons physics was in 1925—we also
have two theories, “both indispensible [yet] without any logical connection.” As a shorthand, I will refer
to these theories as the Seamless Web model of culture and the Toolkit-Repertoire model of culture. The
Seamless Web model holds that culture is a coherent force that powerfully shapes people’s thoughts and
actions. The Repertoire model treats culture as a disorganized collection of strategies that people use to
solve life’s problems. 9 Both are intuitively plausible and—what is more—both are supported by good
empirical evidence. As with physics a century ago, the problem is that researchers seem determined to
establish the correctness of one or the other of these theories in a confirmatory mode without stepping
back to ask, “What kind of model can make sense of all of the data?” This is a less-than-satisfactory state
of affairs. Before attempting to develop a synthetic theory, however, we must look at these two theories of
culture in more detail.
Before doing so, however, let me offer a caveat. The risk in developing and using a two-theory
typology is that I leave myself open to the related critiques of oversimplification and straw-manning. As a
response to the first, I am quite happy to agree that the typology is simplified or even highly simplified,
but I cannot agree that it is oversimplified. That would imply that I have distorted, rather than merely
condensed, the basic logics of the perspectives under scrutiny. As with all theoretical models, the core
principles of each theory can be distilled considerably without a great deal of loss. And though such an
exercise inevitably ignores some local variation and nuance, I believe such analysis can reveal more than
it obscures.

9

Paul DiMaggio, “Culture and Cognition,” Annual Review of Sociology 23 (1997): 263-287.

5

As a preemptive response to accusations of “straw-manning,” let me be clear that my typology
addresses what these theories actually do rather than what their several proponents acknowledge a
complete theory must do. This distinction is crucial. If a theoretical physicist asserted that there is
certainly some way for particle theory to explain the two-slit experiment and acknowledged that a
complete theory must ultimately do so, this would not be a substitute for offering a successful model of
how, exactly, it can do so. In the same way, Seamless Web theorists’ occasional acknowledgements of
fragmentation and inconsistency and Repertoire theorists’ sporadic references to thematicity and
motivation are not substitutes for integrating these “trouble spots” into a coherent model. The theorists
whose work I discuss are intelligent and perceptive people. They know and acknowledge that their
models—like all models—are imperfect and incomplete. Sensing this, they often come up with brilliant
insights that are not really integrated into the overall logic of their model. My critiques of these two
paradigms are not claims of gross negligence or ignorance, but of simple insufficiency. Arguing that a
model does not handle X adequately is not same thing as saying that its creator never considered or
mentioned X. I hope readers will keep that in mind.

The Seamless Web Model
A popular definition of culture is that it involves (1) meaning that is (2) social in origin and (3)
shared with others. In the early days of social-scientific inquiry, most scholars took the social and shared
aspects of meaning to apply to societal groups (e.g., tribes, nations) as a whole and equally to all members
of each particular group. This tendency to regard cultures as seamless wholes was likely due to the fact
that, by the late 19th century, anthropologists had collected a great deal of data on “primitive cultures”
from around the world. From the standpoint of European anthropologists facing smaller, lessdifferentiated societies and without the “local knowledge” that would allow them to see nuances, culture
seemed to be a powerful, shared, integrating force that completely shaped the lives of those living within
it.

6

Emile Durkheim constructed his theory of the relationship between society and culture largely
through an examination of aboriginal cultures in Australia. 10 Durkheim, along with his collaborator and
nephew, Marcel Mauss, treated culture as a set of integrating symbols, beliefs, and ideas that were the
result of ongoing social interaction between members of a group. Culture, on this understanding, is what
brings people together and unites them as members of a group. This orientation set the stage for one of the
most common tendencies of the Seamless Web tradition—to identify “groups” and “cultures” in a one-toone fashion: Group 1 “has” Culture 1, Group 2 “has” Culture 2, and so on. It is this implicit model that
undergirds the tendency for people to talk about “Eastern culture” or “Western culture” as if they were
coherent, discrete, and well-defined entities. 11 A closely related assumption, imported from the Weberian
tradition of sociology, is that the “values” or “ideals” that people internalize as members of a culture
inevitably lead to conduct consistent with them. 12
The Seamless Web fusion of coherent cultures and value-driven motivation lasted well into the
20th century and remained the dominant model of culture until well after the Second World War.
Although there were nuances and debates within this tradition, the overarching goal of the Web paradigm
was to uncover those ideas, beliefs, worldviews, and so on that formed the basis for group solidarity,
collective behavior, and individual conduct. Talcott Parsons and Edward Shils, two leading proponents of
the Seamless Web tradition in the postwar period, argued that even though “the overt or explicit culture
almost always appears fragmentary at first… it is necessary for the student of culture to uncover the
implicit culture and to detect whatever common premises may underlie apparently diverse and
unconnected items of orientation.” 13 Because research in this tradition downplayed observed cultural
incoherence as an artifact of failing to look “deep enough,” it is unsurprising that the Seamless Web
Émile Durkheim and Marcel Mauss, Primitive Classification (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1967).
See e.g., Richard Nisbett, The Geography of Thought: How Asians and Westerners Think Differently...and Why
(New York: Free Press, 2004).
12
James Spates, “The Sociology of Values,” Annual Review of Sociology 9 (1983): 27-49.
13
Talcott Parsons and Edward Shils, Toward a General Theory of Action (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1952), 21. In reality, this work was much more nuanced on the level of theory, though its subtler insights were
rarely put into practice. For instance, Parsons and Shils (pp. 7-8) argue that culture can be both "an object of
orientation" as well as "an element in the orientation of action," and that even the most shared elements of culture
were subject to "varying degrees of conformity, idiosyncrasy, creativity, and persistence" (21).
10
11

7

tradition strongly emphasized the degree to which national, class, or ethnic cultures can be thought of as
analytically discrete entities that shape individual thought and conduct. 14
The Seamless Web consensus began to fall apart dramatically in the late 1960s, but some had
criticized its assumptions much earlier. One major criticism was empirical: ethnographers and other
researchers found that people typically work with a number multiple, competing, and even contradictory
cultures rather than being steeped in just one, coherent culture. 15 Another critique was psychological: the
“internalization of norms” approach favored by so many sociologists at this time was not consistent with
the observed dynamics and tension of the human psyche. 16 In addition, psychological and sociological
research had found something much less than perfect consistency between values or attitudes and
behavior, casting doubt on the notion that internal states cause action. 17
Anthropologists Claudia Strauss and Naomi Quinn, considering the downfall of the Seamless
Web model in their own field, provide a concise summary of its problems that applies equally well in
sociology:

[D]escriptions of “the culture of the X” seem old fashioned. In part, this is because we have
learned how problematic it is, in a world of shifting and multiple identities, to label any set of
people as “the X.” But to a greater extent the problem lies with the phrase “the culture of the X”...
[S]uch descriptions have too often made it sound as if all the X thought, felt, and acted the same
way... 18

See e.g., Oscar Lewis, Five Families: Mexican Case Studies in the Culture of Poverty (New York: Basic Books,
1959); Gabriel A. Almond and Sidney Verba, The Civic Culture: Political Attitudes and Democracy in Five Nations,
an Analytic Study (Boston: Little, Brown, 1965); Nisbett, The Geography of Thought.
15
See e.g., Ulf Hannerz, Soulside: Iniquiries into Ghetto Culture and Community (Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press, 2004).
16
Dennis H. Wrong, “The Oversocialized Conception of Man in Modern Sociology,” American Sociological Review
26, no. 2 (1961): 183-193.
17
Ann Swidler, “Culture in Action: Symbols and Strategies,” American Sociological Review 51, no. 2 (1986): 273286.
18
Strauss and Quinn, A Cognitive Theory of Cultural Meaning, 3, emphasis in original.
14

8

The political context of the late 1960s gave these critiques additional weight. The social
upheavals of that era were difficult to square with strong claims about cultural consensus or about the
ways people internalize and act on social norms. If people learn values and norms from parents, schools,
and churches, where did things like “hell no, we won’t go” and “free love” come from? Politically
conscious scholars also reacted strongly against what they saw as attempts to “blame the victim” for
crime, family breakdown, and poverty in urban areas. To many, talking too much about “culture” and
using “values” to explain crime, single parenthood, and welfare dependency was tantamount to blaming
the poor for their own problems. 19
Given the conceptual (and political) pitfalls associated with its dominant tradition, cultural
analysis fell out of favor almost entirely, at least in sociology. Nevertheless, some scholars continued (and
continue) to examine differences between national and intranational groups in the spirit of Seamless Web
tradition. Recent research on the “culture wars” is very much within this tradition, though it takes liberals
and conservatives rather than discrete social groups as its subcultures of interest. 20 Many sociologists who
study religion also continue to take seriously the power of internalized “moral directives” and their
research strongly supports the claim that such internalized states influence behavior. 21 Nevertheless,

Orlando Patterson, “A Poverty of the Mind,” The New York Times, March 26, 2006,
http://www.nytimes.com/2006/03/26/opinion/26patterson.html; Lamont and Small, “How Culture Matters.”
20
For recent examples of sociological work connected to the broader Seamless Web tradition, see Ronald Inglehart
and Wayne E. Baker, “Modernization, Cultural Change, and the Persistence of Traditional Values,” American
Sociological Review 65, no. 1 (February 2000): 19-51; Wayne E. Baker, America's Crisis of Values: Reality and
Perception (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2005); Robyn R. Ryle and Robert V. Robinson, “Ideology,
Moral Cosmology and Community in the United States,” City and Community 5 (2006): 53-69; Nancy J. Davis and
Robert V. Robinson, “The Egalitarian Face of Islamic Orthodoxy: Support for Islamic Law and Economic Justice in
Seven Muslim-Majority Nations,” American Sociological Review 71, no. 2 (April 2006): 167-190. For examples of
“culture wars” research that treats liberals and conservatives as distinct cultures, see James Davidson Hunter,
Culture Wars: The Struggle to Define America (New York: Basic Books, 1991); George Lakoff, Moral Politics:
How Liberals and Conservatives Think (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2002). This work often differs
from classic Seamless Web thinking in that it allows for different individuals within a particular society to possess
different worldviews (e.g., absolutist or relativist, modernist or orthdox). Its main assumptions about the overall
coherence and operation of culture, however, remain squarely in the Seamless Web tradition. Cultural psychology,
for its part, continues to identify cultures in a “Group 1 has Culture 1” fashion. For a review demonstrating this
tendency, see Adam B. Cohen, “Many Forms of Culture,” American Psychologist 64, no. 3 (April 2009): 194-204.
21
For example, see Christian Smith, “Theorizing Religious Effects among American Adolescents,” Journal for the
Scientific Study of Religion 42, no. 1 (March 2003): 20, and Smith and Denton, Soul Searching: The Religious and
Spiritual Lives of American Teenagers. For a review of the research on religion and adolescent outcomes, see Mark
D. Regnerus, “Religion and Positive Adolescent Outcomes: A Review of Research and Theory,” Review of
19

9

unlike its postwar heyday where such ideas were at the center of social research, the remnants of
Seamless Web theory remain toward the margins of contemporary sociological theory. A mainstream
focus on “culture” did not return in force to sociology until nearly two decades later, and by then its take
on the subject was radically different.

The Toolkit-Repertoire Model
After exiling it to the wilderness for a decade or two, many sociologists began to realize that
culture was something that they couldn’t quite do without. 22 At the same time, memories of the
deficiencies of the Seamless Web model were fresh enough—and its perceived political implications
understood well enough—to make scholars wary of returning to it. 23 By the mid-1980s, the Seamless
Web model—with its assumptions of simple internalization and value-based motivation—was not only
out of fashion, but also seemingly inconsistent with the existence of cultural change and conflict as well
as with empirical evidence of multiple and shifting individual identities. What sociology needed, it
seemed, was a way to think about culture that did not treat people as belonging to single, bounded,
cultures, nor that relied on a model of people as “cultural dopes” who automatically internalize and act on
the values and beliefs that society instills in them.
The “Toolkit-Repertoire” model was sociology’s answer to the limitations of the Seamless Web.
In what has become a foundational statement of this new paradigm, Ann Swidler claimed that

[in the Seamless Web tradition] values are abstract, general, and immanent in social systems.
Social systems exist to realize their core values, and values explain why different actors make

Religious Research 44, no. 4 (2003): 394-413. For a study that explictly attempts to separate out the effect of
internalized, subjective states on behavior, see Kyle C. Longest and Stephen Vaisey, “Control or Conviction:
Religion and Adolescent Initiation of Marijuana Use,” Journal of Drug Issues 38, no. 3 (2008): 689-715.
22
See also Strauss and Quinn, A Cognitive Theory of Cultural Meaning, 4.
23
Patterson, “A Poverty of the Mind”; Lamont and Small, “How Culture Matters.”

10

different choices even in similar situations… [V]alues are essences around which societies are
constituted. They are the unmoved mover in the theory of action. 24

This was not intended as a compliment. In place of thinking of culture as a Seamless Web,
Swidler recommended that we instead think of culture as a “’tool kit’ of symbols, stories, rituals, and
world-views, which people may use in varying configurations to solve different kinds of problems.” 25 She
later elaborated on this theme:

To describe how culture works, we need new metaphors. We must think of culture less as a great
stream in which we are all immersed, and more as a bag of tricks or an oddly assorted tool kit
containing implements of varying shapes that fit the hand more or less well, are not always easy
to use, and only sometimes do the job… [Or] as a repertoire, like that of an actor, musician, or
dancer… It is in this sense that people have an array of cultural resources upon which they can
draw. 26

As with Seamless Web theory, there are nuances and complexities in Repertoire theory that I do
not have space to address here. For the moment, however, what is essential is understanding the core tenet
of this paradigm—that culture is not “values that suffuse other aspects of belief, intention, or collective
life [but rather] complex rule-like structures that can be put to strategic use.” 27 Thus, the most basic
difference between these perspectives is this: whereas the Seamless Web paradigm sees culture as the
source of the ends of action, the Repertoire paradigm sees culture as providing the means for action. 28
By “turning culture on its head,” Repertoire theory solved a number of problems that had plagued
the Seamless Web paradigm. First, the Repertoire model allowed a more compelling and empirically
Swidler, “Culture in Action,” 274.
Ibid., 273.
26
Ann Swidler, Talk of Love: How Culture Matters (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001), 24.
27
DiMaggio, “Culture and Cognition,” 265.
28
Swidler acknowledges this explicitly in Talk of Love: “my focus is on ‘means’ rather than ends” (p. 82).
24
25

11

consistent interpretation of cultural division and conflict. Rather than regarding cultural conflict as
something that “must be” undergirded by more foundational shared assumptions, or as a disturbance in an
otherwise stable system, scholars began investigating culture as a domain of conflict in its own right.
Michèle Lamont has demonstrated, for example, that men in different positions in the middle class rely on
different sets of cultural standards to reinforce their own sense of worth and to devalue others. Highly
educated (but less highly paid) knowledge workers, for example, use their knowledge of art and literature
to delegitimize those in more lucrative fields as crass social climbers; top earners “value” economic
success because it allows them to feel superior to those who have not achieved as much; and church-goers
barely hanging on to middle-class status look down on both groups for (respectively) their pretention and
their greed, patting themselves on the back for their “traditional” values. 29 Culture is a tool for “making
meaning”; cultural tools provide “a rich variety of rationales” for “support[ing] and justify[ing] a given
way of life.” 30 One way of making meaning is to use cultural standards selectively to define oneself as
superior to others. This is one of the key insights of Repertoire theory. 31
Repertoire theory also seems to deal successfully with the observed fact that “[p]eople profess
ideals they do not follow, utter platitudes without examining their validity [and allow] gaps between the
explicit norms, worldviews, and rules of conduct [they] espouse and the ways they habitually act.” 32
Instead of seeing inconsistency and incoherence as problematic pieces of data for cultural analysis,
Repertoire theory integrates these observations at its core. If culture is a repertoire containing many
options, then we should expect inconsistency. In fact, personal inconsistency is helpful because it allows
people to keep multiple cultural resources “on tap” to deal with different sorts of problems. 33 I can say

Michele Lamont, Money, Morals, and Manners: the Culture of the French and the American Upper-Middle Class
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992). See also Pierre Bourdieu, Distinction: A Social Critique of the
Judgement of Taste (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1984).
30
Swidler, Talk of Love, 30.
31
This does not necessarily mean that actors are cynical in their use of culture. The tendency to make a “virtue of
necessity,” as Bourdieu puts it, may be grounded in something like the “endowment effect” identified by behavioral
economists—people tend to value what they have more than what they don’t.
32
Swidler, “Culture in Action,” 280.
33
Swidler, Talk of Love.
29

12

“look before you leap” when I’m feeling cautious and “he who hesitates is lost” when the situation seems
to call for action.
Though it has enabled resolving a number of the problems that plagued Seamless Web theory,
Repertoire theory’s recasting of culture as ends rather than means has also been the source of its greatest
difficulty. If Seamless Web theory was unable to deal with conflict, tension, and contradiction, it at least
had the advantage of positing a coherent (not to say true) account of why people want the things they
want and do the things they do (i.e., values and norms). Repertoire theory, on the other hand, deals very
well with conflict, tension, and contradiction, but struggles to account for why people use culture to do
some things rather than others. Because they lack clearly stated assumptions about why people do what
they do, critics have claimed that Repertoire theorists default to something like a homo economicus model
of action, using money, status, or power as implicit motive concepts and treating culture as a set of
effective rationalizations. 34 Patterson, perhaps the clearest on this point, has argued that “the conception
of culture as a ‘toolkit’ … [is] a mere supplement of rational choice theory.” 35
Repertoire theorists themselves, however, have offered a different model of action comprised of
two related features. First, since a person’s culture repertoire can be more or less extensive and its
elements more or less well mastered, people have a tendency to go with what they know; that is, in order
to avoid “costly cultural retooling,” people “act in ways that utilize their skills.”36 Cultural skills are
therefore necessary conditions for action. If, for example, I never learned how to use a planner or to
badger a teacher to change my grade, I wouldn’t be able to finish college—“valuing education” has
nothing to do with it. 37 But Repertoire theory also holds that people “have in readiness cultural capacities

Christian Smith, Moral, Believing Animals: Human Personhood and Culture (New York: Oxford University
Press, 2003); Jeffrey C. Alexander, “The Reality of Reduction: The Failed Synthesis of Pierre Bourdieu,” in Fin de
Siecle Social Theory: Relativism, Reduction, and the Problem of Reason (New York: Verso, 1995), 128-217;
Patterson, “Taking Culture Seriously.”
35
“Taking Culture Seriously,” 203.
36
Swidler, “Culture in Action,” 277; Ann Swidler, “Comment on Stephen Vaisey's 'Socrates, Skinner, and Aristotle:
Three Ways of Thinking About Culture in Action',” Sociological Forum 23, no. 3 (2008): 616.
37
For a version of this argument, see Annette Lareau, Unequal Childhoods: Class, Race, and Family Life (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 2003). Michele Lamont and Mario Small have recently made this point about culture
as a necessary but insufficient condition for action. See Lamont and Small, “How Culture Matters,” 81.
34

13

they rarely employ” and that “all people know more culture than they use” 38; so what explains why some
skills rather than others are brought to bear in a particular instance?
This brings us to the second feature of Repertoire theory’s model of action—its “inherently
situational” character. 39 Swidler, for example, argues that “core situations or problems provide contexts
within which [using] particular pieces of culture make sense” and that “[p]eople run through different
parts of their cultural repertoires, selecting those parts that correspond to the situation or exemplary
problem that currently holds their attention.” 40 She is not alone in this. DiMaggio has similarly argued
that “cues embedded in the physical and social environment” are what activate cultural tools and that
some scripts rather than others are “invoked in response to particular contextual cues.” 41 Situations,
however, are not presented to us in a haphazard fashion, but are structured into larger assemblages—
institutions—that confront people with “exemplary problems.” For example, the institution of marriage,
Swidler argues, creates the twin problems of choice (monogamous partner selection) and commitment
(making marriage last). The institution of choice (and the situations it entails) requires cultural ideals like
passion, romance, and “soul mates” while the problem of commitment (and the situations it entails)
requires cultural concepts like friendship, compromise, and mutual respect. It is not that some people
think of marriage one way and some another; despite the fact that “romantic” and “prosaic” conceptions
of love are in many ways contradictory, people switch freely from one to the other depending on what
kind of situation they are in. 42
Repertoire theory is more nuanced than it is often given credit for; more nuanced, in fact, than I
have acknowledged in my previous work. 43 But it cannot quite fill the analytical gap left by Seamless
Web theory. First, the structure of any society creates many opportunities for discretion, making an appeal

Swidler, “Culture in Action,” 277.
Swidler, Talk of Love, 82.
40
Ibid., 25.
41
DiMaggio, “Culture and Cognition,” 267-268.
42
Swidler, Talk of Love.
43
See Stephen Vaisey, “Socrates, Skinner, and Aristotle: Three Ways of Thinking About Culture in Action,”
Sociological Forum 23, no. 3 (2008): 603-613; Vaisey, “Motivation and Justification: A Dual-Process Model of
Culture in Action.”
38
39

14

to institutional causes alone less than satifactory. Marriage is actually an excellent example of how very
different strategies of action (staying married or “moving on”) can be equally institutionalized and equally
available to most people in our society. Because Swidler illustrates her model of culture using interview
materials with couples who have stayed married, she inadvertently generalizes from her sample and
presumes that people share an overriding commitment to making their marriages work. But many couples
do, in fact, get divorced and Repertoire theory cannot account for why some reach for this particular
cultural tool. (At least in the case of first marriages, it cannot be because some are more skilled than
others in getting divorced.) Beyond this specific example, Swidler’s work—despite her claim that “what
people want … is of little help in explaining their action” 44—is full of allusions to “wishes” and
“aspirations” that people use culture to fulfill, but whose origins are unexplained. 45
A second major problem is that in the claim that people “act in ways that utilize their skills”
cannot explain what I have elsewhere called “upstream” lines of action.46 How, for example, does
Repertoire theory account for things like religious conversion or “coming out of the closet”—cases where
people abandon the cultural skills they have to pursue new ones? On this problem, Swidler has recently
argued that “it is just because [cultural repertoires] are so crucial to being able to enact a line of action
that those who want to become the selves that can embrace a new line of action often need to seek out a
powerful social context that will give them the cultural equipment to become that new self.”47 This
statement is consistent with Repertoire theory in that it treats culture as a set of skills and asserts the
important of context. But why—if “drastic and costly cultural retooling” is something people avoid—
does anyone ever want to become a new self or “embrace a new line of action”? In cases like these,
Repertoire theory can only adapt by smuggling in new concepts like “wish,” “want,” and “aspire” that are
“without any logical relationship” to the theory itself.

Swidler, “Culture in Action,” 274.
Swidler, Talk of Love, especially ch. 4. See also Jason Kaufman, “Endogenous Explanation in the Sociology of
Culture,” Annual Review of Sociology 30 (2004): 355-387, who offers a similar interpretation.
46
Stephen Vaisey, “Reply to Ann Swidler,” Sociological Forum 23, no. 3 (2008): 619-622.
47
Swidler, “Comment on Stephen Vaisey's 'Socrates, Skinner, and Aristotle',” 616.
44
45

15

The Contours of Contradiction
The goal of the above is not to provide a complete, page-by-page critique of either model, but
rather to sketch the essential features of two theoretical perspectives that—while highly useful and
empirically supported—contain contradictory premises. Seamless Web theory is well suited to thinking
about differences between broad social groups, about the cultural sources of goals and values, and about
why people act in certain ways rather than others in similar contexts. It is poorly equipped, however, for
understanding within-group conflict and within-person contradiction and inconsistency. ToolkitRepertoire theory is invaluable for understanding conflict, contradiction, and inconsistency at multiple
levels, but it comes up short in its attempt to think about why people are motivated to pursue some lines
of action rather than others. Like the wave theory of light in the early 20th century, Repertoire theory
seems capable of handling most things on its own; yet it breaks down at a few key points and needs to
integrate some pieces of its main competitor (“wishes,” “wants,” and “aspirations”) in an ad hoc fashion
to make it fully workable.
Anthropologists Claudia Strauss and Naomi Quinn have diagnosed a similar state of affairs in
their own field:

Most anthropologists today would probably agree … [both] that “cultures” are not bounded,
coherent, timeless systems of meanings … and that human action rests of networks of often
highly stable, pervasive, and motivating assumptions that can be widely shared within social
groups while variable between them… The problem facing the discipline is not which account is
right but how to explain the fact that both are right. 48

So how do we explain that these seemingly contradictory ideas are both right? The way forward
is definitely not to say simply that “both are important” and move on with our lives. This may be the

48

Strauss and Quinn, A Cognitive Theory of Cultural Meaning, 4, emphasis added.

16

simplest way to go in what John Levi Martin has called sociology’s “era of good feelings,” since it allows
everyone to feel validated but to get back to their own research project. 49 It is true that if I am is studying
how people use culture to draw social boundaries or keep their marriages together, I don’t really need to
know why they do some things rather than others. Or if I want to know why, say, some Muslims support
economic redistribution and my data analysis shows that having an “orthodox cosmology” is a strong net
predictor of pro-redistribution attitudes, I probably never need to think about the ways these respondents
might contradict themselves or be inconsistent in different settings. But if we really want to develop a
better theory of culture in action, we need to do better. We need to look at both aspects at the same time.

Conclusion
I have argued that moving toward a better theory of culture in action can be greatly facilitated by
looking more closely at the core principles and limitations of two seemingly contradictory competitors—
the Seamless Web and Toolkit-Repertoire models. It is only by analytically maximizing the contrast
between the two theories that synthesis becomes a possibility. Of course, there is nothing particularly
novel about proposing this sort of “dialectical” method of theory construction; any credit for such an
approach should go to Hegel (or Heraclitus). We, however, are in the rather fortunate position of being
able to supplement such philosophical methods with empirical studies that can render more or less
credible the truth-value of particular postulates. Combining an analysis of theoretical contrasts with
empirical findings has led, for example, toward more useful models that differentiate between culture’s
role as a necessary or sufficient 50 condition for a particular pattern of conduct. For example, there is no
contradiction in saying that possessing a particular type of cultural capital in one’s repertoire is a
necessary condition for finishing college while acknowledging that the value one has learned to place on

John Levi Martin, The Explanation of Social Action, unpublished manuscript, 2009.
Technically, culture could never be a true sufficient condition for any action, but it could be an “INUS” condition
(an insufficient and non-redundant part of an unnecessary but sufficient condition). For one discussion of such
causes, see James Mahoney, “Toward a Unified Theory of Causality,” Comparative Political Studies 41, no. 4/5
(2008): 412-436.
49
50

17

education can also be a contributing cause among those who possess such capital. 51 Rather than taking
some single body of evidence as an adequate test of whether culture is “really” about values or “really”
about cultural capital, iterations of analysis and synthesis can help us move toward more measured,
coherent, and empirically warranted causal claims.
Finally, though I have used the example of theories of “culture in action,” this general approach
would yield fruit in any intellectual context with multiple theoretical perspectives. One of the great
features of “post-Parsonian” sociology is its theoretical diversity. But this diversity can only be
considered a strength if diverse theories are allowed—even required—to confront each other in light of a
wide array of empirical evidence (i.e., not solely the evidence designed to “confirm” one particular
theory). The emphasis on theoretical pluralism is problematic if we simply say that all theories are
“right”—in their own ways. Of course, not all theories make competing claims in particular areas, and we
should not attempt to manufacture debates where none exist. However, our naïve belief that “both” can
somehow serve as an adequate response to, say, the structure-culture debate prevents us from making
progress toward improved theoretical models of concrete phenomena. Of course both structure and
culture “matter,” but that’s hardly the point. It’s figuring out exactly how and when each matters that is
the ongoing challenge for sociological theory. Taking an approach to theory development that focuses on
contrasts and contradictions might make our section receptions a bit more tense, but they will likely make
our ideas much better.

See Vaisey, “Reply to Ann Swidler”; “What People Want: Poverty, Aspirations, and Educational Attainment”;
compare Swidler, “Culture in Action.”
51

18

REFERENCES
Alexander, Jeffrey C. “The Reality of Reduction: The Failed Synthesis of Pierre Bourdieu.” In Fin de
Siecle Social Theory: Relativism, Reduction, and the Problem of Reason, 128-217. New York:
Verso, 1995.
Almond, Gabriel A., and Sidney Verba. The Civic Culture: Political Attitudes and Democracy in Five
Nations, an Analytic Study. Boston: Little, Brown, 1965.
Baker, Wayne E. America's Crisis of Values: Reality and Perception. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 2005.
Bourdieu, Pierre. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1984.
Cohen, Adam B. “Many Forms of Culture.” American Psychologist 64, no. 3 (April 2009): 194-204.
Davis, Nancy J., and Robert V. Robinson. “The Egalitarian Face of Islamic Orthodoxy: Support for
Islamic Law and Economic Justice in Seven Muslim-Majority Nations.” American Sociological
Review 71, no. 2 (April 2006): 167-190.
DiMaggio, Paul. “Culture and Cognition.” Annual Review of Sociology 23 (1997): 263-287.
Durkheim, Émile, and Marcel Mauss. Primitive Classification. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press,
1967.
Gribbin, John. In Search of Schrödinger's Cat: Quantum Physics and Reality. New York: Bantam Books,
1984.
Hannerz, Ulf. Soulside: Iniquiries into Ghetto Culture and Community. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press, 2004.
Hitlin, Steven. Moral Selves, Evil Selves: The Social Psychology of Conscience. New York: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2008.
Hunter, James Davidson. Culture Wars: The Struggle to Define America. New York: Basic Books, 1991.
Inglehart, Ronald, and Wayne E. Baker. “Modernization, Cultural Change, and the Persistence of
Traditional Values.” American Sociological Review 65, no. 1 (February 2000): 19-51.
Kaufman, Jason. “Endogenous Explanation in the Sociology of Culture.” Annual Review of Sociology 30
(2004): 355-387.
Kluckhohn, Clyde, and Henry Murray, eds. Personality: In Nature, Society and Culture. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf, 1948.
Lakoff, George. Moral Politics: How Liberals and Conservatives Think. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press, 2002.
Lamont, Michele. Money, Morals, and Manners: the Culture of the French and the American UpperMiddle Class. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992.
Lamont, Michele, and Mario Luis Small. “How Culture Matters: Enriching Our Understanding of
Poverty.” In The Colors of Poverty: Why Racial and Ethic Disparities Persist, edited by Ann
Chih Lin and David R. Harris, 76-102. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2008.
Lareau, Annette. Unequal Childhoods: Class, Race, and Family Life. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 2003.
Lewis, Oscar. Five Families: Mexican Case Studies in the Culture of Poverty. New York: Basic Books,
1959.
Longest, Kyle C., and Stephen Vaisey. “Control or Conviction: Religion and Adolescent Initiation of
Marijuana Use.” Journal of Drug Issues 38, no. 3 (2008): 689-715.
Mahoney, James. “Toward a Unified Theory of Causality.” Comparative Political Studies 41, no. 4/5
(2008): 412-436.
Martin, John Levi. The Explanation of Social Action. Unpublished manuscript., 2009.
Nisbett, Richard. The Geography of Thought: How Asians and Westerners Think Differently...and Why.
New York: Free Press, 2004.
Parsons, Talcott, and Edward Shils. Toward a General Theory of Action. New York: Harper and Row,
19

1951.
Patterson, Orlando. “A Poverty of the Mind.” The New York Times, March 26, 2006.
http://www.nytimes.com/2006/03/26/opinion/26patterson.html.
———. “Taking Culture Seriously: A Framework and an Afro-American Illustration.” In Culture
Matters: How Values Shape Human Progress, edited by Lawrence E. Harrison and Samuel P.
Huntington, 202-218. New York: Basic Books, 2002.
Regnerus, Mark D. “Religion and Positive Adolescent Outcomes: A Review of Research and Theory.”
Review of Religious Research 44, no. 4 (2003): 394-413.
Ryle, Robyn R., and Robert V. Robinson. “Ideology, Moral Cosmology and Community in the United
States.” City and Community 5 (2006): 53-69.
Smith, Christian. Moral, Believing Animals: Human Personhood and Culture. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2003.
———. “Theorizing Religious Effects among American Adolescents.” Journal for the Scientific Study of
Religion 42, no. 1 (March 2003): 17-30.
Smith, Christian, and Melinda Lundquist Denton. Soul Searching: The Religious and Spiritual Lives of
American Teenagers. New York: Oxford University Press, 2005.
Spates, James. “The Sociology of Values.” Annual Review of Sociology 9 (1983): 27-49.
Strauss, Claudia, and Naomi Quinn. A Cognitive Theory of Cultural Meaning. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1997.
Swidler, Ann. “Comment on Stephen Vaisey's 'Socrates, Skinner, and Aristotle: Three Ways of Thinking
About Culture in Action'.” Sociological Forum 23, no. 3 (2008): 614-618.
———. “Culture in Action: Symbols and Strategies.” American Sociological Review 51, no. 2 (1986):
273-286.
———. Talk of Love: How Culture Matters. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001.
Vaisey, Stephen. “Motivation and Justification: A Dual-Process Model of Culture in Action.” American
Journal of Sociology 114, no. 6 (2009): 1675-1715.
———. “Reply to Ann Swidler.” Sociological Forum 23, no. 3 (2008): 619-622.
———. “Socrates, Skinner, and Aristotle: Three Ways of Thinking About Culture in Action.”
Sociological Forum 23, no. 3 (2008): 603-613.
———. “What People Want: Poverty, Aspirations, and Educational Attainment.” Annals of the American
Academy of Poltical and Social Sciences.
Wilson, William Julius. More than Just Race: Being Black and Poor in the Inner City. New York: W.W.
Norton & Co., 2009.
Wrong, Dennis H. “The Oversocialized Conception of Man in Modern Sociology.” American
Sociological Review 26, no. 2 (1961): 183-193.
Zerubavel, Eviatar. Social Mindscapes: An Invitation to Cognitive Sociology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1997.

20

