"x"
"1" "Enhancing   Motivation and Engagement in Math classrooms  using Inquiry-based learning"
"2" "Abstract"
"3" "S tudents in math classrooms  are disengaged  and math an xious  which  results in them  los ing  interest in any activity related to mathematics.  This paper is an exploratory r eview  which focuses on the topic of student motivation and engagement in classroom learning environments focus ing  on mathematics   and the  instructional method of  inquiry-based learning (IBL) . IBL  ha s  shown to impact student motivation and  engagement,  b ut the outcomes of th is  impact are still unclear.  Thus, IBL is explored as a potential method  to  impact motivation and engagement  in children.   E xpectancy value theory  (EVT)  is used to examine the aforementioned relationship  using symbolic interactionist and  structural functionalist theories for classroom interactions and math self-concept respectively.  Finally,  conclusions are made about  relationships between   IBL  and  motivation and engagement."
"4" "Introduction"
"5" "Math anxiety is a negative feeling towards math experienced by students which causes them to avoid math-related career choices.  Math anxiety is seen as being a type of anxiety disorder, but math anxiety is also prevalent in  the  general population which causes harm to their well-being. There hasn’t been much emphasis on this  until now,  so studying anxiety in  the  general population is very important  ( Lev-Ran ,  Madjar ,   Shoval ,  Weizman , &   Zalsman ,  2018).  “Students’ competence beliefs” ( Ahmed, Kuyper,   Minnaert ,  & Van der  Werf , 2012,  p.385) are one of the major predictors of math anxiety as low self-concept is said to lead to high math anxiety.   Past unsuccessful experiences  and repeated failures over time increase math anxiety and impact self-concept.   Math anxiety is also affected by the sociodemographic variables (Ahmed, 2018) but in the scope of this paper, I am focusing only on math self-concept and classroom interactions.  Th e  study  conducted by Ahmed et al. (2012)  highlighted the impact of self-concept on math anxiety and thus implied that enhancing students’ self-concept will have positive impacts on their math anxiety.   Moreover, instructors play an important role in motivating or demotivating the students through the classroom student-teacher interactions (Jackson & Leffingwell, 1999). If instructors use Inquiry based learning in the classrooms and  facilitate  a positive learning environment , they can play an active role in reducing anxiety and increasing enjoyment in mathematics. So, through this review, t he research question I am investigating is ;  Can Inquiry based learning enhance motivation and engagement of students in a math learning environment?"
"6" "Motivation  and  Engagement"
"7" "Motivation and engagement are interrelated concepts. Motivation motivates higher engagement in classrooms  and can ,  therefore ,  lead to  an  improvement in performance. It  depends on factors like classroom contexts and instructional practices (Blumenfeld,  Kempler , &  Krajcik , 2005). For example, if a traditional method , the most prevalent teaching method which is teacher-centered and not student-centered like modern instructional methods,  is being used  in comparison with  a learning science principles-based method like  IBL , the levels of motivation and engagement in students will differ  in the students . So,  higher motivation in a  student  will enhance their  interest  in   the  topic being discussed  and therefore  they will have  a  deeper engagement which will lead to an increase in their skills and knowledge .  Higher skills and knowledge will then increase their achievement and  their  interest,  and the cycle goes on.  If prior achievements are good, the students’ belief in their own competence, that is self-concept, increases.   But, creating interest in the initial stage is a crucial aspect of engaging students in a subject or a topic  that needs discussion ."
"8" "According to  Blumenfeld,  Kempler ,  and   Krajcik  ( 2005 ) ,  f our major factors determine how motivated and engaged a student is in class.   These  factors  are value, competence, relatedness and autonomy (p.476)."
"9" "Value is about how much a student values the subject matter, because of their interest and thinking about the long-term and short-term outcomes."
"10" "Competence refers to their belief in their own abilities to succeed."
"11" "Relatedness is about having a feeling of belonging in the learning environment ."
"12" "Autonomy  refers to having a “sense of agency”  ( Blumenfeld ,  Kempler , &  Krajcik , 2005 ,   p. 477)  and how much choice and independent decision-making freedom a student has.  It also motivates self-driven learning."
"13" "In addition, engagement can be understood in three forms, affective, behavioural and cognitive (Fielding-Wells, & Makar, 2008)."
"14" "Affective engagement is related to emotions; anxiety, interest and boredom."
"15" "Behavioural engagement is described as conduct, commitment and effort whereas"
"16" "C ognitive engagement is about how completely invested a student is in learning."
"17" "There is a possibility that a student is engaged in one form but not in another and it depends on the determinant factors mentioned above. For instance, a student can be behaviourally engaged as they are putting in their best efforts to solve a problem, but they have weak feelings of competence, that is low self-concept, which can cause anxiety and prevent them from being cognitively and affectively engaged. Hence, these factors and types need to be investigated to understand how to design successful instruction.  Engagement is affected by external contexts, background student variables and instructional variables along with other factors mentioned but, in this paper, I am focusing on instructional variables primarily."
"18" "Disengagement in Math"
"19" "Students who are disengaged and afraid of math tend to avoid taking STEM subjects or making a STEM-related career choice (Ahmed, 2018).  Engagement with instruction is necessary for learn i ng to happen produc t ively an d   disengagement   affects  learning outcomes  adversely .  So, teachers have a profound role in engaging students with the content discussed in the classroom.  S tudent  motivation and engagement are  said to  increase   if instruction is authentic   or relevant ( Yair  2000 , as cited in  Fielding-Wells, & Makar, 2008 ).  According to a  report commissioned by the Department of Education, Employment and   Workplace Relations , there are five areas that contribute to decisions about not continuing to study mathematics. These are “s elf-perception of ability , i nterest and liking for higher-level mathematics , p erception of the difficulty of higher–level mathematics subjects , p revious achievement in mathematics ,  and  p erception of the usefulness of higher-level mathematics ” (p.1)."
"20" "IBL  (Inquiry based learning)"
"21" "In the  different learning theories, Piaget’s constructivism contributes to understanding the balance between using prior knowledge and adding new elements to it and constructing their own learning. Then, John Dewey’s work on “the child-centered approach and the ideas of learning by doing” ( Illeris , 2018, p.88) created influence. Dewey further elaborated and conceptualized Inquiry in his book, ‘Logic: The theory of inquiry’.  According to Dewey,  i nquiry breaks down problematic and complex situation s  to manageable ones that can be solved using  the inquiry  process  step by step .  Further, Kolb’s experiential learning was based on Piaget, Dewey and Lewin ( Illeris , 2018). He  was only limited to the cognitive dimension and  created a lear n ing cycle which had four cyclic, not sequential, stages:"
"22" "Active   Experimentation"
"23" "Concrete experience"
"24" "Reflective observation"
"25" "Abstract Conceptualization  (p.   93)"
"26" "These stages show how all the learning is experiential and is a back and forth process of learning more with every iteration."
"27" "IBL has developed gradually on the grounding of these theories and ideas.   IBL is a form of active learning which includes students making observations, posing questions, collecting information, investigating, proposing and sharing answers, reflecting and predicting answers and conclusions ( Artigue , &  Blomhøj , 2013 ) .    It is an iterative process shifting between inductive and deductive analysis.  In an IBL setting, “ a situation is conceived as the set of interactions between an organism, an individual and its environment” ( p.798 ).   Situated knowledges are an important aspect of  IBL  processes as context and connections to real world are crucial in the process. Inquiry is collaborative in nature, which also involves a lot of cognitive work simultaneously. Prior accumulated knowledge with current situated knowledge provides both, initial information to work with and reconstruct knowledge for further use .  It does not   end with ‘‘ it  works’’, but also aims to achieve understanding of why ‘‘it works’’, which  then  leads to new   questions and  investigations ( Artigue , &  Blomhøj , 2013 ) ."
"28" "IBL has been very popular in science education where it is making a slightly slower entry into math education. According to National Science Education Standards, USA, the foundation of Inquiry is based on these five essential features:"
"29" "students create their own scientifically oriented questions"
"30" "students give priority to evidence in responding to questions"
"31" "students formulate explanations from evidence"
"32" "students connect explanations to scientific knowledge"
"33" "students communicate and justify explanations (p.800)"
"34" "which aligns with the definition of Inquiry provided by  Artigue  and  Blomhøj  (2013) ."
"35" "IBL in math"
"36" "In today’s mathematics, with a lot of additions and modifications throughout the years, IBL is defined as “ a form of active learning in which students are given a carefully scaffolded sequence of mathematical tasks and are asked to solve and make sense of them, working individually or in a group” ( Ernst, Hodge, & Yoshinobu, 2017, p.570).   Initially,  IBL was most ly  implemented in proof-based   courses. Lately it can be found in university mathematics   classrooms  and classrooms  at all levels   (p.570 ) .  The conception of mathematics held by the teacher in a classroom has a significant impact on the classroom teaching and learning environment (Dossey, 1992). The way a teacher portrays mathematics influences the attitude children develop towards the subject. So, a teacher plays an important role as a facilitator while carrying out IBL in the classroom."
"37" "When talking about IBL in mathematics, the theory of didactical situations (TDS) initiated by Guy Brousseau; and realistic mathematics education  (RME) initiated by  Hans  Freudenthal  are important to consider as they contributed in conceptualizing IBL in math ( Artigue , &  Blomhøj , 2013, p.802). IBL in math is related with the Problem - Solving tradition.  Attention is  paid to the role of the teacher in  “ supporting and guiding the development   of productive inquiry and on how forms of teacher–student(s) interaction  contributes  to the negotiation of   meaning ” (p.802) .  To situate and use  IBL in math, it is important to keep the following things in mind."
"38" "The ‘authenticity’ of questions and students’ activity should be kept"
"39" "connecting it to real life as much as possible,"
"40" "“the epistemological relevance of the questions from a mathematical perspective,"
"41" "T he modelling dimension of the inquiry process,"
"42" "the experimental dimension of mathematics” (p.809),"
"43" "developing problem solving abilities,"
"44" "giving autonomy,  and"
"45" "promoting collaboration and dialogic interactions of students and teacher."
"46" "Theoretical framework"
"47" "The topic discussed in this paper is based in constructivist research tradition .  In constructivism, realities are understood as mentally constructed based on the individual’s experiences. In contrast to positivism, constructions are never the objective truth but are modified along with their realities. The ideas, knowledge and findings are constructed through the interactions among the people involved  (Guba & Lincoln, 1994) .  Further,   Dewey’s theory of learning by doing and Kolb’s experiential learning guide the instructional method of IBL being discussed in this paper.  Building on Donna Haraway’s (1988) partial perspectives that every single person’s ideas or any single study or theory only has partial perspectives and to achieve a whole result we need to triangulate and combine different ideas, I am combining  different  theories to get a holistic perspective on the aspects that are discussed in this paper."
"48" "Symbolic Interactionism"
"49" "The social theory that I am using in this paper  to focus in on  interactions between teachers-students and students-   students  and how these interactions impact their beliefs and knowledge construction   is symbolic interactionism .  The impact s  of these interactions and communication on the thinking processes as well as student interest and outcomes are explored.  The limitation  of using this theory is that the structural factors like gender, race, home environment are not considered.  To overcome this limitation, I am using another social theory called structural functionalism."
"50" "Structural Functionalism"
"51" "According to this theory,  society is comprised of different structures working together.   I am using this theory  to study the math self-concept part in the paper in relation to motivation and engagement as self-concept is impacted by many structural factors."
"52" "Expectancy Value Motivation Theory  (EVT)"
"53" "The target of the study is the general student population and EVT   is instrumental in  assess ing   “ aspects of domain-specific anxiety in the general   population ” ( Lev-Ran ,  Madjar ,   Shoval ,  Weizman , &   Zalsman ,  2018,  p.426) .   Given by Eccles and Colleagues in 1983, EVT “ identifies students’ expectancies for success and task values as important determinants of their motivation and subsequent academic outcomes” ( Eccles, Rosenzweig, & Wigfield, 2019, p.617).   EVT provides a theoretical framework that can be used  “ to develop intervention protoco ls to improve  students’ motivation and learning ”  ( Fielding-Wells ,  Makar,  &  O'Brien, 2017 ,  p.634).    It is built on Atkinson’s theory of motivation given in 1957. Eccles and colleagues proposed that students’ motivation to perform achievement tasks is mostly centered around  their expectancies for success  i n a task ,  the value they place  o n it  and the cost . Expectancies for success are usually  understood in combination  with students’ beliefs in their abilities wh en  measur ed  in EVT based research. Further, ability beliefs and expectancies for success are part of a larger cluster of individuals’ beliefs about  ‘ competence ’  which is also a determinant for motivation and engagement. Task value is the amount of willingness or commitment they show towards the task because they believe it is useful for them. Cost is the negative consequence of engaging with a task.  Factors found to be most significantly associated   with psychological cost among the general adolescent   population include gender, school transitions and pr ior  achievements  ( Lev-Ran ,  Madjar ,   Shoval ,  Weizman , &   Zalsman ,  2018, p.427) .  Expectancies of success, task value and cost capture aspects of motivation an d  impact learning outcomes, each in their own different way.   “ From an EVT perspective, motivation is considered to be under the control of the individual and entails cognitive, conscious and affective processes” ( Fielding-Wells ,  Makar,  &  O'Brien, 2017 ,  p.241)."
"54" "According to  Eccles ,  Rosenzweig  and  Wigfield  (2019),"
"55" "Fig. 1. EVT framework"
"56" "Fig. 2. Impacts"
"57" "As discussed before, one of the factors in EVT is task value. It can be of three types:"
"58" "Intrinsic value   - student enjoys task"
"59" "Attainment value   - high personal meaning of task"
"60" "Utility value   - student believes the task to hold importance for their future goals."
"61" "Where expectancies of success and task value tell us why a student might want to do something, cost tells us why a student might not want to do something. Cost is also categorized into three types:"
"62" "Effort cost – the task will require a lot of effort to be completed."
"63" "Emotional cost  – “ students’   perceptions of the negative emotional or psychological consequences of pursuing a task” ( Eccles, Rosenzweig, & Wigfield, 2019,  p. 622)"
"64" "Loss of valued alternative’s cost -   they  will have to give up an alternative task that they like doing."
"65" "To form an understanding of the p henomen a by connecting the two social theories with EVT, I am using phenomenology. Phenomenological approaches can have broad perspectives, divided into seven in the ‘Encyclopedia of Phenomenology’, but for this review, I am taking a hermeneutic perspective.   The  hermeneutic (interpretive)   phenomenology is concerned with  the “ interpretation   of the structures of experience ”   (Swanson &  Wojnar , 2007 , p. 173 )   and  it helps connect EVT to interpretivist viewpoints. Furthermore, hermeneutic phenomenology is also involved  with  the personal aspect of  how   things are understood by  the  people who live through   these experiences . So, it helps understand phenomena related to the structures as well as individual experiences of people  ( Swanson &  Wojnar , 2007 )."
"66" "Expectancy-value theory as we have understood in this paper is focused on all the aspects very specific to  an  individual, their self-expectancies, the cost they place on something and the value they place on some task. To offset this limitation of EVT, I am using symbolic interactionism, structural functionalism and phenomenology to connect them so that the sociocultural and/or socioenvironmental factors that impact the expectancies, self-concept/competence and motivation and engagement are also included in the discussion."
"67" "Interrelationship between IBL and motivation and engagement"
"68" "As already mentioned above, competence, value, autonomy, and relatedness determine motivation and engagement. Learning-science based environments, the modern student-centered approaches to learning, of which IBL is a part, incite positive responses from students. They use cognitive, metacognitive and volitional learning strategies focusing on memory,  planning, affect and evaluation and so on.     IBL includes components that influence value and give a sense of autonomy to students which are determinants of motivation . A lot of work done in IBL environments is in collaboration which gives the children a support system as well as opportunity to communicate and interact while solving the problem taking away some anxiety of individual trial and failure. This also increases their belief in their competence which is similar to self-concept.  As mentioned earlier, IBL in math ensures the authenticity of questions to keep the inquiry process realistic. This gives the students a sense of relatedness and increases task value for them further increasing their motivation and engagement."
"69" "In  a study conducted by Fielding Wells and Makar in 2008, they compared traditional classrooms with inquiry-based classrooms to check the potential of IBL instruction to engage children who previously showed disengagement in math classrooms. Students who were taught using IBL were observed with significant changes in the way they engaged in math classrooms.  IBL has the potential  “to generate high levels of motivation to commit to a task” ( Fielding-Wells, Makar, & O'Brien, 2017,  p.251). These aspects help increase students’ confidence, their self-worth and give them a purpose which is important for engagement (p.251). IBL also reinforces self-efficacy which combined with the previous mentioned aspects motivate students for learning."
"70" "The emotional cost aspect of EVT relates to math anxiety . While doing math, students who suffer from math anxiety are scared of the emotionally taxing experience they would have to go through, so they perceive a very high emotional cost and try to avoid doing math at all. This further disengages them from mathematics learning environments.   The relatedness aspect of IBL and its iterative process has the potential to counter this  setback by helping students realise the importance and develop a connection with the math problem being discussed. The iterative process further relaxes the anxiety by making the process familiar and comfortable."
"71" "In addition,  the major contributors to the development of math anxiety are the socio-environmental factors i.e. non-individual experiences related to math inside and outside of the classroom. These could be experiences at home with parents (   Kumari  &  Soni , 2017; Maloney, Ramirez, & Shaw, 2018)  where their attitudes related to math transfer to their children,  negative experiences in classrooms with peers and/or instructors (Ahmed, 2018; Jackson & Leffingwell, 1999;  Kumari  &  Soni , 2017; Maloney et al., 2018)  as discussed above  and/or social constructions like gender and race/ethnicity (Ahmed, 2018).  So, in combination with the instructional expertise required by the teachers to enhance students’ motivation, it would also be imperative for them to acknowledge the existence of the abovementioned sociocultural factors to include  in their classroom environments."
"72" "Discussion"
"73" "I have never faced math anxiety while doing math as a student and did not need extra efforts to be motivated in math classrooms but whenever the context included  the  broader test anxiety component, I did fall in the disinterested students’ category.  So, considering the focus of this review paper, I am an outsider researcher ."
"74" "I BL enhances  motivation in students but at the same time requires a lot of motivation and constant engagement from students. For children habitual in studying in traditional environments, it introduces difficulties to willingness to engage ( Blumenfeld,  Kempler , &  Krajcik , 2005 ,  p.478). In this instructional method, the amount of effort required to succeed increases. If the teacher lacks the required skills to facilitate such environments, their capability to engage and motivate students goes futile. Moreover, doing a lot of cognitive work and communicating ideas while doing inquiry simultaneously makes IBL complex and difficult. While making connections to the real world, finding authentic problems that students find meaningful, that are feasible and creating driving questions that entirely grab the students’ attention is difficult. So, to ensure positive impact of IBL in math classrooms, first these challenges need to be addressed."
"75" "Conclusion"
"76" "EVT does successfully provide a framework for considering how individuals make decisions based upon expectations and values  but at the same time stresses that motivation is only dependent on individual’s expectancies and beliefs. It is a perception based models and fails to consider the effect of previous experiences and abilities of an individual on the outcomes.  Another limitation of this review is that it does not elaborate on what the teachers can add in their instruction to consider the effect of socioenvironmental factors in classrooms. It can be an avenue for future research where culturally relevant pedagogy is also included in the discussion."
"77" "References"
"78" "Ahmed, W.,  Minnaert , A., Kuyper, H., & Van der  Werf , G. (2012). Reciprocal relationships between math self-concept and math anxiety.  Learning and Individual Differences,   22 (3), 385-389. doi: 10.1016/j.lindif.2011.12.004"
"79" "Ahmed, W. (2018). Developmental trajectories of math anxiety during adolescence: Associations with stem career choice.  Journal of Adolescence,   67 , 158-166. doi: 10.1016/j.adolescence.2018.06.010"
"80" "Artigue , M., &  Blomhøj , M. (2013). Conceptualizing inquiry-based education in mathematics.  Zdm  :  The International Journal on Mathematics Education, 45(6), 797-810. doi:10.1007/s11858-013-0506-6"
"81" "Blumenfeld , P.C.,  Kempler , T.M., &  Krajcik , J.S. (2005). Motivation and cognitive engagement in learning environments . In R. Keith Sawyer (Eds.),  The Cambridge  Handbook of Learning Sciences  (pp. 475-488).  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511816833.029"
"82" "Dossey, J.A. (1992). The nature of mathematics: Its role and its influence. In D.  Grouws  (Eds.),  Handbook of research on mathematics teaching and learning  (pp. 39-48). Macmillan: New York."
"83" "Ernst D.C., Hodge, A., & Yoshinobu, S. (2017). What is inquiry-based learning?  American Mathematical Society, 64 (6), 570-574. doi:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1090/noti1536"
"84" "Fielding-Wells, J., O'Brien, M., & Makar, K. (2017). Using expectancy-value theory to explore aspects of motivation and engagement in inquiry-based learning in primary mathematics.  Mathematics Education Research Journal,   29 (2), 237-254.   https://doi.org/10.1007/s13394-017-0201-y"
"85" "Fielding-Wells, J., & Makar, K. (2008, July).  Student (dis)engagement in mathematics . Paper presented at the conference of Australian Association for Research in Education, Brisbane, Australia.  https://www.researchgate.net/publication/43517208"
"86" "Guba, E. G., & Lincoln, Y. S. (1994). Competing paradigms in qualitative research. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.),   Handbook of qualitative research   (pp. 105-117). London: Sage."
"87" "Haraway, D. (1988). Situated knowledges: The science question in feminism and the privilege of partial perspective.  Feminist Studies,   14 (3), 575-575. doi:10.2307/3178066"
"88" "Illeris , K. (2018). An overview of the history of learning theory.  European Journal of Education,   53 (1), 86-101."
"89" "Jackson, C., & Leffingwell, R. (1999). The role of instructors in creating math anxiety in students from kindergarten through college.  Mathematics Teacher,   92 (7), 583-586. Retrieved 26-01-2019 22:19 UTC from  https://www.jstor.org/stable/27971118"
"90" "Johnston, J. S. (2009). An account of general inquiry.  Deweyan inquiry: From education theory to practice .  Albany, NY: SUNY Press. (2009) .  pp. 7-24. Retrieved from http://ebookcentral.proquest.com. Created from  mcgill  on 2019-02-24 23:05:43"
"91" "Madjar , N.,  Zalsman , G.,  Weizman , A., Lev-Ran, S., &  Shoval , G. (2018). Predictors of developing mathematics anxiety among middle-school students: A 2-year prospective study: Development of mathematics anxiety.  International Journal of Psychology,   53 (6), 426-432. doi:10.1002/ijop.12403"
"92" "Ramirez, G., Shaw, S., & Maloney, E. (2018). Math anxiety: Past research, promising interventions, and a new interpretation framework.  Educational Psychologist,   53 (3), 145-164.   doi: 10.1080/00461520.2018.1447384"
"93" "Rosenzweig, E., Wigfield, A., & Eccles, J. (2019). Expectancy-value theory and its relevance for student motivation and learning. In K.  Renninger  & S.  Hidi  (Authors),   The Cambridge Handbook of Motivation and Learning   (Cambridge Handbooks in Psychology, pp. 617-644). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/9781316823279.026"
"94" "Soni , A., &  Kumari , S. (2017). The role of parental math anxiety and math attitude in their children’s math achievement.  International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education ,  15 (2), 331-347. doi:10.1007/s10763-015-9687-5"
"95" "Wojnar , D. M., & Swanson, K. M. (2007). Phenomenology: An Exploration.  Journal of Holistic Nursing, 25 (3), 172–180. https://doi.org/10.1177/0898010106295172"
