New Political Economy

ISSN: 1356-3467 (Print) 1469-9923 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/cnpe20

The BRICs and International Tax Governance: The
Case of Automatic Exchange of Information
Dries Lesage, Wouter Lips & Mattias Vermeiren
To cite this article: Dries Lesage, Wouter Lips & Mattias Vermeiren (2019): The BRICs and
International Tax Governance: The Case of Automatic Exchange of Information, New Political
Economy
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13563467.2019.1584168

Published online: 05 Mar 2019.

Submit your article to this journal

View Crossmark data

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cnpe20

NEW POLITICAL ECONOMY
https://doi.org/10.1080/13563467.2019.1584168

The BRICs and International Tax Governance: The Case of
Automatic Exchange of Information
Dries Lesage, Wouter Lips

and Mattias Vermeiren

Department of Political Science, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
ABSTRACT

KEYWORDS

This article investigates the BRICs’ involvement in the adoption of
Automatic Exchange of Information (AEoI) by the G20 and the
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) as a
major breakthrough in the global ﬁght against tax evasion. Our main
questions concern the BRICs’ willingness to accept AEoI, and their
agreement to the Western-dominated OECD as its institutional forum.
First, we examine the domestic drivers for BRICs’ participation, as their
statist model of capitalism reveals strong disincentives to join this
regime and the fact that the budgetary consequences of the global
ﬁnancial crisis were less severe than in Western states. We argue that
their agreement on AEoI results more from their persistent balance-ofpayments vulnerability to illicit capital than from ﬁscal weakness, while
also discussing the possibilities for mock compliance. Second, we review
the role the non-reciprocal US foreign account tax compliance act
(FATCA) in shaping the BRICs’ preference for a multilateral AEoI-regime
centred around the OECD’s Common Reporting Standard (CRS). Last, we
show that the BRICs’ acceptance of the OECD resulted from pragmatic
interests and receiving ownership over the process, together with the
absence of coercive mechanisms within the CRS-regime that could
fundamentally undermine their sovereignty in this domain.

BRICS; international tax
governance; automatic
exchange of information;
FATCA; OECD

Introduction
This article investigates the position of Brazil, Russia, India and China (BRICs) in international taxation
governance. More precisely, we examine how the BRIC governments have been involved in the
development of the new global norm of automatic exchange of information (AEoI). In 2012-13 the
Group of 20 (G20) embraced AEoI as an eﬀective way to deal with tax evasion by high net-worth individuals and curb the harmful impact of tax havens on national treasuries. The new international norm
of AEoI signiﬁes a fundamental break with previous practices for tracking private wealth in the foreign
accounts of these individuals, who often make use of bank secrecy provisions oﬀered by oﬀ-shore
ﬁnancial centres (OFC) to hide capital income from their national tax authorities in non-declared
accounts. While the preceding norm – ‘exchange of information on request’ (EIoR) – obliged
foreign ﬁnancial institutions and tax authorities to share these data only under speciﬁc circumstances,
AEoI forces tax authorities and ﬁnancial institutions to deliver such information on a routine basis.
If the new norm is implemented correctly, tax authorities will receive all the necessary information
on foreign bank accounts owned by their residents and the amount of income through these
accounts. In this way, AEoI allows the government to apply the preferred ‘residence principle’ to
taxing natural persons, according to which individuals are supposed to pay taxes on their worldwide
CONTACT Dries Lesage

Dries.Lesage@UGent.be

© 2019 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

@LesageDries

2

D. LESAGE ET AL.

income in the state where they reside (Genschel and Schwarz 2011). It is one of the most eﬀective
ways to promote transparency and ensure adequate taxation of foreign-earned income, testifying
to the G20’s declaration in 2009 that ‘the era of banking secrecy is over’ (G20 2009). After endorsing
AEoI in 2012–13, the G20 leaders called on the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) to develop a multilateral framework and standard for universal application. By April
2018, 102 jurisdictions had already committed to implementing the OECD’s new Common Reporting
Standard (CRS) based on the principle of AEoI, with over 2700 exchange relations activated Figure 1.
Developing a deeper understanding of the role and position of the BRIC countries in the emergence of the CRS regime speaks to several issues that have received inadequate attention in the
IPE literature on international tax governance. One of the key ﬁndings of this literature is that the
United States played a central role in the rise of the CRS by forcing OFCs and bank secrecy jurisdictions to sign bilateral Foreign Account Compliance Act (FATCA) agreements. These bilateral FATCA
agreements, which the United States could impose by exploiting its structural power in global
ﬁnance (see below), obliged OFCs and their ﬁnancial corporations to collect and share information
on ﬁnancial accounts of US residents and foreign entities with signiﬁcant US ownership with US
tax authorities (Eccleston and Gray 2014, Emmeneger 2015, Hakelberg 2016a, 2016b). The literature
remains vague about the precise channel through which these bilateral agreements culminated in
the G20’s call for a multilateral AEoI regime to be monitored by a Western-dominated organisation.
Scholars who have examined this issue have emphasised how FATCA pushed European Union (EU)
countries to consolidate their position regarding AEoI and led to calls by OFCs for a new global standard for international tax cooperation to minimise compliance costs for their banks (see especially
Hakelberg 2015, 2016a, 2016b). Evidently, achieving a G20 agreement on AEoI and granting the
OECD an authoritative role in the multilateral regime was only possible by getting the BRIC countries
on board. Yet, notwithstanding their increasing importance as rising powers and G20 members, there
is an unfortunate lack of in-depth studies of their position in international tax governance – and in the
AEoI regime in particular – in the IPE literature
Our case, nonetheless, raises several interesting and hitherto unresolved issues that have important implications for our broader understanding of the interests and incentives of the BRICs to engage

Figure 1. The BRICs’ automatic exchange network in the CRS-regime. Source: (OECD 2015a).

NEW POLITICAL ECONOMY

3

with and become embedded in Western-oriented structures of global economic governance. First, it
is remarkable that state-led economies with relatively high-levels of corruption have agreed to
implement a far-reaching institutional and legal infrastructure to promote international transparency
on domestic and foreign ﬁnancial accounts, especially given the relatively meagre additional ﬁscal
revenues that the BRICs can expect to gain from the entire multilateral eﬀort. Therefore, their preferences in participating in the multilateral CRS regime need to be problematised and examined rather
than merely presumed. We do this by engaging with the comparative capitalism literature on the
BRICs’ statist model of capitalism (especially Nölke et al. 2015), which provides valuable insights
into their domestic political economy position regarding AEoI. Drawing on this literature, we argue
below that, in contrast to Western OECD governments, a central motivation results from their persistent balance-of-payments vulnerability to illicit capital outﬂows instead of ﬁscal weakness. Although
participation in the multilateral AEoI regime supports them in their ﬁght against illegal capital ﬂight
and complements their available tools to control capital outﬂows, we discuss the risk of ‘mock compliance’ regarding the implementation of the CRS as a result of the close links between public authorities and private domestic capital, and the partial complicity of political elites in these illicit
outﬂows.
Second, it remains unclear how the BRICs’ incentives to engage in AEoI translated into their acceptance of a multilateral regime centred around a Western-oriented international organisation (the
OECD) in which they are not formal members. Here, the precise role of FATCA in pushing the
BRICs to embrace a multilateral standard needs to be more clearly identiﬁed than previous analyses
in the IPE literature have managed to achieve: while there is a link between FATCA and the consolidation of EU preferences and policy vis-à-vis a multilateral AEoI-regime, there is no a priori reason
why entering into bilateral FATCA agreements with the United States has pushed the BRICs to participate in a multilateral regime that signiﬁcantly increases adjustment costs for their state-owned
banks relative to the situation in which only bilateral FATCA agreements would have to be
implemented. We posit that there were two separate motivations behind their endorsement of
the OECD-centred CRS regime: on the one hand, the CRS contained more explicit legal guarantees
of reciprocity than BRIC governments could safeguard in their bilaterals with the United States; on
the other, they welcomed the OECD’s technical expertise in global tax governance and could
command suﬃcient ownership within the CRS regime through their membership of the G20 and
the OECD’s outreach association the ‘Global Forum on Transparency and Exchange of Information
for Tax Purposes’. By examining the BRIC countries’ preferences and interests regarding AEoI, our
analysis complements existing accounts of the central role of FATCA in promoting multilateral institutional change towards the OECD’s CRS regime. Nevertheless, we argue that the BRICs’ move from
FATCA to their endorsement of a multilateral AEoI regime is less straightforward than previous scholarship on international tax governance has suggested (Grinberg 2012, Heiberg 2012, Eccleston and
Gray 2014, Kudrle 2014, Emmenegger 2015, Hakelberg 2015, Vlcek 2016).
Our analysis and conclusions also have broader implication for the IPE and international relations
literatures on the position of the BRICs in the contemporary global political economy and multilateral
system. It supports the view of scholars who are sceptical about the extent to which they aim to
contest western-oriented liberal institutions and practices of global economic governance, in that
‘[t]hey do not diﬀer from other powers, past and present, in wishing to extract as many beneﬁts
as possible from their engagement with the international order while giving up as little decisionmaking autonomy as possible’ (Kahler 2013, p. 712). The BRICs have become major stakeholders in
the existing international economic order, acting as rule-takers rather than rule-makers in those
issue-areas in which they have not developed adequate technical expertise. At the same time, we
concur with scholars who have noted that ‘their [statist] domestic structures put them at odds
with the liberal policy content of Western-sponsored institutions’ (Stephenson 2014, p. 914; see
also Nölke et al. 2015). However, as our case study illustrates, the need to secure a level playingﬁeld with the OECD countries and ownership underpins their participation in newly established
western-sponsored regimes, especially as the lack of international and domestic enforcement

4

D. LESAGE ET AL.

enables mock compliance in ways that make participation more tolerable for key domestic political
constituencies.
As such, our study on AEoI as a key innovation in global taxation governance also provides a contribution to the growing literature on the role of rising powers in the contemporary context of deepening regime complexity (Raustalia and Victor 2004, Orsini et al. 2013). The BRIC countries have
come to accept the OECD-centred regime complex for taxation without being OECD members
(Lesage and van de Graaf 2015). This was made possible through a number of governance innovations that secured a degree of BRICs’ control over the process, without the need to become fullﬂedged OECD members. Most BRICs are not willing to adopt entire the OECD acquis, whereas
several incumbents are not ready to see the OECD’s group identity fundamentally change (see, for
example, Clifton and Díaz-Fuentes 2015, Lesage & van de Graaf 2015).
Our paper is structured as follows. In the next section we discuss the rise of AEoI as a global norm
from FATCA towards the OECD’s CRS, emphasising its signiﬁcant departure from previous practices
and highlighting several missing elements in the literature to understand the BRICs’ position in the
process. In the subsequent section we argue from a comparative capitalism perspective that their
preferences for AEoI are more ambiguous than the literature has acknowledged, identifying domestic
political economy reasons that are distinct from those of the OECD countries (see also Muzaka and
Serrano, this issue). In the ﬁnal section we explain the institutional dimension. This includes the linkages between FATCA and the OECD’s CRS regime from the perspective of the BRICs as well as the
latter countries’ institutional choices.

The Rise of AEoI in International Tax Governance
At its 2009 London Summit, the G20 mandated the OECD – the most prominent multilateral forum for
international taxation governance since the 1960s – to design a regime for the international
exchange of information on foreign ﬁnancial accounts in order to put an end to tax evasion practices.
The initial OECD response was twofold. First, it adopted an amended version of the multilateral convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance on Tax Matters. This convention, ﬁrst devised in 1988,
stipulated core requirements of bilateral information exchange agreements, covered a broad
range of taxes and allowed for joint tax investigations (Kudrle 2014). More importantly, it contained
new rules for the exchange of information and was opened up for non-OECD countries, providing a
multilateral basis for the new information exchange regime. The second eﬀort concerned its list of
uncooperative tax havens, an instrument established in the wake of its harmful tax competition
project in 2000. The OECD speciﬁed in 2009 that, to be compliant, tax havens would have to sign
twelve tax information exchange agreements (TIEAs) or double taxation treaties with an information
exchange clause. Tax havens on the list had resisted signing those TIEAs before 2009. The G20,
however, threatened economic sanctions against them. As a result of the blacklisting eﬀorts, more
than 800 tax treaties have been signed since 2009, the majority of which targeted uncooperative jurisdictions (Johannesen 2014, Palan and Wigan 2014). There are no jurisdictions left listed as uncooperative (OECD 2016b).
These agreements, though, were based on EIoR, which is a fundamentally inadequate method for
curtailing tax evasion. While preferable to no information exchange at all, EIoR does not pierce the
veil of banking secrecy and oﬀshore companies. Generally, a tax administration would have to
know in advance the name of the citizen it wants to request information about, in which jurisdiction
his/her account is located and at which ﬁnancial institution it is held in order to oﬀer a well-grounded
reason to request information. Otherwise the request might be labelled as a ﬁshing expedition (Grinberg 2012). Tax administrations are typically unable to oﬀer these data, because this is exactly the
kind of information they are looking for in the ﬁrst place. Given the intrinsic limitation of EIoR as a
standard for information exchange, the G20 countries oﬃcially backed the adoption of AEoI in
2013 and mandated the OECD to design a new standard based on it. This resulted in a new
regime that introduced a uniform standard for AEoI – the CRS – and would be open to all signatories

NEW POLITICAL ECONOMY

5

of the above-mentioned multilateral convention. In this regime, states can either choose to automatically share information by signing bilateral tax information exchange agreements or to step into a
new framework by signing a multilateral competent authority agreement (MCAA). As of 2016, 87
states had signed the MCAA; 53 states pledged to start sharing information in 2017, while 34
others followed suit in 2018. All the BRIC countries have committed to sharing information under
the CRS, signed the MCAA and voluntarily subjected themselves to the Global Forum’s peer
review process to assess its adequate implementation (OECD 2016c). Notably, all the major OFCs
and bank secrecy jurisdictions agreed to participate in the CRS regime.
How can the relatively swift multilateral endorsement of the CRS be explained? There seems to be
a consensus that the FATCA acted as a catalyst for the multilateral shift to AEoI (Grinberg 2012, 2016,
Sawyer 2014, Hakelberg 2016a). This is also acknowledged by the OECD itself (OECD 2015a). In 2010,
the US government introduced FATCA in response to the UBS oﬀshore banking scandal, which
revealed that many US citizens held secret Swiss bank accounts without reporting or paying the prevailing US taxes on these accounts. FATCA compels foreign ﬁnancial institutions (FFIs) to collect and
share information on the value – and income – of accounts held by US citizens or by foreign entities in
which US citizens have a substantial interest or share, regardless of location (Palan and Wigan 2014). It
also obliges US citizens to report information on certain foreign ﬁnancial accounts and oﬀshore
assets, and attach it to their income tax return. FATCA is a remarkable piece of legislation: it unilaterally demands compliance of ﬁnancial institutions over which the US holds no direct jurisdiction.
In order to accomplish this, the US government imposes a penalty for non-compliance in the form
of a 30 per cent withholding tax on US-based ﬁnancial activities, such as payments from US
sources and proceeds from US investments, from non-complying FFIs (Grinberg 2012). Given the centrality of the US ﬁnancial system and the US dollar in the world economy, the threat of penalty
pushed OFCs and bank secrecy jurisdictions to sign bilateral FATCA agreements with the US government in order to avoid their banks’ and ﬁnancial institutions’ de facto loss of access to US ﬁnancial
markets and US dollar liquidity. As IPE scholars of international tax governance have argued, the
success of FATCA therefore reﬂects the extraordinary structural power of the United States in
global ﬁnance (e.g. Eccleston and Gray 2014, Palan and Wigan 2014, Emmeneger 2015, Hakelberg
2016a).
While concurring with the depiction of FATCA as a ‘game changer’ in international tax governance,
we believe that the literature fails to provide a suﬃciently comprehensive picture of how FATCA
agreements culminated in the OECD’s multilateral CRS regime. Two separate channels have been
suggested in the literature. First, as Hakelberg (2015) has convincingly shown, bilateral FATCA agreements between the United States and EU member states allowed the latter to close important loopholes in its 2005 Savings Directive, which had already installed a regime for AEoI (albeit less extensive)
between its member states yet oﬀered opt-outs for Austria, Belgium and Luxemburg. Given that
these countries were signatories of the EU’s 2011 Directive for Enhanced Cooperation (DAC) in the
ﬁeld of taxation and this contained a ‘most favoured nation’ clause, the remaining opt-out
members (Austria and Luxemburg) were obliged to extend AEoI to other member states once
they had granted it to the US via a FATCA agreement. These FATCA agreements stressed the need
for a coherent intra-EU AEoI system, consolidating the EU’s position regarding the desirability of a
multilateral extension of the standard towards non-EU countries. Second, the G20’s embracement
of AEoI in the wake of proliferating FATCA agreements led OFCs and ﬁnancial institutions to
become advocates of a globally uniform application of AEoI to ensure a level playing-ﬁeld and minimise compliance costs associated with multiple standards (Eccleston and Gray 2014, Hakelberg
2016a, 2016b). Since FATCA regulations operate worldwide, the potential for capital ﬂight to noncomplying jurisdictions was also reduced. As such, FATCA provided a ‘focal point’ that other countries
could use ‘to overcome collective action problems by coordinating their strategies and directing
them against [non-complying] OFCs’ (Emmenegger 2017, p. 26).
By focusing on FATCA’s role in encouraging the EU and OFCs to embrace a multilateral AEoI
regime, scholars of international tax governance have ignored the position of the BRIC countries

6

D. LESAGE ET AL.

in enabling the G20 – as key members of the forum – to endorse AEoI as the new standard
for international tax cooperation. One reason for this neglect might be the prevailing
interpretation that cooperation based on AEoI did not give rise to distributive conﬂicts
between the G20 members and was therefore in their collective interest. As Grinberg (2016,
p. 158) argues,
the combination of unilateral US coercive pressure and multilateral co-ordination towards a global standard for
information-exchange succeeded because the underlying issue was an enforcement measure in which the interests among major economic powers were generally aligned and the beneﬁts from agreement were non-rival.

Beneﬁts are believed to be non-rival because ‘two jurisdictions do not assert overlapping taxing
rights over the same income of the same tax payer’: taking into account that the bulk of the
world’s oﬀshore wealth is owned by residents of the G20 countries,
[i]nformation made available to any one of these jurisdictions about the oﬀshore assets or income of a resident
taxpayer does not limit the ability to provide information to another jurisdiction about the income or assets of its
taxpayers. (Grinberg 2016, p. 164–5)

Nevertheless, as we will argue in the next section, there are reasons to believe that the incentives
of the BRIC countries to participate in a multilateral AEoI regime signiﬁcantly diﬀered from those of
the OECD members of the G20: the former were not confronted with a sharp deterioration of their
public ﬁnances in the wake of the global ﬁnancial crisis and experienced less need to track down
their residents’ oﬀshore accounts to collect additional capital income tax revenues. Moreover, political elites in the BRICs have proﬁted from many of their economies’ extractive institutions, raising
questions about their interest in redistributive taxation. Although the beneﬁts of AEoI in terms of
additional revenues are possibly not as great for the BRICs as for OECD governments, high levels
of public ownership in their domestic banking system imply that compliance costs of implementing
the new standard on a multilateral basis are arguably higher than for OECD countries whose ﬁnancial
institutions are largely privately-owned. By examining the domestic political economy of the BRICs’
state-permeated economies from a comparative capitalism perspective, we therefore problematise
the interests of the BRICs in AEoI and identify distinctive incentives for their participation into the
CRS regime.

The BRICs and the Domestic Political Economy of AEoI
In order to explain the rise of AEoI as a global norm, scholars of international tax governance have
largely focused on the renewed incentives of Western OECD governments in the wake of the
global ﬁnancial crisis to curb international tax evasion by their residents. A common interpretation
is that ‘the global ﬁnancial crisis opened a window of opportunity for improved cooperation [in international tax governance] because the ﬁnancial sector was blamed for the crisis and several states
faced unprecedented public deﬁcits’ (Genschel and Schwarz 2011, Eccleston 2012, Rixen 2013,
Lesage et al. 2014, Emmenegger 2015, Pogge and Mehta 2016). When US and European banks
had to be saved from bankruptcy using taxpayer money, their politicians raised objections about bailouts at a time when many were in the business of helping companies and individuals to avoid and
evade taxes, including through their own branches in tax havens. The crisis also put pressure on
Western governments to ﬁnd new sources of tax revenues as bank bailouts and countercyclical
ﬁscal stabilisation policies in the aftermath of the crisis generated a huge increase in public
deﬁcits and debt levels. In order to bring these deﬁcits back to normal levels, governments
adopted harsh austerity measures that have largely aﬀected the lower and middle classes: one
study found that a consolidation of one per cent of GDP is, on average, associated with an increase
in income inequality of around 0.4-0.7 percent over the following two years (Woo et al. 2013). As a
result, public debates in most OECD countries intensiﬁed on the issue of international tax evasion,
the abuse of ‘unfair’ opportunities for international tax arbitrage by wealthy individuals and

NEW POLITICAL ECONOMY

7

multinational corporations, and the need to spread the burden of ﬁscal consolidation more evenly
across society.
The BRIC countries suﬀered from a diﬀerent kind of crisis. From a comparative capitalism perspective, the eﬀects of the global ﬁnancial crisis on a country’s economy and the response by its government can be expected to be shaped by the domestic institutions of its national model of capitalism. In
recent years, a research programme emerged that aims to bring the BRIC countries and other emerging markets into the orbit of the comparative capitalism literature (e.g. Mcnally 2012, Schmalz and
Ebenau 2012, Becker 2014, Buhr and Frankenberger 2014). An interesting example is the exploration
by Nölke et al. (2015), who argue that the BRICs share a common institutional model. While signiﬁcant
institutional diﬀerences obviously exist between their models of capitalism, Nölke et al. (2015) note
that they all remain in a continuous catch-up process based on strategic integration in the world
economy and guided by ‘close cooperation between various state and domestic business coalitions
at the national and sub-national level which gives rise to the notion of a rather fragmented, yet
dynamic state-permeated market economy’ (p. 543). A strong presence of state-owned enterprises
(SOEs) in the domestic political economy is a common feature: apart from the many ﬁrms where
the government acts as a minority shareholder, SOEs (fully owned or with majority state control)
still contribute a large portion of GDP (respectively 30 per cent, 13.1 per cent and 29.7 per cent in
Brazil, India and China in 2010) and represent a major portion of total stock market capitalisation
(respectively 34 per cent, 41 per cent and 70 per cent).
The BRIC countries’ model of capitalism is not, of course, only based on state interventionism, nor
that these manifestations have faded completely in the OECD. Nevertheless, because intervention
remains much more prevalent, there are at least four reasons why we believe that their preferences
for AEoI in the aftermath of the global ﬁnancial crisis was less evident than for most OECD countries.
First, the crisis had less ‘ﬁscal impact’ on the BRICs’ public balances. As they put in place more stringent ﬁnancial regulations and various controls over private cross-border capital ﬂows, their banks
were more domestically oriented and less exposed to US and European ﬁnancial markets than US
and European banks. So, in contrast to many OECD governments, they did not have to bail out
their banks. Moreover, counter-cyclical ﬁscal deﬁcit spending was less pronounced in the BRICs.
They supported growth by encouraging state-dominated banks to increase lending to the nonﬁnancial sector – especially to the SOEs – to boost corporate and infrastructural investment spending
rather than by engaging in counter-cyclical deﬁcit spending.1 In contrast to OECD welfare states, the
BRICs rely more on targeted taxation than on high levels of tax collection and massive transfers and
redistribution: most notably, their revenues from taxes on income, proﬁts and capital gains (IPC) are
much lower than the OECD average (Table 1). Like the East Asian developmental states, government
intervention in the BRIC countries takes place predominantly in the form of an active industrial policy
based on stringent regulation of product and capital markets, price controls in these markets (and
related subsidies) as well as government ownership (Musacchio and Lazzarini 2014, Nölke et al.
2015). So, while their ﬁscal needs were not as deep as those of OECD governments, the revenues
from additional capital income tax collection as a result of AEoI could be expected to be signiﬁcantly
lower for them than for the latter.
Second, the adjustment burden of implementing a multilateral AEoI is signiﬁcantly higher for the
BRICs governments, given that their banking system is largely state-owned and they were less able to
deﬂect the costs of compliance to the private ﬁnancial sector: government ownership of the banking
system (as a percentage of total assets) approximates 50 per cent in Brazil, China and Russia and
reaches almost 75 per cent in India (Jaeger 2011). Moreover, their banks are mostly oriented
towards the domestic market and less dependent on attracting foreign savings to fund their
balance sheets and boost proﬁts. As Table 2 shows, the BRICs do not have highly-ranked global
ﬁnancial centres – with perhaps the partial exception of Hong Kong as China’s oﬀshore and
mostly autonomous ﬁnancial centre – so potential ‘reputation costs’ due to non-participation in a
multilateral AEoI regime would have been minimal. The implementation of an adequate infrastructure to adopt a multilateral AEoI standard is thus a highly cumbersome enterprise for the BRICs’

8

D. LESAGE ET AL.

Table 1. Fiscal indicators in the BRICS.
OECD Average
Total Tax
IPC Tax
Public deﬁcit
Public debt
Brazil
Total Tax
IPC Tax
Public deﬁcit
Public debt
China
Total Tax
IPC Tax
Public deﬁcit
Public debt
India
Total Tax
IPC Tax
Public deﬁcit
Public debt

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

35,47%
13,36%
0,46%
49,56%

34,86%
13,06%
−1,66%
54,62%

34,47%
12,36%
−5,85%
63,45%

34,60%
12,43%
−5,99%
68,41%

35,13%
12,79%
−4,03%
72,41%

35,85%
13,27%
−3,56%
75,68%

32,72%
7,09%
−2,74%
63,796

33,03%
7,54%
−1,53%
61,913

32,22%
7,04%
−3,19%
65,039

32,22%
6,66%
−2,72%
63,029

33,11%
7,18%
−2,47%
61,226

33,19%
6,82%
−2,57%
63,537

17,11%
4,49%
2,94%
34,64%

17,16%
4,72%
1,25%
31,59%

17,07%
4,44%
0,11%
36,12%

18,17%
4,39%
1,45%
36,01%

18,98%
4,83%
1,47%
35,60%

20,97%
5,09%
1,26%
37,05%

17,64%
NA
−4,41%
74,03%

16,47%
NA
−9,96%
74,54%

15,28%
NA
−9,75%
72,53%

15,71%
NA
−8,40%
67,46%

NA
NA
−8,12%
68,10%

NA
NA
−7,44%
67,45%

Source: ICTD Database.

state-dominated and domestically-oriented banking systems. In this regard, it is important to note
that the compliance costs ensuing from the OECD’s CRS regime are much higher than those following
from bilateral FATCA agreements with the US. In contrast to these FATCA agreements, the CRS does
not include a US$ 50,000 threshold, subjecting all the ﬁnancial accounts owned by foreign residents
to potential review and reporting. ‘Combined with the fact that the review has to be done with multiple reportable jurisdictions (rather than just US accounts under FATCA)’, this means that ‘ﬁnancial
institutions will have to collect and remit signiﬁcantly more accounts under the CRS than under
FATCA’ and that ‘ﬁnancial institutions that have implemented manual review processes for FATCA
will not be able to use the same procedures for CRS’ (Kinsley et al. 2015). In short, it is unlikely
that BRIC banks favoured a multilateral standard to minimise compliance costs.
Third, a key feature of the domestic political economy of the BRICs is strong ties between political
and economic elites and their involvement in many of its extractive institutions. An important distinction between these contemporary models of state capitalism and the older varieties is that coordination of economic activity frequently occurs via ‘reciprocal models of trust between individual
members of these (competition-driven) state-business coalitions, based on informal personal
relations, family ties, and shared social (elite) backgrounds’ rather than under the guidance of an
all-powerful, centralised bureaucracy (Nölke et al. 2015). This has culminated in highly developed
patrimonial systems that have generated a variety of incentives for long-term clientelist collaboration
between political and economic elites. Such networks feature prominently in autocratic states such as

Table 2. Ranking and rating of BRIC global ﬁnancial centres (Long Finance GFCI and Xinhua-Dow Jones index).
GFCI 1 rank (rating) 2007
Xinhua-Dow Jones rank 2014
GFCI 20 rank (rating) 2020
Hong Kong
3 (684)
4
4 (748)
Shanghai
24 (576)
6
16 (700)
Shenzhen
–
15
22 (691)
Rio De Janeiro
–
15
54 (623)
Sao Paolo
–
22
48 (51)
Beijing
36 (513)
11
26 (683)
Moscow
45 (421)
23
84 (538)
Mumbai
39 (460)
20
75 (598)
Source: Long Finance, Xinhua (http://www.longﬁnance.net/global-ﬁnancial-centres-index-20/1037-gfci-20.html; http://www.
longﬁnance.net/programmes/ﬁnancial-centre-futures/fcf-publications.html). Based on Huotari and Hanemann (2014).

NEW POLITICAL ECONOMY

9

Russia and China (Buhr and Frankenberger 2014). Party elites in China were able to maintain both
their political power and economic interests by transforming themselves into a new dominant economic class, enabling them to turn bureaucratic privileges into economic advantages (Dickson 2007, Li
and Shaw 2013). Under Putin, top Kremlin staﬀers and senior ministers have been appointed to the
boards of various SOEs, taking an active interest in their progress and proﬁts. As such, ‘[p]rivate and
corporate interests are behind most of Moscow’s major policy decisions, as Russia is ruled by people
who largely own it’ (Trenin 2007, p. 95, see also Dawisha 2014). While Brazil and India have democratic
political institutions, they also share a type of capitalism that relies on clans as a mode of social
coordination that is supported by multi-party clientelism (Nölke 2010, May et al. 2019). So, even
though the BRICs suﬀer from high levels of wealth inequality that has increased sharply over the
past 15 years (Table 3), the determination of their political elites to improve structures of redistributive taxation through AEoI can therefore be called into question.
Finally, they have – to diﬀerent degrees – restricted the openness of their ﬁnancial systems,
making their economies less prone to international tax arbitrage by wealthy residents. The third
column of Table 4 contains the Chinn-Ito index of ﬁnancial openness (developed by Chinn and Ito
2006), which measures their degree of capital account openness by codifying the tabulation of
restrictions on cross-border ﬁnancial transactions reported in the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange
Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions. The index for the OECD’s advanced market economies
averaged 1 between 2004 and 2014, so the much lower value for the BRICs reﬂects the far higher
degree of legal restrictions on cross-border capital ﬂows throughout this period. They are less
restricted in their use of various capital controls to curb ﬁnancial outﬂows towards oﬀshore bank
accounts than the OECD’s advanced market economies, which remain entirely subscribed to the
norm of free capital mobility or – as in the EU countries – even have legal prohibitions against the
use of capital account restrictions. The BRICs, by contrast, believe that ‘the persistence of ﬁnancial
globalisation collides with state-capitalist preferences to minimise risk and to preserve economic
stability’ (Nölke et al. 2015, p. 22; see also Dierckx 2013). So, while for the advanced market economies
AEoI is the only strategy available to inhibit their residents from moving capital oﬀshore to evade
taxes, it is part of a broader menu of options available to BRIC politicians to curb tax-related
capital outﬂows.
These observations do not suggest that the BRICs do not have anything to beneﬁt from a multilateral AEoI regime. As Table 4 also shows, they belong to the top 7 countries with highest average
illicit capital ﬂows in the developing world: estimates suggest that since 2009 illegal outﬂows from
the BRICs amounted to almost 50 per cent of the developing world’s aggregate illegal outﬂows.
Trade misinvoicing by ﬁrms is commonly the preferred method to circumvent legal restrictions on
international ﬁnancial transactions (see Kar 2010, 2014, Kar and Freitas 2012, 2013, Kar and Spanjers
2015, for country case studies on Brazil, Russia, China and India). In this way, BRIC ﬁrms are able to
illicitly transfer capital to a foreign country either by over-invoicing imports or by under-invoicing
exports to foreign subsidiaries, which often reside in oﬀshore ﬁnancial centres and use incorrect
invoices to settle international transactions with foreign ﬁrms. From the perspective of BRICs governments, the main short- to medium-term threat to domestic political-economic stability is their persistent balance-of-payments vulnerability rather than ﬁscal weakness: excessive capital outﬂows risk
Table 3. Wealth share of the top decile in the BRICS.
Share in the top decile
China
India
Russia
Brazil
South Africa

2000
48.6%
65.9%
77.1%
69.4%
72.2%

Source: Davies et al. (2015).

2007
56.1%
72.3%
75.4%
68.8%
69.0%

Change in top decile share
2014
64.0%
74.0%
84.8%
73.3%
71.7%

2000–2007
rapid rise
rapid rise
fall
ﬂat
fall

2007–2014
rapid rise
rise
rapid rise
rapid rise
rise

2000–2014
rapid rise
rapid rise
rapid rise
rise
ﬂat

10

D. LESAGE ET AL.

Table 4 . Illicit capital ﬂows from developing countries in billions of US dollar.
Rank

Country

1
China
2
Russia
3
Mexico
4
India
5
Malaysia
6
Brazil
7
South Africa
8
Thailand
9
Indonesia
10
Nigeria
Total BRICS
BRICS as % of total
Developing world total

Chinn-Ito Index

2005

2007

2009

2011

2013

2004–2013

0.16
0.50
0.70
0.16
0.34
0.54
0.16
0.26
0.61
0.30

82.5
53.3
35.4
20.3
35.3
17.2
13.6
11.9
13.3
17.9
186.9
35.6%
524.6

107.4
81.2
46.4
34.5
36.5
16.4
27.3
10.3
18.4
19.3
266.9
38.2%
699.1

138.9
125.1
38.4
29.2
34.4
22.1
29.6
14.7
20.5
26.4
344.8
46.2%
747.0

133.8
183.5
63.3
85.6
50.2
31.1
23.0
27.4
18.3
18.3
457.0
45.3%
1007.7

258.6
120.3
77.6
83.0
48.3
28.2
17.4
33.0
14.6
26.7
507.6
46.6%
1090.1

1392.3
1049.8
528.4
510.3
418.5
226.7
209.2
191.8
180.7
178.0
3388.2
43.2%
7847.9

Source: Kar and Spanjers (2015), Chinn and Ito (2006).

undermining the state’s control over domestic banking credit to the non-ﬁnancial sector. These risks
can be particularly challenging for Brazil and India, which are dependent on a net inﬂux of private
capital to ﬁnance persistent current account deﬁcits (averaging, respectively, 3.6 per cent and 3.0
per cent between 2010 and 2014). However, the accumulation of current account surpluses and
massive foreign exchange reserves did not entirely shield China and Russia from destabilising
capital outﬂows. Increasing capital ﬂight since 2014 forced the People’s Bank of China to sell more
than US$ 1 trillion in foreign exchange reserves in order to defend its exchange rate peg in the
face of accelerating ﬁnancial outﬂows, potentially undercutting its ability to pursue monetary expansion and prevent a ‘hard landing’ of the domestic economy.
Here, it is important to highlight diﬀerences between the BRICS and OECD countries in terms of
illicit capital outﬂows to tax havens and OFCs. Given that the latter have all embraced the neoliberal
norm of free capital mobility, it is not illegal for a citizen to open up a bank account on a tax haven; it
is only illegal if he/she does not declare the capital income on that bank account to his/her tax authorities in order to evade capital income taxes. Capital outﬂows from the BRIC countries to tax havens
and OFCs, on the other hand, are illegal and illicit by deﬁnition if these ﬂows consist of evasion of
capital controls based on techniques like trade misinvoicing. The problem is that legal restrictions
on capital outﬂows can be notoriously leaky, as the above data testify. In this regard, participating
in a multilateral AEoI-regime can be considered an eﬀective instrument that is complementary to
the existing toolkit to curb illicit capital outﬂows: AEoI enables tax authorities to track down these
outﬂows and functions as a deterrent for capital control evasion by increasing the risk of getting
caught. Although CRS rules stipulate that the data obtained through the AE should be used conﬁdentially and can only be used for tax purposes (personal interview, May 2018), it should be noted that
the evasion of legal restrictions on capital outﬂows based on trade misinvoicing also amounts to tax
evasion by leading to an underreporting of corporate proﬁts.
A ﬁnal motivation to participate can be linked to domestic anti-corruption battles in the BRICs
countries, raising the spectre of domestic political exploitation of information received via AEoI.
According to Transparency International’s corruption perceptions index, the BRICs all lie below the
midpoint between 0 (‘highly corrupt’) and 100 (‘highly clean’): Brazil, India and China scored 40
(rank 79) in 2016 and Russia 29 (rank 131). Illicit capital outﬂows are intrinsically connected to
high levels of corruption. Records obtained by the international Consortium of Investigative Journalists (ICIJ) exposed secretive investments of top managers of Russian SOEs and close relatives of
Russian high-level oﬃcials in OFCs (Sheynov 2013). Brazil has been mired in corruption scandals at
SOEs, from which millions of funds were siphoned into secret bank accounts of ruling coalition politicians and business executives in Switzerland and oﬀshore ﬁnancial havens. Since president Xi
Jinping launched his anti-corruption campaign in 2012, more than 100,000 people (mostly politicians
and oﬃcials) have been indicted for corruption in China (The Economist 2015). Notably, Xi started his

NEW POLITICAL ECONOMY

11

campaign around the same time the Hurun Report was published, which contained survey results
revealing that wealthy Chinese hold 19 per cent of their assets overseas (The Economist 2012). In
India, Narendra Modi came to power pledging to overturn the status quo and ﬁght endemic corruption in both the public and private sectors. One measure included a ban on the largest currency bills
circulating in the economy in order to target vast amounts of untaxed money (Anand and Kumar
2016). As such, one of the beneﬁts of AEoI for the BRICs would be to collect information that
could be usefully exploited by incumbent political elites as a way to boost their domestic public
standing as champions of anti-corruption. While the primary purpose of the CRS is to curb international tax evasion, multiple forms of corruption are often entangled and exposing tax evasion
can lead to positive spillovers by acting as a deterrent for other forms of corruption (personal interview, May 2018).
At the same time, the potential involvement of these incumbent elites in corruption and illegal
capital ﬂight makes it likely that they will aim to protect political cronies and use the AEoI-obtained
information only selectively to dispose of political rivals. For instance, the ICIJ also revealed that close
relatives of China’s top leaders have held secretive oﬀshore companies in tax havens: conﬁdential
ﬁles included the ‘details of a real estate company co-owned by current President Xi Jinping’s
brother-in-law and British Virgin Islands companies set up by former Premier Wen Jiabao’s son
and also by his son-in-law’ (Guevara et al. 2014). This begs the question of whether the BRICs will
be tempted to engage in ‘mock compliance’ with regard to AEoI – that is, whether the legislative,
administrative and regulatory infrastructure they need to establish to enable AEoI will remain
dormant. By drawing on Walter’s (2008) study of the adoption of transnational ﬁnancial regulatory
standards by the East Asian countries, Woodward (2016) argues that mock compliance in the AEoI
regime is most likely when ‘states recognise that outright deﬁance […] would result in serious repercussions but where full compliance would impose signiﬁcant costs on powerful domestic groups and
actors’. At ﬁrst sight, mock compliance seems unlikely as the BRICs do not depend on the provision of
ﬁnancial secrecy services and have no real reason to forsake their obligation to share information on
foreign residents’ bank accounts. The key risk of their mock compliance is located at the receiving end
of the information exchange: their tax administration could selectively share exchanged information
with the central government so as to exploit compromising information on political rivals for domestic political purposes. This would run against internationally agreed rules on AEoI that preclude tax
administrations from sharing exchanged information with other local authorities and using it for nontax purposes.2

The BRICs from FATCA to the CRS
Moving on from the distinctive domestic political economy reasons for the BRICs’ interest in AEoI, we
now examine the international level to explain why they agreed to join the multilateral CRS regime
centred around a western-oriented organisation, and how their desire to participate can be linked to
the bilateral FATCA agreements they were forced to close with the United States.

Fatca and the BRICs
The BRIC governments have all signed an ‘intergovernmental agreement’ (IGA) with the United States
to comply with FATCA stipulations. There are two diﬀerent IGA models: under a Model 2 IGA foreign
ﬁnancial institutions report directly to the US government about their US customers, whereas a Model
1 IGA allows them to report this information to their national tax authority who will then hand over
the information to the IRS. Model 1 IGAs, in turn, come in two variants: Model 1a is reciprocal and
obliges US ﬁnancial institutions to divulge information about foreign residents of the country it is
signed with, whereas Model 1b is non-reciprocal (United States Treasury Department 2017). It
should be no surprise that the BRICs governments entered a Model 1a IGA with the expectation
that the United States would share information on BRIC residents’ US bank accounts on a reciprocal

12

D. LESAGE ET AL.

basis. Nevertheless, many scholars and practitioners are sceptical about the extent to which these
IGAs legally bind the United States to reciprocity (e.g. Christians 2013, Eccleston and Gray 2014, Hakelberg 2016a, 2016b). As the United States needs to enact new legislation in order to allow such full
reciprocity, it could only ‘acknowledge the need to achieve equivalent levels of reciprocal automatic
information exchange’ within a Model 1a FATCA IGA ‘by pursuing the adoption of regulations and
advocating and supporting relevant legislation to achieve such equivalent levels of reciprocal automatic exchange’ (Christians 2013, p. 2). When the Obama administration included FATCA reciprocity
measures in its budget proposals for 2014–2017, the US Congress refused to approve them. This left
many experts suspicious about the political willingness in the United States to provide reciprocity,
with some even suspecting it of attempting to become the last tax secrecy provider in the world
by holding oﬀ reciprocal AEoI (Drucker 2016).
The BRIC countries have been concerned about the lack of guaranteed reciprocity, which they perceived as an act of aggressive unilateralism. Opposition to FATCA was ﬁerce in Brazil, with members
of Congress calling the law an infringement of Brazil’s national sovereignty and civil rights of its citizens. A top oﬃcial at India’s Department of Revenue described FATCA as ‘inequitable’, stating that ‘It’s
a law which is made in USA, it’s law which is imposed by USA on the rest of the world. Its exchange of
information which is not fully reciprocal, yet India and other countries around the world have had to
sign those agreements’ (Akhilesh Ranjan quoted in Panday 2011). While agreeing that countering tax
evasion is important policy, a Chinese central bank oﬃcial claimed that
an uncoordinated extraterritorial measure such as FATCA is unlikely to generate broadly accepted solutions with full
consideration of the eﬀects on global ﬁnancial systems and the conﬂicts involved … A more coordinated multilateral approach should eventually replace the unilateral approach of FATCA. (Liu Xiangmin cited in Cochrane 2014)

Russia has been one of the most vocal critics of FATCA’s unilateralism and even refused to enter
into a bilateral IGA with the United States. The chief of Russia’s Federal Financial Monitoring Service
condemned FATCA for forcing Russian ﬁnancial institutions to ‘become tax agents, tax informants for
the US economy’, warning it would ‘undoubtedly present a serious risk to our economy’ (Yury Chickhansin cited in D’Amora 2014). Nevertheless, even Russia eventually enacted a new law to enable its
ﬁnancial institutions to comply with FATCA procedures after obtaining consent from account holders
and Russian tax authorities.3
How can we explain that, despite these fundamental concerns, the BRIC governments either
closed FATCA IGAs with the United States or – as in Russia’s case – adopted new legislation so as
to allow their ﬁnancial institutions to comply with FATCA stipulations? As Emmeneger (2015,
p. 478) has argued, the centrality of the US dollar to the global ﬁnancial system endowed the US government with the structural power to impose FATCA agreements:
[T]here is virtually no possibility for a bank to be internationally active without repeatedly trading in US dollars,
with US-based institutions, or with other banks that trade in US dollars or with US-based institutions. However, by
doing so, international banks are, from the point of view of US regulatory agencies, subject to US jurisdiction. This
combination of international banks’ economic dependence on access to the dollar-based ﬁnancial system and US
regulatory bodies’ ability to control access to it makes international ﬁnance structurally dependent on the United
States. (see also Hakelberg 2016a, 2016b)

It is well-known that the BRIC countries are very dependent on the US dollar-based ﬁnancial
system: their central banks have accumulated massive foreign exchange reserves that are mostly
invested in dollar-denominated assets, whereas the United States is a key consumer market for
their export-oriented ﬁrms (Vermeiren 2014). As internationally-oriented BRIC banks and corporations
obviously need access to the dollar-based ﬁnancial system, their respective governments had to
comply with FATCA regulations in order to avoid the substantial economic costs associated with
non-compliance: the BRICs engage in enormous ﬁnancial and trade transactions with the United
States, which are mostly settled in dollars and should be reported to US ﬁnancial institutions that
could charge a 30 per cent withholding tax to non-compliant foreign ﬁnancial institutions (Ramakrishnan et al. 2015).

NEW POLITICAL ECONOMY

13

These observations indicate that the BRICs resented being forced to comply with US tax
stipulations, suggesting a distinctive link between FATCA and their endorsement of the
OECD’s multilateral CRS regime. By participating in the latter regime and backing it as a multilateral solution to a common problem of tax evasion, they could ward oﬀ the perception that
they established a legal and administrative infrastructure to share information merely as a
passive reaction to US pressure. In contrast to FATCA, the CRS regime contains legal safeguards to ensure reciprocity: participating states ‘may suspend the exchange of information
under this Agreement by giving notice in writing to the other [participating state] that it
has determined that there is or has been signiﬁcant non-compliance by the other [participating state] with this Agreement’ (Section 7 of the CRS). As such, it can be argued that the BRIC
countries’ participation in the CRS regime followed both a ‘logic of appropriateness’ and ‘logic
of expected consequences’ (March and Olsen 1998): by subscribing to the principle of reciprocal multilateralism as the normative foundation of any appropriate AEoI regime, the BRICs
could potentially put pressure on the United States to pursue reciprocity within its Model
1a FATCA IGAs, which contain a commitment for both parties ‘to [work] with other partners
and the OECD … on adapting the terms of this Agreement to a common model for automatic
exchange of information’.4 If the US Congress remains unwilling to enact legislation that
requires US ﬁnancial institutions to obtain and report reciprocal information on non-resident
accounts, CRS countries that have entered into a Model 1a FATCA IGA with the United States
and have not received reciprocal information pertaining to their residents’ US accounts may
decide to stop sharing information with the IRS. In such a scenario the legitimate use of coercion by the United States would be much more diﬃcult.5

The OECD and the BRICs
At the international level, a ﬁnal institutional puzzle is that the BRIC countries accepted the Westernoriented OECD as the central organisation in the multilateral AEoI regime, in the absence of a true
world tax organisation (Tanzi 1999). The OECD has been the world’s de facto leading tax organisation,
and its regulatory norms and tax conventions spread beyond OECD members. The BRICs, along with
the wider Global South, have, in the past, criticised this Western-oriented organisation, denouncing it
as a ‘club of rich countries’ whose tax conventions were disadvantageous for the developing world
(Mishra 2012), and called for a global tax organisation under UN auspices. Rhetorically, the BRICs’ continued support for the latter (BRICs heads of state 2016), but their involvement in the OECD and
Global Forum threatens to further marginalise the role of the UN in tax matters. Their acceptance
of the OECD’s role in this case was based on a pragmatic recognition of its technical capacity, and
the requirement that they gain a form of ownership over the process. Following their agreement
on the multilateral AEoI agenda, the BRICs could have demanded that the UN Committee of
Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters, a highly technical subsidiary body to the UN
Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC), be its institutional home. However, they realised this
would have led to a political deadlock with the Western G20 countries, which would argue in
favour of the OECD (Interview with Indian government oﬃcial in London, November 2016). Furthermore, the UN probably did not have the technical capacity and expertise, nor the suﬃcient treaty
framework to realise a multilateral AEoI agreement, while the OECD could instantly oﬀer both. It
thus made sense to accept the technical role of the OECD in the case of AEoI and likewise in the
Base-Erosion and Proﬁt-Shifting (BEPS) process of corporate tax reform, the other big G20/OECD
tax undertaking (OECD 2015b). An OECD oﬃcial working in the Global Forum conﬁrmed this narrative, stating:
Multilateral AEoI is an area where the interests of countries are all aligned (except for tax havens). I do not see this
as within the traditional OECD-UN divide paradigm, or developed vs developing countries (Personal Interview,
May 2018).

14

D. LESAGE ET AL.

Another factor that convinced the BRICs to accept the OECD was that it offered them a sense of ownership. They participate in political agenda setting for the OECD through the G20, which arguably acts
as a more important principal than the OECD’s own Council in the case of AEoI. The BRICs agreed to
AEoI as the global norm during the 2012 Mexican G20 presidency, and the G20 Finance Ministers
explicitly tasked the OECD with the development of a new multilateral standard on AEoI, in
cooperation with G20 countries under the 2013 Russian presidency (G20 2013). They also secured
ownership through the expanded Global Forum which is in charge of monitoring and reviewing
members’ implementation of information exchange (OECD 2016a). Becoming part of this increased
their sense of ownership over the entire process, and more importantly made sure they were equals
to the OECD countries in the review stages. While the technical drafting of the CRS happened within
the OECD, this mattered relatively little to the BRICs since they could always opt not to sign if they did
not agree with the ﬁnal version. The implementation review is of greater political and symbolic
importance. If this would be the mandate of the OECD it would mean the BRICs would have to voluntarily subject themselves to the judgment of the ‘club of rich countries’. Mandating the Global Forum
with this task and implementing a peer-review process enhanced the BRIC ownership and equality
with the OECD countries. Their involvement in the Global Forum has continued to increase. They
held rotating positions on its steering group, including the (vice)-chair(s). In 2012, the OECD
Council allowed the employment of non-OECD nationals in the Global Forum. Since then, the
Global Forum Secretariat has been headed by an Indian national, and a mix of staff and secondees
from a wide range of nationalities are present. The Global Forum has since become a model internally
for other OECD bodies that wish to overcome divisions of OECD and non-OECD countries (Personal
interview, Paris, May 2018).
Finally, one motivation for the BRICs to participate in the OECD’s CRS regime could be that its
monitoring process does not pose a real threat to their national sovereignty as it lacks an adequate
enforcement mechanism. Indeed, as Grinberg (2016, p. 166) notes,
a coercive mechanism imposed by multiple sovereigns still needs to be established to ensure compliance – as
opposed to nominal commitment – to a multiple automatic information exchange system that provides
beneﬁts to multiple sovereigns … As long as the United States is the only country exercising coercive authority
to ensure compliance, defection from the emerging regime remains a possibility.

Since the CRS requires ‘the reporting obligations to be translated into domestic law’ and ‘the introduction of a framework to enforce compliance with those obligations’, national authorities remain
fully responsible for the adequate implementation of AEoI. At the international level, the CRS
regime therefore provides a facilitating context for domestic incentives to mock compliance identiﬁed in the previous section.

Conclusion
In this article, we examined the position of the BRICs countries in the emergence of the multilateral
OECD-centred CRS regime, which consolidated reciprocal AEoI as the new norm for global tax
cooperation in the struggle against tax evasion by wealthy individuals. The IPE literature on global
tax governance has ignored the pivotal role of the BRICs in the emergence of this regime, even
though as key members of the G20 they were indispensable in forging a new international consensus
on the importance of AEoI and mandating the Western-oriented OECD to develop a multilateral standard on AEoI. Scholars have focused on the crucial role of FATCA in consolidating the EU position on
AEoI and shifting the preferences of OFCs and foreign ﬁnancial institutions towards a global standard
as a way to minimise their compliance costs. The participation of the BRICs does not appear to be
puzzling for these scholars, as the gains of AEoI are believed to be non-rival: beneﬁts for the
Western G20 countries in terms of increased ﬁscal revenues ensuing from AEoI did not reduce the
beneﬁts for the BRICs.
By drawing on comparative capitalism scholarship on the BRICs’ domestic political economy, we
have problematised their preferences for AEoI by pointing to incentives that were distinctive

NEW POLITICAL ECONOMY

15

compared to those of OECD members. Domestically, the global ﬁnancial crisis had much less impact
on the BRIC governments’ ﬁscal balances and public debt levels, making the ﬁght against the evasion
of capital income taxes much less pressing than for OECD governments. Moreover, the compliance
costs of a multilateral AEoI regime were higher for the BRICs, as their banking systems are largely
state-owned, making it more diﬃcult to deﬂect these costs to the private ﬁnancial sector. Nevertheless, they are more vulnerable to illicit capital outﬂows, which create pressures on their balance-ofpayments and can have negative eﬀects on domestic credit ﬂows. In this regard, participation in a
multilateral AEoI regime should be seen as complementary to the set of capital controls available
to the them: it could become a key instrument to track down capital that has circumvented these
controls, reducing the attractiveness of illicit capital ﬂight and alleviating the pressure on their
balance-of-payments. Furthermore, AEoI could be a useful tool to boost the domestic public standing
of incumbent political elites by assisting them in their battle against black money and corruption,
which is an endemic feature of their state-permeated capitalism. Internationally, the BRICs have
been pragmatic in their acceptance of the OECD’s technical expertise in international tax governance,
while the risk of being subjected to the biased judgment of the ‘club of rich countries’ was attenuated
by securing a suﬃcient level of ownership over the process through their membership of the G20 and
the OECD’s Global Forum. Importantly, their endorsement of the CRS regime’s reciprocal multilateralism as the only acceptable standard for AEoI could also be seen as a normative strategy to push the
United States to uphold its promise to secure reciprocity in its FATCA IGAs.
Our examination of the BRICs’ position in the emergence of the CRS regime also raises several concerns about the eﬀectiveness of the multilateral AEoI standard and the regime of global tax governance in promoting global tax justice. One reason why the BRICs – which do not particularly stand out
as advocates of transparency in their domestic and foreign economic policies – agreed to participate
could be that there are plenty of opportunities for mock compliance within the regime. Domestically,
incumbent political elites can attempt to selectively use the ﬁnancial data received via the CRS by
pressing charges only against political rivals and shielding their political cronies against potentially
compromising information. Internationally, the CRS regime lacks a coercive mechanism to ensure
compliance. Its main enforcement mechanism resides at the national level: BRIC countries have
the responsibility to implement a legal framework to make sure their ﬁnancial institutions comply
with the obligations of the CRS, making it likely that their tax authorities and ﬁnancial institutions
will adopt a wait-and-see approach with respect to AEoI. Finally, while the BRICs see themselves at
the political forefront of the developing world and may continue to rhetorically endorse an inclusive
UN tax body, their position on international taxation towards developing countries may start to
resemble that of the OECD countries as their economic importance continues to grow. As such,
the OECD may continue to co-opt the BRICs and vice versa. This can either happen through adhoc OECD-plus arrangements, such as the Global Forum, or eventually through full OECD membership (Clifton & Díaz-Fuentes 2015). Brazils’ oﬃcial membership request in May 2017 is an interesting
new turn of events in this area (Reuters 2017). These developments would fundamentally transform
the OECD’s role in the world and will most likely render the UN even more irrelevant as a global tax
organisation.
These conclusions speak to central issues that have occupied debates in the broader IPE literature
on the implications of the rise of the BRICs for the western-promoted institutions of global economic
governance. While their statist domestic political economy can conﬂict with the liberal tenets of these
institutions, our case study showed that the BRICs aimed to extract as many beneﬁts as possible from
their engagement with newly established institutions without fundamentally relinquishing their
national sovereignty.

Notes
1. China’s macroeconomic stimulus, for instance, was largely funded by an extraordinary expansion of banking
credit since 2009: credit to the non-ﬁnancial sector skyrocketed to more than 240 per cent of GDP in 2015.

16

D. LESAGE ET AL.

2.

3.

4.
5.

Since 2007 the ratio in Brazil, Russia and South Africa increased by, respectively, 36 per cent, 50 per cent and 16
per cent, reaching 140 per cent, 92 per cent and 122 per cent of GDP in 2015. Only in India credit to the nonﬁnancial sector grew at about the same pace as GDP throughout this period, oscillating around 127 per cent
of GDP (Figure 1).
The OECD itself does not look at the information or how it is used, because of its conﬁdential nature. As such, the
accountability lies solely with the national tax administration. However, it is also important to recognise that there
is a learning curve towards handling the enormous amounts of newly acquired data that must not be confused
with mock compliance (Personal interview, May 2018).
Federal Law No. 173-FZ ‘Concerning Special Considerations Relating to the Conduct of Financial Operations with
Foreign Citizens and Legal Entities, the Introduction of Amendments to the Administrative Oﬀences Code of the
Russian Federation and the Annulment of Certain Provisions of Legislative Acts of the Russian Federation.’
See https://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Documents/reciprocal.pdf.
For China an additional beneﬁt of the CRS regime’s safeguard reciprocity was that is creates a ‘level-playing-ﬁeld’
for Hong Kong, whose status as global ﬁnancial center had to be protected from asymmetric compliance costs.
OFCs such as Hong Kong have been under such close scrutiny since the 2000s, so there was very little opportunity
for undetected non-compliance with respect to AEoI. By participating in the reciprocal CRS regime together with
Western OECD countries, these OFCs could maintain a level playing ﬁeld and avoid asymmetric compliance costs.

Acknowledgement
This work was supported by the Research Foundation Flanders under grant number 3F015115.

Disclosure Statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.

Funding
This work was supported by the Research Foundation Flanders under [grant number 3F015115].

Notes on contributors
Dries Lesage is associate professor of globalisation and global governance at Ghent University.
Wouter Lips is a junior researcher, funded by the Flanders Research Foundation, at Ghent University. He works on global
tax governance.
Mattias Vermeiren is assistant professor of International Political Economy at Ghent University. He is the author of Power
and Imbalances in the Global Monetary System: A Comparative Capitalism Perspective (Palgrave 2014) and co-author of
Rising Powers and Economic Crisis in the Euro Area (Palgrave 2016).

ORCID
Wouter Lips

http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3801-8727

References
Anand, G. and Kumar, H., 2016. Narendra Modi Bans India’s largest currency bills in bid to cut corruption [online].
New York Times, 8 Nov. Available from: https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/09/business/india-bans-largest-currencybills-for-now-n-bid-to-cut-corruption.html [Accessed 25 October 2017].
Becker, U., 2014. The brics and emerging economies in comparative perspective. London: Routledge.
Buhr, D. and Frankenberger, R., 2014. Emerging varieties of incorporated capitalism. Theoretical considerations and
empirical evidence. Business and politics, 16 (3), 393–427.
Chinn, M.D. and Ito, H., 2006. What matters for ﬁnancial development? capital controls, institutions, and Interactions.
Journal of development economics, 81 (1), 163–92.
Christians, A., 2013. What you give and what you get: reciprocity under a model 1 intergovernmental agreement on
FATCA. Cayman Financial Review, 1–8 April.

NEW POLITICAL ECONOMY

17

Clifton, J. and Díaz-Fuentes, D., 2015. From “club of the rich” to “globalization à la carte”? Evaluating reform at the OECD.
In: D. Lesage and T. van de Graaf, eds. Rising powers and multilateral institutions. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 60–78.
Cochrane, P., 2014. FATCA, China and the World. International link. Available from: http://www.internationallinkmagazine.
com.hk/news/editorialjuly2014.
D’Amora, D., 2014. Putin signs last-minute law to satisfy FATCA. The Moscow Times. Available from: http://www.
themoscowtimes.com/business/article/putin-signs-last-minute-law-to-satisfy-fatca/502732.html.
Davies, J., Lluberas, G., and Shorrocks, A., 2015. Global wealth report. Credit Suisse Research Institute, October.
Dawisha, K., 2014. Putin’s Kleptocrady. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Dickson, B., 2007. Integrating wealth and power in China: the communist party’s embrace of the private sector. China
quarterly, 192, 827–54.
Dierckx, S., 2013. After the crisis and beyond the new constitutionalism? The case of the free movement of capital.
Globalizations, 10 (6), 803–18.
Drucker, J., 2016. The word’s favorite new tax haven is the United States [online]. Bloomberg, 27 Jan. Available from:
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-01-27/the-world-s-favorite-new-tax-haven-is-the-united-states
[Accessed 24 Feb 2019].
Eccleston, R., 2012. The Dynamics of global economic governance. The ﬁnancial crisis, the OECD and the politics of international tax cooperation. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Eccleston, R. and Gray, F., 2014. Foreign accounts tax compliance act and American leadership in the campaign against
international tax evasion: revolution or false dawn? Global policy, 5 (3), 321–33. http://doi.org/10.1111/1758-5899.
12122
The Economist, 2012. BoP until you drop. 4 Aug.
The Economist, 2015. Rubber barons, beware, 22 Oct.
Emmenegger, P., 2015. The long arm of justice: U. S. structural power and international banking. Bussiness and politics, 17
(3), 73–493. http://doi.org/10.1515/bap-2014-0046
Emmenegger, P., 2017. Swiss banking secrecy and the problem of international cooperation in tax matters: A nut too hard
to crack? Regulation and governance, 11 (1), 24–40. http://doi.org/10.1111/rego.12106
G20, 2009. London summit: leaders’ statement. 2 Apr.
G20, 2013. G20 Saint-Petersburg summit Leader’s declaration.
Genschel, P. and Schwarz, P., 2011. Tax competition: a literature review. Socio-economic review, 9 (2), 339–70. http://doi.
org/10.1093/ser/mwr004
Grinberg, I., 2012. Beyond FATCA: an evolutionary moment for the international tax system (working draft). Ssrn electronic
journal. http://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1996752
Grinberg, I., 2016. Does FATCA teach broader lessons about international tax multilateralism? In: P. Dietsch and T. Rixen,
eds. Global tax goverance: what is wrong and how to ﬁx it. Colchester: ECPR Press, 157–75.
Guevara, M., et al., 2014. Leaked records reveal oﬀshore holdings of China’s Elite [online]. Available from: http://www.icij.
org/oﬀshore/leaked-records-reveal-oﬀshore-holdings-chinas-elite [Accessed 10 March 2016].
Hakelberg, L., 2015. The power politics of international tax co-operation: Luxembourg, Austria and the automatic
exchange of information. Journal of european public policy, 22 (3), 409–28. http://doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2014.
941380
Hakelberg, L., 2016a. Coercion in international tax cooperation: identifying the prerequisites for sanction threats by a
great power. Review of international political economy, 23 (3), 511–41. http://doi.org/10.1080/09692290.2015.1127269
Hakelberg, L., 2016b. Power in international tax policy. The preconditions and redistributive consequences of credible sanction threats. Florence: European University Institute.
Heiberg, J., 2012. Fatca: toward a multilateral regime. Washington & lee law review, 69, 1685–714.
Huotari, M. and Hanemann, T., 2014. Emerging powers and change in the global ﬁnancial order. Global policy, 5 (3), 298–
310.
Jaeger, M., 2011. BRIC banking systems after the crisis. Deutsche Bank Research, Talking Point, 11 July.
Johannesen, N., 2014. Tax avoidance with cross-border hybrid instruments. Journal of public economics, 112, 40–52.
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2014.01.011
Kahler, M., 2013. Rising powers and global governance: negotiating change in a resilient status quo. International aﬀairs,
89 (3), 711–29.
Kar, D., 2010. The drivers and dynamics of illicit ﬁnancial ﬂows from India: 1948–2008 [online]. Global Financial Integrity,
November. Available from: https://www.gﬁntegrity.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/GFI_India.pdf [Accessed 24
February 2019].
Kar, D., 2014. Brazil: capital ﬂight, illicit ﬂows, and macroeconomic crises, 1960–2012 [online]. Global Financial Integrity,
September. Available from: https://www.gﬁntegrity.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/Brazil-Capital-Flight-IllicitFlows-and-Macroeconomic-Crises-1960-2012.pdf [Accessed 24 February 2019].
Kar, D. and Freitas, S., 2012. Illicit ﬁnancial ﬂows from China and the role of trade misinvoicing [online]. Global Financial
Integrity, October. Available from: https://www.gﬁntegrity.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/gﬁ-china-oct2012report-web.pdf [Accessed 24 February 2019].

18

D. LESAGE ET AL.

Kar, D. and Freitas, S., 2013. Russia: illicit ﬁnancial ﬂows and the role of the underground economy [online]. Global
Financial Integrity, February. Available from: http://russia.gﬁntegrity.org/Russia_Illicit_Financial_Flows_and_the_
Role_of_the_Underground_Economy-Web.pdf [Accessed 24 February 2019].
Kar, D. and Spanjers, J., 2015. Illicit ﬁnancial ﬂows from developing countries: 2004–2013 [online]. Global Financial
Integrity, December. Available from: https://www.gﬁntegrity.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/IFF-Update_2015Final-1.pdf [Accessed 24 February 2019].
Kinsley, C., et al., 2015. FATCA and CRS: the changing landscape of ﬁscal disclosure. International Tax Review, 4 Dec.
Kudrle, R.T., 2014. The OECD and the international tax regime: persistence Pays Oﬀ. Journal of comparative policy analysis:
research and practice, 16 (3), 201–15. http://doi.org/10.1080/13876988.2013.834642
Lesage, D. and van de Graaf, T., 2015. Analytical framework and ﬁndings. In: D. Lesage and T. van de Graaf, eds. Rising
powers and multilateral institutions. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 3–13.
Lesage, D., Vermeiren, M. and Dierckx, S., 2014. New constitutionalism, international taxation and crisis. In: S. Gill & A.C.
Cutler, eds. New constitutionalism and world order (pp. 197–2010). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1-19.
Li, X. and Shaw, T., 2013. The political economy of Chinese state capitalism. Journal of China and international relations, 1
(1), 1–26.
March, J. and Olsen, J., 1998. The institutional dynamics of international political orders. International organization, 52 (4),
943–969.
May, C., Nölke, A., and ten Brink, T., 2019. Public-private coordination in large emerging economies: the case of Brazil,
India and China. Contemporary politics. doi:10.1080/13569775.2018.1555781.
McNally, C.A., 2012. Sino-capitalism: China’s reemergence and the international political economy. World politics, 64 (4),
741–776. http://doi.org/10.1017/S0043887112000202
Mishra, S.K., 2012. Letter to Alexander Trepelkov [online]. Available from: https://www.un.org/esa/ﬀd/tax/2012ICTM/
LetterIndia.pdf.
Musacchio, A. and Lazzarini, S., 2014. Reinventing state capitalism Leviathan in business, Brazil and beyond. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Nölke, A., 2010. A “BRIC”-variety of capitalism and social inequality: the case of Brazil. Revista de Estudos e Pesquisas sobre
as Américas, 4 (1), 1–16.
Nölke, A., et al., 2015. Domestic structures, foreign economic policies and global economic order: implications from the
rise of large emerging economies. European journal of international relations, 21 (3), 538–67.
OECD, 2015a. Common reporting standard [online]. Available from: http://www.oecd.org/tax/automatic-exchange/
common-reporting-standard/ [Accessed 18 November 2015].
OECD, 2015b. OECD/G20 Base Erosion and Proﬁt Shifting Project. Executive Summaries 2015 Final Reports [online].
Available from: http://doi.org/10.1016/S0090-2616(15)00007-8.
OECD, 2016a. Global forum on transparancy and exchange of information for tax purposes [online]. Available from: http://
www.oecd.org/tax/transparency/ [Accessed 9 February 2016].
OECD, 2016b. List of Uncooperative Tax Havens [online]. Avaliable from: http://www.oecd.org/countries/monaco/
listofunco-operativetaxhavens.htm [Accessed 1 November 2016].
OECD, 2016c. Signatories of the Multilateral Competent Authority Agreement and Intended First Information Exchange
Date. Status as of 2 November 2016 [online]. Avaliable from: http://www.oecd.org/ctp/exchange-of-tax-information/
MCAA-Signatories.pdf.
Orsini, A., Morin, J., and Young, O., 2013. Regime complexes: A buzz, a boom, or a boost for global governance? Global
governance, 19 (1), 27–39.
Palan, R. and Wigan, D. 2014. Herding cats and taming tax havens: the US strategy of “not in my backyard.” Global policy, 5
(3), 334–43. http://doi.org/10.1111/1758-5899.12135
Panday, V., 2011. PM Manmohan Singh reminds G20 about pledge to end bank secrecy. Available from: http://articles.
economictimes.indiatimes.com/2011-11-04/news/30359509_1_tax-evasion-or-tax-exchange-of-tax-relatedinformation-bank-secrecy [Accessed 10 February 2016].
Pogge, T. and Mehta, K., 2016. Global tax fairness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ramakrishnan, A., et al., 2015. FATCA: high-cost initiative to curb tax evasion [online]. Aranca Report, 30 Sept. Available
from:
https://www.aranca.com/knowledge-library/special-reports/business-research/fatca-high-cost-initiative-tocurb-tax-evasion [Accessed 24 February 2019].
Raustalia, K. and Victor, D.G., 2004. The regime complex for plant genetic resources. International organization, 58 (2),
277–309.
Reuters, T., 2017. Update 1-Brazil seeks to join OECD despite political crisis [online]. Avaliable from: http://mobile.reuters.
com/article/amp/idUSL1N1IW1X2 [Accessed 7 July 2017].
Rixen, T., 2013. Why reregulation after the crisis is feeble: shadow banking, oﬀshore ﬁnancial centers, and jurisdictional
competition. Regulation & governance, 7 (4), 435–59.
Sawyer, A., 2014. Will Hong Kong Succumb to international pressure on taxation matters? Asia paciﬁc law review, 22 (2), 3–
32.
Schmalz, S. and Ebenau, M., 2012. After neoliberalism? Brazil, India, and China in the global economic crisis after neoliberalism? Globalizations, 9 (4), 487–501.

NEW POLITICAL ECONOMY

19

Sheynov, R., 2013. Elites undermine putin rail against tax havens [online]. Available from: http://www.icij.org/oﬀshore/
elites-undermine-putin-rail-against-tax-havens [Accessed 10 March 2016].
Stephenson, M., 2014. Rising powers, global capitalism and liberal global governance: a historical materialist account of
the BRICs challenge. European journal of international relations, 20 (4), 912–38.
Tanzi, V., 1999. Is there a need for a world tax organization? In: A. Razin and E. Sadka, eds. The economics of globalization,
policy persepectives from public economics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 173–86.
Trenin, D., 2007. Getting Russia right. Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment.
United States Treasury Department, 2017. FATCA Recourse Center [online]. Available from: http://www.treasury.gov/
resource-center/tax-policy/treaties/Pages/FATCA.aspx [Accessed 10 February 2017].
Vermeiren, M., 2014. Power and imbalances in the global monetary system: a comparative capitalism perspective.
Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Vlcek, W., 2016. Oﬀshore ﬁnance and global governance disciplining the tax nomad. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Walter, A., 2008. Governing ﬁnance: East Asia’s adoption of transparency standards. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Woo, J., et al., 2013. Distributional consequences of ﬁscal consolidation and the role of ﬁscal policy: what do the data say?
Washington, DC: IMF Working Paper No. 13/195.
Woodward, R., 2016. A strange revolution: mock compliance and the failure of the OECD’s international tax transparency
regime. In: P. Dietsch and T. Rixen, eds. Global tax governance - what is wrong with it and how to ﬁx it. Colchester: ECPR
Press, 103–21.

