"BUPOLO" Movement
Abstract: Maghrib Bupolo movement chant is a form of social movement initiated by the Government of Buru
together with the Ministry of Religious Affairs Buru as efforts to use maghrib time and avoid the public from
the negative impact of technological developments and to make the movement as a medium pruralisme
achievement. Bupolo movement recite Maghrib received a positive response from the community where the
initiation is done society to become an instrument of achieving the harmonization of social life to look after each
and remind the maghrib time utilization. In addition, the mapping of sectoral activities in the community recite
Maghrib Bupolo Movement spawned two components moral and ethical.

Keywords: Quran; pruralisme; maghrib; movement.
I.

Introduction

Namlea sub-district is the capital of Buru district consisting of seven villages and 11 hamlets.
The total area of 226.55 km² Namlea subdistrict and district region which has the largest
population in Buru. Namlea District residents according to the Central Bureau of Statistics in
2018 was 34 326 inhabitants. This number continues to grow every year with 6.26 percent
population growth rate (BPS data, 2018). With this population growth, will automatically
lead to the increasing heterogeneity of the population in Sub Namlea.
Increasing population density so quickly may result in heterogeneity becomes a threat that
could interfere with the process of social life. Buru understand the character of society as
heterogeneous society as a consequence of a new area that should receive migrants from
the area around the Moluccas [1], In addition, an abundant natural resource potential is the
main attraction for outsiders to live and settle in Buru [2], Conditions that lead to
heterogeneous cause local governments through the legal department together with the
Ministry of Religion Buru plan a program that aims to ward off many bad influences or
negative impact on the condition of society and the development of communication for
people in Buru. Bupolo movement recite Maghrib (Stadium) went on to become the new
paradigm for education and learning community in Buru.
Orientation for education and learning the Quran Maghrib Bupolo Movement can be a
media-actualization for the achievement of pluralism. Pluralism is an understanding that
teach that all religions are equal[3], So that truth is relative [4], Therefore there can be no
one religion that claims to be the only true religion [5], "Religious plurality" is a condition of
living together (coexistence) [6] between religions (in the broadest sense) [7]Different in
one community while maintaining the specific characteristics or the teachings of each
religion [8], Great expectations with the pluralism of the public life in Buru more
harmonious and prosperous.
Indra in his research on the implementation of the program management community
movements sunset Koran in the province of West Sumatra suggests the benefits of the
program dusk Koran is shaping the attitude and behavior of public morality, build social
engineering (social engineering) which are based on the spirit of local wisdom and spiritual
values, motion sunset Quran as a medium to build a strong bond in order to form a family
[9], Meanwhile, Sapendi in research on building social relationships across religions in
school, explaining the school as an educational environment that provides context for the
development of students in various aspects. Environmental education is everything that
exists in the school that interact directly or indirectly with students and can reconstruct the
values pruralisme [10], This study was conducted based on the preferences of the program
in the district dusk chanting Namlea as social engineering efforts in actualizing pruralisme.
1| Page

II.

method

The research was conducted in the District Namlea, Buru. Subdistrict Namlea selected as the
study site because the percentage of the population as well as aspects of heterogeneity
which is high compared with other districts that are in Buru.
In step interview depth interviews with relevant parties [11] as well as providing
questionnaires to the informant at these locations in response to the implementation of the
Quran Maghrib Bupolo Movement [12], Researchers are also looking for complementary
information [13] related to the implementation Movement recite the maghrib Bupolo run
by the government and the people in the District Namlea via the internet and library
research using document / state archive [14] associated with the policy for Maghrib Bupolo
Movement Quran.
The analysis technique used in this research is the analysis of qualitative data is given
following the concept of Miles and Huberman and Spradley. Miles and Huberman, suggests
that activity in the qualitative data analysis performed interactively and continues over at
every stage of research so as to completion and its data until saturated. Activities in the data
analysis of data reduction (data reduction), presentation of data (data display), conclusion
or verification (conclusion drawing / verification).
III.

Results and Discussion

Maghrib movement Quran is the movement of Religious Affairs of the Republic of Indonesia
which was launched in 2013. This movement is motivated by the scarcity of children who
recite the Quran at present, that with this expectation, is expected to motivate parents to
send their children Maghrib prayers and Quran at the time of Maghrib [15], Meanwhile, the
Movement Bupolo Maghrib Koran in Buru pioneered by Regent Ramly Umasugi, S.Pi., MM.
trying to realize the significance of the utilization of the maghrib time to learning, education
and the strengthening of religious values.
Quran is one of the acts of worship very closely with the Muslim community in the District
Namlea, since the early development of Islam in Buru [2], A number of houses of worship
such as prayer rooms, mosques and others constantly enlivened by chanting activities,
especially in the late afternoon after prayers or Maghrib “ba'da”. For the people in the
District Namlea, not unlike the Koran into non-formal religious educational institutions.
Viewed from the side benefits, children and teens who love to recite them to follow the
association will inhibit excessive [16], Filter out the bad influence from the outside and be
filial to parents and also make the child more fluent in reading the Qur'an [17],
Initiation by the community is a appreciation for programs that are considered in
accordance with their socio-cultural conditions. On measures of control, urges and invites a
social act. By using Max Weber's theory of social action [18], We can understand the
behavior of individuals and groups that each have different motives and goals against an
action taken [3], As disclosed by Weber, the best way to understand the various groups is
appreciated typical forms of action that became his trademark. So that we can understand
the reasons why the people of that society acts [19],
For every action there is orientation to be achieved by the people for the success of the
destination, it uses the maghrib time [20], Such measures restrict vehicle by closing the road
for that activity does not interfere with the sound of the engine. In addition, calls to close
the shops / stalls do for restrict economic activity so that people with activities focused only
maghrib Koran.
Examine further the meaning of social action against prulalisme then According to Emil
Durkheim [18], Religious pluralism should be developed for two reasons. First, pluralism is a
2| Page

social attitudes and actions of religious communities with one another, either in one religion
or more than one religion [21], Second, pluralism there are social processes that are
associative[22], Particularly in religious dialogue. In this regard, religious pluralism analyzed
using sociological perspective because it happened the social processes that are associative
[23], Thus, there is a chance in a variety of possibilities to uphold religious pluralism in social
values that underlie the meaning of a desire for peaceful coexistence between the various
elements of society [24],
Morals and ethics became an important part of people's activities in maghrib time. Moral
religion is defined as motivation and inspiration for the believer as a guide to life[25], while
ethics is a rational argument that has the social, cultural and political. Ethics emphasizes the
role of human beings in life and overcome the problems of diverse ethical life [26],
Contains moral teachings views on moral values and norms which are among a group of
people [4], The moral value as human beings is human kindness. Moral term derived from
the Latin, the plural of the mores commensurate with the word customs, morals are in
accordance with the general ideas received about action [27], Meanwhile, the ethical
standards that govern the behavior of society [28], Ethics deals with the concept of the
values of good and being a model of human relationships between people such as truth,
freedom, honesty, justice, love, compassion and refers to the good life, of what is good and
bad, about whether there is the correct destination and wrong, and how knowing that there
[29],
IV.

Conclusion

The desire to take advantage of the maghrib time became a major foundation in the Koran
Maghrib penyelenggaaraan Bupolo Movement in District Namlea with the aim of achieving
the attitudes and behavior are getting better towards the harmonization of public life in
Buru. Initiation of community becomes an instrument to bring forth sympathy and empathy
in order to actualization pruralisme the people in the District Namlea.
Sectoral mapping communities in the implementation Bupolo Movement Maghrib Koran
explains that morality and ethics into the primary capital to grow and maintain the people in
the District pruralisme Namlea so that the sustainability of public life can be a unity in
diversity.

[1]

[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]

References
M. C. B. Umanailo, “Proceeding of Community Development Integration of Community
Empowerment Models [ Pengintegrasian Model Pemberdayaan Masyarakat ] M Chairul
Basrun Umanailo Abstrak,” Proceeding Community Dev., vol. 2, pp. 268–277, 2018.
M. C. B. Umanailo, Masyarakat Buru Dalam Perspektif Kontemporer, 1st ed. Namlea: Mega
Utama, 2015.
K. Marshall, “Global education challenges: Exploring religious dimensions,” Int. J. Educ.
Dev., vol. 62, pp. 184–191, Sep. 2018.
A. G. B. Cruz, Y. Seo, and M. Buchanan-Oliver, “Religion as a field of transcultural practices
in multicultural marketplaces,” J. Bus. Res., vol. 91, pp. 317–325, Oct. 2018.
D. H. U. Sumbulah and Nurjanah, PLURALISME AGAMA Makna dan Lokalitas Pola
Kerukunan Antarumat Beragama. Malang: UIN Maliki Malang, 2013.
A. Hasan Afandi and M. Chairul Basrun Umanailo, “Watudakon Citizens ’Social Conflict on
Joker Toll Road Development in 2017 in Kesamben District, Jombang Regency,” J. Soc. Sci.
Res., no. 5, pp. 656–661, 2018.
B. Sam et al., “Female Feminism in the Customary Island of Buru,” Int. J. Sci. Technol. Res.,
vol. 8, no. 8, 2019.
3| Page

[8]

[9]
[10]

[11]

[12]
[13]

[14]

[15]

[16]

[17]
[18]
[19]
[20]

[21]

[22]
[23]
[24]
[25]

[26]
[27]

[28]
[29]

L. Rumkel, B. Sam, and M. C. B. Umanailo, “Village Head Partnership, Village Consultative
Body and Customary Institution in Village Development,” Int. J. Sci. Technol. Res., vol. 8, no.
8, 2019.
B. S. Amanto, M. C. B. Umanailo, R. S. Wulandari, T. Taufik, and S. Susiati, “Local
Consumption Diversification,” Int. J. Sci. Technol. Res., vol. 8, no. 8, 2019.
M. C. B. Umanailo, N. Handayani, A. Masniati, S. H. Makatita, and S. Lisaholit, “The
Urbanization and Diversification of Farmland Namlea Village,” Int. J. Sci. Technol. Res., vol.
8, no. 8, 2019.
S. Rachman, H. Hamiru, M. C. B. Umanailo, Y. Yulismayanti, and H. Harziko, “Semiotic
Analysis of Indigenous Fashion in The Island of Buru,” Int. J. Sci. Technol. Res., vol. 8, no. 8,
2019.
R. Umanailo, M. Nawawi, M. C. B. Umanailo, S. Malik, and I. Hentihu, “Conversion of
Farmland Namlea Subdistrict,” Int. J. Sci. Technol. Res., vol. 8, no. 8, 2019.
S. Yusuf, M. C. B. Umanailo, R. N. Putri, D. Q. M. Ely, and D. Darma, “Village Institution
Relations in the Utilization of Village Funds in Namlea District,” Int. J. Sci. Technol. Res., vol.
8, no. 8, 2019.
A. Wibowo, M. A. Fegumi, Muchsinin, F. Nursidiq, P. H. Al-, and Rasyid, “Gerakan taman
baca ‘perpustakaan dusun’ dari mahasiswa untuk desa,” J. Inov. dan Kewirausahaan, vol. 2,
no. 1, pp. 63–67, 2013.
M. R. Khairullah, “Evaluasi Peraturan Daerah Nomor 2 Tahun 2013 Tentang Gerakan
Masyarakat Maghrib Mengaji Di Kabupaten Kampar,” JOM FISIP, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–45,
2017.
R. Misra, S. Srivastava, and D. K. Banwet, “Do religious and conscious investors make better
economic decisions? Evidence from India,” J. Behav. Exp. Financ., vol. 22, pp. 64–74, Jun.
2019.
D. Indra, “Pelaksanaan Manajemen Program Gerakan Masyarakat Magrib Mengaji Di Provinsi
Sumatera Barat (Study Komparatif Di Tiga Daerah),” Al-Fikrah, vol. 2, no. 2, 2014.
M. C. B. Umanailo, “Discourse on the Consumerist Community Consumption,” J. Soc. Sci.
Res. ISSN(e), vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 1181–1186, 2019.
A. Muhlis and Nurkholis, “Analisis Tindakan Sosial Max Weber Dalam Tradisi Pembacaan
Kitab Mukhtashar Al-Bukhari,” J. Living Hadis, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 1–17, 2016.
A. Jiménez, G. F. Jiang, B. Petersen, and J. Gammelgaard, “Within-country religious diversity
and the performance of private participation infrastructure projects,” J. Bus. Res., vol. 95, pp.
13–25, Feb. 2019.
H. Abadi, E. Ibnususilo, and Rahdiansyah, “Review Of Implementation Of Government
Authorities In Policy-Making In The "Religious Affairs”,” Talrev, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 79–97,
2018.
P. S. Gorski, D. K. Kim, J. Torpey, and J. Van Antwerpen, Eds., The Post-Secular in Quetion:
Religion in Contemporary Society. New York and London: New York University Press, 2012.
S. Abdullah, “Potensi dan Kekuatan Modal Sosial dalam Suatu Komunitas,” SOCIUS J.
Sosiol., vol. 12, pp. 15–21, 2013.
N. Rachmat, “Sosio-Teologis : Memahami Dualitas Perspektif Pluralisme Agama di
Indonesia,” J. Multikultural Multireligius, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 43–52, 2012.
C. Li, Y. Xu, A. Gill, Z. A. Haider, and Y. Wang, “Religious beliefs, socially responsible
investment, and cost of debt: Evidence from entrepreneurial firms in India,” Emerg. Mark.
Rev., vol. 38, pp. 102–114, Mar. 2019.
B. M. Faturahman, “pluralisme agama dan modernitas pembangunan,” in Seminar Nasional
Islam Moderat, 2018, pp. 20–41.
I. Hudi, “Pengaruh Pengetahuan Moral Terhadap Perilaku Moral Pada Siswa Smp Negeri Kota
Pekan Baru Berdasarkan Pendidikan ORANGTUA,” J. Moral Kemasyarakatan, vol. 2, no. 1,
pp. 30–44, 2017.
A.-A. Egeh, O. Dugsieh, K. Erlandsson, and F. Osman, “The views of Somali religious leaders
on birth spacing – A qualitative study,” Sex. Reprod. Healthc., vol. 20, pp. 27–31, Jun. 2019.
S. Sarjana and N. Khayati, “Pengaruh Etika, Perilaku, Dan Kepribadian Terhadap Integritas
Guru,” J. Pendidik. dan Kebud., vol. 1, no. 3, p. 379, 2017.
4| Page

