These are proofs of the final publication available at SAGE via History of the Human Sciences:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695111421865

‘Bildung’ in German human sciences: the discursive transformation of a concept
Julian Hamann, University of Bamberg

Abstract
This article analyses the transformation of the notion of Bildung that is constructed in the
German human sciences. From a perspective of field theory and discourse analysis, the article
reveals how the notion evolves and stabilizes during a first stage (1810–60), how it comes under
pressure because of the contextual changes in a second stage (1860–1960) and how the tension
increases before it is resolved by a fundamental change of the traditional notion of Bildung in
a third stage (1960–99).

Introduction
How can we grasp the relationship between ideas and contexts? How do concepts change in
relation to the altering circumstances they are produced and received in? The aim of this article
is to put forward an answer to these questions by means of an empirical example. A historical
exploration, led by Bourdieu’s field theory and discourse analysis, traces the transformation of
the notion of Bildung1 that is constructed discursively in the field of German human sciences2
and relates it to a selection of contextual factors that are crucial in this process. The main part
of the article describes the development in the discourse about Bildung in three formative
stages. To this end, the specific material and symbolic contextual factors that form a framework
for the struggles over Bildung are examined in each case. The concluding remarks put the
insights that have been provided by the empirical example into a broader context and relate
them to the questions that have been posed at the beginning. The article starts off with a brief
overview of the methodological and empirical premises guiding the examination.
Since the very beginning of their existence as a disciplinary group, the German human sciences
have bred a whole literary genre concerned with the state they are in – needless to say this has
There is no direct translation for the German term Bildung, and the variation of the concept’s meaning over time
is the very matter of this article. What seems to be beyond dispute over a long period of time is that Bildung covers
a form of self-cultivation and learnedness, embracing the whole personality of the individual. The formed or valuesaturated personality is attained by understanding and experiencing general cultural values (more successful
attempts at translating the traditional concept can be found in Ringer, 1989; Sorkin, 1983). However, by and by
this notion has been transformed into a notion of Bildung that is closer to vocational training than to selfcultivation, providing a certain set of skills rather than aiming at the whole personality and teaching practical
abilities and competencies rather than passing on general cultural values. This article aims at the scientific notion
of the concept of Bildung, leaving out its relevance for primary and secondary education.
2
Just like the term Bildung, Geisteswissenschaften is another concept that is difficult to translate as it has no direct
equivalent in other languages. The term has its roots in the Romantic, idealistic and neo-humanistic climate of late
18th- and early 19th-century Germany, when on philological, philosophical and historical disciplines – that up
until today form the core of the disciplinary group – was conferred the status of sciences. The constitutional
moment of the Geisteswissenschaften was when the merely propaedeutic occupation with classical languages was
superseded by research, led by an impetus to scientifically analyse the spirit (Geist) of the Greeks, who were
deemed to be kindred with the philosophical nation that was Germany (concise descriptions of the term and origin
of the Geisteswissenschaften can be found in Diemer, 1974; Geldsetzer, 1974; Rüegg, 2004). Throughout the text,
‘human sciences’ will be used as a translation of the term.
1

1

These are proofs of the final publication available at SAGE via History of the Human Sciences:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695111421865

almost always been a state of crisis. A pivotal topic of this discursive context is the reflection
about the legitimate notion of Bildung. While the label itself has been ever-present in the selfconception of the disciplinary group, its very meaning is subject to the interpretational efforts
taking place in the human sciences. The notion is generated in the field’s specialist discourse
and, at the same time, it generates the agents’ practice in this context. As both a structuring and
structured structure of knowledge (cf. Bourdieu, 1991: 164–6), the respective dominant
construction of Bildung possesses an especially high capacity of structuration in the selfreflective discourse of the field of human sciences, because the disciplinary group is (held)
responsible for the definition and preservation of a national cultural canon.3
Against the background of Bourdieu’s field theory, the discursive construction of Bildung can
be understood as a symbolic struggle. The subjects of these struggles are definitions of positions
that can be taken, as well as of resources that can be acquired in the field. In other words, ‘[w]hat
is at stake in the symbolic struggle is the monopoly of legitimate nomination, the dominant
viewpoint which, in gaining recognition as the legitimate viewpoint, causes its truth as a
specific, situated, dated viewpoint to be misconstrued’ (Bourdieu, 1988: 26). Different
constructions of Bildung are but one exemplary result of the symbolic struggles taking place in
the field.
The agents’ interpretations and attributions unfurl in a material context that presents itself as a
structure of available resources. The respective allocation of these resources marks a space of
possibilities in which knowledge can be produced and received. In the following, this material
structure of the field of German human sciences is being considered with two indicators. First,
the indicator population embraces the number and the social background of the students as well
as the mode of recruitment of the professors. Second, the indicator institutional differentiation
draws attention to the structure of subjects in German human sciences as an organizational
frame of the development. However, shape and outcome of symbolic struggles are not only
influenced by the availability or scarcity of material resources that is captured rudimentarily by
the two indicators above. The actors’ struggles are also framed by a symbolic structure,
understood as common ascriptions and knowledge that is widely acknowledged in the discourse
and that is taken into account during those efforts. The study approaches this symbolic frame
with the indicator notion of science.4 Generally speaking, statements about this notion establish
the respective standards for the scientific character of the disciplines. Hence, they are a
fundamental part of the discursive self-reflection of German human sciences. Furthermore, the
dominant notion of science has a high capacity of structuration for the practice in the whole
field, not least because of the unity of research and teaching (Einheit von Forschung und Lehre).

3

Ringer (1990: 87) emphasizes that the importance of this concept goes beyond the academic field of German
human sciences: ‘The word Bildung, as it evolved during the late eighteenth century, contained the single most
important tenet of the mandarin tradition.’
4
The term Wissenschaft is a prominent example of the close relation of a concept’s meaning and its context. A
specific trait of the German term Geisteswissenschaften is that the disciplines included in it are still very much
residing in the area of science. In this regard, there has never been a clear distinction between arts and human
sciences on the one side and science on the other side, which is the common systematization in probably most
other western countries. Science in the German sense of Wissenschaft covers any systematic inquiry. English
readers of this article will have to bear this in mind, because the remarks about the notion of science that can be
found in the following are always meant as a reference to science in the German sense. The common scientific
ground that Geisteswissenschaften and Naturwissenschaften are sharing is going to form the foundation for fierce
competition later on. Right now, it is sufficient to consider that the notions and standards that are ascribed to the
practice in German human sciences have a scientific character that is – at least in principle – comparable to the
notion of science in force in every other scientific field.

2

These are proofs of the final publication available at SAGE via History of the Human Sciences:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695111421865

The three indicators – population, institutional differentiation and notion of science – give a
rough idea of the context in which the production and reception of the concept of Bildung are
taking place. By capturing a structure of allocation of material resources with the first two
indicators alongside a structure of interpretation of symbolic resources with the third indicator,
we are able to take into account the two dimensions Bourdieu ascribes to the reality of fields.
The historical examination starts off when the disciplinary identity of German human sciences
emerges at the beginning of the 19th century. Up until the end of the 18th century, the faculty
of philosophy served as some kind of preparatory school for the other faculties, imparting a
general education (Allgemeinbildung) that was meant to prepare for studies in jurisprudence,
medicine, or theology. It was not until the professionalization of the education of teachers that
the transformation from the handmaid of the higher faculties (cf. Kant, 1977: 228; 2005: 28) to
the ‘first and indeed mistress of all others’5 (Schleiermacher, 1956: 260) took place. The change
in the balance of power between the faculties was fully institutionalized when Humboldt
founded the University of Berlin in 1809. From then on, the new ethos of the university was
determined not by religious prejudice or the utilitarian-professional functions of the former
higher faculties, but by knowledge for the sake of knowledge. The realization of the then
emerging notion of Bildung, based on neo-Humanism and the philosophy of German Idealism,
puts the ennoblement of the character not only into the centre of Bildung in the human sciences,
but also into the centre of the development of the German university as a whole. As a
consequence, the faculty of philosophy is destined to be the institutional hub of this
transformation, and it is becoming the institutional and ideological centre in most newly
established universities from then on. The occupation with Allgemeinbildung, formerly
demoting the faculty to a mere accessory of the higher faculties, has become an advantage in
Der Streit der Fakultäten [The Conflict of the Faculties] (Kant, 2005).6

First stage, 1810–60
Material and symbolic context
At the beginning of the 19th century, the above-described change in the balance of power is
both initiated and accompanied by a generous funding of philological and historical subjects.
Especially the core subjects of German human sciences – philosophy, classical philology,
history and oriental studies – are experiencing a remarkable expansion. It is not until the 1950s
that chairs for new subjects like Slavic studies, musicology and Egyptology are established on
a larger scale. Despite the institutional expansion (cf. table 1), the teaching body is already
reduced again at most universities at this point.7 Chairs are vacant for longer periods of time as
soon as professors retire (cf. Baumgarten, 1997: 49–62). On the one hand, the reasons for this
more cautious personnel policy are of an intellectual nature: the demise of Romanticism and
German Idealism from the 1830s onwards is withdrawing the ideological foundation from the
previously founded chairs. In addition to that, professors are suspected of being related to the
revolutionary ideas of the pre-March era (Vormärz) just before the failed 1848 revolution. On
5

All translations are made by the author.
From the perspective of an established theologian and philosopher, the new balance of power at the university
presents itself as follows: And indeed every teacher of jurisprudence or theology deserves to be laughed at and
excluded from the university, if he does not feel the powers and the will in himself to achieve something of his
own with distinguished success in the field of pure philosophy or ethics or philosophical history or philology.
(Schleiermacher, 1956: 261–2)
7
This is why the increase in the number of professors and lecturers at German faculties of philosophy in the 19
years from 1834 to 1853 is moderate (by 17.4 per cent from 224 to 263), while it is considerably higher in the
following 20 years from 1853 to 1873 (by 52.1 per cent from 263 to 400) (cf. Lundgreen, 2009: 19–20).
6

3

These are proofs of the final publication available at SAGE via History of the Human Sciences:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695111421865

the other hand, staff cuts are justified by the decline in the number of students taking place in
the middle of the 19th century. However, it is remarkable that German human sciences are
generally threatened far less by this development than other disciplinary groups. Hence, the
share of students in the human sciences in the total number of students is growing noticeably
(cf. table 2). This decoupling of the general development can be seen as an indicator for a
relatively independent mode of reproduction. And indeed, while German academics in general
are composed of the elitist educated middle classes (Bildungsbürgertum), the fact that
university families, in which professorships and lectureships are passed on from generation to
generation, are a common phenomenon especially in German human sciences, confirms the
particular dissociation of the disciplinary group (cf. Baumgarten, 1997: 93, 130).
As we have seen for population as well as for institutional differentiation, the material structure
testifies the influence of German Idealism and neo-Humanism, representing the established and
legitimate view that Bourdieu (1995: 159–71) calls orthodoxy – a dominant and dominating
way of thinking. The same can be said for the symbolic structure of the field. At the beginning
of the 19th century, the dominant notion of science strictly refuses applicability and
specialization for an idea of legitimate research in the human sciences. Quite the contrary,
research in the human sciences, understood as a contemplative occupation with classical texts,
has to be protected from any kind of constraints or rules that could limit or restrict its freedom
(cf. Grimm, 1984: 215–16; Humboldt, 2008: 920; Schleiermacher, 1956: 244–5, 262). Ideally,
the result of this independent and introverted way of conducting research is pure insight and
knowledge. Although it may seem so at first sight, this concept is not a contradiction to the
close alliance between German scholars and the absolutistic Prussian state. From the university
founders’ viewpoint, it is above all the occupation with pure research in the human sciences
that teaches students the independent thinking that enables them to become worthy citizens and
capable members of the community.8
The indicators suggest that the struggles for a notion of Bildung take place in a context with a
remarkable degree of closure on the material as well as the symbolic dimension. Regarding the
institutional differentiation, we have seen that the vigorous expansion of chairs in the human
sciences occurs on the basis of the orthodoxy of German Idealism and is, therefore, largely
limited to core subjects. Likewise, the population of the field recruits itself in a closed mode of
reproduction. The discursively constructed notion of science as pure and purposelessness
research, founded on the basis of German Idealism as well, is engrained deeply into the practice
of the whole field. This is the context in which the discourse of Bildung in German human
sciences emerges and develops.
Notion of Bildung
In view of the context described above, it is not surprising that the concept of Bildung produced
and received therein clearly shows the influence of neo-Humanism and of the philosophy of
German Idealism. The discourse features three main focuses that are especially striking. First,
Bildung in the human sciences is not focused on single abilities or competences, but it is rather
meant to seize the personality as a holistic unit. A detailed and accurate description of the ‘inner
improvement and ennoblement’ (Humboldt, 1960: 235) of humankind is made very difficult by

8

The social legitimation of purposeless research in the human sciences can therefore be found in the teleological
connection that is built with the interests of the state. Humboldt (1956: 384) is making this position clear when he
says: ‘The University namely has always close connections with practical life and the needs of the state, because
it always undergoes practical affairs for him, the guidance of the youth.’

4

These are proofs of the final publication available at SAGE via History of the Human Sciences:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695111421865

the mystical and religious terminology often used by exponents of the ideal.9 Notwithstanding,
what seems to be beyond dispute is that Bildung in the human sciences is seen as an interplay
between the character of the researcher and the subject matter of research. The philosopher,
theologian and classic philologist Friedrich Schleiermacher (1956: 301) remarked in 1808 that
the whole character should participate in the act of humane insight and knowledge, so that ‘the
cultivation of the character [can] progress evenly with the one of the scientific mind’. The mind
of the researcher is supposed to converge with the ideals found in the interaction with classical
texts. This notion is led by the assumption that the classics have an effect on scholars and their
students through the moral and aesthetic examples they embody. Thus, if the humanistic
occupation is supposed to fulfil its cultivating potential, it is important for the researcher that
‘from everything he carries out outside of himself, the illuminating light and the pleasant
warmth shine back into his inner self. But for this purpose he has to bring home the mass of
objects to himself, imprint into them the character of his mind and make both similar to each
other’, as Humboldt (1960: 237) emphasized in 1810.
The character that is ennobled through the synthesis with the subject matter of research is a
scientific character.10 This definition of Bildung as decidedly scientific is the second main focus
evolving in the discursive context of the first stage. It is expected that, by and during
participation in the research process, key qualifications for a scientific occupation are imparted
to the students. This makes research and scientific insight the most important outcome of the
process of Bildung, while the actual results of research almost fade into the background (cf.
McClelland, 1983: 316). Schleiermacher (1956: 276) concludes ‘that learning in and of itself,
whichever shape it may take, is not the purpose of the university, but knowledge; that it is not
about filling up the memory, and not about enriching the intellect, but about stimulating a whole
new life, a higher, truly scientific mind’. It is this very emphasis of the notion of Bildung that
allows the Einheit von Forschung und Lehre to emerge. In 1849, the philologist and literary
scholar Jacob Grimm (1984: 215–16) asks for ‘the foundation, in which every single and the
sciences altogether root, what fathers, nurtures and sates them? Abiding reference will have to
be made to an inner and outer cause, who are almost inseparably intertwined and can barely be
imagined without one another. I am talking about the urge for learning and teaching.’
Closely connected to the decidedly scientific character of Bildung is the third main focus, based
on the idea of academic freedom and defining Bildung as utterly purposeless. The internal effect
of Bildung as ennoblement of the character finds its equivalent in an intrinsic motivation of
those who participate in the process of it. Grimm (1984: 235) is by no means an exception when
he demands ‘that everybody studied from an inner urge’.
According to the legitimate notion in the discourse, Bildung in the human sciences requires no
additional legitimation or justification. It is exactly the lack of a direct purpose that is supposed
to make Bildung so valuable for scholars, for students and, not least of all, for society.11 The
aim is to learn the general rules of thought, not certain contents of positive knowledge. The
necessary freedom for scholars and students to study and learn without being distracted by
However, Ringer (1990: 87) sketches the universalistic focus of Bildung well when he writes: ‘The materials
which are ‘experienced’ in the course of learning are ‘objective cultural values’. … He [the scholar, JH] does not
only come to know them. Rather, the moral and aesthetic examples contained in the classical sources affect him
deeply and totally. The whole personality is involved in the act of cognition.’
10
As has been pointed out, the scientific character that the notion of Bildung in German human sciences is aiming
for has nothing to do with science in the English sense of the word and is actually very much located on the ground
of human sciences (cf. footnote 4).
11
Thus, the connection of disinterestedness in human sciences with the interests of the state follows the logic that
has already been described for the notion of science (cf. footnote 8). It is precisely the undirected and general
Bildung that allows students to think independently and that enables them to become valuable citizens.
9

5

These are proofs of the final publication available at SAGE via History of the Human Sciences:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695111421865

external constraints is what Schleiermacher (1956: 277) has in mind when he underlines that
the process of Bildung in the human sciences ‘cannot at all be handled in a mechanistic way,
but has to contain a character rather to the contrary, namely the one of freedom, within all parts
of itself’.
In sum, the legitimate interpretation of Bildung as it is established in the discourse in German
human sciences is founded on three main focuses – the ennoblement of the whole character, the
decidedly scientific nature of Bildung, and its purposelessness. Those emphases can be
understood as part of an orthodoxy made up of German Idealism and neo-Humanism,
structuring the material and symbolic order of the entire field. Hence, the relative closure of the
context of production and reception is reflected by the relative closure of symbolic struggles,
whose result is the notion of Bildung that has just been described.

Second stage, 1860–1960
Material and symbolic context
The relative closure of the field of German human sciences during the first stage is followed by
a partial opening in the second stage. With regard to the material structure, this can be
demonstrated for both indicators. The structure of the population of the field is becoming more
open because the number of students experiences a considerable increase. First signs of the
expansion that is going to revolutionize most educational systems in the western world later on
can be recognized as early as at the turn of the century (cf. table 2; Eulenburg, 1904: 187, 269;
Jarausch, 1981: 16–23). This development can be observed for all disciplinary groups, and the
increase in the human sciences is roughly proportional to the overall increase. Furthermore, the
social background of the students in the human sciences changes as well. Especially
descendants of lower and middle civil servants (mittleres and unteres Beamtentum) and of
employees benefit from a more open mode of reproduction. As a result, the Bildungsbu¨rgertum
is losing a lot of influence (cf. tables 2 and 3). During the 1860s and 1870s, a transformation in
the mode of recruitment of professors takes place due to a change in appointment policies that
gives ministries more influence. This restricts the power of university families and familial
structures in general.12 Another factor that should not be underestimated when it comes to a
more heterogeneous population is that it is not until the beginning of the 20th century that
women are allowed to register at universities (cf. Baumgarten, 1997: 157–8; McClelland, 1980:
183).
The expansion is accompanied by an institutional differentiation (cf. table 1). The main reasons
for this differentiation are three demands with which society confronts the university. First, the
institution is seen as an important part of the educational system and is, accordingly, held
responsible for the employability of its graduates. An increasing number of students have to
find their place on the labour market, and the universities are made accountable for this. Second,
society confronts sciences at the university (i.e. sciences in the English sense, but also human
sciences) with a need for continuous progress. Both demands lead to an institutional
differentiation, and this is especially the case for the human sciences.13 At the same time, a
12

Especially in light of a Bourdieusian argumentation we have to bear in mind that the more meritocratic selection
is still taking place on the foundations of an ‘inherited’ habitus and specific forms of capital. Hence, an actual
opening of the mode of reproduction is out of question, but at least sons of professors are now forced to pursue
their academic careers at other universities than the ones their fathers are teaching at (cf. Baumgarten, 1997: 102).
13
Baumgarten (1997: 159) notes that the institutional expansion in the German human sciences is taking place
more rapidly than in the natural sciences. While the development in the natural sciences was ‘rather left to chance

6

These are proofs of the final publication available at SAGE via History of the Human Sciences:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695111421865

general need for innovation in contents and in methods, partly attributable to the rise of the
natural sciences, is putting the idealistic canon of the human sciences under pressure. Third,
from the end of the 19th century onwards, sciences (including the human sciences) are
becoming part of a nationalistic agenda whose purpose it is to prove the superiority of the
German cultural nation (Kulturnation). German human sciences do not fail to live up to their
responsibilities and play an important role in producing and inculcating a national selfknowledge (cf. Bialas and Rabinbach, 2007; Lepenies, 2006: 16–26).14
But it is not only the material structure that is shaped by the emerging competition with the
natural sciences as well as by the modernization and industrialization of society in general.
Similar developments can be observed for the symbolic structure. In terms of a notion of science
in German human sciences, Wilhelm Dilthey’s (1958a, 1959) systematic foundation of the
disciplinary group can be viewed as the most influential conception in this stage.15 Obviously,
the success of the systematization is based on its providing a synthesis of the two positions that
divided the field of German human sciences at that time. Those who are responding to the
objection that critical philosophy is ahistorical do so in the name of neo-Kantianism (cf. Beiser,
2008). Windelband (1894, 1921) and his pupil Rickert (1902, 1926) are among the defenders
of Kantian philosophy and of the need to take a higher universal standpoint, their aim being to
keep philosophy a science without falling for the relativism of Historicism (Historismus), a
decidedly empirical approach that is interested in an objective explanation of individual events
(cf. Iggers, 1995). Dilthey takes up both approaches, providing Historicism with the foundation
of the philosophy of enlightenment it lacks, but at the same time refusing the neo-Kantian stance
he perceives as dogmatic. He positions himself ‘in contrast to the dominating empiricism as
well as to speculation’ (Dilthey, 1959: 124), conciliating the positivistic tendency of
Historicism with introspective philosophy. According to Bourdieu, the notion of science
becoming apparent in Dilthey’s methodological legitimization of the human sciences can be
interpreted as a translation of the generally emerging modern notion of science into the specific
logic of the field of human sciences. While the hermeneutic method Dilthey establishes is still
clearly influenced by Kantian philosophy, it is the endeavour to make objective statements on
the basis of systematized methods at all that is a sure indication of the newly emerging
empirical-positivistic notion of science. The broad debates taking place in human sciences at
the turn of the century are not limited to Historicism and neo-Kantianism; they also spill over
to the emerging social sciences (cf. Simmel, 1923; Weber, 1922, whose methodological
approach is heavily influenced by Rickert). The general search for a methodology in its own
right, serving as a distinction and as a legitimation in the new scientific climate, is a positive
sign of the dominance natural sciences are gaining (cf. Hamann, 2009: 94–101; Huschke-Rhein,
1979: 98–105).
. . . because of a lack of traditions’, the expansion in the human sciences took place along the lines of the humanistic
concept of Bildung and could therefore ‘take up older structures from the eighteenth century and push on the
process of scientification by determined appointments of prominent scholars’. Around 1880, a reorganization of
the faculty structure gave birth to faculties of human sciences, faculties of natural sciences, and also faculties of
social sciences. In addition to that, studies from Lundgreen (1983: 157–60) and Ferber (1956: 62–6) give evidence
of the specialization in German human sciences by pointing out the increasing number of subjects in the
disciplinary group and a higher growth rate than in the natural sciences.
14
Muhlack’s example (1990: 98–9) for history illustrates that the engagement for a national
culture is actually a specific form of applicable science: ‘Due to the controversial involvement of authors of
historicism in the German national movement … the practical relevance of historical science and education comes
to the fore more and more, until it becomes noticeable in the very concepts of philosophy of science.’
15
Schnädelbach (1983: 154) does not estimate Dilthey’s influence too generously when he states that his ‘outlines
of methodology of the humanities … had such a strong effect on the respective discussion from the turn of the
century onwards, that everything up to now can, with only slight exaggeration, be labelled as a series of footnotes
to Dilthey’.

7

These are proofs of the final publication available at SAGE via History of the Human Sciences:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695111421865

Another result of the opening of symbolic struggles in the human sciences is that philosophy
has lost its status of a leading discipline. In the political climate of the German Reich from 1871
to 1945, history and linguistics are far more responsive to utilization in regards of a German
National narrative. Consequently, those are the disciplines that gain influence and social power
(as opposed to academic power, cf. Bourdieu, 1988: 73–4) in the field of human sciences. In
addition to that, Habermas (1992: 3–9) suggests that it is not only external influences
contributing to the marginalization of philosophy, but that the internal break with the tradition
of the discipline is adding to the development as well.
The distinct growth in the number of students, their changed social composition and the
transformed mode of recruiting of professors all point towards a partial opening of the material
structure. An analogous development has been demonstrated for the symbolic structure of the
field, where the orthodoxy made up of German Idealism and neo-Humanism is drawing to an
end. However, it is noteworthy that there is no complete opening of the symbolic structure.
Dilthey’s synthesis contributes greatly to this inertia, integrating and hedging in the symbolic
struggles that break out after the end of the dominance of the orthodoxy.
Notion of Bildung
The end of the relatively closed unity of German human sciences is also reflected by the
discourse of Bildung that is taking place. The three main focuses of the ideal in the first stage
cannot maintain their legitimacy unconditionally. First, the holistic emphasis, interpreting
Bildung as an ennoblement of the whole character, has lost its value in the discursive struggles.
The second emphasis, stressing the purposelessness and autonomy of Bildung, is not legitimate
without substantial restrictions either. Nonetheless, it is possible to maintain the validity of this
representation due to a reinterpretation. The German human sciences are able to meet society’s
demand for applicability by satisfying the need for teachers, which has grown significantly
during the general opening of the educational system. As a result, the increased number of
students in the human sciences can be compensated for within the traditional educational
mission of the disciplinary group for the time being. The decidedly scientific nature of Bildung
as the third emphasis remains dominant in the second stage. The concept is still defined in a
scientific way and is still assumed to be obtained in the process of a scientific occupation.
However, what has become controversial is what the cultivating capacity of science is actually
made up of. In other words, the participants in symbolic struggles can agree on the formula
Bildung durch Wissenschaft, but what they cannot agree upon is the kind of Bildung and the
kind of Wissenschaft it describes. The struggles for interpretational hegemony in this question
take place along two fronts.
First, the fact that a humanistic notion of Bildung is generally called into question constitutes a
front on which the discursive context as a whole fights against the loss of legitimacy.
Interestingly enough, at this point in time a discourse of Bildung is becoming prominent in the
natural sciences as well.16 It can be seen as part of the more fundamental competition for
16

Ben David (1971: 118) even puts the whole rise of empirical science down to the revolt against the philosophy
of the newly founded universities. And indeed, there are numerous examples of this revolt. Emil Heinrich Du BoisReymond (quoted in Engelhardt, 1990: 112), physiologist and rector of the University of Berlin, effectively attacks
the symbolic power of the human sciences, demanding ‘cone sections instead of Greek scripts’. The chemist Justus
Liebig (quoted ibid.) fears that philosophical cultivation may cause ‘self-overestimation, vanity and
pretentiousness’ in the academic youth, while the ‘overgrowing Humanism [opposes] the progress of natural
sciences and medicine’. Another example is the chemist Albert Ladenburg (1912: 146), anticipating Charles P.
Snow’s 1959 Rede Lecture (see Snow, The Two Cultures [2008]) when he criticizes that a lack of culture is only
diagnosed for those ‘making grammatical mistakes or not remembering important dates. But one who does not

8

These are proofs of the final publication available at SAGE via History of the Human Sciences:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695111421865

scientific dominance between the natural and the human sciences in the late 19th century (cf.
Veit-Brause, 2001). The philosopher Karl Jaspers (1946: 35) depicts the interpretational efforts
taking place against this backdrop. According to him, both disciplinary groups, human and
natural sciences, have ‘the tendency to give themselves priority and declare themselves the
actual, real science. … The spiritualization is confronted with the natural sciences and their
knowledge of reality, in which our whole mental knowledge is intertwined as well.’
Second, the discourse of Bildung in the human sciences is divided internally by the front
between neo-Kantianism and Historicism. Exponents of the latter champion a notion of Bildung
that is supposed to provide clear directions for everyday life and to qualify immediately for
social practice. Following this ideal, the historian Johann Gustav Droysen (1977: 449, cf. 269)
praises the applicability of historical Bildung in the lectures he holds from 1857 onwards:
‘Historical studies are the foundation for political education and culture. The statesman is the
practical historian.’ When Dilthey is integrating Historicism and neo-Kantianism in his
foundation of the human sciences, his first and foremost goal is not to create a concept of
Bildung. However, the hermeneutic method he systematizes has a cultivating capacity ‘which
strives to establish the perfection of the events and their connections in the spiritual life’
(Dilthey, 1963: 26). In the process of understanding, Dilthey’s hermeneutics of the human
sciences (geisteswissenschaftliche Hermeneutik) is supposed to bring about a transformation of
the self – this is where Humboldt’s idea of interplay between the character of the researcher and
the subject matters of research re-emerges.17
Dilthey’s epistemological foundation of the disciplinary group provides a point of reference
that is able to integrate the different positions in the discourse in the field of human sciences.
Notwithstanding, we can observe a relatively heterogeneous knowledge structure in comparison
to the first stage. Exponents of Historicism only represent the most successful approach that is
able to establish itself and enforce an orthodoxy challenging Schelling’s and Hegel’s absolute
Idealism as well as early neo-Kantian Idealism which itself consists of several differing schools;
cf. Adair-Toteff, 2003). Besides that, it is remarkable to see that Bildung as a subject matter of
symbolic struggles in the human sciences is altogether underrepresented in this period. The
focus of the struggles is rather on developing a methodology for the German human sciences,
laying down methods as well as subject matters and questions of research that are actually able
to compete with those of the rapidly growing natural sciences (cf. Hamann, 2009: 73–9).
Against this background, an investment in the interpretational struggles for a certain
representation of Bildung seems to be less rewarding.

Third stage, 1960–99
Material and symbolic context
While a closure of the material and the symbolic structure could be sustained at least partially
during the second stage, the beginning of the third stage is characterized by an extensive social
opening of the university as a whole. The demographical, economical and political reasons for
know what the change of seasons is based on, or does not know the physiological significance of respiration, is
not necessarily considered illiterate because of that.’
17
Elsewhere, Dilthey (1958b: 126) describes this process as a unique feature that raises the hermeneutics of the
human sciences above a method of the natural sciences: ‘If the mind wanted to contrast its own creations merely
as something objective and empirical and analyse them by the outer method of the natural sciences, a selfalienation of mind towards its own creations occurred.’

9

These are proofs of the final publication available at SAGE via History of the Human Sciences:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695111421865

the educational expansion are well documented (for a sample of the works dealing with this
transformation, cf. Oehler, 1998 and Windolf, 1997).
The dramatic increase in student numbers displays about the same extent in German human
sciences as it does in other disciplinary groups. In this regard, the human sciences do not
account for a special case (cf. table 2). But it is not only the quantity of students that changes.
The third stage sees a likewise dramatic change in their social background as well. Hartmann
(2002: 51) argues that ‘the students of 1959 . . . show a remarkably more exclusive social
recruitment . . . than those of the following years’. While the quantity of the general personnel
in German human sciences reflects this development, the number of professors increases to a
much lesser extent, especially in relation to the number of the students (cf. Lundgreen, 2009:
49, 200). However, there is not only a change in quantity of general personnel and, considerably
less so, professors, but also a significant opening regarding their mode of recruitment. Careers
at the university even seem to be dominated by post-doctoral students from the working class
and the broader middle class (Hartmann, 2002: 114). Of course, the crucial bottleneck arrives
right after the doctorate, which is especially true for German universities and their hierarchic
institutional chair structure. Yet, it still seems fair to assume that the influence the social
background has on the mode of reproduction has declined compared with the long established
social structure of the university as a corporation of professors and with a traditional chair
system (Ordinarienuniversität).
In comparison with sciences as a whole, the degree of institutional differentiation in the German
human sciences is lower. One main reason for this is that, up until the 1980s, no proper science
policy exists for them.18 Tellingly, it is educational policy discovering the human sciences as
its domain, and it can be attributed to this policy area – and not to science policy – that the
number of professors still grows sevenfold (Weingart et al., 1991: 274; cf. table 4). Bearing in
mind that development, it is not surprising that there are two groups of disciplines showing an
especially high growth rate. On the one hand, there is institutional differentiation in smaller
subjects like Far Eastern linguistic and cultural studies or medieval Latin, which have a low
base level and, therefore, a high growth potential. On the other hand, there is differentiation in
the established subjects that play a central role for the education of teachers, i.e. history, German
studies, English studies and American studies as well as Romance studies and philosophy.
The extensive social opening of the field of German human sciences can also be detected on
the symbolic dimension. The notion of science in the human sciences of the second half of the
20th century experiences an opening that sees new methods of research on the rise. A new
understanding of relevance for texts develops, right through to an extended notion of ‘text’ in
general. Subject matters of the human sciences, formerly either classical or national literature,
are to be contextualized, because the societal environment in which these texts have been
produced becomes more important and gains legitimacy as a subject matter in its own right.
This can be interpreted as a turn towards the flourishing social sciences or as a more general
cultural turn across social and human sciences (cf. Hall, 1990, McLennan, 1998, for similar
developments in the British context). This development is taking place in history, where the
historical social science (Historische Sozialwissenschaft) forms an influential school (cf.
Kocka, 1990; Wehler, 1973). The same can be observed for literary studies, where the rise of
reception theory adds weight to the historical and social conditions in which cultural products
are produced and received (cf. Schücking, 1961; Voßkamp, 1990). Another example is German
18

It took the council founded in 1957 as an advisory body to the German federal government and the state
governments (Wissenschaftsrat) almost 30 years to discover the human sciences as a disciplinary group in its own
right (cf. Weingart et al., 1991: 38–53).

10

These are proofs of the final publication available at SAGE via History of the Human Sciences:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695111421865

studies, where trivial literature and non-fiction are discovered as subject matters in addition to
the established canon (cf. Grimminger, 2000; Röther, 1980).19
The changed notion of science also becomes apparent in the various attempts to legitimize the
human sciences towards society. The most influential attempt in this regard has to be Odo
Marquard’s (1986) thesis of compensation. The philosopher champions the – controversially
discussed – assumption that the human sciences’ purpose is to compensate for the social
damages that have been caused by modernization. In other words, Marquard claims that the
disciplinary group is necessary to balance the losses in the Lebenswelt that are caused by those
technological innovations that, in the end, have been pushed forward by natural sciences and
engineering. Taking into account the difference in legitimacy and prestige ascribed to German
human sciences at the beginning of the 19th century, when the faculty of philosophy has been
declared the first at the university (cf. Fichte, 1910: 26; Schleiermacher, 1956: 239–41, 250,
260; Steffens, 1910: 261), a merely compensational function is a rather humble and sober
foundation on which to base the status of the disciplinary group.
Considering the developments of the material and symbolic context in stage three, it is obvious
that a profound change has taken place. The extensive social opening on the material dimension
of the field increases the tension on the symbolic dimension to a degree where Dilthey’s
integration is not sufficient any more. The result is a structure of the field that is largely open
both on the material dimension of allocation and on the symbolic dimension of interpretation
and attribution. As we will see in the following paragraphs, the complete transformation of the
framework for the production and reception is reflected in a fundamentally changed discursive
construction of Bildung.
Notion of Bildung
The postwar period is characterized by an intellectual reconstruction that is taking place in the
human sciences as well as elsewhere in German society. In the first years, this means a return
to traditional values and ideas. However, after a short renaissance, the notion of Bildung that is
based on Idealism and neo-Humanism is rapidly losing its backing from the mid-1960s
onwards. Society’s demand for a form of Bildung that is in fact vocational education cannot be
satisfied merely by the education of teachers any more. Students in the human sciences, who
by and by realize the changed mode of reproduction in the field, lay claim to the applicability
of their competences beyond the realms of the university (cf. Bourdieu, 1988).20 It is not
surprising that this development is reflected by the discourse of Bildung in the field. As at the
university in general, the new main focus of Bildung in the discourse in the human sciences is
the orientation towards the labour market. In the course of time two interpretations of this
emphasis can be identified.
Given the material structure of the field, the purposelessness of Bildung has in large parts lost
its legitimacy. The philosopher Joachim Ritter (1974: 109) comments on this when he states
that ‘… a ‘free’ Bildung through participation in pure science cannot be preserved in the long
19

The opening of the symbolic structure in German studies is also displayed by the change of
topics of the annual meeting of the official association of German scholars in German studies (Tagungen des
Deutschen Germanisten-Verbandes) in the years from 1953 to 2007 (compilation in Hamann, 2009: 216–19).
20
This realization becomes manifest only gradually because ‘there is a continuously growing gap between the
level of aspiration and the level of achievement, between the ideal representation and the reality of scientific and
pedagogical practices’ (Bourdieu, 1988: 112). As a result of this discrepancy, the discrepancy between
expectations towards and demands of studying makes for irrational scheduling of and alienation from subjects that
are related to science (including human sciences) and are not directly connected to applicability on the labour
market (cf. Oehler, 1998: 428).

11

These are proofs of the final publication available at SAGE via History of the Human Sciences:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695111421865

run when it has been taken out of the societal context; as a ‘lift up over practical life and its
demands for purpose’, it contradicts the elementary necessities of current reality.’ In the light
of the new challenges that teaching is facing, the coupling of scientific Bildung and research
cannot be preserved either. All in all, the third stage is characterized by a restructuring of the
university system towards a higher education sector. This is the backdrop against which Georg
Picht’s (1964) analysis of Die deutsche Bildungskatastrophe [The German Catastrophe of
Bildung] and Ralf Dahrendorf’s (1965) claim that Bildung ist Bürgerrecht [Bildung is a Civil
Right] receive broad attention beyond the discourse in the human sciences. The concept
subsequently emerging in the discourse is a participative interpretation aiming at inclusion
rather than an elitist social closure based on the Bildungsbürgertum. The social opening of the
field has now reached dimensions in which the education of teachers that has spared the human
sciences broader changes up to this point does not suffice to provide employment for the
majority of graduating students. Bearing this in mind, Hermann Müller-Solger and Ludwig
Gieseke (1977: 5) demand in the journal of the official association of German scholars in
German studies (Mitteilungen des Deutschen Germanisten-Verbandes) that the ‘new generation
of university teachers [have to] seek and also get safeguarding by employment possibilities
outside of the university to an increasing degree’.21 What can be witnessed in the first 20 years
of the third stage is that the discourse of Bildung is focused on participation, because this is
seen as the prerequisite for inclusion into the labour market.
However, broad inclusion is achieved in the 1970s, and from the 1980s onwards a new
interpretation of orientation towards the labour market gains ground. Bildung is now defined in
a more competitive way, namely as an allocation of human capital, reintroducing an elitist
understanding that has been banned during the participative interpretation. The dominant notion
now represents a preparation for social practice, and in the end this is achieved by the
disciplines’ programmatic ‘openness for the labour market’ (BDA and HRK, 2003: 21), as
unambiguously pointed out in a joint publication of the Confederation of German Employers’
Associations (Bundesvereinigung der Deutschen Arbeitgeberverbände) and the German
Rectors’ Conference (Hochschulrektorenkonferenz). The main emphasis has now moved from
broad participation in higher education to increased competitiveness by means of higher
education. The literary scholar Wolfgang Frühwald (1991: 110) seems to confirm this when he
agrees with Hubert Markl, then president of the German Research Foundation (Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft), who ‘… names the development of skills that are ‘needed urgently
in all areas of life’ as personality-building consequences of independent research: hard work,
deep satisfaction through performance, self-criticism, fair and dedicated cooperation, modesty,
the ability to differ between important and unimportant things … but these are at least educating
consequences in the human sciences as well.’
The media are established as a legitimate field of employment by now. After all, museums, the
press and publishing houses are already described as ‘classical’ branches for graduates of the
human sciences on the 1991 Tagung des Deutschen Germanisten-Verbandes (Stooß, 1991:
172).22 More recent studies verify that the alternative employment possibilities Müller-Solger
In the same publication, Karl Maly (1977: 9) bemoans: ‘Just five years ago you would hardly have asked yourself
seriously the question which employment possibilities arise for the scholars of German studies. Even if one did
not know their accurate numbers, one was aware of the fact that, in the end, the school would accommodate all
those who would not seek and find their place at the universities or in the reservations of literature.’
22
About 10 years later in a talk ‘On the Future of the Human sciences’, the philosopher Julian Nida-Rümelin
(2003: 10) highlights the symbolic opening of the disciplinary group when he praises the almost universal
applicability of the contents that are imparted: ‘But what is happening at present is something different, namely
that it matters to have studied at all, and apparently the expectation on the labour market is that something has
been learned in these years at the university – also and especially in the human sciences. And apparently this is
sufficient to offer a majority of 94–95 per cent a real professional perspective – which, admittedly, has in content
21

12

These are proofs of the final publication available at SAGE via History of the Human Sciences:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695111421865

and Gieseke have been talking about in the 1970s can still be found mainly in the media (cf.
Briedis et al., 2008: 43–7).
In sum, the changed notion of Bildung in the third stage reflects the dramatic transformation of
the context the discourse is taking place in. The field of German human sciences is opened on
the material as well as the symbolic dimension by now. The symbolic struggles give rise to a
concept of Bildung whose main focus is the orientation towards the requirements of the labour
market. This emphasis is first interpreted in a rather participative way, while an interpretation
based on competitiveness gains ground later on. The traditional legitimacy of a classical canon
gives way to flexibility in content, reflecting the flexibility that is expected from the graduates
on the labour market.

Concluding remarks
The development in the self-reflective discourse in the field of German human sciences
represents a remarkable transformation of the dominant concept of Bildung. In the first stage,
the discursive attributions are relatively homogeneous, structured by an orthodoxy made up of
German Idealism and neo-Humanism. The notion results from symbolic struggles that take
place in a context that is structured by this orthodoxy as well. The indicators suggest that the
material structure is closed, and the same can be said for the symbolic structure. In the second
stage, the indicators refer to a change in the twofold structure. The change is especially obvious
on the material dimension, putting the symbolic dimension under pressure. Accordingly, the
traditional conception of Bildung is put under pressure as well, and its legitimacy is confined.
In the third stage, the pressure increases considerably. The educational expansion increases
exponentially the openness of the material dimension of the field. As the fundamentally
changed notion of science suggests, an opening of the symbolic structure is taking place
eventually. These developments increase the tension between the context of production and
reproduction on the one hand, and the traditional ideal on the other hand, to a degree where it
has to be resolved. In the end, the discursive construction and interpretational efforts within this
context generate an idea of Bildung that is a reflection of these circumstances – the prevalent
notion of Bildung in the respective discourse currently taking place in German human sciences
is now closer to an idea of practical learning and vocational training. The previous notion of
Bildung as developed in the first stage has been transformed thoroughly and lost most of its
legitimacy and authority in the process. This situation is reminiscent of the discussion taking
place in England for quite a while now (cf. Baker, 2011; Coiffait, 2011; Collini, 1999; Head,
2011; Observer, 2010; Salter and Tapper, 2002; Schwartz, 2011). It is noteworthy that the
discourses about Bildung in German and English human sciences seem to head in the same
direction, while their starting points differed considerably.
Coming back to the questions raised at the beginning of this article, the empirical example that
has been put forward highlights at least three points about the relationship between knowledge
structures and the context they are produced and received in. First, the context-sensitivity of
ideas – or their textual representation – has been emphasized and demonstrated. The field of
the human sciences has been put forward as one possible conceptualization of a space that
structures scientific speech (cf. Livingstone, 2007). The construction and reception of ideas is
taking place during symbolic struggles for interpretative hegemony. Those struggles are
contextual as well, their outcome depends both on the disposability of different material
often little to do with the studies. But what does that mean: Little to do? Is it not possible that it plays a part whether
one is able to adjust to other cultures, and can therefore be transferred to other countries without the economical
activities of the relevant enterprise failing?’

13

These are proofs of the final publication available at SAGE via History of the Human Sciences:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695111421865

resources and on the availability of other symbolic knowledge structures. Following up on this,
the example suggests, second, that it is exactly the combination of material and symbolic
context factors that can provide new insights into questions about the contextuality of
knowledge. Bourdieu’s field theory has proved to be useful for approaching this twodimensional structure of allocations and ascriptions. The indicators employed in this article can
only be a first step to approximating this context systematically. Third, the article underlines
how valuable historical analyses can be for the kind of questions asked here. While research
into the circulation of concepts and ideas across borders of fields and countries is certainly an
important approach, a historical perspective allows new insights in comparison.

Tables
Table 1: Number of independent organisational entities at German universities (ioe), average
number of organisational entities at German universities (aoe), average number of
organisational entities in subjects of mathematics or natural sciences (mnsoe) and of
organisational entities in linguistic and cultural studies (lcsoe) as well as number of independent
organisational entities in faculties of linguistic and cultural studies at selected universities (oeB
= Berlin, oeM = Munich, oeL = Leipzig, oeH = Heidelberg, oeG = Göttingen)
ioe

aoe

mnsoe

lcsoe

oeB

oeM

oeL

oeH

oeG

1830

231

17

5.20

2.20

1

-

-

1

1

1840

312

18

5.70

2.80

1

-

3

1

1

1850

398

20

6.90

3.20

1

4

2

1

4

1860

446

22

7.20

3.40

2

5

3

2

6

1870

552

26

8.80

4.00

2

6

4

2

6

1880

708

34

10.10

6.10

3

7

10

4

6

1890

840

40

10.80

8.10

9

7

14

4

11

1900

988

47

11.80

10.00

11

14

23

8

10

1910

1127

54

12.40

12.30

16

18

27

10

10

1920

1419

59

11.80

14.90

20

23

37

12

10

1930

1743

76

15.00

18.70

27

28

42

16

16

1940

2020

88

15.40

22.00

35

29

43

20

20

14

These are proofs of the final publication available at SAGE via History of the Human Sciences:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695111421865

Table 2: Number of students in German human sciences in relation to the overall number of
students
Students in human sciences

Students overall

Percentage

1830

2,937

15,870

18.5

1840

3,064

11,567

26.5

1850

3,102

12,426

25.0

1860

3,976

12,444

32.0

1870

2,703

12,256

22.0

1880

4,609

21,432

21.5

1890

2,948

28,359

10.4

1900

4,855

33,688

14.4

1910

12,543

53,351

23.5

1920

12,620

86,416

14.6

1930

21,911

95,807

22.9

1954

16,055

106,138

15.1

1957

24,044

130,338

18.4

1960

33,038

155,228

21.3

1963

42,859

232,429

18.4

1966

47,813

243,642

19.6

1969

45,073*

304,720

14.8*

1972

23,904*

456,853

5.2*

1975

145,388

620,196

23.4

15

These are proofs of the final publication available at SAGE via History of the Human Sciences:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695111421865
1978

165,878

690,467

24.0

1981

193,649

794,142

24.4

1984

213,677

930,748

22.9

1987

204,631

1,047,157

19.5

1990

259,552

1,148,686

22.6

1993

296,448

1,392,808

21.3

1996

314,678

1,409,345

22.3

1999

303,640

1,364,803

22.2

2002

341,886

1,382,261

24.7

* In 1969, teacher trainings for Volks-, Berufs-, Gewerbe- and Handelsschulen are not included. In 1972,
no teacher training is included at all. (Titze, 1987; Weingart, et al., 1991: 109; Wissenschaftsrat, 2006:
124; 2008: 106)

Table 3: Percentage of male students at Prussian universities in the subjects old and new
philologies and history, sorted by occupation of their fathers
trade and
middle and
senior service

freelance

commerce

(Freie

(Handel und

Berufe)

Gewerbe-

lower service
(Höhere
(Mittlere und
Beamte)

employees

labourers

(Angestellte)

(Arbeiter)

untere Beamte)
treibende)
1890

15.21

24.93

3.94

34.72

5.77

0.70

1895

19.16

26.20

3.69

35.57

4.64

0.34

1902

14.43

32.47

3.35

33.33

5.09

0.61

1905

12.88

37.01

2.63

30.20

5.87

0.60

1911

10.75

39.09

2.40

30.47

6.37

0.52

1925

13.59

36.35

4.81

19.68

11.54

2.36

16

These are proofs of the final publication available at SAGE via History of the Human Sciences:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695111421865
1930

9.78

43.67

3.30

18.17

14.39

4.48

Table 4: Distribution of chairs in the German human sciences at six selected* universities
Kiel

FU Berlin

Bochum

Duisburg

Passau

Stuttgart

added

1954

19

29

-

-

-

3

51

1969

36

55

38

-

-

11

140

1972

43

153

64

5

-

14

279

1975

36

156

75

18

-

18

303

1984

58

211

108

29

18

23

447

* Selection criteria were the time of foundation (old/new), the type of university
(Universität/Technische Universität/Gesamthochschule) as well as the organisational structure
(faculty/department) (Weingart, et al., 1991: 252-266)

References
Adair-Toteff, C. (2003) 'Neo-Kantianism: the German Idealism Movement', in T. Baldwin (ed.)
The Cambridge History of Philosophy 1870–1945, Vol. 1: The Cambridge History of
Philosophy 1870–1945. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 27-42.
Baker, S. (2011) 'Hefce Shows how the Axe will be Wielded', Times Higher Education.
Baumgarten, M. (1997) Professoren und Universitäten im 19. Jahrhundert: zur Sozialgeschichte
deutscher Geistes- und Naturwissenschaftler [Professors and Universities in the Nineteenth
Century: Social History of German Human and Natural Scientists]. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck &
Ruprecht.
BDA and HRK (2003) Wegweiser in die Wissensgesellschaft. Zur Zukunfts- und
Wettbewerbsfähigkeit unserer Hochschulen [Guide to the Knowledge-Based Society. About
the Sustainability and Competitiveness of our Universities]. Berlin.
Beiser, F. (2008) 'Historicism and neo-Kantianism Studies', History and Philosophy of Science
39: 554-64.
Ben-David, J. (1971) The Scientist's Role in Society. A Comparative Study. Englewood Cliffs,
New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Bialas, W. and Rabinbach, A. (2007) Nazi Germany and the Humanities. Oxford: Oneworld.
Bourdieu, P. (1988) Homo Academicus. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1991) Language and Symbolic Power. Cambridge: Polity Press.
17

These are proofs of the final publication available at SAGE via History of the Human Sciences:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695111421865

Bourdieu, P. (1995) Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Briedis, K., et al. (2008) Berufsverbleib von Geisteswissenschaftlerinnen und
Geisteswissenschaftlern [Professional Future of Human Scientists]. Hannover: HochschulInformations-System.
Coiffait, L. (2011) Blue Skies: New thinking about the Future of Higher Education. London:
Pearson Centre for Policy and Learning.
Collini, S. (1999) 'Against Prodspeak: 'Research' in the Humanities', in S. Collini (ed.) English
Pasts. Essays in History and Culture. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 233-51.
Dahrendorf, R. (1965) Bildung ist Bürgerrecht. Plädoyer für eine aktive Bildungspolitik
[Bildung is a Civil Right]. Hamburg: Nannen.
Diemer, A. (1974) 'Geisteswissenschaften', in J. Ritter (ed.) Historisches Wörterbuch der
Philosophie. Bd. 3: G-H. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, pp. 212-5.
Dilthey, W. (1958a) 'Der Aufbau der geschichtlichen Welt in den Geisteswissenschaften' [The
Composition of the Historical World in the Human Sciences], in B. Groethuysen (ed.) Wilhelm
Dilthey. Gesammelte Schriften, VII. Band. Stuttgart: B.G. Teubner.
Dilthey, W. (1958b) 'Die geistige Welt. Einleitung in die Philosophie des Lebens. 2. Hälfte:
Abhandlungen zur Poetik, Ethik und Pädagogik' [The Mental World. Introduction to the
Philosophy of Life. 2nd half: Essays on Poetics, Ethics and Pedagogy], in G. Misch (ed.)
Wilhelm Dilthey. Gesammelte Schriften, VI. Band. Stuttgart: B.G. Teubner.
Dilthey, W. (1959) 'Einleitung in die Geisteswissenschaften. Versuch einer Grundlegung für
das Studium der Gesellschaft und der Geschichte' [Introduction to the Human Sciences. Essay
on the Foundation of the Study of Society and History], in B. Groethuysen (ed.) Wilhelm
Dilthey. Gesammelte Schriften, I. Band. Stuttgart: B.G. Teubner.
Dilthey, W. (1963) Über die Möglichkeit einer allgemeingültigen pädagogischen Wissenschaft
[About the Possibility of a Universally Valid Pedagogical Science]. Weinheim: Beltz.
Droysen, J. G. (1977) Historik [History]. Stuttgart, Bad Cannstatt: Frommann - Holzboog.
Engelhardt, D. v. (1990) 'Der Bildungsbegriff in der Naturwissenschaft des 19. Jahrhunderts'
[The Notion of Bildung in the Natural Sciences of the 19th Century], in R. Koselleck (ed.)
Bildungsbürgertum im 19. Jahrhundert. Teil II: Bildungsgüter und Bildungswissen. Stuttgart:
Klett-Cotta, pp. 106-16.
Eulenburg, F. (1904) Die Frequenz der deutschen Universitäten. Von ihrer Gründung bis zur
Gegenwart [Frequency of German Universities. From their Foundation to the Present]. Leipzig:
B. G. Teubner.
Frühwald, W. (1991) 'Humanistische und naturwissenschaftlich-technische Bildung: die
Erfahrung des 19. Jahrhunderts' [Humanistic and Scientific-Technical Bildung: The Experience
of the 19th Century], in W. Frühwald, et al. (eds) Geisteswissenschaften heute. Frankfurt/M.:
Suhrkamp, pp. 73-111.
Geldsetzer, L. (1974) 'Die Geisteswissenschaften - Begriff und Entwicklung.' [The
Geisteswissenschaften - Notion and Development], in H. Rombach (ed.) Wissenschaftstheorie.
Bd. 1: Probleme und Positionen der Wissenschaftstheorie. Freiburg/Br.: Herder, pp. 141-50.
18

These are proofs of the final publication available at SAGE via History of the Human Sciences:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695111421865

Grimm, J. (1984) 'Über Schule Universität Academie' [About School University Academy], in
W. Neumann and H. Schmidt (eds) Jacob Grimm. Reden in der Akademie. Berlin: AkademieVerlag, pp. 212-49.
Grimminger, R. (2000) 'Krisen, Innovationen und andere Erbschaften. Drei Jahrzehnte
Germanistik' [Crises, Innovations and other Legacies. Three Decades of German Studies], in S.
Vietta and D. Kemper (eds) Germanistik der siebziger Jahre. Zwischen Innovation und
Ideologie. München: Wilhelm Fink Verlag, pp. 59-81.
Habermas, J. (1992) Postmetaphysical Thinking. Philosophical Essays. Massachusetts: MIT
Press.
Hall, S. (1990) 'The Emergence of Cultural Studies and the Crisis of the Humanities', October
53: 11-23.
Hamann, J. (2009) Der Preis des Erfolges. Die 'Krise der Geisteswissenschaften' in
feldtheoretischer Perspektive [The Price of Success. The 'Crisis of the Humanities' in
Perspective of Field Theory]. Bamberg: University of Bamberg Press.
Hartmann, M. (2002) Der Mythos von den Leistungseliten: Spitzenkarrieren und soziale
Herkunft in Wirtschaft, Politik, Justiz und Wissenschaft [The Myth of Meritocratic Elites: Top
Level Careers and Social Origins in Economy, Politics, Justice and Science]. Frankfurt/M.:
Campus.
Head, S. (2011) 'The Grim Threat to British Universities', The New York Review of Books 58.
Humboldt, W. von (1956) 'Über die innere und äußere Organisation der höheren
wissenschaftlichen Anstalten in Berlin' [About the Inner and Outer Organisation of the Higher
Education Institutions in Berlin], in E. Anrich (ed.) Die Idee der deutschen Universität. Die fünf
Grundschriften aus der Zeit ihrer Neubegründung durch klassischen Idealismus und
romantischen Realismus. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, pp. 375-86.
Humboldt, W. von (1960) 'Theorie der Bildung des Menschen' [Theory of Bildung of Man], in:
A. Flitner and K. Giel (eds) Wilhelm von Humboldt. Werke in fünf Bänden, Bd. I. Darmstadt:
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, pp. 234-40.
Humboldt, W. von (2008) 'Über die Bedingungen, unter denen Wissenschaft und Kunst in
einem Volke gedeihen' [About the Conditions under which Science and Art Flourish in a
Nation], in W. von Humboldt (ed.) Schriften zur Sprache. Neu-Isenburg: Wunderkammer
Verlag, pp. 916-21.
Huschke-Rhein, R. B. (1979) Das Wissenschaftsverständnis in der geisteswissenschaftlichen
Pädagogik. Dilthey - Litt - Nohl - Spranger [The Notion of Science in Humane Pedagogics.
Dilthey - Litt - Nohl - Spranger]. Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta.
Iggers, G. G. (1995) 'Historicism: The History and Meaning of the Term', Journal of the History
of Ideas 56: 129-52.
Jarausch, K. H. (1981) 'Die neuhumanistische Universität und die bürgerliche Gesellschaft
1800-1870. Eine quantitative Untersuchung zur Sozialstruktur der Studentenschaften deutscher
Universitäten' [The Neo-Humanistic University and Bourgeois Society 1800-1870. A
Quantitative Analysis of the Social Structure of German Universities' Student Body], in C.
19

These are proofs of the final publication available at SAGE via History of the Human Sciences:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695111421865

Probst (ed.) Darstellungen und Quellen zur Geschichte der deutschen Einheitsbewegung im
neunzehnten und zwanzigsten Jahrhundert, Bd. 11. Heidelberg: Winter, pp. 11-57.
Jaspers, K. (1946) Die Idee der Universität [The Idea of the University]. Berlin: Springer
Verlag.
Kant, I. (1977) 'Zum ewigen Frieden. Ein philosophischer Entwurf' [Perpetual Peace. A
Philosophical Sketch], in W. Weischedel (ed.) Immanuel Kant: Werke in zwölf Bänden, Bd.
11. Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp.
Kant, I. (2005) Der Streit der Fakultäten [The Conflict of the Faculties]. Hamburg: Felix Meiner
Verlag.
Kocka, J. (1990) 'Veränderungen in der Geschichtswissenschaft. Eine "Geisteswissenschaft"?'
[Changes in History. A 'Human Science'?], in W. Prinz and P. Weingart (eds) Die sog.
Geisteswissenschaften. Innenansichten. Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, pp. 134-7.
Ladenburg, A. (1912) Lebenserinnerungen [Memoirs]. Breslau: Trewendt & Granier.
Lepenies, W. (2006) The Seduction of Culture in German History. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Livingstone, D. N. (2007) 'Science, Site and Speech: Scientific Knowledge and the Spaces of
Rhetoric', History of the Human Sciences 20(2): 71-98.
Lundgreen, P. (1983) 'Differentiation in German Higher Education', in K. H. Jarausch (ed.) The
Transformation of Higher Learning. 1860-1930. Expansion, Diversification, Social Opening
and Professionalization in England, Germany, Russia and the United States. Stuttgart: Ernst
Klett, pp. 149-79.
Lundgreen, P. (2009) Das Personal an den Hochschulen in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland
1953-2005. Datenhandbuch zur deutschen Bildungsgeschichte, Bd. 10 [Personnel at the
Universities in the Federal Republic of Germany 1953-2005. Data Handbook for German
History of Education, Vol. 10]. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Marquard, O. (1986) 'Über die Unvermeidlichkeit der Geisteswissenschaften' [About the
Inevitability of Human Sciences], in O. Marquard (ed.) Apologie des Zufälligen.
Philosophische Studien. Stuttgart: Reclam, pp. 98-116.
McClelland, C. E. (1980) State, Society, and University in Modern Germany 1700-1914.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McClelland, C. E. (1983) 'Professionalization and Higher Education in Germany', in K. H.
Jarausch (ed.) The Transformation of Higher Learning 1860-1930. Expansion, Diversification,
Social Opening and Professionalization in England, Germany, Russia and the United States.
Stuttgart: Ernst Klett, pp. 306-20.
McLennan, G. (1998) 'Sociology and Cultural Studies: Rhetorics of Disciplinary Identity',
History of the Human Sciences 11(3): 1-17.
Muhlack, U. (1990) 'Bildung zwischen Neuhumanismus und Historismus' [Bildung between
neo-Humanism and Historicism], in R. Koselleck (ed.) Bildungsbürgertum im 19. Jahrhundert.
Teil II: Bildungsgüter und Bildungswissen. Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta, pp. 80-105.
20

These are proofs of the final publication available at SAGE via History of the Human Sciences:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695111421865

Müller-Solger, H. and Gieseke, L. (1977) Zu den Zukunftsperspektiven des wissenschaftlichen
Nachwuchses in der Germanistik [Future Perspectives of Junior Scientific Staff of German
studies], Mitteilungen des Deutschen Germanisten-Verbandes 24: 3-9.
Nida-Rümelin, J. (2003) Zur Zukunft der Geisteswissenschaften. Eine humanistische
Perspektive [The Future of the Humanities. A Humanistic Perspective], in European Institute
for International Affairs. Heidelberg.
Observer (2010) 'Don't Ditch Arts Funding in Favour of Science. It's Vital to our Society', The
Observer. London.
Oehler, C. (1998) 'Die Hochschulentwicklung nach 1945' [Tertiary Education Development
after 1945], in C. Führ and C.-L. Furck (eds) Handbuch der deutschen Bildungsgeschichte, Bd.
5/1. München: C.H. Beck, pp. 412-46.
Picht, G. (1964) Die deutsche Bildungskatastrophe. Analyse und Dokumentation [The German
Catastrophe of Bildung. Analysis and Documentation]. Olten: Walter-Verlag.
Rickert, H. (1902) Die Grenzen der naturwissenschaftlichen Begriffsbildung. Eine logische
Einleitung in die historischen Wissenschaften [The Limits of Concept Formation in Natural
Sciences. A Logical Introduction into the Historical Sciences]. Tübingen, Leipzig: J.C.B. Mohr.
Rickert, H. (1926) Kulturwissenschaft und Naturwissenschaft [Cultural Science and Natural
Science]. Tübingen: Mohr.
Ringer, F. K. (1989) 'Bildung: The Social and Ideological Context of the German Historical
Tradition', History of European Ideas 10: 193-202.
Ringer, F. K. (1990) The Decline of the German Mandarins: the German Academic
Community, 1890-1933. Lebanon, New England: University Press of New England.
Ritter, J. (1974) 'Die Aufgabe der Geisteswissenschaften in der modernen Gesellschaft' [The
Purpose of Human Sciences in the Modern Society], in J. Ritter (ed.) Subjektivität. Sechs
Aufsätze. Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp.
Röther, K. (1980) Die Germanistenverbände und ihre Tagungen. Ein Beitrag zur
germanistischen Organisations- und Wissenschaftsgeschichte [The Associations of Scholars of
German Studies and their Congresses. A Contribution to the Organisational and Scientific
History of German Studies]. Köln: Pahl-Rugenstein Verlag.
Rüegg,
W.
(2004)
'Theologie
und
Geisteswissenschaften' [Theology and
Geisteswissenschaften], in W. Rüegg (ed.) Geschichte der Universität in Europa. Bd. III: Vom
19. Jahrhundert zum Zweiten Weltkrieg (1800-1945). München: C. H. Beck, pp. 325-78.
Salter, B. and Tapper, T. (2002) 'The External Pressure on the Internal Governance of
Universities Higher', Education Quarterly 56: 245-56.
Schleiermacher, F. (1956) 'Gelegentliche Gedanken über Universitäten im deutschen Sinn,
nebst einem Anhang über neu zu errichtende' [Occasional Thoughts on Universities in the
German Sense, With an Appendix Regarding a University Soon to be Established], in E. Anrich
(ed.) Die Idee der deutschen Universität. Die fünf Grundschriften aus der Zeit ihrer
Neubegründung durch klassischen Idealismus und romantischen Realismus. Darmstadt:
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, pp. 219-93.
21

These are proofs of the final publication available at SAGE via History of the Human Sciences:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695111421865

Schnädelbach, H. (1983) Philosophie in Deutschland 1831-1933 [Philosophy in Germany
1831-1933]. Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp.
Schücking, L. L. (1961) Soziologie der literarischen Geschmacksbildung [Sociology of Literary
Formation of Taste]. Bern, München: Francke.
Schwartz, S. (2011) 'Not By Skills Alone', Times Higher Education.
Simmel, G. (1923) Die Probleme der Geschichtsphilosophie. Eine erkenntnistheoretische
Studie [Problems of History of Philosophy. An Epistemological Study]. München: Duncker &
Humblot.
Snow, C. P. (2008) The Two Cultures. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sorkin, D. (1983) 'Wilhelm Von Humboldt: The Theory and Practice of Self-Formation
(Bildung)', Journal of the History of Ideas 44: 55-73.
Stooß, F. (1991) 'Berufsaussichten für Germanisten und neue Studiengänge' [Professional
Outlook für Scholars of German Studies and new Degree Courses], in J. Janota (ed.) Kultureller
Wandel und die Germanistik in der Bundesrepublik. Vorträge des Augsburger Germanistentags
1991. Tübingen: Max Niemeyer Verlag, pp. 171-5.
Titze, H. (1987) Das Hochschulstudium in Preußen und Deutschland 1820-1944.
Datenhandbuch zur deutschen Bildungsgeschichte, Bd. 1,1 [University Education in Prussia
and Germany 1820-1944. Data Handbook for German History of Education, Vol. 1,1].
Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Titze, H. (1995) Wachstum und Differenzierung der deutschen Universitäten 1830-1945.
Datenhandbuch zur deutschen Bildungsgeschichte, Bd. 1,2 [Growth and Differentiation of
German Universities 1830-1945. Data Handbook of German History of Education, Vol. 1,2].
Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Veit-Brause, I. (2001) 'Scientists and the Cultural Politics of Academic Disciplines in Late 19thCentury Germany: Emil Du Bois-Reymond and the Controversy over the Role of the Cultural
Sciences', History of the Human Sciences 14(4): 31-56.
von Ferber, C. (1956) Die Entwicklung des Lehrkörpers der deutschen Universitäten und
Hochschulen 1864-1954 [The Development of Academic Staff of German Universities and
Tertiary Institutions 1864-1954]. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Voßkamp, W. (1990) 'Literaturwissenschaft als Geisteswissenschaft. Thesen zur Geschichte
der deutschen Literaturwissenschaft nach dem zweiten Weltkrieg' [Literary Studies as Human
Sciences. Theses on the History of German Literary Studies after the Second World War], in
W. Prinz and P. Weingart P. (eds) Die sog. Geisteswissenschaften. Innenansichten.
Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp, pp. 240-7.
Weber, M. (1922) 'Wissenschaft als Beruf' [Science as a Vocation], in M. Weber (ed.)
Gesammelte Aufsätze zur Wissenschaftslehre. Tübingen: J. C. B. Mohr, pp. 524-55.
Wehler, H.-U. (1973) Geschichte als historische Sozialwissenschaft [History as Historial Social
Science]. Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp.
Weingart, P., et al. (1991) Die sog. Geisteswissenschaften: Außenansichten [The So-Called
Human Sciences. Exterior Views]. Frankfurt/M.: Suhrkamp.
22

These are proofs of the final publication available at SAGE via History of the Human Sciences:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0952695111421865

Windelband, W. (1894) Geschichte und Naturwissenschaft. Rede beim Stiftungsfest der KaiserWilhelms-Universitaet Strassburg, 1. Mai 1894 [History and Natural Sciences. Rectoral
Address at the Kaiser-Wilhelms-Universitaet in Strassburg, 1st May 1894]. Strassburg: Druck
von Heitz.
Windelband, W. (1921) Präludien. Aufsätze und Reden zur Philosophie und ihrer Geschichte,
2 Bde [Preludes. Articles and Speeches about Philosophy and its History, 2 vols.]. Tübingen:
Mohr.
Windolf, P. (1997) Expansion and Structural Change: Higher Education in Germany, United
States and Japan 1870 -1990. Boulder: Westview.
Wissenschaftsrat [The German Council of Sciences and Humanities] (2006) 'Empfehlungen zur
Entwicklung und Förderung der Geisteswissenschaften in Deutschland'. Berlin.
Wissenschaftsrat [The German Council of Sciences and Humanities] (2008) 'Empfehlungen zur
Qualitätsverbesserung von Lehre und Studium'. Berlin.

23

