Obedience and Authority among Muslim Couples: Negotiating Gendered Religious Scripts in
Contemporary Indonesia
Sociology of Religion (published online 10 December 2018).
https://doi.org/10.1093/socrel/sry045
This study of Muslim married couples in Indonesia shows that religiously justified scripts about
wives’ obedience and husbands’ household authority are ways of accomplishing gender as well
as achieving status as good Muslims. Such scripts are amplified by a context in which a version
of Islamic family law that envisions women as primarily domestic and men as household
authorities and breadwinners has been institutionalized. However, this vision is also being
challenged by women’s increasing educational attainment as well as competing egalitarian
discourses of gender in Islam. The gendered religious scripts used by Muslim couples
compensate for social changes that threaten to reshape both domestic and public life. I propose
that how Muslim men and women talk about their marriages and households has become a key
mechanism for accomplishing modern Muslim gender identities in a context where men’s
authority is at risk. These dynamics may be especially prevalent in Muslim contexts where
Islamic law is becoming more institutionalized in state bureaucracies and everyday life.

1

Recent sociological literature examines how gender and religion are mutually constitutive. As
scholarship has shown, not only do people do religion in gendered ways, but they also often do
gender in religious ways (Avishai 2008; Irby 2014b; Avishai, Jafar, and Rinaldo 2015; Burke
and Hudec 2015; Rao 2015; Darwin 2018; Sumerau, Mathers, and Cragun 2018). As Darwin
(2018) observes, in religions with strong gender prescriptions, to practice religion is to do gender.
Intimate relationships are a key site for enactments of religion and gender. Yet, while the
relationality of gender is well recognized, few recent studies investigate qualitatively the
intersections of gender and religion among partners in intimate relationships, and much less is
known about couples in Muslim contexts. Building on Bartkowski’s (2001) concept of the
“tandem negotiation of gender” in Evangelical marriages, this article investigates scripts of
wives’ obedience and husbands’ authority among Muslim couples in urban Indonesia. I extend
the literature to show how married women and men use these gendered religious scripts to
accomplish their statuses as Muslim men and women.
Ideas about women’s submission and men’s leadership are not new in Indonesia, the
world’s fourth largest country and the largest Muslim country by population. Different from the
Western contexts in which many sociological studies of religion and gender are situated,
Indonesia is a majority Muslim country which has undergone a process of revitalization of Islam.
As part of this process, the state’s version of Muslim family law has become increasingly
influential. This development has coincided with rising rates of women’s education and more
diverse work opportunities for educated women. Thus, greater institutionalization of Islamic
family law coexists with social changes that potentially challenge the gender ideals it promotes.
As this article shows, this context has an important role in shaping couple dynamics such
that many married men and women seek to protect or bolster men’s status in the household.

2

Women tend to emphasize their obedience and underplay their income earning, while men
emphasize their authority and family leadership. This process, I argue, compensates for the
broader social changes that are occurring and shows that how Muslim men and women talk
about their marriages and households has become a key mechanism for accomplishing gender
status. This tandem negotiation of gender among Muslim married couples in Indonesia shows
that gendered religious scripts (Rao 2015) are crucial to how married Muslim men and women
enact gender identities, especially in situations where the conventional gendered order is at risk.
More broadly, this article suggests that as public life becomes more egalitarian, domestic
life can become a significant arena for reasserting gender norms. These dynamics may be
especially pronounced in Muslim contexts where increased opportunities for women challenge
the male breadwinner model embedded in institutionalized versions of Islamic family law.

RELIGION AND GENDER
Studies of religion and gender have sought to understand religious women’s experiences,
particularly in conservative religious traditions (Avishai, Jafar, and Rinaldo 2015; Avishai 2016;
Avishai and Irby 2017). Scholars such as Bartkowski (2001) and Gallagher (2003) have also
studied gender relations among religious married couples. Marriage is an especially significant
site for investigation, because conservative religions often emphasize “traditional” gender and
family ideals, such as complementarianism (the belief that men and women have naturally
different roles and responsibilities). While Evangelical couples rely on the Bible as an essential
resource for negotiating gender, Muslim couples may rely on the Qur’an and other Islamic texts,
including Muslim family law. These texts and the discourses of religious elites influence scripts
that instruct believers how to enact gendered roles and responsibilities.

3

This literature shows that religious discourses on gender are complex and flexible. For
example, Evangelical women may embrace submission to their husbands as a way to manage
relationship difficulties, especially over the division of labor (Griffith 1997; Brasher 1998;
Chong 2008). Other recent research suggests that younger Evangelicals may be embracing more
mutuality when it comes to gender (Irby 2014a;). Some scholars see Evangelical scripts about
women’s submission shifting to emphasize a softer form of patriarchy that is more emotionally
attuned to women and children (Wilcox 2004) and able to accommodate women’s careers and
decision-making responsibilities (Denton 2004; Edgell 2006; Irby 2014). Evangelical scripts of
women’s submission may increasingly play a symbolic role because of economic pressures that
necessitate two incomes (Gallagher and Smith 1999; Gallagher 2003). Similarly, Edgell (2006)
argues that Evangelicals respond to gender egalitarianism by emphasizing mutuality within the
household while also symbolically affirming male headship.
Scholarship on gender and religion has also fruitfully engaged with the sociology of
gender and feminist theory to better understand the workings of gender in religious families.
Bartkowski (2001) observes a “tandem negotiation of gender” in Evangelical couples, in which
people creatively draw on resources from the Evangelical cultural repertoire to address their
family needs. Contemporary Evangelicalism includes debates over wifely versus mutual
submission. Spouses grapple both individually and together to interpret, adapt, and occasionally
reject such religious discourses. Bartkowski found that most respondents emphasized scripts of
wifely submission and men’s household leadership, with women talking about their choice to
submit (often framed in terms of helping their husbands), while husbands emphasized the
commandment to love their wives. Yet couples also told stories of compromise and negotiation,

4

illustrating how gender practices often do not match gender ideals. Bartkowski proposes that
“wifely submission in word ultimately gives way to mutual submission in deed” (135).
Such scholarship has been important for showing how conservative religions are complex
and flexible, adapted by adherents including women for their own purposes (Bartkowski and
Read 2003; Burke 2012). Traditionalist gender discourses can be a crucial part of negotiating
modern lifestyles and relationship dynamics. Intimate relationships among religious believers are
sites of active negotiation, and in some cases religious gender ideals may be more of a symbolic
commitment than a blueprint for daily life.
Crucial to my focus on gender negotiations among Muslim married couples are two
further insights from recent studies of religion. First, many believers seek to adhere to religious
discourses as part of their commitment to religion. That is, rather than trying to circumvent
religious restrictions, people may strive to comply with them (Mahmood 2005; Irby 2014b;
Avishai 2008). Such a sincere commitment is not incompatible with strategic or critical uses of
religion (Author 2015). But from this perspective, elite religious discourses matter because many
believers seek to live up to their expectations (Mahmood 113).
Second, just as gender is something that people work to achieve and “do” through daily
interactions (West and Zimmerman 1987), so too is religion (Mahmood 2005; Avishai 2008).
Mahmood showed that Egyptian Muslim women adopt veiling not simply to express piety, but to
cultivate it in themselves. Moreover, people do religion in gendered ways (Irby 2014a; Rao
2015; Darwin 2018). Rao (2015) shows in her study of Muslim converts how the effort to
comply with religious expectations makes different demands on men and women. She argues
that “doing religion” is guided by gendered religious scripts, and thus, the production of a moral

5

religious self is necessarily the production of a gendered moral self (432). I use this concept of
gendered religious scripts to describe narratives about gender that draw on religious discourses.
The inextricability of gender and religion can also be seen when religious practitioners
appropriate the practices of the other gender in order to redo religious gender norms. Jewish
women who adopt the masculine kippot find that their legitimacy as both women and Jews
comes in to question (Darwin 2018). Darwin argues: “One cannot simply ‘do religion’ if that
religion holds one gender accountable to a different set of practices than the other gender” (366367). This is especially so in religions such as Evangelicalism or Islam that include strong
recommendations about how men and women should present themselves and relate to each other.
Despite the insights of this literature about religion, gender, and relationship dynamics,
few recent studies investigate qualitatively the links between gender and religion within couples.
Moreover, little research exists on such issues among Muslim couples. This study therefore
examines how the gender discourses promulgated through Muslim family law compare to the
lived realities of gender among Indonesian Muslims. It does so with a unique focus on the
tandem negotiation of gender, especially the use of religious gender scripts among married
Muslim couples. How exactly should we understand gendered religious scripts about Muslim
women’s obedience and men’s authority? And what does this tell us about the negotiation of
gender in contemporary Muslim couples? I extend the scholarship on religion and gender by
showing that Muslim couples’ scripts of wives’ obedience and husbands’ household authority
work to accomplish gender as well as achieve status as Muslims. The use of these gendered
religious scripts compensates for social changes that put men’s authority at risk, and that the
ways men and women talk about their marriages and households are not simply repetitions of
elite discourses, but mechanisms for accomplishing modern Muslim gender identities.

6

THE INDONESIAN CONTEXT: ISLAM, FAMILY LAW, AND GENDER
Before turning to my research methods and findings, it is necessary to discuss the significant role
of Muslim family law as well as recent shifts in gender and Islam in Indonesia.
Nearly 90% of Indonesia’s population of 266 million is Muslim, making it the largest
Muslim population in the world and the largest Muslim majority democracy. Muslim beliefs and
practices vary widely in Indonesia. While Indonesia has been heralded as more gender
egalitarian than other majority Muslim societies, scholars of the region have shown that
colonialism and monotheistic religions brought a gender binary structure to Southeast Asia that
undermined older traditions of gender fluidity and pluralism (Peletz 2009). Scholars have also
documented how the authoritarian Suharto regime (1966-1998) circumscribed women’s roles in
public life. The regime drew on Javanese cultural traditions and used state programs to instill
ideas about women’s primary roles as mothers and wives. Since the 1990s, Indonesia has been
home to a vibrant women’s rights movement that includes both secular and religious activists
(Author 2013). But scholars have also chronicled how Suharto era gender ideologies gained a
strong hold within the middle class and remain influential in the post-democratization era.
(Sullivan 1994; Brenner 1998; Robinson 2008; Tickamyer and Kusujiarti 2013).

Indonesian Muslim Family Law
Like many majority Muslim countries, Indonesia has a secular court system and a religious
(Islamic) court system, both of which are under the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. The
religious courts deal exclusively with family law and inheritance. In many Muslim settings,
Muslims are governed by family laws that are influenced by Islamic law (Esposito and DeLongBas 2001). In most versions of Muslim family law, husbands are envisioned as breadwinners,

7

while wives are tasked with managing the household and caring for children. In this
complementarian vision of marriage, wives are not usually prevented from working outside the
household or earning income, although they may need to seek their husbands’ permission to do
so. Husbands are obligated to pay for the wife’s food, clothing and shelter (referred to as
maintenance – nafaqa in Arabic and nafkah in Indonesian), while in return wives are obligated to
obey their husbands (Welchman 2011). Wives who fail to do so are considered nushuz (Arabic –
disobedient). According to historians, Islamic courts have enforced nafaqaa much more than
nushuz, but the concept of nushuz does encode women’s submission in marriage (Tucker 2008).
This is justified with reference to the Qur’anic verse from Surah An-Nisa (4:34), which
reads: “Men are in charge of women by [right of] what Allah has given one over another and
what they spend [for maintenance] from their wealth. So righteous women are devoutly obedient,
guarding in [the husband’s] absence what Allah would have them guard. But those [wives] from
whom you fear arrogance – [first] advise them; [then if they persist] forsake them in bed; and
[finally] strike them. But if they obey you [once more], seek no means against them”
(Quran.com). Although there are different interpretations, this verse is also commonly used as
justification for men’s authority over women more generally (Mir-Hosseini 2015).
The gender and marriage discourses encoded in Muslim family laws are influential for
many Muslims, even in contexts where they are not governed by them. They have always been
subject to interpretation and adaptation, and Indonesian traditions of Muslim family law have
historically been more liberal than elsewhere (Esposito and DeLong Bas 2001; Predelli 2004;
Read and Bartkowski 2003; Welchman 2011; Van Huis 2015; Nyhagen and Halsaa 2016).
Muslim family laws have been the subject of much contestation among Muslims, with some
activists arguing for broader implementation or stricter interpretations of Muslim family codes,

8

while others strive to shift family law in a more egalitarian direction. Muslim feminists, for
example, argue that Islamic law can be interpreted in ways that support gender equality. Their
efforts at reinterpretation especially challenge the idea of men’s authority or guardianship over
women (Mir-Hosseini 2015). Both of these trends are evident in Indonesia, where the
bureaucratic institutionalization of Muslim family law has occurred quite recently.
Marriage in Indonesia is regulated by the 1974 Marriage Law, which was the first
national law to govern marriage and divorce (Cammack, Young, and Heaton 1996). The law is
contradictory when it comes to women’s status. Chapter Six, “The Rights and Obligations of
Couples,” states in paragraph 31 “The rights and position of the wife are equal with the rights
and position of the husband both in family life and in society.” However, paragraph 31
continues: “The husband is the head of the family and the wife is the mother of the household.”
Paragraph 33 states that “The husband and wife are obligated to love each other, respect each
other, be faithful and give each other spiritual support.” Paragraph 34 sets out their duties. “The
husband is obligated to protect his wife and give her whatever she needs for their household life
to the best of his abilities. The wife shall manage the household to the best of her abilities. If the
husband or wife neglects his or her responsibilities, the other party can launch a complaint to the
court.” (Author’s translation, Bahan Penyuluhan Hukum 2001: 124). As is evident from these
sentences, the 1974 law does not include many explicit religious references. However, many
Indonesians consider the 1974 law to be inspired by Surah An-Nisa because it asserts that the
husband is the primary authority in the household (Cammack, Bedner, and Van Huis 2015).
In 1989, the Suharto government strengthened the religious court system, giving religious
courts autonomy and full jurisdiction over Muslim marriages and divorces (Feener and
Cammack 2015).i The government released the Compilation of Islamic Law in 1991, a state

9

sanctioned version of Islamic law that applies to Muslim marriages and divorces. While the 1974
Marriage Law is still the national family law, the Compilation applies to all Muslim families.ii
The Compilation is intended to be compatible with the 1974 Marriage Law and it gives
women more rights than many other versions of Muslim family law (Nurlaelawati 2010;
Cammack, Bedner and Van Huis 2015; Van Huis 2015). For example, wives have broad grounds
for divorce and custody of children. However, like the 1974 Marriage Law its messages about
gender are contradictory. For example, Paragraphs 80 and 83 set out the obligations of husbands
and wives. Paragraph 80 states: “The husband is the leader (pembimbing) of the wife and the
household, however important household business will be decided by the couple together.” It
goes on to stipulate that “The husband protects his wife and provides her daily needs to the best
of his abilities” and depending on his earnings, he is required to financially maintain the
household (using the word nafkah), pay for medical care for his wife and children, and pay for
the children’s education (paragraph 80). This paragraph also states that the wife can free her
husband from the obligation to provide a living for the household and pay for medical care.
Paragraph 83 on the obligations of the wife reads: “The primary obligation of a wife is to be
pious and devoted to her husband within the bounds of Islamic law” and “The wife must
maintain and manage the daily needs of the household as best she can.” Paragraph 84 notes:
“The wife can be considered nusyuz (disobedient) if she does not carry out her obligations as
specified in paragraph 83 unless there is a valid excuse.” It continues: “As long as the wife is
nusyuz, the obligations of the husband to his wife as stipulated in paragraph 80 are not valid
except for important issues relating to the children” (Author’s translations, Bahan Penyuluhan
Hukum 2001: 182-183).

10

The Compilation represents a more explicitly Muslim articulation of gender relations in
the household than the 1974 Marriage Law. The use of the words nafkah and nusyuz and the
stipulations about husbands’ and wives’ obligations are direct references to Islamic law (Tucker
2008). While it is more liberal than the family laws of many Middle Eastern countries, it does
not reflect the egalitarian Islamic interpretations of Muslim reformists (Welchman 2011). And
the Compilation is increasingly influential as more Indonesian marriages and divorces are
formalized through the religious courts (Nurlaelawati 2013).iii Finally, because of its
institutionalization as state law it is an authoritative vision of gender relations.

Changes in Indonesian Muslim Family Law
What has driven the shift to a more explicitly Muslim family law? An Islamic revival since the
late 1980s along with democratization after 1998 have resulted in substantial changes in religious
and political life. Crucial to the Islamic revival in Indonesia and elsewhere is the idea of piety.
To be a good Muslim in the contemporary world is to adopt orthodox pious practices, especially
those that are visible and public, such as veiling for women, observing taboos on alcohol, and
more (Mahmood 2005). As Brenner observes about the Islamic revival in Indonesia: “This
movement has had rippling effects in virtually all spheres of social and political life, as seen in
the changing modes of piety, ethical decorum, modes of interaction, and styles of dress; in the
introduction of Islamic law into local and provincial legal codes; and in the rise of both religious
extremism…and mainstream Islamic consumer culture” (2011: 478). In this context, to become a
good Muslim in Indonesia is to adopt more publicly pious practices. Arguably, in this era, the
state both increasingly recognizes religious authority in its family law efforts as well as seeks
more control over the interpretation of Islam (Feener and Cammack 2012; Menchik 2016)

11

Such changes have not necessarily disempowered women. Indonesian women’s rights
activists synthesize Islam and feminism in creative ways to argue for gender equality (Blackburn
2004; Robinson 2008; Brenner 2011; Rinaldo 2013). For example, they argue that the obedience
in Islam means obedience to Allah, not husbands. Such activists provide an alternative and
egalitarian set of Islamic gender ideals. Their arguments have helped to pass legislation such as
the 2004 Anti-Domestic Violence Law and have also underpinned recent reforms that have made
religious courts more responsive to women. Their ideas are a potential source of leverage for
women negotiating ordinary household life.
These religious changes have occurred amidst other social changes. Indonesian women,
especially those in the middle class, have increasing work and educational opportunities.
Indonesian women have long worked outside the house, but mostly in the informal and
agricultural sectors. Indonesian women’s labor force participation rose from 26% to 51.4%
between 1971 and 2014, though it has not changed much since 1990 (Schaner and Das 2016).
Research shows that educated young women do not plan to give up their careers after marriage
(Utomo 2015; 2016). Women are gravitating toward the service sector, with 58% of working
women in non-agricultural sectors (Schaner and Das 2016). In 2016, just 12% of Indonesians
aged 25-34 had tertiary education, but the percentage of women among those enrolled in tertiary
education rose from 9% in 1990 to 32% in 2012 (OECD 2016). The country’s gender parity
index (GPI) for secondary education improved from 0.53 in 1970 to 1 in 2015, meaning that the
ratio of girls to boys in secondary education is now the same (Lowy Institute 2018).
Ideas about women’s lesser status and men’s authority are certainly not new in Indonesia
and Suharto state discourses about women’s domesticity certainly played a major role in
legitimizing such ideas. Yet the words obedience (taat) or disobedience (nusyuz) with regards to

12

wives are not notable in major ethnographies of gender in Java from the 1980s and 1990s
(Sullivan 1994), (Brenner 1998), (Tickamyer and Kusujiarti 2012). However, in her study of
divorce, O’Shaughnessy (2009) sees an increasing tendency for religious courts after 2000 to
emphasize wives’ obedience (199) and this was also a prominent theme in my interviews. This
most likely is influenced by the use of the term nusyuz in the Compilation of Islamic Law. It
suggests that Islam has increasingly become the language used to justify gender hierarchies.
Overall in Indonesia, a particular version of Islamic family law is more institutionalized
in the state and influential in everyday life. It envisions women as primarily domestic and men as
breadwinners and it provides men with authority over the household. On the other hand, the
increasing educational attainment of Indonesian women, especially in the middle class, means
that they have a broader array of work opportunities, as well as access to better paying jobs that
pose a challenge to the male breadwinner ideal. These dynamics make Indonesia an especially
significant context to examine the intertwining of gender and religion among Muslim couples.

METHODS
This article draws on interviews and fieldwork with Muslim married couples in Malang, East
Java, Indonesia in 2013. Malang is a city of 820,000. As elsewhere in Java, about 90% of
residents are Muslim (BPS Malang).
Malang is often referred to as “kota pelajar” (city of students) because of its universities.
At last count, the city has at least 17 institutions of tertiary education, including a state university
and a state Islamic university, as well as numerous private institutions of higher education.
The full study included 34 Muslims, 5 Protestants, and 2 Catholics (total = 41). This
article is based on the interviews with 18 Muslim women and 16 Muslim men. This group of 34

13

consisted of 16 married couples, one widow, and one wife whose husband declined to be
interviewed. The ages of the Muslim participants ranged from age 26 to 70. There were 16
Muslim participants in their 20s and 30s, 9 in their 40s, 7 in their 50s, and 2 over 60. Most
couples were close in age. Sampling was a combination of purposive and snowball. I worked
with one male and one female research assistant, both recent graduates from a local university.
For convenience, I focused on a walkable area of the city.
Although some participants had difficulty estimating their monthly household incomes,
the reported estimates ranged from as little as 200,000 rupiah (a little over $20) to a high of
about 22 million ($2500), with about three quarters of respondents reporting between 1 and 5
million rupiah per month. (The Boston Consulting Group defines middle class in Indonesia as
ranging in purchasing power from 1.5 million to 5 million rupiah per month, accounting for
about 141 million people [2013]). This study therefore does not include many households at the
extremes of poverty and wealth, but it does capture the increasingly broad middle.
Nine of the 18 Muslim women interviewees worked outside the house. Many were
employed as teachers and a few worked in the private sector. Of the women who did not work
outside the house, some had a home-based small business, and/or managed rooms for student
boarders. Men worked as teachers, government employees, and small business owners.
My interview participants were more educated than average. Fourteen of my 34 Muslim
participants (8 women and 6 men) had at least some tertiary education (41%). However, 20
Muslim participants had a high school education or less, with 5 having only an elementary
school education. It is important to note that in Indonesia and other Muslim contexts,
conservative and textualist understandings of Islam are especially strong among the educated
urban middle class (Mahmood 2005; Sidel 2006; Brenner 2011).

14

I interviewed individuals inside their houses. Husbands and wives were interviewed
separately. Interviews were semi-structured and included questions about gender, the household
division of labor, and religious attitudes. Interviews were conducted in Indonesian, the national
language. The research assistants did not translate, but occasionally asked “probe” questions.
I initially used MS Excel to sort respondents based on age, gender, educational levels,
religion, and income. After doing open coding of the interview transcripts by hand, women’s
obedience and men’s authority emerged as the most prevalent themes. I used NVIVO to code
interviews for these and related themes such as authority, leader, and respect.
There are certainly limitations to this study. First, this is a small sample. However, the
goal of a qualitative study such as this is not to be representative but to achieve saturation of
diverse perspectives (Small 2009) and I think my sample achieves this goal. Second is my
presence as a white American woman. I have done extensive fieldwork in Indonesia and speak
the language. I did not find that being a woman made it difficult to talk to men, perhaps due to
the research assistants. My presence probably made the interviews more formal and may have
encouraged people to explain their religious beliefs and to present themselves as “good”
Muslims. However, the fact that my presence may have elicited certain scripts allows for an
analysis of those scripts and why people aimed to present themselves in certain ways.

GENDERED RELIGIOUS SCRIPTS: OBEDIENCE AND AUTHORITY
The neighborhoods where I conducted interviews included a dense mix of housing ranging from
tiny concrete houses in alleys too narrow for cars to spacious McMansions on tree lined streets.
Most houses are one or two stories, but second floor windows often have views of the mountains,
including a smoking volcano. During the day there are vendors roaming the streets with carts,

15

housewives hanging laundry, food stalls catering to students, and grandmothers or maids caring
for young children. As the universities have grown, many houses have added rooms for boarding
students. At any time of day, there are students traveling through the neighborhood on foot or by
motorbike. During the week, many Indonesian urban neighborhoods are dominated by women
and children and the elderly, with adult men (and some women) away at work. In this case, the
additional element of students means that neighborhood almost always feels active and busy.
My interview questions about gender in the household tended to prompt scripts about
wives obeying their husbands and husbands’ authority over the family. Eighteen of the 34
Muslim interviewees told me explicitly that men are heads of the household, and it was clear
from nearly all research participants that they would agree with this statement. Eleven out of 18
women and four out of 16 men said that wives should obey their husbands. Such answers came
in response to interview questions about the differences between men and women, the household
division of labor, or what makes a person a good Muslim man or women. Much of the time,
these statements were justified with reference to Islam. Yet most interviewees did not refer
specifically to religious texts. Instead, their answers were more general, along the lines of “In
Islam, wives are supposed to obey their husbands.” Such generality leaves open the possibility
for multiple meanings, such as wives are supposed to obey but don’t necessarily do so, or wives
are supposed to obey husbands in certain contexts.
Women expressed the idea of obedience in several ways. More so than men, many
women spoke about it directly, using the words taat sama/pada suami (to obey the husband). A
young woman said, “You know, women must obey (taat) their husbands, they shouldn’t be
above their husbands,” and when I followed up by asking whether she thought men and women
were naturally different, she replied, “In religion and in kodrat (a Javanese term meaning a

16

person’s essential gendered nature) women must serve (melayani) their husbands.” Others chose
different words. As one middle-aged woman said: “A good Muslim wife doesn’t reject any
requests, her husband is the head of the household, so she should talk politely to her husband.”
Some women used the phrase harus mengikuti suaminya – women must follow their husbands. A
few used the word patuh rather than taat– this word is more ambiguous, as it can be used to
mean loyalty, but also is widely used to mean obedience. Finally, a few women did not use taat
or patuh but said that wives should respect (menghormati) their husbands.
Men used the word obedience (usually using the word taat) less often than women,
although it was clear that most of them agreed with the idea of wifely obedience. Similar to the
Compilation of Islamic Law, men talked about their responsibilities as being a household leader,
provider/protector, and/or a moral guide for their family. For example, when I asked him about
his duties in the household, a middle aged man told me, “Well, I’m the head of the household.”
When asked to be more specific, he said, “I am responsible for the children’s education.” Later,
he said that a good Muslim husband is one who “leads his wife and children well.” A very
common statement from men was that voiced by a 37 year old man who said: “My religion says
that men should be leaders in the household.” A few men forbade their wives from working
while their children were young. As I will discuss later, a small number of men emphasized
mutual respect (saling menghormati) or cooperation between spouses.
Certainly, women were more likely to use the word obedience because in the
Compilation of Islamic Law it is associated with their role in the marriage, while the script of
household authority was more pronounced among men because the Law associates it with their
role in the marriage. However, the use of the word obedience and the emphasis on male headship
was more evident among interviewees under 50. For example, of the 11 women who used the

17

term obedience explicitly, 10 were under 50, seven worked outside the house, and five had at
least some university education.
My interviews with Arief and Putri demonstrate the typical ways couples voiced these
scripts. Arief is 50, with a high school education. He runs an internet café out of his house. His
wife Putri, also a high school graduate, is 47. She works out of the house as a tailor. They have
two children, one of whom is in college, but their finances are shaky. She earns about 700,000
rupiah per month, while he earns about 1 million a month, making a total of about $200, or just
barely lower middle class. During university breaks, students return home, so Arief’s income
drops considerably. They admitted that their income is sometimes barely enough to cover basic
expenses and they rely on assistance from their eldest son, who works while he is in school.
Arief agreed that women and men should have the same rights in education and politics.
“Yes, it’s the same,” he told me. “It should be as high as the sky. But still, in the household, it
has to be a special rule that a woman is under a man. Other than that, everything is possible. But
if we make it the same in the household, there will be no leader and our household will be in
danger…. In household life, it’s still necessary to keep our rules according to our religion. The
mother has to be under the father, the leader is the father.” Nevertheless, he also stressed that the
family is a team, in which everyone helps each other. He said that he often cleans the house
because his wife is busy with her work.
Putri echoed much of what her husband told me. She recognized that the income from her
work was critical for the family. When I first asked about the differences and similarities
between men and women, Putri said that men are supposed to be heads of households. And then
she added somewhat jokingly, “Women should be obedient, ha ha ha, unless they get some ideas.
But men and women are equal nowadays.” When I pressed her, she said that men are made to be

18

leaders, while women are made to be mothers, but she also felt that they should have equal rights
in work and education. Many respondents used the words for woman and wife interchangeably,
and when I asked Putri what it meant to be a good Muslim woman, she replied that it means
being devout in religion and following her religion’s rules. When I asked about being a good
Muslim wife, she answered, “It’s to be obedient to her husband.”
These statements reveal themes voiced by many interviewees. The spouses connect their
complementarian gender ideology to Islam. Yet while Arief is often the breadwinner, Putri’s
income is significant and more stable. He does not challenge her working and earning income –
this is taken for granted.
Although she bears the burden of domestic responsibilities, he is proud to say that he
contributes to certain household tasks. However, this is framed as something he does to be
helpful, not as a necessary part of being a husband. What is connected to his role as husband is
authority over the family. Similarly, she is pleased for women to have equal rights in work and
education but expresses her view that to be a good Muslim wife is to obey her husband. Thus,
Arief and Putri suggest that women’s obedience to men is expected in the household, but not in
public life, a leitmotif that emerged in many interviews.
The script of obedience is a way for women to achieve being pious and “good” Muslim
wives. In an era of Islamic revival, this also helps to reconcile potential contradictions between
the family ideals of Muslim family law and women’s needs or desires to take advantage of
education and work opportunities. The obedience script also bolsters Arief’s manhood at a time
when his breadwinner status is at risk. And his talk about his household authority thus becomes a
way to accomplish his status as a Muslim husband.

19

Some couples emphasized the script of wives’ obedience very explicitly, while others
placed more emphasis on the script of husbands’ household authority. In the following sections, I
discuss how each of these scripts and how they were used, and I also show how the dynamics of
gender and religion revealed in interviews were evident in local institutions.

THE SCRIPT OF WIFELY OBEDIENCE: ACHIEVING MUSLIM WOMANHOOD AND
BOLSTERING MUSLIM MANHOOD
One of the youngest couples I met was Toni, 27, a salesman and high school graduate, and Dian,
26, also a high school graduate. They had one young child and Dian was pregnant with another.
They lived in Dian’s mother’s house and their income was about two million rupiah per month, a
little under $200. Toni said that men and women should have equal rights, but that men should
be leaders. When asked to specify this, he said with conviction that men should be the
breadwinners. When I asked how he would feel if his wife wanted to get a job he replied: "To me
it’s fine, but it depends on the husband. Women aren’t allowed to disobey their husbands’ orders.
Our religion tells women to stay in the house taking care of the family, but it’s okay for women
to work if they really need to help with the finances.” When I asked him what it meant to be a
good Muslim man, he answered, “A Muslim man should guide his children and his wife, men are
responsible for everything in Islam.”
Dian worked before she had children, and she seemed to think it was a good thing that
women could get education and become leaders. She viewed the household and childcare as her
responsibility, though she said that she and Toni discussed everything. Although she described
herself as not very devout, she said that she thought religion was crucial for her children and
wanted to send her daughter to a Muslim boarding school so that she would learn Islam properly.

20

When I asked her how Islam affected her role as a wife, she said, “It has a lot of influence
because it teaches me to obey my husband.” Later, when I asked her what it meant to be a good
Muslim woman, she answered immediately: “To be obedient to my husband, devout in religion,
like in the Islamic books. Islamic books teach us to be obedient to our husbands.”
Andi and Dian are not trying to adapt elite religious gender discourses but seeking to
comply with them. They are eager to achieve their statuses as Muslim husband and wife through
their religious gender scripts. Although Andi’s breadwinner role does not seem to be at risk, they
both seem to recognize that men’s breadwinner status more generally is at risk in this context.
Dian’s answer about what it means to be a good Muslim woman is not just about her
achievement of gender, but also safeguards her husband’s manhood. Andi does not necessarily
oppose the idea of Dian working outside the house, but it has to happen with his permission. This
ensures that even if she takes on responsibilities that challenge their division of labor, the way
they talk about his authority does not change, protecting his Muslim manhood. Notably, his view
on this is more conservative than the Compilation of Islamic Law, which does not say that wives
need to ask their husbands’ permission to work. Although they were interviewed separately, their
accounts jibe with each other, demonstrating the relationality of gender (Bartkowski 2001).
The script of women’s obedience may take on greater importance when the wife earns
significant income. Fajar Halim, 43 and his wife Siti, 35, are one of the most affluent couples I
encountered. They live in a spacious house on a street that has many large houses to which the
owners have built additions for boarding students. Fajar is an independent building contractor, so
his income varies, but he said it was generally between 5-10 million rupiah per month, though
that also includes income from the family’s boarding house business, which is mostly overseen
by Siti. Siti earns 5 million a month from her job as a marketing manager for a hotel, and she is

21

also an investor in a small business which brings her another 6 million per month in additional
income (for a total of about 20 million rupiah per month – about $2000 at the time I conducted
the research, putting them in the upper stretches of the middle class). Both are college graduates,
but Siti has a master’s degree. They have two young children.
Plainspoken, Fajar was happy to discuss his views on religion and gender. “I’m a
Muslim, so the differences between men and women are that men are supposed to work outside
while women are supposed to take care of the children.” When I asked if men and women should
have equal rights, he said, “I think they do, as long as they are qualified enough to become a
leader, why not?” On the other hand, he repeated, “Based on religious rules, women are
supposed to stay at home and mind their children.”
However, Siti works full time. Fajar said that he washes the car and the motorcycle and
takes the trash out, as these are “masculine duties.” Siti cooks, takes care of the children, and
prepares breakfast. He said they both clean the house. Unlike many other affluent families, they
did not have a regular maid. Fajar seemed conflicted about his wife’s work. In fact, in her
previous job, he was unhappy about her long hours, and insisted that she quit.
When I interviewed Siti, she seemed exasperated with Fajar’s failure to help around the
house. During the interview, which took place in the evening, the two children frequently
interrupted us, wanting someone to play with them. Fajar stayed in the back of the house
watching TV and reading the newspaper. I felt that he was intentionally performing what he
considered to be the proper gender division of labor in the home. And as his interview reveals,
this division of labor was closely connected to Fajar’s religious views.
Fajar said that Islam was very important in his life. In his view, a good Muslim husband
is a leader in the household and a good Muslim wife obeys him. “A man should be responsive to

22

his wife and children. And especially to his God, though it’s enough to protect the family. But so
far, I still let my wife work. I told her that even though she has like 500 subordinates she still has
to obey me. I’m afraid that sometimes successful wives disobey their husbands. It happened to
my colleague. She doesn’t want to get married because she’s afraid that the man would limit her.
She’s 40 now and hasn’t married because she’s afraid of the limitations.” When I asked what he
thought about that, he said, “It’s her choice, but for me the ideal is to marry, and she may work
and also be responsible for her family. If she doesn’t marry or chooses to divorce and prioritize
her career, that’s her right, but it’s not how we create partnership.”
Siti attributed their differences to divergent backgrounds. She told me that in Fajar’s
affluent but religiously conservative family, women stayed home, despite having good
educations. In contrast, her family was lower middle class and her parents had a troubled
marriage, but they raised her to be independent. “My husband thinks that is better for a woman to
stay at home, while I think it’s a shame since I have an education... Perhaps he embraces his
family’s culture and he thinks that the boarding house business is sufficient,” she remarked.
She was vocal about the dilemmas of “career women” like herself. “Sometimes a woman
needs to reconsider if she’s being promoted to a higher career level. In my job, I would take a
higher position if I am still able to look after my children. Every career woman feels the same.
Husbands usually think that it’s better for a woman to stay home.” In fact, she continued, in her
last job she was offered a promotion, but Fajar tore up the papers when she told him. “I tried and
tried to tell him that I work for our family. We dream to have our children study abroad and so
we have to start saving and investing. He supports me now,” she said. After he forced her to
resign, she complained so much about being at home that he encouraged her to find a new job.

23

I asked Siti if she thought women should stay at home. Siti declared that such a thing is
“old people’s doctrine” and that men and women should have the same opportunities. However,
she said, she would resign if her husband had a higher and more consistent income.
Siti also said that a good Muslim wife is obedient to her husband: “A good Muslim wife
is an obedient wife and sets many good examples for her children.” She veiled while in college at
an Islamic university, then stopped veiling in her 20s but began again after going on the hajj and
in response to Fajar’s request. But she also expressed dissatisfaction with their division of labor.
“I have a larger portion of the duties here. I still have to handle the children after I get back from
work since my husband isn’t able to. Actually, I want him to be able to deal with the kids too.”
She said that Fajar also made most of the major decisions. “He’ll make his own choice even if he
asks for my opinion. It’s fine, I respect my leader, ha ha ha.” Like many Javanese women, she
manages her own income, which she says is for the children and future investments.iv
Siti seemed to be struggling to reconcile her belief that women should be able to have
careers with her marriage to Fajar, who was willing to let her work because of the income but
would do little to ease her domestic burdens. Even though she was contributing at least half of
the family’s income, she was unable to get Fajar to take on more household responsibilities.
Despite her pride in her career, she emphatically agreed she was willing to obey Fajar, even if it
meant giving up her job. Nevertheless, Siti worked long hours. I was staying across the street,
and often observed them returning home from picking her up at work around 8 pm.
Siti’s use of the obedience script signals that she is ready to fulfill what she sees as her
domestic responsibilities, which in her understanding are crucial to be a good wife. While Fajar
recognizes the importance of her income, her emphasis on obedience also helps to underplay her
income earning, high status career, and long working hours. Such deference may make Fajar less

24

concerned about her work outside the house. Yet while this private-public division gives Siti
more freedom to pursue her career, it also gives Siti the burden of domestic responsibilities.
Siti’s adherence to the obedience script means that she is not simply a good wife, but a
pious Muslim. She is clearly striving to be a good Muslim wife and the obedience script is the
way to accomplish this. Moreover, her obedience script bolsters Fajar’s authority as a Muslim
man, especially given that his breadwinner status is very much at risk in this marriage. Indeed,
Fajar’s remark about his wife still needing to obey him even if she has 500 subordinates suggests
a need to reinforce his sense of masculinity, which is inspired by a particular understanding of
Islamic gender ideals. It is not her working per se that is the problem, as this has long been the
norm in much of Indonesia and is allowed in most versions of Islam, but it is her career
ambitions and success in the workplace that could upend the hierarchy in the household.
In both of these cases, women’s narratives that revolve around wifely obedience are not
just about achieving Muslim womanhood, but also safeguarding their husbands’ Muslim
manhood. As the example of Siti and Fajar suggests, I found that the couples in which both
partners most emphasized scripts about wives’ obedience and husbands’ authority tended to be
under 50 and/or included a wife with significant income. As mentioned previously, the script of
obedience was more common among younger women who worked outside the house (seven of
nine Muslim women, two of whom were close to being breadwinners). The small size of this
sample makes it difficult to draw conclusions about this pattern. However, it is suggestive of a
pattern noted by scholars of religion and gender, in which people compensate ideologically for
their deviation from expectations. For example, Gallagher and Smith (1999) find that American
evangelical couples adhere to ideals of male authority and female submission even while both
partners are working and dividing up the household labor. They argue that such “symbolic

25

traditionalism” provides a way for Evangelicals to maintain a sense of cultural distinctiveness,
although the reality of their lives is better characterized by “pragmatic egalitarianism.”
In this case, cultural distinctiveness is not the major concern, but there seems to be a
similar process operating, in which wives who work outside the house, especially if they earn
significant income, shore up conventional hierarchies by emphasizing their obedience and their
husbands’ authority. These women are also invested in such hierarchies, as they seek to be good
Muslims. Similar to what Macleod (1992) argues in her study of the resurgence of veiling in
Egypt, presenting herself as a pious Muslim gives Siti greater license for her work outside the
house. Yet while Macleod emphasizes the potentially problematic aspects of Egyptian women
entering masculinized public spaces, the couples discussed here appear to be more preoccupied
with gender relations inside the household. As public life becomes more egalitarian in Indonesia,
it is domestic life that becomes the focus of efforts to (re)establish traditional gender norms.
This theme can also be seen among the smaller number of couples who tended to express
their adherence to Muslim family law through discussions of husband’s household authority.

THE SCRIPT OF HUSBANDS’ HOUSEHOLD AUTHORITY: ACHIEVING MUSLIM
MANHOOD IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
Abdul is 38 and works in his family’s shop and sells street food, despite having a bachelor’s
degree. He was the neighborhood head at the time of my research. His wife Fitri, 35, also has a
bachelor’s degree and is a public school teacher. Because of his position, they were well known
in the community. They have one child and earn about 3.5 million (about $400) per month.
Though his income was usually higher, her job came with benefits and was more stable.

26

Abdul at first told me that there aren’t many differences between men and women. He
said that he thought that women should be able to be involved in politics or have jobs, and at the
end of the interview he said that one of the big changes in the neighborhood in the last twenty
years is that there are more working women, and more occupations that women can enter. He
said that he and his wife help each other at home, and he said that often takes care of their son.
However, Abdul stressed that that supporting the family is the husband’s responsibility in
Islam. He said that Fitri had to ask his permission to take a job. “I have to be familiar with her
working environment,” he said, “I allow her to be a teacher, but it’s important for me to be
familiar with her environment so that we have mutual trust.”
For Abdul, the household seems to be a different realm than the public, one where
religion plays a stronger role. “Islam influences my daily life, it’s unstoppable,” he said. “There
are rules that husbands should reprimand their wives, and we should follow the rules.” Yet
clearly, Abdul like others saw this as compatible with women working outside the household.
Fitri was more explicit about the difference between public and private life. She told me,
“Nowadays there are no significant differences [between men and women], as women can also
lead. Men have to lead the household well.” As the wife of the neighborhood head, Fitri also led
the neighborhood branch of the state women’s organization, and she was known and respected in
the area. She went on to tell me that men and women should have equal rights to education and
that women can have the same abilities as men, but that wives must obey their husbands at home.
When I asked her to elaborate, she explained, “Our religion has arranged the rights and
responsibilities between men and women. We have to fully understand such limits in accordance
with Islamic life guidance. As wives, we should respect our husbands, and our husbands should
adhere firmly to religion, and so we have to remind each other of this.”

27

In fact, when I asked Fitri about the division of labor in the household, and how her
husband felt about her both working and being a community leader, Fitri told me: My husband
allows me to be active in the organization as long as I can take care of my family. I will cook if I
have the time, otherwise I’ll just grab takeout…. He understands because his mother was active
in the organization as well. I was also previously the secretary of Muslimat [a local branch of a
national Muslim women’s organization].”
Fitri demonstrates her Muslim womanhood through her compliance to the norms of
Muslim family law, but her language about this is somewhat muted. She emphasizes the script of
husband’s leadership more than the script of obedience. Abdul supports her work, while also
being clear about his authority in the household. While Abdul is willing to do some child care,
the home is Fitri’s responsibility. As previously mentioned, – in the case of Fitri and Abdul, the
scripts of wives’ obedience and husbands’ authority apply primarily to the domestic sphere.
For another more affluent couple, the obedience script was also lower key, but the script
of husband’s authority in the household was still strong. Halim, 37, has a master’s degree, is
working on a doctorate, and is a lecturer (similar to assistant professor), and Nadirah, 32, is a
college educated housewife who worked before she was married. They lived in a nicely
furnished house on a street lined with deluxe student boarding houses – indeed their boarding
house was one of the more prominent in the area. Even with the income from the boarding
house, it was not obvious to me how Halim’s income from university teaching supported their
affluent lifestyle, but a neighbor told me Halim had inherited the property from his parents.
Halim made many of the same distinctions as other respondents, explaining that in Islam
men are supposed to lead households, though he qualified this by saying that his wife and
children were supposed to have input. “In our culture, men are supposed to lead the household.

28

I’m a Muslim and Islam teaches men to lead. However, my wife would complain to me if I did
something wrong. It doesn’t mean I can’t hear a complaint just because I’m a leader, both my
wife and my child complain to me. They often criticize my rubber time behavior.”
He expressed openness to women’s involvement in public life, saying that some women
are smarter than men. When I asked how he would feel about Nadirah working, he responded,
“It’s up to her. I would let her, but I’d give certain preconditions. I’d let her work if there is
someone able to look after our children. She actually has gotten many job offers. It’s fine for her
to work in social or commercial activities. She used to supply building materials, and that was
fine because she just needed to make a call.”
Nadirah explained to me that she and Halim cooperate in everything – for her, this means
he works while she takes care of the children “Sometimes it’s better to work, but I prioritize my
children,” she said. She referred to caring for her children as “my job.” When I asked her if she
thought wives should stay home, she responded, “It was hard to accept the truth at first. Because
I went to college, my parents wanted me to work in a bank or to be a secretary. It was just a plan.
I had children after I married, so then who would take care of them? I couldn’t have them taken
care by the babysitter, that would be such a shame. I took care of them myself, I had to make
sacrifices.” Yet when I asked her more generally if women should have the same rights as men to
get an education or a job, she said adamantly, “Oh, of course yes... Why not, women should be
able to do so.” In fact, she said she may return to work when the children are older. Thinking
realistically about her chances of reentering the labor market, she said that she would have to do
something entrepreneurial, such as a restaurant or a catering business.
Unlike many women I interviewed, Nadirah didn’t cite religion as a justification for male
authority. Instead, she spoke about being the primary caretaker of the children as her “duty.”

29

Halim talked about his role as a household leader with mentioning obedience. It’s possible that
Halim was tailoring his answers for me. But he was a high status person being interviewed in his
well-appointed house – I did not sense that he was trying to impress me.
Halim and Nadirah may reflect a trend among upper middle class Muslims to talk about
their household in more mutualistic terms, possibly influenced by religious reformists who have
argued for more egalitarian gender relations. Higher status people may have less need to
demonstrate their adherence to convention. And perhaps because Halim’s masculine authority is
not at risk in this marriage, they are comfortable with more negotiation. But significantly, even
though they downplay the script of wifely obedience, they show a similar dynamic to other couples
in their emphasis on the script of husbands’ household authority. Halim presents himself as a
leader of the family, emphasizing that he would allow Nadirah to work, with certain conditions,
mainly that she has a plan for appropriate childcare. Like others, he connects his masculine
authority to his religion, saying “Islam teaches men to lead.”
These examples demonstrate a pattern of emphasizing the script of husband’s authority
more than wives’ obedience that was more common for younger and well educated couples.
Halim and Abdul both are aware that public life has become more egalitarian and do not seem
upset by such changes. Yet they too voice the script of husbands’ authority, suggesting that this
script is still an important way for Muslim men to accomplish gender and religion.

GENDER AND RELIGION IN ACTION
While interviews are especially useful for eliciting discussions of gender and religion, gender
and religion are also of course “done” in less explicit ways. One place to see this is in local
institutions that are not overtly religious.

30

One of the few formal institutions that brings women together in urban neighborhoods is
the PKK – Pembinaan Kesejahteraan Keluarga, or the Family Welfare Program. This
organization is a remnant of Suharto era development policies. It was created in the late 1960s to
alleviate poverty through nutrition, health, and educational programs targeting women and
children, and it originally had branches in every village and neighborhood in the country.
Traditionally, the wives of local male bureaucrats are the heads of the local PKK. Scholars have
long been critical of how the PKK was used to mobilize support for the regime’s goals, as well
as of its emphasis on women’s domestic roles (Tickamyer and Kusujiarti 2013). Nevertheless, in
the post-Suharto era, the PKK has become less politicized and plays an important role in
providing women with information about health and nutrition.
In the neighborhood where I was doing my research, the monthly PKK meeting was
combined with an arisan. The arisan is a women’s savings club, an informal institution that is
widespread in Java. A group of women meet monthly and each contributes a fixed amount of
cash. They draw numbers and at each meeting a different woman “wins” the whole pot.
I attended a joint PKK/arisan that took place in a house situated in one of the
neighborhoods’ narrow alleys. About 10 women sat in the alley outside, and another 20 on the
floor of the living room, chatting and laughing. Most of the women wore headscarves and tunic
blouses with long skirts, but it was clear from their clothes and their teeth that many were lower
class. There was a microphone and amplifier, and bowls full of snacks.
Fitri’s status as PKK head and wife of the neighborhood head was obvious. She was
dressed fashionably according to pious middle class standards, including a long maroon
headscarf decorated with tiny beads and a deep purple tunic and skirt, and she had good teeth and

31

glowing skin and wore lipstick. She spoke clearly, with an authoritative tone in her voice (using
the microphone) and used simple enough words for everyone to understand.
The meeting began with a long discussion of the previous year’s financial report. I was
told that the PKK meetings in this neighborhood consist mostly of educational programs as well
as Quranic study sessions (pengajian) for the women, although neither of those was happening at
this meeting. According to the visitor book, the previous outside visitor was a representative
from a local organization providing information about cervical cancer screenings.
Once the PKK business was over, the arisan began. For this arisan, each woman
contributes 10,000 rupiah per month (a little less than $1 at the time). Each month the arisan
may collect anywhere from 400,000 – 800,000 rupiah, and there are often as many as 50 women
participating. Every transaction is carefully recorded. This arisan also operates as a cooperative,
and women can borrow from it, or they can use money as a group to undertake various activities.
Finally, it was time for the distribution of money. Things got loud and raucous as women
waited for their names to be called and the envelope of cash passed to them. When I asked the
woman sitting next to me what most women used their money for, she said school related
expenses or paying off bills. As soon as the lucky recipients got their money, they left, and the
room cleared out quickly.
Later that evening I attended a men’s arisan organized by Abdul, the neighborhood head
and husband of Fitri. I had never heard of such a thing, and neither had most people I spoke with,
but Abdul told me that he recalled men’s arisans in the neighborhood when he was a kid. In any
case, he said he had initiated this men’s arisan as a form of “gotong royong” or mutual
assistance – a longstanding Indonesian concept that was coopted by the Suharto regime to
promote a sense of moral obligation to the the state (Bowen 1986). Abdul told me that this arisan

32

does not have a pengajian, but he uses the meetings to convey information from the government,
such as about the new government e-identity cards, to provide health information, and also to
find out about potential problems in the neighborhood.
The men’s arisan took place in the same room as the women’s arisan. About 20 men of
varying age gradually arrived. Most were dressed casually, in jeans or trousers with short sleeved
shirts. As with the women, about half sat in a circle on the floor, and others sat in the alley
outside. The arisan was led by Abdul and his assistant. They were both in their mid-late 30s,
university graduates and their clothing and manners were more polished and prosperous than
most of the other men. The arisan meets once a month, and each man contributes 2500 rupiah
(less than 25 cents). Sometimes they also organize outings – Abdul said they were planning a trip
to the beach next month.
The meeting began with announcements of events, and a discussion of a celebration for
an upcoming religious holiday. The problem was that the local mosque council wants each
neighborhood to contribute rice and money for the event. Abdul said that he thought it would be
too much of a burden for neighborhood residents, as it happens every year. He said he asked if
they could contribute cakes/sweets instead, but the mosque council didn’t like that idea. So, he
complained, they are stuck with having to contribute. This did not arouse any discussion.
Next Abdul initiated the arisan. They rolled dice and one man won the lot. In general,
this arisan was shorter and much calmer than the women’s arisan, partly because it didn’t have
as many people. The men chatted quietly (some just smoked and did not speak). They joked
around but were not as raucous as the women. It is also possible that my presence as a foreign
woman caused them to be quieter than usual.

33

The differences between the women’s and the men’s neighborhood meetings highlighted
the dynamics evident in many of my interviews. The women’s PKK/arisan reflects the gender
negotiations in many marriages. The meeting focuses on family and health issues in ways that do
not challenge conventional gender scripts, and it also has a religious component with the regular
pengajians. Fitri’s leading of the event involves doing Muslim femininity. She takes on a public
role, yet she is leading other women rather than men, and does not challenge the conventional
norms of authority in Islam. She comports herself in a way that emphasizes her commitment to
Muslim piety and also signals her high status. Yet the PKK/arisan also connects women
providing them with a space of activity outside their homes, giving them access to financial
resources, and linking them to state development goals. In contrast, the men’s arisan was
struggling to define its role in the neighborhood. It was clear that men wanted to be involved in
public leadership, but they seemed unsure of what exactly they wanted to do. Except for Abdul’s
position as neighborhood head, they lacked a strong connection to public institutions. The
amount of money circulating through the arisan was smaller, and it was used for pocket money
rather than as a poverty alleviation mechanism. Finally, the men’s arisan had no religious
component, suggesting that the performance of piety is more important for women. The less
focused men’s arisan seems to reflect men’s struggle to maintain authority at a time when
women are becoming more influential in public life.

CONCLUSION
In contemporary Indonesia, Muslim family law has become increasingly institutionalized and
influential. This has happened at a time of rising rates of women’s education and diversification
of work opportunities for educated women. Greater institutionalization of Muslim family law

34

coexists with social changes that potentially challenge the male breadwinner model embedded
within the law. How does such a context influence gender negotiation between married spouses?
While most studies of religion, gender, and marriage focus on Christians, this article investigates
the tandem negotiation of gender among Muslim married couples, showing how gendered
religious scripts are crucial to how married Muslim men and women enact gender identities,
especially when the conventional gendered order is at risk.
Not only do people often practice religion in gendered ways, they also do gender in
religious ways (Avishai 2008; Rao 2015; Darwin 2018). Scripts of wives’ obedience and
husbands’ household authority are not simply recitations of religion, nor do they usually reflect
attempts to grapple with religious gender norms, but rather, they are a way to accomplish both
gender and religion. This article highlights how a particular context can amplify this process.
In contemporary Indonesia, gender ideals that stress men’s authority and breadwinning
have become influential through the ongoing Islamic revival and Muslim family law’s
institutionalization in the legal system. Yet these ideals are under threat from social and
economic changes that are resulting in women’s greater educational attainment and career
potential, as well as from competing egalitarian Islamic gender discourses.
This context shapes Muslim households such that married women and men seek to
protect or bolster men’s status through gendered religious scripts of women’s obedience and
men’s household authority. Women achieve femininity and protect their husbands’ masculinity
by emphasizing their obedience and underplaying their careers and income earning, while men
achieve masculinity through emphasizing their household leaderships and authority over their
wives. I argue that this process helps to compensate for the social changes that are putting men’s
authority at risk – the rhetoric reassures people that the household remains a space of “tradition,”

35

justified by Islam. For women, the complementarian gender discourses of Islam appeal because
they are understood to allow for them to work and seek education, while maintaining a gendered
understanding of themselves and their household that does not threaten their husband, their
femininity, or their religion. Key to this is that the script of obedience allows them to live up to
their ideals of being pious Muslims, something many believers seek in a time of religious
revival. As scholars have shown, gendered religious scripts can be flexible, used and interpreted
in different ways, and this is true for both the scripts of women’s obedience and men’s authority.
As women increasingly have the potential to contribute significant income to families,
the actual gendered division of labor in households may not necessarily reflect the ideal of male
breadwinning and household authority encoded in Indonesia’s Islamic family law. Gendered
religious scripts may be especially crucial to how people achieve their gendered identities when
the conventional gendered order is challenged. Indeed, I propose that in the case of contemporary
urban Indonesia, gendered religious scripts are becoming the mechanism to achieve status as
Muslim men and women at a time when such status is at risk.
As the public sphere becomes more egalitarian in societies where the dominant
interpretation of religion is not egalitarian, religiously justified gender norms may take on greater
importance in the household. This process may be especially pronounced in Muslim contexts
where particular religious gender discourses are institutionalized and also subject to challenge
from socioeconomic changes as well as ideological contestation. For example, Malaysia has
institutionalized Islamic law within its governance to a greater extent than Indonesia, and recent
years have seen increases in tertiary educational attainment and workforce participation by
women. Issues of gender, sexuality, and religious identity have become politicized and the
Muslim family has come to be seen as a critical site for the production of a “pure” Islam (Stivens

36

2017). In this setting, there is increased pressure for women to adhere to gendered religious
norms such as deferring to their husbands’ authority.
But these dynamics are also evident in other places where conventional understandings of
religion and gender are challenged by economic or social changes. For example, evidence from
the US after the recession of 2008 shows that when men lost their jobs, their contribution to
domestic and caregiving work remained limited because such work was still considered to be the
province of women. Men were focused on maintaining their masculine identities in the absence
of employment. Apparently, challenges to men’s breadwinner status can actually reinforce
traditional gender ideologies (Legerski and Cornwall 2010). This could be one of the reasons for
the persistent gendering of household labor (England 2010). Ideological compensation for going
against conventional sex/gender norms is not only seen in heterosexual Evangelical couples but
can also be seen in LGBTQ affirming congregations where men affirm their masculinity through
“manhood acts” that exclude women from power (Sumerau 2012). Promising directions for
future research could include studying how gendered religious scripts shape the distribution of
household labor and women’s career attainment in diverse religious contexts, the dynamics of
gendered religious scripts in different kinds of intimate relationships (including LGBTQ
relationships); and international comparative investigations of how changes in the public sphere
such as increasing women’s employment shape the doing of gender and religion in everyday life.

37

REFERENCES
Australia Indonesia Partnership for Economic Governance. 2017. “Women’s Economic
Participation in Indonesia.”
https://www.monash.edu/business/cdes/research/publications/publications2/Womens-economicparticipation-in-Indonesia-June-2017.pdf
Avishai, Orit and Courtney Irby. 2017. “Bifurcated Conversations in Sociological Studies of
Religion and Gender.” Gender & Society 31(5): 647-676
Avishai, Orit. 2016. “Theorizing Gender from Religion Cases: Agency, Feminist Activism, and
Masculinity.” Sociology of Religion 77(3): 261-179.
Avishai, Orit, Afshan Jafar, and Rachel Rinaldo. 2015. “A Gender Lens on Religion.” Gender &
Society 29(1): 5-25.
Avishai, Orit. 2008. “’Doing Religion’ in a Secular World: Women in Conservative Religions
and the Question of Agency.” Gender & Society 22(4): 409-433.
Bahan Penyuluhan Hukum. 2001. Departmen Agama R.I. Direktorat Jenderal Pembinaan
Kelembagaan Agama Islam.
Bartkowski, John. 2001. Remaking the Godly Marriage: Gender Negotiation in Evangelical
Families. Rutgers University Press.
Bartkowski, John and Jen’nan Ghazal Read. 2003. “Veiled Submission: Gender, Power, and
Identity among Evangelical and Muslim Women in the United States.” Qualitative Sociology
26(1): 71-92.
Blackburn, Suzanne. 2004. Women and the State in Modern Indonesia. Cambridge University
Press.
Boston Consulting Group. 2013. “Indonesia’s Rising Middle Class and Affluent Consumers:
Asia’s Next Big Opportunity.”
https://www.bcgperspectives.com/content/articles/center_consumer_customer_insight_consumer
_products_indonesias_rising_middle_class_affluent_consumers/
Bowen, John. R. 1986. “On the Political Construction of Tradition: Gotong Royong in
Indonesia.” The Journal of Asian Studies 45(3): 545-561.
BPS Malang. 2013. Malang Dalam Angka. Malang, Indonesia.
Brasher, Brenda. 1998. Godly Women: Fundamentalism and Female Power. Rutgers University
Press.

38

Brenner, Suzanne. 1998. The Domestication of Desire: Women, Wealth, and Modernity in Java.
Princeton University Press.
_____. 2011. “Private Moralities in the Public Sphere: Democratization, Islam, and Gender in
Indonesia. American Anthropologist 113(3): 478-490.
Bruinessen, Martin, ed. 2013. Contemporary Developments in Indonesian Islam: Explaining the
‘Conservative Turn’. Singapore: ISEAS Press.
Burke, Kelsy and Amy Moff Hudec. 2015. “Sexual Encounters and Manhood Acts:
Evangelicals, Latter Day Saints, and Religious Masculinities.” Journal for the Scientific Study of
Religion 54(2): 330-344.
Burke, Kelsy. 2012. “Women’s Agency in Gender-Traditional Religions: A Review of Four
Approaches.” Social Compass 6(2): 122-133.
Cammack, Mark, Lawrence A. Young and Tim Heaton. 1996. “Legislating Social Change in an
Islamic Society: Indonesia’s Marriage Law.” The American Journal of Comparative Law 44(1):
45-73.
Cammack, Mark and Tim Heaton. 2011. “Explaining the Recent Upturn in Divorce in Indonesia:
Developmental Idealism and the Effect of Political Change.” Asian Journal of Social Science 39:
776-796.
Cammack, Mark and R. Michael Feener. 2012. “The Islamic Legal System in Indonesia.” Pacific
Rim Law and Policy Journal 21(1): 13-42.
Cammack, Mark, Adrian Bedner, and Stijn Van Huis. 2015. “Democracy, Islam, and Islamic
Family Law in Post-Soeharto Indonesia. New Middle Eastern Studies 5.
http://www.brismes.ac.uk/nmes/archives/1413
Chong, Kelly H. 2008. Deliverance and Submission: Evangelical Women and the Negotiation of
Patriarchy in South Korea. Harvard University Press.
Darwin, Helana. 2018. “Redoing Gender, Redoing Religion.” Gender & Society 32(3): 348-370.
Denton, Melinda Lundquist. 2004. “Gender and Marital Decision-making: Negotiating Religious
Ideology and Practice.” Social Forces 82(3): 1151-1180.
Edgell, Penny. 2006. Religion and Family in a Changing Society. Princeton University Press.
England, Paula. 2010. “The Gender Revolution: Uneven and Stalled.” Gender & Society 24(2):
149-166.
Esposito, John L. and Natana DeLong-Bas. 2001. Women in Muslim Family Law. Syracuse, NY:
Syracuse University Press.

39

Gallagher, Sally K. and Christian Smith. 1999. “Symbolic Traditionalism and Pragmatic
Egalitarianism: Contemporary Evangelicals, Families, and Gender.” Gender & Society 13(2):
211-233.
Gallagher, Sally K. 2003. Evangelical Identity and Gendered Family Life. Rutgers University
Press.
Griffith, Marie R. 1997. God’s Daughters: Evangelical Women and the Power of Submission.
University of California Press.
Irby, Courtney. 2014a. “Dating in Light of Christ: Young Evangelicals Negotiating Gender in the
Context of Religious and Secular American Culture.” Sociology of Religion 75(2): 260-283.
Irby, Courtney. 2014b. “Moving Beyond Agency: A Review of Gender and Intimate
Relationships in Conservative Religions.” Sociology Compass 8(11): 1269-1280.
Legerski, Elizabeth Miklya and Marie Cornwall. 2010. “Working-Class Job Loss, Gender, and
the Negotiation of Household Labor.” Gender & Society 24(4): 447-474.
Mahmood, Saba. 2005. Politics of Piety: The Islamic Revival and the Feminist Subject. Princeton
University Press.
Macleod, Arlene E. 1992. “Hegemonic Relations and Gender Resistance: The New Veiling as
Accommodating Protest in Cairo.” Signs 17(3). 533-577.
Menchik, Jeremy. 2016. Islam and Democracy in Indonesia: Tolerance without Liberalism.
Cambridge University Press.
Mir-Hosseini, Ziba, Mulki al-Sharmani and Jana Rumminger, eds. 2015. Men in Charge?
Rethinking Muslim Legal Tradition. London: Oneworld Publications.
Nurlaelawati, Euis. 2010. Modernization, Tradition, and Identity: The Kompilasi Hukum Islam
and Legal Practice in the Indonesian Religious Courts. Amsterdam University Press.
Nurlaelawati, Euis. 2013. “Muslim Women in Indonesian Religious Courts: Reform, Strategies,
and Pronouncement of Divorce.” Islamic Law and Society 20(3): 242-271.
Nyhagen, Line and Beatrice Halsaa. 2016. Religion, Gender, and Citizenship: Women of Faith,
Gender, Equality and Feminism. Palgrave Macmillan.
OECD. 2017. “Education at a Glance: Indonesia.” Http://stats.oecd.org.
O’Shaughnessy, Kate. 2009. Gender, State, and Social Power in Contemporary Indonesia:
Divorce and Marriage Law. New York and London: Routledge.

40

Peletz, Michael. 2009. Gender Pluralism: Southeast Asia since Early Modern Times. New York
and London: Routledge.
Predelli, Line Nyhagen. 2004. “Interpreting Gender in Islam: A Case Study of Immigrant
Women in Oslo, Norway.” Gender & Society 18(4): 473-493.
Quran.com. “An-Nisa.” https://quran.com/4
Rao, Aliya. 2015. “Gender and Cultivating the Moral Self in Islam: Muslim Converts in an
American Mosque.” Sociology of Religion 76(4): 413-435.
Rinaldo, Rachel. 2013. Mobilizing Piety: Islam and Feminism in Indonesia. Oxford University
Press.
Robinson, Kathryn. 2008. Gender, Islam, and Democracy in Indonesia. London and New York:
Routledge.
Rosser, Andrew. 2018. “Beyond Access: Making Indonesia’s Educational System Work.” Lowy
Institute Analyses. https://www.lowyinstitute.org/publications/beyond-access-making-indonesias-education-system-work
Schaner, Simone and Smita Das. 2016. “Female Labor Force Participation in Asia: Indonesia
Country Study.” Asian Development Bank Economics Working Paper Series #474.
Sidel, John Thayer. 2006. Riots, Pogroms, Jihad: Religious Violence in Indonesia. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
Small, Mario L. 2009. “How Many Cases do I Need? On Science and the Logic of Case
Selection in Field Research. Ethnography 10(1): 5-38.
Stivens, Maila. 2017. “Making Spaces in Malaysia: Women’s Rights and New Muslim
Religiosities.” In Jose Casanova and Jocelyn Cesari, eds. Islam, Gender, and Democracy in
Comparative Perspective. Oxford University Press.
Sullivan, Norma. 1994. Masters and Managers: A Study of Gender Relations in Urban Java.
Sydney, Australia: Allen and Unwin.
Tickamyer, Ann R. and Siti Kusujiarti. 2012. Power, Change, and Gender Relations in Rural
Java. Ohio University Press.
Tucker, Judith E. 2008. Women, Family, and Gender in Islamic Law. Cambridge University
Press.
UNESCO Institute for Statistics. 2016. “Education.” Retrieved May 30, 2016.
http://data.uis.unesco.org/?queryid=142

41

Utomo, Ariane. 2015. “A Woman’s Place.” Inside Indonesia 120.
http://www.insideindonesia.org/a-woman-s-place-3
Utomo, Ariane J. 2016. “Gender in the Midst of Reforms: Attitudes to Work and Family Roles
among University Students in Urban Indonesia.” Marriage and Family Review 52(5): 421-441.
Van Huis, Stijn. 2015. “Islamic Courts and Women’s Divorce Rights in Indonesia: The Cases of
Cianjur and Bulukumba.” Unpublished PhD dissertation, Leiden University.
Welchman, Lynn. 2011. “A Husband’s Authority: Emerging Formulations in Muslim Family
Laws.” International Journal of Law, Policy, and the Family 25(1): 1-23.
West, Candace and Don Zimmerman. “Doing Gender.” Gender & Society 1(2): 125-151.
Wilcox, W. Bradford. 2004. Soft Patriarchs, New Men: How Christianity Shapes Fathers and
Husbands. University of Chicago Press.
World Bank. 2016. “Indonesia’s Rising Divide.” Washington, D.C. World Bank Group.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/267671467991932516/Indonesias-rising-divide.
i

Non-Muslim family matters are overseen by civil (secular) courts.
Prior to 1991, some Muslims also used religious courts for family law matters, but many also pursued these
matters less formally through local religious leaders. The 1991 Compilation standardized the interpretation of
Islamic law applied to family matters in the religious courts and required Muslims to register marriages and pursue
divorce and inheritance cases through the religious courts.
iii
Van Huis (2015) notes that spousal responsibilities under the 1974 Marriage Law were until recently listed on
marriage certificates.
iv
In most versions of Muslim family law, including the Compilation of Islamic Law, family maintenance (nafkah) is
considered to be the responsibility of the husband and the wife is free to use her income as she chooses. Indonesia
also wives frequently manage the household finances.
ii

42

