"x"
"1" "Corporate Stances as Lived Religion: The Sisters of St. Joseph and Social Justice Activism"
"2" "Ryan P. Murphy"
"3" "Chestnut Hill College"
"4" "murphyr@chc.edu"
"5" "Abstract"
"6" "In September 1988, in response to a grassroots movement begun by several sisters and under the direction of the congregation’s Commission for Justice, the Sisters of St. Joseph of Philadelphia announced a corporate stand opposing apartheid in South Africa.  In this paper, I argue that for this congregation, the corporate stand is evidence of  lived religion , that is, the  actual  experiences of religious persons rather than prescribed inst itutional beliefs and practices.  Using data from in-person interviews with sisters, and resources in the SSJ Congregational Archives, I suggest that as they initiated the first corporate stand and solidified their commitment to social justice, the Sisters of St. Joseph experienced a profound internal cultural shift that oriented the congregation much more toward activism. Finally, I draw on several sociological theories of culture to understand the organizational dynamics at work in developing the corporate stand."
"7" "Introduction"
"8" "In September 1988,  in response to a grassroots movement begun by several sisters and  under the direction of the congregation’s Commission for Justice, the Sisters of St. Joseph of Philadelphia announced  a  corporate stand opposing apartheid  in South Africa .  The  result of a  multi -year  process of planning and  prayerful  discernment,  in  publicly denouncing the discriminatory  system ,  the congregation  moved beyond rhetoric to take  active steps to restore dignity to black brothers and sisters  in South Africa .   Sisters called on  the congregation’s General Council to sever ties with organizations  that had  financial investments in South Africa  and lobbied  Philadelphia’s City Council and Pennsylvania’s state and national congresspersons  to take action.   Following the advice of the Interfaith Center on Corporate Responsibility, the congregation offered countless workshops and retreats on racism , white privilege,  and nonviolence, and sisters symbolically destroyed their Mobil and Shell gasoline credit cards in public demons trations.  Though certainly not alone, as many congregations of women religious have mobilized to take similar actions  (Williams 2012;  Connolly 2014;  Ciliberto  2016 ; Taylor 2009 ) , i n  making  this,  their first of several corporate stands, the Sisters of St. Joseph fully  embraced  the  social  justice component of their mission and charism."
"9" "While the Sisters of St. Joseph have had a long history of commitment to  social  justice, 1988’s corporate stand marked a watershed moment in the congregation’s history.  In her recently published history of the congregation,  Beirne  (2015) writes, “[f]or many, taking the corporate stand in 1988 symbolized the congregation’s transformation ”  (211).  I n  enacting a corporate stand  against apartheid, each Sister of Saint Joseph was challenged to  incorporate social justice activism into her individual and institutional religious  identity.   Rather than  working for social  justice through  separate ad hoc political actions, the corporate stand signified the congregation’s first unified public  statement ."
"10" "In this paper, I argue that  for  this  congregation,  the corporate stand  is evidence of  lived religion , that is, the  actual  experiences of religious persons rather than prescribed institutional beliefs and practices (McGuire 2008).  Through  the process of  developing and enacting the  corporate stand,  social justice activism became a constitutive element to living authentically as a Sister of St. Joseph.  In their public actions and through  exam ini ng the ways in which the congregation addressed institutional racism both internally and externally,  the Sisters of St. Joseph helped to push Church and civic leaders forward in condemning systemic oppression.   Using data from in-person interviews with sisters, and resources in the SSJ Congregational Archives,  I suggest that as they initiated the first  corporate  stand and solidified  their  commitment to social justice, the Sisters of St. Joseph  experienced  a profound  internal cultural shift that oriented the congregation much more toward activism .  Finally,  I   draw on several sociological theories of culture to understand the organizational dynamics at work in developing the corporate stand ."
"11" "Lived Religion"
"12" "In his  ethnographic study  of Italian immigrants in Harlem,  Robert  Orsi  (1985) draws distinction s  between the traditional study of religion as a set of sacred rituals, prayers, symbols, and  the overall  faith of a community, with the “totality of their ultimate values, their most deeply held ethical convictions, their efforts to order their reality…More simply stated,  religion  here means ‘what matters’” (xvii).  Similarly, as sociologists of religion have explored lived religion,  Ganzevoort  and Roeland  ( 2014 )  stress that the focus must  be  on praxis, or  what people  do , rather than on the religious institutions and doctrines that constitute the sacred (93-94).  Drawing on  Bourdieu’s (1977) concept of agency as capacity for “invention, rebellion, distancing, and improvisation with respect to the broader social and cultural order,” the authors reinforce David Hall’s (1997) assertion that, “the approach to lived religion…opens up a fundamental rethinking of the place of religion in the American experience, one that emphasizes dissent, subversion, and resistance, rather than harmony, consensus, and social legitimation” (15).  In light of the congregation’s first corporate stand against apartheid, the Sisters of St. Joseph began to take a more  focused  look at issues of privilege and how they  negotiated  racial inequalities closer to home.  I submit that this marked shift toward social justice  activism  and particularly how the sisters incorporated it into all aspects of their public and private lives represents an example of lived religion for the congregation."
"13" "Though the process of implementing the first corporate stand  officially  got underway in 1988, roots of this movement can be traced to the general chapter meeting in 1979. In the chapter documents from 1979, the congregation asserts,"
"14" "“Since justice calls us to a ‘radical sense of mission’…we propose that the Superior General and Council ‘direct the course of the inst itute’ toward a  lived-out stance of social justice …[ and] establish, by January 1980, a Commission for Justice” (SSJ Archival Documents)  [emphasis mine] ."
"15" "The Commission, officially inaugurated in March 1980, began in earnest to change hearts and minds through education and acti on to move  individual sisters  and the congregation as a whole  toward greater justice in  living the Gospel ( Beirne  2015).  A few years later, t he chapter of 1984 mandated education toward taking a corporate stand, and using resources from the Leadership Conference of Women Religious (LCWR), in the fall of 1987, the Sisters of St. Joseph defined a corporate stand as “a deliberate public statement and/or action by a group with regard to an issue of human concerns, gospel values, and/or ecclesial, societal systems.  The stand, expressed non-violently, may be one of assent or dissent. ”   The Commission for Justice  outlined the process  of adopting the  corporate stand, which included a  vote requiring a quorum  of 66 and 2/3%  of sisters to approve,  steps for  promulgation of the corporate stand by the General Council to media outlets, clergy, and civic leaders, and  strategies  for ongoing  evaluation and accountability  ( Beirne  2015). The corporate stand, they argued, was rooted in the Gospel,  in  directives  from the Second Vatican Council, and the congregation’s  founding documents and mission .  Similarly, in the year preceding the first corporate stand, congregational leadership released criteria and protocol for actions of civil disobedience, whether they be undertaken by individuals or groups of sisters ( Beirne  2015)."
"16" "After soliciting suggestions from the congregation, the Commission for Justice selected apa rtheid  as the first issue. O ut of 1, 804 Sisters of St. Joseph , 1,489 participated in the vote. 80%, or 1,188 sisters voted in support of the corporate stand, while 301 or 20% opposed, and thus the corporate stand was adopted in September 1988  (SSJ Archival Documents) ."
"17" "Over the next year as the corporate stand was implemented, the sisters lived  this stand  through social justice activism, reflection, prayer, dialogue, and education. This newly expressed commitment to social justice and mission was solidified at the 1989 chapter as each sister was expected to hold each other accountable for living their mission of unity with a special preference for the poor ( Beirne  2015)."
"18" "Despite the overwhelming support for the corporate stand, some sisters in the congregation questioned  its  efficacy and potential negative repercussions  they  may incur as a result of this  public declaration. While acknowledging the possible impact on the congregation’s pool of benefactors given that the stand could be at odds with prevailing societal norms, the Commission concluded however that “In a corporate stand, our union with the poor challenges  us to give up our security and status as we become one with the victims of oppression. The severity of the critical situation moves us to speak publicly” ( Beirne  2015)."
"19" "Over the next several years, i n order to fully incorporate the corporate stand as lived religion, as I am suggesting, the sisters  effectively  alter ed  the institutional culture of the congregation  toward a more  deliberate   social justice  activism .  Sociologist  Nancy  Ammerman  (1994) contends that religious congregations provide an arena in which to organize strategies for public action, but that “the cultural work that goes on inside the congregation does not always emerge visibly into some larger ‘public’” (294-295).   Thus,  I turn next to  this behind-the-scenes cultural work."
"20" "Culture"
"21" "Ann  Swidler  (1986) defines culture as “ symbolic vehicles of meaning, including benefits, ritual practices, art forms, and ceremonies, as well as informal cultural practices such as language, gossip, stories, and rituals of daily life” (273). The author argues further that an analysis of culture consists of three main steps: 1) viewing culture as a “tool kit”  that  people may use to solve problems, 2) focusing on the “strategies of action” and 3) viewing culture’s causal significance not in defining the ends of action, but in providing cultural components used to construct strategies of action ( Swidler  1986:273).  For the  development and implementation of  the  corporate stand, the Commission for Justice led the congregation through a lengthy,  multi -phase process of prayer and discernment. Phase I, in November-December 1987, provided materials for local community meetings of reflection and discussion about “ the what  and why” of a corporate stand. Phase II, in January-February 1988, provided materials to local communities about the logistics and technical process of taking the corporate stand. Phase III, from March- May 1988  offered   resources on  the vot ing process and evaluations of the  entire period of preparation , and how these  results  would be  communicated  to the sisters."
"22" "In each of these phases, the Commission for Justice supplied each  local community  with resources for prayer services, links to documents from the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops and Vatican II, statements from prominent theologians and social justice advocates, as well as connections to the congregation’s foundational documents and constitutions. Additionally, in each phase the Commission for Justice solicited feedback from sisters and the results of these evaluations indicate significant support for the corporate stand, but also considerable  dissent, which  Swidler  (2001) argues must be acknow ledged in any study of culture. For example, in a letter to the congregation in August 1988 after the vote to adopt the corporate stand was affirmed, the Commission for Justice provided a sample of the comments returned with voting ballots. While emphasizing that the evaluations were overwhelmingly positive and included comments like, “The process is well thought out and carefully developed; The educational materials were excellent; We are obliged as Christians to support this stand; The corporate stand shows our unity as a congregation- in unity there is strength; and This corporate stand is faithful to scripture, to our charism, and to our mission.” -  they also provide a sample of some of the negative comments such as, “I do not think we should take a  corporate  stand on anything; I oppose  apartheid but I do not think that we should take a corporate stand on this issue; There are many other issues in our country and/or congregation which are unjust; Do not get into politics; I am afraid of the implications: legal and financial; and Not enough sisters will return votes to make the corporate stand representative of the whole congregation. ”  (SSJ Archival Documents).   Though overall  support for  the corporate stand against apartheid was relatively strong, the  congregation’s  1998 corporate stand against the death penalty was  decidedly more contentious, with lengthy internal debates about process and implementation dominating the conversation."
"23" "To understand this internal process of cultural shift, I turn to the theoretical work of Amin  Ghaziani , whose writings on  group internal  conflicts, or infighting, point  to organizations “ engaged in definitional debates, wrestling for answers to abstract que stions of identity and strategy” ( Ghaziani  2009:9).  While much  cultural work focuses on cultural objects (see  Schudson  1989),  Ghaziani’s  examination of cultural processes allow for a richer empirical understanding of collective self-definition. In the case of the Sisters of St. Joseph and  the  corporate stand, the shift toward more active social justice work and advocacy was profound, as the  lengthy  process was painstaking and not without internal conflict and questions of congregational direction."
"24" "While  it was during the late 80s that  this cultural shift became most  visible, the internal changes in culture were much subtler, and at times, tedious. For  instance ,  many  sisters  recounted to me the protracted and laborious  debates in chapter and subcommittee meetings in the 1970s ,  1980s , and early 1990s .  Debates over adopting inclusive language, and those about remodeling chapels to be in the round rather than static with pews or rows often required extensive dialogue. Discussions about the roles about women in the Church and secular society were similarly long and occasionally difficult. Several sisters, in hindsight, laughed at the time spent discussing the length of the hem of the congregation’s habit, and whether the move to a 4-inch hem was too radical a change. Of course, this was years after many other congregations abandoned the habit altogether. One sister remembered these debates about culture and direction  saying,"
"25" "“[I] n some cases, some places, people caused some friction because some women religious were wanting to get on that bandwagon- they  kinda  caught it early, others were holding back, others questioned it- even feared it to a certain degree … luckily enough there were enough of us that gently and lovingly wanted to move forward and I can  remember the Chapter of 69, being a chapter where we were first asked to look at the poor as a model for what we were doing or should be doing, who we could be. And that whole attention to the poor kept coming u p. So each chapter – 69, 74, 79… I believe that each chapter, including right up until the last one in 2014- that as a body, we felt a call to go more deeply into who we could be and I think each time we got more courage to do that because we were together. Not everyone- there are sisters who suffered because of those changes- they real ly did, and  we we re asked to be so aware of that. I f you were more on the liberal end, ‘be aware- some pe ople think that’s really hard.’… that’s still among us and so we have to hold both with love. Hold both with love, not judge people- wonder about them maybe, but not judge them. Try to meet them where they are. So if we could do it with one another, it could help us to do it wherever we are, but we  had to start with one another.”"
"26" "The sisters I interviewed acknowledged  that their congregation was never one to be on the forefront of public progress  and declarations ,  but focused  instead on internal renewal before moving forward with visible outward changes.   Months and months of dialogue  would often precede major decisions.  For instance, one sister said to me,"
"27" "“ We  worked hardest as a congregation at the inner freedom, the inner life,  our  spiritual lives- we worked very hard at that. Some people thought we weren’t  gonna  change- we were late in changing, and some people thought we weren’t really changing but we were really working on the interior life, hard, long, and still- because that’s always so important to us.”"
"28" "Though slow and not visible to those outside the congregation , the cultural work being done internally during these years of renewal after Vatican II was  transformative.  Another sister told me that this reluctance to rush into any decision is characteristic of her congregation, and decisions both great and small were made only after significant dialogue. Consistent with the congregation’s mission of unity, all decisions are made with unified , but not unanimous  voice- whether they be as large as taking a corporate stand  against apartheid  or as small as a local community debating whether  or not  to purchase another refrigerator for the house."
"29" "Ghaziani  (2009) contends that  organizational debates over the mundane signify much deeper internal debates about collective self-definition and strategies of action . He argues that overlaying conflict  onto routine tas ks, allows for an understanding of the cultur e concept through  an empirical  measurement of the construction of identity and collective understandings of group activity. The author proposes thinking about these internal conflicts about nuts and bolts activities a s  a resin onto which definitional debates can stick ( Ghaziani  2009:5). Using this theoretical framework to explore the Sisters of St. Joseph then ,  I submit that these internal dialogues of dissent about  smaller  activities  like community purchases and hem lengths  actually  shed light on  a congregation grappling with its own  multilayered  identity and how to live out strategies of  action for  larger  social justice  initiatives like the corporate stand."
"30" "Conclusion"
"31" "D espite the  initial  apprehension and dissention among some sisters, the congregation’s  calls for  social justice  were   eventually more unified .  Sister Mary Elizabeth Clark, first director of the SSJ Commission for Justice contends, “If anyone encounters a sister on the street and asks her, she would have to know about the stand.”  Though social justice had always been part of the congregation’s mission, much of this work was done ad hoc and failed to fully mobilize the larger body of sisters. However, as the cultural shift toward social justice took hold, sisters began to express their support of the corporate stand through public actions and advocacy, as well as private methods like prayer and fasting. Each sister was encouraged to live out the support of the stand in her  own ways, both visible and invisible."
"32" "In the years that followed  the first corporate stand , the Commission for Justice continued to navigate the political waters for the congregation, leading the Sisters of St. Joseph to adopt a corporate stand against the death penalty in 1998, and against human trafficking in 2008. At the time of writing, the Sisters of St. Joseph are expected to follow their contemporaries and call for humane immigration reform , and just this week, the U.S. Federation of Sisters of St. Joseph released a statement affirming human rights for farm workers  ( http://www.cssjfed.org/images/2016_Federation_Statement_Farmworkers_Human_Rights_2_1.pdf ) ."
"33" "In this  paper, I demonstrate how the process of taking a corporate stand marked a significant interna l cultural shift in the Sisters  of St. Joseph. Though actions like lobbying and destroying corporate credit cards were visible to the larger public, in the  years of renewal after Vatican II , the congregation was emerging from lengthy internal debates about identity and collective understanding of strategies for action - about who they were and where they were going . Never a congregation to be quick in  making any progressive changes, u ltimately, the  Sisters of St. Joseph responded to grassroots calls  among sisters  for a more expressed commitment   to soc ial justice,  transformed the  ways in which individual sisters lived this component of their mission, and how they collectively constructed their intersubjective reality (McGuire 2008). Instead of being episodic and cause-specific, after adopting their first corporate stand,  strategies of action to oppose  injustice became woven into the fabric of the lives of the Sisters of St. Joseph- it became what mattered and what they did. It became how they lived their religion."
"34" "REFERENCES"
"35" "Ammerman , Nancy T. 1994. “Telling Congregational Stories.”  Review of Religious Research  35(4):289-301."
"36" "Beirne , Mary Helen. 2015.  Ready for Any Good Work: History of the Sisters of Saint Joseph, Chestnut Hill, Philadelphia 1944-1999 . Lanham, MD: University Press of America."
"37" "Bourdieu,  Peirre . 1977.  Outline of a Theory of Practice . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press."
"38" "Ciliberto , Gina. 2016. “ These Catholic Sisters Take Firm Stances on Justice Issues. Here’s Why They Think You Should, Too .”  The Huffington Post , March 2 nd . ( http://www.huffingtonpost.com/gina-ciliberto/these-catholic-sisters-ta_b_9358656.html )"
"39" "Commission for Justice Archives,  History of Education on Anti-Racism from Justice Office 1988-1997 . Sisters of St. Joseph Archives."
"40" "Connolly, Mary Beth Fraser. 2014.  Women of Faith: The Chicago Sisters of Mercy and the Evolution of a Religious Community . Bronx,  NY : Fordham University Press."
"41" "Ganzevoort ,  Ruard  R. and Johan Roeland. 2014. “ Lived  Religion: the P raxis of Practical"
"42" "Theology .”  International Journal of Practical Theology  18(1):91-101."
"43" "Ghaziani , Amin. 2009. “’An Amorphous Mist?’ The Problem of Measurement in the Study of Culture.”  Theory and Society  38(6):581- 612."
"44" "Hall, David. 1997.  Lived Religion in America: Toward a History of Practice . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press."
"45" "McGuire, Meredith B. 2008.  Lived Religion: Faith and Practice in Everyday Life . New York, NY:  Oxford University Press USA."
"46" "Orsi , Robert. 1985.  Madonna of 115th Street :  Faith and C ommunity in Italian Harlem, 1880- 1950 . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press."
"47" "Schudson , Michael. 1989. “ How Culture Works: Perspectives from Media Studies on the Efficacy of Symbols .”  Theory and Society  18(2):153-180."
"48" "Swidler , Ann. 1986. “Culture in Action: Symbols and Strategies.”  American Sociological  Review  51(2):273-286."
"49" "------.  2001.  Talk of love: How Culture M atters . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press."
"50" "Taylor, Sarah  McFarland. 2009.  Green Sisters: A Spiritual Ecology . Cambridge,  MA : Harvard University Press."
"51" "Williams, Sally. 2012. \" Share Holder Rebels: The Unlikely Activists, \"  The Sunday Telegraph , July 15 th . ( http://www.telegraph.co.uk/journalists/sally-williams/9395405/Shareholder-rebels-The-unlikely-activists.html )"
