Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 3 September 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no3.11

Pp.165-177

Student Engagement for Quality Enhancement and Responding to Student Needs in the
Moroccan University: The Case of the English Studies Track
IKRAM BEN AJIBA
Faculty of Education Sciences
Mohammed V University, Rabat, Morocco
BADIA ZERHOUNI
Faculty of Education Sciences
Mohammed V University, Rabat, Morocco
Abstract
The present article aims at providing some empirical evidence on the important role student
engagement plays in responding to student needs and in enhancing the quality of the teaching and
learning environment in Moroccan universities. Student engagement happens at many levels that
correspond to the “principles of good practice in undergraduate education” that were suggested by
Chickering and Gamson (1987). This article tries to identify these aspects of student engagement
and good practice in the English Studies Track (EST) program from the EST students’ perspective.
The data were collected in three Moroccan universities: Abdelmalek Essaadi University in
Tetouan, Ibn Tofail University in Kenitra, and Cadi Ayad University in Marrakech. An adapted
version of Student Engagement Questionnaire (Kember, Leung & McNaught, 2005 in Kember &
Leung, 2009) was administered to 883 EST students. The data were submitted to a statistical
analysis of frequencies using SPSS. The results of this study show that EST students experience a
low level of engagement with their studies and that the EST program lacks some aspects of “good
practice” in higher education. This study can help enhance the quality of university programs as
it reveals some gaps and negative practices that need to be taken into account in the reform process
Moroccan universities are going through. Another implication of this research is that students are
aware of their needs and, hence, are able to provide useful feedback that can be used to improve
the quality of the teaching and learning environment in Moroccan universities.
Keywords: Moroccan university reform, quality enhancement, student engagement, student needs

Cite as: BEN AJIBA, I., & ZERHOUNI, B. (2019). Student Engagement for Quality Enhancement
and Responding to Student Needs in the Moroccan University: The Case of the English Studies
Track. Arab World English Journal, 10 (3) 165-177.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no3.11

165

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Student Engagement for Quality Enhancement and Responding
BEN AJIBA & ZERHOUNI

Introduction
The educational system in Morocco has undergone different reform attempts since 1999
with The National Charter of Education and Training (Commission Spéciale Education Formation,
1999) up to The Strategic Vision of the Reform 2015- 2030 (Conseil Supérieur de l’Education, de
la Formation et de la Recherche Scientifique, 2015). The main aim of these reforms has been to
improve the quality of the Moroccan educational system and to make it easier for Moroccan
students to integrate the European and the American educational systems, especially at the level
of higher education. One of the main reform principles that has been emphasized throughout the
various reform documents is the shift towards a more student-centered pedagogy that promotes the
learner’s cognitive capabilities, life skills, critical thinking, and initiative taking (The Strategic
Vision of the Reform, 2015). This entails giving the student more room to express their points of
view about their studies and engaging students at different levels of the educational process.
However, despite all the efforts and the good will, Morocco still lags behind in the international
rankings as far as education is concerned. The Global Competitiveness Report (2018) reveals that
out of 140 countries, Morocco ranks 117th in the category “skillset of graduates” and 138th in the
category “critical thinking in teaching”. This means that the Moroccan higher education system
has not yet made the crucial shift from a teacher-centered to a student-centered pedagogy that
would take into account students’ needs and that would allow the achievement of the
abovementioned outcomes. In a study carried out among 55 university students belonging to
different higher education institutions (Ben Ajiba & Zerhouni, 2017) it has been found that needs
analysis is not a common practice in Moroccan universities as 78.8% of the respondents said they
never took a needs analysis survey in their higher education institutions. Even the ones (18.8%)
who reported that they rarely took this kind of survey were skeptic about its worth: “I guess they
are just trying to give the impression that they care about people’s opinions but they actually
don’t.” (Ben Ajiba & Zerhouni, 2017, p. 171) Such a negative attitude is likely to hinder the
development of student engagement and the improvement of university programs. Indeed, research
has:
Consistently shown correlations between engagement and improvements in specific
desirable outcomes, including: general abilities, practical competence and skills
transferability, cognitive development, self-esteem, psychological development, student
satisfaction, accrual of social capital, improved grades, and persistence. (Trowler &
Trowler, 2010, p. 9).
The present article is an attempt to delve into the condition of student engagement in the Moroccan
higher education and to provide evidence on the significance of this construct in responding to
university students’ needs as well as in the enhancement of the teaching and the learning
environments in Moroccan universities.
Theoretical Background
As can be deduced from the title, the present article is based on three concepts: student
engagement, student needs and quality enhancement. This section will define these concepts and
will lay the ground for the methodological section of this article.
1.1 Student engagement
There is a large body of literature dealing with the concept of student engagement due to
its critical role in achieving learning and improving the quality of higher education (Trowler &
Arab World English Journal
166
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Student Engagement for Quality Enhancement and Responding
BEN AJIBA & ZERHOUNI

Trowler, 2010). Since the late 1980s, researchers have investigated how to increase engagement
among students in order to “restructure” the educational system (Keedy & Drmacich, 1991) and
to improve student success and reach the desired outcomes (Zepke & Leach, 2010). Student
engagement is a complex construct that has a behavioral, a psychological, a psycho-social, and a
socio-political dimension. However, in the context of higher education, it is the behavioral
perspective that has been most emphasized because there is a deeper concern with “student
behavior and teaching practice” (Kahu, 2013, p. 759) and “a desire for enhancement” (Trowler &
Trowler, 2010, p. 7).
Among the many definitions of student engagement, Jones (2009) provides the following
definition:
Learner engagement is [the] extent to which all learners (1) are motivated and committed
to learning, (2) have a sense of belonging and accomplishment, and (3) have relationships
with adults, peers, and parents that support learning. Students need to be engaged before
they can apply higher order, creative thinking skills. They learn most effectively when the
teacher makes sense and meaning of the curriculum material being taught. This can only
happen if the teacher has created a safe learning environment that encourages students to
meet challenges and apply high rigor skills to real-world, unpredictable situations inside
and outside of school. (p. 24)
Jones’ definition indicates that student engagement is a construct that goes beyond motivation.
Student engagement is the result of students’ positive interaction with their teaching and learning
environment (peers and teachers) and their social environment. It is also the result of students’
involvement in “educationally purposeful activities” (Coates, 2005, p. 26). Finally, student
engagement is the product of students’ sense of belonging to their institutions not because they are
enrolled in these institutions but because they are given the opportunity to voice their points of
view about their studies and because their needs are taken into consideration.
In this regard, Zyngier (2008) suggests that teachers and students must work together
within the framework of an “engaging pedagogy” that is based on the principles of “Connecting,
Owning, Responding, and Empowering” (p. 1772). This engaging pedagogy is likely to improve
students’ motivation which “is an essential element […] for quality education” (Williams &
Williams, 2011, p. 2).
1.2 Student needs
Student engagement is closely related to the concept of student needs and the very essence
of education. According to Tyler (1949), education consists in “changing the behavior patterns of
people”; hence, it is necessary to study the learners in order to diagnose the kind of changes
required in a given educational context. A common misconception about student needs in the
Moroccan higher education context is that it is a luxury and a way to ‘spoil’ students. The idea that
students do not know their needs is quite widespread among university teachers and staff. The
reason may be due to a lack of awareness of the difference between needs and wants. It is thought
that if we study student needs and if we involve students in this process, teachers will have to
submit to students’ whims and fantasies. Tyler’s definition of student needs dissipates this
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

167

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Student Engagement for Quality Enhancement and Responding
BEN AJIBA & ZERHOUNI

confusion and attests to the extreme importance of having a clear idea of student needs in the
educational process:
“Studies of the learner suggest educational objectives only when the information about the
learner is compared with some desirable standards, some conception of acceptable norms,
so that the difference between the present condition of the learner and the acceptable norm
can be identified. This difference or gap is what is generally referred to as a need.” (Tyler,
1949, p. 2)
In fact, student needs are closely related to the changes and outcomes that the educational system
is supposed to achieve.
According to Harris (2010) graduates of the 21st century need to study in a learning
environment that is fair, engaging and motivating, accessible, challenging, appropriate,
comfortable, and is also a learning community. These criteria can be identified in Chickering and
Gamson’s article “Seven Principles for Good Practice in Undergraduate Education” (1987). These
seven principles are based on what students need in their higher education programs, regardless of
the field of specialty, in order to achieve a high level of engagement and the ultimate purpose of
undergraduate education which is to “prepare students to understand and deal intelligently with
modern life” (Chickering and Gamson, 1987, p. 3)

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

According to Chickering & Gamson (1987), “good practice in higher education
Encourages contacts between students and faculty
Develops reciprocity and cooperation among students,
Uses active learning techniques,
Gives prompt feedback,
Emphasizes time on task,
Communicates high expectations, and
Respects diverse talents and ways of learning.” (p.2)

If these principles are practiced, they are likely to increase student engagement and enhance the
quality of the higher education programs.
1.3 Quality enhancement
Quality is one of the main concerns in the 21st century education context. Quality assurance
mechanisms and agencies are created by governments to maintain and raise the quality of
education. However, many quality institutions in the world are focusing more on enhancement
rather than assurance. Biggs (2014) states that quality enhancement is broader than assurance
because quality enhancement veers towards “addressing problems as they arise and takes steps to
prevent them, ensuring that teaching will be better” (p. 19). Quality enhancement or improvement
is a cyclic process that aims at refining the educational practices in a way that helps achieve the
set goals and objectives. According to The Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education
(QAA), Scotland (2017), enhancement is “taking deliberate steps to bring about improvement in
the effectiveness of the learning experiences of students even when threshold quality is secure” (p.
3).
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

168

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Student Engagement for Quality Enhancement and Responding
BEN AJIBA & ZERHOUNI

For this purpose, the QAA Scotland has designed the Quality Enhancement Framework
that encompasses five elements: “Enhancement Themes, institution-led review, student
engagement in quality, public information, and Enhancement-led Institutional Review” (QAA,
2017, p. 2). Student engagement plays an important role in the Scottish Enhancement Framework
for two reasons. First, students are believed to have an important role in the “formulation, operation
and evaluation of the institution’s approach to enhancement” (QAA, 2017, p. 27). Second, the
Enhancement-led Institutional Review team takes into consideration in its evaluation “the
approach institutions take to engaging students in their own learning” (QAA, 2017, p. 27).
In light of the aforementioned evidence from the literature, the present article argues that
student engagement is a key factor in responding to higher education students’ needs and in
enhancing the quality of the teaching and learning environment in the Moroccan tertiary level. The
less students are engaged in their studies, the less quality there is in the higher education programs
and the less students are satisfied with their studies. This premise will be examined through the
fieldwork that will be presented in the following sections.
Methodology
2.1 Research questions
The two questions this article tries to answer are:
1. To what extent are the English Studies Track (EST) students satisfied with their teaching
and learning environment in EST?
2. To what extent does the EST program respond to Chickering and Gamson’s seven
principles of good practice?
2.2 Research setting
The study was carried out in the English departments of three Moroccan universities:
Abdelmalek Essaadi University in Tetouan (AEU, North of Morocco), Ibn Tofail University in
Kenitra (ITU, North West of Morocco), and Cadi Ayad University in Marrakech (CAU, Center of
Morocco). The choice of these universities was based on two criteria: representativity, i.e.
representing universities from different regions of Morocco; and accessibility.
2.3 Research Population and sample
The research targeted the English Studies Track students in the English departments of the
abovementioned universities. 883 students studying in Semester 2 (S2), Semester 4 (S4), and
Semester 6 (S6) participated in the study. Table 1 gives more information about the distribution of
the participants in terms of the university and the semester they belong to.
Table 1 The participants’ distribution
Semester
Total
The English Department
Semester 2 Semester 4 Semester 6
AEU
130
24
43
197
ITU
116
85
165
366
CAU
75
102
143
320
Total
321
211
351
883
2.4 Research instrument
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

169

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Student Engagement for Quality Enhancement and Responding
BEN AJIBA & ZERHOUNI

Data was collected using Kember, Leung, & McNaught’s (2005) the Student Engagement
Questionnaire (SEQ) (in Kember & Leung, 2009) which was adapted to the Moroccan context.
The adapted version of the SEQ contains 32 statements. Each statement is followed by a five-point
agreement Likert scale or a five-point frequency Likert scale. The present article will report the
findings related to eight items of the questionnaire; namely the ones that will answer the
aforementioned research questions.
Results
3.1 First research question results
The first research question “To what extent are the English Studies Track (EST) students
satisfied with their teaching and learning environment in EST?” was answered in the survey
through the following statement: “I have been satisfied with the quality of the program.”

3.6%
24.1%

32.4%

24.3%

14.3%

Figure 1 EST students’ satisfaction with the EST program
Figure 1 shows that 32.4% of the respondents cannot make up their mind on their level of
satisfaction with the program. However, a striking phenomenon that arises from the results yielded
by this item is that the percentage of students who are satisfied with the EST program (27.7%) is
lower that the students who are dissatisfied (38.6%). The reasons for students’ lack of satisfaction
with the teaching and learning environment in the English Studies Track may be due to the
information revealed by the answers to the second research question.
3.2 Second research question results
The second research question “To what extent does the EST program respond to Chickering
and Gamson’s seven principles of good practice?” was answered through seven statements in the
survey. The results will be presented in the order Chickering and Gamson’s principles have been
presented in the theoretical background. Each principle will be followed by its corresponding
statement in the SEQ.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

170

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Student Engagement for Quality Enhancement and Responding
BEN AJIBA & ZERHOUNI

3.2.1 Principle 1: encourages contacts between students and faculty
“I can have meetings with my teachers if I need extra help.”

6.2%

7.8%

18.6%

25.6%

41%

Figure 2 Frequency of EST students’ meetings with teachers
The majority of the respondents state that they never (41%) or rarely (25.6%) receive any
kind of tutoring from their teachers if they face any academic difficulties (Figure 2). 18.6% claim
they can sometimes meet their teachers if they need extra help. However, only 14% of the
respondents have been able to meet their teachers to get some kind of counseling.
3.2.2 Principle 2: develops reciprocity and cooperation among students
“I have developed my ability to work effectively as a team or group member.”

15.1%

23.3%

33%

17.3%

11.2%

Figure 3 Team work in the EST program
Figure 3 shows that 38.4% of the respondents consider that the EST program has always
or usually provided them with opportunities to work effectively in a team. However, 33% deem
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

171

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Student Engagement for Quality Enhancement and Responding
BEN AJIBA & ZERHOUNI

that these opportunities happen sometimes only; and 28.5% think that it has been rarely or never
possible for them to develop effective collaborative skills in the EST program.
3.2.3 Principle 3: uses active learning techniques
“I have been given the chance to participate actively in classes.”
EST students’ perception of their participation in the program they study is not very
positive (Figure 4). Only 15.1% of the respondents state that they have always been given the
chance to participate actively in classes. 36% say they sometimes participate actively in class;
whereas, 21.1% declare they rarely do so. 10.2% of the participants consider they never experience
an active participation in class.

15.1%

17.4%

36%

21.1%

10.2%

Figure 4 Students’ active participation in the EST program
3.2.4 Principle 4: gives prompt feedback
“I am given enough feedback on activities and assignments to ensure that I learn from the work I
do.

9.7%

23.8%

38 .3
%

19.3
%

8.2%

Figure 5 Feedback in the EST program
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

172

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Student Engagement for Quality Enhancement and Responding
BEN AJIBA & ZERHOUNI

Figure 5 uncovers an unsystematic practice of giving feedback to students on the activities
and assignments they do in the EST program. 38.3% of the participants get feedback only
sometimes and 27.5% rarely or never receive any feedback. Only 9.7% claim they always receive
feedback from their teachers and 23.8% say they usually do.
3.2.5 Principle 5: emphasizes time on task
“I can complete the requirements of the program without feeling overly stressed.”

5.3%

23.1%

30.2%

27.9%

12.1%

Figure 6 Enough time to complete tasks in the EST program
It can be deduced from Figure 6 that 40% of the participants think that the workload in the
EST program is quite stressful because of a lack of time. 30.2% are not sure if they can complete
the requirements of the program without feeling overly stressed. The students who believe that
they can deal with the program requirements represent 28.4% of the respondents.
3.2.6 Principle 6: communicates high expectations
“I am aware of the outcomes I have to reach by the end of each course.”
EST students’ lack of awareness of the program outcomes is the most striking result shown
by Figure 7. Almost 40% of the students are only partially aware of the program outcomes; while,
13.8% are rarely aware of these outcomes. The percentage of students who know what they are
supposed to achieve in the EST program reaches 40%. This means that the program does not
communicate (high) expectations to 60% of the students.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

173

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Student Engagement for Quality Enhancement and Responding
BEN AJIBA & ZERHOUNI

12.7%

27.3
%

39.4
%

13.8
%

5.1%

Figure 7 Students’ awareness of the EST program outcomes
3.2.7 Principle 7: respects diverse talents and ways of learning
“I have experienced a variety of teaching methods (lectures, group work and group discussions,
class discussions, peer instruction, online courses …)”

17.3%

24.3%

29.1%

18 .2%

10.9%

Figure 8 Variety of teaching methods in the EST program
The participants’ opinion about the use of different teaching methods in the EST program
is quite segmented across the five points of the Likert scale. Figure 8 shows that 17.3% of the
respondents have always experienced a variety of teaching methods in the program they study;
and that 24.3% think they have usually done so. The highest percentage (29.1%) for this item
represents the students who have only sometimes experienced this variety. Paradoxically, the same
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

174

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Student Engagement for Quality Enhancement and Responding
BEN AJIBA & ZERHOUNI

percentage (29.1%) is scored if we add up the percentages of the students who believe that varied
teaching methods have been rarely (18.2%) or never (10.9%) used in the EST program.
Discussion
The results of the study have shown, on the one hand, that the EST students are not quite
satisfied with the teaching and learning environment in the three participating Moroccan
universities. On the other hand, the study has revealed that the EST program does not fully respond
to the seven principles of good undergraduate practice. Indeed, there is a permeating sense of
confusion and lack of certainty among students that can be deduced from the participants’ answers
that fall within the “sometimes” and “I’m not sure” categories, as the abovementioned figures
illustrate. The only time when students gave a clear-cut answer was to say that the program does
not provide opportunities of contact between students and faculty. This means that the EST
program in Moroccan universities lacks “the most important factor in student motivation and
involvement”, which is the “frequent student-faculty contact in and out of classes” (Chickering &
Gamson, 1987, p. 3).
The present study provides evidence that the Moroccan higher education still adopts a
teacher-centered pedagogy that does not create enough opportunities for student engagement and
does not respond to the needs of the 21st century graduates. As a matter of fact, the instances of
good practice in higher education are usually not instilled by the institutions. They are the result
of the initiative of individual teachers who believe in their students’ capacities.
The reform of the Moroccan educational system will not achieve its desired outcomes
unless it pays more attention to classroom practices. It is not enough to create quality assurance
institutions and evaluate the performance of higher education institutions on the basis of
accreditation criteria. It is urgent to “engage with a research-informed, evidence-based approach
to evaluation and enhancement” (Harvey & Newton, 2004, p. 160). In this regard, evidence from
the literature and the practice of some Quality Assurance Agencies like QAA Scotland has proved
that student engagement and a student-centered pedagogy that responds to student needs are the
best way to enhance the quality of university programs. There is also an urgent need for more
internal reviews within the Moroccan higher education institutions because, according to Harvey
& Newton (2004), “it is more difficult for external review to engage with the learning-teaching
interface” (p. 153). Enhancing the quality of programs entails getting to the core of the classroom
experience in order to identify the positive and negative practices. However, these internal reviews
have to be research- informed and not politically oriented.
Conclusion
The main objective of the present study was to shed some light on student engagement in
the Moroccan tertiary level context, and its close relationship to student needs and quality
enhancement. Little, if no attention has been paid so far to this key element in education in
Morocco, hence, the importance of the current study. Great efforts are being made to enhance the
quality of the Moroccan higher education system at the macro-level (reform projects, guidelines,
new buildings …); nonetheless, it is high time more attention was paid to the micro-level of
classroom practices and the students’ role in the educational process.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

175

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Student Engagement for Quality Enhancement and Responding
BEN AJIBA & ZERHOUNI

About the Authors
IKRAM BEN AJIBA is currently an EFL teacher and a teacher trainer at the American Language
Center in Rabat, Morocco. She holds an M.A. degree in Applied Linguistics and TEFL from the
Faculty of Education Sciences in Rabat. She is also a PhD candidate at the same faculty. ORCID:
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1393-3646
Dr. BADIA ZERHOUNI is an associate professor of Applied Linguistics/TEFL at the Faculty of
Education Sciences -Mohammed V University- Rabat, Morocco. She currently teaches and
supervises research projects in MA Applied Linguistics /ELT programs and supervises doctoral
research in different subjects related to AL/ELT.
References
Ben Ajiba, I. & Zerhouni, B. (2017). Needs analysis as a quality enhancement tool in the Moroccan
university: A Small-scale survey on beliefs and practice. Doctoriales Attadris: Cahiers
de Recherche n°1. Faculté des Sciences de l’Education, Université Mohamed V, Rabat,
164- 176
Biggs, J. (2014). Constructive alignment in university teaching. HERDSA Review of Higher
Education, 1, 5- 22.
Chickering, A.W., & Gamson, Z. (1987, March). Seven principles for good practice in
undergraduate education. American Association for Higher Education Bulletin. 2-6.
Coates, H. (2005). The Value of student engagement for higher education quality assurance.
Quality in Higher Education, 11 (1), 25–36.
Commission Spéciale Education Formation. (1999). Charte Nationale d’Education et de
Formation. Retrieved from www.esi.ac.ma/Dossiers/20150713090757.pdf
Conseil Supérieur de l’Education, de la Formation et de la Recherche Scientifique. (2015). Vision
Stratégique
de
la
Réforme
20152030.
Retrieved
from
https://www.men.gov.ma/Fr/Documents/Vision_strateg_CSEF16004fr.pdf
Harris, M. (2010). Responding to student needs: emerging and continuing issues. Quality
Assurance Agency for Higher Education. Retrieved from
www.enhancementthemes.ac.uk
Harvey, L. & Newton, J. (2004). Transforming quality evaluation. Quality in Higher Education,
10 (2), 149- 165.
Jones, R.D. (2009). Student Engagement: Teacher Handbook. International Center for Leadership
in Education.
Kahu, E.R. (2013). Framing student engagement in higher education. Studies in Higher Education,
38 (5), 758- 773.
Keedy, J.L. & Drmacich, D. (1991). Giving voice and empowerment to student engagement: A
school-based interactive curriculum. Paper presented at the Second National Conference
on
School
Restructuring,
Atlanta,
Georgia.
Retrieved
from
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED356516.pdf
Kember, D. & Leung, D.Y.P. (2009). Development of a questionnaire for assessing students’
perceptions of the teaching and learning environment and its use in quality assurance.
Learning Environment Research, 12 (1), 15- 29. DOI 10.1007/s10984-008-9050-7

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

176

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
Student Engagement for Quality Enhancement and Responding
BEN AJIBA & ZERHOUNI

Schwab, K. (Ed.). (2018). The Global Competitiveness Report 2018. Geneva: The World
Economic Forum.
The Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education. (2017). Enhancement-led Institutional
Review Handbook. Fourth Edition. QAA Scotland.
Trowler, V. & Trowler, P. (2010). Student Engagement Summary. University of Lancaster: The
Higher Education Academy.
Tyler, R. (1949). Basic Principles of Curriculum and Instruction. Chicago: University of Chicago.
Williams, K.C. & Williams, C.C. (2011). Five-key ingredients for improving student motivation.
Research
in
Higher
Education
Journal,
12.
Retrieved
from
http://aabri.com/manuscripts/11834.pdf
Zepke, N. & Leach, L. (2010). Improving student engagement: Ten proposals for action. Active
Learning in Higher Education, 11 (3), 167- 177.
Zyngier, D. (2008). (Re)Conceptualising student engagement: Doing education not doing time.
Teaching and Teacher Education, 24 (7), 1765- 1776.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

177

