doi: 10.17605/OSF.IO/NJQHS

Emile Durkheim’s Elementary Forms of
Religious Life as Seen through Star Wars
Jacob Hardy, Texas A & M University
Introduction
When Emile Durkheim set out to begin
his study of the most elementary forms of
religious life, as the title of his book
suggests, he did so with a specific purpose
in mind. With regards to the text and
sociology he writes, “It does not seek to
become acquainted with bygone forms of
civilization for the sole purpose of being
acquainted with and reconstructing them…
its purpose above all is to explain a present
reality that is near to us and thus capable of
affecting our ideas and actions. That reality
is man.”1 This approach also will be our
goal in connecting the elementary principles
of religious life to examples found in that
fantastic Galaxy Far, Far Away, in Star
Wars. A titan of science fiction and fantasy
storytelling, Star Wars has stood the test of
time and enthralled millions of people over
the past three decades, and it continues to be
a huge hit across the world. We would argue
that much of this popularity is not due to
special effects or production value, but on
Star Wars’ ability to aid in explaining and
understanding the present reality of man,
much as Durkheim attempted to do in his
own work. In this way, Star Wars stands at
an intersection of fandom and sociocultural

insight. This paper shall endeavor to explore
the Star Wars universe and the incredible
amount of examples found within it. We
hope to make accessible, through the
medium of fandom, many of Durkheim’s
original points about religion, introducing in
a new way these fascinating principles of
sociology. Whether it is the dichotomy of
the Jedi and the Sith, their relation to the
Force, or simply how the galaxy itself is
creatively filled with life and stories, Star
Wars is a fascinating tapestry of ideas
wherein much of the concepts that
Durkheim observed and came to understand
in the Elementary Forms of Religious Life
come to life in a variety of new and exciting
ways. Throughout this paper, a variety of
examples will be used to discuss how
Durkheim’s study of religion in humanity
can be tied to Star Wars. Ranging from
topics such as churinga and totem, all the
way to the nature of the soul, and much in
between, Star Wars is a fascinating
wellspring of incredible connections.

1

Durkheim and Fields, The Elementary Forms of
Religious Life. Emile Durkheim ; Translated and with
an Introduction by Karen E. Fields, 1.

The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 4, No. 1, August 2018

102

Religious Objects – Churinga & Totem2
One of the first connections we would
like to make between Durkheim and Star
Wars is tied to Durkheim’s concept of the
churinga. Durkheim describes the churinga
by saying:
In themselves, the churingas are
merely objects of wood and stone
like so many others; they are
distinguished from profane things of
the same kind by only one
particularity: The totemic mark is
drawn or engraved upon them. That
mark, and only that mark, confers
sacredness on them.3
It is this concept of churinga that we believe
is strongly reflected in one of the most
iconic objects in all of Star Wars, the
lightsaber. To begin with though, some
explanation of what a churinga is exactly
should be obtained. Durkheim describes
them as objects that, while made of ordinary
materials, are imbued with a power and awe
that comes from their association and
inscription with the sacred totem of the tribe.
Within Star Wars, the lightsaber acts not
only as the weapon of the Jedi Knight, but it
also acts as an identifying badge of their
membership in the order, and one that is
both unique and sacred to them and as such,
acts as their churinga.

2

Star Wars material in this section sourced from:
“Lightsaber,”; “Kyber Crystal”; “The Gathering”;
“The Force”; “Category:Force-Based Organizations”;
“Rakata”; “Massassi,” all in Wookieepedia.
3
Durkheim and Fields, 121.

During their training as younglings,
young Jedi take part in a sacred ritual known
as The Gathering. It is during this time that
the younglings are allowed to visit the
restricted Jedi temple on the planet Ilum,
and during their time there, they are allowed
to step into the hallowed walls of the Crystal
Cave. Within this cave the naturally
occurring, and incredibly unique, kyber
crystals are found. These crystal formations
are virtually colorless until they come into
contact with a youngling whose presence in
the Force resonates with the crystal’s own
link to the Force, and they become attuned
to one another. During this time, the kyber
crystal begins to take on a unique hue as it
attunes itself to its new owner, it is from this
process that the color of the lightsaber is
born. Having found their sacred crystal and
bonded with it in the intimate way that only
a connection to the Force would allow, the
Jedi youngling is now ready to begin the
assembly of their lightsaber, and they
proceed to do so in a meditative state,
channeling the Force as they constructed
their sacred weapon and tool.
It should be noted that the shell of the
lightsaber so to speak, that is, its frame, is
entirely ordinary just as Durkheim makes
mention of in the quote above. It is a simple
emitter, power cell, and switch contained
within a metal frame. It is not the materials
that make up the lightsaber that set it apart
as sacred; it is the crystal within that marks
it as sacred. For, without it, the signature
colored blade would not be able to function,
and the Jedi would not be able to use it to so
great an effect. It is their attunement to the
kyber crystal that allows the Jedi to use the
lightsaber with such skill, and why all other

The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 4, No. 1, August 2018

103

wielders who attempt to use one feel as if it
is a clumsy tool in their hands.
Throughout the Star Wars universe, the
mere sight of a lightsaber was often enough
to put an end to a brewing conflict, as the
power it contained as a churinga of the Jedi
Order was incredible. If a lightsaber was
displayed, it was done to indicate to all
around that the individual carrying it was a
member of the Jedi Order, demonstrating
both their sacred nature, and quite literal
control of the Force. In Episode I, Anakin
glimpsed Qui-Gon’s lightsaber under his
robe, and later asked him if he was a Jedi.
Qui-Gon responds by asking why he would
even ask such a question (attempting to keep
a low profile) to which Anakin replied that
he saw his lightsaber, and that only Jedi
carried that weapon.4 Moving forward to
Episode IV, Obi-Wan tells Luke something
similar as he presents to him his father’s
lightsaber. He tells Luke that it is his
father’s, that it is called a lightsaber, and that
it is an elegant weapon from a more
civilized age, the weapon of a Jedi Knight.5
It should also be noted that the Sith,
ancient enemies of the Jedi who wielded the
Dark Side of The Force, did not utilize these
natural kyber crystals. Instead, they would
synthetically create their own, and forcibly
imbue them with the Dark Side energy. It
was this process which gave the Sith’s
lightsabers their crimson hue, which acted to
set them apart from the Jedi. This largely
stemmed from the Sith’s inability to enter
the Crystal Cave, or even land on the planet
of Ilum. Since they could not obtain the true
4
5

Lucas, Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace.
Lucas, Star Wars. Episode IV: A New Hope.

sacred crystals, they created their own
artificial type, and, as opposed to them
naturally holding Force energy, they force it
upon the mock crystal through the power of
the Dark Side. Every Sith presented in the
major films has wielded a red bladed
lightsaber, and it further emphasizes the
nature of these objects as churingas in the
Star Wars universe.
There are numerous other examples
throughout the Star Wars universe that
further tie the lightsaber to the Jedi, but the
key connection to Durkheim is that the
nature of the lightsaber, and in particular the
lightsaber of the Jedi, as a churinga stems
from the Force. It is the sacred crystal
contained within, bonded with its wielder,
that enables the Jedi to use their lightsaber
with such power, skill, and precision. While
members of the galaxy at large might have
been largely ignorant of the appearance of a
Jedi, once a lightsaber was revealed they
knew that they belonged to the Jedi Order. It
was this impression that allowed the Jedi to
act as peacekeepers and guardians of the
Republic for over a thousand generations. It
was also this malformed relationship
between Force wielder and crystal which
made the Sith’s crimson blade such a
powerful identifier into their nature.
Another example of Durkheim’s
connection of concept in Star Wars is how
Durkheim presents the idea of a totemic
force in religion, and how remarkably
similar that force is to the Force found in
Star Wars. Durkheim describes totemism
and the totemic force by saying:
In other words, totemism is not the
religion of certain animals, certain

The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 4, No. 1, August 2018

104

men, or certain images; it is the
religion of a kind of anonymous and
impersonal force that is identifiable
in each of these beings but identical
to none of them. None possesses it
entirely, and all participate in it…
Taking the word “god” in a very
broad sense, one could say that it is
the god that each totemic cult
worships. But it is an impersonal
god, without name, without history,
immanent in the world, diffused in a
numberless multitude of things.6
Using the quote above, it can be seen that
throughout the Star Wars films and its
Expanded Universe legends that Durkheim’s
description of this powerful totemic force is
nearly identically reflected in the world of
Star Wars in what is known there as simply
the Force.
To begin with, as Durkheim describes,
totemism is not a religion of a certain animal
or object. It is anonymous and identifiable
within things, but is identical to none of
them. This is much like the Force in Star
Wars. In the Star Wars galaxy, the force is
never solely imbued in one being, it is never
the tool of one sole Jedi or Sith, it is a
universal force throughout the galaxy. In
addition to this, the Force is not just a tool of
these two well-known Force based
organizations within Star Wars. The
Expanded Universe of Star Wars is home to
many Force based organizations among
whom are the Aing-Tii, the Baran Do, the
Matauki, Rakata, the mystics of Voss, and
many others. While the names of these
6

Durkheim and Fields, 191.

organizations might sound like nonsense to
all but the most dedicated of Star Wars fans,
they embody the point that Durkheim
makes. The Force in the Star Wars galaxy
does not belong to a certain individual,
object, or animal. Nor is it the sole object of
a single Force based organization. For the
Jedi, it is the kyber crystal and the sacred
spire within the Temple that are their holy
objects and places. The original Sith had the
planet of Korriban which they revered as the
birth place of the Massassi, the place where
they first became Force sensitive. The
Rakata had the first infinity gate, an object
that first awoke their latent Force potential.
All of these groups and more have their own
sacred totems and symbols, but they do not,
as Durkheim said, make it solely about a
certain place or image. All of their sacred
sites and temples arise because they are an
object or nexus of the Force. It is through
these sacred objects and places that they all
came to touch and interact with the Force of
the Star Wars galaxy. While they might have
their own traditions, just as the different
religions and tribes of our own world do,
they all stem from the Cosmic Force.
The other key point that Durkheim
makes in the above quote is that the “god” is
impersonal and diffused in a numberless
multitude of things. This basic principle, in
strikingly similar words, is how Yoda
explains to Luke the nature of the Force. He
describes it as being all around them,
surrounding and binding them. Not only
binding them to each other, but to ties that
extend between them, the trees around them,
and the rocks. The Force was found within
all of these objects. The impersonal god
diffused in a numberless multitude of things

The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 4, No. 1, August 2018

105

as Durkheim described were similarly
connected to the Living Force for Yoda. It
was this knowledge of the Living Force that
Yoda told Luke was what made him so
powerful. Yoda in and of himself was quite
simply just a 900-year-old hermit at that
time, but, as he told Luke, he had a powerful
ally in the Force. Much as people of our
world draw strength, belonging, and purpose
from their sacred objects, so too is this
principle dramatically put forth in the Star
Wars galaxy. While the galaxy of Star Wars
might at first blush appear fantastical, we
believe that it has uncanny way of taking
these principles discovered by Durkheim
and making them understandable in an
incredibly exciting way.

stated… Even the peoples most
enamored of free thinking tend to
place on principle above discussion
and regard it as untouchable, in other
words, sacred.8
In the reading of this passage from
Durkheim’s Elementary Forms, it is striking
how incredibly similar to the Star Wars
universe it can be seen to be. Durkheim in
the quote above discusses how the belief
that something is sacred can be tied to
something more than just a physical object,
it can be attached to even an idea. In the Star
Wars galaxy this is found within the concept
of the Jedi Code. The Jedi Code states:
Emotion, yet peace.
Ignorance, yet knowledge.
Passion, yet serenity.
Chaos, yet harmony.
Death, yet the Force.

Religious Differentiation- Consecration &
Tattooing 7
Continuing in our study of the Star Wars
galaxy as we endeavor to explain the reality
of man, our discussion now turns to the
concept of a code or creed and its ties to the
Durkheimian conception of the Sacred and
Profane.
Durkheim describes the consecration of
ideas by saying:
Just as society consecrates men, so it
also consecrates things, including
ideas. When a belief is shared
unanimously by a people, to touch
it—that is, to deny or question it—is
forbidden, for the reasons already
7

Star Wars material in this section sourced from:
“Sith Tattoo”; “Force Wars”; “Je’daii Order”; “The
Force”; “Sith Order”; “Jedi Code,” all from
Wookieepedia.

The Jedi Code originated with the
founding of what would come to be known
as the Jedi Order on the planet of Tython. It
was on Tython that one of the oldest
collection of force sensitive cultures arose.
This culture, originally known as Je’daii,
lived and worked on Tython, relatively
unknown to the rest of the galaxy,
meditating on and studying the Force as they
understood it. The Je’daii perceived in the
Force two aspects which they called Ashla
(the light side of the Force) and Bogan (the
dark side of the force.) The Je’daii saw these
aspects of the Force as existing in balance
with one another, neither one dominating or
8

Durkheim and Fields, 215.

The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 4, No. 1, August 2018

106

overtaking the other. All of this changed
though when an event known as the Force
Wars occurred. The Force Wars was an
invasion of the planet Tython by the only
other advanced race at the time, the Rakata.
The Rakata were a race that had steeped
themselves in the dark side of the Force and
used its energies to fuel their galactic
conquest. When they came to Tython, the
Je’daii were forced to defend themselves,
with many of the members coming to rely
on what they knew as Bogan to fight the
invaders. While the Je’daii were able to
repel the invaders, the members of their
order who had strong embraced Bogan
became tainted after the conflict with the
Rakata and began to attack members of their
own order. The Je’daii Order endured, but
was irrevocably broken, casting out the
followers of Bogan from the planet, the
remaining members renamed themselves
Jedi, and created their code.
The Jedi created their code out of the
intense desire to codify what their core
beliefs were. The goal of the Jedi code in
turn was to set apart their beliefs from that
of all other Force based organizations they
had come into contact with at that time. The
Jedi strived earnestly to embrace the aspects
of Ashla in order that they might never again
experience a schism like that which the
Force Wars had caused. In essence, they did
just as Durkheim said a society would do,
they consecrated the very idea of Ashla into
a written word and mantra. This code would
then endure for over 30,000 years, changing
very little during that time. It was this code
which every Jedi apprentice memorized and
meditated upon when they joined the Order.
It was this mantra that Jedi repeated to

themselves in times of great hardship. It was
this idea that Yoda passed on to Luke during
his own training, albeit in a simpler form
since Luke had had no contact with the
Order. Luke asked Yoda how he would
know the Light from the Dark to which
Yoda responded, “You will know when you
are calm, at peace, passive. A Jedi uses the
force for knowledge and defense, never for
attack.”9 Thousands of years later, Yoda is
still passing on the principles of the Jedi
Code to his final student. Much as the Jedi
order codified concepts and ideas, the Sith,
too, created things unique and distinct to
their order, and it is to them that we turn to
in the next section of this paper.
Another of example of Durkheimian,
elementary religious forms comes through
the discussion of markings and tattoos upon
the body. Durkheim describes this idea by
saying:
The best way of testifying to oneself
and others that one is part of the
same group is to place the same
distinctive mark on the body. Proof
that such is indeed the raison d’etre
of the totemic image is that, as I have
shown, it does not try to copy the
appearance of the thing it is
considered to represent… The
purpose of the image is not to
represent or evoke a particular
object, but to testify that certain
number of individuals share the same
moral life.10

9

Lucas, Star Wars. Episode V, The Empire Strikes
Back.
10
Durkheim and Fields, 234.

The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 4, No. 1, August 2018

107

Nowhere in Star Wars is this concept more
clearly visible than in the tattoos of
members of the Sith Order. In particular, the
Sith Darth Maul the secondary antagonist
from Episode I, dramatically and visually
demonstrated his dedication to the Sith
Order by covering his entire body with Sith
tattoos. In the climactic battle at the
conclusion of Episode I, the Sith are
revealed to be operating again in the galaxy,
and Darth Maul’s identification as Sith
stems largely from the ritual tattoos in which
he had adorned himself and their connection
to the Sith Order.
For much of galactic history, members
of the Sith Order utilized a unique tattooing
process to set themselves apart from other
force users and in particular other Dark Side
force users. This was done in large part to
indicate to the galaxy at large that the
bearers of the tattoos were set apart from all
other Force organizations, and could trace
their lineage in the Force to the original Sith
Lords. This process originated with the
species known as the Sith, from which the
order so well known in the films drew much
of its inspiration, including its very name.
To give the importance of this fact some
context, some Star Wars history should be
explored.
Following the Force Wars on Tython,
the defeated Je’daii who chose to embrace
Bogan fled to the far reaches of the galaxy,
eventually arriving on a planet known as
Ziost. It was there that they discovered the
Sith species, a primitive alien race which
had also embraced the use of Bogan.
Noticing the tattoos which the native Sith
species marked themselves with to delineate
their clans, the fallen Je’daii tattooed

themselves in a similar fashion, utilizing the
venom of an insect native to Ziost, and used
their mastery of the Dark Side to enforce
their domination over the native Sith
species. It was through this domination that
the dark Je’daii came to call themselves Sith
Lords, the enforced rulers of the Sith
species.
For the thousands of years that made up
its existence, virtually every Sith Lord
would possess some form of Sith tattoo to
indicate their connection and lineage to this
original fallen Je’daii. It was a crucial part
of the indoctrination process, and many
aspiring Sith considered it a mark of pride to
bear the tattoos upon their body, for it was
the purest expression of their dedication, as
Durkheim said, to the idea of a particular
moral life. While this “moral” might have
been a dark one, it is symbolic of much of
what the Sith Order sought to embody.
It is this connection, going thousands of
years into Star Wars history which makes
Darth Maul’s tattoos so impactful. For
centuries, following the retreat of the Sith
Order into hiding, the followers of the Sith
way had kept their tattoos in easy to conceal
places so as to not draw overt attention to
themselves. But, as Palpatine began his
machinations to destroy the Jedi, which
makes up the plot of the prequel films, Darth
Maul is the harbinger of this coming threat.
Brazenly revealing his fully tattooed face as
he duals both Qui-Gon and Obi-Wan, Maul
stands as a testament to the return of the Sith
Order. Qui-Gon himself says as much when
he gives his report on the incident with Maul
on Tatooine to the Jedi Council. He simply
says, “…my only conclusion can be that it

The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 4, No. 1, August 2018

108

was a Sith Lord.”11 Even thousands of years
after the first wielders of Bogan tattooed
themselves, it still only takes the very sight
of the marks for a Jedi to know that it is a
Sith which they face, and not some
pretender foe. It is much like what
Durkheim said in his study of religion in our
own galaxy. Those distinctive marks upon
Darth Maul’s face said more than any other
pronouncement could have about Darth
Maul’s belonging to the Sith Order. Maul
did not have to espouse the Sith code or
announce his allegiance to the Dark Side;
the marks on his face made all of that selfevident.
The Soul12
As we continue our discussion linking
Durkheim and Star Wars, we would like to
now turn to Durkheim’s discussion of the
soul. Durkheim describes the soul by
writing:
Since no other souls but these exist,
we arrive at the conclusion that, in
general terms, the soul is none other
than the totemic principle incarnated
in each individual. Nothing about
this derivation should surprise us.
We already know that this principle
is immanent in each member of the
clan, and that by permeating
individuals, it inevitably becomes
individualized….
Since
each

11

Lucas, Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace.
Star Wars material in this section sourced from:
“Force Ghost”; “Immortality,” all from
Wookieepedia.
12

consciousness has its own form, the
soul in each takes a distinct form.13
Here, we can see that as Durkheim discusses
the nature of the soul, and how its
acknowledgement is essentially an extension
of the totemic principle at work in society,
only in a distinct form, ties into a Jedi
becoming “one with the Force” yet also
manifesting as a Force Ghost.
Within Star Wars, a Force Ghost or
Force Spirit, is an individual who, through
deep meditation and training in the Light
Side of the Force, has gained the ability to
manifest their presence outside of their
body, even following their own death. This
ability is possessed only by those who
follow the Light Side, though, and it comes
from a Jedi’s ability to flow through and
with the living Force, thereby enabling their
souls to persist, even following death.
This ability is rediscovered by Jedi
Master Qui-Gon Jinn following his death in
his duel against Darth Maul. His meditations
on the Light Side of the Force had helped
him to rediscover this lost talent, and it helps
to highlight many of Durkheim’s key points
about the soul.
To begin, the Jedi are keen to point out,
as Yoda does to Luke when he is training on
Dagobah, that life and the Force surround
everything and everyone in the galaxy. It is
this life which creates the Force and gives a
Jedi his or her power. Given this, it is clear
that all living things, to some extent, possess
a soul in accordance with Jedi philosophy.
But it is thanks to a Jedi’s training that they
are able to take the essence of their soul and
13

Durkheim and Fields, 251.

The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 4, No. 1, August 2018

109

manifest it fully in a fashion much like
Durkheim describes. The inability for users
of the Dark Side to perform this action is
deeply tied to how they approach and utilize
the Force itself. Few Sith, if any, have ever
truly understood what it means to embrace
the Force. For the followers of Bogan, the
Force is something to be dominated, and this
is reflected in their ideology, where the
Force is not something that is with you and
around you; it is something to be dominated
and used as a tool. This is most succinctly
summed up in the simple expression used
when members of each order would speak to
others. When a Jedi spoke to anyone,
regardless of their Force sensitivity, their
parting words would often be. “May the
Force be with you.” For the Sith, the parting
comment would be, “May the Force serve
you always.” Even this though, would only
be spoken to other Sith, never to a nonForce sensitive.
We first see this ability to manifest the
soul utilized by Qui-Gon in the Star Wars
timeline when he cries out to Anakin as a
disembodied voice as Anakin slaughters a
tribe of Tusken Raiders, in very un-Jedi-like
fashion to avenge the death of his mother.
Qui-Gon cries out as a Force Spirit to try
and stop Anakin, who sadly does not hear
him.14 Yoda, in his meditations, does hear
Qui-Gon, and he reaches out to him to learn
how he was able to do such a thing. Here we
see Durkheim’s principle at work of how
certain people are able to see and commune
with by souls “…by virtue of special powers
they owe to either age or special

knowledge.”15 In the case of Yoda, he
possesses both.
It was thanks to this revelation by QuiGon that Obi-Wan, Yoda, and even Anakin
were able to present themselves as Force
Spirits throughout the original trilogy of
films. Obi-Wan appears to Luke as a
disembodied voice as he runs the Death Star
trench, telling to turn off his targeting
computer and to instead use the Force. He
appears again to him as a visible Spirit on
the ice planet of Hoth, telling him to seek
out Yoda on Dagobah. Finally, all three of
these individuals appear before Luke on
Endor following the defeat of the emperor.16
In each of these instances, the Force Spirit is
shimmering, and tinted blue, definitely noncorporeal, but not quite immaterial either.
They remain present, and readily identifiable
in a distinct form which looks much like
their bodies did originally in their own lives.
It is this principle which so drives home
Durkheim’s point. The Jedi freely admit that
all life flows through the Force, but it is
thanks to their meditation upon it, or their
special power, that they are able to see and
manifest as a Force Spirit before others. It is
through their unity with the Force that a Jedi
is able to realize their spirit’s own distinct
role and presence within it, thus enabling
them to persist on, guiding, advising, and
communicating with those still alive.
The counterpoint to the Jedi’s ability to
do this is strongly highlighted in the nature
of the Sith. For millennia, the Sith had been
attempting to find a method to secure eternal
15

Durkheim and Fields, 244.
Lucas, Star Wars. Episode IV: A New Hope; Lucas,
Star Wars Episode V: The Empire Strikes Back;
Lucas, Star Wars. Episode VI: Return of the Jedi.
16

14

Lucas, Star Wars. Episode II: Attack of the Clones.

The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 4, No. 1, August 2018

110

life. This was the goal of many powerful
Sith Lords throughout the history of Star
Wars. Names such as Darth Vititate, Darth
Nihilus, and even Darth Sidious from the
films all had immortality as their goal. None
of them ever succeed in attaining their
desire. Those who even got close, such as
Vititate and Sidious, only did so through the
utilization of host bodies, never through the
simple manifestation of their Force Spirit. It
was an ability that, due to its very nature,
was impossible for the Dark Side. This
further serves to highlight Durkheim’s point
about how the soul is an incarnation of the
totemic principle, a principle which the
followers of the Dark Side have no
understanding.
Religious & Magical Groups17
To bring our discussion to a close, we
would like to make one final comparison
between Durkheim’s elementary forms and
the Star Wars universe. It is this point that
we believe truly ties these two methods of
understanding humanity together. Durkheim
discusses how religion itself, through all of
its constituent parts, totem and churinga,
tattoo and soul, comes to impact man. He
does this by saying:
If religion protects man against the
desire for self-destruction, it is not
that it preaches the respect for his
own person to him with arguments
sui generis; but because it is a
society. What constitutes this society
17

Star Wars material in this section sourced from:
“Jedi Order”; “Sith Order”; “Rule of Two”;
“Padawan,” all from Wookieepedia.

is the existence of a certain number
of beliefs and practices common to
all the faithful, traditional and thus
obligatory. The more numerous and
strong these collective states of mind
are, the stronger the integration of
the religious community, and also
the greater its preservative value.
The details of dogmas and rites are
secondary. The essential thing is that
they be capable of supporting a
sufficiently intense collective life.18
In particular, this quote can be tied to how
Durkheim’s
discussion
around
the
integrative force of religion plays itself out
in the nature of the two largest Force
organizations in the Star Wars galaxy, the
Jedi and the Sith.
Within the Star Wars universe, the Jedi
and Sith are the two primary collective
bodies of Force users. There are a variety of
others, but none have been as long lasting or
as impactful to the Star Wars galaxy as a
whole as these two groups have been. The
key point we would like to draw out of this
is how the nature of the Jedi and the Sith,
and their status as a religion versus a cult or
magic society, respectively, is played out in
the work of the Star Wars films and the
expanded universe literature.
To begin, the Jedi can be looked upon as
what Durkheim would call a religion. They
possess many things that have been
discussed in this paper and have been
discussed in papers written previously, that
mark them as operating in what Durkheim
would call a religious fashion. Whether it is
18

Durkheim and Fields, 170.

The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 4, No. 1, August 2018

111

the nature of their initiation rites, their use of
totem and churinga in the lightsaber, the
connection to the Force itself which is the
source of their power, their ability to
channel or present the spirit, the possession
of their Code, or a myriad of other factors,
they possess many of the hallmarks of a
religious group. The sheer longevity and
continuity of the Jedi order is what we wish
to highlight. In the Star Wars galaxy, the
Jedi order has existed, nearly continuously,
for over 5,000 years. It was of virtually one
mind for much of its existence, and acted as
a unifying force not only for its own
members, but also for the Galactic Republic,
of which it operated as de facto guardians.
This is evident in their very symbol, wherein
the number nine representing unity to the
early Je’daii was expressed in eight spokes
joining together to form one new whole. Not
only did this symbol remain integral to the
Jedi philosophy, it also came to be adopted
by the Republic they had so steadfastly
guarded for thousands of years.
The Jedi Order was incredibly
integrated, and stressed this integration
throughout its lifetime. It possessed a
tireless dedication to the Jedi Code, and the
training and meditation needed to make that
code a reality. From a young age, Jedi
trainees would be paired with a Master, who
would then take that trainee into every
aspect of their life, with the trainee
becoming what is known as a Padawan. The
Padawan sleeps, eats, trains, even goes on
missions with the Master as they continue
their training together. Their bond becomes
incredibly strong, and it is ultimately the
Master who presents his Padawan for the
initiation rites into Knighthood. If the

Padawan passes, he or she then becomes a
Knight, and is allowed to take on their own
trainee, who when they ascend to
Knighthood qualifies the elder Knight for
the rank of Master. The entire process is
geared toward integrating the Padawan into
the ideals and lifestyle of the Jedi. The bond
between Master and Padawan is incredibly
strong, and it leads to, as Durkheim might
say, a rather intense collective life for
members of the order. It is this collective
strength which has allowed the Jedi order to
function for as long as it has, and to endure
even the most arduous of trials. They stand
in stark contrast to the Sith Order.
The Sith Order is a group of Dark Side
Force users that have very little bonding
them together other than their lust for power.
The various forms their order has taken have
been marked by internal strife, and near
destruction several times over. Their very
birth came from the schism of the Force
Wars discussed earlier in this paper, and
their existence has been anything but stable,
continuous, or peaceful. From the fall of
several Sith Empires, to their near extinction
that resulted in the rule of two, wherein only
two Sith could ever exist, one Master and
one Apprentice, they are the near antithesis
of what the Jedi Order represents. The
Apprentice exists only to usurp and
ultimately kill the Master, and it is this cycle
which has brought the Sith to near
destruction multiple times over. For the Sith,
there are no truly strong collective states
which serve to protect them or their
members. The legacy of the Sith has been
one of pain and fracture, and is more akin to
those who use magic for Durkheim than a
true religion.

The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 4, No. 1, August 2018

112

The best way to elucidate this is to
define exactly what Durkheim considers to
be a church, and how that ties into religion.
For Durkheim, “Religious beliefs proper are
always shared by a definite group that
professes them and that practices the
corresponding rites.”19 He then goes on to
say, “A society whose members are united
because they imagine the sacred world and
its relations with the profane world in the
same way, and because they translate this
common representation into identical
practices, is what is called a Church.”20
Given this definition, it is clear through all
that we have discussed that the Jedi fit this
description most strongly. The Sith on the
other hand, fall most strongly into what
Durkheim would call magic. He describes
magic by saying:
Granted, magic beliefs are never
without a certain currency. They are
often widespread among broad strata
of the population, and there are even
peoples where they count no fewer
active followers than religion proper.
But they do not bind men who
believe in them to one another and
unite them into the same group,
living the same life. There is no
Church of magic.21
It is clear that utilizing these Durkheimian
definitions we can sort the Jedi and Sith into
religion and magic, church and non-church.
The Jedi’s focus on uniting and the
Master/Padawan training plan showed their
19

Ibid., 41.
Ibid.
21
Ibid., 42.
20

dedication to their code, and their
commitment to Ashla, the Light Side of the
Force. On the opposite end of the spectrum,
the Sith Order sought only power, and
would kill their own without a second
thought if it meant they could secure victory
or safety. As mentioned above, this became
embodied in their Rule of Two, wherein an
Apprentice existed only to one day usurp
and kill their Master.
This theme of religion versus magic is
highlighted throughout the entire Star Wars
saga, and its catalyst is found in Episode VI
where Darth Vader sacrifices himself to save
his son Luke, and in turn redeems himself as
Anakin, the Chosen One of the Force. The
Sith, on the other hand, take the survival of
the fittest, Herbert Spencer approach. The
whole goal behind the Rule of Two was to
produce an apex Sith, one who, by virtue of
their very survival, did so because of their
ability to dominate and defeat all that had
come before. The films made it clear who
the ultimate victor was, and that balance
would always return, but the parallels even
here remain fascinating.
Conclusion
Ultimately, we have found it incredibly
interesting how time and again the Star
Wars galaxy has become a place where the
ideas of Durkheim and others can be seen at
work in a variety of fascinating ways.
Seeing the Jedi Order as a religion and the
broader Star Wars galaxy as a whole, not
from the traditional point of view, but from
Durkheim’s, has allowed us to see Star Wars
in an entirely new light. It is our hope that
this paper will, much as Durkheim hoped to

The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 4, No. 1, August 2018

113

do with his own original work in The
Elementary Forms of Religious Life, help
those understand the reality of humankind
today through a lens they might not have
expected to look through. As Durkheim said,
“…religion was able to be the womb in
which the principal seeds of human
civilization have developed.”22 Durkheim
found the evidence of this birth of
civilization
of
aboriginal
Australia.
Ultimately, we think one can find evidence
of this same birth in the galaxy of Star Wars.
Its status as a cultural icon, a juggernaut of
astounding proportions whose value is in the
billions of dollars did not become what it is
today purely by happenstance. It was able to
tap into something primal within people,
something that spoke to individuals the
world around regardless of nationality or
creed. That something was the elementary
forms of religious life.
Bibliography
“Category:Force-Based Organizations |
Wookieepedia | FANDOM Powered by
Wikia.” Accessed 22 June 2018.
http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Category
%3AForce-based_organizations.
Durkheim, Emile, and Karen E. Fields. The
Elementary Forms of Religious Life.
Emile Durkheim ; Translated and with
an Introduction by Karen E. Fields. New
York : Free Press, 1995], 1995.
http://libezproxy.tamu.edu:2048/login?url=http://
search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=
true&db=cat03318a&AN=tamug.28082
22

Durkheim and Fields, 224–25.

07&site=eds-live
http://catdir.loc.gov/catdir/description/si
mon033/94041128.html
http://catdir.loc.gov/catdir/samples/simo
n031/9404112.
“Force Ghost | Wookieepedia | FANDOM
Powered by Wikia.” Accessed 22 June
2018.
http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Force_gh
ost.
“Force Wars | Wookieepedia | FANDOM
Powered by Wikia.” Accessed 22 June
2018.
http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Force_W
ars.
“Immortality | Wookieepedia | FANDOM
Powered by Wikia.” Accessed 22 June
2018.
http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Immortali
ty/Legends.
“Je’daii Order | Wookieepedia | FANDOM
Powered by Wikia.” Accessed 22 June
2018.
http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Je’daii_O
rder.
“Jedi Code | Wookieepedia | FANDOM
Powered by Wikia.” Accessed 22 June
2018.
http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Jedi_Cod
e.
“Jedi Order | Wookieepedia | FANDOM
Powered by Wikia.” Accessed 22 June
2018.
http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Jedi_Ord
er.
“Kyber Crystal | Wookieepedia | FANDOM
Powered by Wikia.” Accessed 22 June
2018.
http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Kyber_cr
ystal.

The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 4, No. 1, August 2018

114

“Lightsaber | Wookieepedia | FANDOM
Powered by Wikia.” Accessed 22 June
2018.
http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Lightsabe
r.
Lucas, George. Star Wars. Episode II,
Attack of the Clones. Beverly Hills,
Calif. : 20th Century Fox Home
Entertainment, [2002], 2002.
---. Star Wars. Episode IV, A New Hope.
Star Wars Trilogy. Beverly Hills, Calif. :
20th Century Fox Entertainment, [2004],
2004.
---. Star Wars. Episode V, The Empire
Strikes Back. Star Wars Trilogy. Beverly
Hills, Calif. : 20th Century Fox Home
Entertainment, [2004], 2004.
---. Star Wars. Episode VI, Return of the
Jedi. Star Wars Trilogy. Beverly Hills,
Calif. : 20th Century Fox Entertainment,
[2004], 2004.
---. Star Wars Episode I, The Phantom
Menace. Beverly Hills, Calif. :
Twentieth Century Fox Home
Entertainment, 2001, 2001.
“Massassi | Wookieepedia | FANDOM
Powered by Wikia.” Accessed 22 June
2018.
http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Massassi/
Legends.
“Padawan | Wookieepedia | FANDOM
Powered by Wikia.” Accessed 22 June

2018.
http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Padawan.
“Rakata | Wookieepedia | FANDOM
Powered by Wikia.” Accessed 22 June
2018.
http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Rakata.
“Rule of Two | Wookieepedia | FANDOM
Powered by Wikia.” Accessed 22 June
2018.
http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Rule_of_
Two.
“Sith Order | Wookieepedia | FANDOM
Powered by Wikia.” Accessed 22 June
2018.
http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Sith_Ord
er.
“Sith Tattoo | Wookieepedia | FANDOM
Powered by Wikia.” Accessed 22 June
2018.
http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/Sith_tatto
o.
“The Force | Wookieepedia | FANDOM
Powered by Wikia.” Accessed 22 June
2018.
http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/The_Forc
e.
“The Gathering | Wookieepedia | FANDOM
Powered by Wikia.” Accessed 22 June
2018.
http://starwars.wikia.com/wiki/The_Gath
ering.

The Phoenix Papers, Vol. 4, No. 1, August 2018

115

