1

Pekka Mertala

Wag the dog - The nature and foundations of preschool educators'
positive ICT pedagogical beliefs
Citation:
Mertala, P. (2017). Wag the dog - The nature and foundations of preschool educators'
positive ICT pedagogical beliefs. Computers in Human Behavior (67), 197–206.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2016.12.037
ABSTRACT
It has become evident that the vast majority of early childhood educators feel positive about using
ICT with children. However, as they are found to have had no or only a little training or practical
experience of pedagogical use of ICT, it is important to explore where the positive attitude comes
from, and what pedagogical benefits early childhood educators believe ICT use brings about. This
study focuses on the relationships of educators’ general and ICT-related pedagogical beliefs, and the
foundations of educators’ positive ICT pedagogical beliefs.
In their general pedagogical beliefs, the educators emphasized the learning of socio-emotional skills,
and reported that they carry out practices where children have an active role in their learning. In their
ICT pedagogical beliefs, the educators emphasized the learning of academic skills, and the methods
they described were usually individual exercises which were either carried out using ICT or by
following educators’ ICT-supported instructions. Positive ICT pedagogical beliefs were, to a large
extent, based on perceptions of what different devices and software promise in terms of children’s
learning. Outside influences, i.e., the model observed from primary school, also played a significant
role in the construction of the educators’ ICT pedagogical beliefs.
KEYWORDS
preschool; ICT, teacher beliefs; early childhood education; technology; learning
HIGHLIGHTS

Explores preschool educators’ general and ICT-related pedagogical beliefs
Preschool educators’ general and ICT-related pedagogical beliefs are incoherent
Preschool educators have uncritical beliefs about the benefits of educational technology

2

Primary education’s ICT culture affects preschool educators’ positive ICT pedagogical beliefs

1. INTRODUCTION
A decade ago, Wang and Hoot (2006) stated that teachers in early childhood education1 no longer ask
if information and communication technology (ICT) should be used with small children, but how it
should be used. A recent survey carried out by the Finnish teachers’ trade union supports this
statement. In it, 80% of early childhood teachers reported having a positive attitude toward using ICT
with children. However, over 80% of the whole sample reported having insufficient pre-service or
in-service training for using ICT with children, and a total of 40% have had no ICT pedagogical inservice training at all. Moreover, only 10% of them reported using ICT with children at least once a
week. (OAJ, 2016.) This is mainly due to the fact that ICT – which in this study refers to digital
devices (i.e., computers, tablets, smartphones) and products or outputs that are viewed, played, or
created on these devices (i.e., applications, games, websites) (see Plowman, 2016) – are scarce in
Finnish early childhood education settings (e.g., Alasuutari, Karila, Alila, & Eskelinen, 2014; Hujala
et al., 2012). None of these phenomena are limited only to Finland. While doubts and concerns are
still expressed (e.g., Dong, 2016; Hernwall, 2016; Palaiologou, 2016),2 it has become evident that the
vast majority of teachers in early childhood education feel positive about using ICT with children
(e.g., Aubrey & Dahl 2014; Gialamas & Nikolopoulou, 2010; Jimoyiannis & Komis, 2007).
Similarly, the lack of equipment, experience, and training is a common theme in international research
reports (e.g., Aubrey & Dahl, 2014; Hernwall, 2016; Palaiologou, 2016; Petrogiannins, 2010).
As positive views are found to predict future ICT use (Gialamas & Nikolopolou, 2010), the key
question here is where does the positive attitude come from if one has no or only a little training or
practical experience of pedagogic use of ICT? It is a timely question to ask, as stakeholders such as
UNICEF (Kalaš, 2010) and the OECD (Taguma, Litjens, & Mackowiecki, 2012) have recommended
equipping kindergartens with ICT, and Finland, along with several other countries, has included the
use of ICT in their early years curricula or white papers (e.g., Bølgan, 2012; Dong & Newman, 2016;
Edwards, 2013; Finnish National Board of Education [FNBoE], 2014, 2016; Vangsnes & Økland,
This paper follows the Finnish discourse, where the term “early childhood education” is used as an umbrella category
for all the institutional education that happens prior to primary school, while “preschool” is used when addressing the
final year before children start primary school. In Finland, children attend preschool in the year they turn 6.
1

It is feared that ICT use will replace play and face-to-face interaction, and hinder children’s social skills, physical
activity, cognitive development, and imagination (see Dong, 2016; Hernwall, 2016; Palaiologou, 2016). Furthermore,
while educational technology is represented as an “essentially positive project” (Selwyn, 2011), it needs to remembered
that ICT and social media can also be used – and are used – for bullying and harassment (Guitton, 2014).
2

3

2013). In the present paper this question is examined through the theoretical concept of pedagogical
beliefs, which have appeared to be one of strongest predictors of teachers’ ICT use (e.g., Ertmer,
Ottenbreit-Leftwich, Sadik, Sendurur, & Sendurur, 2012; Miranda & Russell, 2012). OttenbreitLeftwich, Clazewski, Newby, and Ertmer (2010) have argued that the core underlying value for using
ICT is that ICT use is believed to beneficial for students’ learning. Thus, as pointed out by Hermans,
Tondeur, vanBraak, and Valcke (2008), in order to understand how and why teachers use (or do not
use) ICT, one must first understand their beliefs about teaching and learning. Inspired by the work of
Pajares (1992), Ertmer (2005) has named these as (teachers’) pedagogical beliefs.
Pedagogical beliefs are typically understood to include two dimensions: traditional/teacher-centered
beliefs and constructivist/student-centered beliefs (Ertmer, Ottenbreit-Leftwich, & Tondeur, 2014).
Traditional/teacher-centered beliefs refer to a view where learning is seen as knowledge transmission,
which makes the teacher favor teacher-led whole-class activities and individual drill-and-practice
exercises as pedagogical practices. Constructivist/student-centered beliefs, in turn, refer to the view
of learning as knowledge construction, which makes the teacher favor group work and exploratory
learning projects as pedagogical practices (e.g., Chai, 2010; Ertmer et al., 2014; de Koster, Kuipert,
& Volman, 2012). However, even though traditional and constructivist beliefs are often presented as
ends of the spectrum, teachers’ pedagogical beliefs usually include elements from both categories
(e.g., Parker & Neuharth-Pritchett, 2006; Tondeur, Hermans, van Braak, & Valcke, 2008), and the
classroom reality is often a mixture of methods based on different pedagogical tendencies (Aris &
Orcos, 2015; Chen, 2008).
Although teacher beliefs in the context of pedagogical ICT integration have been studied extensively
in different educational and national contexts and with quantitative and qualitative methods, the
research has mainly focused on beliefs associated only with technology (see the review in Kim, Kim,
Lee, Spector, & DeMeester, 2013). A review of studies performed in the context of early childhood
education support the aforementioned critique, as with them ICT-associated beliefs are not explored
in relation to educators’3 more general beliefs (e.g., Blackwell, Lauricella, & Wartella, 2014;
Ihmedieh, 2009; Jimoyiannis & Komis, 2007; Nikolopoulou & Gialamas, 2015). Furthermore, early
childhood educators’ beliefs in the context of ICT integration have so far been examined mainly
through surveys (e.g., Aldhafeeri, Palaiologou, & Folorunsho, 2016; Dong, 2016; Gialamas &
Nikolopoulou, 2010; Jimoyiannis & Komis, 2007; Nikolopoulou & Gialamas; 2015) or short3

Early childhood education is usually carried out in teams of teachers, nurses and (possibly) assistants (Van Laere,
Peeters, & Vandenbroeck, 2012). In this paper, the term “educator” is used when the former literature or the results of
the present study discuss findings based on data from more than one profession. The exact professional title is used on
the data produced by members of a certain profession.

4

duration (max. 15 minutes) interviews (Aubrey & Dahl, 2014; Ihmedieh, 2009, and the need for more
comprehensive approaches has been acknowledged (Blackwell et al., 2014).
Additionally, it appears that the discussion about teachers’ pedagogical beliefs in ICT integration has
concentrated on beliefs about how students learn and how they should be taught (e.g., Chai, 2010;
Ertmer et al., 2014). However, former research suggests that teachers also have varying beliefs about
what students should be taught, which here refers to beliefs about the pedagogical goals of
institutional education. For instance, secondary school teachers in the study by Lasky (2005) reported
that their job is to teach the “whole child”, by which they meant that besides supporting students’
academic performance, their professional task is also to take care of their students’ socio-emotional
well-being. In addition, teachers in the study by Estola, Erkkilä, & Syrjälä (2003) were “deeply
involved in acting for the benefit of children and being responsible for them” (p. 250) in a manner
that goes beyond supporting the learning of academic skills. Thus, in the present paper the concept
of pedagogical beliefs is broadened to also include beliefs about pedagogical goals.
1.1.Purpose of the study and research questions
In this study, interview data from 17 preschool educators has been examined by focusing on the
relationships between preschool educators’ general and ICT-related positive pedagogical beliefs, and
on the foundations of educators’ positive ICT pedagogical beliefs. Beliefs are examined from the
viewpoint of pedagogical goals and practices. Goals here refer to the ontological aspects of what
educators believe preschool education is for, and what should be taught there. Practices, in turn, are
understood as the means to achieve these goals. Following the same logic, ICT pedagogical beliefs
are understood as beliefs concerning why (goals) and how (practices) ICT should be used in preschool
education. The research questions are:


How do preschool educators’ general pedagogical beliefs (considering pedagogical goals and
practices) and positive ICT pedagogical beliefs relate to each other?



What are the foundations of preschool educators’ positive ICT pedagogical beliefs?

2. EARLY CHILDHOOD EDUCATORS’ GENERAL AND ICT-RELATED PEDAGOGICAL
BELIEFS: A LITERATURE REVIEW
The review of research literature suggests that the majority of teachers in early childhood education
believe that practicing socio-emotional skills is more important than practicing academic skills, which
here are understood to consist of the three Rs: reading, writing, and arithmetic. For instance, 61% of

5

teachers in the study by Lee (2006) stated that promoting children’s social development is important,
and that they should not be hurried to learn academic subjects. In addition, teachers in the study by
Kowalski, Pretti-Frontczak, and Johnson (2001) ranked learning socio-emotional skills significantly
higher than the learning of language and literacy and early math (3.86, 2.97, and 2.92, on a five step
scale, respectively).
Furthermore, 83% of the teachers in Lee’s (2006) study stated that children need to be involved,
engaged, and explorative in their learning. To attain a high level of engagement, educators are found
to prefer small group activities over whole-class instructions (Lara-Cinisomo et al., 2009). According
to Wasik (2008) small group activities offer greater opportunities for high-quality interaction between
the children as well as between the children and the teacher when compared to whole-class activities,
as children ask more questions and listen to others more carefully when working in small, teachermediated groups. Method-wise, early childhood educators are found to appreciate hands-on activities,
namely direct and physical interaction with materials (Abu-Jaber, Al-Shawareb, & Gheith, 2010;
Lara-Cinisomo et al., 2009; Parker & Neuharth-Pritchett, 2006). In addition, learning activities which
involve movement are valued over sitting behind a desk (Lee, 2006).
However, while socio-emotional skills are highlighted in general pedagogical goal beliefs, ICT is
specifically understood as a medium for learning academic skills (e.g., Blackwell, Lauricella, &
Wartella, 2016; Dong & Newman, 2016; Ihmedieh, 2009), and only 24% of the teachers in a study
by Palaiologou (2016) agreed with a statement that digital devices can facilitate play-based pedagogy
as a cooperative tool. The literature offers no comprehensive account for why ICT is mostly seen as
a tool for academic excellence, but one reason could be that teachers in early childhood education
have been found to use technological affordances as the starting point for their ICT pedagogical
planning (Dong & Newman, 2016; Hernwall, 2016), and analyses of educational mobile applications
for young children show that the supply is dominated by apps advertised to promote the learning of
literacy and mathematics (Highfield & Goodwind, 2013; Vaala, Ly & Levine, 2015).
Method-wise, teachers are found to prefer ICT-supported whole-class instruction (e.g., Kerckaert,
Vanderlinde, & van Braak, 2015; Morgan, 2010), or encouraging the children to do individual
exercises, i.e., play learning games (Blackwell et al., 2016). Educators also express that children’s
peer interaction disturbs the learning potential of ICT use and that their task is to protect the computerusing child from unnecessary interruption (Ljung-Djärf, Åberg‐Bengtsson, & Ottosson, 2005). The
reasoning behind this logic seems to be that child-computer interaction and interactive software itself
are believed to be educational (see Plowman & McPacke, 2013), which appears to lead to practices

6

where the educator’s role is understood to act as a reactive supervisor whose main tasks are
monitoring turn-taking, resolving conflicts, and helping children with technical difficulties (Plowman
& Stephen, 2005; see also Dong, 2016; Vangsnes & Økland, 2013).
3. METHOD
The data was collected from four preschool groups participating in a development project which was
funded by the Finnish National Board of Education and conducted in a city in northern Finland.4 Data
collection took place in October 2013 during the orientation period, when children, their families and
preschool educators were asked about ideas about the form and use of ICT before any new ICT
devices were purchased (for children’s ideas see Mertala, 2016). Data from the educators was
collected via thematic interviews, which is considered to be an appropriate method for collecting data
from phenomena that are impossible to observe (Patton 2002, 340-341). Such phenomena in this
study were the educators’ past experiences (foundations of beliefs) and their future intentions (what
kind of ICT-enhanced pedagogy they would carry out).
A total of seventeen (17) educators (four directors, two vice directors, eight teachers, three nurses)
were interviewed. All of them were women and all but four of them were over 40 years old.5 Five
teachers and one nurse had previously worked in centers that had had computers for children to use.
Participants with experiences of using ICT with children are marked with an asterisk (*) in the Results
section. None of the educators had had formal ICT pedagogical training, but six of them had attended
in-service training or other venues that had partially dealt with using ICT with children. Nonetheless,
all the participants described themselves as novices when it came to ICT pedagogy. Table 1 presents
an overview of the participants, including the distribution of professions, types of interviews carried
out, and the existing ICT equipment of the groups. Device-wise, the participating groups can be
described as being typical Finnish preschool classes (Alasuutari, et al., 2014; Hujala et al., 2012).

4

There was a total of five groups participating in the project, but due to sudden staff changes one of the groups was
unable to participate in the interviews.
5
As the data was collected from a small-scale public development project, participants’ backgrounds are not discussed
in detail in order to protect their anonymity.

7

Table 1. Distribution of professions, interview types and the existing ICT devices by groups
Group
A

Informants and interview type
Individual interviews: Director,
Teacher 1, Teacher 2 and Nurse

B

Pair interviews: Director and Vice
Director; Teacher 1 and Teacher 2
Individual interviews: Director,
Teacher 1, Teacher 2, Nurse

C

D

Pair interview: Director and Vice
Director. Group interview: Teacher
1, Teacher 2 and Nurse

Existing ICT devices
Laptop and smartphone for staff; desktop for
children (not in use due to technical
problems)
Laptop and smartphone for staff

Center type
Separate

Laptop and smartphone for staff; interactive
whiteboard (IWB) for staff and children (not
in use due to technical problems)
Laptop and smartphone for staff; IWB for
staff and children

Within a primary
school

Separate

Within a primary
school

3.1. Interview procedure
The interviews were conducted during the working day and took place on the premises of the
participating units, i.e., in a meeting room or in an office. The place and form of the interview was
left for the participants to decide on. All interviews were either audiotaped (individual interviews) or
videoed (pair and group interviews). The length of individual interviews ranged from 13 minutes to
52 minutes. The brevity of the shortest one was caused by the tight schedule of the interviewed leader.
All pair and group interviews lasted over 40 minutes, with the longest being 76 minutes. The
interviews have been fully transcribed and the material comprises 102 pages.
The form of knowledge produced in research interviews is constructive by nature, and the knowledge
is constructed between the interviewer and the interviewee (Kvale & Brinkmann, 2009, 2). Thus it is
important to pay attention to who the respondents think the interviewer is, as the nature of the
relationship can have a notable impact on their answers (McCracken, 1988, 25-26). In the context of
this study, when introducing myself to the participants, I brought up my recent preschool teacher
background in an attempt to create a collegial atmosphere, which I assumed would provide freer talk
and discussion than what would be gained if I had been thought of solely as a scholar. Quotes like
“well surely you know what I’m talking about” 6 (Teacher 1A) suggest that at least some of the
educators felt they were talking with someone that they shared similar experiences and vocabulary
with. In order for the interview situation to develop in a more conversational direction, no fixed
questions were used, and the questions were worded spontaneously (see Patton, 2002, 343–344) based
on an interview guide which is presented in Table 2. Probes – asking questions that follow up on the
answers to previous questions (Keats, 2000, 39–40) – were used to obtain highly detailed data.

Some “narrative smoothing” (Polkinghorne, 1995), i.e., taking out hesitations, unnecessary repetitions and breaks, has
been made to the extracts presented in this paper.
6

8

Table 2. Interview guide for teachers and nurses7
Background information and warm-up
How long have you worked in early childhood education/in this unit/in this group
Profession
 Initial education
 Prior ICT pedagogical training
Personal experiences and relationship with ICT
 What do you use, how do you use it, why do you use it, when do you use it
Theme 1: Motives and wishes for the development project
Why did you apply to take part in the project?
 How was the process of application conducted?
What do you expect from the project?
 As concrete a level as possible  devices, software, training, support and resources for planning
What would be A) the best and B) the worst outcome for the project?
 How could A be reached and B be avoided?
Theme 2: Beliefs about ICT-enhanced pedagogy in preschool education
What do you understand by ICT?
What do you understand by ICT-enhanced pedagogy?
 What is important to take into account when using ICT in preschool?
Are ICT-enhanced practices carried out in your current or former groups?
 Why are/were these kinds of practices carried out?
Theme 3: Beliefs about children’s ICT use during their free time
What do you think children do with ICT in their free time?
 What devices, how, why, where?
 How do you know this?
What methods, contents and devices do you believe children would prefer to have in preschool?
Theme 4: Beliefs about children’s parents/guardians’ views of ICT-enhanced pedagogy in preschool education
What methods, contents and devices do you believe children’s parents or guardians would like their children to have
in preschool?
 Why?
Theme 5: Beliefs about the nature of preschool education
What themes, topics and methods do you think are the most important in preschool education?
 Why?
What have you done with the children this week?
 How could ICT be integrated into these themes and methods?

3.2. Analysis
The data was analyzed by means of Constant Comparative Analysis Method (CCA), which is often
considered to be synonymous with grounded theory research (Fram, 2013). However, as pointed out
by O’Connor, Netting and Thomas (2008), “constant comparison, the data analysis method, does not
in and of itself constitute a grounded theory design” (p. 41). Indeed, there is a growing body of
research literature which suggests that CCA can be treated as “a set of procedures and techniques for
gathering and analyzing the data” (Straus & Corbin, 1998, p. 3), without aiming to constitute a
substantive theory, which is the aim in grounded theory research (O’Connor et al., 2008; for studies
carried out in the context of ICT integration, see e.g., Chai, 2010; Ottenbreit-Leftwich et al., 2010).
The interview guide for directors was identical except for the fact that it included a question about how teachers’ and
nurses’ opportunities for on-the-job learning can be taken into account in the project.
7

9

It appears that in these studies researchers take a rather pragmatic stance toward CCA, meaning that
it is the research questions asked (Fram, 2013) and the kind of material involved (Boeje, 2002) that
determine the number of steps taken and the types of comparisons done during the analysis process.
In the context of the present paper, the comparison comprised three different levels:
1. comparison between theory and data,
2. comparison between the data from different participants,
3. comparison within the data from individual participants.
By comparison between theory and data I mean that while no strict deductive analysis was applied in
this study, previous research has still acted as a “theoretical thread” in the analysis process (see
Grönfors, 2011). In the context of the current paper, the main theoretical thread was the notion that
while early childhood educators in general value the learning of social skills over the learning of
academic skills (Kowalski et al., 2001; Lee, 2006), the importance of learning academic skills is more
prominent in educators’ ICT-related beliefs (e.g., Blackwell et al., 2016; Dong & Newman, 2016;
Hernwall, 2016; Ihmedieh, 2009; Palaiologou, 2016). Another thread was that in the research
literature

about

early

childhood

educators’

general

pedagogical

beliefs,

student-

centered/constructivist practices are held in high esteem (Abu-Jaber, Al-Shawareb, & Gheith, 2010;
Lara-Cinisomo et al., 2009; Parker & Neuharth-Pritchett, 2006), but in the research literature about
early childhood educators, ICT-related beliefs, teacher-centered/traditional practices are prominent
(Blackwell et al., 2016; Kerckaert et al., 2015; Morgan, 2010) (see section 2).
Nevertheless, as early childhood educators’ general and ICT-related pedagogical beliefs have not
been studied within a single research project, it is not known whether these inconsistencies take place
between the educators or within the educators. What I mean by this is that it is possible that there are
either (at least) two kinds of educators – those with traditional/teacher-centered general pedagogical
beliefs who also have traditional/teacher-centered ICT-related beliefs, and those with
constructivist/student-centered general pedagogical beliefs who also have constructivist/studentcentered ICT-related beliefs – or that there are inconsistencies between individual educators’ general
and ICT-related pedagogical beliefs. Therefore, a comparison between the data from different
participants was carried out in order to discover whether there are distinguishable educator profiles,
and comparison within the data from individual participants was carried out to identify any possible
internal inconsistencies (see Boeije, 2002).
The analysis process itself consists of four phases: In the first phase, the focus was on the data that
discussed educators’ general pedagogical beliefs, and concentrated on the data that discussed “why”

10

(goals) and “how” (practices) preschool education should be implemented in general. In the second
phase, the focus was on the data that discussed “why” and “how” ICT should be used in preschool.
During the third phase, the interpretations made during phases one and two were compared with each
other to examine the similarities and differences between educators’ general pedagogical beliefs and
those that are ICT-related. In each of these three stages, comparisons between the data from different
participants and within the data from individual participants were performed. In the fourth and final
stage, the focus was on the foundations of educators’ ICT pedagogical beliefs.
Next, I will clarify the analysis process and the interpretations made by using data examples from one
participant, Teacher 1B*. The reason for using extracts from a single participant here is that no
distinguishable belief profiles between the participants were found, but all the educators were
identified as having similar internal inconsistencies between their general and ICT-related
pedagogical beliefs. More extracts from the data are presented in the Results section to improve the
reliability and clarity of the research.
Table 3. Data examples from Teacher 1B*
Goal-related pedagogical beliefs
General
ICT
“Social skills, learning how to be in a group and how to
“[I would use] ICT for literacy and math. It would
take others into account, it is perhaps the most important support the learning of those areas”
thing in preschool education”
Code: preschool education is about socio-emotional
Code: ICT is about academic skills
skills
Practice-related pedagogical beliefs
General
ICT
“[Preschool education] should include versatile
“A document camera made it possible to show teacher’s
activities. I think it is quite activity-based what we do
materials to the children while they sit in their places”
here, and pen and paper exercises are just a small thing”
Code: constructivist/student-centered beliefs
Code: traditional/teacher-centered beliefs

As can be seen from Table 3, there were incoherencies between Teacher 1B*’s general and ICTrelated pedagogical beliefs. She, for instance, expressed that preschool education should be “activitybased” (toiminnallista), which in Finnish discourse refers to student-centered practices in which
children have an active role in their learning, and in which embodied and tactile methods are used
instead of sitting at a desk doing pen and paper exercises. Thus this extract was understood to refer
to constructivist/student-centered beliefs. Conversely, in her description of how ICT should and could
be used, she referred to a teacher-centered practice where children sit at their desks. This extract was
understood to refer to traditional/teacher-centered beliefs. Furthermore, as can be seen from the
extract about the use of the document camera, Teacher 1B* used the past tense when she described

11

the use of a document camera. Here she was referring to experiences she had had when her preschool
class was temporarily located on the school premises, and she was able to use the classroom ICT.
This was understood to refer to the foundations of her pedagogical beliefs. In this particular case, the
extract was interpreted to reflect the effect of the ICT culture in primary school education.
4. RESULTS
The results are presented in two main sections. The first discusses the (incoherent) relationships
between educators’ general pedagogical beliefs and their positive ICT pedagogical beliefs. The
second section examines the foundations of educators’ positive ICT pedagogical beliefs.
4.1. The relationships between educators’ general and ICT pedagogical beliefs
Educators’ general and ICT pedagogical beliefs are discussed using three “buts,” which refer to the
identified incoherencies between the beliefs. The first section represents the incoherencies
considering pedagogical goals, while the second and the third have their focus on beliefs considering
pedagogical methods.
4.1.1. Preschool is about socio-emotional skills, but ICT is about academic skills
Educators in this study emphasized that the learning of social-emotional skills is the core goal of
preschool education, and several educators made it clear that there is a clear order of precedence
between the learning of socio-emotional skills and the learning of academic skills:
From a pedagogical perspective, more important than letters and mathematics is that
they [children] have the courage to speak, and express their opinions, and to have an
opinion in the first place… numbers and letters are the last one in the list. (Teacher 1A)
This hierarchy was also visible in educators’ comments about preschool exercise books, which in the
Finnish context mainly concentrate on printed literacy, fine motor pen exercises, and mathematics
(Myöhänen, 2011, 83): exercise books were said to be things that are “only a small part of preschool
education” (Teacher 1B*) and should not be used “at the cost of more important things” (Teacher
2A*). According to the participants, these “more important things” were:
Social skills, learning how to be in a group and how to take others into account, it is
perhaps the most important thing in preschool education (Teacher 1B*),
However, only two educators expressed that one of the goals of ICT use could be the development of
children’s social skills by creating meaningful interactional situations around ICT. According to one:

12

As some of these children need [to practice] social relationships, it would be nice if
children could do something together with a friend with the computer. So they would
have to discuss and find a common line there. (Teacher 2A*)
In general, ICT was believed to be a tool to support children’s academic skills, namely literacy and
mathematics (see Table 3). This was explicitly mentioned by twelve (12) educators, and usually
meant having children play learning games. Also, even though exercise books were seen as secondary
learning tools, six (6) educators said that one of the biggest benefits of ICT would be having access
to digital resources in the exercise books.
4.1.2. Good learning is active, but good learning with ICT is inactive
The term “active” refers here to two things: First, it refers to a child’s active role in his/her own
learning, and second, it refers to the nature of pedagogical practices. From the first viewpoint,
educators in this study described good pedagogy to be an adult-mediated activity, with plenty of room
for children’s voices. Knowledge was understood to be something that is constructed in the interaction
between the participants. In the words of one teacher:
We have gotten rid of the culture that we adults are the ones with all the answers – I
devote a lot of time to discussions, [and] I ask things from children… they are very
clever, and asking questions is a good way to have them become aware of things.
(Teacher 1A)
However, in educators’ descriptions of good ICT pedagogy, the child’s role was represented quite
differently. While there were three educators who said that children could use computers to produce
their own texts, and thus have an active role in ICT-enhanced learning, significantly more common
were views in which ICT was used as a medium for knowledge transition. This theme was most
prominent in the data regarding (digital) learning games, which were believed to motivate children.
A common belief among the participants was that:
Children love it when they have a chance to play games a little (Teacher 1C), because
they are pretty rewarding and fun (Director D), but they have the idea of learning in the
background (Teacher 1B*).
The extracts above imply that children’s awareness of the purpose of playing games in preschool was
not seen to be that important, and one teacher said frankly that with games “we can cheat children a
little so that they don’t realize that while they are gaming, they are also learning”. (Teacher 1D*).
The view of children as passive learners who are unaware of the purpose of their activities is not only

13

contradictory to educators’ general pedagogical beliefs, but is also at variance with the alignments of
the Finnish early years curricula, as they name the development of learning skills as one of the key
tasks (FNBoE, 2014, 2016).
Practice-wise, educators in this study valued embodied and tactile methods over traditional classroom
activities, i.e., the use of exercise books. As stated by one of the teachers,
We have a “hands-on” preschool. We use the exercise books only once a week, and
instead we have a lot of concrete activities. We practice hyphenation by jumping. We
also throw a dice and look for letters I have spread in the corridor. If the dice shows an
“A” then we look for it, and then there [back of the letter] is a physical exercise
instruction and we jump up like ten times, and then return to throwing the dice. (Teacher
2A*)
Nonetheless, educators’ descriptions of good ICT pedagogy were dominated by examples where
children either sit still around ICT (i.e., playing learning games) or follow teachers’ ICT-enhanced
whole-class instructions while sitting in their places. This incoherency was highly prominent in the
data from teachers in Group B. During the interview, both emphasized how preschool is a place for
active and hands-on learning, but at one point they began to think back to how, a few years earlier,
they had temporarily had their preschool group on the school premises. During that period, they were
able to use the classroom ICT which consisted of a staff computer, projector, document camera and
canvas. According to them,
It was great! The document camera made it possible to show the teacher’s material to
the children while they sat in their places. (Teacher 1B*)
The “greatness” of presentation technology refers explicitly to whole-class instruction, as they said
that such ICT is good for teaching things to large groups of children. At that moment they had only a
staff computer to use, and they found the lack of a projector and canvas frustrating:
Today we studied reflectors, and we watched short video clips about them. Now we had
to watch the videos from the screen in small groups. (Teacher 2B*)
4.1.3. Good learning is social, but good learning with ICT is independent
The educators in this study highlighted the importance of intersubjective aspects of learning. As
discussed in the previous section, teacher-mediated discussions and open-ended questions were held
in high esteem. Another thing which illustrates beliefs about the importance of the intersubjective and
social nature of learning is small group pedagogy, which was described as being an essential part of

14

the educators’ everyday practices. One teacher commented that “we do everything in small groups”
(Teacher 2A*), and also others made it clear that small group activities are a crucial part of their
pedagogy.
First thing in the morning we had free play. Then we teachers began to work with our
own groups. My group did mushroom paintings and read a book about them to find out
what mushrooms really are, are they animals or plants or what. (Teacher 1C)
While early childhood educators have been criticized for not paying enough attention to how small
groups are formed (Wasik, 2008), in this context of the present study the situation appeared to be
different. Children’s age, gender, mother tongue, special educational needs, and how familiar the
educator was with the children and their parents/guardians (i.e., has one of the teachers taught their
older siblings) were some of the aspects that educators considered to be important when composing
home groups. Besides home groups, other types of small groups were designed based on, e.g.,
children’s existing skills and developmental needs. Furthermore, one teacher said that homogenous
small groups are sometimes needed in order to prevent low-achieving children from constantly feeling
worse than others. To sum up, small group pedagogy was believed to support children’s learning in
socio-emotional and academic areas.
Educators who had used ICT with children reported that children were keen on using computers in
pairs or small groups. However, besides the two educators with ideas about using ICT to support the
development of children’s social skills, there were no examples of these pairs or small groups being
intentionally organized, or that interaction around ICT has much pedagogical value in the first place.
Conversely, children’s collaborative ICT use was believed to be a potential disturber for learning (see
Ljung-Djärf et al., 2005). According to one teacher:
Usually there were two or three children there [around the computer] at a time. The
freedom of choice was quite big, and there were many different options and routes to
choose, so it became quite chaotic when three of them waffled to each other and fool
around with the game… Some children do like systematic work with it, so it’s just kind
of goofing. In a sense they just play around. (T2D*)
With ICT, learning was believed to happen when children worked individually and independently.
For instance, the game that was most mentioned was the GraphoGame, a technology-enhanced
learning environment for those learning to read, where the use of headphones is required as the player
needs an undisturbed opportunity to concentrate fully on the sounds presented to them (Richardson
& Lyytinen, 2014). Furthermore, educators who had either used the GraphoGame or other learning

15

games, or were planning to do so, said that a number of rules need to be set to ensure that children
can use the computer without interference.
We had lists on the wall, and the computer time was 10 minutes per child. (Teacher
2B*)
We used an alarm clock. It was 20 minutes’ game-time for each child per day, and we
kept records of who had their turn and who didn’t. (Teacher 2D*)
There could be quite a fight about whose turn it was when we got the computer and
started to play games. I think we need to have some kind of rotation and schedule for it.
(Nurse A)
The extracts above also give an insight into participants’ views about the role of the educator in ICTenhanced activities, other than giving whole-class instructions. Unlike the educators’ general
pedagogical beliefs, in these examples the educator is not a mediator or a collaborator, but a reactive
supervisor whose main tasks are monitoring turn-taking, solving conflicts and helping children with
technical difficulties (see Plowman & Stephen, 2005).
4.2. Foundations of educators’ positive ICT pedagogical beliefs
The foundations of educators’ ICT pedagogical beliefs are discussed in three sections. The first one
presents beliefs based on the perceived educational affordances of ICT. The second one is about the
impact of primary school education, and the third is about how outside experts have influenced
educators’ beliefs.
4.2.1. Promises of ICT
By using the term “promises of ICT,” I mean an underlying belief that digital technologies are capable
of improving education (see Selwyn, 2011). Such beliefs were expressed by twelve (12) educators.
One illustrative example is that while educators in this study were critical about using exercise books
in preschool, they were interested in having access to the digital resources of the books (see section
4.1.1). This notion implies that educators believed that there is “extra value” in the digital material
compared to the printed book. Another example is interactive whiteboards (IWB), which are said to
be useful tools as they exhibit features which promote interactivity, collaboration, flexibility,
efficiency, and easy access (Morgan, 2010). These promises were recognized by one of the directors.
She had previously bought an IWB for the preschool group because children could “act and move
together and do many kinds of things with it“ (Director D). However, the experiences of the teachers
and the nurse were somewhat different, and according to the nurse:

16

We have 26 children and one IWB which should be used in alternation, but the children
don’t remember it and every time two children touch the IWB at the same time it freezes.
(Nurse D*)
Beliefs about the educational value of ICT were also visible in educators’ views considering the use
of educational games. As discussed in section 4.1.2, educational games were believed to have high
value in terms of engagement and motivation, and none of the participants questioned their learning
value. Besides games, multimedia presentations were also believed to be attractive and educational
(see Dong & Newman, 2016). For instance, teachers from Group B said that at the time when they
had ICT in their class, they had stopped going to the theater with children because they were able to
show them videos via the projector. They justified this by saying that the combination of music and
video made the presentation “lifelike” and that the experience was probably “new for the children
too” (Teacher 2B*). Nonetheless, going to a theater to see a play, or having a group perform the play
on their premises, is more than just watching a play: It is attending a unique form of a cultural, social
and artistic event. This is not a statement that theater has a greater pedagogical, cultural, or artistic
value over movies or other kinds of video presentations. What I mean is that as they are two different
forms of art, neither can be used to replace the other. Also, this rationale ignores the fact that the
homes of young Finnish children are usually rich in technology, and by the time they reach their
preschool year, children have had lots of experiences of watching programs on screens (Suoninen,
2014).
4.2.2. Influence of primary school education
The second influential factor was the influence of primary school education. This theme was present
in the data from six (6) educators. The ICT culture in primary school education was described as
being more advanced than ICT culture in preschool, and thus worth paying attention to. According to
one teacher, “the things they have done in primary school can be applied in preschool” (Teacher
1B*).
She was not alone in her belief. One teacher from Group C said that the decision to buy IWBs for all
their preschool classes was partially inspired by the fact that the primary school that was located on
the same premises had similar IWBs. The director of the center went on to say that they could also
turn to the more experienced primary school teachers to get help and ideas. Furthermore, one director
said that ICT should be used in preschool because:
When children start in primary school, ICT wouldn’t be a new thing for them… as they
use smartphones and iPads a lot in the school (Director D)

17

Her choice of words implies that the importance of equipping preschool with ICT lies with the more
frequent ICT use in primary school, and the ICT in preschool should be similar to that in primary
school so that children could learn to master it during the preschool year. Locating within a primary
school or hands-on experiences with classroom technology were not necessary for preschool
educators to become inspired by the ICT pedagogy of primary education. For example, one teacher
said that during school visits she had seen a Grade 1 teacher use the projector and whiteboard to give
children whole-class instructions, and that similar equipment would be useful in preschool as well.
4.2.3. Guidance from outside experts
Five (5) teachers had attended in-service training or other venues that were not entirely about ICTenhanced pedagogy but had contained examples of ICT use. One teacher had attended an event held
by a publishing company. She was impressed by the digital material presented to her, and said that “I
was like wow! One could [practice] all the letters and everything else with it (Teacher 1B*p).
However, as there was an extra charge for getting access to the digital material, she had not had a
chance to actually try out the material. Similarly, another teacher stated that she had attended a lecture
which was about the computer-assisted writing to read method (WTR). According to her “it seemed
like a good thing” (Teacher 2C), but she also had not had an opportunity to test the method because
she had no computers in her class. The third teacher, in turn, told me about a literacy education
training event where one sub-topic had been the GraphoGame, which she had found to be an
interesting learning tool with lots of potential. At the time she had no computers for the children to
use, but she decided to find out if she would be able to get a computer for her class. Obtaining the
computer took over three years and a lot of effort, and when it was eventually provided, the
GraphoGame did not work due to problems with the internet connection firewall. By the time of the
interview they had had the computer for eight months but it had not been used once.
It appears that as the training the teachers had attended had focused on a single method or tool (WTR,
GraphoGame, and commercial digital material of one publishing company), they have been provided
with a rather restricted view of what pedagogical ICT use in preschool can be. This is most prominent
in the GraphoGame case, where the classroom computer was left unused because of the firewall
problem. The lack of an internet connection would not have prevented the use of the word processor,
drawing programs, or photo and video editors, but as the computer was represented only as a device
for playing the GraphoGame in the training – and the teacher had had no other ICT-related training –
these issues were not visible to her.
5. DISCUSSION

18

This study has addressed the relationships of preschool educators’ general and ICT-related
pedagogical beliefs and the foundations of educators’ positive ICT pedagogical beliefs. In the context
of the present study, beliefs were examined in a twofold manner: As beliefs about pedagogical goals,
and as beliefs about pedagogical practices. On a general level, the educators in this study valued the
learning of socio-emotional skills over academic skills, which is congruent with previous research
(Kowalski et al., 2001; Lee, 2006). The educators in this study also emphasized that learning is
something that happens interpersonally, and that children must have an active role as meaning-makers
in the learning process. Method-wise, small group pedagogy and embodied activities were valued.
Again, these findings are supported by previous research (Abu-Jaber, et al., 2010; Lara-Cinisomo et
al., 2009; Lee, 2006; Parker & Neuharth-Pritchett, 2006). However, when the focus was shifted to
ICT pedagogical beliefs, the educators in this study expressed that the main goal behind ICT use is
supporting the development of children’s academic skills. As positive methods they described giving
ICT-supported whole-class instructions, and having children perform individual game-based drilland-practice exercises. Similar findings regarding ICT pedagogy have also been discovered in
previous research (e.g., Blackwell et al., 2016; Kerckaert et al., 2015; Morgan, 2010).
It appears that with regards to practice-related beliefs, educators’ general pedagogical beliefs were
mainly constructivist/student-centered, but their ICT pedagogical

beliefs were

mainly

traditional/teacher-centered. In the interviews, the educators expressed explicit references to practices
where children act as knowledge constructors (see section 4.1.2), but also the educators’ effort in
forming functional small groups can be understood to describe a constructivist belief about learning:
If learning is something that happens in interaction with others, then the quality of the interactions is
the key factor in learning and is thus the place where pedagogical effort needs to be targeted.
Conversely, when discussing good ICT pedagogy, the educators in this study argued that ICT is to be
used to reinforce learning with methods which are congruent with the traditional/teacher-centered
concept of learning.
While it is not unprecedented for educators to have varying and conflicting beliefs (e.g., Chen, 2008;
Parker & Neuharth-Pritchett, 2006; Tondeur et al., 2008), the notable contrariety between educators’
general and ICT pedagogical beliefs, and the significant role of outside influences in educators’ ICT
pedagogical beliefs, are phenomena worth paying attention to. In my interpretation, these outcomes
imply the presence of a “wag the dog” phenomenon. By this I mean that the educators’ beliefs of
what is good ICT-enhanced pedagogy was not based on their beliefs about the pedagogical core of
preschool education, but it was either the technology itself or the model and guidance received from
others that shaped their ICT pedagogical beliefs the most. As the “theater versus projector” example

19

in section 4.2.1 implies, this incongruous base can lead to practices that weaken the quality of
education.
One problematic feature is that critical reflection of how observed or suggested practices would fit in
the context of preschool education was practically nonexistent. For instance, even though the
educators sometimes said that they “apply” the practices they observe from primary education, the
examples used were rather direct copies with no re-contextualization to meet the needs of the younger
children. Plowman and Stephen (2005) have suggested that the lack of criticism is due to the low
level of practitioner confidence, which is at least partially due to insufficient training. All the
educators in this study were certified early childhood educators, but none of them had any formal
training for pedagogical ICT use, which is common in national (OAJ, 2016) and international contexts
(e.g., Aubrey & Dahl, 2014; Hernwall, 2016; Palaiologou, 2016). Thus it is understandable that
educators who feel insecure about their ICT pedagogical competence model the practices of those
they consider to be more competent. However, following the example or advice of those whose
background is not in early childhood education can lead to pedagogically problematic beliefs and
practices. This is not to say that early childhood education should be prevented from interacting with
other fields of education, and the continuum between early childhood education and primary school
education is emphasized in curriculum documents (FNBoE, 2014, 2016). Nonetheless, simply
copying ICT infrastructures and practices from primary education does not equal a dialogical
relationship between children’s current and future learning environments.
Furthermore, none of the educators problematized the commercial intentions behind the learning
games or other digital materials (i.e., digital resources of exercise books, see section 4.2.3) (see also
Dong & Newman, 2016). Nevertheless, designers’ commercial interests can be in conflict with
pedagogical ones, and as argued by Linderoth (2012), in order to avoid players from getting frustrated
(and disliking the game), games offer players hints which allow them to progress without actually
solving the problem they have faced. Strong faith in the educational potential of ICT use, namely the
playing of learning games, can also be one explanation for why many educators in this study as well
as in previous ones (Ljung-Djärf et al., 2005; Plowman & Stephen, 2005; Vangsnes & Økland, 2013)
were found to take the role of reactive supervisor rather than that of mediator in ICT-enhanced
practices.
5.1. Implications for in-service and pre-service training
While beliefs have appeared to be difficult to change (Pajares, 1992), the findings of the present paper
imply that as early childhood educators’ ICT pedagogical beliefs are often based on fragmented

20

observations, they can be subjected to change when new perspectives (which are grounded in the
pedagogy of early childhood education) are presented to them (see Angeli, 2004). For instance, the
teacher talking about the GraphoGame, presented in section 4.2.3, quickly became aware of her onesided thinking. When asked if she had:
… done anything else with it [the computer]? Say, used the word processor, drawing
program or photo editor? (Researcher)
she replied that:
… perhaps I have been too keen on getting the GraphoGame while not be able to do
anything else with it [the computer]. (Teacher 1A)
Furthermore, these findings challenge teacher educators and policy makers to find ways to support
pre-service and in-service early childhood educators’ professional development in becoming
competent ICT pedagogues. Naturally, one key question is what is meant by “competence.” The
incoherence of educators’ general pedagogical beliefs and ICT pedagogical beliefs (and its relation
to lack of confidence) as well as the possibility of educators’ low self-confidence as ICT pedagogues
imply that there is a need for training approaches that are built on the cornerstones of early childhood
education’s pedagogical goals (i.e., socio-emotional skills) and practices (i.e., small group activities,
embodied activities), as this way ICT pedagogical competence becomes an extension of educators’
existing proficiency rather than being a new and peripheral area of expertise.
5.2. Limitations of the study
As interviews were conducted at the beginning of a development project to which groups had applied
on their own accord, it is justifiable to expect that their attitudes and beliefs toward the use of ICT
with children are more positive than how they may be in general. Also, the context may have guided
informants to remain silent about their doubts concerning the use of ICT with children in order not to
appear as challenging partners in the project by “serving up” what they thought was wanted of them
(see McCracken, 1988, 27). Indeed, participants found it difficult to discuss any possible
shortcomings of the project, i.e., when asked about the threats that need to be taken into account (see
Table 2), answers like “you mean something negative? Well, I think that this is a good thing and I
have an open mind and positive feelings about this” (Director A,) and “I don’t see anything negative
in this” (Director C) were typical. However, this possible distortion has been taken into account in
research questions which only address the positive beliefs.

21

In terms or validity and reproducibility, it is evident that the small number of participants and
geographically homogenous data do not allow for generalizations of the findings. In addition, we
should bear in mind that the participants in this study do not represent the entire field of early
childhood education, but they were all working with children who were about to start primary school
education the following year. Thus it is possible that the ICT culture of primary school education
could be more influential for them than for those who work with younger children, because regular
collaboration between preschool educators and first grade teachers (including school visits) is
required in order to facilitate children’s transition to school.
6. FUNDING SOURCES
This work was supported by the Jenny and Antti Wihuri Foundation.
7. REFERENCES
Abu-Jaber, M., Al-Shawareb, A., & Gheith, E. (2010). Kindergarten teachers’ beliefs toward
developmentally appropriate practice in Jordan. Early Childhood Education Journal, 38(1), 65-74.
DOI: 10.1007/s10643-010-0379-z
Alasuutari, M., Karila, K., Alila, K., & Eskelinen, M. (2014). Vaikuta varhaiskasvatukseen. Lasten
ja vanhempien kuuleminen osana varhaiskasvatuksen lainsäädäntöprosessia [Contribute to Early
Childhood Education. Consultation of Children and Parents as Part of the Early Childhood Act
Process]. Opetus- ja kulttuuriministeriön työryhmämuistioita ja selvityksiä 2014:13.
Aldhafeeri, F., Palaiologou, I., & Folorunsho, A. (2016). Integration of digital technologies into
play-based pedagogy in Kuwaiti early childhood education: teachers’ views, attitudes and aptitudes.
International Journal of Early Years Education, 1–19. DOI:10.1080/09669760.2016.1172477
Angeli, C. (2004). The effects of case‐based learning on early childhood pre‐service teachers’
beliefs about the pedagogical uses of ICT. Journal of Educational Media, 29(2), 139–151.
DOI:10.1080/1358165042000253302
Aris, N., & Orcos, L. (2015). ICTs and School Education. International Journal of Interactive
Multimedia and Artificial Intelligence, 3(4), 13–16 DOI:10.9781/ijimai.2015.342.
Aubrey, C., & Dahl, S. 2014. The confidence and competence in information and communication
technologies of practitioners, parents and young children in the early years’ foundation stage. Early
Years: Journal of International Research & Development, 34(1), 94–108.
DOI:10.1080/09575146.2013.792789
Blackwell, C. K., Lauricella, A. R., & Wartella, E. (2014). Factors influencing digital technology
use in early childhood education. Computers & Education, 77, 82–90.
DOI:10.1016/j.compedu.2014.04.013
Blackwell, C. K., Lauricella, A. R., & Wartella, E. (2016). The influence of TPACK contextual
factors on early childhood educators’ tablet computer use. Computers & Education, 98, 57–69.
DOI: 10.1016/j.compedu.2016.02.010

22

Boeije, H. (2002). A purposeful approach to the constant comparative method in the analysis of
qualitative interviews. Quality and Quantity, 36(4), 391-409.
Bølgan, N. (2012). From IT to tablet: Current use and future needs in kindergartens. Nordic Journal
of Digital Literacy, 3(6), 154–170.
Chai, C. S. (2010). Teachers' epistemic beliefs and their pedagogical beliefs: A qualitative case
study among Singaporean teachers in the context of ICT-supported reforms. TOJET: The Turkish
Online Journal of Educational Technology, 9(4), 128–139.
Chen, C. H. (2008). Why do teachers not practice what they believe regarding technology
integration? The Journal of Educational Research, 102(1), 65–75. DOI: 10.3200/joer.102.1.65-75
Dong, C. (2016). Preschool teachers’ perceptions and pedagogical practices: young children’s use
of ICT. Early Child Development and Care, 1-16. DOI: 10.1080/03004430.2016.1226293
Dong, C., & Newman, L. (2016). Ready, steady… pause: integrating ICT into Shanghai preschools.
International Journal of Early Years Education, 24(2), 224–237. DOI:
10.1080/09669760.2016.1144048
Edwards, S. (2013). Digital play in the early years: a contextual response to the problem of
integrating technologies and play-based pedagogies in the early childhood curriculum. European
Early Childhood Education Research Journal, 21(2), 199–212. DOI:
10.1080/1350293x.2013.789190
Ertmer, P. A. (2005). Teacher pedagogical beliefs: The final frontier in our quest for technology
integration? Educational Technology Research and Development, 53(4), 25–39. DOI:
10.1007/bf02504683
Ertmer, P. A., Ottenbreit-Leftwich, A. T., Sadik, O., Sendurur, E., & Sendurur, P. (2012). Teachers
beliefs and technology integration practices: a critical relationship. Computers & Education, 59(2),
423–435. DOI: 10.1016/j.compedu.2012.02.001
Ertmer, P. A., Ottenbreit-Leftwich, A. T., & Tondeur, J. (2014). Teachers’ beliefs and uses of
technology to support 21st-century teaching and learning. In. H. Fives & M. G. Gill (eds.)
International Handbook of Research on Teachers’ Beliefs. Oxford, UK: Routledge, 1239–1262.
Estola, E., Erkkilä, R., & Syrjälä, L. (2003). A moral voice of vocation in teachers' narratives.
Teachers and Teaching: theory and practice, 9(3), 239–256. DOI: 10.1080/13540600309381
Finnish National Board of Education (2014). Esiopetuksen opetussuunnitelman perusteet [National
Core Curriculum Guidelines for Preschool Education].
Finnish National Board of Education (2016). Varhaiskasvatussuunnitelman perusteet [National
Core Curriculum Guidelines for Early Childhood Education].
Fram, S. M. (2013). The constant comparative analysis method outside of grounded theory. The
Qualitative Report, 18(1), 1–25.
Gialamas, V., & Nikolopoulou, K. (2010). In-service and pre-service early childhood teachers’
views and intentions about ICT use in early childhood settings: A comparative study. Computers &
Education, 55(1), 333–341. DOI: 10.1016/j.compedu.2010.01.019.

23

Grönfors, M. (2011). Laadullisen tutkimuksen kenttätyömenetelmät [The Field Methods of
Qualitative Research]. Hämeenlinna: SoFia-Sosiologi-Filosofiapu Vilkka. Retrieved from:
http://vilkka.fi/books/Laadullisen_tutkimuksen.pdf
Guitton, M. J. (2014). Editorial: The importance of studying the dark side of social networks.
Computers in Human Behavior, 31, 355. DOI: 10.1016/j.chb.2013.10.055.
Hermans, R., Tondeur, J., van Braak, J., & Valcke, M. (2008). The impact of primary school
teachers’ educational beliefs on the classroom use of computers. Computers & Education, 51(4),
1499–1509. DOI: 10.1016/j.compedu.2008.02.001
Hernwall, P. (2016). ‘We have to be professional’ –Swedish preschool teachers’ conceptualisation
of digital media. Nordic Journal of Digital Literacy, 10(01), 5–23. DOI: 10.18261/issn.1891-943x2016-01-01
Highfield, K., & Goodwin, K. 2013. A Framework for Examining Technologies and Early
Mathematics Learning. Teoksessa L. D. English & J. T. Mulligan (eds.) Reconceptualizing Early
Mathematics Learning, Advances in Mathematics Education, Dordrecht: Springer, 205–226
Hujala, E; Backlund-Smulter, T; Koivisto, P; Parkkinen, H; Sarakorpi, H; Suortti, O; Niemelä, T;
Kuronen, I; Knubb-Manninen, G; Smeds-Nylund, A-S; Hietala, R. & Korkeakoski, E. 2012.
Esiopetuksen laatu [Quality assessment of preschool education]. Koulutuksen arviointineuvoston
julkaisuja 61. Jyväskylä: Jyväskylän yliopistopaino
Ihmeideh, F. (2009). The role of computer technology in teaching reading and writing: Preschool
teachers’ beliefs and practices. Journal of Research in Childhood Education, 24(1), 60–79. DOI:
10.1080/02568540903439409.
Jimoyiannis, A., & Komis, V. (2007). Examining teachers’ beliefs about ICT in education:
Implications of a teacher preparation programme. Teacher Development, 11(2), 149–173. DOI:
10.1080/13664530701414779.
Kalaš, I. (2010). Recognizing the Potential of ICT in Early Childhood Education. Moscow:
UNESCO Institute for Information Technologies in Education.
Keats, D.M. (2000). Interviewing – A Practical Guide for Students and Professionals. Philadelphia:
Open University Press.
Kerckaert, S., Vanderlinde, R., & van Braak, J. (2015). The role of ICT in early childhood
education: Scale development and research on ICT use and influencing factors. European Early
Childhood Education Research Journal, 23(2), 183–199. DOI: 10.1080/1350293x.2015.1016804
Kim, C., Kim, M. K., Lee, C., Spector, J. M., & DeMeester, K. (2013). Teacher beliefs and
technology integration. Teaching and Teacher Education, 29, 76–85. DOI:
10.1016/j.tate.2012.08.005
de Koster, S., Kuiper, E., & Volman, M. (2012). Concept‐guided development of ICT use in
‘traditional’ and ‘innovative’ primary schools: what types of ICT use do schools develop? Journal
of Computer Assisted Learning, 28(5), 454–464. DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2729.2011.00452.x
Kowalski, K., Pretti-Frontczak, K., & Johnson, L. (2001). Preschool teachers’ beliefs concerning
the importance of various developmental skills and abilities. Journal of Research in Childhood
Education, 16(1), 5–14. DOI: 10.1080/02568540109594970

24

Kvale, S., & Brinkmann, S. (2009). Interviews: Learning the Craft of Qualitative Research
Interviewing. (2. ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lara-Cinisomo, S., Fuligni, A. S., Daugherty, L., Howes, C., & Karoly, L. A. (2009). A Qualitative
Study of Early Childhood Educators' Beliefs About Key Preschool Classroom Experiences.
Retrieved from: http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ848842.pdf
Lasky, S. (2005). A sociocultural approach to understanding teacher identity, agency and
professional vulnerability in a context of secondary school reform. Teaching and Teacher
Education, 21(8), 899–916. DOI: 10.1016/j.tate.2005.06.003
Lee, J. S. (2006). Preschool teachers’ shared beliefs about appropriate pedagogy for 4-year-olds.
Early Childhood Education Journal, 33(6), 433–441. DOI: 10.1007/s10643-006-0059-1
Linderoth, J. (2012). Why gamers don’t learn more: An ecological approach to games as learning
environments. Journal of Gaming & Virtual Worlds, 4(1), 45–62. DOI: 10.1386/jgvw.4.1.45_1
Ljung‐Djärf, A., Åberg‐Bengtsson, L., & Ottosson, T. (2005). Ways of relating to computer use in
pre‐school activity. International Journal of Early Years Education, 13(1), 29–41.
DOI:10.1080/09669760500048295.
McCracken, G. (1988). The Long Interview. Qualitative Research Methods Series 13. Newbury
Park, CA: Sage
Mertala, P. (2016). Fun and games – Finnish children’s ideas for the use of digital media in
preschool. Nordic Journal of Digital Literacy, 11(4), 207–226. DOI: 10.18261/issn.1891-943x2016-04-01.
Miranda, H. P., & Russell, M. (2012). Understanding factors associated with teacher‐directed
student use of technology in elementary classrooms: A structural equation modeling approach.
British Journal of Educational Technology, 43(4), 652–666. DOI: 10.1111/j.14678535.2011.01228.x
Morgan, A. (2010). Interactive whiteboards, interactivity and play in the classroom with children
aged three to seven years. European Early Childhood Education Research Journal, 18(1), 93–104.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13502930903520082.
Myöhänen, M. (2011). Esiopetuskirjojen harjoitukset kielellisen tietoisuuden kehittäjinä [Preshool
exercise books and development of children’s language consciousness]. PhD dissertation. Turku,
University of Turku.
Nikolopoulou, K., & Gialamas, V. (2015). ICT and play in preschool: early childhood teachers’
beliefs and confidence. International Journal of Early Years Education, 23(4), 409–425. DOI:
10.1080/09669760.2015.1078727
OAJ (2016). Askelmerkit digiloikkaan.[Step Marks for the Digital Leap]. OAJ:n julkaisusarja
3:2016.
O’Connor, M. K., Netting, F. E., & Thomas, M. L. (2008). Grounded theory managing the
challenge for those facing institutional review board oversight. Qualitative Inquiry, 14(1), 28-45.
DOI: 10.1177/1077800407308907

25

Ottenbreit-Leftwich, A. T., Glazewski, K. D., Newby, T. J., & Ertmer, P. A. (2010). Teacher value
beliefs associated with using technology: Addressing professional and student needs. Computers &
Education, 55(3), 1321-1335. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2010.06.002.
Pajares, M. F. (1992). Teachers’ beliefs and educational research: Cleaning up a messy construct.
Review of Educational Research, 62(3), 307–332.
Palaiologou, I. (2016). Teachers’ dispositions towards the role of digital devices in play-based
pedagogy in early childhood education. Early Years, 1–17. DOI: 10.1080/09575146.2016.1174816
Parker, A., & Neuharth-Pritchett, S. (2006). Developmentally appropriate practice in kindergarten:
Factors shaping teacher beliefs and practice. Journal of Research in Childhood Education, 21(1),
65–78. DOI: 10.1080/02568540609594579
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative Research and Evaluation Methods (3 ed.). London: Sage
Petrogiannis, K. (2010). The relationship between perceived preparedness for computer use and
other psychological constructs among kindergarten teachers with and without computer experience
in Greece. Journal of Information Technology Impact, 10(2), 99–110.
Plowman, L. (2016). Learning Technology at Home and Preschool. In: N. Rushby & D.W- Surry
(eds.). The Wiley Handbook of Learning Technology. Chichester, UK: Wiley Blackwell, 96–112.
DOI:10.1002/9781118736494.ch6.
Plowman, L., & McPake, J. (2013). Seven myths about young children and technology. Childhood
Education, 89(1), 27–33. DOI: 10.1080/00094056.2013.757490
Plowman, L. & Stephen, C. (2005). Children, play and computers in pre-school education. British
Journal of Educational Technology 36(2), 145–157. DOI:10.1111/j.1467-8535.2005.00449.x
Polkinghorne, D. E. (1995). Narrative configuration in qualitative analysis. International Journal of
Qualitative Studies in Education, 8(1), 5–23. DOI: 10.1080/0951839950080103
Richardson, U., & Lyytinen, H. (2014). The GraphoGame method: the theoretical and
methodological background of the technology-enhanced learning environment for learning to read.
Human Technology: An Interdisciplinary Journal on Humans in ICT Environments, 10(1), 39–60.
DOI: 10.17011/ht/urn.20140528185
Selwyn, N. (2011). Editorial: In praise of pessimism – the need for negativity in educational
technology. British Journal of Educational Technology, 42(5), 713-718. DOI: 10.1111/j.14678535.2011.01215.x.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for
Developing Grounded Theory (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Suoninen, A. (2014). Lasten mediabarometri 2013. 0–8-vuotiaiden mediankäyttö ja sen muutokset
vuodesta 2010 [Children’s Media Barometer 2013. Media uses of 0–8 year-old children and
changes in media uses during the 2010s]. Nuorisotutkimusverkosto / nuorisotutkimusseura
julkaisuja 149. Helsinki, Unigrafia.
Taguma, M., Litjens, I., & Makowiecki, K. (2012). Quality Matters in Early Childhood Education
and Care: Finland. OECD Publishing. Retrieved from:
http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED530922.pdf

26

Tondeur, J., Hermans, R., van Braak, J., & Valcke, M. (2008). Exploring the link between teachers’
educational belief profiles and different types of computer use in the classroom. Computers in
Human Behavior, 24(6), 2541–2553. DOI: 10.1016/j.chb.2008.02.020
Vaala, S., Ly, A., & Levine, M. H. (2015). Getting a Read on the App Stores: A Market Scan and
Analysis of Children’s Literacy Apps. The Joan Ganz Cooney Center at Sesame Workshop.
Retrieved from: http://www.joanganzcooneycenter.org/wpcontent/uploads/2015/12/jgcc_gettingaread_exec.pdf
Vangsnes, V., & Økland, N. T. G. (2015). Didactic dissonance: teacher roles in computer gaming
situations in kindergartens. Technology, Pedagogy and Education, 24(2), 211–230. DOI:
10.1080/1475939x.2013.853686
Van Laere, K., Peeters, J., & Vandenbroeck, M. (2012). The Education and Care Divide: the role of
the early childhood workforce in 15 European countries. European Journal of Education, 47(4),
527–541. DOI: 10.1111/ejed.12006
Wang, X. C., & Hoot, J. L. (2006). Information and communication technology in early childhood
education. Early Education and Development, 17(3), 317–322. DOI:10.1207/s15566935eed1703_1
Wasik, B. (2008). When fewer is more: Small groups in early childhood classrooms. Early
Childhood Education Journal, 35(6), 515-521. DOI: 10.1007/s10643-008-0245-4

