How to define games and why we need to
Jonne Arjoranta
University of Jyväskylä, Centre of Excellence in Game Culture Studies
2019-06-05
Abstract
This article provides guidelines on how to make useful game definitions and discusses when that is
a worthwhile undertaking. It examines a recent article attempting to define videogames (Bergonse,
2017), and uses it as an example to discuss game definitions in general. It concludes with reasons why
making a final definition of games is not possible and why we need to continue to define games.

her actions within this fictional context (Bergonse, 2017: 253).

Introduction

There is one central problem with this: the
claim that there is a dearth of previous definitions is demonstrably false (e.g. Bogost, 2009; Deterding, 2013; Esposito, 2005; Karhulahti, 2015b;
Tavinor, 2008; Whitton, 2009; Wolf, 2001). Because the author bases their argument on that
false premise, they fail to take into account almost
all of the previous work on this subject. This leads
to other problems, as Fifty Years On stumbles
over hurdles that others have already overcome.
For example, the definition excludes zero-player
games (Björk and Juul, 2012) and games that do
not require “electronic visual displays,” like the
Dark Room Sex Game (Korsgaard et al., 2008; see
also Karhulahti, 2015b) or games in the Audio
Game Hub (Sonnar Interactive Ltd, 2016). Perhaps there are good reasons not to include these
in videogames, but it is hard to tell why, when no
reasons are given.
It is understandable how one might conclude
that there are a lack of videogame definitions, if
one only looks at articles in The Computer Games
Journal, the journal in which Fifty Years On was
published. It is not a journal known for its philosophical discussions. Fortunately, there are other
journals that are more likely to publish philosophical articles, and there are book chapters, conference articles and books about the subject. It
might make sense to publish this response in one
of these places, but, considering that the article
that this is a response to was published in The
Computer Games Journal, it seems sensible to respond in the same journal.

A recent article in The Computer Games Journal
(Bergonse, 2017: 239, called Fifty Years On) made
a remarkable claim:
During the last five decades,
videogames evolved into a major
component of popular culture as well
as a multi-billion-dollar industry. The
medium diversified tremendously,
currently encompassing simple implementations of numeric games on
the screen of a cell phone as well as
vast, persistent online worlds on last
generation consoles and PCs. In spite
of its cultural and economic relevance,
few attempts have been made to
define what a videogame exactly is.
(emphasis added)
Based on this perceived lack of previous definitions, the article then endeavours to give an essentialist definition of videogames, identifying five
essential properties. These are summarised in the
following definition:
[a videogame is] a mode of interaction
between a player, a machine with an
electronic visual display, and possibly
other players, that is mediated by a
meaningful fictional context, and sustained by an emotional attachment between the player and the outcomes of
1

How to define games and why we need to

The goal here is not to focus on Fifty Years
On. It is used here as an example to discuss the
problems of definitions in general, because it happens to be a good example of a mistaken approach
to game definitions. However, the article is not
alone in making that mistake: struggling with
game definitions seems to be a persistent feature
of game studies. This is perhaps understandable:
game studies is a multidisciplinary field and many
disciplines do not have long traditions of theorizing definitions. Because of this, it might not be
entirely clear for all researchers what the purpose
of defining things is and what kind of activity making definitions is. Hopefully, reading this article
will clarify some of that confusion.
Fifty Years On discusses videogames. As the
author notes, there are alternative terms that
could be used, like computer game or console
game (Bergonse, 2017: 241; cf. Karhulahti,
2015b). I will mostly use the word ‘game’; this
should be read to include what Fifty Years On
discusses as videogames. This is not because I
think that videogames and games are the same
thing (but they are related, Bergonse, 2017: 240;
cf. Karhulahti, 2015a), but because the process
of defining both is similar and benefits from the
same considerations. Games and videogames may
not be the same thing, but the definitions of both
are definitions, and therefore understanding definitions helps in making definitions for both. The
problems in the definition literature of both also
tend to be similar, so discussing them together is
useful in clarifying issues that appear in relation
to both. Regardless of which one you are trying
to define, this paper points out potential pitfalls
and suggests solutions.
In this article, first, I discuss the alleged
bias in game studies. Second, I show that there
are many previous definitions of games and
videogames. Third, I discuss what definitions
are and what they are useful for. Fourth, I draw
upon previously published literature to show how
to make useful (video)game definitions. Fifth,
I look at when and why making definitions is
useful in the first place. If there is already a rich
history of previous definitions, is it useful to keep
defining games? I argue that it is, and by doing
so highlight a problem with Fifty Years On: that
it argues for a essentialist definition for a concept
that is highly contextual. There is a good reason
to keep defining games despite all the previous
definitions, but that reason has more to do with
definitions than with games. That is why I end

with a discussion on why using an essentialist
definition for a cultural phenomenon is not the
best match.

Is there a bias in game studies?
Many of the definitions of games include
videogames in games because the definitions
have been formulated after videogames became
a major cultural force and a creative industry.
People making these definitions are interested in
defining games because of the rise of videogames.
Fifty Years On does not include videogames in
games because it claims to identify a bias in game
studies publications:
[T]here persists a tendency to approach videogames from a game
studies perspective, therefore assuming them to be essentially the latest
iteration of games.
Independently
of the important relations between
both concepts, this leads to a lack
of concern with specifically defining
videogames per se, with considerations
being rather centred on videogames
vis-à-vis traditional gaming (Tavinor
2009). (Bergonse, 2017: 240)
It is entirely possible that game studies could
focus too much on games in general and therefore
miss what is unique to videogames. However, this
seems unlikely, considering the history of exactly
the opposite happening, with game scholars focusing on a relatively small set of digital games, with
a special focus on the World of Warcraft (Blizzard
Entertainment, 2004; see Coavoux et al., 2017).
The genesis of game studies as a field is often stated as 2001, when “Computer Game Studies, Year One” (Aarseth, 2001) was published and
the journal Game Studies started. As the name
of the editorial introduction implies, videogames
have had a prevalent position in game studies from
the beginning of the field. Similarly, scholars have
noted that the international association for game
scholars is called the Digital Games Research Association, not the more inclusive Games Research
Association, despite some members’ vocal opposition.
Stenros, Waern and Evans (2011: 1) call this
overemphasis on digital games the “digital fallacy”
after noting that the “field of game studies is currently dominated by the study of digital games” –
2

How to define games and why we need to

and this does not seem to be any less true almost
a decade later. Therefore it does not seem that
game studies suffers from insufficient attention on
videogames; the opposite seems more likely. Fortunately, this has lead to the creation of the journal Analog Game Studies, in an effort to provide a
place for publishing research on non-digital games.

that tradition is unlikely to produce anything
substantially better. However, the goal of this
article is not to find the best definition of
videogames, but to discuss how one arrives at a
useful definition, and what the purpose of making
definitions is in the first place.

What are definitions?

Previous definitions

To understand game definitions it helps to first understand what definitions are.1 There are different
types of definitions, with different goals. Definitions can have, for example, explicative, analytical or persuasive functions (Laas, 2017: 84–85).
They can be used in different contexts, for example in political arguments. These are all equally
valid uses for definitions, but this article focuses
on how definitions work in science and philosophy,
because the goal is to help game studies deal with
game definitions. The following discussion starts
by focusing on essential definitions, before moving on to discuss a Wittgensteinian approach to
definitions that better fits our specific case.
An approach that tries to give an essentialist
definition for something typically tries to identify
the necessary and sufficient conditions that must
be fulfilled in order for something to be essentially
that thing. ‘Necessary’ and ‘sufficient’ are technical terms in philosophy, deriving from logical
terminology. Essential definitions succeed by including the kinds of things being defined, and only
those things. Conversely, they fail by either not
including all of the things that are being defined or
including things that are not being defined. As an
example, we can think about videogames in the
genre of walking simulators. If we include challenge (e.g. Juul, 2003) in our definition of games,
Proteus (Key and Kanaga, 2013) is not a game.
We can then either think that the definition fails
by not being inclusive enough, or that Proteus is
indeed not a game and the definition makes an important distinction between it and proper games.
I will not go into detail here how essential
proofs are typically constructed, instead I will focus on why this is usually done. Words like ‘essential’ might lead one to conclude that a definition that defines the essential properties of some-

A good starting point for looking at previous definitions of games is the systematic literature review
by Stenros (2017), which looks at over 60 definitions of games since the 1930s. Not all of them
are about videogames (some predate videogames),
but if videogames have anything to do with games,
looking at how games have been previously defined
might be enlightening. One exemplary definition
is provided by Bernard Suits (1967b, 1980). Suits
(1967b: 156) considers that:
to play a game is to engage in activity
directed toward bringing about a specific state of affairs, using only means
permitted by specific rules, where the
means permitted by the rules are more
limited in scope than they would be in
the absence of the rules, and where the
sole reason for accepting such limitation is to make possible such activity.
This highly formal definition covers games,
but perhaps it covers too much. Even if one
disagrees with the position that videogames
are games, and therefore is only interested in
definitions of videogames, Fifty Years On is not
the first to try to define to videogames. For
example, Esposito (2005) presents a very succinct
definition:
A videogame is a game which we play
thanks to an audiovisual apparatus
and which can be based on a story.
(emphasis in original)
Perhaps this rather minimalistic definition
is lacking and can be added to, but it makes a
good starting point for the discussion (for other
definitions of videogames see e.g. Bogost, 2009;
Deterding, 2013; Karhulahti, 2015b; Tavinor,
2008; Whitton, 2009; Wolf, 2001). For the purposes of the current examination it is sufficient
to note that there are previous definitions and
making new ones without being in dialogue with

1 The following section simplifies some issues and ignores
others in order to present a short and understandable explanation of what definitions are. For a more thorough
introduction to these issues, see Cohen (1934). For a discussion on essentialist definitions, see Walton and Macagno
(2009).

3

How to define games and why we need to

thing has created some kind of metaphysical act
of delimitation, drawing the limits of some object
perfectly against the background of the noisy universe. The reality is somewhat more mundane, as
definitions are less about recognising perfectly the
essence of the objects around us and more about
solving practical problems, often caused by language. Using technical tools like necessary and
sufficient conditions is useful, because they allow
logicians to use tools developed for logical thinking to reason about the relations between things.
In this sense, definitions work like mathematical axioms, taken to be true because they help
in making sense of some problem that is otherwise difficult to solve. They have pragmatic consequences, because by assuming certain things to
be true they allow us to reason about the reality
we live in.
They also have other practical consequences:
“knowledge itself is power,” as noted by Francis
Bacon (see García, 2001 on how Bourdieu and
Foucault further elaborated on this relationship). Making definitions is exercising power.
Definitions affect the terms in which things are
discussed: what are acceptable answers to questions and what are not. Experts are in positions
of power because of their ability to define the
terms of discussion. That is why definitions are
not just neutral descriptions of reality and can
have consequences beyond their typical academic
confines.
One of the reasons definition problems keep
coming up in relation to games is because one
of the most influential philosophers of the 20th
century, Ludwig Wittgenstein, happened to write
about games in his book Philosophical Investigations (2001). He discusses games as an example
at the beginning of the book (Wittgenstein, 2001
paragraph §3):

board-games, card-games, ball-games,
Olympic games, and so on. What is
common to them all? – Don’t say:
“There must be something common, or
they would not be called ‘games’ ”-but
look and see whether there is anything
common to all. – For if you look at
them you will not see something that
is common to all, but similarities,
relationships, and a whole series of
them at that. To repeat: don’t think,
but look! –
Wittgenstein seems to be saying that if one
looks at games, one does not find something “common to” all games, but their relation to each other.
He continues this line of thought for a while and
finally concludes that:
we see a complicated network of similarities overlapping and criss-crossing:
sometimes overall similarities, sometimes similarities of detail.
It is easy to look at this discussion and conclude that Wittgenstein is claiming that games
cannot be defined. It might even lead one on a
quest to show how he was wrong by providing a
working definition of games (cf. Suits, 1980). However, this misunderstanding stems from the misreading that Wittgenstein is here writing about
games, when he is in fact concerned with how language works (e.g. Arjoranta, 2014; Laas, 2017).
Especially to the confusion of game scholars, he
happens to use games as an example of how language operates. Therefore, the lesson should not
be that games cannot be defined, but that language works by a “complicated network of similarities” that Wittgenstein calls family resemblance.
If this is applied to games, it means that they
should be understood as a family of related concepts that share family resemblances.2 Wittgenstein continues his argument by explaining where
these family resemblances come from and by considering some possible counter-arguments, but for
the purposes of this discussion it is sufficient to understand his idea of family resemblances and how
it informs understanding definitions.

It is as if someone were to say: “A
game consists in moving objects about
on a surface according to certain
rules…” –and we replied: You seem
to be thinking of board games, but
there are others.
You can make
your definition correct by expressly
restricting it to those games.

2 Fifty

Years On also recognises that some previous authors (e.g. Feige, 2012; see also Arjoranta, 2014; Whitton,
2009) have used Wittgenstein’s (2001) concept of family
resemblances to make sense of game definitions, but it curiously identifies this approach as “ignor[ing] the subject”
(2017: 240) instead of solving the problem it seems to be
struggling with.

While he discusses other things after this, he
returns to games a bit later in the book (Wittgenstein, 2001 paragraph §66):
Consider for example the proceedings that we call “games”. I mean
4

How to define games and why we need to

Laas (2017: 84) summarises the Wittgensteinian approach to definitions as four central
claims:

3. What does the definition highlight or emphasise? What does it downplay or ignore? For
what reasons?

a) definitions are of different kinds;
b) definitions are relative to the definer’s purpose;
c) definitions do not capture the essences of
things; and
d) the meanings of definitions, like that of concepts and linguistic entities in general, are
language-game and theory-dependent.

The above applies to all definitions, not just
to definitions of games. In addition to fitting the
task at hand, game definitions should also be useful for discussing games and in solving problems
related to them. Fortunately, there are a variety
of earlier definitions that can either be used as-is,
or if the context does not correspond to one of
the previously considered, be used as a point of
departure for a new definition.
If one is required to make a new definition,
it should probably say something useful about
games. A typical way to solve this in game
studies has been to look at how previous definitions have discussed games, solve any issues with
them and provide a synthesis (e.g. Juul, 2003).
One thorough review of this type is by Stenros
(2017), a systematic review of over 60 definitions.
Instead of providing a definition, it synthesises
the issues game definitions seek to answer into
10 questions or points of contention that a good
game definition answers:

Now, with a better understanding of how definitions operate and what they are useful for, we
can turn back to thinking about game definitions.

How can we make useful game
definitions?
In order to make useful game definitions, it is first
necessary to know why we are making them. As
shown in the previous section, there are different
kinds of definitions and they serve different purposes in relation to the definer’s purpose. A new
definition should, then, be thought of in relation
to a problem one is trying to solve. In this sense,
the philosophical task of defining things is also immensely pragmatic.
For example, if one is trying to think about
the differences between games and other interactive media, like interactive literature, then thinking about what makes games games and not literature can help in illuminating that situation. The
definition provided in that context is unlikely to
be very useful for other tasks, like solving whether
esports should be thought of as sports. Because
definitions are relative to purpose, these two different problems require different solutions.
In addition to usefulness in relation to purpose, there are other criteria that can be used to
evaluate definitions (Laas, 2017: 90–91):

1. What are rules?
2. Do games have a function?
3. Are games an artifact or an activity or a
muddle of the two?
4. How games exist in relation to the quotidian?
5. What are players?
6. What do games produce?
7. What is the role of competition?
8. What about goals?
9. What sorts of phenomena are relevant for
games?
10. What purpose do definitions serve?
Answering these questions does not guarantee that a game definition is useful, but it does
help to make sure that a definition takes previous
work in the field into consideration. Taking previous research into consideration is no guarantee of
quality, and it is entirely possible to make a useful
definition without knowing anything about previous research; however, it is simply more difficult,
and prone to run into problems that others have
already solved.
This article will not try to provide an exhaustive answer to each and every one of Stenros’ (2017) questions in all their possible configurations. Instead, it will continue by discussing why
making definitions is necessary in the first place.

1. Who has the power to define something?
Should they have authority to do so?
Should their view be taken for granted?
Who is affected by the definition and should
their views be taken into account?
2. Can we identify exemplars of the thing we
are identifying? Does the definition rule out
commonly accepted examples? If so, does it
do so for good reasons?

5

How to define games and why we need to

Why define games?

2. The act of making the definition is the
argument itself. You might want to make a
new game definition, if you are working on
discussing games in a novel way to highlight
some aspects that are otherwise easily
ignored or have been previously overlooked.
You can also use definitions in this way
to explore some aspects of games or other
phenomena, by asking “what would happen
if we included X in what we consider to
be games?” Is life a game we are playing
(Suits, 1967a)? You play Capoeira, but
is it a game?4 Are digital board game
adaptations board games?
A working
definition of games can perhaps help with
these questions.

For clarity, let us first discuss some cases where
many game scholars are often tempted into making definitions when it is not necessary.
1. The first case is whenever you are writing
about games. Perhaps because they have
seen so many other game scholars give definitions, game scholars often give game definitions when they are studying some specific
aspect of games.3 This probably hinders
whatever argument is being put forward in
the article more than it helps, since it stops
the flow of the main argument and provides
opportunities for disagreement, especially if
the definition is poorly made.

3. There is no previous (useful) definition for
the context you are considering and making a new definition performs some kind of
analytical work that has pragmatic consequences. This differs from the previous case
in that you are still discussing something
that is considered a game, but from a perspective that has been explored less. Making the assumptions you make about games
more explicit can help when performing the
rest of the analytical work for your actual
research question.

2. The second case is whenever another, existing, definition would work. There are multiple previous definitions made by people who
have struggled with these questions for a
long time. They have published those definitions after intense discussions, sometimes
after decades of work, and often after multiple rounds of peer-review (cf. Suits, 1967b,
1980). It is possible that you might be able
to do better than they have, but probably
not before working on the issue for a significant amount of time – which you could instead put into whatever aspect of games you
are actually interested in.

There is another reason why we might need
to keep making game definitions. Because it
is slightly more complicated than the previous
examples discussed, I will discuss it separately
and introduce more background in order to understand it. There is a slight change of perspective in
the next section relative to the previous sections.
While the previous three points relate to the
pragmatic and persuasive benefits of definitions
(Laas, 2017: 85–86), the next section discusses
the philosophical aspects of definitions and why
we might need to keep making game definitions
whether we want to or not.

You do need a new definition, when
1. The reader is going to be confused about
what you mean with ‘games’ or ‘videogames’.
In most cases when you are writing about
games, the reader is going to recognise the
examples you use and agree – at least to
the extent that it matters – on whether they
are games. For example, if you write about
the Gothic monsters in Fallout 3 (Bethesda
Game Studios, 2008; Piittinen, 2018), the
reader is unlikely to stop reading and ask
“but is Fallout 3 a game?” In contrast, if
you are going to argue that puzzles are not
games (Karhulahti, 2013), you might benefit
from some definitional work.

Why keep defining games?
Games are a cultural phenomenon. While most
animals play, humans have a tendency to make
games. The board game Mehen was played in
Egypt over five thousand years ago (Crist and
Vaturi, 2008). Mehen had something to do with

3 As an example, in Arjoranta (2011) I define games as
“a form of procedural media: they are systems with certain
internal logics.” This definition has multiple problems and
adds little to understanding game hermeneutics, the actual
topic of that paper.

4 Capoeira is a Afro-Brazilian martial art and dance that,
according to its practitioners, is played.

6

How to define games and why we need to

burial rituals, but its exact purpose and rules have
been lost. It would be relatively odd to include it
in funeral rituals today, even if one knew the rules.
Mehen has not changed, but the culture around it
has.
If an ancient Egyptian game scholar needed
to define games, they might have included something about games being used as part of burial
ceremonies. It is unlikely that you would find a
contemporary definition that says anything about
burials, but many of them include something
about fun or enjoyment (e.g. Aarseth, 2007). Is
our hypothetical Egyptian scholar wrong, since
their definition does not fit newer examples? Yes,
but no more than Aarseth (2007). Definitions of
cultural phenomena are necessarily tied to the
cultural context in which they are made. When
the cultural context changes – new examples are
created, norms change – the definitions need to
change too.
In philosophical terminology, our current
historical and cultural context is our “horizon”
(Gadamer, 2004). This is a spatial metaphor:
we can only see as far as the horizon, but no
further. Our horizon can expand, especially when
it comes to understanding history in the light of
new information, but ultimately we are always
bound to some limits, beyond which we cannot
see. The next genre-defining game is always
around the corner and the role of play in society
is constantly changing (cf. Frissen et al., 2015).
However, it would be a mistake to understand
this to mean that there is no point in making
definitions or that all of them are equally useless.
A definition can be better or worse within a
particular cultural and historical context and for
a particular purpose. The only thing our limited
horizon rules out as impossible is coming up with
a perfect, eternal definition of all games for all
purposes.
There is no final definition of games as long
as there are people capable of both playing games
and thinking about them. New examples of games
or new practices around games need new definitions. This means that game scholars are not going to run out of work anytime soon; the best we
can do is to keep updating our knowledge to fit
the world in which we live.

others. They are ways to describe or create
reality, not capture it. There is no one, perfect
definition for anything, because the quality of
a definition is contingent on the purpose of the
definition.
Useful game definitions are not confused
about the purpose of definitions, they fit the particular use case and take into account previously
published work. It is possible to make a useful
game definition without being in dialogue with
previously published work; it is just very unlikely
to succeed.
You may want to define games if the reader is
going to be confused by what you mean by games,
you argue for a specific way of framing what games
are or the definition does the analytical work of
no previous definition. There are also philosophical reasons why we need new game definitions:
because games are a cultural phenomenon, they
keep changing. Even if our games do not change,
our perspective on games keeps changing as the
culture around them changes.

Acknowledgments
I wish to thank Michael Debus, Andreas Geisler,
Paweł Grabarczyk, Michael Heron, Veli-Matti
Karhulahti and the ITU WIP seminar participants for their comments on this article.
This is a pre-print of an article published in
The Computer Games Journal. The final authenticated version is available online at: https://doi.
org/10.1007/s40869-019-00080-6

Funding
Funding was provided by Academy of Finland
(Grant No. 312397).
Open access funding
provided by University of Jyväskylä (JYU).

Conflict of interest
The corresponding author states that there is no
conflict of interest.

References
Aarseth E (2001) Computer Game Studies, Year
One. Game Studies 1(1).

Conclusions
Definitions are tools for analysis or persuasion.
They help us understand the world or convince
7

How to define games and why we need to

Aarseth E (2007) I Fought the Law: Transgressive Play and The Implied Player. In: Situated Play, DiGRA 2007 (ed. A Baba), Tokyo,
Japan, 2007, pp. 130–133. University of Tokyo.
Arjoranta J (2011) Do We Need Real-Time
Hermeneutics? Structures of Meaning in Games.
In: DiGRA ’11 - Proceedings of the 2011 DiGRA
International Conference: Think Design Play,
Utrecht, September 2011, p. 13. DiGRA/Utrecht
School of the Arts.
Arjoranta J (2014) Game Definitions: A
Wittgensteinian Approach. Game Studies 14(1).
Bergonse R (2017) Fifty Years on, What Exactly is a Videogame? An Essentialistic Definitional Approach. The Computer Games Journal
6(4): 239–255. DOI: 10.1007/s40869-017-0045-4.
Bethesda Game Studios (2008) Fallout 3.
Rockville, Maryland, USA: Bethesda Softworks.
Björk S and Juul J (2012) Zero-Player Games.
Or: What We Talk about When We Talk about
Players. In: The Philosophy of Computer Games
Conference, Madrid, 2012.
Blizzard Entertainment (2004) World of Warcraft. Irvine, California: Blizzard Entertainment.
Bogost I (2009) Videogames are a Mess. Ian
Bogost. Personal Website.
Coavoux S, Boutet M and Zabban V (2017)
What We Know About Games: A Scientometric Approach to Game Studies in the 2000s.
Games and Culture 12(6): 563–584.
DOI:
10.1177/1555412016676661.
Cohen MF (1934) An Introduction to Logic
and Scientific Method. Kansas City: Harcourt,
Brace & World.
Crist W and Vaturi A (2008) Board Games
in Antiquity. In: Selin H (ed.) Encyclopaedia of
the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine
in Non-Western Cultures. Dordrecht: Springer
Netherlands, pp. 1–10. DOI: 10.1007/978-94-0073934-5_9836-1.
Deterding S (2013) Modes of Play: A Frame
Analytic Account of Video Game Play. PhD thesis.
Esposito N (2005) A Short and Simple
Definition of What a Videogame Is. In: DiGRA
2005 Conference: Changing Views–Worlds in
Play, 2005.
Feige DM (2012) Computer Games as
Works of Art. In: Fromme J and Unger A
(eds) Computer Games and New Media Cultures:
A Handbook of Digital Games Studies. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp. 93–106. DOI:
10.1007/978-94-007-2777-9_6.

Frissen V, Lammes S, de Lange M, et al. (eds)
(2015) Playful Identities: The Ludification of Digital Media Cultures. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Gadamer H-G (2004) Truth and Method. 2.
ed. London: Continuum.
García JMR (2001) Scientia Potestas Est Knowledge is Power: Francis Bacon to Michel
Foucault. Neohelicon 28(1): 109–121. DOI:
10.1023/A:1011901104984.
Juul J (2003) The Game, the Player, the
World: Looking for a Heart of Gameness. In:
Level Up: Digital Games Research (eds M Copier
and J Raessens), 2003, pp. 30–45. Utrecht
University.
Karhulahti V-M (2013) Puzzle Is Not a
Game! Basic Structures of Challenge. In: Proceedings of DiGRA 2013: DeFragging Game
Studies, 2013.
Karhulahti V-M (2015a) Adventures of Ludom: A Videogame Geneontology. Dissertation.
University of Turku, Turku.
Karhulahti V-M (2015b) Defining the
Videogame. Game Studies 15(2).
Key E and Kanaga D (2013) Proteus.
Twisted Tree Games.
Korsgaard L, Wilson D, Dimovska D, et al.
(2008) Dark Room Sex Game. Copenhagen: IT
University of Copenhagen.
Laas O (2017) On game definitions. Journal
of the Philosophy of Sport 44(1): 81–94. DOI:
10.1080/00948705.2016.1255556.
Piittinen S (2018) Morality in Let’s Play
narrations: Moral evaluations of Gothic monsters in gameplay videos of Fallout 3. New
Media & Society: 1461444818779754.
DOI:
10.1177/1461444818779754.
Sonnar Interactive Ltd (2016) Audio Game
Hub. Auckland, New Zealand: Sonnar Interactive
Ltd.
Stenros J (2017) The Game Definition Game:
A Review. Games and Culture 12(6): 1–22. DOI:
10.1177/1555412016655679.
Stenros J and Waern A (2011) Games as Activity: Correcting the Digital Fallacy. In: Evans
M (ed.) Videogame Studies: Concepts, Cultures
and Communication. Oxford: Inter-Disciplinary
Press.
Suits B (1967a) Is Life a Game We Are Playing? Ethics 77(3): 209–213.
Suits B (1967b) What Is a Game? Philosophy
of Science 34(2): 148–156.

8

How to define games and why we need to

Suits B (1980) The Grasshopper: Games, Life
and Utopia. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Tavinor G (2008) Definition of Videogames.
Contemporary Aesthetics 6.
Walton D and Macagno F (2009) Classification and ambiguity: The role of definition in a
conceptual system. Studies in Logic, Grammar
and Rhetoric 16(29): 245–264.
Whitton N (2009) Learning with Digital
Games: A Practical Guide to Engaging Students
in Higher Education. New York: Routledge.
Wittgenstein L (2001) Philosophical Investigations: The German Text, with a Revised English Translation. 3rd ed. Anscombe GEM (ed.).
Oxford: Blackwell.
Wolf MJP (ed.) (2001) The Medium of the
Video Game. Austin: University of Texas Press.

9

