Title Page
Historical family systems and lasting developmental trajectories in Europe:
the power of the family?
Keywords: family systems - comparative development – patriarchy - historical persistence –
deep roots of gender inequality – individualism/collectivism – family ties
Running title: The power of the family

Authors full names:
Mikołaj Szołtysek (corresponding author), Institute of History, University of Warsaw,
Krakowskie Przedmieście 26/28, 00-927 Warsaw, Poland, Ph.: 0048660717650;
mszoltis@gmail.com; ORCID identifier: 0000-0003-4814-5586
Radosław Poniat, University of Białystok, Plac Niezależnego Zrzeszenia Studentów 1, 15420 Białystok, Poland

Conflict of Interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

Acknowledgements
This research is part of the project funded under the POLONEZ 3 scheme granted to M. Szołtysek by
the National Science Centre, Poland (No. 2016/23/P/HS3/03984). The scheme has received funding
from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under the Marie
Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 665778. Siegfried Gruber (University of Graz, Austria) is
acknowledged for integrating Mosaic with the selection of NAPP data. We thank seminar participants
at the universities of Oxford, Regensburg, Muenster and Nijmegen, as well as Chris Welzel, Jan
Luiten van Zanden, Sarah Carmichael, and Selin Dilli for their helpful comments and suggestions. We
also thank Sarah Carmichael for data sharing.

Historical family systems and lasting developmental trajectories in Europe:
the power of the family?

ABSTRACT
Last years have witnessed a growing interest in economics and cross-cultural studies in the
role of the historical family as the instigator of disparate developmental trajectories. This new
emerging literature has already provoked a considerable amount of controversy, involving
debates on the precise underlying mechanisms, the role of non-familial institutions and the
possibility of reversed causality, as well as the quality of historical data. Using novel
historical database of European family this paper reaffirms the hypothesis that historical
family organization could be one of the intermediate factors associated with developmental
and value disparities among European nations today pointed out in earlier scholarship. We
show that countries starting out from more patriarchal family structures in the past exhibit
more hierarchical gender relations, more collectivist mindsets, and lower levels of economic
and human development in the present. These findings suggest that the criticism of the family
role in comparative development may be premature, and that links between historical family
organisation and developmental gradients merit further attention.

1. Introduction
Over the past few years historical family organization has become the object of extensive
research in economics and cross-cultural studies as part of a broader agenda on the impact of
culture on economic performance and comparative development (e.g., Greif, 2006; Duranton
et al., 2009; De Moor & Van Zanden, 2010; Foreman-Peck, 2011; Carmichael et al., 2016a;
Rijpma & Carmichael, 2016; Carmichael & Rijpma, 2017; Dennison & Ogilvie, 2014, 2016;
Dilli, 2017; Le Bris, 2016; Szołtysek et al., 2017a; Santos Silva et al., 2017; Bertocchi &
Bozzano, 2015; also Alexander & Welzel, 2015). This new emerging literature has already
provoked a considerable amount of controversy, involving debates on the precise underlying
mechanisms, the role of non-familial institutions and the possibility of reversed causality
(Dennison & Ogilvie 2014, 2016; Carmichael et al., 2015; Carmichael et al,. 2016b; Baten et
al,. 2016; Bertocchi & Bozzano 2016; Edwards & Ogilvie, 2018; Szołtysek et al., 2017a). A
further recurring problem encountered in all previous studies was finding historical

demographic data that would be at the same time detailed and global to empirically anchor the
authors’ arguments (Szołtysek & Poniat 2018, 3-4). Recognising these challenges, Carmichael
and co-authors (2016b, 200) suggested that the criticism of the family role in comparative
development may well be premature, and should be re-examined using newly available
historical demographic databases.
In line with this argument, most recently Szołtysek & Poniat (2018) argued that
conclusions about the relationship between historical family organization and various societal
outcomes may be sensitive to the data and measurement practices adhered to, and that that
sensitivity has not received the attention it warrants (p. 3). As a way out of that conundrum,
they suggested considering a broader range of indicators of historical family patterns than had
been used thus far, in particular drawing on a recent explosion of historical census microdata.
If results acquired using different measures of the focal predictor are complimentary to the
wisdom of the earlier literature, then the generalisability of the family-development nexus can
be strengthened.
The major contribution of this paper resides in expanding the on-going debate by
testing the relationship between historical family patterns and contemporary gender
inequality, value orientations, economic growth and human development using an alternative
measure of family systems derived from historical microdata infrastructures recently
developed through the Mosaic and the North Atlantic Population projects. Applying this novel
composite measure of familial organisation in 26 European countries in the past (the
Patriarchy Index; henceforth PI)1, this paper reconfirms the hypothesis that historical family
organization is associated with developmental and value disparities among European nations
today pointed out in earlier scholarship. Based on cross-country correlations (bivariate) and
multivariate regressions, we show that countries starting out from more patriarchal family
1

The narrowing of our view to Europe is dictated by the scope of the datasets we employ. However, Emmanuel
Todd’s pioneering work (see below) has also started with Europe.

structures in the past exhibit more hierarchical gender relations, more collectivist mindsets,
and lower levels of economic and human development today. Although we acknowledge that
both family structures and developmental outcomes may have been influenced by some set of
underlying factors which are not included in our analysis, a strong correlation between
familial patterns today and in the past which we unravel, may suggest that the correlation is
likely to run from persistent family patterns to developmental outcomes. By demonstrating
that the major thread of the observations at the country level holds also when our analysis is
pursued at a finer regional scale, we ascertain that the observed effect of historical family
systems is not an artefact created by our aggregation procedures.
The remaining of this paper is divided into six parts. First, we review the state of
research exploring how historical family patterns are linked to current developmental
outcomes. We then present an alternative data framework and elucidate how this
complements family system indicators used previously. In the core parts of the paper, we
examine degrees of covariation between our historical country-level indicators of family
organization (the PI) and selected contemporary indicators, using both correlational and
multivariate framework. The next section discusses main causal paths that could account for
the observed associations and provides evidence for the persistence of historical family
patterns to the present. An assessment of the robustness of our results is then provided,
including checks carried out at a lower aggregation scale (NUTS or ITAN level).

We

conclude by summarizing our findings.

2. Previous literature
The notion that family systems could have had an impact on wider societal outcomes has a
long pedigree. For example, Max Weber alluded to it when he argued that strong family
values do not allow for the development of individual forms of entrepreneurship, which are

fundamental to the formation of capitalist societies (Weber, 1904; also Banfield, 1958;
Nimkoff, 1965, 61 ff). In the last few years, these ideas have regained prominence in the New
Institutional Economics after scholars have re-discovered the importance of the family as the
grassroot institution of society (see Alesina & Giuliano, 2010; earlier Sen, 1983; see also
Mason, 2001; Carmichael et al., 2016a; Kok, 2017). For example, in a recent series of papers,
Alesina and Giuliano (2010, 2014) have shown that the strength of family values across the
world is negatively associated with a wide range of societal attitudes related to productivity
and growth, as well as political participation, levels of trust and attitudes towards gender
hierarchies (earlier, Bertrand & Schoar, 2006; also Kick et al., 2000; Daniele & Geys, 2016).
Inspired by these insights, as well as by a growing recognition that human development can
be affected by persistent historical traits (Nunn, 2009; Spolaore & Wacziarg, 2013), an
increasing number of economic history works has incorporated past familial behaviour into
explanations of developmental divergences within Europe and beyond (e.g. Greif, 2006;
Duranton et al., 2009; De Moor & Van Zanden, 2010; Foreman-Peck, 2011; Dennison &
Ogilvie, 2014, 2016; Bertocchi & Bozzano, 2015; Carmichael et al., 2016a; Rijpma &
Carmichael, 2016; Carmichael & Rijpma, 2017; Dilli, 2017; Le Bris, 2016; Szołtysek et al.,
2017a; Santos Silva et al., 2017; earlier also Reher, 1998; Therborn, 2004).
To date, an overwhelming majority of these attempts has relied on a world-wide
classification of family systems inferred from anthropological evidence by Emmanuel Todd
(1985, 1987)2. Duranton and co-authors (2009) identified a significant association between
Todd’s classification of family types and regional disparities in educational attainment, social
capital, labour participation, wealth, and inequality in Western Europe. Le Bris (2016) built
the family score based on Todd’s three family characteristics and found it to be significantly

2

Todd himself argued that different patterns of family organization explain the diffusion of, or resistance to, a
wide array of critical social changes on the continent, including the spread of Protestantism, secularism, and the
acceptance and diffusion of communism.

(and robustly) associated with contemporary variation in economic outcomes as measured by
GDP across 79 countries of the world. Building further upon this evidence, Carmichael and
colleagues used a combination of Todd’s classification with information compiled in George
Murdock’s Ethnographic Atlas3 to test the supposedly considerable influence the family
patterns could have exerted on regional inequalities through their divergent impact on the
status of women. In a series of analyses they found historical family constraints on female
autonomy to be significantly and inversely associated with gender equality outcomes in
contemporary world data (Rijpma & Carmichael, 2016, 38; Carmichael & Rijpma, 2017).
They also established a strong and positive effect of “female friendly” family systems on the
historical and contemporary estimates of per capita GDP for a range (25 to 52) of Eurasian
countries. These analyses were complemented by Dilli (2017) who, relying on the same data,
found that historical family institutions associated with higher female agency (such as equal
inheritance practices, prevalence of nuclear household, late female marriage and absence of
polygamy) were related to higher levels of economic development across 92 contemporary
countries.
3. Materials and methods
3.1 Rationale for alternative data framework
Todd-like types of measures use dichotomous classifications to capture social norms or
“cultural ideals” regarding family behaviours at the country level. For example, Carmichael’s
“Female Friendliness Index” strives to identify whether a country had historically preferred an
extended household structure over a nuclear one, whether cousin marriage and patrilineal
inheritance were practiced or not, whether polygamy was prevalent, and if postmarital
residence was of a patrilocal or different type (Carmichael, 2014, 187–189; cf. Szołtysek &
Poniat, 2018). However, considering that values, norms and beliefs may differ noticeably
Given the latter’s meager coverage of Europe, the European part of their dataset was still based primarily on
Todd.
3

from the grassroot practices (House et al., 2004; also Maseland & van Hoorn, 2009) and that
they may evolve at their own pace, operationalizations of family systems based on the actual
practices in family behaviours might present a viable alternative to look at when modelling
family influences on wider societal outcomes.
In order to provide data framework for such an assessment of local family practices we
drew on a massive repository of European historical census microdata recently made available
through the North Atlantic Population (NAPP) and Mosaic projects4. All these databases were
discussed in great detail elsewhere (Ruggles et al. 2011; Szołtysek & Gruber, 2016; Szołtysek
et al., 2017b; Szołtysek & Poniat, 2018), and readers wishing to know more about them are
encouraged to check the original sources.
Similar to Szołtysek and Poniat (2018), we use a combination of the two databases
including 293 regional populations, with 15.3 million persons living in 3 million households,
which outweighs all precedent infrastructure efforts in family history. Of the 293 regional
datasets, a slight majority (56%) represents populations after 1850, while 44% cover
populations before 1850, and 21% populations before 1800. The collection includes
information on both rural and urban sites, although rural societies predominate (see Figure 1;
also Supplementary material 1). Whereas Mosaic samples are of a varying level of
representativeness (see Szołtysek and Gruber 2016), the NAPP components stand either for
full-count census data or representative samples taken from them5.

Figure 1
4

See www.censusmosaic.org; https://www.nappdata.org/napp/. All of the samples describe the characteristics of
individuals in a given settlement or area grouped into households (co-resident domestic groups), and provide
information on the relationships between co-resident individuals, as well as their sex, age, and marital status.
5
In collecting the NAPP data we gave preference to the oldest available censuses for north-western Europe. It
was possible to obtain data for Iceland, Denmark, and Norway for the late 18th/early 19th centuries, while for
Sweden (1880) and England and Wales (1881) we were forced to use NAPP data from the late 19th century (the
data for Great Britain in 1851 were highly clustered, and were therefore not considered). Except in England,
where we employed a 10-percent sample, we used 100-percent samples. All of the other data from Great Britain
represent 100-percent samples.

Table 1
Using a range of harmonized variables from the combined Mosaic and NAPP data, a
composite measure of historical family organization known as the Patriarchy Index (see
Szołtysek et al., 2017) was computed at the level of resolution of regions as presented in
Figure 16. Table 1 provides the complete list of the ten Index components, showing how they
are defined and measured, and indicating the expected direction of their relationship with
familial patriarchy levels (+/-) (for technical details and computation steps, see Gruber &
Szołtysek, 2016).

3.2 Aggregation strategy
In order to be able to relate cross-country developmental measures to regional estimates of
historical patriarchy, the latter were averaged for contemporary country borders and sat at the
average time when their relevant information was taken from, making allowance for multiple
boundary changes wherever necessary. For the NAPP countries, we took an average PI value
weighted by population size of their constituent regional groups. The same strategy was
applied to a number of countries represented in Mosaic with several censuses of the same
structure (i.e., either rural or urban) 7. Where contrary was the case, the average PI value from
various censuses was weighted by an index of urbanization characteristic of a given area at a
respective time-period using data available from Malanima (2010). In this way, the weight of
the overrepresented urban populations could be mitigated in favour of the rural areas. In cases

Cronbach’s alpha for 10 components of the Index equals 0.87 (|0.85, 0.89|), suggesting that the items have a
relatively high internal consistency. The alpha coefficient of reliability also suggests that there is no component
variable that would decrease the Index’s general reliability. Principal Component Analysis shows that that the
ten components of the Index load on two dimensions which altogether explain nearly 70 percent of the variance.
This confirms that the notion of family systems we are trying to capture is not uni-dimensional (Wall, 1995).
Because the construction of the Index was mainly theory-driven, the PCA results do not invalidate its
composition.
7
The following discussion applies primarily to the Mosaic part of the dataset which is used for that paper. Since
the NAPP regional data are derived from complete populations or 10% representative samples or full census
counts, they are of no issue in this regard.
6

where our country values are derived from censuses of a different chronology, the above
procedure was applied to each dataset separately, then followed by taking a grand mean (here,
weights related to population size were no longer used). The only special case in this regard
was that of Switzerland – for two periods the available populations were either rural or urban.
Here, we still applied the urbanization weights (averaged for the periods in question) which
enabled us to reduce the impact of a very low PI characterising the 19th-century Zurich.
Finally, when it comes to countries for which there was only one census population available
in Mosaic, the PI value derived from that population was taken to represent that whole
country.
In the end, following those routines we were able to compute the historical PI values
for 26 contemporary European countries. These values range from 12 to 29 index points, with
Denmark scoring lowest on the patriarchy scale, and Albania situated at the top end of it (see
Figure 2 and Table 2). The social prevalence of the PI may be taken to have variably
influenced not only the cultural orientation of a given society in the past, but also largely the
types of action which dominate thereby, including those prone to more rigid gender and age
hierarchies, and enactment of loyalty to family, kin or lineage, filial piety, reverence for
ancestors and obedience; and in-group assortative sociality.

Figure 2
Table 2
Although the outcomes of our aggregation strategy may be subject to some limitations
due to the unequal coverage of contemporary countries with the Mosaic data, the dataset
advanced here can be tentatively considered as accounting for cross-country variation in
historical family patterns, i.e., as representing country-level generalizations derived from
empirically assessed variation at the local/regional level. To this end it is perhaps worth

pointing out that except for Croatia, Bulgaria, Turkey and Spain (each represented by a single
or highly clustered censal population; see Figure 1), the rest of our country means yield fairly
reasonable representations of those countries’ historical familial diversity at a certain moment
in time (Szołtysek & Gruber, 2016)8. Controlling for time period in subsequent regression
models also removes part of the evolution problem making it possible to account for variable
effects of family systems captured at different times (see more in the robustness section).

3.3 Added value of the new measure
By combining a range of 10 variables related to familial behaviour rather than just focusing
on marriage patterns or on the prevalence of nuclear families, the underlying structure of the
PI moves us closer to a multi-stranded account of family organization in the past (cf. Mason
2001, 160–161). While Todd’s scheme takes four (five in Carmichael’s case) aspects and adds
them up, implicitly assuming that each is equally important, the PI has the virtue of using
more elements (10) with varying weights, thus reducing the chance that any strange
component drives the index’s variation. By choosing to use individual-level and age-specific
measures instead of household-level variables we also ensure that our indicator of family
structure is less sensitive to the latent variation in demographic conditions (Ruggles, 2012).
Unlike Todd’s scheme, the PI allows for making distinctions between various family types

8

A more qualitative assessment of the scattered data from Russia, customarily a troublesome case, also leads to
safeguarding the reliability of our measures which were derived by pooling together data (altogether for 85
villages/settlements with 46,296 persons) from nearly 200 years of Russian history (1710-1897), and from such
diverse contexts as the newly settled areas in the Urals, as well as established rural communities in the Central
Black Earth Region; rural communities in sparsely populated rural regions with harsh ecological conditions; and
those located in more environmentally friendly areas in the vicinity of urban centers. The five French data points
in Figure 1 in fact refer to data for 25 villages in 25 départements of the French census of 1846. 11 villages are
part of the collection of villages chosen by Louis Henry for the reconstruction of the population of France from
1670 to 1829 based on family reconstitution (all of them in Northern France). 14 villages are an extension to
regions either not covered by this collection or a replacement for villages where no census data was preserved
for 1846, or of too bad quality, or not available. They are the first villages beginning with the letter “B” in the
respective départments. Altogether, the spatial distribution of these data captures the major distinction in family
organisation between the north and south/southwest of the country (Flandrin, 1979). The share of rural regions in
the French sample (79 percent) is also very close to Malanima’s own estimations of the French urbanization rate
from more or less the same period (Malanima, 2010, 246).

once account has been taken of gender relations through an explicit consideration of male
domination among its diagnostic criteria. By capturing the inner architecture of generational
and gender relations at the domestic level, it presents itself superior for the identification of
the channels that – through their bearing on individual agency – may have affected economic
behaviour and value formations. In particular, the PI has a virtue of capturing several
elements of familial behaviour not accounted for in the measures used so far, such as living as
non-kin or life-cycle servants, age at marriage, headship and seniority patterns, as well as
female position in domestic organization. Not only have these long been used by historical
demographers among the major measurement yardsticks to distinguish between different
family systems (e.g., Wall, 1995), they also have a potential to capture important associations
between the familial realm, on the one hand, and the economic performance and value
orientation, on the other (de Moor & van Zanden, 2010; Foreman-Peck, 2011).
Furthermore, the continuous rating scale implemented in the PI provides a more
sensitive metric for the assessment of the intensity of familial behaviour in a given population
than fixed categories or binary measures. Finally, the scrutiny of historical record merged into
our database allows to make the composition of our dataset fully transparent by providing
explicit information about the sample size and the number of its constituent populations, the
period of observation, and the share of urban–rural population in the data which came to
constitute each country sample (Table 2).
In order to test the added value of the new measure we compared its predictive validity
against an indicator of family organization derived from Todd’s typology and previously
adhered to by economic historians (Carmichael’s “Female Friendliness Index”)9, by looking
at how the focal variables associate with widely used measures of contemporary gender
equality, value orientations, and economic output. Their response variables included: 1) two
9

While some of the FFI constituent measures correspond to the components of the PI, they were derived in a
different manner by utilizing the information from Todd, and extrapolating it to entire countries.

contemporary gender inequality measures – Gender Inequality Index (GII) and the “Family”
component of the Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI) (Van Staveren, 2013)10; 2) two
country-level value indices – the Emancipatory Value Index (henceforth EVI), the most recent
and complex representative of the “modernization-emancipation family” of value indices
(Welzel, 2013; Sokolov, 2018, 3)11; along with Hofstede’s Individualism, one of

the

dimensions of undoubtedly the most widely used national culture framework (Kirkman et al.,
2006)12; finally, 3) the two most popular measures of development: contemporary per capita
GDP (logged) and the Human Development Index (HDI)13.

Figure 3
Based on a series of unconditional correlations (with bootstrapped 95% confidence
intervals; Figure 3), we found the association between historical “female-friendliness” and
current outcomes to be generally weaker and less systematic compared to when contemporary
country-level traits are predicted with the PI. For most of the variables, the relationship

10

Gender Inequality Index measures gender inequalities in: reproductive health (maternal mortality ratio and
adolescent birth rates); empowerment (proportion of parliamentary seats occupied by females and the proportion
of adult females and males aged 25+ years with at least some secondary education); and economic status (labour
market participation of the female and the male populations aged 15+ years); see
http://hdr.undp.org/en/content/gender-inequality-index-gii. Higher values indicate more gender inequality. The
“Family” component of the Social Institutions and Gender Index measures a country’s “Discriminatory Family
code” with regards to marriage, parental authority, and inheritance rights in 2014 (OECD Development Centre,
Social
Institutions
and
Gender
Index
2014.
Synthesis
Report,
61–64;
https://www.genderindex.org/countries/?region=europe-and-central-asia. We focus on this component because it
yields global estimates for the largest number of countries from our collection, as well as for reasons of this
component’s substantial affinity to our PI.
11
The index represents a reformulation of Inglehart’s seminal measure of "survival versus self-expression
values”. It is the 12-item index introduced by Welzel (2013, 57–104) based on responses taken from the World
Values Surveys (WVS), measuring the belief in freedom of choice and equality of opportunities over four
domains, each of which summarizes three items: (1) equity values: an orientation that prioritizes gender equality
over patriarchy; (2) liberty values: an orientation that prioritizes reproductive freedoms over their restriction; (3)
autonomy values: an orientation that prioritizes self-determination over obedience; (4) expression values: an
orientation that prioritizes voice over order.
12
It measures (at the national level) the strength of a preference for a loosely-knit social framework in which
individuals are expected to take care only of themselves and their immediate families (its opposite being
collectivism). See Hofstede et al., 2010; also https://geert-hofstede.com.
13
As is well known, the GDP and HDI –though partly overlapping – do not yield the same information and the
correlation between them may well be far from absolute (Islam, 1995; Mukherjee & Chakraborty, 2010; cf. Bolt
et al., 2014).

between the FFI and contemporary outcomes is either less predictive, more often only
marginally significant, or the 95% confidence intervals are usually considerably wider than
those calculated for the PI. The fact that respective correlations for the PI are much stronger
and generally more reliable suggests that it is somewhat better suited for the purpose of
predicting cross-country differences in present-day outcomes than its counterpart (see more in
Szołtysek & Poniat, 2018, table 4, p. 20).

4. Empirical analysis
4.1 Hypotheses and stylized facts
Our general hypothesis is that centuries-old patterns of familial patriarchy—either directly,
through their survival over time, or indirectly, through their internalization in values, customs,
and culture—are strongly associated with current regional disparities across Europe in the
areas we considered, i.e. in gender hierarchies, value orientations and developmental
gradients. Before running more complex statistical models, we made some more specific
predictions about the effects of historical family forms on the selected societal outcomes and
proposed three a priori hypotheses.

Hypothesis 1. Countries that had elevated PI levels in the past tend to preserve more rigid
gender hierarchies in the present, whereas those with low scores on the PI scale are more
likely to be associated with more egalitarian and gender-balanced outcomes
[Alternative: There is no, or a reverse correlation between past elevated PI levels and
today’s egalitarian and gender-balance characteristics]
It has been increasingly recognized that while underdevelopment may enhance gender and
other forms of inequality, societies hold certain cultural views, historically embedded, that
may cast a long shadow on beliefs and values regarding the appropriate role of women

(Duflo, 2012; Jayachandran 2015; Alesina et al., 2013; Hansen at al., 2015; Olsson & Paik,
2016; also Bisin & Verdier, 2015). Deeply rooted patriarchal values from the last three
hundred years are likely to persist, and hence become the long-lived sources of male and
female identity. Because patriarchal family structures are characterised by customs and
attitudes that collectively serve to maximise fertility (e.g., Dyson & Moore, 1983), they create
incentives for women to remain subordinate in exchange for receiving support in raising their
children, thus decreasing the former’s bargaining power (Galor & Klemp, 2014). Patriarchal
pre-adult socialisation practices and parental concerns about exposing daughters to outside
influences (female virginity) further inhibit women from exercising agency outside of the
domestic sphere, thus limiting their access to education, employment, and training (Caldwell,
1981; De Baca et al., 2014; Grogan, 2007). Finally, in many patriarchal societies, family
honour depends on the sexual purity of women, and girls tend to marry at very young ages
(Gruber & Szołtysek 2016; Caldwell, 1981, 10-11; Cain, 1988).

Hypothesis 2. Countries characterized historically by strong patriarchal traits tend to
preserve a more collectivist mindset and exhibit a weaker social prevalence of emancipatory
values in the present
[Alternative: There is no, or a reverse correlation between past elevated PI levels and
today’s prevalence of emancipatory values]
Olsson and Paik (2016) provided links between hierarchical value systems emerging after the
Neolithic Revolution and current beliefs. By the same token, specific patterns of family
organization may lead to a development of lasting individual psychological and behavioural
dispositions affecting societies through bottom-up aggregation. Family loyalty and
interdependence characteristic of patriarchal societies are generally considered the defining
components of the cross-cultural dimension of collectivism-individualism, with collectivism

positively associated with strong family ties in multiple cross-cultural studies (e.g., Vandello
& Cohen, 1999; Gelfand et al., 2004; Fincher & Thornhill, 2012; also Alesina & Giuliano,
2010). Evidence from traditional family- and kinship-based agrarian economies has shown
that the underlying patriarchal authority structures are often consciously safeguarded by childrearing practices that oppose fostering or even allowing competitiveness and individual
initiative in children during their upbringing (Caldwell, 1981, 15). Because of its strong
emphasis on loyalty to family, lineage, and kin, a patriarchal family structure restricts
interactions between the family and the public sphere, and discourages family members from
forming cooperative relationships with non-relatives. By this, it limits potentially stimulating
“peer group effects” on development of more open value systems, instead rewarding
conformity and normative behaviour and reduced trust in strangers, which may be fairly
immune to top-down policy interventions (Ermisch & Gambetta, 2010; Alexander & Welzel,
2015).

Hypothesis 3. Historically more patriarchal countries will more likely yield weaker indicators
of economic growth and general human development in the present
[Alternative: There is no, or a reverse correlation between past elevated PI levels and
today’s economic growth and general human development]
In the male- and adult-centred patriarchal milieu the mobility of offspring is strongly limited
(Caldwell, 1982), human capital acquisition by younger and female family members is
discouraged by familial pressures, and women tend to become “overspecialised” in
reproductive, child-rearing, and domestic work. These hamper the acquisition of knowledge
and skills through training or apprenticeship that would enable offspring (females in
particular) to enter into labour and contractual relationships in the public sphere and to
accumulate other forms of human capital and transmit it intergenerationally, thus stifling

economic development in the longer run (Galor & Klemp, 2014). Because patriarchal
societies place a high premium on family loyalty and reverence for ancestors (i.e., a
collectivist mindset), their members (especially females and the youngsters) are less prone to
engage in the types of entrepreneurship, collaboration with non-kin, and risk-taking that are
prerequisites for economic success (Whyte, 1996). By rewarding conformity and normative
behaviour, and by reducing trust in strangers, patriarchal societies are also likely to be
characterized by a high avoidance of uncertainty and generally a less individualist culture
(Thornhill & Fincher, 2014; also Ermisch and Gambetta, 2010; Gorodnichenko & Roland,
2011; Mokyr, 2016; also Ang, 2015). Because patriarchal structures hinder the ability of
women to provide information, education, and cognitive skills to their offspring
(Kambhampati & Rajan, 2008; Grogan, 2007), their effects tend to accumulate over time. In
contrast, constraints on the power of the patriarch or the parents would improve incentives
and property rights of women (and young men) and therefore the quality of decision making
at that level (Dilli, 2017), leading towards more egalitarian achievements in human
development.

4.2 Bivariate correlations
Figure 3 (above) reports the Pearson's r with 95% CI (bootstrapped) for unconditional
correlations between our variable of interest – the PI – and selected measures of contemporary
outcomes following the approach set out in Szołtysek and Poniat (2018). Each of the
correlations involving the PI (indicated with a black point) is based on 1,000 simulations, and
their confidence intervals were obtained with the use of the bias-corrected and accelerated
(BCa) method (Efron, 1987).
In the first place, we find strong positive and statistically significant relationships
between historical patriarchy and gender patterns today. The good match is most perceptive

with GII (r = .64; 95% CI |0.43,0.78|), implying that along with the increase in historical
patriarchy levels the probability that a given present-day country will be characterized by
more gender inequality also increases pretty much linearly. The relationship between the PI
and the “Discriminatory Family Code” component of SIGI looks similar, though it is
somewhat weakened.
The correlations with measures of value orientation yield even more suggestive
results. In both cases a country’s historical patriarchy profile is strongly and inversely related
to the strength of emancipatory and individualistic values today. High patriarchy in the past
strongly increases the probability that a country will have a low score on the EVI. With the
Pearson r of -0.73 and plausible values of the true correlation as expressed by a 95%
confidence interval ranging from -.55 to -0.83, the estimate is very satisfactory from the
accuracy point of view. Accordingly, we found an inverse and equally strong association of
the PI with one of Hofstede’s Individualism. Also here, there is a fair amount of certainty in
the true magnitude of the effect.
The PI is also associated with the chosen measures of development (per capita GDP
(logged) and the HDI). The observed negative correlations are in line with theoretical
expectations and previous research (e.g., Bertrand & Schoar, 2006; Dilli, 2017); they both
appear to be very general and downward sloping. In the case of both variables the observed
relationship is very strong, as even the lower boundaries of 95% confidence intervals (above 0.70 point estimate) would represent a genuinely large (negative) effect.

4.3 Multivariate analysis
A lurking threat to the observations above is the possibility that the PI may be correlated with
unobserved country characteristics resulting in biased estimates of the effect of patriarchy on
current developmental outcomes. In order to determine whether the associations predicted by

historical family systems are not spuriously driven we examined them against a host of
covariates. Our choice of controls was based on a respective hypothesis under investigation,
whenever possible taking the same set of baseline control variables as used in previous
research to ensure comparability. The chosen covariates were grouped into four major
categories. Historical data characteristics consider the average timing of the patriarchy score
for each country, assuming that the relationship between the historical family and
contemporary developmental outcomes may be weaker the further back in time the PI
estimates go14. Historical development factors account for main alternative channels through
which historical persistence could impact contemporary outcomes. Backward GDP
reconstructions (corresponding to the time of patriarchy score in our database)15, and the state
antiquity (Bockstette et al., 2002) were hypothesized as strong predictors of a country’s
prospective social and economic development (de Pleijt & van Zanden, 2016; Borcan et al.,
2018)16. We also included the time elapsed since the first transition to agriculture (Neolithic
Revolution; Putterman & Weil, 2010) because it has been shown to be positively related to the
levels of economic development in recent times (Hibbs & Olsson, 2004; Putterman, 2008;
Olsson & Paik, 2016), as well to contemporary gender equality (Hansen et al., 2015).
By the same token, two bio-geographic endowment factors were considered as having
impact on various attitudinal outcomes today. Firstly, we included the climatic configuration
of a country called the “Cool Water” (CW-) condition. Captured by an indexed measure

14

For example, the Albanian patriarchy score refers to 1918, meaning that the time span between the reference
period and the presence is “only” one hundred years; on the other hand, the Croatian PI levels are from 1674,
hence nearly two and a half centuries earlier.
15
Historical GDP data are derived from the data file created by the Maddison Project. In the case of some
countries (e.g. Belarus), with GDP data only from the 20th century we have used data describing their nearest
neighbours or former rulers (like the Russian Empire, in this case). Data source:
https://www.rug.nl/ggdc/historicaldevelopment/maddison/releases/maddison-project-database-2018.
16
The effects of some further potential confounders – such as the percent rural datasets in the sample and
historical urbanization (the latter commonly used in the literature) – have been reduced already at the stage of
computing the PI, and hence they were not considered in the model specification.

proposed by Welzel (2013; henceforth: CWI)17, it has been shown to predict differences in
pre-industrial female marriage ages, which in turn explain differences in gender equality
today (Santos Silva, 2017). Secondly, we considered the historical pathogens prevalence
(Murray & Schaller, 2010) based on Fincher et al. (2008) and Cashdan and Steel (2013) who
demonstrated that people in regions historically more exposed to infectious diseases tended to
develop more collectivist norms.
Finally, we account for two great socio-cultural, political and institutional
transformations by including dummies for the Protestant heritage of the country and its
experience of Communism. Following Becker and Woessmann (2009), as well as de Pleijt and
van Zanden (2016), we hypothesize that Protestantism may have a significant effect on
economic growth indirectly via its effect on human capital formation. We also presumed that
a Protestant heritage would be an important objective factor favouring strong emphasis on
secular-rational and self-expression values in the present, and a circumstance improving the
status of women (Inglehart & Norris, 2003). In turn, institutional and cultural traits produced
by communism are expected to continue retarding growth and human development today
(e.g., Sookias et al., 2018). Furthermore, given that the Communism variable has spatial
distribution corresponding neatly to the distribution of the countries’ PI values, it also
presents a major challenge to the explanatory power of our focal predictor.
A natural framework in which to test our hypotheses is a regression where a selected
contemporary trait is the dependent variable, as in the form:

yc = α + βPcT + Tc + Xc1_4 + uc

17

The indicator measures the prevalence of relatively cool temperatures in each season combined with abundant
fresh water resources throughout the year, on a country’s historically most populated area (see Welzel, 2013).

where yc denotes respective current developmental or value measure at the country level; Pc
is this country’s level of historical family patriarchy; T is the historical period that varies
depending on the country; Xc represents a vector of a country’s other controls (historicaldevelopmental; biogeographic; social transformations), and uc is the error term.
In each model the PI serves as the main explanatory variable. However, since the PI
estimates are time-dependent, all of our specifications also control for the period of patriarchy
“observation” in each country allowing it to differ accordingly18.
In all subsequent models the selection of additional controls was decided depending on
their theoretical relevance to the hypothesis under test. In each case, the presumption was that
a given set of covariates could affect respective response variables through channels other
than the one we are interested in identifying. Given the small N, the number of regressors in a
single model was restricted to the most relevant ones and they were entered one at a time to
avoid over-fitting. Crucially, in all regressions the bootstrap approximation was applied to the
distribution of the least squares estimates and standard errors (involving 1,000 random
samplings with replacement for each model; the bias-corrected and accelerated (BCa) method
was used to obtain confidence intervals)19.

Table 3
Table 3 presents the results of OLS estimations for the relationship between the PI and
gender inequality measures. It shows that historical family data are fairly good predictors of
contemporary cross-country differences in inequalities between the sexes. In the model
specification with PI and Time period, a one-standard deviation increase of the PI value is
associated with an increase of GII by 0.61 standard deviation. This is a substantively

18

To some extent this also helps mitigate potentially confounding effects of the unobserved historical
characteristics and/or processes (economic change, institutional and legal reforms, etc.).
19
We have used procedures implemented in the library boot of R language.

important effect equal to a change by 95 index points, equivalent to a difference in gender
inequality levels between the Netherlands and Croatia. Controlling for the timing of the
Neolithic Revolution or Protestantism (columns 2 and 3) – both of which enter the regression
as expected – does not eliminate the role of the PI as the most significant covariate in the
models. Its increase by one-standard deviation still results in an increase by 0.53 and 0.45
standard deviation in GII, respectively – i.e., in magnitudes only a little smaller than those of
the basic model. Each of these three models produces R-squared of about .40, thus accounting
for a non-negligible part of the variation in contemporary gender inequalities. Historical
patriarchy stops being statistically significant only after the CWI is included as a control
variable (column 4), which is not surprising given that both variables are strongly correlated
(r=-0.708, significant at the 0.01 level). It stands to reason to argue that patterns of household
formation and marriage, by being an important component of our index, provide a plausible, if
not major, transmission channel through which biogeographic endowments have impacted
contemporary gender relations (cf. Santos Silva et al., 2017).
The PI also appears to be a passable predictor of contemporary gender inequalities
with regards to legal standing in marriage, parental authority, and inheritance rights as
captured by SIGI’s Discriminatory Family Code variable, whereby higher levels of historical
patriarchy are associated with a more deterred position of women in the present, holding all
else constant. Both in the basic specification with Time period (column 5) as well as in the
model conditioning on the timing of the Neolithic Revolution (column 6), the effect of the PI
is substantial and fairly stable. The latter model also suggests (in line with Hansen et al. 2015)
that societies with longer histories of agriculture may have less equality in gender roles in the
present, and that this may happen in part independently from their historical patriarchy levels.
By accounting for the effect of Protestantism in column (7) we obtain results whereby
historically high patriarchy levels still appear to be positively associated with contemporary

gender inequality, but the precision of this model becomes more uncertain. Meanwhile,
controlling for CWI (column 8) does not yield any significant associations.
In turn, the inspection of Table 4 shows a strong and statistically significant
association between the PI and emancipatory values (EVI) in nearly all five model
specifications. In each model, higher patriarchy levels correspond to a weaker prevalence of
emancipatory values in a country holding all else constant. To obtain an impression of the
economic significance, we note that the result of our basic model (with Time period only)
implies that a one-standard deviation increase in the PI is associated with a decrease in the
prevalence of emancipatory values by nearly 0.20 index points in EVI, amounting to a shift in
the individualism scale from the levels of Austria to those of Albania. The importance of the
PI decreases somewhat after the effects of Protestantism are controlled for (column 3), with
Protestant countries scoring higher on the emancipatory value scale, as expected. Even in this
case, however, one standard deviation increase in the PI leads to a decrease in EVI by
approximately 0.11 points. Though this is still a statistically significant result, it may contain
both substantively meaningful as well as negligible effects ([0.64, -0.03]). Contrary to
expectations, neither the CWI nor historical pathogen loads enter the emancipatory values
regression with significant coefficients (columns 4 and 5), while patriarchy holds still. This is
consistent with the view that the PI could act as a transmission channel for those variables. In
the last model for EVI (column 5), the effect size of patriarchy becomes particularly strong:
the estimated coefficient suggests an economically large relationship with the spread of
emancipatory values that is about six times the effect of historical pathogen prevalence.

Table 4
Similar results are achieved when one of Hofstede’s “dimensions of culture” is chosen
as our response variable (columns 6-10 in Table 4). Also here, historically higher patriarchy

levels are invariably associated with lower contemporary individualism scores, but the
models’ statistical and substantive significance and their explanatory power are greater
compared to regressions with EVI. For example, in four out of five specifications, an increase
in PI by one-standard deviation leads to a decrease in individualism by over 0.8 standard
deviation, i.e., by 20 index points – roughly the difference between Poland and the
Netherlands. Moreover, the effect of historical patriarchy is fairly robust to the inclusion of
other covariates, of which only the CWI enters the model with a significantly positive and
strong coefficient (as expected; see Welzel, 2013).

Table 5
As shown in Table 5, historical PI also tends to be significantly and negatively
associated with contemporary (2016) GDP per capita in all seven model specifications. In all
models, standardized coefficients of PI are generally above 0.6, and in two cases close to 0.8,
indicating an economically important effect of historical family systems. For example, in
column (1), the PI’s increase by a one-standard deviation results in a difference in real GDP
values by nearly 100% (equivalent to the difference between Slovakia and Spain). The
relationship between patriarchy and economic output would tend to be economically
substantial even if the true correlation fell near the lower boundaries of the 95% confidence
intervals (point estimate of -0.70). Noteworthily, the PI turns out to be a better predictor of
contemporary cross-country differences in economic performance than Maddison’s estimates
of historical GDP (column 2), or the time elapsed since the Neolithic Revolution (column 3),
and is also robust to controlling for the effects of CWI, Protestantism, or State Antiquity
(columns 4, 5, and 7, respectively). The effects of the PI are also not wiped out after
accounting for cross-country differences in the experience of Communism (column 6), which

exert strong and independent impact on contemporary GDP levels20. A one-standard deviation
increase in PI in this model is still associated with a decrease of predicted real GDP by 0.43
standard deviation, thus implying a shift in a country’s economic output by roughly 40
percent.

Table 6

Similar results are obtained when the same covariates, including the PI, are regressed
on the values of the HDI from 2015 (Table 6). Given that the GDP index in the HDI is based
on GDP per capita, this can hardly be surprising. Interestingly, however, the HDI’s greater
accountability of non-economic elements of development results in revealing a stronger and
more robust relationship with PI. Same as in the models with GDP, the effect of historical
patriarchy is invariably negative and statistically significant, even after controlling for
selected covariates. Of the latter, CWI, Protestantism and the experience of Communism enter
regressions with significant coefficients and expected direction, but only the former surpasses
the effect size of the PI. In this worst scenario, where the standardized Beta coefficient for the
PI falls below 0.5, a one standard deviation increase in historical patriarchy still represents an
economically substantial change in the value of HDI (by 62 index points).

5. Discussion
In general, our results appear to confirm that historical family patterns in Europe have a
significant and strong association with current regional disparities in gender inequality, value
orientations, and economic and human development. Four main causal paths could account
for these associations. First, family structures may persist to the present and continue to affect
20

Partial r-squared for PI in this model equals to 0.26, and for Communism to 0.34.

contemporary outcomes directly. This form of persistence seems intuitively likely given that
family behaviour and values represent “deep” cultural layers which are transmitted from
generation to generation and move slowly over time (Bisin & Verdier, 2000). Studies in
family history have substantiated this observation by revealing a strong continuity of
demographic behaviour, at least in some areas of Europe (Reher, 1998; Therborn, 2004; Wall,
2001; Dalla Zuanna & Micheli, 2004).
Second, the persistence may develop through intermediate factors, such as the nature
of political or economic institutions that have been shaped first by family structures and have
continued to influence contemporary societies in a path-dependant manner. For example, in
the 1980s, after Laslett showed that the nuclear family structure had been the dominant family
type in England long before the Industrial Revolution, some scholars (including Laslett
himself) argued that the dominance of the nuclear family was among the necessary
preconditions for modernisation and industrialisation, which could then spill over further
developmental outcomes irrespective of subsequent family change.
Third, reverse causation is also plausible in that the differences in economic and
institutional factors across countries might have themselves caused the variation in family
structures. Greif (2006), for example, pointed out a potential feedback mechanism where on
the one hand, nuclear families facilitate the development of corporate institutions, but on the
other the socioeconomic transformations related to that development encourage the formation
of nuclear families across Europe (also Dennison & Ogilvie, 2014, 672-685).
Finally, another possibility is that the links between family structures and
developmental gradients are an outcome of a deeper underlying determinant. In this case,
family structures would be endogenous to the causal process and of little explanatory value.
There is nothing about our own results that makes causality automatic from past to
present outcomes, and our analyses are not legitimate to rule out entirely the possibility of

bidirectional or circular causation, or to assert that the links between family structures and
developmental gradients are not an outcome of a deeper underlying determinant21. Although
we cannot address the endogeneity question explicitly, an important step towards elucidation
of the temporal order of the relationships between historical family and our developmental
measures can be offered by examining the extent to which contemporary familial behaviours
are related to historical family structures22.
For the purpose of this exercise we focus on contemporary accounts of actual
(experienced or current) practices related to family life and cohesion23. Our first measure of
contemporary family was Welzel’s measure of “contemporary patriarchy” based on a series of
responses from the World Values Surveys which combined scores for percent females who
declared being married before the age 20, and for the percent married men (aged 30-34 years)
who declared living with parents. In addition, we used the percent 30-39 years old living with
parents, based on data from European Values Study 2008. We assume that earlier marriage
may enhance more patriarchal conjugal relations (Gruber & Szołtysek, 2016; Therborn,
2004), and that the family ties might be considered stronger and more aligned with a complex
hierarchy of authority patterns based on age, if the individual lives with his or her parents
(Reher, 1998; Todd, 1985).
21

Note, however, that our identification strategy allowed us to capture potential influences on our response
variables other than those of historical patriarchy, including religion and historical development. In addition, we
offered a number of theoretically informed guesses for why familial institutions might have played an exogenous
role by suggesting that patriarchal structures from the last three hundred years may be prone to strong persistence
(and even tend to accumulate over time), and hence remain fairly immune to top-down policy interventions
(Alexander & Welzel, 2015).
22
Neither Todd’s own work, nor papers by Greif, De Moor and Van Zanden, and Duranton and co-authors,
provided any empirical tests of these potential trajectories. While Duranton only conjectured the long-term
persistence of medieval family types (Duranton et al., 2009), Rijpma and Carmichael observed that while their
measures of historical family had some predictive power for today’s measures of family characteristics, they
were far from perfect (Rijpma & Carmichael, 2016, 35).
23
We have chosen to focus on practices rather than on subjective measures of the strength of family ties (such as
those of Alesina & Giuliano, 2010 or Thornhill & Fincher, 2014, 131) because values scores tend to be
noticeably different from practices scores across many recent cross-cultural studies (e.g., the GLOBE project;
see House et al. 2004). For example, using data for 15 Mosaic/NAPP countries covered by the GLOBE project
we established that Gender Egalitarianism and In-group Collectivism tended to be valued more than they were
practiced (at the organizational level). Furthermore, for both variables, a clear linear positive relationship
between Societal Values and Societal Practices could not be established (own calculations based on
http://globeproject.com/study_2004_2007#data; available on request).

As a preliminary test of the degree of covariation between those measures,
unconditional correlations between historical and contemporary data were plotted in Figures
4A-B (again, bootstrapping methods and 95% confidence intervals were used). The two
correlations suggest that our data contain a strong signal. For both the Contemporary
Patriarchy and the EVS data the relationship is fairly linear and has no particular outliers. In
both cases, countries with higher patriarchal values in the past display higher frequencies of
intergenerational co-residence in the present (and earlier marriage for women). The Pearson r
of 0.80 or above, and plausible values of the true correlation as expressed by a 95%
confidence interval ranging from 0.61 to 0.89 for the former variable, and from 0.74 and 0.94
for the latter one, imply very substantial effects.

Figures 4A-B
The associations from Figures 4A-B were found to be robust to controlling for a host
of potentially confounding factors in the multivariate framework (Tables 7-8). Out of sixteen
regression specifications for the two response variables of interest, the PI turns out to be
significantly associated in fifteen models, suggesting that countries with heightened historical
patriarchy quite invariably tend to display stronger intergenerational bonding, and hence
stronger family ties, today. Furthermore, in most specifications the size effects of the PI are
large or even very large. The only exception is the model for Contemporary Patriarchy
indicating that the negative and significant relationship between past and present family
patterns is not robust to including the current log GDP estimates (column 7 in Table 7).
Potential concerns over this issue are, however, partly allayed by the fact that similar
qualification does not apply to regression with our second measure of contemporary
behaviour (see below). The association between historical and current patriarchy manifests
itself most strongly in the model controlling for time period and historical pathogens (ibid.,

column 2), in which an increase by one-standard deviation in PI corresponds to increase in the
Contemporary Patriarchy scores by 0.90 standard deviation, roughly equal to the difference
between Switzerland and Albania. The PI’s impact on current family practices remains
genuinely robust to the inclusion of Protestantism (again, negatively correlated with the
outcome variable), CWI, and the experience of Communism24.

Tables 7-8
The regressions with the EVS data as a dependent variable provide further evidence
which shows that higher patriarchy is related to contemporary tighter intergenerational bonds
(Table 8). The results remain significant and strong across all specifications, even after
controlling for the effect of Communism and the “cool-water” effect (both significant). Most
noteworthy, the result is also robust to the inclusion of the contemporary log GDP, despite its
otherwise strong effect on the outcome variable (an increase by one-standard deviation in
GDP results in the decrease in the rates of contemporary co-residence by 0.56 standard
deviation, equal to 5.3 index points). Same as in Table 7 above, historical pathogens, the
experience of Protestantism, membership in the Soviet Union, and the variation in historical
GDP do not matter, while the PI holds prominently in these models. For example, the results
from column 2 purport to saying that a 4.6 point difference on the patriarchy scale could make
a difference of about 9 percent points in contemporary co-residence, like, for example,
between Austria (10.6%) and Lithuania (19.2%)25.

24

Interestingly, earlier membership in the Soviet Union does not enter the regression with significant sign, which
might suggest that the specific Soviet-type of Communism had more impact on normative systems rather than on
actual behaviour.
25
Leverage tests revealed that these results are not subject to significant change with the removal of outlying
cases (data available on request). Similar exercises performed for response variables measuring the normative
aspect of family ties (Alesina/Giuliano’s and Thornhill/Fincher’s measures of the strength of family ties)
established that the relationship between the PI and both indexes is positive and linear, although it tends to be
wiped out by controlling for other covariates. The important exceptions were models indicating a strong positive
linear relationship of historical patriarchy with contemporary family ties controlling for a country’s experience

6. Robustness checks
Because the number of observations that are used for all the above-presented regressions is
relatively small, we used the procedure for identifying the influence of particular observations
on our model estimates. We then re-estimated all model specifications on subpopulations of
Mosaic/NAPP countries omitting some potentially problematic observations. The
identification of potentially “problematic” cases was carried out in two different ways. First,
we have excluded four countries for which Mosaic data were the least representative
(Bulgaria, Croatia, Spain and Turkey), on the grounds that their PI estimates may be biased
and hence create spurious correlations in the models. Our exclusion criteria were concerned
either with a country’s meagre representation in our database (e.g., only one very early
population corresponding to modern day Croatia; exclusive focus on Istanbul as regards
Turkey); or on the presumption that a country’s collection of data was too regionally clustered
(two Bulgarian populations based on numerous small censuses from different periods; Spain
represented by two populations only from Catalonia)26. All the models we have presented
above were then re-run on the basis of such a curtailed sample.
Additionally, we have run residuals and leverage tests based on the Cook’s distances
derived from the full (based on the full countries sample) models. Highly influential cases
observed separately for each model were then removed from the sample one at a time, each
time refitting the regression model on the remaining countries. Since Cook’s D doesn’t have a
one-standard and common accepted cut-off point, we have decided to use the formula Di>4/n
and discard values above 0.15. The new models were rerun only for those instances when at

of belonging to the USSR (of an equally strong but adverse effect). In this case, the PI’s increase by one-standard
deviation led to increase in the strength of family ties by over 0.62 standard deviation.
26
As mentioned before, the small number of mapped points in France in fact hides a much wider territorial
coverage (25 departments) and hence does not present an additional case for exclusion in this regard.

least one observation was above that point, and in due course we found that the number of
discarded observations was never greater than 3.
The results of these tests showed that even after removing particular observations our
findings remained stable, both in terms of estimation and inference. The new models obtained
by curtailing the dataset were very similar to those based on the full country sample (see
Appendix 1, Tables 1A-1F). The PI effects, their direction and sizes are in almost every case
identical with those from the full models. Important differences were identified only in the
models with SIGI_Family as the dependent variable, and PI, Time period and Protestantism
as the predictors (columns 5 and 6, Table 1B in Appendix 1), which turned out to be
decidedly weak. Given that even the whole model based on the 25 countries instead of 21 and
23 was relatively weak and the PI influence was significant only at the 90% level, this finding
does not seem to undermine our core findings.

6.1 The aggregation problem
Another potential threat to the robustness of our findings is that the observed effect of
historical family systems might be artefactually created by our aggregation procedures. To
mitigate this concern, the main body of our analyses has been replicated at the smaller
geographical scale. In order to do so, the NAPP/Mosaic regional populations (see Figure 1)
have been assigned to contemporary administrative units of the European Union (NUTS 2,
2016) or to their equivalents in the neighbouring countries (ITAN), and the PI estimates
obtained with this procedure were linked to available developmental statistics27.
Embarking on this approach faced a number of challenges, the most severe of which
were that (1) part of our chosen developmental indicators was available only at the country
27

Because one such unit usually encompassed 1-2 historical populations, weighting by an index of urbanization
was omitted in this spatial join. In cases where a NAPP/Mosaic region spread over several contemporary
statistical areas (especially in case of the NAPP data), it was assigned to that NUTS-2 unit where its centroid
weighted by the population size was located.

level; (2) many existing survey data do not provide a division into NUTS; (3) the available
data do not cover all our areas of interest; and (4) regional statistics were often computed
using inconsistent methodologies and spatial divisions, especially in the non-EU countries. In
consequence, although we were able to compute the historical PI scores for 124 NUTS/ITAN
regions, in hardly any regression could all these observations be used conjointly. Accordingly,
in our analyses we were able to consider only some of the dependent variables used
previously (GDP, HDI, the percent 30-39 years old living with parents)28.
In the face of the lack of lower-scale gender inequality measures, regional differences
between female and male life expectancy at birth in 2016 (de0; Eurostat) were computed and
used as a proxy for gender gaps in one particular dimension of human development
achievements. Secondly, as a more attitudinal measure, we took the question C001 from the
EVS data from 2008 asking whether respondents strongly agreed, agreed, disagreed, or
strongly disagreed with the statement that “men should be preferred when jobs are scarce”.
Severe limitations applied also to the usage of the control variables, the number of
which had to be kept small. Besides our focal predictor, in each model we control for the
share of rural populations in the regional PI sample and for the average year of the patriarchy
“observation” in each NUTS/ITAN unit. In addition, relying on theoretical considerations and
findings of the main analysis (see Section 4.3), in each model we also accounted for whether
the particular administrative unit had any experience of the communist regime. Same as in the
main analysis, in all regressions the bootstrap approximation was applied to the distribution of
the least squares estimates and standard errors (involving 1,000 random samplings with
replacement for each model). Table 1G in Appendix 1 presents the results of the regressions.

28

Data on regional GDP and the information used to compute de0 are from Eurostat
(http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/regions/data/database). Regional HDI was obtained from Hardeman and
Dikstra (2014). The variable RHDI represents the region’s HDI rank among all EU regions. Data on question
C001 and on the share of Dane on c001 and on the share of 30-39 years old living with parents, are from EVS
2008.

In 4 out of 5 models, the PI has turned out to have significant and theoretically
plausible impact on the response variables. A historically higher PI is associated with a bigger
female-to-male difference in life expectancy, lower GDP in 2012, and a lower rank in the
ranking of the EU-RHDI, and these relationships are not explained away by accounting for
the experience of communism. A historically higher PI is also associated with a stronger
propensity among the EVS respondents to favour men on the labour market, overriding the
effect of communism which ceased to be a significant predictor in that model. Although PI
significantly predicts the percent 30-39 years old living with parents after controlling for basic
historical characteristics (rural and time period; β=.63, p-value <0.001), this effect was not
robust to the inclusion of the experience of communism variable29.
Altogether, the models in Table 1G largely corroborate the results at the country level
obtained above and suggest that the effects of historical family systems observed in the main
analyses were not an artefact created by our aggregation procedures.

7. Conclusions
Overall, the results of this paper add to the evidence that the principles of family organization
at the grassroots of society could be one of the intermediate variables accounting for
contemporary cultural and developmental divergences within Europe. An alternative measure
of historical family systems (the PI) generates results similar to previous dispersed findings
using different methodologies, and therefore reconfirms the importance of the historical
family as the potential instigator of disparate and lasting developmental trajectories on the
continent. In an effort toward understanding what drives these correlations, we have made
informed suggestions that family patterns are very persistent. Accordingly, we have tested
29

We have also run a series of separate regression models on the same data but including basic geographical
controls (longitude/latitude; available on request). Although in basic models latitude and especially longitude
were usually highly significant, with standardized coefficients often above 0.5, in most cases their importance
(and statistical significance) were wiped out by the effect of Communism.

these presumptions empirically showing that familial behaviour today and family patterns in
the past are, indeed, correlated, and that this persistence is not likely to be a sole by-product of
differences in current economic development.
Our contribution also demonstrates potential gains of family and economic history
working together to expand the existing data frameworks towards better understanding of the
family-development nexus. Before we pause with putting effort in exploring what place the
family occupied in the ‘horse race’ between various deep causes of human development
(Dennison & Ogilvie, 2014), it might be worth considering what is to be gained from taking
into account a broader range of indicators than has been used thus far, in particular by
drawing on a recent explosion of historical-demographic data. To this end, our findings
illustrate potential benefits of further efforts to mobilize historical data on family practices
rather than crude measures of social norms or “cultural ideals” regarding family behaviours
used before. This study is also the first to test the relationship between historical family
patterns and contemporary gender inequality, value orientations, economic growth and human
development within a unified empirical framework. Increased research efforts along each of
these lines may help to strengthen the generalisability of the family-development nexus both
in Europe, and beyond.
However, a number of limitations of this study must be clearly acknowledged. By
necessity, our analyses were limited to 26 European countries. Given the small N, the number
of regressors in a single model must have also been restricted, so the obtained coefficients
cannot be very precise. Our sample size – which still represents more than a half of current
European countries - can be placed at the bottom end of the sample size distributions that we
have encountered in the output growth analyses, such as those of Levine and Zervos (1998;
the N-range from 32 to 45 countries) or Knack and Keefer (1997; 29 countries). More
recently, Santos Silva et al. (2017) presented regressions based on as small a number of

countries as 25 (p.59); and Olsson and Paik (2013) regressions based on 21 to 31 observations
(see tables 3 and 5-6). It should also be noted that the main body of our analyses has been
replicated with larger number of observations at the smaller geographical scale.
Regarding the data, we are aware that there are important areas of Europe not yet
covered by the Mosaic/NAPP database (e.g., Italy), and that those covered sometimes are
represented by spatially sparse data points. However, several attempts to remedy this problem
have been attempted in the course of analysis showing that the general thrust of our results
remains unaltered after removing the most susceptible observations and pursuing the lowerscale analyses. A major way to move forward in the future would be to create higher density
“samples” for some countries and to further expand the regional analysis.
Finally, evidencing causality based on regressions with 26 observations and 7-8
explanatory variables is difficult unless one has an exogenous source of variation. Because
there is a possibility that both family structures and development patterns are an outcome of a
deeper, underlying influence, our regression estimates should be read as indicating
association, rather than “causal influence” of family organization on numeracy. Although at
this stage we cannot address the endogeneity question explicitly, we nevertheless provided a
number of theoretical and empirical considerations in support of the view that such causal
influences might indeed exist. A clear identification of the direction of these relationships
presents a veritable task for the future.
Overall, future research should strive to test if the main insight of this paper remains
intact by employing our measure of historical family to a wider assembly of settings (be those
countries or their subdivisions) and taking into account other correlates (including spatial
autocorrelation) and the potential for reverse causation. Should the results of those future
endeavors indeed prove to suggest that historical family patterns cast a very long shadow on
recent developmental outcomes, then certain recommendations can be made for policy-

makers to show greater sensitivity to historical path dependencies in the familial and
demographic realm, and to bear in mind the specific characteristics of family systems when
designing social policies. Bringing together policy-making with the type of work conducted
by economic and family historians might be particularly important for the societies which
don’t have the growth enhancing family institutions historically.

References
ALESINA, A., and GIULIANO, P. (2010). The Power of the Family. Journal of Economic
Growth, 15 (2), 93–125.
ALESINA, A., and GIULIANO, P. (2014). Family Ties. In P. Aghion & S. Durlauf (Eds),
Handbook of Economic Growth, Volume 2A (pp. 177–216). Amsterdam and Boston: Elsevier,
North-Holland.
ALESINA, A., GIULIANO, P., & NUNN, N. (2013). On the Origins of Gender Roles:
Women and the Plough. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128 (2), 469–530.
ALEXANDER, A. C., & WELZEL, C. (2015). Eroding Patriarchy: The Co-Evolution of
Women's Rights and Emancipative Values. International Review of Sociology, 25(1), 144–
165.
ANG, J. B. (2015). Agricultural Legacy, Individualistic Culture, and Techology Adoption.
EGC Report No: 2015/06. http://www3.ntu.edu.sg/hss2/egc/wp/2015/2015-06.pdf, retrieved
1st November 2017.
BATEN, J., M. SZOŁTYSEK, AND M. CAMPESTRINI (2017). ‘Girl power’ in eastern
Europe? The human capital development of central-eastern and eastern Europe in the
seventeenth to nineteenth centuries and its determinants. European Review of Economic
History 21 (1):29–63
BERTOCCHI, G., & BOZZANO, M. (2015). Family Structure and the Education Gender
Gap: Evidence from Italian Provinces. CESifo Economic Studies, 61(1), 263–300.
BERTRAND, M., & SCHOAR, A. (2006). The Role of Family in Family Firms. Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 20(2), 73–96.
BISIN, A., and VERDIER, T. (2001). The Economics of Cultural Transmission and the
Dynamics of Preferences. Journal of Economic Theory 97 (2): 298–319.
BOCKSTETTE, V., CHANDA, A. & PUTTERMAN, L. (2002). States and Markets: The
Advantage of an Early Start. Journal of Economic Growth (7): 347.
BOLT, J., TIMMER , M.AND VAN ZANDEN, J.L. (2014), “GDP per capita since 1820”, in
Jan Luiten van Zanden, et al. (eds.), How Was Life?: Global Well-being since 1820, OECD
Publishing. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264214262-7-en.
CAIN, M. (1988). Patriarchal structure and demographic change. In Conference on women’s
position and demographic change in the course of development (1988: Oslo). Solicited papers
(pp. 19–41). Liege: International Union for the Scientific Study of Population.
CALDWELL, J. C. (1981). The Mechanisms of Demographic Change in Historical
Perspective. Population Studies, Vol. 35, No. 1, pp. 5-27.
CALDWELL, J. (1982). Theory of Fertility Decline. London and New York: Academic Press.
CARMICHAEL, S.G., DE PLEIJT, A., VAN ZANDEN, J.L., & DE MOOR, T. (2015).
Reply to Tracy Dennison and Sheilagh Ogilvie: The European Marriage pattern and the Little
Divergence. CGEH Working Paper Series, July 2015, Working Paper no. 70.
CARMICHAEL, S.G., DILLI, S. & VAN ZANDEN, J.L. (2016a). Introduction: Family
Systems and Economic Development. Economic History of Developing Regions, 31(1), 1-9,
DOI: 10.1080/20780389.2015.1132625.

CARMICHAEL, S.G., DE PLEIJT, A., VAN ZANDEN, J.L., & DE MOOR, T. (2016b). The
European Marriage Pattern and Its Measurement. The Journal of Economic History, 76(1),
196-204.
CARMICHAEL, S.G., & RIJPMA, A. (2017). Measuring agency. In J. L. Van Zanden, A.
Rijpma, & J. Kok (Eds), Agency, Gender, and Economic Development in the World Economy
1850-2000: Testing the Sen hypothesis (pp. 51-72). London and New York: Routledge.
CASHDAN, E., & STEELE, M. (2013). Pathogen prevalence, group bias, and collectivism in
the standard cross-cultural sample. Human Nature, 24, 59–75.
DALLA ZUANNA. G., and MICHELI, G. A. (2004) (eds.). Strong Family and. Low
Fertility: A Paradox? New Perspectives in Interpreting Contemporary Family and
Reproductive Behaviour. Netherlands: Kluwer Academic. Publishers.
DE BACA, T.C., SOTOMAYOR-PETERSON, M., SMITH-CASTRO, V., and
FIGUEREDO, A. (2014). Contributions of Matrilineal and Patrilineal Kin Alloparental Effort
to the Development of Life History Strategies and Patriarchal Values: A Cross-Cultural Life
History Approach. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology 45: 534-554.
DE MOOR, T., & VAN ZANDEN, J. L. (2010). Girl power: the European marriage pattern
and labour markets in the North Sea region in the late medieval and early modern period. The
Economic History Review, 63, 1–33.
DE PLEIJT, A., VAN ZANDEN, J.L. (2016). Accounting for the “Little Divergence”: What
drove economic growth in pre-industrial Europe, 1300–1800? European Review of Economic
History, 20, Issue 4, 387–409, https://doi.org/10.1093/ereh/hew013.
DENNISON, T. K., & OGILVIE, S. (2014). Does the European Marriage Pattern Explain
Economic Growth? The Journal of Economic History, 74, 651-693.
DENNISON, T. K., & OGILVIE, S. (2016) Institutions, Demography, and Economic Growth.
The Journal of Economic History, 76(1), 205–217.
DILLI, S. D. (2017). The Deep Causes of Economic Development. Family systems and
female agency. In J. L. Van Zanden, A. Rijpma, & J. Kok (Eds), Agency, Gender, and
Economic Development in the World Economy 1850-2000: Testing the Sen hypothesis (pp.
138-161). London and New York: Routledge.
DUFLO, E. (2012). Women Empowerment and Economic Development. Journal of
Economic Literature 50, no. 4, (pp. 1051-79).
DURANTON, G., RODRÍGUEZ-POSE, A., & SANDALL, R. (2009). Family types and the
persistence of regional disparities in Europe. Economic Geography, 85(1), 23-47.
DYSON, T., & MOORE, M. (1983). On kinship structure, female autonomy, and
demographic behavior in India. Population and Development Review, 9(1), 35–60.
EFRON, B. (1987). Better bootstrap confidence intervals. Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 82(397):171–185.
ERMISCH, J., & GAMBETTA, D. (2010). Do Strong Family Ties Inhibit Trust? Journal of
Economic Behavior & Organization, 75, 365–376.
FINCHER, C.L., THORNHILL, R., MURRAY, D.R., SCHALLER, M. (2008). Pathogen
prevalence predicts human cross-cultural variability in individualism/collectivism. Proc Biol
Sci. 2008;275(1640):1279–1285.

FINCHER, C. L., & THORNHILL, R. (2012). Parasite-stress promotes in-group assortative
sociality: the cases of strong family ties and heightened religiosity. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 35, 61–79.
FLANDRIN, J. L. (1979). Families in former times. Kinship, household and sexuality
(translated by Richard Southern). Cambridge University Press Cambridge.
FOREMAN-PECK, J. (2011). The Western European marriage pattern and economic
development. Explorations in Economic History, 48(2), 292-309.
GALOR O., KLEMP, M. (2014). The Biocultural Origins of Human Capital Formation.
NBER Working Paper No. 20474, September 2014.
GELFAND, M. J., BHAWUK, D. P. S., NISHII, L. H., & BECHTOLD, D. J. (2004).
Individualism and collectivism. In R. J. House, P. J. Hanges, M. Javidan, P. W. Dorfman, &
V. Gupta (Eds), Culture, leadership, and organizations: the GLOBE study of 62 societies(pp.
437–512). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
GORODNICHENKO, Y., & ROLAND, G. (2011). Individualism, innovation, and long-run
growth. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(4), 21316-21319.
GREIF, A. (2006). Family Structure, Institutions, and Growth: The Origins and Implications
of Western Corporations. The American Economic Review, 96(2), 308–312.
GROGAN, L. A. (2007). Patrilocality and Human Capital Accumulation: Evidence from
Central Asia. Economics of Transition, Vol. 15, No. 4, pp. 685–705.
GRUBER, S., & SZOŁTYSEK, M. (2016).The patriarchy index: a comparative study of
power relations across historical Europe, The History of the Family, 21(2), 133-174.
HANSEN, C.W., JENSEN, P.S., & SKOVSGAARD, C.V. (2015). Modern gender roles and
agricultural history: the Neolithic inheritance. Journal of Economic Growth, 20(4), 365-404.
HARDEMAN S., DIJKSTRA L. (2014). The EU Regional Human Development Index
(EU‑RHDI). European Commission Joint Research Centre Science and Policy Reports,
Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg,
http://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/JRC90538, accessed 15 August 2018.
HIBBS, D. and OLSSON, O. (2004). Geography, biogeography, and why some countries are
rich and others are poor. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,101, 3715–20.
HOFSTEDE, G., HOFSTEDE, G. I., & MINKOV, M. (2010) Cultures and Organizations:
Software of the Mind. Revised and expanded 3rd Edition. New York: McGraw-Hill.
HOUSE, R.J., HANGES, P.J., JAVIDAN, M., DORFMAN, P.W., & GUPTA, V. (Eds)
(2004). Culture, Leadership, and Organizations: The GLOBE Study of 62 Societies.
Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.
INGLEHART, R., & NORRIS, P. (2003). Rising Tide: Gender Equality and Cultural.
Change Around the World. New York and Cambridge: Cambridge University
JAYACHANDRAN, S. (2015). The Roots of Gender Inequality in Developing Countries.
Annual Review of Economics. Vol. 7: 63-88.
KAMBHAMPATI, U., RAJAN, R. (2008). The 'Nowhere' Children: Patriarchy and the Role
of Girls in India's Rural Economy. Journal Of Development Studies 44(9):1309-1341.
KIRKMAN, B. L., LOWE, K. B., & GIBSON, C. B. (2006). A quarter century of Culture’s
Consequences: A review of empirical research incorporating Hofstede’s cultural value
framework. Journal of International Business Studies, 37(3): 285–320.

KNACK, S., KEEFER, P. (1997). Does Social Capital Have an Economic Payoff? A CrossCountry Investigation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (4): 1251-1288.
KOK, J. (2017). Women’s Agency in Historical Family Systems. In J.L. Van Zanden, A.
Rijpma & J. Kok (Eds), Agency, Gender, and Economic Development in the World Economy
1850-2000: Testing the Sen hypothesis. London and New York: Routledge.
LE BRIS, D. (2016). Family Characteristics and Economic Development (October 28, 2016).
Available
at
SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2511173
or
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2511173.
LEVINE and ZERVOS (1998) Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth. Ross Levine;
Sara Zervos. The American Economic Review, Vol. 88, No. 3., 537-558
MALANIMA P. (2010). Urbanisation 1700–1870. In Broadberry S. & K. O'Rourke (Eds),
The Cambridge Economic History of Modern Europe, vol. I (pp. 235–63). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
MAMADOUH, V. (1999). A political-cultural map of Europe. Family structures and the
origins of differences between national political cultures in the European Union. GeoJournal,
47, 477–486.
MASELAND, R. AND VAN HOORN, A. (2009). Explaining the Negative Correlation
between Values and Practices: A Note on the Hofstede–Globe Debate. Journal of
International Business Studies, Vol. 40, No. 3, pp. 527-532.
MASON, K. O. (2001). Gender and Family systems in the fertility transition. Population and
Development Review, 27, 160-76.
MOKYR, J. (2016). A culture of growth. The origins of the modern economy. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
MURRAY, D. R. and SCHALLER, M. (2010). Historical Prevalence of Infectious Diseases
Within 230 Geopolitical Regions: A Tool for Investigating Origins of Culture. Journal of
Cross-Cultural Psychology 41(1) 99–108
NIMKOFF, M. F. (Ed.) (1965). Comparative Family Systems. Boston: Houghton & Mifiin.
OLSSON, O. AND PAIK, C. (2013). A Western Reversal Since the Neolithic? The Long-Run
Impact of Early Agriculture. WORKING PAPERS IN ECONOMICS No 552, Department of
Economics School of Business, Economics and Law at University of Gothenburg.
OLSSON, O., PAIK, C. (2016). Long-run cultural divergence: Evidence from the Neolithic
Revolution. Journal of Development Economics 122, 197–213.
PUTTERMAN, L. (2008). Agriculture, Diffusion and Development: Ripple Effects of the
Neolithic Revolution. Economica, 75(300), 729–748. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0335.2007.00652.x
PUTTERMAN, L. and D. WEIL (2010). Post-1500 Population Flows and the Long-Run
Determinants of Economic Growth and Inequality. Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(4),
1627-1682
REHER, D. S. (1998). Family ties in Western Europe: persistent contrasts. Population and
Development Review, 4(2), 203-234.
RIJPMA, A., & CARMICHAEL, S. G. (2016). Testing Todd and Matching Murdock: Global
Data on Historical Family Characteristics. Economic History of Developing Regions, 31(1),
10-46.
RUGGLES, S. (2012). The Future of Historical Family Demography. Annual Review of
Sociology, 38, 423-441.

RUGGLES, S., ROBERTS, E., SARKAR, S., & SOBEK, M. (2011). The North Atlantic
Population Project: Progress and prospects. Historical Methods, 44, 1-6.
SANTOS SILVA, M., ALEXANDER, A. C., KLASEN, S., & WELZEL, C. (2017). The
roots of female emancipation: From perennial cool water via pre-industrial late marriages to
postindustrial gender equality. Courant Research Centre: Poverty, Equity and Growth Discussion Papers, No. 241.
SEN, A. (1983). Economics and the Family. Asian Development Review, 1(2), 14–21.
SOOKIAS, R.B., PASSMORE, S., ATKINSON, Q.D. (2018). Deep cultural ancestry and
human development indicators across nation states. Royal Society open science 5 (4), 171411.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsos.171411.
SPOLAORE, E., & WACZIARG, R. (2013). How Deep Are the Roots of Economic
Development? Journal of Economic Literature, 51(2), 1–45.
SZOŁTYSEK, M. (2015). Households and family systems in early modern Europe. In
Hamish Scott (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Early Modern European History, 1350-1750,
Volume I: Peoples and Place (pp. 313-341). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
SZOŁTYSEK, M., & GRUBER, S. (2016). Mosaic: recovering surviving census records and
reconstructing the familial history of Europe, The History of the Family, 21(1), 38-60
SZOŁTYSEK, M., PONIAT, R., KLÜSENER, S., & GRUBER, S. (2017a). Family
organisation and human capital inequalities in historic Europe: testing the association anew.
MPIDR Working Paper WP-2017-012.
SZOŁTYSEK, M., S. KLUESENER, R. PONIAT, & GRUBER, S. (2017b). The patriarchy
index: A new measure of gender and generational inequalities in the past. Cross-Cultural
Research, 51(3), 228–262.
SZOŁTYSEK, M., R. PONIAT (2018). Historical family systems and contemporary
developmental outcomes: what is to be gained from the historical census microdata
revolution? The History of the Family, DOI: 10.1080/1081602X.2018.1477686.
THERBORN, G. (2004). Between Sex and Power: Family in the World 1900–2000. London:
Routledge.
THORNHILL, R., & FINCHER, C. L. (2014). Collectivism–Individualism, Family Ties, and
Philopatry. In R. Thornhill & C. L. Fincher, The Parasite-Stress Theory of Values and
Sociality: Infectious Disease, History and Human Values Worldwide (pp. 113-170). Cham
(Switzerland) and New York: Springer.
TODD, E. (1985). The explanation of ideology. Family structures and social systems. Oxford:
Basic Blackwell.
TODD, E. (1987). The Causes of Progress: Culture, Authority and Change. Translated by
Richard Boulin. New York: Basil.
VAN STAVEREN, I. (2013). To Measure is to Know? A Comparative Analysis of Gender
Indices. Review of Social Economy, 71(3), 339–372. doi:10.1080/00346764.2012.707398
VANDELLO, J. A., & COHEN, D. (1999). Patterns of individualism and collectivism across
the United States. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 279-292.
WALL, R. (2001). Transformation of the European family across the centuries’. In R. Wall,
T. K. Hareven, J. Ehmer and M. Cerman (eds), Family history revisited. Comparative
perspectives, pp. 217–241. Newark: University of Delaware Press.

WASSERSTEIN, R. L. & LAZAR, N. A. (2016). The ASA's Statement on p-Values:
Context, Process, and Purpose, The American Statistician, 70:2, 129-133.
WEBER, M. (1904). The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. Scribner’s Press,
NewYork.
WELZEL, C. (2013). Freedom Rising. Human Empowerment and the Quest for
Emancipation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
WHYTE, M.K. (1996). The Chinese Family and Economic Development: Obstacle or
Engine." Economic Development and Cultural Change 45(1): 1-30.

Figures
Figure 1: Spatial distribution of the combined Mosaic/NAPP data

Notes: for sources of the Mosaic and NAPP data, see Supplementary material 2.

Figure 2: Cross-country variation in historical patriarchy (combined Mosaic/NAPP data)

Notes: for sources of the Mosaic and NAPP data, see Supplementary material 2. Grey colour indicates no data.

Figure 3: Comparisons of the Pearson's r with 95% CI (bootstrapped) for unconditional
correlations between indicators of family organization (PI vs FFI) and selected measures of
gender inequality, value orientations, economic growth and human development

Source: for PI – Mosaic/NAPP database; for FFI – data courtesy of S. Carmichael.

Figures 4a-b: The unconditional correlations between contemporary family ties, patriarchy
and intergenerational coresidence, and historical patriarchy levels (PI)

Notes: sources as in Tables 7-8.

Table 1: Components of the Patriarchy Index
Domain/ component
Male domination

Component

Abbreviation

Definition/measurement

Relationship with
patriarchy

Proportion of female household
heads

Female heads

the proportion of all female household heads among all
adult (20+ years) household heads of family households

Proportion of young brides

Young brides

the proportion of ever-married women in the age group 15- positive
19 years

Proportion of wives who are
older than their husbands

Older wives

the proportion of all of the wives who are older than their negative
husbands among all of the couples for whom the ages of
both partners are known

age-standardized

Proportion of young women
living as non-kin

Female non-kin

the proportion of women aged 20-34 years who live as
non-kin, usually as lodgers or servants

negative

age-standardized

Younger household
head

the proportion of elderly men (aged 65+ years) living in a negative
household headed by a male household head of a younger
generation

Generational domination Proportion of elderly men

coresiding with a younger
household head

Proportion of neolocal residence Neolocal
among young men

the proportion of male household heads living without any
relatives except spouses and children among ever-married
men in the age group 20-29 years

negative

Specification
age-standardized

Only family households;the elderly
men must be relatives of the
household head

negative

only family households; agestandardized

Proportion of elderly people
living with lateral relatives

Lateral

the proportion of elderly people (aged 65+ years) living
with at least one lateral relative in the household

positive

Only family households

Patrilocality

Proportion of elderly people
living with married daughters

Married daughter

the proportion of elderly people (aged 65+ years) living
with at least one married daughter in the same household
among those elderly people who live with at least one
married child in the same household

negative

Only family households

Son preference

Proportion of boys among the
last child

Boy as last child

the proportion of boys among the last children (if the last
child is one of a set of siblings of both sexes, he or she will
be excluded from the analysis).

positive

only children of household heads;
only age group 10 to 14 years;
family households

Sex ratio of youngest age group Sex ratio

the sex ratio (boys to 100 girls) in the youngest age group positive
(0-4 years old).

Only family households

Table 2: Basic characteristics of Mosaic/NAPP country samples
Country

PI

IQR

No. of
regions

No. of
settlements
(parishes/
villages)*
14
291

Albania

29,32

4,0

Austria

14,9

5,25

4

Belarus

25,1

–

Belgium

14

Bulgaria

Pop.

% rural

Time
(average)

Time
(range)

140,611

58

1918

–

53

20,036

74

1910

–

2

90(p)/340

44,508

100

1793

1768–1804

–

1

5 (p)

13,666

100

1814

–

24,68

–

2

8(p)

8,373

78

1908

1877–1947

Croatia

22

–

1

24

1,880

100

1674

–

Denmark

12,2

1,0

19

n/a

838,623

94

1787

–

France

16,37

3,0

5

33

27,745

79

1845

1831–1901

Germany

14,24

3,25

44

690

384,049

62

1824

1700–1900

Hungary

19

2,25

4

20 (p)

13,724

100

1869

–

Iceland

14

–

1

n/a

51,003

100

1703

–

Lithuania

22,5

–

2

480

19,917

100

1847

–

Netherlands

13,6

1,0

5

33

40,037

53

1811

1810–1811

Norway

16,3

1,0

21

n/a

878,073

95

1801

–

Poland

16,66

3,0

10

88(p)/440

83,276

65

1791

1666–1809

Romania

20,1

1,25

8

71

14,514

100

1844

1781–1879

Russia

22,59

2,75

11

85

46,296

92

1768

1710–1897

Slovakia

20,5

–

3

21

8,410

100

1869

–

Spain

20,9

–

3

13 (p)

23,997

29

1889

1880–1890

Sweden

12,9

2,25

24

n/a 4,624,825

92

1880

–

Ukraine

22,16

2,0

11

231

90,022

81

1815

1765–1897

U.K.

11,6

1,0

83

n/a 7,859,626

57

1881

–

Serbia

24,73

–

3

18

19,180

86

1870

1863–1884

Turkey

20

–

2

1

8,354

0

1896

1885–1907

Switzerland

17,28

–

3

18 (p)

16,140

68

1787

1671–1870

Latvia

19,1

2,25

4

67 (p)

35,807

100

1797

–

Source: Mosaic and NAPP.
* Numbers indicated with „p” stand for „parishes/or estates”; otherwise refer to settlements/villages.

Table 3: Cross-country variation in gender inequality

Historical PI
Time Period

GII

GII

GII

GII

SIGI
Family

SIGI
Family

SIGI
Family

SIGI
Family

0.61***
(0.14)
0.16
(0.14)

0.53***
(0.17)
0.04
(0.27)
0.38^
(0.22)

0.45*
(0.19)
0.12
(0.15)

0.13
(0.18)
-0.03
(0.14)

0.53***
(0.16)
0.16
(0.20)

0.42**
(0.15)
0.04
(0.21)
0.61**
(0.22)

0.46^
(0.26)
0.15
(0.20)

0.25
(0.29)
0.05
(0.22)

Neolithic
Revolution
Protestantism
Cool Water
effect
Intercept
N
Adj. Rsquared
F-statistic
AIC

-0.25
(0.19)

-0.09
(0.26)

Yes
26
0.39

Yes
24
0.40

Yes
26
0.40

-0.71**
(0.24)
Yes
26
0.61

9.03**
65.70

6.19**
61.57

6.61**
66.06

13.92***
55.10

Yes
25
0.29

Yes
23
0.56

Yes
25
0.27

-0.41
(0.32)
Yes
25
0.34

5.99**
67.06

10.42**
52.22

4.05*
68.51

5.27**
65.88

Notes: cross-country OLS estimates, bootstrapped standard errors (based on 1,000 replications) in parentheses.
In columns 1-4, the dependent variable is Gender Inequality Index from 2015; in columns 5-8 - the
“Discriminatory Family Code” component of the Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI) as of 2014.
^ p-value <0.1
* p-value <0.05 ** p-value <0.01
*** p-value <0.001

Table 4: Cross-country variation in value orientations

Historical PI
Time Period

EVI

EVI

EVI

EVI

EVI

Ind.

Ind.

Ind.

Ind.

Ind.

-0.73***
(0.12)
0.16
(0.16)

-0.79***
(0.17)
0.31
(0.30)
-0.14
(0.26)

-0.38**
(0.16)
0.25
(0.13)

-0.46*
(0.23)
0.20
(0.16)

-0.88***
(0.14)
0.14
(0.23)

-0.87***
(0.10)
0.10
(0.11)

-0.88***
(0.13)
0.22
(0.16)
-0.23
(0.22)

-0.83***
(14)
0.11
(0.10)

-0.53***
(0.14)
0.24*
(0.11)

-0.88***
(0.14)
0.14
(0.23)

Neolithic
Revolution
Protestant.
Cool Water
effect
Pathogen
load
Intercept
N
Adj. Rsquared
F-statistic
AIC

0.59**
(0.19)

0.08
(0.14)
0.39
(0.28)

0.53**
(0.17)

Yes
24
0.51

Yes
22
0.48

Yes
24
0.62

Yes
24
0.52

0.14
(0.33)
Yes
22
0.50

12.87***
55.88

7.49**
55.27

13.45***
50.57

9.61***
55.66

8.15**
54.01

Yes
25
0.67

Yes
23
0.78

Yes
25
0.67

Yes
25
0.80

0.14
(0.34)
Yes
23
0.64

24.88***
48.37

27.02***
37.99

19.92***
49.21

32.56***
36.62

14.22***
43.79

Notes: cross-country OLS estimates, bootstrapped standard errors (based on 1,000 replications) in parentheses.
In columns 1-5, the dependent variable is Emancipatory Value Index (time-pooled cross section country
aggregates from WVS Waves 1 to 6); in columns 6-10 – one of Hofsteede’s “dimensions of culture”
(Individualism), measuring the degree of interdependence a society maintains among its members
(time-pooled cross section country aggregates from Hofstede et al., 2010; also https://geert-hofstede.com).
^ p-value <0.1
* p-value <0.05 ** p-value <0.01
*** p-value <0.001

Table 5: Cross-country variation in economic performance

Historical PI
Time period

GDP (ln)

GDP (ln)

GDP (ln)

GDP (ln)

GDP (ln)

GDP (ln)

GDP (ln)

-0.83***
(0.10)
0.01
(0.09)

-0.68***
(0.19)
-0.15
(0.18)
0.23
(0.30)

-0.79***
(0.11)
0.09
(0.22)

-0.60***
(0.12)
0.08
(0.10)

-0.69***
(0.13)
0.02
(0.10)

-0.43**
(0.13)
-0.10
(0.08)

-0.65***
(0.13)
-0.08
(0.11)

Hist. GDP (ln)
Neolithic
Revolution
Cool Water
effect

-0.10
(0.12)
0.38^
(0.18)
0.22
(0.15)

Protestantism

-0.51**
(0.16)

Communism
State Antiquity
Intercept
N
Adj. R-squared
F-statistic
AIC

Yes
26
0.68
27.76***
48.84

Yes
25
0.68
18.29***
48.50

Yes
24
0.64
14.88***
48.60

Yes
26
0.72
22.91***
45.29

Yes
26
0.70
20.26***
48.31

Yes
26
0.78
30.92***
39.82

0.31^
(0.15)
Yes
26
0.73
24.28***
44.14

Notes: cross-country OLS estimates, bootstrapped standard errors (based on 1,000 replications) in parentheses.
In all columns, the dependent variable is per capita gross domestic product of 2016 (transformed by taking the
natural logarithm; source: the World Bank).
^ p-value <0.1
* p-value <0.05 ** p-value <0.01
*** p-value <0.001

Table 6: Cross-country variation in human development
Historical PI
Time period

HDI

HDI

HDI

HDI

HDI

HDI

HDI

-0.82***
(0.10)
-0.07
(0.10)

-0.71***
(0.17)
-0.11
(0.16)
0.14
(0.25)

-0.77***
(0.12)
0.05
(0.22)

-0.45***
(0.09)
0.08
(0.09)

-0.65***
(0.12)
-0.03
(0.10)

-0.50**
(0.18)
-0.14^
(0.08)

-0.71***
(0.14)
-0.11
(0.10)

Hist. GDP (ln)
Neolithic
Revolution
Cool Water
effect
Protestantism

-0.23
(0.17)
0.56***
(0.14)
0.26^
(0.15)

Communism

-0.39^
(0.21)

State Antiquity
Intercept
N
Adj. R-squared
F-statistic
AIC

Yes
26
0.67
26.38***
49.77

Yes
25
0.70
19.66***
45.26

Yes
24
0.66
15.87***
48.32

Yes
26
0.80
35.03***
37.16

Yes
26
0.70
20.26***
48.31

Yes
26
0.72
22.79***
46.03

0.18
(0.17)
Yes
26
0.68
18.59***
49.93

Notes: cross-country OLS estimates, bootstrapped standard errors (based on 1,000 replications) in parentheses.
In all columns, the dependent variable is Human Development Index of 2015 (source: United Nations
Development Program (2016). Human development report 2016. New York, 198-201).

^ p-value <0.1

* p-value <0.05

** p-value <0.01

*** p-value <0.001

Table 7: Cross-country variation in contemporary patriarchy
Historical PI
Time Period
Pathogen
load
Protestantism
Communism
Postsoviet
Cool Water
effect
GDP ln

1
0.83***
(0.13)
-0.03
(0.13)

2
0.90***
(0.17)
0.00
(0.14)
-0.13
(0.28)

3
0.57***
(0.16)
-0.08
(0.14)

4
0.30*
(0.14)
0.06
(0.09)

5
0.78***
(0.17)
-0.01
(0.15)

6
0.50**
(0.19)
-0.16
(0.13)

7
0.18
(0.18)
0.02
(0.08)

8
0.74**
(0.23)
0.05
(0.25)

-0.46**
(0.16)
0.68***
(0.15)
0.13
(0.17)
-0.59*
(0.24)
-0.75***
(0.19)

Historical
-0.10
GDP ln
(0.42)
Intercept
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
N
21
21
21
21
21
21
21
20
Adj. R0.61
0.59
0.63
0.65
0.60
0.75
0.72
0.65
squared
F-statistic
16.51*** 10.77*** 12.38*** 13.52*** 10.99*** 20.74*** 18.22*** 12.66***
AIC
44.69
46.21
44.25
42.96
45.92
36.25
38.35
40.35
Notes: cross-country OLS estimates, bootstrapped standard errors (based on 1,000 replications) in parentheses.
The dependent variable is Welzel’s measure of contemporary patriarchy (time-pooled cross section country
aggregates from WVS Waves 1-6; data: courtesy of C. Welzel).
^ p-value <0.1
* p-value <0.05 ** p-value <0.01
*** p-value <0.001

Table 8: Cross-country variation in contemporary residential proximity
Historical PI
Time Period
Pathogen
load
Protestantism
Communism
Postsoviet
Cool Water
effect
GDP ln

1
0.98***
(0.10)
0.05
(0.10)

2
0.95***
(0.15)
0.01
(0.11)
0.10
(0.25)

3
0.74***
(0.21)
0.00
(0.13)

4
0.49*
(0.20)
0.10
(0.09)

5
1.08***
(0.14)
0.03
(0.11)

6
0.67***
(0.16)
-0.03
(0.11)

7
0.50**
(0.19)
0.06
(0.10)

8
0.90***
(0.20)
0.14
(0.20)

-0.30
(0.19)
0.56**
(0.20)
-0.15
(0.15)
-0.42*
(0.21)
-0.56*
(0.23)

Historical
-0.13
GDP ln
(0.27)
Intercept
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
N
23
22
23
23
23
23
23
22
Adj. R0.76
0.74
0.78
0.83
0.76
0.79
0.85
0.75
squared
F-statistic
36.46*** 21.27*** 26.80*** 36.13*** 24.37*** 28.35*** 41.55*** 22.58***
AIC
36.92
37.78
36.19
30.48
37.94
35.13
27.72
37.78
Notes: cross-country OLS estimates, bootstrapped standard errors (based on 1,000 replications) in parentheses.
The dependent variable is percent 30-39 years old living with parents, based on EVS (2016): European Values
Study 2008: Integrated Dataset (EVS 2008). GESIS Data Archive, Cologne. ZA4800 Data file Version 4.0.0,
doi:10.4232/1.12458).
^ p-value <0.1
* p-value <0.05 ** p-value <0.01
*** p-value <0.001

Appendix 1
Table 1A: Cross-country variation in gender inequality (robustness tests with selected
countries omitted)
Historical PI
Time Period

1
0.67***
(0.16)
0.11
(0.15)

2
0.63**
(0.21)
-0.07
(0.31)
0.33
(0.27)

Neolithic
Revolution
Protestantism

3
0.63**
(0.20)
-0.18
(0.31)
0.31
(0.27)

4
0.51*
(0.21)
0.05
(0.15)

5
0.16
(0.27)
0.03
(0.16)

6
0.17
(0.16)
-0.11
(0.14)

-0.27
(0.19)

Cool Water
effect
Intercept
N
Adj. R-squared
F-statistic
AIC
Omitted
countries

-0.65*
-0.75***
(0.30)
(0.22)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
22
20
22
22
22
25
0.44
0.41
0.38
0.46
0.58
0.66
9.28**
5.50**
5.28**
6.90**
10.56***
16.76***
54.41
52.05
57.93
54.57
49.07
49.37
Bulgaria,
Bulgaria,
Croatia,
Bulgaria,
Bulgaria,
Great Britain
Croatia,
Croatia,
Turkey
Croatia,
Croatia,
Spain,
Spain,
Spain,
Spain,
Turkey
Turkey
Turkey
Turkey
Notes: cross-country OLS estimates, bootstrapped standard errors (based on 1,000 replications) in parentheses.
The dependent variable is Gender Inequality Index from 2015. Model specifications in columns (3) and (6) based
on Cook’s distances.
^ p-value <0.1
* p-value <0.05 ** p-value <0.01
*** p-value <0.001

Table 1B: Cross-country variation in gender inequality (robustness tests with selected
countries omitted)
Historical PI
Time Period

1
0.47*
(0.21)
0.18
(0.20)

2
0.45**
(0.16)
0.30^
(0.17)

Neolithic
Revolution
Protestantism
Cool Water
effect
Intercept
N
Adj. Rsquared
F-statistic
AIC
Omitted
countries

Yes
21
0.22

Yes
24
0.34

3
0.42*
(0.21)
0.19
(0.33)
0.48^
(0.27)

Yes
19
0.38

4
0.32*
(0.15)
0.16
(0.28)
0.56*
(0.27)

Yes
21
0.46

5
0.47
(0.38)
0.18
(0.23)

6
0.23
(0.34)
0.25
(0.22)

0.01
(0.35)

-0.13
(0.36)

Yes
21
0.18

Yes
23
0.18

7
0.28
(0.42)
0.15
(0.24)

8
0.04
(0.39)
0.13
(0.22)

-0.23
(0.40)
Yes
21
0.21

-0.44
(0.40)
Yes
22
0.19

3.96*
7.09**
4.67*
6.84**
2.52
2.58
2.79
2.66
58.92
62.71
51.24
52,51
60.84
66.37
60.17
63.34
Bulgaria, Croatia
Bulgaria, Albania, Bulgaria, Albania, Bulgaria, Albania,
Croatia,
Croatia,
Croatia
Croatia,
Croatia
Croatia,
Croatia,
Spain,
Spain,
Spain,
Spain,
Turkey
Turkey
Turkey
Turkey
Turkey
Notes: cross-country OLS estimates, bootstrapped standard errors (based on 1,000 replications) in parentheses.
The dependent variable is the “Discriminatory Family Code” component of the Social Institutions and Gender
Index (SIGI) as of 2014. Model specifications in columns (2), (4), (6), and (8) based on Cook’s distances.
^ p-value <0.1
* p-value <0.05 ** p-value <0.01
*** p-value <0.001

Table 1C: Cross-country variation in value orientation (robustness tests with selected
countries omitted)
Historical PI
Time Period

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

-0.77***
(0.14)
0.06
(0.15)

-0.70***
(0.11)
0.09
(0.16)

-0.77***
(0.17)
0.17
(0.25)
-0.11
(0.23)

-0.86***
(0.20)
0.42
(0.40)
-0.20
(0.40)

-0.49**
(0.17)
0.17
(0.11)

-0.51***
(0.14)
0.41***
(0.11)

-0.48*
(0.23)
0.10
(0.15)

-0.79***
(0.16)
0.15
(0.20)

-0.81***
(0.16)
0.01
(0.30)

0.47*
(0.21)

0.53***
(0.14)

-0.11
(0.32)
Yes
20
0.54
8.62**
48.02
Bulgaria,
Croatia,
Spain,
Turkey

0.11
(0.41)
Yes
20
0.47
6.60**
50.94
Spain,
Sweden

Neolithic
Revolution
Protestantism

0.36
(0.23)

Cool Water
effect
Pathogen load
Intercept
N
Adj. R-squared
F-statistic
AIC
Omitted
countries

Yes
22
0.53
12.72***
52.72
Bulgaria,
Croatia,
Spain,
Turkey

Yes
23
0.46
12.53***
55.71
Sweden

Yes
20
0.49
7.15**
50.45
Bulgaria,
Croatia,
Spain,
Turkey

Yes
20
0.41
5.48**
52.99
Great
Britain,
Sweden

Yes
22
0.64
13.72***
45.23
Bulgaria,
Croatia,
Spain,
Turkey

Yes
21
0.81
28.81***
30.65
Great
Britain,
Latvia,
Norway

Yes
22
0.55
9.70***
50.25
Bulgaria,
Croatia,
Spain,
Turkey

Notes: cross-country OLS estimates, bootstrapped standard errors (based on 1,000 replications) in parentheses.
The dependent variable is Emancipatory Value Index (time-pooled cross section country aggregates from WVS
Waves 1-6). Model specifications in columns (2), (4), (6), and (9) based on Cook’s distances.
^ p-value <0.1
* p-value <0.05 ** p-value <0.01
*** p-value <0.001

Table 1D: Cross-country variation in value orientation (robustness tests with selected
countries omitted)
Historical PI
Time Period
Neolithic
Revolution
Protestantism
Cool Water
effect
Pathogen load

1
-0.88***
(0.13)
0.10
(0.14)

2
-0.90***
(0.19)
0.30
(0.29)
-0.21
(0.22)

3
-0.91***
(0.11)
0.24
(0.20)
-0.36*
(0.16)

4
-0.84***
(0.19)
0.11
(0.14)

5
-0.38*
(0.18)
0.16
(0.13)

6
-0.43**
(0.15)
0.25
(0.11)

0.63***
(0.17)

0.60***
(0.16)

7
-0.81***
(0.16)
0.01
(0.31)

8
-0.74***
(0.18)
0.25
(0.18)

0.06
(0.17)

0.11
-0.22
(0.41)
(0.26)
Intercept
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
N
21
19
21
21
21
24
19
22
Adj. R-squared
0.62
0.73
0.88
0.62
0.79
0.81
0.56
0.69
F-statistic
17.66*** 17.25*** 51.96
11.74*** 25.55*** 33.16*** 8.56*
16.48***
AIC
43.76
36.48
21.77
44.99
32.73
34.19
40.33
39.20
Omitted
Bulgaria, Bulgaria, Hungary, Bulgaria, Bulgaria, Turkey
Bulgaria, Austria
countries
Croatia,
Croatia,
Sweden
Croatia,
Croatia,
Croatia,
Spain,
Spain,
Spain,
Spain,
Spain,
Turkey
Turkey
Turkey
Turkey
Turkey
Notes: cross-country OLS estimates, bootstrapped standard errors (based on 1,000 replications) in parentheses.
The dependent variable is of Hofstede’s “Individualism” (time-pooled cross section country aggregates from
Hofstede et al., 2010; also https://geert-hofstede.com). Model specifications in columns (3), (6), and (8) based on
Cook’s distances.
^ p-value <0.1
* p-value <0.05 ** p-value <0.01
*** p-value <0.001

Table 1E: Cross-country variation in economic output (robustness tests with selected countries omitted)
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

Historical PI

-0.84***
(0.11)

-0.87***
(0.08)

-0.70**
(0.22)

-0.69***
(0.20)

-0.82***
(0.15)

-0.83***
(0.15)

-0.50**
(0.17)

-0.62***
(0.11)

-0.69***
(0.15)

-0.73***
(0.13)

-0.34*
(0.15)

-0.38**
(0.13)

-0.63***
(0.18)

-0.64***
(0.15)

Time Period

-0.02
(0.12)

-0.04
(0.10)

-0.13
(0.19)
0.19
(0.29)

-0.19
(0.20)
0.28
(0.25)

0.18
(0.17)

0.25
(0.25)

0.03
(0.12)

0.11
(0.10)

0.03
(0.12)

-0.01
(0.09)

-0.05
(0.07)

-0.10
(0.07)

-0.05
(0.11)

-0.16
(0.11)

-0.16
(0.16)

-0.18
(0.16)
0.44*
(0.21)

0.36**
(0.14)
0.25
(0.16)

0.21
(0.15)
-0.59***
(0.16)

-0.61***
(0.13)

0.31^
(0.16)
Yes
24
0.78
28.55***

Historical
GDP (ln)
Neolithic
Revolution
CWI
Protestant.
Communism
State
Antiquity
Intercept
N
Adj. Rsquared
F-statistic
AIC
Omitted
countries

Yes
22
0.70

Yes
25
0.74

Yes
22
0.68

Yes
23
0.77

Yes
20
0.66

Yes
23
0.65

Yes
22
0.75

Yes
23
0.79

Yes
22
0.71

Yes
25
0.76

Yes
22
0.81

Yes
24
0.89

0.32^
(0.19)
Yes
22
0.74

24.28***

35.85***

15.95***

26.32***

13.11***

14.70***

21.99***

28.94***

18.31***

26.24***

30.23***

63.05***

20.74***

41.50
41.70
42.87
37.08
41.10
46.47
37.52
34.75
40.63
40.98
31.85
20.75
38.53
37.14
Bulgaria, Ukraine Bulgaria, Great
Bulgaria, Croatia
Bulgaria, Great
Bulgaria, Ukraine Bulgaria, Turkey, Bulgaria, Russia,
Croatia,
Croatia,
Britain, Croatia,
Croatia,
Britain, Croatia,
Croatia,
Ukraine Croatia,
Ukraine
Spain,
Spain,
Ukraine Spain,
Spain,
Turkey, Spain,
Spain,
Spain,
Turkey
Turkey
Turkey
Turkey
Ukraine Turkey
Turkey
Turkey
Notes: cross-country OLS estimates, bootstrapped standard errors (based on 1,000 replications) in parentheses. The dependent variable is per capita gross domestic product of
2016 (transformed by taking the natural logarithm; source: the World Bank). Model specifications in columns (2), (4), …, and (14) based on Cook’s distances.
^ p-value <0.1
* p-value <0.05 ** p-value <0.01
*** p-value <0.001

Table 1F: Cross-country variation in human development (robustness tests with selected countries omitted)
Historical PI
Time Period

1
-0.85***
(0.11)
-0.06
(0.1)

Historical
GDP (ln)
Neolithic
Revolution
CWI

2
-0.75***
(0.21)
-0.14
(0.17)
0.13
(0.26)

3
-0.57***
(0.14)
-0.25
(0.15)
0.39
(0.25)

4
-0.84***
(0.14)
0.09
(0.09)

5
-0.82***
(0.12)
0.06
(0.19)

-0.16
(0.18)

-0.09
(0.15)

6
-0.43**
(0.14)
0.00
(0.10)

7
-0.46***
(0.08)
0.13
(0.09)

0.52**
(0.17)

0.59***
(0.12)

Protestantism

8
-0.68***
(0.14)
0.00
(0.09)

10
-0.36***
(0.10)
-0.10
(0.06)

-0.57***
(0.16)

-0.60***
(0.13)

11
-0.68***
(0.18)
-0.09
(0.10)

12
-0.74***
(0.15)
-0.08
(0.11)

0.24
(0.19)
Yes
22
0.74

0.19
(0.14)
Yes
24
0.76

0.27^
(0.16)

Communism
State
Antiquity
Intercept
N
Adj. Rsquared
F-statistic
AIC
Omitted
countries

9
-0.36*
(0.15)
0.08
(0.07)

Yes
22
0.71

Yes
22
0.70

Yes
23
0.77

Yes
20
0.68

Yes
23
0.67

Yes
22
0.81

Yes
25
0.82

Yes
22
0.75

Yes
22
0.82

Yes
25
0.84

27.42***
17.66***
25.80***
14.76***
16.04***
30.79***
37.41***
21.72***
33.95***
42.99***
20.65***
25.50***
39.55
41.22
35.85
40.05
45.82
31.51
33.74
37.74
29.70
30.78
38.60
39.32
Bulgaria,
Bulgaria,
Great
Bulgaria,
Turkey
Bulgaria,
Great
Bulgaria,
Bulgaria,
Turkey
Bulgaria,
Turkey,
Croatia,
Croatia,
Britain,
Croatia,
Croatia,
Britain
Croatia,
Croatia,
Croatia,
Ukraine
Spain,
Spain,
Norway
Spain,
Spain,
Spain,
Spain,
Spain,
Turkey
Turkey
Turkey
Turkey
Turkey
Turkey
Turkey
Notes: cross-country OLS estimates, bootstrapped standard errors (based on 1,000 replications) in parentheses. The dependent variable is Human Development Index of 2015
(source: United Nations Development Program (2016). Human development report 2016. New York, 198-201). Model specifications in columns (3), (5), (7), (10), and (12)
based on Cook’s distances.
^ p-value <0.1
* p-value <0.05 ** p-value <0.01
*** p-value <0.001

Table 1G: Cross-regional (NUTS/ITAN-level) variation in contemporary developmental outcomes
de0

logGDP_2012

RHDI_2012

C001

30-39 with parents

0,37***
(0,09)

-0,26*
(0,13)

0,48***
(0,11)

-0,4*
(0,18)

0,19
(0,13)

Rural

-0,05
(0,05)

-0,17*
(0,07)

0,05
(0,1)

-0,01
(0,15)

0,13
(0,09)

Time period

0,01
(0,06)

-0,19**
(0,07)

-0,01
(0,05)

-0,12
(0,13)

0,08
(0,07)

Communism

0,74***
(0,06)

-0,74***
(0,08)

0,61***
(0,1)

0
(0,14)

0,62***
(0,12)

105

102

95

80

98

0,788

0,658

0,643

0,115

0,546

PI

N
Adj. R-squared

Notes: cross-regional OLS estimates for NUTS/ITAN administrative units; bootstrapped standard errors (based on 1,000 replications) in parentheses.
“de0” is the difference between female and male life expectancy at birth in 2016 (source: Eurostat); “C001” is question C001 from the EVS data from 2008 asking whether
respondents strongly agreed, agreed, disagreed, or strongly disagreed with the statement that “men should be preferred when jobs are scare”.
RHDI_2012 represents the region’s HDI rank among all EU regions (source: Hardeman and Dijkstra 2014)
* p-value <0.05 ** p-value <0.01

*** p-value <0.001

Supplementary material 1
Table 2A: Mosaic datafiles (as of December 2017).
census

regions

N (=pop.)

Albania, 1918 census

8 rural regions, 6 cities

140,611

Austria-Hungary, 1869 census

9 rural regions from Hungary, Romania, Slovakia

31,406

Austria-Hungary, 1910 census

3 rural regions and 1 city from Austria

20,036

Belgium 1814 census

1 rural region from Western Flanders

13,666

Bulgaria, 1877-1947
household registers

1 rural region and 1 city from the Rhodope area

8,373

Dubrovnik, 1674 status
animarum
Denmark, 1803 census

1 rural region from Dalmatia

1,880

9 rural regions and 2 urban regions from Schleswig and Holstein

107,861

France, 1846 census

3 rural regions

16,967

France, 1831-1901 census

1 rural region from South-Western France

5,109

France, 1846-1856 census

1 city from South-Western France

5,669

German Customs Union, 1846
census

10 rural regions and 4 urban regions

36,760

German Customs Union, 1858
census

1 rural region from the East

3,468

German Customs Union, 1861
census
German Customs Union, 1867
census
Germany, 1900 census

1 rural region from the Southwest

6,541

4 rural regions and 1 city in Mecklenburg-Schwerin

66,938

1 city

55,705

Mecklenburg-Schwerin, 1819
census
Münster, around 1700 status
animarum
Münster, 1749 status
animarum
Netherlands, census 18101811
Poland-Lithuania, 1768-1804
listings
Poland-Lithuania, 1791–1792
census
Moldavia, 1781-1879 status
animarum
Wallachia, 1838 census

3 rural regions and 1 city

37,332

3 rural regions in North-Western Germany

23,010

3 rural regions in North-Western Germany

34,169

2 rural regions and 3 cities in the south

40,037

12 rural regions

155,818

3 urban regions

28,975

2 rural regions

5,291

4 rural regions

21,546

Russia, 1710 enumeration

6 rural and 2 urban regions in the Ural area

27,736

Russia, 1765 census

4 rural regions in the Hetmanate area (Ukraine)

18,391

Russia, 1795 revision lists

1 rural region in Ukraine

8,050

Russia, 1797 revision lists

4 rural regions in Courland (Latvia)

35,807

Russia, 1814 private
enumeration
Russia, 1847 enumeration

1 region in Central Russia

2,955

2 rural regions in Lithuania and Belarus

19,917

Mosaic data:

Russia, 1897 census

34,441

Serbia, 1863 census

1 rural region around Moscow; 4 rural regions and 1 urban region
around Berdychiv in Ukraine
1 rural region and 1 city

Serbia, 1884 census

1 rural region

9,434

Spain, 1880-1890 local census

1 rural and 2 urban regions in Catalonia

23,997

Switzerland, 1671-1762
church listings
Switzerland, 1870 census

2 rural regions in canton Zürich

10,988

Zürich

8,152

Ottoman Empire, 1885 census

Istanbul

3,408

Ottoman Empire, 1907 census

Istanbul

4,946

Mosaic data overall

142 regions (109 rural and 33 urban)

1,085,136

9,746

NAPP data
Denmark, 1787 census (100%) 21 regions

838,623

Iceland, 1703 census (100%)

1 region

51,003

Norway, 1801 census (100%)

19 regions

878,073

Sweden, 1880 census (100%)

24 regions

4,624,825

England (10% sample)

76 regions

2,926,374

Wales (10% sample)

13 regions

1,573,065

Scotland (10% sample)

32 regions

2,783,354

Islands (10% sample)

3 regions

139,614

NAPP data overall

151 regions

14,252,150

United Kingdom, 1881 census:

Supplementary material 2
Table 3A: References to the data
Mosaic data:
Karl Kaser, Siegfried Gruber, Gentiana Kera, Enriketa Pandelejmoni. 1918 Census of Albania,
Version 0.1 [SPSS file]. Graz, 2011.
Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR). 1869 Census of Hungary, Version 1.0 [Mosaic
Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2014.
Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR). 1910 Census of Austria, Version 1.0 [Mosaic
Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2014.
Familiekunde Vlaanderen and Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR). 1814 Census of
Western Flanders, Version 1.0 [Mosaic Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2014.
Ulf Brunnbauer. Household registers of Rhodope region, Version 1.0 [Mosaic Historical Microdata
File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2014.
Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR). Status Animarum for Lisac and Pridvorje, Version
1.0 [Mosaic Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2015.
Danish Data Archive. 1803 Census of Schleswig and Holstein, Version 1.1 [Mosaic Historical
Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2012.
Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR). 1846 Census of France, Version 1.0 [Mosaic
Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2014.
University of Bordeaux. 1831 Census of Sallespisse, Version 1.2 [Mosaic Historical Microdata File].
www.censusmosaic.org, 2013.
University of Bordeaux. 1836 Census of Boulazac, Version 1.1 [Mosaic Historical Microdata File].
www.censusmosaic.org, 2012.
University of Bordeaux. 1841 Census of St. Jean de Luz, Version 1.1 [Mosaic Historical Microdata
File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2012.
University of Bordeaux. 1841 Census of Targon, Version 1.1 [Mosaic Historical Microdata File].
www.censusmosaic.org, 2012.

University of Bordeaux. 1876 Census of Boulazac, Version 1.1 [Mosaic Historical Microdata File].
www.censusmosaic.org, 2012.
University of Bordeaux. 1901 Census of Sauternes, Version 1.1 [Mosaic Historical Microdata File].
www.censusmosaic.org, 2012.
University of Bordeaux. 1846 Census of Saint-Émilion, Version 1.2 [Mosaic Historical Microdata
File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2014.
University of Bordeaux. 1856 Census of Saint-Émilion, Version 1.2 [Mosaic Historical Microdata
File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2014.
Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR). 1846 German Customs Union Census, Version 2.1
[Mosaic Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2014.
Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR). 1846 Census of Höhscheid, Version 1.0 [Mosaic
Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2014.
Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR). 1858 German Customs Union Census, Version 1.0
[Mosaic Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2014.
Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR). 1861 Census of Haigerloch, Version 1.0 [Mosaic
Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2014.
State Main Archive Schwerin, Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR), and Department of
Multimedia and Data Processing, University of Rostock. 1819 Census of Mecklenburg-Schwerin,
Version 1.0 [Mosaic Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2016.
State Main Archive Schwerin, Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR), and Department of
Multimedia and Data Processing, University of Rostock. 1819 Census of Rostock, Version 1.0
[Mosaic Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2015.
State Main Archive Schwerin, Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR), and Department of
Multimedia and Data Processing, University of Rostock. 1867 Census of Mecklenburg-Schwerin,
Version 1.0 [Mosaic Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2016.
State Main Archive Schwerin, Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR), and Department of
Multimedia and Data Processing, University of Rostock. 1867 Census of Rostock, Version 1.0 [Mosaic
Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2015.

State Main Archive Schwerin, Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR), and Department of
Multimedia and Data Processing, University of Rostock. 1900 Census of Rostock, Version 1.0 [Mosaic
Historical Microdata File]. Rostock, Germany: www.censusmosaic.org, 2013.
Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR). 1749 Status Animarum of Münster, Version 1.0
[Mosaic Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2014.
Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR). 1690-1713 Status Animarum of Oldenburger
Münsterland, Version 1.0 [Mosaic Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2014.
Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR). 1811 Census of Zeeland, Version 1.0 [Mosaic
Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2015.
Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR). 1810 Census of North Brabant, Version 1.0 [Mosaic
Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2015.
Mikołaj Szołtysek (2012) CEURFAMFORM database, Version 23 [SPSS file]. Rostock.
Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR). 1781-1879 Status Animarum in Moldavia, Version
1.0 [Mosaic Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2015.
Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR). 1838 Census of Wallachia, Version 1.0 [Mosaic
Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2014.
Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR). 1710 Russian enumeration of Ural region, Version
1.0 [Mosaic Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2017.
Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR). 1765 Rumyantsev census of Hetmanate region,
Version 1.0 [Mosaic Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2017.
Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR). 1795 Braclav Region Revision Lists, Version 1.0
[Mosaic Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2014.
Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR). 1797 Revision lists of Courland, Version 1.0 [Mosaic
Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2017.
Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR). 1814 Russian list of inhabitants, Version 1.0 [Mosaic
Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2014.
Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR). 1847 Lithuanian Estate Household Listings,
Version 1.0 [Mosaic Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2015.

Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR). 1897 Russian census, Moscow region, Version 1.0
[Mosaic Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org,2014.
Tomasz Jankowski. 1897 Russian Census, Berdychiv region, Version 1.0 [Mosaic Historical
Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2017.
Joel M. Halpern and Siegfried Gruber. 1863 Census of Jasenički srez, Serbia, Version 1.1 [Mosaic
Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2012.
Joel M. Halpern and Siegfried Gruber. 1884 Census of Jasenički srez, Serbia, Version 1.1 [Mosaic
Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2012.
Laboratory of Historical Demography (MPIDR). 1880-1890 Local Censuses in Catalonia, Version
1.0 [Mosaic Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2015.
Ulrich Pfister. 1634-1764 Soul listings of canton Zürich, Version 1.0 [Mosaic Historical Microdata
File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2017.
Vienna Database on European Family History. 1671-1685 Church listings of canton Zürich, Version
1.0 [Mosaic Historical Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2017.
Vienna Database on European Family History. 1870 Census of Zürich, Version 1.0 [Mosaic Historical
Microdata File]. www.censusmosaic.org, 2017.
Alan Duben. 1885 Census of Istanbul, Version 1.0 [Mosaic Historical Microdata File].
www.censusmosaic.org, 2014.
Alan Duben. 1907 Census of Istanbul, Version 1.0 [Mosaic Historical Microdata File].
www.censusmosaic.org, 2014.
Cezary Kuko, Radoslaw Poniat. Censuses of the Civil-Military Order Commissions 1791–1792 [Polish
Urban Sample].

NAPP data:
Minnesota Population Center. North Atlantic Population Project: Complete Count Microdata.
Version 2.3 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis: Minnesota Population Center, 2016.

-

England and Wales 1881: K. Schürer and M. Woollard, National Sample from the
1881 Census of Great Britain [computer file], Colchester, Essex: History Data
Service, UK Data Archive [distributor], 2003

-

Scotland 1881: K. Schürer and M. Woollard, National Sample from the 1881
Census of Great Britain [computer file], Colchester, Essex: History Data Service,
UK Data Archive [distributor], 2003.

-

Denmark 1787: Nanna Floor Clausen, Danish National Archives. 1787 Census of
Denmark, Version 1.0

-

Iceland 1703: Ólöf Garðarsdóttir (University of Iceland) and National Archives of
Iceland (NAI). 1703 Census of Iceland, Version 1.0.

-

Norway 1801: The Digital Archive (The National Archive), University of Bergen,
and the Minnesota Population Center. Census of Norway 1801, Version 1.0.
Bergen, Norway: University of Bergen, 2011.

-

Sweden 1880: The Swedish National Archives, Umeå University, and the
Minnesota Population Center. National Sample of the 1880 Census of Sweden,
Version 1.0. Minneapolis: Minnesota Population Center [distributor], 2014.

