A century of economics and engineering at Stanford
Beatrice Cherrier & Aurélien Saïdi
CNRS & THEMA, Université de Cergy; EconomiX, Université Paris Nanterre

1. Introduction1
In 2018, the prestigious John J. Carty Award for the Advancement of science was, for the first
time, awarded to economists.2 The laureates, Robert Wilson, David Kreps and Paul Milgrom,
came from Stanford University. Together with a fourth colleague, John Roberts, they
pioneered “economic engineering,” which Kreps describes as “adapt[ing] what is learned
from the stylized models and apply them to real-world contexts.” Examples range “from
auctions of the radio spectrum to models for school choice to kidney exchanges … licenses
for mobile communications and other uses.” In a seminal 2002 paper entitled “The Economist
as Engineer,” Al Roth, a former student of Wilson, further argued that this research program
created a shift in economics’ identity. He explained that “design economics” exhibited
relationships between theory and applications akin to those of physics and engineering:
“[B]ridge design also concerns metallurgy and soil mechanics, and the
sideways forces of water and wind … These complications, and how they
interact with the parts of the physics captured by the simple model, are the
domain of the engineering literature. Engineering is often less elegant than
the simple underlying physics, but it allows bridges designed on the same
basic model to be built longer and stronger over time, as the complexities and
how to deal with them become better understood.”
The comparison was not merely metaphorical. Wilson, Kreps and Roth shared a background
1 We are grateful to Pedro Duarte and Yann Giraud, Al Roth, two referees, the participants into the 2018
HOPE conference, as well as Oliver Beige, Philippe Fontaine, David Kreps, Eddie Nik-Khah and Bob Wilson
for their very helpful comments. Errors remain our own. We are also indebted to Rebecca Pernell, Paul
Reist, and all the librarians, archivists and warehouse workers of the Stanford Libraries and Special
Collections for their helpful assistance.
2 It had been awarded to Elinor Ostrom in 2004. Though she later received the Bank of Sweden economics
prize in honor of Alfred Nobel, the Carty award was conferred to her as representing “social/political
science.”

1

in Operation Research.3 And it was his contributions to this same field that earned famed
Stanford theorist Kenneth Arrow the 2014 “Stanford Engineering Hero” prize, alongside
Google’s Sergueï Brin and Larry Page, and Sally Ride, the first woman to fly in space.
Historians of economics (Armatte 2010, Morgan 2003, Klein 2015) have long pointed to
some cross-fertilization between economics and engineering, and the purpose of the present
volume is to document and characterize it more systematically. Our paper raises the question
of the role specific institutions played in nurturing such cross-fertilization, and takes Stanford
as a case study.
Previous research has documented diverging intra-university dynamics. At MIT, Paul
Samuelson and Robert Solow tapped the administrative requirements that all students receive
substantial training in mathematics and physics to support the development of a more
formalized “new economics,” but the lack of substantial collaboration between economists
and engineers in OR or energy pricing is striking (Weintraub 2014, Thomas 2014, Breslau
(this volume)). At Carnegie, Judy Klein (2015; this volume) documents remarkable tool
transfers, with optimal control and dynamic programming techniques developed for missile
guidance finding their way into macroeconomic modeling. Most of the cross-disciplinary
ventures examined by historians however took place in extra-university environments
(Fontaine 2015).4 The Statistical Research Group or the RAND Corporation, among others,
cradled decision theory, statistics, linear programming, operations research, system analysis
and game theory.5 In this respect, the existing literature on Stanford exhibits an interesting
gap. Though the university was home to Arrow’s contribution to OR and to economic
engineering, Stanford is largely overlooked in accounts of Cold War economics or the rise of
market design (Mirowski and Nik-Khah 2017). At the same time, economists are altogether
absent from the histories of how the RAND, the Cold War military, the Federal government
and the rising electronic and computer industry borrowed from and shaped Stanford
Giraud and Duarte (this volume) note that 40 % of John Bates Clark laureates can claim some background in
engineering.
4 Fontaine 2015 proposes to use the word ‘multidisciplinary’ to convey a process where disciplines
coexist, ‘interdisciplinary’ to denote exchanges between disciplines, ’transdisciplinary’ to characterize a
desire to build a common overarching framework, and ‘cross-disciplinary’ as a general term without
special emphasis on a type and degree of relation between discipline. What we document is the existence
of interdisciplinary transfers between economics and engineering. The two communities of scholars did
more than just coexist in departments and workshops, but retained some disciplinary identity throughout
their work.
5 See Jardini 1996 and Bessner 2015 on the RAND, Erickson et alii 2013 and Mirowski 2002 on decision
science, Erickson 2015 on the history of game theory or Thomas 2015 on the history of operations
research.
3

2

engineering and fostered the rise of a “Cold War University” (Leslie 1993, Lowen 1997,
Gilmore 2004, O’Mara 2019). Our paper attempts to bridge this gap through documenting and
explaining a paradox. We argue that though economics was, for a long time, given little
attention, esteem and resources by Stanford administrators, Wilson, Milgrom, Kreps and Roth
were nevertheless heirs to a century-long intellectual tradition and operated within an
institutional structure designed to foster the kind of cross-disciplinary exchanges they built
on. Engineers borrowed economists’ normative decision tools. Economists retained
engineers’ mathematical tools and modeling strategies, but also a fine-grained knowledge of
production and innovation processes, and ultimately, a “design” epistemology whereby
scientific knowledge is shaped by clients’ needs, and theoretical and applied work are
articulated with the purpose of designing and building (economic) systems that work rather
than just modeling them.
We document the key role played by engineers like Herbert Hoover or Frederick Terman
in defining the university’s strategy, its longstanding intellectual, financial and cultural
association with the developing Californian industrial milieu, the ability to attract a flow of
scientists for short-term visits and permanent positions. Terman’s view of research, in
particular, was entrepreneurial and relied on the ability to attract public and private contracts.
A consequence was that those economists modeling allocation, decision, production, growth
and innovation, later pricing, competition and business strategies with statistics, optimal
control or game theory found home at the school of Engineering and the Graduate School of
Business (hereafter GSB) more than in the long-neglected Department of Economics.
This paper should neither be read a history of economics, engineering or management
science at Stanford and their idiosyncrasies.6 None of the research programs or institutional
arrangements we described were unique to Stanford. Rather, we document how some of the
engineering and economics theories, tools and epistemologies developed elsewhere were
recombined in a specific institutional setting and entrepreneurial culture, thus came to infuse
to vision that some Stanford economists developed and spread in the last decades.

6

Accordingly, we leave out large chunks of the history of Stanford economics: the rise of macroeconomics and
of political economy in the 1980s, the labor economics tradition, the contested influence of the Hoover
institution, the type of agricultural, environmental and development economics engineered at the Food Research
Institute, or the role of the Center for Advanced Studies in the Behavioral Sciences in fostering the crossfertilization of economics and psychology.

3

2. Prologue: economics and engineering in the Wild Wild West
From Stanford’s early days, economics held an ambiguous and paradoxical position. On the
one hand, the discipline was not a priority, though a School of Humanities and Social Science
was immediately established. It was even regarded with suspicion by trustees and
administrators. The university was opened in 1891 by Jane and Leland Stanford, railroad
barons, with the purpose of competing with Eastern Universities.7 It was built ex nihilo on
sunny rural land. A remote area in an already isolated state, Stanford was immediately given a
devoted train station. Drawing inspiration from the development of Cornell, the Stanfords
ambitioned to retain the scientists and especially engineers meant to foster the economic
development of the West in California. Its motto, taken from German, praised the “Wind of
Freedom” and embodied an ambitious pioneering spirit whereby frontiers, geographical,
social and economic were meant to be pushed.8
Not only did the university prioritize engineering training and equipment during its
first 50 years of existence, but its strategy, orientations and culture were largely shaped by
engineers. After the death of the Stanfords, Herbert Hoover, trained as an in-house geologist
at Stanford and a successful mining engineer before being elected president, quickly ascended
as the key trustee and donor. He managed to get his friend Ray Wilbur elected as Stanford
president and campaigned for the establishment of a graduate school of business, which
opened in 1925. It coincided with the recruitment of electrical radio engineer Frederick
Terman, trained at MIT by Vannevar Bush. Hoover, Wilbur, Terman, who was soon
nominated chairman of the Department of Civil Engineering, general secretary Paul Davis,
trustee and future Stanford president Donald Tresidder, all shared a common vision: research
was to be developed for and funded by industrial partners. Terman thus encouraged students,
among whom William Hewlett, David Packard and the Varian brothers, to set up new firms to
develop and commercialize advances in radio engineering, vacuum tubes and circuits, like the
klystron tube and the audio oscillator.
None of these key prewar administrators held economics in high esteem, despite the
Department of Economics and Sociology housing renowned scholars, including Allyn Young,
Leland Stanford presided over the Southern Pacific Railroad and cofounded the Central Pacific. This
history of Stanford is largely taken from Leslie 1933, Elliott 1937, and Nash 1988.
8 The university Charter, likewise stated that its goal was to “qualify students for personal success and
direct usefulness in life”
7

4

Thorstein Veblen, Frank Fetter and Harold Hotelling. None however stayed more than a few
years and some resigned amidst controversies. That the first appointed sociologist, Edward A.
Ross, attacked railroad patrons (including Stanford himself) for undermining efforts from
Chinese workers to unionize did not help. Hoover also resented economists’ support for
Senator Robert La Folette and their campaign for public management of utilities like railroads
and water power. As they would continue to do after World War II, economists also resisted
pressures to fund research through industrial and business partnerships, which they believed
threatened their independence. Administrators, who rather conceived public funding as
threatening, retorted with (aborted) plans to place the Department of Economics within the
business school “where its professors might properly focus on issues of concerns to industry”
(Lowen 1997, 71). The institutional and intellectual independence of economics within
Stanford was thus constantly challenged, a trend that did not abate with the establishment of a
standalone Department of Economics in 1948.
At the same time, Stanford engineers insisted that economic and management knowledge
were key to sound engineering “design.” The first two economics courses offered by the
Department of Civil Engineering in 1891 were “Economic Theory of Railroad Location,”
based on Arthur M. Wellington’s 1887 The Economic Theory of the Location of Railroad, and
“Railroad operations and Management” (Bulletin 1891/92, 60; 84). Wellington (1887, 1)
opened his book with the warning that “engineering … is rather the art of not constructing …
the art of doing that well with one dollar.” The course bulletin described bridge design as
“bridge location, economic relation between the cost of superstructure and substructure”
(Bulletin 1891/1892, 86) and electrical engineering students were likewise instructed to focus
on “the economics, design and management of central station systems” (p. 136).
The set of economic courses for engineers soon became articulated and important enough
to be established as an independent curriculum called “Engineering Economy,” then a whole
“Industrial Engineering” program during the 1930s, and a “Civil Engineering Administration”
2-year graduate curriculum co-operated by the School of Engineering and the GSB. The
course offering was developed by John C.L. Fish, author of a 1915 principles book on
Engineering Economics. It was then taken over by Eugene Grant, a professor of civil
engineering also trained in Economics. Grant was influenced by Fish’s idea that “every
engineering structure, with few exceptions, is first suggested by economic requirements …
the so-called principles of design are subordinate to the principles which underlie economic
5

judgment.” (Fish 1915, p. v). He applied the techniques Fish had developed to study railroad
to telecommunications. In 1930, Grant published an influential textbook, Principles of
Engineering Economy, in which he used cost-benefit analysis to compare business
alternatives. It borrowed from cost accounting and finance more than microeconomics.
The war entailed a shift in the university patronage, from industrial clients to the military,
but this in fact strengthened the reliance on external funding and the insistence that teaching
and research should be oriented toward clients’ needs. Efforts to embed the new
interdisciplinary War science into a university structure did not raise the status of economics
as a discipline within the university, but it created new institutional spaces that nurtured a
series of theoretical, epistemological and practical transfers between some economists and
engineers.

3. Nesting the new sciences of decision, allocation and production into
engineering (1945-1967)
Embedding the new Cold War science into a university disciplinary structure
The war and the ensuing Cold War prompted a massive metamorphosis of all sciences, hard,
social and humanities. Historians have extensively documented how the demands for more
efficient allocation algorithms, new accounting systems, new decisions rules to produce
planes, submarines, to schedule bombing strategies, and to guide missiles were channeled into
extra-university entities like the Statistical Research Group (SRG), the RAND corporation
(aka the Air force research group), the Office of Naval Research (hereafter ONR) and the
Cowles Commission.9 This fostered interdisciplinary interactions between mathematicians,
physicists, psychologists, economists, etc.
The science they came up with was of quantitative, mathematical and applied nature.
Linear programming, statistical decision theory, operations research, optimal control theory,
inventory theory, game theory, or sequential analysis, all were born out of the need to deal
with pressing practical problems. Mathematician George Dantzig, for instance, was famously
asked by the Air Force to organize the airlift of supplies during the 1948–9 Berlin blockade.
9

See note 5, as well as the references in Cravens and Solovey 2012.

6

Building on Leontief’s input-output matrices, he represented the task as a system of a hundred
of mutually dependent linear equations to be maximized under a set of inequalities (the
practical constraints). The mathematical intractability of the system prompted him to build on
the theory of convex sets to forge the simplex algorithm. Likewise, in the summer of 1948 at
Santa Monica, Arrow, statistician Abraham Girschik and mathematician David Blackwell
pooled together to solve a mathematical problem they had encountered as they worked on
inventory decision rules, that is how to balance the costs and benefits of gathering information
through sequential testing (Erickson et alii 2013, chapter 2).
Like other universities, in particular nearby Berkeley, Stanford was eager to tap this
pool of new methods. The challenge was to convince those scientists used to work into
interdisciplinary settings to comply with the more disciplinary structure of the university. A
solution was to create new interdisciplinary and application-oriented departments within the
stable school structure. One example was the Department of Statistics, founded in 1945 within
the School of Humanities. Upon return from Harvard, where he had led the prestigious Radio
Research Lab, Terman, now dean of the School of Engineering, applied the contract-capturing
and “steeples of excellence” development strategy he had successfully implemented during
the war (O’Mara 2019, chapter 2). He helped recruit statistician Al Bowker at the instigation
of ONR mathematical division head, Mina Rees. The purpose was to draw funding from the
military and lure top scientists into a new research environment. Bowker modeled the new
department he headed on SRG, where he had worked with scientists from all disciplines
during the war. [We are] “hopefully having a series of problems come in from either
government or industry, having enough space so that all of the young scholars, graduate
students and the faculty could be housed in the same building, easily accessible to each
other,” he explained (quoted in Olkin 1987, 473). He recruited Abraham Girshick in 1948,
Wald’s student Herman Chernoff in 1950, Herbert Scarf in 1957, Herbert Solomon in 1959.
Stanford increasingly resembled an annex of the RAND offices in Santa Monica, with an
equal number of mathematical economists and statisticians recruited at Berkeley.
Terman and Bowker also relied on joint appointments and shared course sequences to
create an environment in which the science military patrons needed could be produced, and to
create bridges between schools and departments. Mechanical engineer and former SRG staffer
Gerald Lieberman was jointly recruited by the Departments of Statistics and Industrial
Engineering, and quickly found himself in charge of the engineering economy and quality
7

control courses. Samuel Karlin was recruited in mathematics and statistics, and set to develop
courses not just for statisticians, but also for engineers, businessmen, psychologists and
economists. In 1957–1958, for instance, he was teaching sampling from human population,
statistical methods in engineering and physical sciences, theory of games and statistical
decisions, management science and decision theory. Most important, Bowker managed to
recruit Arrow from the Cowles Commission on a joint appointment at the Departments of
Statistics and Economics.10
Arrow’s influence in bridging disciplines was enormous. He spent his summers at
RAND and later organized workshops with political scientists and philosophers. He
contributed to the development of sequential decision with Blackwell and Girshick, optimal
inventory policy with Thomas Harris and Jacob Marschak, mathematical modeling of
allocation, broadly considered, with Patrick Suppes and Karlin. He applied most of these tools
to economic topics – general equilibrium theory, endogenous growth, production. But unlike
other contemporary economists covering a wide range of topics and tools (such as Paul
Samuelson), he was, by every account, also interested in the institutional architecture of
science. He sat on dissertation, departmental, and university committees, chaired research
centers. He acted as a major transmission channel between the tools produced by
mathematicians and statisticians, the applications promoted by engineers and the knowledge
about actual production processes they generated, and the topics favored by economists.
Terman’s client-focused strategy was immediately successful. By 1947 already, the
School of Engineering was receiving more money from military contracts than from the
university itself. An institution builder, he founded the Stanford Research Institute (hereafter
SRI) in 1946, a non-profit organization designed to allow commercial contracts too risky for
industry and promote science education. He then opened the Electronic Research laboratory
and the Stanford Research Park in 1951 to house growing companies funded by former
students to commercialize research innovation. His and Bowker’s recruits drew millions in
small and large grants to the university. For instance, the Varian brothers, Terman’s former
mentees, offered $11,000 to establish a fellowship in economics for students “with
engineering or scientific training” (Trustees 1956, 24). Arrow brought a huge ONR contract
on the efficiency of decision making from the ONR totaling more than $200, 000 by 1958. He
Arrow was meant to replace Allen Wallis. Part of Arrow’s appointment was also at the School of
Engineering after it established an OR program in 1962.
10

8

also grossed NSF and Rockefeller foundations grants, housed in various programs,
department and labs within the university. The contract-focused and entrepreneurial strategy
Terman was allowed to spread throughout the university as provost between 1955 and 1965
created space for disciplinary transfers, yet would also further marginalized scholars from the
Department of Economics.

From economists contributing to engineering …
In 1945, Industrial Engineering was formally established as a separate undergraduate program
“for students who wish to emphasize the business aspects of engineering” within the
department of Civil Engineering (Bulletin 45/46, 257-8). The set of courses offered included
Statistics and Accounting for Engineers, Production Engineering, and Machine Design.11 By
the early 1960s, the Engineering Economy course, now compulsory for industrial engineering
undergraduates, was advertised as “economic decision making for engineering alternatives”
(Registrar 62/63, 60). The shift highlights the new role the rise of the sciences of decision
created for economics, itself in the process of being reframed as the science of rational
decision under uncertainty (Erickson et alii 2013, Backhouse and Medema 2009). Beyond
Arrow, who initially nurtured those research lines, economists at Stanford as elsewhere
collectively understood that rational decision theories was what they had to propose in crossdisciplinary ventures. This was clearly articulated by Stanford econometrician Marc Nerlove
in a letter to the chief of the John Hopkins Operations Research Office where he had interned
(emphasis added):12
“Economics has two general aspects: (1) the first relates to the economy,
that is, to a complex of producing, marketing, distributing and consuming
institutions and activities. (2) the second relates to economizing, that is, to a
certain kind of rational choice and behavior, to making the most of one’s
resources in achieving one’s objectives, in whatever kind of institutional
framework. It is the second aspect of economics which I believe especially
qualifies economists for work in operation research, for almost all problems
of operation research are problems of rational choice in the sense described
above.”
11
12

The program was given its own budget and MS in 1952, under the leadership of William Ireson.
Nerlove to Simcox, 04/11/1960, box 146, MNP.

9

Nerlove’s perspective was shared – albeit with a managerial bent – by Alan Manne,
who was recruited from Yale at the GSB in 1961 and spent most of his career at Stanford. A
former RAND analyst, Manne had just published a textbook entitled Economic Analysis for
Business Decisions, which he explicitly located in the tradition developed by Grant. The mix
of linear and integer programming, inventory models and sequential decision theory covered
in the book could be indifferently called engineering economics, operation research or
management science, and reflected the convergence of economic analysts and business
executives when it came to analyze “the internal operation of the business enterprise” (Manne
1961, v-vii). In the introduction, he presented a Dantzig transportation problem where the
most efficient route between several factories needed to be determined to make the case that
the economist should be considered as an efficiency expert “concerned with finding ways to
increase the organization’s profitability” (Manne 1961, 1-5). Some of the dissertations
defended at the School of Engineering in these years were thus clearly economic in their
topic, such as Eric Thain’s 1968 thesis on “the spatial distribution of public investment in a
dual economy,” supervised by Arrow, Manne and Cottle.
The above quotes attest that the combination of mathematics, statistics, engineering
and economics into a new science of decision (military, business and public) had produced a
set of new disciplines sometimes called Operation Research (hereafter OR), sometimes called
System Analysis. Though close in their content, mathematical tools and RAND origins, the
two research programs and associated communities responded to different client demands and
were stabilized in distinct communities (Thomas 2015). OR programs were established
throughout the country during the 1950s, in particular within those business schools
undergoing a process of scienticization under the patronage of the Ford Foundation (Kurhana
2007, Augier and March 2011). The archetypal example of this transformation was the
Carnegie Tech’s Graduate School of Industrial Administration, headed by economist Georges
Leland Bach, where Herbert Simon, Richard Bellman, Franco Modigliani, John Muth and the
likes of Robert Lucas, engineered new models of decision, from bounded rationality to
dynamic programming and rational expectations. System analysis grew out of the need to
rationalize air warfare analysis, but the willingness to model how much human pilots deviated
from rationality during aerial combats led RAND social scientists to focus more on “moral”
factors. They strove to apply their “science of warfare” to large-scale policy problems of all
10

stripes and soon established a separate society for management science. At the same time,
efforts to sell OR to industry clients who had long housed operation engineers resulting in a
growing emphasis on its “scientific” aspect, understood as its theoretical foundations. OR
morphed into a more abstract discipline.
At Stanford, these two branches of the new science of rational decision making
tapping economists’ knowledge for engineering and business needs were institutionalized in
two separate departments. In 1960, the School of Engineering received $3.4 millions from the
Ford Foundation for the development of programs focused on decision-making in the field of
public works engineering, operations research, systems optimization, reliability of
engineering systems and components and man-machine systems” (Cottle 2010, slide 29).
Arrow pushed for the establishment of an interdepartmental committee on the future of OR,
which led to the creation of an inter-school program 1962, turned into a degree-granting
department in 1967. Chaired by engineer Gerard Lieberman, its faculty was drawn the
Departments of Electrical Engineering (Arthur Kalman, William Linvill), Industrial
Engineering (Frederick Hillier, Arthur Vienott), Mathematics (Samuel Karlin), Statistics
(Herbert Scarf, Herman Chernoff, Herbert Solomon), Economics (Arrow, Hirofumi Uzawa,
Marc Nerlove), and the GSB, where Bach had just been recruited. He shared Terman’s clientoriented strategy of selecting a few elite quantitative applied research programs to which
researchers from various disciplines contributed. This is what business students needed to be
taught, he reflected (Augier and March 2011).13
At the same time, a distinct Institute in Engineering-Economic System (hereafter EES)
was established, covering close topics: “engineering economy, operation research, system
theory and the planning of engineering works” (62/63 registrar). It was chaired by electrical
engineer William Linvill, and staffed with another set of researchers drawn from the GBS,
civil, electrical and engineering, economics but also the Food Research Institute whose
trademark was an interdisciplinary structural and institutional approach to development, and
political sciences. Arrow later complained that it was like “having two economic departments,
one Keynesian and one anti-Keynesian, which is wrong; they both should be working
together” (Arrow 2011, 80). Yet, for EES professor Ronald Howard, there was a clear
difference between the two programs: “Our discipline was engineering. Theirs [at OR] was
13

Dantzig himself was poached from UC Berkeley on a joint appointment in operations research and computer
science in 1966.

11

applied mathematics,” he explained (quoted in Garber 2009, 267). According to the 1962
registrar, the goal was to “develop improved … methodology for decision making in public
works.” Most EES dissertations emphasized a desire to produce “real-world applications” and
were completed in specific firms, in line with the distinctive internship requirement pushed by
Linvill.14 “A unique feature of the program is the internship, a period of experience in the real
world that allows a student to test theory the face of reality . . . [and] formulate meaningful
research problems . . . Problems of broad scope requiring a system viewpoint and thus
suitable for the internship experience are found in large industrial firms, in companies and
research groups concerned with the design and operation of civilian and military systems, and
in government agencies planning and executing public works and economic development
projects,” the EES registrar read (1966/1967, 124).

… to engineers turned economists
The interaction between economists and engineers described above were largely
located within the School of Engineering, yet they also affected the kind of topic and methods
pursued at the Department of Economics. Shifts in orientation are visible in the database of
economics theses defended at Stanford between 1940 and 1990 that we have assembled.15 The
dominant characteristic of the 1950s was diversity. Welfare economist Tibor Scitovsky
supervised or sat on the committee of 7 dissertations during the 1950s. Other active faculty
included Keynesian Lorie Tarshis (5), finance macroeconomist Edward Shaw (4) who trained
John Gurley, Arrow (4), and Moses Abramovitz (4), who supervised an engineering
dissertation on the political economy of petroleum conservation in Oklahoma. Thomas
Marschak and John Harsanyi graduated in these years. Topics ranged from international to
labor economics and institutional economic history. 1960s figures show a clear dominance of
Arrow, who supervised or sat on the committee of 32 dissertations, vs 15 for Ronald
McKinnon and Lorie Tarshis and 14 for Melvin Reder and John Gurley. Some of these were
formally defended in the OR department. Arrow supervised technical work on “Simultaneous

14

Yaw Ansu, for instance acknowledged his principal advisor (economist Ronald McKinnon) whose “insistence
that [his] work stay in touch with real world economic problems has done much to shape both substance and
form of the final product” (Ansu 1984, acknowledgments).
15
We have reconstructed a database of the Stanford dissertations defended between 1891 and 1990 (including
titles, dates and committee members) based on the Stanford archives manuscripts. These volumes have been
identified by mean of the SearchWorks catalog, from which we have extracted 457 entries in economics, 523 in
operations research or engineering-economic systems and 401 from the GSB.

12

equations and correlation theory” or “mathematical programming in allocation over time,” but
also dissertations on trade, migration, health and insurance.
Though topics researched and taught at the department spanned international economics,
public finance and taxation, labor economics and economic history and development, the
main research program was focused on production and growth. It was carried at the
department’s Research Center for Growth, opened in 1960 to “consolidate a number of
research and training activities in the fields of economic development and comparative
economics” (Ballandone 2012, 455). The Center was the offspring of two previous projects:
the Stanford Project for Quantitative Research in Economic Development launched around
1954 by faculty members Hollis Chenery, Hendrick Houthakker and Abramovitz, then taken
over by Emile Despres, and the Quantitative project on Production Functions, coordinated by
Arrow, Chenery, Bagisha Minhas and MIT’s Robert Solow. The first of these projects had
allowed Chenery, recruited at Stanford in 1953, to study scale economies in specific
industries, and he, Arrow and others were looking to draw general laws on the shape of
production functions from industry specific processes that could be modeled by power-law
distributions. At about that time, Nerlove proposed an early implicit empirical application of
duality of production and costs to estimate returns to scale in electricity supply.16 All this
research was informed by engineering-friendly environment in which it was carried.
Chenery’s work on production functions drew on his background as a former petroleum
engineer. Author of a 1949 Harvard dissertation, Engineering bases for economic analysis,
supervised by Leontief, he meant to bridge the gap between an engineering and an economic
conception of the production function: “the essential difference between the engineer and the
economist lies in the variables that each uses to describe the process of production,” he later
reflected. “The inputs into the engineering production function include pumps, pipe, energy
sources, and skilled labor … main outputs are the movement of natural gas over varying
distances and at different pressures … design laws [for pipelines] can be used to construct a
production function linking inputs and outputs. The economist’s cost function can then be
derived by replacing some of the engineering variables with economic variables which

Nerlove (1993, 125) remembered that when he presented a version of the electricity supply at a
seminar, Uzawa said “you can always recover production function from cost function. I thought it was a
question, but Uzawa said… ‘not a question. Always true.’”
16

13

conceptualize output as a function of the types of capital goods, labor and raw material,” he
went on (Chenery, 1992, 373).
The Stanford interdisciplinary institutional setting also allowed the transfer of
mathematical tools to economics. The many models of optimal growth written by faculty,
including Arrow and Hirofumi Uzawa and graduate students like Menahem Yaari, Karl Shell,
David Cass and David Starrett were challenging to solve. Uzawa’s two-sector model and
Cass’s optimum growth model included infinite-horizon maximizing agents and constraints,
the kind of problems that are hardly solved with the classical calculus of variations in use in
economics since Frank Ramsey. The engineering environment in Stanford provided the
adequate generalization of these techniques: it was Karlin who suggested that Uzawa checked
Pontryagin’s Mathematical Theory of Optimal Processes, just translated into English in 1962.
Growth economists tapped engineering knowledge in other ways. In his learning-by-doing
paper, Arrow 1962 modeled the learning process by a log-linear equation. He borrowed this
idea from research on the learning processes in the airframe industry carried at RAND and the
SRI (Ballandonne 2012, 470-72).
The kind of interdisciplinary research drawing hundreds of thousands of dollars from
clients Arrow spearheaded was exactly the kind of endeavor favored by Terman, but it
remained an exception within the Department of Economics. Only the research in economic
development (with a growing industrial focus) and international economics led by Chenery,
Houthakker and Tarshis drew an equivalent amount funding from the Ford Foundation
(Trustees 1958, 402). The much smaller grants Shaw, Tarshis, Haley, Baran or Abramovitz
received from the SSRC, Brookings or the NBER did not convince Stanford administrators to
endow the department with more human and space resources, to the growing dismay of
economists. After a bitter 1955 battle between Terman and Shaw, then chairman, Arrow had
already warned Stanford president Wallace Sterling that it was “a mistake to channel all
research into the particular lines for which outside support is available and into relatively
large projects . . . the Individual Scholar, working in a field which may or may not be
currently fashionable plays a very vital role in economics” (quoted in Lowen 1997, 161). By
the mid-1960s, Scarf, Uzawa and Nerlove, having fought with Terman over recruitment, were
gone, and emerging stars Zvi Griliches, Franklin Fischer and Dale Jorgenson had turned down
offers. Arrow blamed it on the lack of cooperation of the university in opening fullprofessorships and aligning salaries with other universities, warned that such brain drain in
14

economic theory reduced Stanford’s status in the field considerably. 17 He finally left for
Harvard in 1967, amidst speculation that he resented the University’s lack of support to
economics or simply wanted to be closer to policy decision-making circles (see the many
interviews in Feiwel 1987).

4. Crisis and renewal (1967-1990)
A twofold crisis
Arrow’s departure threw a “demoralized and deteriorating” Department of Economics in
disarray, so much so that the associate dean of the School of Humanities and Sciences
Richard Lyman appointed a committee in 1971 and invited Nerlove, now at Chicago, to
propose a plan for renewal.18 His report stressed that Stanford economics suffered from
fragmentation. Economists were institutionally and geographically scattered across the
university, at the School of Engineering, the School of Medicine, the Food Research Institute,
the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences (hereafter CASBS), the Hoover
institution, the rising GSB and the Institute for Public Policy.19 He suggested that some
unification was in order, that full-professorship be established within the department, that
economists be given control over fundraising and appointments of peers across the university
(deans were those with the real power), and physically housed in one place.
In response, economists were allowed to grow their faculty to 30, attracting Joseph
Stiglitz, Michael Spence, Theodore Anderson, Roger Noll, Robert Hall, etc. and succeeding in
getting Arrow back. Yet by the mid-1980s, little had changed. Many of the new recruits only
stayed a few years. 20 In 1985, the faculty sent Nathan Rosenberg, then chairman of the
department, a long collective letter titled “The Priority of Economics at Stanford: an urgent
need for change.” They complained about their lack of attractiveness. Not only did they have

17

Nerlove to Abramovitz, 02/26/1964; Abramovitz to Griliches, undated, folder “Correspondence: Jan 1964March 64,” Arrow to Full professors, memorandum, undated ; Arrow to full professors, 06/06/1963, all from box
146, MNP.
18
See https://news.stanford.edu/news/2005/july13/memlrosse-071305.html
19
Nerlove to Arrow, 09/20/1973 ; “Innovation and Change in the Social Sciences at Stanford University,”
Nerlove, undated. Box 5, folder “Marc Nerlove;” KAP.
20
Spence, for instance, only stayed at the department of economics from 1973-1975. He came back in the 1990s,
but at the GSB.

15

to deal with the “Cambridge Mystique” (East-coast departments were always selected in case
of competing job offerings), but as the NSF was widely slashing support to social sciences,
business schools were on the rise throughout the country, cannibalizing funding, recruits and
students: “the paradoxical outcome is that the same Economics which has been subjected to
current political hostility and severe resource cut backs in the School of Humanities and
Sciences has been declared desirable by the business community and lavishly endowed with
financial support when conducted in a school of business.” To compete, they had no building
and too little university funding for research, visiting scholars, or yearly seminars, and no
computer facility.
The lingering departmental crisis was simmering in the context of a larger social and
financial crisis. The late 1960s and 1970s were troubled times at Stanford, as elsewhere.
Students’ ire targeted the preferred institution whereby military money was channeled into
academic research, the Stanford Research Institute (Mody 2017). The Applied Electronics
laboratory was occupied and classified research was banned, resulting in a 2 million $ budget
shortfall. This prompted a reorientation of Stanford’s research toward interdisciplinary
problem-solving research related to transportation, urban, population and environmental
issues. While economists were not directly targeted by the protests, the ensuing gradual
withdrawal of military patrons (including the reorientation of RAND’s research agenda
toward social and urban studies) affected their research programs. The financial, institutional
and intellectual relationships with industrial business clients, while overshadowed by the
weight of the military demands of the postwar decades of the 1960s, needed to be reinforced.

The rise of the economist as a market designer
At the time Stanford economists were searching for a consistent vision, a wealth of new
theories, tools and research question were emerging in the profession. None of these were
architected at Stanford, but they were brought together through the university’s summer
workshop tradition, combined by a handful of scholars among whom Robert Wilson, who
blended them with an focus on applied theory borrowed from OR and an awareness to
business applications characteristic of the GSB, which housed his research group.
In the 1960s, game theory experienced a renewal under the guise of an evolution from
its cooperative to its non-cooperative species (Erickson 2015, chapter 7). Thomas Schelling’s
16

research on armed conflict resolution led John Harsanyi to transform the analysis of games
with incomplete information into games with complete but imperfect information. Richard
Selten studied what kind of strategies and resulting equilibria emerged from playing such
games in dynamic settings. Interest in the consequences of information imperfections and
asymmetries on market outcomes was pervasive, with Arrow contributing the foundational
paper in the analysis of the health market before leaving to Harvard. Another set of questions
came from Minnesota’s theorist Leonid Hurwicz, who pointed out the destabilizing effects of
information asymmetries. A long-term co-author of Arrow, he began to rethink informational
efficiency in resource allocation processes while visiting Stanford in 1958-1959.21 In 1973, he
suggested that economists should not merely take existing market settings as object of study,
but also study which “mechanism” (i.e., which procedure that uses messages received from
agents to select an outcome, the decision to produce a public good or a market allocation) was
optimal. The challenge was to identify “incentive compatible” mechanisms inducing
participants to reveal information about their true beliefs.
These new research orientations launched a race to analyze new types of dynamic
games and develop all sorts of equilibrium refinements, with the soon-thwarted hope to
identify unique equilibria. While the hothouse of game theory in the 1970s was Northwestern,
most of this flourishing literature was brought to Stanford through the large number of visitors
who came through the CASBS, and in particular through the summer workshop, organized
annually by Mordecai Kurz, at the Institute for Mathematics in the Social Sciences (IMSS)
from 1969. Initially funded by the Ford Foundation and later supported by the Hoover
institution, this workshop brought together mathematical economists for a 6 to 8 weeks
program combining presentation and day-long courses. In 1982, for instance, July workshops
were taught by Eric Maskin (“Incentive theory”) or Hurwicz and Marschak (“Resource
Allocation Mechanism in Discrete spaces”). Rogerson presented on the role of reputation in
repeated agency problems, Drew Fudenberg on sequential equilibria, and Roger Myerson on
the value of games with incomplete information.22

21

His resulting paper was published in 1960 in the book on mathematical models for social sciences edited by
Arrow, Karlin and Suppes.
22 The workshop is still active under a new heading, SITE. Another workshop series important in the
development of game theory and market design was the Conference on Econometrics and Mathematical
Economics (CEME), inaugurated at Berkeley in the early 1970s. It was instigated by Arrow and divided in
two branches, general economics and decentralization, first coordinated by Debreu and Radner (then
Kreps took over, and by the early 1980s, Wilson and Milgrom were also regular presenters).

17

Economists then looked for applications beyond international warfare, among whom
Robert Wilson. Trained under Howard Raiffa at the Harvard Business School, Wilson had
participated into the famous seminar in which Bayesian games were forged. In 1963, he
defended a dissertation presenting an algorithm to solve non-linear programming problems
before taking a position at the Stanford GSB. Though he “was still considered partly an
operations researcher” by the late 1960s and kept training student in that area (Jennergreen
2002,1), he gradually turned to problems of bargaining and auctions. As then explained by
Michael Rothkopf (1969, 362), “operations researchers are starting to construct bidding
models that are realistic and that consider simultaneously the optimality of the decisions of all
bidders.” “Only Wilson has begun to take account of the uncertainty of a bidder about the
value of the subject of the auction to himself,” he continued. Building on Bayesian
assumptions on how economic agents use new information to revise their beliefs across time,
Wilson modeled a no-regret strategy whereby each agent would use the information revealed
by other player’s leaving the auction to recalibrate her own reservation value, and studied the
resulting bidding equilibrium.
In line with his OR background and the business school environment in which he was
operating, Wilson paired his theoretical interests with a distinctive concern for real-world
applications. His work on auctions was aimed at providing better strategies to bid for offshore
oil tracts to the oil companies he was advising, so as to escape the “winner’s curse” – winning
as a result of having ex ante overestimated the value of the commodity.23 Likewise, his work
on the pricing of public utilities, culminating in the publication of the book Nonlinear Pricing
in 1983, was fueled by his consulting work for the Analysis Research Group at the Xerox
Palo Alto Research Center and for the Electric Power Research Institute.24 Applying game
theoretic concepts of strategy and equilibrium to real-world situation often meant relaxing
informational requirements, dealing with the fact that equilibrium are indeterminate, multiple
and very sensitive to players’ beliefs, that outcomes can be non budget-balanced and
manipulated by coalitions, that the computational burden for solutions is often intractable, and
that preparing bids is often extremely costly. Wilson took these constraints into account in his

23 The problem had been clearly outlined (and christened) in a seminal 1971 paper by three oil engineers
from Atlantic Richfield Co., E.C. Capen, R.V. Clapp and W.M. Campbell.
24 Former Stanford PhD student Samuel Oren, a Xerox staffer, remembers that in 1979, “we became
interested in broadband communication […] there were no customers, so how do you do market research?
[…] Wilson introduced us to the whole area of non-linear pricing, market design.” See also Rothkopf
(2000).

18

theoretical work. In the end, his economics, though building upon game theoretic rather than
financial accounting, programming or optimal control tools, was in the spirit of the work of
the likes of Grant and Manne: it was knowledge built with the purpose of making practical
industrial management decisions more efficient.25
This blend of theoretical rigor and practical bent Wilson imparted on the stream of
students he directed, as well as those many more who attended, often several years in a row,
his graduate lectures. The graduate students he trained in the 1970s and early 1980s included
Roth, Milgrom, Holmström, Armando Ortega-Reichert, Claude d’Aspremont and Peter
Cramton. Many of them shared an OR background with Wilson, and several built on prior
professional experience as they entered the graduate program. Milgrom had worked as an
actuary, and Holmström had worked as an OR analyst at a Finnish conglomerate. “My interest
in incentives had been raised by the problems I had encountered when trying to implement a
large-scale corporate planning model at Ahlstrom,” he later explained (Holmström 2002, 1).
Many of them were trained within a newly founded “Decision Sciences Group” founded by
Wilson and a cluster of researchers interested in OR, applied mathematics and economics at
the GSB.26
It was within the GSB, the summer workshops organized by the IMSS and other
newly established interdisciplinary spaces that the moribund tradition of introducing students
to game theory’s applications was gradually renewed. While Karlin had published a two
volume book on Mathematical methods and Theory in Games, Programming and Economics
in 1959, by the late 1960s, the topic was not taught anymore. It was (re)taught by IMSS
visitors like Aumann (courses offered in 1971 and 1975), as well as Michael Maschler (1973).
In his business course “Competitive Strategies,” based on business case, Wilson suggested
students read references by Dresher, Luce and Raiffa, Von Neumann and Morgenstern,
25 In the introductory essay to a tribute volume, Milgrom, Holmström and Roth (2002, 1) pointed to Wilson’s
emphasis that “the value of theory is its usefulness in addressing practical problems,” which Roth (2018) called
“the Wilson Doctrine.” Mirowksi and Nik-Khah (2017) claim that it was only the “experimental school” of
market design led by Roth which “designed” markets, and that the two previous schools, Hurwicz’s “walrasian
school” and Wilson’s “bayesian school” remained highly theoretical. What we argue here is that, though
theoretical, Wilson’s approach was applied in that it was aimed at solving business clients’ issues, therefore
already a “design” practice akin to what engineers were doing.
26 They included OR specialist Evan Porteus, who was working on Markov decision processes, and later his
student David Kreps, who had completed a dissertation in the theory of dynamic programming . In the 1970s, the
GSB was organized into “groups” including the Economic Policy Analysis Group run by GSB’s Bach,
Accounting, Finance, Marketing and Organizational Behavior. It was a structure more fluid and less hierarchical
than a departmental one, and facilitated interdisciplinary transfers (Wilson, correspondence with authors).

19

Shubik, Aumann, Cottle, Dantzig and Karlin.27 He then set up a course on “multi-person
decision theory,” in which he was teaching the modeling strategy and key results of the 16
papers from the previous year that he had found most noteworthy.
As hinted above, the operationalization of Hurwicz’s hope to “design” markets
required permanent trade-offs between theoretical purity, information requirements, concepts
of equilibria, the legal and institutional characteristics of the real-world, and the
computational abilities of real players and the scientists who advised them. The development
of experimental economics (see Svorencik 2016) afforded new ways for testing auction and
matching designs. Architected at Arizona State, Caltech and other experimental economic
labs, these techniques were brought to Stanford through, again, the creation of new
workshops. Upon moving back to California in 1979, Arrow, whose interest in decision
theory and applied and interdisciplinary bent had not abated, organized an interdisciplinary
seminar in applied decision analysis with Wilson, Amos Tversky from the Department of
Psychology, and organization theorist James March. It was advertised as the “study of
normative and descriptive decision making particularly in the face of uncertainty … problems
arising in making decisions analyses in applied policy contexts” (Registrar 1980-1981, 341),
and featured Vernon Smith on risk aversion auction, as well as Charles Plott, Richard Thaler,
and political scientists and law scholars. In subsequent years, presentations focused on
conflict and negotiations.28 As highlighted in our introduction, Roth largely contributed to
blend game theoretic tools, experiments and a concern for design he had inherited from his
engineering background and continued discussions with his wife Emily Roth, a psychologist
specialized in cognitive engineering (Roth and Wilson 2018).
What emerged from this outline is not just a two-way street between economics and
engineering, but a three-legged nexus of engineering, economics and management, each
discipline growing closer to the other two. When Milgrom was brought back to Stanford in
the early 1980s, Arrow pointed out that “in the field of managerial economics (the common
part of decision analysis and microeconomic theory), it is hard to find anyone common with
him.” At the same time, Industrial administration PhD and marketing professor Seenu
27

“Lectures on Cooperative Game Theory,” Aumann, July 1971; “Analysis of Competitive Strategies” Wilson,
Spring 1973, all Box 21, ARP. In his syllabus, Wilson noted the lack of treatment of uncertainty and applications
to “the practical context of managerial decisions.”
28 Arrow came back to Stanford with a ONR grant to establish a “Center on Decision and Conflict in
Complex Organizations,” for which he got a grant from the Hewlett foundation in 1988. He also
participated in the development of a program in political economy.

20

Srinivanan was setting up a GSB joint course on the design of new product with Operational
Management professor William Lovejoy and mechanical engineer David Beach. Called
“Integrated Design for Marketability and Manufacturing,” it illustrated the complementarities
of engineering and business. One knew “how to understand consumers and how to market a
product,” the second “how to manufacture” and the third “how to design.” The course
combined two MBAs and two engineers in each team (Srinivasan 2017).

Rethinking innovation and operations managements
The overhaul of industrial relations by game theorists and the nascent field of market design
were not the only spaces where yet other types of interactions between economics and
engineering flourished. Though still centered on decision theory, OR and EES’s course
offerings evolved with the pressing issues of the time. EES advertised its expertise in the
“economics of depletable resources; impact of government policies on economic growth . . .
econometrics with particular emphasis on passenger car use of gasoline.” Course programs in
health policy and energy modeling and analysis were set up (Bulletin 1981-82). In OR too,
environment had become a major topic, as a new optimization system lab promised to help
students “learn about modeling complex systems dealing with energy, the economy, water.”
Arrow taught a “theory of information and organization course” throughout the 1980s and
1990s, and OR students were also allowed to attend the conflict resolution seminar, a course
on welfare economics by Starrett, or another interdisciplinary seminar in risk management
organized by Arrow and Lieberman (Bulletin 1990-1991, 216).
Beginning in the 1970s, interactions between economics and engineering were not
merely largely mediated and unified by management (both the client-oriented approach and
the GSB flexible group structure), but also increasingly by computer science. In the 1950s,
Terman, Bowker, mathematicians and engineers had established a Computation Center and a
graduate program in data processing and scientific computation, and recruited George
Foresythe to head a small group within the department of mathematics (Cottle 2010). By the
late-1960s, it has evolved into an independent Department within the School of Humanities
with a strong interdisciplinary bent. Several economists including Manne and Wilson were
associated with some of its projects in mathematical programming languages. By the mid21

1980s, computer science had become so central that it was seen as a basis on which to merge
the still independents Departements of OR, EES and Industrial Engineering. In 1985, a failed
proposal to establish a joint research center in decision analysis suggested to merge “elements
from the social (people, organizations), analytic (logic, mathematics), and technological
(enabling technologies) domains to develop and explore new concepts that will be relevant in
solving the complex problems of modern businesses and industries. Jim March saw these
domains as analogous (sic) to empires competing for power and the center enabling them to
make trade agreements.” The report pointed out that “a theme emerged based on the idea that
it is tough to manage companies and this management can be made easier with computers.”
The term ‘Intelligent Management Systems’ was thus chosen as the rallying idea to “express
ties to both engineering and business.”29
At the Department of Economics, a distinct “economics of industry” program was
taking shape, one that was also influenced by proximity with engineering. It also dealt with
health, environment, and market structures, but it was of a more institutional nature. Roger
Noll, Tim Bresnahan and others wanted to study oligopoly and the antitrust status of joint
ventures, contracts negotiations and property rights in collaboration with the GSB and
political scientists, through a detailed study of actual institutional arrangements. Under the
leadership of economic historian Paul David and Nathan Rosenberg, economists’ traditional
concern with the explanation of growth had morphed into a “new economics of science” that
drew on case studies to understand the production and dissemination of knowledge and the
determinants of innovation (David and Dasgupta 1994).
David had been teaching a course on the determinants and consequences of the diffusion
of technological innovations in the economic history of the West from the 9th to the 19th
centuries. The key takeaway was the notion of “innovation clusters.” His research combined
economic theory, history and microeconometrics to analyze technological change, studying
the failure of innovation like the reaper to disseminate, on the establishment of standards like
the QWERTY keyboard. Rosenberg was teaching a course on “technology and modern
industrial society,” studying the “socio-economic processes” influencing the rate and
direction of technological changes. Some of his knowledge was taken from a seminar on
“Science, Technology and Society” organized by an aeronautics engineer, Walter Vincenti

29 “Engineering research center proposal 1985” folder, box 66, KAP.

22

(see Rosenberg and Vincenti 1978).30 The latter published an influential 1990 book entitled
What Engineers Know and How they Know it. It used examples from the history of
aeronautical engineering to construct an epistemology of engineering and to sketch a model of
how new technologies are produced. The gist of the argument was to explain what engineers
do when they “design” – design variation is affected by “blindness” and selection by
“unsureness,” so engineers are left combining theoretical knowledge and trials and errors in
various ways. Market designers would not have rejected that characterization.

5. Epilogue
In the past two decades, the Stanford Department of Economics has eventually managed to
rank within the US top-10 departments. The much-covered 1994 FCC auctions for radio
spectrum acted as a test for market designer’s epistemology of applied economics, and the
Stanford economists involved in the process subsequently founded Market Design Inc.31 The
OR, EES and industrial engineering departments were eventually merged into a new
“Management Science and Engineering” department, covering decision analysis and risk
analysis, economics and finance, information science and technology, production and
operations management, and system modeling and optimization.
The continuing intellectual cross-fertilization and joint institutional redevelopment in
economics, engineering, business and more recently computer science, illustrate the
paradoxical history of economics at Stanford in the past hundred years. On the one hand, this
history was one of a long protracted battle between economists and an administrative
hierarchy they felt neglected them, to strengthen their disciplinary boundaries, emphasize
their specificities, and get control over funding and recruitment. At the same time, what was
crucial to the import of mathematical tools, an engineering perspective on innovation and a
“philosophy of design” into economics, and to the export of economists’ contributions to the
postwar science of decision and allocation to OR and EES was the constant institutional
innovations whereby these disciplines were combined and recombined. This involved a long
30 Rosenberg and Vincenti 1978 coauthored book on The Generation and Diffusion of Technological
Knowledge. David and Vincenti appear to have read each other’s course material, though the extent of
their exchanges and mutual influences will be studied from archives in the future. In the 1980s, Rosenberg
and David Landau chaired a workshop on technological innovation sponsored by the Department of
Economics and the Center for Economic Policy Research.
31
For historical and methodological analyses of the auctions, see the references listed in Mirowski and NikKhah 2017.

23

tradition of supporting joint appointments, and of constantly updating a rich and complex
network of interschool and interdisciplinary training “programs” and yearly and summer
workshops.
In the end, none of the ingredients that shaped the relationships between economics
and engineering were specific to Stanford (except the weather), from the rise of statistics and
OR to the Cold War context and associated stream of military and federal financial support. If
what later came to be called the Silicon Valley formed a unique intellectual and industrial
environment, a university forging ties with its industrial milieu was nothing original. Nor was
retaining the best students as educators, researchers or business partners. Yet these ingredients
were stirred by a few scientists with an interdisciplinary bent like Bowker, Foresythe, Arrow
or Wilson as well as engineers turned administrators like Hoover and Terman, who upheld a
strong vision of which grants and contracts-capturing research programs should be prioritized.
They created an institutional structure in which theoretical, tool and epistemological crossfertilization between disciplines and between researchers, public and business clients was
nurtured on a long-term scale. This included interdisciplinary programs like OR, teams at the
GBS, and other extra-departmental structures like the Stanford Research Park for electrical
engineering and computer science, or the IMSS workshop for mathematical science. Though
economics was not a priority in itself, the skills developed by some economists in the context
of the Cold War allowed them to become central resources in engineering education and
research fostered by the Army, then the large-utilities energy industry, then the Silicon Valley
companies.

24

References
KAP: Kenneth Arrow Papers, Duke University
MNP: Marc Nerlove Papers, Duke University
ALP : Al Roth Papers, Duke University
ECON: Department of Economics Papers, Stanford University
Ansu, Yaw, 1984. Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies for an Economy with Parallel Markets: The
Case of Ghana, Department of EES, Stanford University
Armatte, Michel. 2010. La Science économique comme ingénierie . Paris: Presses des Mines
Arrow, K. 2011. “Oral History Interview conducted by Jane Hibbard.” Stanford Oral History
program.
Augier, M. March, J. 2011. The Roots, Rituals, and Rhetorics of Change : North American business
schools after Second World War. Stanford, CA : Stanford Business Books
Backhouse, Roger. Medema, Steven. 2009. “On the Definition of Economics” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 23(1).
Ballandonne. M. 2012. “New Economics of science, economics of scientific knowledge and sociology
of science: the case of Paul David.” Journal of Economic Methodology 19(4), 391-406
Ballandonne, M. 2015. Creating Increasing Returns: The Genesis of Arrow’s “Learning by Doing.”
History of Political Economy, 47(3), 448-479
Bessner, 2015. “Organizing Complexity: the Hopeful Dreams and Harsh Realities of Interdisciplinary
Collaboration at the RAND Corporation in the Early Cold War.” Journal of the History of the
Behavioral Sciences 51(1), 31-53.
Chenery, H. 1992. “From Engineering to Economics” BNL Quaterly Review, 183.
Cottle.R. 2010. “The building of Management Science and Engineering at Stanford” powerpoint. Link
Cravens, H. Solovey, M. 2012. Cold War Social Science Knowledge Production, Liberal Democracy,
and Human Nature. Palgrave Macmillan
David, P. Dasgupta, 1994. “Toward a new economics of Science,” Research Policy 23: 487-532
Elliott, Orrin Leslie, 1937. Stanford University : The First Twenty-Five Years. Stanford University
Press.
Erickson, P. 2015. The World the Game Theorists Made. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press
Erickson, P. Klein, J. Daston, L. Lemov, R. Sturm T., Gordin M. 2013. How Reason Almost Lost its
Mind: The Strange Career of Cold War Rationality. Chicago: University of Chicago Press
Feiwel, G. (ed.), 1987. Arrow and the Foundations of the Theory of Economic Policy. Palgrave
Macmillan

25

Fish, John C. 1915. Engineering Economics: First Principles. Mc Graw Hill
Fontaine, 2015. “Introduction: The Social Sciences in a Cross-Disciplinary Age.” Journal of the
History of the Behavioral Sciences 51(1), 1-9
Garber, Russ. 2009. “An Interview with Ronald A. Howard.” Decision Analysis 6(4):263-272
Gilmore, G. Steward, 2004. Fred Terman at Stanford: Building a Discipline, a University and Silicon
Valley. Stanford University Press : Stanford.
Grant, Eugene. [1930] 1938. Principles of Engineering Economy with Problems. New York: Ronald
Press Company, p. vii
Holmstrom, B. Milgrom, P. Roth A. 2002. Game Theory in the Tradition of Bob Wilson.
https://services.bepress.com/wilson/
Jardini, 1996. Out Of the Blue Yonder: The RAND Corporation’s Diversification into ocial Welfare
Research: 1946-1968, doctoral dissertation, Carnegie Mellon University
Jennergren, L. Peter, 2002. "Introducton to a Paper Inspired by Bob Wilson, Well-known
Optimization
Theorist.”
Game
Theory
in
the
Tradition
of
Bob
Wilson
7.
https://services.bepress.com/wilson/art7
Khurana, R. 2007. From Higher Aims to Hired Hands The Social Transformation of American
Business Schools and the Unfulfilled Promise of Management as a Profession. Princeton University
press.
Klein, J. 2015. “The Cold War Hot House for Modeling Strategies at the Carnegie Institute of
Technology,” INET WP series n°19
Leslie, Stuart W. 1993. The Cold War and American Science: The Military-Industrial- Academic
Complex at MIT and Stanford. New York: Columbia University Press
Lowen, Rebecca S. 1997. Creating the Cold War University: The Transformation of Stanford;
University of California Press.
Manne, 1961. Economic Analysis for Business Decisions. New York: McGraw-Hill
Holmstrom, Bengt; Milgrom, Paul; and Roth, Alvin E. 2002. "Introduction." Game Theory in the
Tradition of Bob Wilson. 1.
https://services.bepress.com/wilson/art1
Holmstrom, Bengt, 2002. "Introductory Essay to Groves Scheme on Restricted Domains." Game
Theory in the Tradition of Bob Wilson. 19. https://services.bepress.com/wilson/art19
Mirowski, P. 2002. Machine Dreams: Economics Becomes a Cyborg Science. Cambridge: Cambridge
Universiy Press
Mirowski, P. Nik-Khah, 2017. “The Knowledge we have lost in information.” Oxford: Oxford
University Press
Mody, C. 2017. “INterdisciplinarity at Vietnam-Era Stanford” in Frickel et alii (eds) Investigatng
Interdisciplinary Collaboration;. New Brunswick: Rutgers University press
Morgan, Mary S. 2003. “Economics.” In Porter, Theodore M. and Ross, Dorothy (eds.), The

26

Cambridge History of Science Volume 7: The Modern Social Sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 275-305.
Nash, Georges H. 1988. Herbert Hoover and Stanford University. Stanford : Hoover Institution.
Nerlove, M. 1993. “The ET Interview by Eric Ghysels,” Econometric Theory 9, 117-143
Olkin, 1987. “A Conversation with Albert H. Bowker.” Statistical Science 2(4), 472-483
O’Mara, M. 2019. The Code: Silicon Valley and the Remaking of America. New York: Penguin.
Rosenberg, N. Vincenti, W. 1978. The Britannia Bridge: The Generation and Diffusion of
Technological Knowledge
Roth, Alvin E. 2002. “The Economist as Engineer: Game Theory, Experimentation, and Computation
as Tools for Design Economics.” Econometrica , 70 (4): 1341-78.
Roth, A. Wilson, R. 2019. “How market design emerged from game theory,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 33(3), 118-143
Rothkopft, 1969. “A Model of Rational Competitive Bidding.”Management Science 15(7): 362– 373.
Srinivasan, V. Seenu, 2017. “Interview by Leigh McAlister, October 24, 2017,” working paper
Svorencik, 2016. The Experimental Turn in Economics, dissertation, Utrecht University.
Thomas, W. 2014. “Decisions and Dynamics: Postwar Theoretical Problems and the MIT Style of
Economics,” History of Political Economy 46 (suppl_1): 295-314
Thomas, W. 2015. Rational Action: The Sciences of Policy in Britain and America, 1940-1960. MIT
University Press
Vincenti, W.G.. 1990. What Engineers Know and How they Know It: Analytical Studies from
Aeronautical History . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Weintraub, R. (ed). 2014. “MIT and the Transformation of American Economics” History of Political
Economy 46 (suppl_1)

27

