Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.22

Pp. 284-292

Functioning of Emotive-Evaluative Vocabulary in a Political Text
Liliya S. Polyakova
assistant professor of the Foreign Languages for Engineering Department,
Nosov Magnitogorsk State Technical University, Magnitogorsk, Russia
Elena V. Suvorova
assistant professor of the Foreign Languages for Engineering Department,
Nosov Magnitogorsk State Technical University, Magnitogorsk, Russia
Alexey Yu. Trutnev
ssociate professor of the Philosophy, Culturology,
Humanities and Social Sciences Department,
Glinka Magnitogorsk State Conservatory, Magnitogorsk, Russia

Abstract
This paper is aimed at highlighting the problem of the use of emotive-evaluative vocabulary in the
English-language mass media political discourse, which is a relevant topic since the scope of media
texts in English is widespread in the information community and the media language is the basic
means for communication, phrasing, conveying and storing information.
Political discourse is a popular area of research of linguistics, as it covers all aspects of modern
life and society. Being mainly broadcasted by the politicians, it is considered a complex linguistic
phenomenon, whose objectives, direct or indirect, are aimed at disseminating, implementing
political authorities and obtaining the majority of votes during the election campaigns. The article
is devoted to the evaluation categories, which refer to the semantic and pragmatic categories and
can be one of the strongest tools of influence on the public. Within the framework of our research
29 English articles, posted on the Internet, concerning the political leaders of the United States and
Great Britain, attributing the personal characteristics to them, were analysed. Using the continuous
sampling method there was found 214 examples of English emotive-evaluative vocabulary. During
the study, the methods of compilation, interpretation, and descriptive methods were used.

Keywords: discourse, political discourse, media text, linguistic means, emotive-evaluative
vocabulary, linguistic manipulation.
Cite as Polyakova, L. S. , Suvorova, E.V. , & Trutnev, A. Y. (2019) Functioning of EmotiveEvaluative Vocabulary in a Political Text. Arab World English Journal, 10 (2)284-292.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.22
284

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Functioning of Emotive-Evaluative Vocabulary in a Political Text

Polyakova, Suvorova & Trutnev

Introduction
Effective and persuasive speech of a politician is characterised by many factors, one of which is
the speaker's ability to use the relevant language that can lead to the creation of interpersonal
relationships between the speaker and the targeted audiences. Language and politics are
intertwined. Language is the method to transfer one’s political ideas to the community (Harris,
1984). Vocabulary in politics is a powerful weapon, as it can prove the political actions to be either
effective or ineffective. The use of emotive-evaluated vocabulary can influence the emotions of
the audience. Due to the right choice of words a politician can draw the audience's attention and
invoke the appropriate feelings from the listeners: a speaker can convince the audience in his/her
ideas or can trigger the feelings of disagreement. Thus, a competent politician should know how
to implement necessary lexical means in his/her speech and he/she should be aware of how to do
it successfully. That is why a language is a key element of political discourse, as well as an
important tool in convincing the target audience, since the ability of a politician to choose the
appropriate forms of linguistic means to achieve the desired objectives can contribute to his/her
failure or success.
The study represents a linguistic analysis of the impact of emotive-evaluative vocabulary
of political language based on the media English texts. The attempt is made to identify the
similarities and differences in the use of linguistic means. Communication can be considered as
the basis of politics, because it helps to conduct political processes within the country and the
world in general. The establishment of political ties helps the policy makers to establish a certain
influence on society, makes their work complete, which becomes especially true during the
election campaigns, when the future of the country depends on the votes of the citizens of the
country. It is believed that nowadays political discourse is constantly changing, it became faster,
clearer and tougher (Fitzwater, 2016, p. 6) that can be explained by the widespread use of media,
social media and social networks. Politicians become personality-oriented, which means that the
use of aggressive strategies of negative evaluation has increased in the description of their
opponents.
To achieve its goals, a politician usually uses a wide range of tools and strategies, among
which there are effective tools for shaping public opinion and broadcasting hidden policy goals.
The purpose of this article is to conduct a comprehensive linguistic analysis of the use of emotional
and evaluative vocabulary in political discourse, which plays an important role in political speech,
as it refers to lexical means that transmit emotions of persuasion, evaluation, judgement and
recognition within the framework of the Theory of Assessment (Martin & White, 2005). Attention
is also paid to metaphorical expressions, which constitute an essential part of political
communication and can indirectly influence political actions. All this makes the topic of our
research relevant.
Literature review
As it was mentioned above the study is based on the analysis of English language political media
texts. The term "media text" appeared at the end of the 20th century in the English-language
scientific literature, in the works of Bell (1998), Montgomery (1996), Fairclough (1995) & Fowler
(1991), Yuzhakova et al. (2018, p. 465). The research is performed in the frame of critical
discourse analysis, which purpose is to study the political language in terms of conveying political
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

285

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Functioning of Emotive-Evaluative Vocabulary in a Political Text

Polyakova, Suvorova & Trutnev

power, abuse of authority or dominance (van Dijk, 1997, p. 11). Political discourse-analysis
contributes not only to the study of discourse and political science, but also to other social sciences
(van Dijk, 1997, p. 12). The focus of linguists is on characteristics of rhetoric of political
communication (Schaffner, 1995). According to Van Dyck, the analyses of political discourse
"should not be limited to the structural peculiarities of a text only, but also include a systemic
account of the context and its relations to discursive structures" (van Dijk, 1997, p. 15).
Political discourse is not only the discourse of politicians (van Dijk, 1997, p. 12), but a
complex linguistic phenomenon that is directly or indirectly aimed at the dissemination and
implementation of political power (Sheigal, 2000) and at political decision-making as well.
Politicians are not the only participants of political discourse. The recipients of political
information, the public, citizens and voters should also be included in the analysis of discourse
(van Dijk, 1997, p. 13). In this case, political discourse becomes public. Moreover, political
discourse is the institutional type of discourse, as the speaker is not an ordinary official, but is the
representative of a political party, country or a government (Karasik, 2004, p. 281). It is believed
that political discourse is characterized by a high degree of manipulation. In this aspect, the interest
in its study is determined, firstly, by finding the best ways of influence used by politicians on the
audience and, secondly, by the need to find out the genuine intentions of the speaker and the hidden
mechanisms of manipulation on the audience (Sheigal, 2000, p. 45).
Political discourse is a form of political activity and political process in politics (van Dijk,
1997, p. 14). During the election campaign all the members of society are involved in this process
that leads to their ideological promotion. In this case, the categories of evaluation and emotiveness
draw particular attention to further analysis. If these linguistic notions are included in the political
text, the audience's attention can be attracted to either some parts of the text or a speech, and thus,
the manipulation of the audience can be achieved.
In recent decades, linguistic studies have been focused on discussing the problem of
culture, language and consciousness interrelation due to interdisciplinary scientific knowledge
integration (Zalavina et al., 2019, p. 184). The phenomenon of evaluation is a common area of
linguistic researches and refers to the anthropocentric approach, which means that it reflects the
human nature and depends on the person’s values and axiological norms. The notion of evaluation
was investigated within the frame of communicative linguistics in respect of linguistic personality
(Karasik, 2004) within the function of lexical component in the study of connotative meaning and
semantic contents (Sinclair, 2004) in the field of stylistic analysis (Short and Semino, 2008); within
pragmatics in the use of various assessment tools to impact the recipient and achieve the desired
effect (Fraser, 1996); in establishing the interaction between values and emotions (Mulligan, 1998)
and the foundations of the evaluation situation (Zhabotynska, 2013), in the field of cognitive
linguistics in the study of ideology and semantics of evaluation (Malrieu, 1999).
According to the definition of Ahmanova, emotionally-evaluative vocabulary is the lexical
units (single words or expressions), which have the potential to cause particular stylistic impact
regardless of the context, as the meaning of such words conveys not only the subject-logic
information (about the subject indicated), but also the additional information, i.e. connotations
(Ahmanova, 2004, p. 310). Arnold defines such vocabulary as stylistically marked words which,
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

286

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Functioning of Emotive-Evaluative Vocabulary in a Political Text

Polyakova, Suvorova & Trutnev

together with the denotative meaning, indicating the subject of the speech, possess connotative
meaning, which is comprised of emotional, expressive, stylistic and functional evaluation
components (Arnold, 2002, p. 153).
There are three types of evaluation depending upon the method of implementation of
estimation of lexical units:
1) functional evaluation, it occurs when the evaluated seme of denotation is presented (for
example: bad, useful, horror, to despise);
2) connotative evaluation, it is acquired in neutral lexical units only in a particular context
(for example: in Russian language, Red-Brown (in negative connotation denoting
political forces advocating Communist and ultra-nationalist ideology), transparent
(positive characteristics)); in our view, such evaluation approach, can be called
"contextual";
3) pragmatic evaluation is explained by the specificity of its denotation (e.g.: aider,
terrorism) (Markelova 1995, p. 77).
The category of evaluation is one of the main features of political discourse, which has a
widespread use in the political texts of the mass media (Polyakova & Yuzhakova, 2018, p.137).
Discussion
Since the purpose of our research is the identification and analysis of emotive-evaluative
vocabulary used in political media texts, we are to find linguistic and pragmatic means contributing
to the conveyed connotations. So the main method of the study is the method of pragmatic analysis
implicating identification the addressee’s intentions and presuppositions (Oualif, 2017).
Supplementary methods are: discourse analysis method, the contextual analysis method, the
cultural interpretation method, the component semantic analysis method, the stylistic analysis
method. In other words, the methodological basis of our study is the complex of linguistic
analytical methods. Here we cannot but refer to the works in the field of pragmalinguistics by
Grice (1985), Leech (1983), Lakoff (1973), and Brown & Levinson (1987), Yuzhakova et al.
(2018, p.476).
Within the framework of our research 29 English articles, posted on the Internet,
concerning the political leaders of the United States and Great Britain, attributing the personal
characteristics to them, were analysed. Using the continuous sampling method there was found
214 examples of English emotive-evaluative vocabulary.
The analysis of English political speeches shows the presence of several kinds of verbal
means in achieving the expressiveness of the text. First of all, they are the linguistic means
denoting evaluation which are usually expressed by the evaluative vocabulary, like the units lovely
or wonderful in the following example: “And I watched the way you talk now about how lovely
everything is and how wonderful you are” (https://singjupost.com/full-transcript-presidentialdebate-september-26–2016-donald-trump-vs-hillary-clinton/2/?singlepage=1).
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

287

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Functioning of Emotive-Evaluative Vocabulary in a Political Text

Polyakova, Suvorova & Trutnev

Another way to demonstrate of use of emotionally-evaluative vocabulary and to show the
category of evaluation is the use of widespread connotations. Thus, the following quote has a
positive connotation due to the units achievements and social justice: “Some of our biggest
achievements — including the introduction of same-sex marriage and taking the lowest-paid out
of income tax altogether — they’ve been all about the pursuit of social justice”
(https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/theresa-mays-tory-leadership-launchstatement-full-text-a7111026.html). The expression social justice denotes the universal value,
which contributes to the impact on the audience, which consists in the formation of a positive
image of the speaker.
The second group consists of stylistically-coloured vocabulary, the use of which is aimed
at developing the desired political assessments and emotional responses from the audience. For
example, this effect has the unit hell, referring to the lower layer of vocabulary: “He's done a hell
of a job as your A. G. and you've got to get him with us”
(https://www.realclearpolitics.com/video/2018/08/21/watch_live_trump_rally_in_west_virginia.
html);
“you
put
up
one
hell
of
a
fight,
thank
you,
Evan”
(https://www.realclearpolitics.com/video/2018/08/21/watch_live_trump_rally_in_west_virginia.
html).
The third group includes a variety of stylistic techniques. At the syntactic level, these
techniques are mainly represented by the numerous repetitions in the text, which allow the
addressee to emphasize the semantically meaningful parts of the text, thus provoking the
audience to the appropriate intellectual or emotional reactions: "Doesn't deserve a mention.
Doesn't deserve a headline"
(https://www.realclearpolitics.com/video/2018/08/21/watch_live_trump_rally_in_west_virginia.
html).
Any person, as a conscious being, is forced routinely to make conclusions consciously or
unconsciously in terms of linguistic or everyday situation (Suvorova & Polyakova, 2018, p. 295).
That is why, at the lexical level, the linguistic techniques are aimed at forming vivid images in the
minds of the recipients, which should be followed by the necessary assessments and political
responses. For example, a metaphorical epithet "puppet" in the part of the text "the building of a
puppet government" (https://singjupost.com/full-transcript-presidential-debate-september-26–
2016-donald-trump-vs-hillary-clinton/2/?singlepage=1) generates the image with the negative
connotation.
According to the findings of the research the main purpose of the expressive-evaluative
language means in political rhetoric is to fulfil the pragmatic functions of the text, which consists
of achieving the manipulative influence on the audience and the provoking it to the desired
intellectual or emotional response.
Regarding the choice of vocabulary, within the framework of the analyzed material, the
political speeches can be divided into two groups with. The first group of words comprises the
political vocabulary; the second one consists of common lexis. The approaches to the study of the
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

288

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Functioning of Emotive-Evaluative Vocabulary in a Political Text

Polyakova, Suvorova & Trutnev

common lexis vary, that is why, when analyzing the political speeches, the author’s emotive
vocabulary, the elements of conversational vocabulary, the author’s imagery, the use of expressive
idioms, and other linguists devices, can be discussed. Connotatively marked political words,
having affective meanings, are of a special interest. Such words as freedom, justice, independence,
social progress, compassion traditionally are connotatively charged, as they express collective
emotions. Politically affective words are often used as catchwords or key words in political texts.
They acquire their expressive or affective connotation both in the stylistic and certain political
contexts, where a speaker and a listener are the participants. In this case, their belonging to a
particular ideology, a culture, a political situation in the country or the world, is reflected.
For instance, speaking about such world events as the fall of the Berlin Wall and the Soviet
Union’s collapse, the American president Bill Clinton uses a cliché “revolutionary times” which
gets an expressive and affective connotation in his speech. It results from a special political
background, i.e. the speaker’s and listener’s belonging to the American culture. The desire for
changes is one of the main values of the American society. The representatives of the American
culture consider any changes to be a positive stimulus for development, growth, progress and
improvement. The notion “revolution” is closely connected with the notion “changes”, that results
in expressive, affective and evaluative connotation in the phrase “revolutionary times”: You are
living in revolutionary times (B. Clinton) (https://usa.usembassy.de/etexts/ga6-940712.htm).
Stylistic devices, which convey frustrated expectations, which occurs when the continuity
and linearity of speech is broken due to the introduction of some unpredicted information, are also
interesting. Thus, the device transfers ideologeme freedom into the class of affective words, as in
an example And as we and our coalition partners are doing in Afganistan, we will bring to the
Iraqi people food and medicine and supplies – and freedom (G. Bush)
(https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/sep/21/september11.usa13).
These words are
emotionally and expressively charged and demonstrate pragmatic power and strength.
It’s necessary to make an emphasis on the assessment that plays a very important role in
the political communication. The criterion of the assessment is an ideological position of the
speech agent. Any political phenomenon can become the object of the political assessment,
nevertheless, a political leader, his/her ideological position, as well as a political party or a group,
are more common subjects for an assessment. As a rule, a political speech focuses on the
assessment transfer not the genuine interpretation of facts, data or certain information, as the public
figures strive to demonstrate their view on the social and political structure, the organization of the
state institutions, their system of values, as being positive, whereas showing the ideas of their
ideological opponents being negative (O'Neill, 1994). Being mainly neutral, political vocabulary
acquires its positive or negative evaluation in a certain political context.
Thus, a lexeme regime has the following meanings: mode of rule or management; form of
government; period of rule. None of these has an evaluative seme. In the remark, taken from the
speech of the British prime-minister T. Blair, this lexical unit with the collocation of such
evaluative words as shackle, brutal, victim gets the connotation of a negative evaluation. Compare:
And how risible would be the claims that these were wars on Muslims if the world could see these
Muslim nations still Muslim, but with some hope for the future, not shackled by brutal regimes
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

289

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Functioning of Emotive-Evaluative Vocabulary in a Political Text

Polyakova, Suvorova & Trutnev

whose principal victims were the very Muslims they pretended to protect? (T. Blair)
(http://ammanmessage.com/the-full-text-of-tony-blairs-speech-to-the-islam-and-muslims-in-theworld-today-conference/).
Thus, one can conclude that the layer of political nomination is of a great interest especially
in the framework of the anthropocentric approach to the communication as it allows interpreting
the purpose and the ploys of the pragmatic speech impact.
Conclusion
The use of the emotional evaluative lexis is one of the main peculiarities of the political discourse.
The political discourse is not aimed at informing by force, but is focused on forming either a
positive, or a negative attitude among the addressees, changing their world views, influencing their
way of thinking. Thus, a political discourse acquires the function of an impact, which can be
achieved by the use of certain linguistic means, i.e. emotively-evaluated vocabulary. Nevertheless,
it should be noted that the choice of emotional and evaluative lexis is attributed to the peculiarities
of the author’s individual style of presentation.
The linguistic researches offer a variety of definitions of political rhetoric, but all of them
stress the importance of pragmatic functions of the text. Considering the analysed material, the
following features of political discourse can be highlighted: the manipulation technique, which is
aimed at the address to the feelings and emotions of the audience; the argumentative technique,
the purpose of which is to appeal to the mind of the recipient; the address to the existing values of
the community. Obviously, all these factors are aimed at achieving the pragmatic function of the
text: they are designed to arouse a certain impact from the recipients with the desired respond.

About the authors
Liliya S. Polyakova, PhD (Philology), Assoc. Prof. of Foreign Languages for Engineering,
Institute of Humanities, Nosov Magnitogorsk State Technical University, Magnitogorsk, Russia.
Research interests include the English language, discourse, gender linguistics, political discourse,
etc. http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9990-7694
Elena V. Suvorova, PhD (Pedagogy), Assoc. Prof. of Foreign Languages for Engineering,
Institute of Humanities, Nosov Magnitogorsk State Technical University, Magnitogorsk, Russia.
Research interests include the English language, cognitive linguistics, semantics, discourse, etc.
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-5821-3952
Alexey Yu. Trutnev, PhD (Pedagogy), Assoc. Prof. of the Philosophy, Culturology, Humanities
and Social Sciences Department at the Glinka Magnitogorsk State Conservatory (Academy),
Magnitogorsk, Russia. Research interests are linguistics, computer-assisted language learning,
translation studies etc. http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1885-1300

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

290

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Functioning of Emotive-Evaluative Vocabulary in a Political Text

Polyakova, Suvorova & Trutnev

References
Ahmanova O. S. (2004). Slovar' lingvisticheskih terminov [Glossary of linguistic terms]. Moscow,
URSS: Editorial URSS.
Arnold I. (2002). Stilistika. Sovremennyj anglijskij yazyk [Stylistics. Modern English]. Мoscow:
Flint science.
Bell, A. (1998). Approaches to Media Discourse. Oxford: Blackwell.
Brown, P. & Levinson, S. (1987). Politeness: Some Universals in Language Usage. Cambridge:
Cambridge Univ. Press.
Clinton B. (1994).
Berlin is free. Retrieved November 6, 2018 from
https://usa.usembassy.de/etexts/ga6-940712.htm
Grice, G. (1985). Logic and Speech Communication. Moscow: News in Foreign Linguistics, vol.
16 (Linguistic Pragmatics), 217-237.
Harris, S. (1984). Questions as a mode of control in a magistrate’s court. International Journal of
the Sociology of Language, 49, 5-27.
Fairclough, N. (1995). Media Discourse. London: Edward Arnold.
Fitzwater, M. (2016). I do not think there is a quick fix. Civility in Presidential Election Discourse.
Rindge, New Hampshire: Franklin Pierce University, 6-7.
Fowler, R. (1991). Language in the News: Discourse and Ideology in the Press. London and New
York: Routledge.
Fraser,
B.
(1996).
Pragmatic
Markers.
Pragmatics,
6(2),
167-190.
https://doi.org/10.1075/prag.6.2.03fra
Karasik, V. (2004). Iazykovoi Krug: Lichnost', Kontsepty, Diskurs [Language Circle: Personality,
Concepts, Discourse]. Moscow: Gnosis.
Lakoff, R. (1973). The Logic of Politeness. Chicago: Papers from the 9-th Regional Meeting of
the Chicago Linguistics Society, 292 – 305.
Leech, G. (1983). Principles of Pragmatics. London and New York: Longman.
Malrieu, J. P. (1999). Evaluative Semantics. Cognition, Language, and Ideology. London, New
York: Routledge.
Markelova T. (1995). Semantika i pragmatika sredstv vyrazheniya ocenki v russkom yazyke
[Semantics and Pragmatics of means of expression evaluation in Russian language].
Filologicheskie nauki [Philology], 3, 67-79.
Martin, J. R., White P. R.R. (2005). The Language of Evaluation. Appraisal in English. New York:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Mulligan, K. (1998). From Appropriate Emotions to Values. The Monist, 81(1), 161-188.
https://doi.org/10.5840/monist199881114
Montgomery M., & Edington, B. (1996). The Media. London: The British Council.
O'Neill, P. (1994). Fictions of Discourse. Reading narrative theory. Toronto: University of
Toronto Press.
Oualif, M. (2017). Presupposition: A Semantic or Pragmatic Phenomenon? Arab World English
Journal, 8 (3), 46 -59.
Presidential Debate at Hofstra University in Hempstead (2016). New York. Retrieved April 12,
2018 from https://singjupost.com/full-transcript-presidential-debate-september-26–2016donald-trump-vs-hillary-clinton/2/?singlepage=1
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

291

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Functioning of Emotive-Evaluative Vocabulary in a Political Text

Polyakova, Suvorova & Trutnev

Polyakova L.S., Yuzhakova Yu. V., (2017). The peculiarities of mediatext translation (on the
example of “Daily Mail” article “Tsar Harry!”) Humanitarian and pedagogical
researches, 1 (1), 136-143.
Suvorova, E.V., & Polyakova, L. S. (2018). Types of Inferences in Discourse. Arab World English
Journal, 9 (1). DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no1.21
Yuzhakova, Y.V., Polyakova, L. S., Dyorina, N. V. & Zalavina, T. Y. (2018). Peculiarities of
Ethnic Stereotypes Usage in English Political Discourse. Arab World English Journal,
9 (4), 464 -472. https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.34
Schaffner, C., Wenden, A. (1995). Language and peace. Dartmouth: Aldershot.
Tory leadership launch statement: full text. (2016). Retrieved November 4, 2018 from
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/theresa-mays-tory-leadership-launchstatement-full-text-a7111026.html
Tony Blair’s speech to the “Islam and Muslims in the World Today” conference: full text. (2006).
Retrieved November 4, 2018 from http://ammanmessage.com/the-full-text-of-tony-blairsspeech-to-the-islam-and-muslims-in-the-world-today-conference/
Trump’s
MAGA
Rally.
(2018).
Retrieved
November
4,
2018
from
https://www.realclearpolitics.com/video/2018/08/21/watch_live_trump_rally_in_west_vir
ginia.html
Van Dijk, T. A. (1997). What is Political Discourse Analysis? Belgian Journal of Linguistics,
11(1), 11-52. https://doi.org/10.1075/bjl.11.03dij
Yuzhakova, Yu. V., Polyakova, L. S. Ethnic Stereotypes in English political discourse.
Philological Sciences. Issues of theory and practice 7(85), 199-203 (2018)
Zalavina, T. Y., Yuzhakova, Y.V., Dyorina, N. V., & Polyakova, L. S. (2019). The Concept of
"Money" in the Context of National Linguocultures. Arab World English Journal, 10 (1)
183-189.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

292

