AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies, Volume3, Number2.May 2019

Pp.152-164

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no2.13

Inter-mixing Indiannesss with Thainesss in selected Thai Novels
Sophana Srichampa
Centre for Bharat Studies
Research Institute for Languages and Cultures of Asia
Mahidol University, Thailand

Abstract
This article studies the Indian settings and plots of eight Thai novels by seven writers
based on the period of the works and the relative experience of the writer. The results are
as follows: During the early Ratanakosin period, only one piece of Thai poetry recording
the lives of two Hindu Indians fighting over a Melayu woman was written using a Thai
setting. In the Middle Ratanakosin period, one renowned book about India recounted the
visit of a young King Rama V of Siam to India to experience and learn from the positive
and negative experience of colonized countries. His Majesty was inspired by that visit and
reformed Siam (former name of Thailand) into a dynastic state with numerous new
economic political and social developments. In the current Ratanakosin period of rampant
globalization, “Indianness” presented in the settings and protagonists are plotted in many
Thai novels mixing with “Thainess” through Thai or Indian-Thai characterisation and
aspects of culture and concepts related to Hinduism and Buddhism. “Dharma” and “Karma”
are the main key reflections found in Thai works. It can be concluded that, through their
art, Thai novelists serve de facto roles as cultural ambassadors linking Thai readers to
India.
Keywords: Buddhism, Hinduism, India, novel, Thailand
Cites as: Srichampa, S. (2019). Inter-mixing Indiannesss with Thainesss in selected Thai Novels.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies, 3 (2). 152-164.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no2.13

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 |www.awej-tls.org

152

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Inter-mixing Indiannesss with Thainesss in selected Thai Novels
Srichampa
Introduction
Thailand, as a part of Suvarnabhumi, has had a long relationship with India─thousands of years
in fact, with trade being the main objective of Indians sailing from India to Southeast Asia.
Hinduism, introduced by brahmins who accompanied Indian traders, was accepted and adapted by
rulers in the region. In the 3rd century BCE, Buddhism was spread by Sona and Uttara in Nakhon
Pathom province. Buddhism and Hinduism mixed with local administrative systems and beliefs to
become the raja system. Venerable Buddhadasa, the most famous Thai monk and social reformer,
once stated that Hinduism, Buddhism, the four basic human needs, and the language and culture
of India all influenced Siam to become the Thai society we know today. There is a combination of
Indian flesh and blood in ours. We unconsciously have Hinduism as our mother and Buddhism as
our father”. Buddhadasa asked Thai people to express their gratitude to India. (Buddhadasa, 1980,
p. 18, 24).
During the time of colonization under the British up to the post-colonization era, waves of
Indians from Punjab, including today’s Pakistan and other areas, migrated to Siam as it was the
only country in Southeast Asia not colonized by Europeans. They sought to make their living there,
often by selling clothes in Bangkok’s Pahurat area or by walking door to door sometimes as far as
neighboring provinces. Earlier arrivees helped the newcomers and once able to stand on their own
feet, they would venture off to make their own way in life. Clothes and textiles are part of Indian
identity in Pahurat despite many of the later generations of Indians in Thailand choosing not to
take up the business given the new career opportunities afforded them by their higher education,
which the first and second generations never had. Most have forgone the textile trade in favour of
technology and other commercial pursuits. The new generation is Thai but they look Indian and
although not many Indians cross-marry with Thais, they mix with them in their daily life through
work, study, religious and social activities.
The early generation of Indians in Thailand, without the benefit of a good education, was
a forced to sell goods such as cloth and mosquito nets door to door, usually financed by loans from
money-lenders who charged high daily interest. Thus the Thai saying “Meet an Indian and meet a
snake, beat the Indian first” (Kaew-Uraj, 2011.). This depicts the long held negative reputation of
Indians, that remains deeply imbedded in the Thai mindset to this day.
Nonetheless, the Indian government opted to apply cultural diplomacy to develop a positive
profile by focusing on arts, languages and culture and offering annual scholarships for various
education programs to students in many countries. As a result, over 50 years, more than a thousand
Thai students have graduated from India by virtue of various Indian scholarship schemes. Today
many Thais study there of the own accord or at the numerous Thai universities that teach about
India as part of eastern civilization, history, literature, religion, languages and culture studies. In
2009, the Indian Cultural Center was established in Bangkok, which functions as a hub of Indian
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

153

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Inter-mixing Indiannesss with Thainesss in selected Thai Novels
Srichampa
arts, languages and culture promotion and exchange between India and Thailand. Its aim is to bring
the peoples of both countries closer for better understanding. Also, many Thai Buddhists choose to
go on pilgrimages to sacred Buddhist sites in India or visit renowned tourist places such as Taj
Mahal, Kashmir, Chennai, Mumbai, New Delhi and Kolkata. Air connectivity between India and
Thailand is very convenient nowadays with direct flights every day that facilitate travel and
opportunities to learn about and know each other. With their knowledge, experiences and
perceptions of India, many Thai writers use Indian setting and protagonists inter-mixing in their
Thai novels.
Objective
The objective of this paper is to discover the Indian settings and genres presented in selected
Thai novels.
Methodology:
Seven writers and eight works were selected for analysis: one literary work, one historical
documentary, and six novels were reviewed which varied according to the period in which they
were written and the seniority of the writers.
Results and findings:
The selected works are presented according to the periods as follows:
Early Ratanakosin Era
The early Ratanakosin era included the reigns of Kings Rama’ I to III. (C.E.1782- C.E.1851)
(Terwiel, 1983). One outstanding novel that was composed in this period is “Radenlandaj” which is
described below.
This first work of literature about India was written in the reign of King Rama III and
comprised various styles of Thai poetry. The setting for Radenlandaj is Bangkok, Thailand. The
poems describe the life of a Hindu Indian named “Landaj” who is a wonderer, does not speak Thai
well, lives near the Devasthan (Brahmin temple) and earns his living as a beggar by singing and
playing the fiddle. There is another Indian character known as “Khaek Pradu” who owns cows. His
wife is “Pradae”, a Melayu woman. One day both men have a fight over this woman. The story was
already well known but Phra Maha Montri reinterpreted it as a play representing the first written
work based on the true story of a Hindu Indian. In an amusing way, he used royal vocabularies to
describe the life of an ordinary man like Landaj, a story described as “one of the most parodical
stories which is hardly comparable” (Vitchayaprakorn, 2006, http://www.human.nu.ac.th/jhnu/
journal_detail.php?m=4&a=50).
Radenlandaj reflects on the life of a beggar who earns his living playing music in exchange
for offerings. Landaj represents the wonderer who appears at different times and in different
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

154

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Inter-mixing Indiannesss with Thainesss in selected Thai Novels
Srichampa
contexts through history. The setting of the story is in the proximity of the Brahmin Swing near
the Devasthan which is on the Ratanakosin Island in Bangkok and is a place where many the
wonderers today pass their time (Nathi, 2010).
Radenlandaj was the first work of social satire in Thai and the first to record the existence
of a beggar: “This is the story of a beggar. Before that, in the Sukhothai and Ayutthaya Kingdoms,
there might have been burglars too, but there is no record” (Pitak, 2014, p. 2).
The Middle Ratanakosin Era
The middle Ratanakosin era covered the reigns of King Rama IV-King Rama VI (from C.E.
1851-C.E.1926) (Terwiel, 1983). One renowned book about India from that time is discussed below.
During the British colonial period, King Rama V, as the 19 year old young king of Siam
(Today is Thailand), visited India in 1872. The purpose of his visit was to survey the situation there
in terms of military, politics, and socio-cultural scenario to be used as possible models for Siam
(Sahai, 2002). Kasetsiri (2016) opines that:
His visit during the early reign of the young king, especially to the British colonies of
Singapore (1870), India (with Burma) in 1871, was extremely important to the "reform" and
the royal policies of Siam during the reign of Kings Rama V, VI and VII (until Revolution
24 June 1932). Such reforms in the reign of King Rama V made Siam a “dynastic state” that
centralized power with the king and became “absolutism” more than a “nationstate ” (p.4).
There is a book written in 2002 about his visit entitled “India in 1872: As Seen by the Siamese” by
the Indian scholar Professor Dr. Sahai Sachchidanand, which was translated into Thai by Kanthika
Sri-udom in 2003. This book is a good reference to India under the British Raj from the viewpoint
of the young Siamese king.
During the period of colonization in Asia, which impacted Siam less than its neighbours,
the young Siamese king sought to learn how those colonized countries were affected, India in
particular. He visited them to learn how best he could rule and keep Siam safe from being colonized
itself. He sailed to the port of Calcatta, the then capital of British Raj, and stayed for 47 days. At
that time, India had been under British rule for more than a hundred years and had had its
infrastructure developed and modernized: railways, telecommunications, telegraph systems, roads
and canals connected to the main rivers. Western education, a western-styled military, foundries,
coins, docks, prisons, museums, zoos, religious places and palaces were all provided by the British.
All this represented “westernness” or “modernity”. At the same time, the young king experienced
the abolition of the Maharaja system in the process, so he witnessed both positive and negative
aspects of western colonization in India. Upon returning to Siam, he instigated development
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

155

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Inter-mixing Indiannesss with Thainesss in selected Thai Novels
Srichampa
projects by applying “western” concepts and using “India as a role model for Siamese reform”
(Muksri, 2003). The King together with leaders of the nobility, drove the modernization process
quickly by introducing a taxation system, reengineering the political system and abandoning outdated traditions such as slavery and crawl. (Wongthet, 2016).
These two works provide a positive view of India from a Thai perspective. In
“Radenlandaj”, the presentation of the poor Hindu beggar reflects a Thai predisposition to have
fun. “India in 1872: As Seen by the Siamese” on the other hand, is a valuable historical record
compiled by the renowned Indian scholar and translated into Thai as an inter-cultural work for both
sides to learn from.
Current Ratanakosin Era
In the reign of King Rama IX, there were numerous Thai novels written with foreign
countries as settings. India was one such country that inspired Thai writers. The selected works
studied in this part are presented according to the periods of publications and the seniority of the
writers in Thai society.
A number of Thai writers have used elements of Indian history, geography, literature and
knowledge in their plots and settings, and the first writer introduced here is Phnomthien. He wrote
his first novel, “Chulatrikhun”, in 1948 when he was in secondary school. It is a tragic romance
novel. Chulatrikhun is the point where two rivers the Ganga and the Yamuna merge with the milky
way from heaven to become three rivers. He describes the tragic romance as follows: Dararai-philat
is a beautiful princess from Varanasi who prays at Chulatrikhun to become an ugly woman because
she does not want her life to end like that of her beautiful mother. She meets Ariyawat, the king of
Magadha who falls in love with her at first sight. Their destiny is complicated and tragic when, in
the end, Ariyawat betrays her by marrying another princess, leading Dararai-philat to take her own
life at Chulatrikhun.
This retro fantasy is one of the most popular novels in Thailand and has been reproduced
as a radio drama, film and stage drama at various times. Moreover, five songs related to the story
were composed.
By the same writer, with another Indian setting is “Sivaaraatri”. Sivaaraatri means “A night
of sin floating; it is Siva night”. This is a beautiful novel by Phnomthien and written in a style that
cannot be copied. (Kananurak, 2001). Four volumes have been published at various times. The plot
revolves around a battle between Aryan and Milakha (Dravidian), but is sprinkled with romantic
elements. In the story, the Aryans, led by Phitsanu Maharaja, invade the lands of the Dravidians.
They want to kill all new born Dravidian babies because a prophesy foretells that on Sivaaraatri,
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

156

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Inter-mixing Indiannesss with Thainesss in selected Thai Novels
Srichampa
Dravidian babies will defend their ancestral lands and defeat the Aryans. Three babies are born to
the Dravidian King on Sivaaraatri and protected by various groups: one baby is cared for by a
bandit; the second baby by a magician and the third baby by a priest. They do not know each other,
only that the babies have the same royal seal on their backs. Twenty years later, now men, the three
join together to fight for their freedom. The war causes losses on both sides, but finally the
Dravidians prevail and soon realize what a disaster war brings. As a result, they succeed in uniting
all groups and declare that, no matter who, they are one Jambudvipa people.
Phnomthien, who is a renowned writer of Bharat novels, explained the background to this
novel saying: “I wrote this novel after studying the theology and indology of India and literature
written by King Rama VI which inspired me… It was the history of India when Aryan invaded
Jambudvipa where Dravidian resided around 1,500 B.C.E. establishing the myths that eventually
produced the Hindu gods”. (Soythong and Tulaphitak, 1999, p. 4).
The following are examples of two Thai readers’ impression of this novel.
(1) “Whoever reads Sivaaratri three times need not worry about how to use Thai anymore”.
(Pantip, 2015, https://pantip. com/topic/34053932).
(2)“It’s very long, more than two thousand pages. But it is fun and captivates readers with
good advice”.
(Jidapa, 2014, https://pantip. com/topic/34053932.)
The second renowned writer is Thommayanti. She wrote “Sivalaj” which has two settings. One
setting is in India during the time of King Ashoka, and the other is Thailand. The main characters
are Thais of Indian extraction. The genre is mystery. Wamarin, the female protagonist, is an IndianThai model, who her Thai diplomat family adores. She often experiences strange premonitions
which are familiar to her but she does not know why or where. When she is contacted for a fashion
shooting in India, she accepts the job and decides to explore the area around Rishi Gate, the origin
of the river Ganges. She gets lost but meets her Thai mother. The photography production team
includes Ruthara, who is working as a coordinator shooting at the Taj Mahal. Along the way,
Wamarin comes face to face with her karma and Ruthara tells her that he was the mouth of
Mahadeva (Siva). They go to ‘Sivalaj’ together to change her bad karma, which she is constantly
trying to avoid. This story mixes Buddhist and Hindu elements as well as the reincarnation of the
male and female protagonists.
Examples of the reflections of some readers of this novel include:
(3) “I like this novel very much because of the beautiful language. The story appeals to me.”
(Monaliz, 2014, https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/22014794 )
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

157

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Inter-mixing Indiannesss with Thainesss in selected Thai Novels
Srichampa
(4) “I get so overcome with emotion that I cry after reading some of the poems (in this novel).
I am a fan of Thommyanti”.
(Tam, n.d., https://writer.dek-d.com/writer/story/viewlongc.php?id=117900&chapter=5.)
The third well-known writer is Sophak Suwan. She was the first writer to introduce to readers the
nature of different races, religions, politics and cultures in the foreign lands. Although these issues
are not insignificant, equality of human beings is more important (Satjaphan, 2013). Two of her
novels involve Indian settings. The first one is “Meet Each Other under the Stars” which is set in
the British colonial period and is an adventure romance story. The male protagonist, Khich-han
Salim Agbar, is a descendant of the Mughal King Agbar. The female protagonist is Iris, the
daughter of Doctor Schneider, a German doctor, and his English wife. Iris spends her childhood
with her English aunt and an Indian uncle who is the private doctor to Khich-han’s mother, a
princess. Khich-han is sent to study in England with Heirich, Iris’s’ brother, at the same time that
Iris has to move back to stay with her family in Austria. Doctor Schneider loves to climb mountains.
His dream is to climb in the Himalayas, and luckily one day he and his team are sent to survey
there. But the mission has not yet finished when World War II breaks out and they are arrested and
ultimately disappear. After the war, Iris and her brother go to India. Together with Khich-han, they
search for their father as far as Tibet with the help of Junk Yimpa, a Tibetan man who is a friend
of Khich-han and Doctor Schneider’s family. Finally, they find Doctor Schneider and they all
decide to help Junk Yimpa find work in Lasa. Unfortunately, the Chinese invade Tibet and they all
have to flee back to India. Iris becomes a volunteer teacher in Dhammasala, and in the end, Khichhan, who becomes an Indian diplomat, marries Iris and all live happily ever after.
One reader of this novel commented as follows:
(5) “Reading about the 50th anniversary of the Tibetan occupation made me think of this
Sophak Suwan novel, which is one that I like very much. The story begins about a decade
before the Second World War. It starts in India and concludes in Tibet. The writer added a
lot of information, but it’s still readable.
The male protagonist, Kich-han, speaks very little and there are only two romantic scenes
in the story between Kich-han and Iris, but Sophak Suwan was able to make us feel the
romance and love between the two”.
(Pichayaratana, 2009, https://www.bloggang.com/mainblog.php?id=pichayaratana& month
=01-042009&group=1&gblog=1)
The second novel by Sophak Suwan about India is “Justmina-Mahal”. The setting is in India which
is full of geographic and cultural diversity. The genre is romance. Malatee Mala is an Indian
princess engaged to a prince since she was 5 years old by her Indian grandmother. After her Indian
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
158
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Inter-mixing Indiannesss with Thainesss in selected Thai Novels
Srichampa
father and Thai mother, the King and Queen, die in an accident when Malatee is 8 years old, she
and her nanny go to stay with her Thai grandparents in Thailand. As a teenager, she goes to England
to study nursing and returns to India to work in public health with an NGO. There she meets her
financé, Ronnachit Jirendra Gandawhar and Major General Isara Jairaj Gandawhar who is his step
brother. In a happy ending, she marries her step brother who is Maharaja of Arunapura and becomes
Maharani.
Reviews of this story include likes and dislikes:
(6) “This novel is fun but it’s difficult to read; too much of description, letter writing to each
other and a lot of English vocabularies…”
(7) “This novel also mentions the Thai family. I like the impressive advice of the grandfather
to his granddaughters”.
(Javee, 2017, https://www.bloggang.com/mainblog.php?id=javee&month=26-122010& group=8&gblog=11)
(8) “I’ve already read it. It’s lovely. The male character is very tender as is the female one since
she is so young…I like it”.
(Laylin, 2017, https://www.bloggang.com/mainblogphp?id=javee&month=26-122010&group=8&gblog=11)
Warangkhana is the pen name of the Thai writer who wrote “Sari”, a Thai novel set in both Thailand
and India. The main character, Trat, is a Thai student who earns a scholarship to study science at
Aligarh Muslim University in India. He is attracted to an Indian Muslim princess who is around
ten years older than him, but he also loves the princess’ niece, Praveen, who is studying at the same
university. The princess is a kind-hearted woman who is well regarded and respected by others
because of her charity. Trat is offered private English classes with the princess as he is almost
retired. He eventually agrees to become her husband and moves to live with her in the palace.
Although he feels as if he has sold himself out for success, he believes he had no choice as he does
not want to go back to Thailand as a failure, so he serves her as she demands. However, he soon
attracts the attention of another niece, Muni, who has fallen in love with him. He does not really
love her but an affair together leaves Muni pregnant. The princess soon learns of this but decides
to help Muni, who is stubborn and rejects the princess’ advice. In the end, the princess arranges the
marriage of her other niece, Praveen, whom Trat loves, as she feels guilty for stealing Trat from
her. But Muni prevents the marriage out of jealousy by fatally shooting Praveen. Muni also dies,
but her daughter, named “Little Praveen”, is saved and taken care of by Trat who returns to Thailand
after graduation. Trat finally gets married to his cousin, Amravadi, who looks after “Little Praveen”
as her mother. This novel is a love triangle and tragedy.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

159

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Inter-mixing Indiannesss with Thainesss in selected Thai Novels
Srichampa
The last writer is Chayaphim. Her novel is “Love Solok beneath Star Ray”. The setting is in India.
The male protagonist, Ram Anderson, is an English-Indian, and the female is Laksmi who is Thai.
The story is a romance. Broken hearted, Laksmi departs Thailand for India with the idea to write a
new novel. She meets Ram who is a guide and henna artist. Feelings for each other gradually form
into a deep relationship but there are many obstacles that test their love. But as this is real love,
like that between the goddess Laksmi and the god Ram, it has a happy ending.
The following are comments by readers:
(9) “The story is about Indian people and tradition. It’s hard to find novels like this in my
opinion. I’ve never read other such novels. The writer depicts the beauty of this country
which we never thought of visiting before. But after reading this novel, I am inspired to go
there. I have learned about the customs and gained other knowledge…”.
(Lookpla, 2013, https://www. goodreads.com/book/show/13371427)
(10) “This novel covers various genres. The first part is romantic, and at the same time, it
documents the arts and culture of India. The last part is romance mixed with drama…”
(May, 2017, https://www. goodreads.com/book/show/13371427)
Discussion
During the Ratanakosin dynasty, there was significant Indian migration to Siam. Indianness is
the theme of the Thai literary work, “Radenlandaj”, which is based on a real story recounted in a
humorous style using high language. It is an outstanding piece of literature and is included in the
curriculum for secondary school students. In general, Thai people do not discriminate against
“otherness” by using vulgar words, and this work exemplifies the keen potential of the writer as
teacher. Moreover, the story underlines two facts: 1) wonderers like Landaj have been a part of Thai
society since the beginning of the Ratanakosin era; 2) Thailand has always been a multicultural
society.
The historical documentary “India in 1872: As Seen by the Siamese” by Indian scholar
Professor Dr. Sahai Sachchidanand follows King Rama V’s 92 days of travel throughout India,
recording the history and events of the time in detail never before available to Thai readers. The
writer, as an Indian who knew and understood Indian culture well, included items from the mass
media written by both westerners and Indians in English and Hindi to supplement his descriptions.
It shows how truly important India has been to Thailand (Sri-Udom, 2018) and offers a view of
India as a reflection of the British raj, with both positive and negative consequences. As an outsider
from a small independent country, the then young King of Siam learned many new things from the
experience, demonstrating that no matter how seemingly different, Siam (Thailand) could and can
learn much from India as the links between the two are so long and strong.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

160

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Inter-mixing Indiannesss with Thainesss in selected Thai Novels
Srichampa

The selected Thai novels from the current Ratanakosin period reviewed in this study
represent modernization through which the writers express both .”Thainess.” and .”Indianness”. India
and Indianness has been an inspiration for many Thai writers throughout their lives and has
enriched the knowledge and experiences through study, travel and musings that are ultimately
expressed in their stories. Aiewsriwong (2017) said, regarding the foreign settings in Thai novelism,
“Even though the novel used foreign scenes and foreign protagonists throughout the story, foreign
lands are not important except it is exotic background, like spices we never taste…”. But if we
consider readers’comments, it is clear that when writers of these genres of fiction insert South
Asian elements through characterization and settings, readers are able to taste the essence of India
and learn from it. Aiewsriwong also insists that the writers should pay attention to the ‘otherness’
that reveals the diverse ways of thinking, ways of life and beliefs of foreign lands, as depicted in
the settings and exposed by the characters, without resorting to full blown representations and
explanations. Nevertheless, some writers are unable to do this well so readers responded quite
negatively to the overdetailed descriptions of the Indian scenes in the stories.
‘Thainess’ is expressed through the Thai or Indian-Thai characters’ behavior as well as
aspects of culture and concepts which are a blend of Hinduism and Buddhism. A feature of most
Thai novels is the principle of karmic reward and retribution–Do good things and good things will
be done to you. Do bad things and bad things will be done to you’. Phnomthien, for example, states
that
Humanity is the first instinct of humans. Humanity will cause conscience, ethics and
morals to follow later… I think “Dharma” is the most important thing in human life and I
try to reflect it in all of my literary works in order to lend this conscience to readers
indirectly.
(Sophapong, n.d.)
At the same time, .”Indianness.” is represented through the Indian characters and setting, which
convey the history, geography, religion, beliefs, language and culture of the time. The writers
combine their knowledge of India with their creative imaginings and experiences of India and
blend them into the stories. Therefore, not only are these novels sources of entertainment, but the
mix of “Indianness” and “Thainess” offers insight and knowledge for readers through the beautiful
prose and mesmerizing use of language. Some novels are admired by the readers and fans of
respected older writers such as Phnomthien, Thomayanti and Sophak Suwan. But there are also
some readers who may not appreciate certain over-stylised descriptions in the stories, as stated in
some comments by readers. A number of these novels have been republished many times and
produced in other entertainment forms such as films, dramas, TV series and songs, which serve to
promote India to Thais through popular culture. New writers inspired by these stories, increasingly
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

161

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Inter-mixing Indiannesss with Thainesss in selected Thai Novels
Srichampa
choose India as a travel destination for real experiences and inspiration for modern Thai novels,
often with Indian settings.
The image of India in Thai society is one of a civilized country that has strongly influenced
Thai religion and culture throughout history. Many Thai novels prefer to present “Indianness”. based
on historical, spiritual and cultural sources in attractive literary styles. In so doing, “Thainess” is
portrayed through the Thai characters in a glamorized setting. The works of Thai novelists can
thereby serve as cultural ambassadors linking Thai readers to India, encouraging readers to survey
more about India for themselves after turning the final page. By the same token, if Thailand is used
as their setting, reciprocal promotion will open readers from both countries to the delights and
wonders of each other’s societies, history and peoples.
Conclusion
In the early Ratanakosin era (C.E1782-C.E.1851), Indianness was reflected through descriptions of
real life two Hindu Indians and one Melayu woman. The setting was Thailand. In the current period
of globalization, although many Thais still have negative attitudes towards Indians, many Thai
writers are inspired to mix both Thai and Indian elements into settings and protagonists in their
novels without feeling “otherness”. According to the data, five types of settings were identified 1)
Thai setting with Indian males and foreign female protagonist, 2) Indian setting with Indian male
and female protagonists, 3) Indian and Thai settings with local Indians, 4) Indian and Thai settings
with Indian and Thai male and female protagonists, and 5) Indian setting with Thai protagonists. In
terms of genres, an Indian perspective and flavor is also added to the content of some Thai novels–
mostly mystery, adventure and tragedy mixed with romance. Thai novels reflect “Indianness” and
“Thainess” through karmic reward and retribution which are based on Buddhism and Hinduism.
These selected novels not only entertain Thai readers, but also encourage Thai readers to feel closer
to India.
About the Author
Dr. Sophana Srichampa is an Associate Professor in Linguistics at the Research Institute for
Language and Cultures of Asia, Mahidol University, Thailand. One of her research interests is the
relation between India and Thailand in terms of socio-cultural perspectives. She is the author of
several articles related to language, culture and society. ID ORCID is https://orcid.org/0000-00033936-4963.

References
Aiewsriwong, N. (2017). Phai-rat-ni-jaaj-thai (Thai novels with foreign setting). Available at
https://www.matichonweekly.com/column/article_40553.
Buddhadasa, B. (1980). Gratitude of India to Thai. Bangkok: Mae Kham Phang.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

162

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Inter-mixing Indiannesss with Thainesss in selected Thai Novels
Srichampa
Chayaphim, (2011). Salok-rak-taaj-saeng-daaw (Love Solok beneath the Star Ray). Bangkok:
Phimkham.
Celeb Online. (2015). Pleasant day with Phanomthien, Chatchai Wisetsuvarnabhumi. Available at
http://www.manager.co.th/CelebOnline/ViewNews.aspx?NewsID=9570000043824
Javee (penname). (2017). Justmina-Mahal. Available at https://www.bloggang.com/mainblog.
php?id=javee&month=26-12-2010&group=8&gblog=11.
Jidapa, M. (2017). Shiwaratri Vol. I. Available at https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/ 207461811.
Kaew-Uraj, R. (2011). What to beat between khaek and snake? Available at https://www.gotoknow.
org/ posts/467412
Kananurak, M. (2001). The Important people of Pattani. Available at http://www.
kananurak.com/mcontents/marticle.php?headtitle=mcontents&id=74142
Kasetsiri, C. 2016. King Rama V and his visit India in 1871and understanding of the reform of the
reign. Bangkok: Dream Catcher Graphic Co.Ltd. Available at http://54408.activeboard.
com/t2619429/5/.
Kledthai Publishing House. (2017). A complete version of Kamnita-Vasithi. Available at
http://www.kledthai. com/ 9789747033977.html.
Laylin, (penname) (2017). Justmina-Mahal. Available at https://www.bloggang.com/
mainblogphp?id=javee&month=26-12-2010&group=8&gblog=11.
Lookplam (penname). (2013). Love Solok beneath Star Ray. Available at https://www.goodreads.
com/book/show/13371427
May (penname). (2017). Love Solok beneath Star Ray. Available at https://www.goodreads.
com/book/ show/13371427.
MBookstore. (2013). Inaugurate three renowned novels, three styles of Warangkhana. Available at
https://www.facebook.com/pg/Mbookstores/photos/?tab=album&album_id= 496330233798124
Monaliz, J. (2014). Sivalaj. Goodreads. Available at https://www.goodreads.com/bookshow/
22014794. (May 27, 2018). Muksri, S . (2003). India was a role model of the Siamese Reform in
the reign of King Rama V. Available at http://54408.activeboard.com/t2619429/5/
Nathi, N.S . (2010). From Radenlandaj at the Beginning of Ratankosin to People Living in Public in
Bangkok. Available at https://www.gotoknow.org/posts/344455.
Pantip, (2015). Impression after Reading Sivaaraati. Available at https://pantip.com/topic/ 34053932.
Phnomthien. (2013). Chulatrikhun. Bangkok: Phraew Publishing House.
Phnomthien. (2002). Sivaaraatri Vol.1-VIII. Bangkok: At Baan Wannakam Group.
Pichayaratana. (2009). Meet Each Other under the Star. Available at https://www.bloggang.com/
mainblog.php?id=pichayaratana&month=01-042009&group=1&gblog=1.
Pitak (penname). (2014). Beggar in this country now. Available at http://oknation.nationtv.
tv/mblog/entry.php?id=914390.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
163
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
Inter-mixing Indiannesss with Thainesss in selected Thai Novels
Srichampa
Pramaha Montri. (2017). Radenlandaj. Available at https://pantip.com/topic/340539325%E0%
B8%B1%E0% B8%99%E0%B9%84%E0%B8%94.
Soythong, P. and Tulaphitak, S. 1999. (He) is Phnomthien. Pantip. Available at https://pantip.
com/topic/32685399.
Radenlandaj. (2018). Available at https://sites.google.com/site/thai059ssru/phu-Taeng.
Rama I. (n.d.). Available at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rama_I.
Rama III. (n.d.). Available at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rama_III.
Sahai, Sachchidananda. (2002). India in 1872 as Seen by the Siamese. New Delhi: B.R Publishing
Corporation.
Satjaphan, Ruenruthai. (2013). Commemorative Certificate to Mrs. Ramphaiphan Suwannasarn
Srisophak. Available at http://www1.culture.go.th/thai/images/stories/ news/160157/03.pdf.
Sophak Suwan. (2008). Jusmina-Mahal Vol. I and II. Bangkok: Buraphasaan Co.,Ltd.
Sophak Suwan. (2013). Meet Each Other under the Star. (phop-kan-taajduang-daaw). Bangkok:
Khlang Withaya Publishing House.
Sophak Suwan. (2018). Available at https://th.wikipedia.org/wiki.
Sri-Udom, Kanthika.(2018). Discussion of King Rama V’s book Visited India. Available at
http://daily.khaosod.co.th/view_news.php?newsid.
Sophapong. A. (n.d.). Available at http://www.winbookclub.com/popup.php?type=2 &interviewid=36.
Sumethi, Phanuwat. (2016). Meet the writers: From scripts to a Romantic novel of Chayaphim.
Available at http://www.all-magazine.com/ColumnDetail/allColumDetail/tabid/106/articleType/ Article
View/articleId/5430/-.aspx.
Tam. (2018). Sentimental Poem Collections from a Chapter in the Novels. Available at
https://writer.dek-d.com/writer/story/viewlongc.php?id=117900&chapter=5.
Terwiel. Baren Jan.1983. A history of modern Thailand, 1767-1942. St. Lucia, Qld.: University
of Queensland Press.
Thommayanti. (2017). Available at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thommayanti.
Thomyanti. 2008. Sivalaj. Vol. I, II. Bangkok: At Wannakam House Group.
Vitchayaprakorn, Karnchana. 2006. Humor Fabrication in the Parody Literature: Radenlandaay.
Journal of Humanities, Narasuan University Vol. 3/2 Available at http://www.human.
nu.ac.th/jhnu/journal_detail.php?m=4&a=50.
Warangkhana. (1994). Sari. Bangkok: Double Nine Publishing House.
Wimon Chiamcharoen. (2017). Available at https://th.wikipedia.org/wiki.
Wongthet, Sujit. (2016). King Rama V Visited Colonised Surrounding Countries of Siam for
Learning to Reform the Modernised Country. Available at
https://www.matichon.co.th/columnists/news_332057.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

164

