Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.29

Pp. 379-393

Interactional Metadiscourse Markers in the Abstract Sections of Arabic Patents
Manal Mahmoud Alzarieni (Corresponding author)
School of Language Studies and Linguistics, Faculty of Social Sciences and Humanities
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM)
Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia
Intan Safinaz Zainudin
School of Language Studies and Linguistics, Faculty of Social Sciences and Humanities
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM)
Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia
Norsimah Mat Awal
School of Language Studies and Linguistics, Faculty of Social Sciences and Humanities
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM)
Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia
Mohamed Zain Sulaiman
School of Language Studies and Linguistics, Faculty of Social Sciences and Humanities
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM)
Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia
Abstract
This study aims to investigate interactional metadiscourse markers (IMDMs) in 60 patent abstracts written
in Arabic by Arabic-native drafters within the field of human necessity. Specifically, the objectives are to
identify which categories of IMDMs are predominant in Arabic patent abstract and to explain how
metadiscourse markers function in these abstracts. To achieve these objectives, data were analyzed
quantitatively to count the frequency of IMDMs, and qualitatively to examine the functions of these markers
within Arabic patent abstracts based on Hyland’s model (2005). The results indicate that boosters, hedges
and attitude markers are the most frequently employed markers while the remaining categories show a low
frequency of occurrence. Moreover, the analysis also reveals that IMDMs fulfill different functions, such
as providing data in a truthful manner, avoiding commitment to precise figures and persuasion among
others. The findings of this research are useful for Arabic-speaking drafters and novice inventors for a better
understanding of IMDMs commonly applied in their patent abstracts. A better understanding of the
pragmatic functions of IMDMs can improve not only patent drafting skills, but also the chance for
successful patent grants. It is recommended that future research investigate IMDMs within other patent
sections such as claims, description, and background among different disciplines in order to achieve better
insights of the use of such rhetorical metadiscourse features.
Keywords: Abstract section, Arabic, interactional resources, metadiscourse markers, patent
Cite as: Alzarieni, M.M., Zainudin, I. S., Awal, N.M., & Sulaiman, M. Z. (2019). Interactional
Metadiscourse Markers in the Abstract Sections of Arabic Patents. Arab World English Journal, 10 (2).
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.29

379

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Interactional Metadiscourse Markers in the Abstract Sections

Alzarieni, Zainudin, Awal & Sulaiman

Introduction
Patents are documents granted by a government to inventors giving them the sole right to make,
use, and sell their invention. Regardless its language, patent is a structured document, which
typically consists of several sections, such as title, abstract, background of the invention and
claims. The abstract section, which is the focus of this study, is an essential component of the
entire patent documentation that consists of a concise summary of the invention and serves a
common communicative purpose of introducing an invention. Its communicative purpose is
informative as well as persuasive. Through patent abstracts, readers can predict the quality of the
invention and decide if the other sections of the patent are worth scanning or not. Quinn (2014)
confirms that in writing patent abstracts, it is not enough for drafters to represent the object of their
invention; they must also try to persuade the examiners to accept their invention and to establish
the importance of their new ideas. Patent drafters have to persuade the readers _in particular, patent
examiners that their inventions are useful and new. If not, the application faces an increased
opportunity of being rejected. Persuading a patent examiner of the usefulness of an invention is
the ultimate goal of a patent application.
Drafting well-organized Arabic patent abstract poses difficulties for patent drafters
(Alrahman, 2015), even for the native Arabic drafters because they need to be acquainted with
persuading linguistics devices commonly employed to make their abstracts acceptable by their
target discourse community. Overall, patent drafting certainly necessitates not only a sufficient
command of the terminology of the language since it is mostly “acquired by imitation"of other
patent documents” (Sancho-Guinda & Arinas-Pellón, 2011, p.13), but also the rhetorical strategies
typically deployed to achieve persuasion (Berkenkotter & Huckin, 1995; Sancho-Guinda, 2012).
Such persuasion could be achieved through a skillful manipulation of rhetorical features that create
successful abstracts such as metadiscourse which are essential for persuading the reader (Breeze,
2009).
Literature Review
Metadiscourse
The concept ‘metadiscourse’ is not a well-defined term and it has been defined consequently by
several scholars (William, 1981; Vande-Kopple, 1985, 2002; Crismore & Fansworth, 1990;
Markkanen et al., 1993; Luuka, 1994; Bunton, 1999; Hyland, 2000, 2005; Dafouz, 2003; Hyland
& Tse, 2004). Williams (1981) views metadiscourse as “whatever does not refer to the subject
matter being addressed”( p.212). Similarly Vande- Kopple (1985) defines it as “discourse that
people use not to expand referential material but to help their readers connect, organize, interpret,
evaluate, and develop attitudes toward that material.”(p.83), and Crismore et al. (1993, as cited in
González, 2005, p.37) have viewed metadiscourse as “non-propositional aspects of discourse
which help to organize the prose as a coherent text and convey a writer's personality, credibility,
reader sensitivity and relationship to the message”. More recently, Williams (2007) views
metadiscourse as “the language that refers not to the substance of your ideas, but to yourself, your
reader, or your writing.”(p.65) However, Hyland (2004, 2005) presents a more comprehensive
interpersonal view of metadiscourse: Hyland (2000) defines metadiscourse as “the linguistic
resources used to organize a discourse or the writer’s stance towards either its content or the
reader” (p. 109). The clear point with these interrelated definitions is that the appropriate
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

380

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Interactional Metadiscourse Markers in the Abstract Sections

Alzarieni, Zainudin, Awal & Sulaiman

employment of metadiscourse assists the writer to skillfully manipulate his writing to achieve the
demands and expectations of the discourse community (Nasiri, 2012; Hyland, 2005).
Metadiscourse assists to transmit propositional information in a clear, persuasive and
attractive way in an endeavor to gain acceptance and understanding, as well as reader-writer
involvement. It also helps to produce a coherent text and indicates the writers’ “personality,
credibility, considerateness of the reader, and relationship to the subject matter and to the readers”
(Crismore et al., 1993, p. 40).
This study adopts the interactive definition of metadiscourse introduced by, for instance,
Crismore et al. (1993) and Hyland (1998). In other words, for the present research, metadiscourse
is viewed as a tool that writers employ for the purpose of affecting the reader’s comprehension
and evaluation of the text. In this respect, the abstract section of patent can be seen as a persuasive
form of writing. According to Aragonés (2007), the rhetorical purpose of patent abstract is
essentially persuasive; it seeks to persuade the reader that what is claimed is new and useful.
Aragonés (2007) points out that besides providing technical information quickly, the patent
abstract section convinces the readers that the patent is worth reading without disclose the whole
invention. Drawing on this persuasive task, metadiscourse can assist patent drafters to realize their
ultimate communicative purposes.
Metadiscourse Models
Several metadiscourse taxonomies have been proposed by metadiscourse theorists (Hyland,2005;
Vande Kopple, 1985, 1997; Crismore, 1993). Vande Kopple(1985) provides the first taxonomy of
metadiscourse. His model consists of “textual” and “interpersonal” metadiscoursal markers. In
this taxonomy, textual metadiscourse consists of four categories: text connectives, code glosses,
illocution markers and narrators, whereas the interpersonal metadiscourse constitutes three
categories: validity markers, attitude markers and commentaries. Vande Kopple’s taxonomy was
particularly significant since it was the first organized and systematic endeavor for offering a
model that paved the way to a number of studies and new taxonomies. However, this model has
been subjected to many modifications due to some conceptual and practical deficiencies in this
model as Hyland (2005) points out, particularly the overlapping functions between categories.
Crismore et al. (1993) propose a modified version of Vande Kopple’s model. In this
taxonomy, the two main categories of textual and interpersonal remained the same, but they divide,
and reorganize the subcategories. Furthermore, they divide the textual metadiscourse into two
main categories of “textual” and “interpretive” markers with a view to separate organizational and
evaluative functions. Textual metadiscourse constitute markers which can assist the discourse to
be organized, and interpretive markers help the reader to better interpret and comprehend the
writer’s intended message (Crismore et al., 1993).
Later taxonomies have differentiated between categories such as “interactional” and
“interactive” (Hyland & Tse, 2004). Hyland (Hyland, 2000, 2005) offers the possibly most
inclusive model for the study of metadiscourse. His model, developed from earlier works such as
Vande-Kopple (1985) and Crismore et al.(1993), includes two main types of metadiscourse:
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

381

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Interactional Metadiscourse Markers in the Abstract Sections

Alzarieni, Zainudin, Awal & Sulaiman

interactive and interactional (see Table 1). The former assists to organize the text as a whole while
the later involves the reader in the text.
Table 1. An Interpersonal Model of Metadiscourse
Category
Function
Interactive
Help to guide the reader
through the text
Transitions
express relations between
main clauses
Frame markers
refer to discourse acts,
sequences or stages
of parts of the text
Endophoric markers
refer to information in other
parts of the
text
Evidentials
refer to information from
other texts
Code glosses
elaborate propositional
meanings
Interactional
Hedges
Boosters

Involve readers in the text
withhold certainty and open
dialogue
emphasize certainty or
close dialogue

Attitude markers

express writer’s attitude to
proposition

Self-mentions

explicit reference to
author(s) in the text
explicitly build relationship
with reader

Engagement markers

Examples
Resources
in addition, and, but, thus
first, next, finally, to
conclude
as noted above, see Fig, in
section ...
according to X, Z states
namely, for example, such
as, in other
words
Resources
might, perhaps, possible,
about
in fact, definitely,
obviously, it is clear
that, demonstrate
unfortunately, hopefully,
surprisingly, I
agree
I, we, my, me, our
you, your, consider, note,
you can see that

Source: (Hyland 2005, p. 49)
Based on the table above, Hyland’s model consists of two major categories of metadiscourse:
interactive and interactional. The interactive category includes transitions, frame markers,
endophoric markers, evidentials, and code glosses. The main aim of these features is to provide an
organized and coherent text that helps guide the reader through the text in a way to meet the needs
of the reader based on the writer’s expectations. The interactional category includes hedges,
boosters, attitude markers, self-mentions, and engagement markers. It essentially aims at offering
a vivid text where the reader can easily find the writer’s voice. It also aims at building a personal
relationship with the readers as it is employed to convey the writer’s reactions to the content.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

382

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Interactional Metadiscourse Markers in the Abstract Sections

Alzarieni, Zainudin, Awal & Sulaiman

For the present study, Hyland’s (2005) taxonomy was adopted over the other models of
metadiscourse (e.g, Crismore et al., 1993; Vande-Kopple, 2002) because the categorization is
concise and inclusive (Vazquez et al., 2006). It was also found to be uncomplicated, clear and
comprehensive (Abdi et al., 2010).Besides, this framework was noted to be successful in existing
studies that investigate the Arabic abstract such as Rashidi and Alihosseini (2012) and Salek
(2014). As Hyland (2005) points out, the taxonomy has overcome some flaws and overlaps in
previous taxonomies such as Crismore et al. (1993) and Vande-Kopple (1985).
The focus of this research is to examine the second function of metadiscourse, that is, the
interactional metadiscourse since it is “more personal” (Hyland, 2005) and involves the reader
more directly compared with interactive metadiscourse. Interactive markers comprise selfreflective resources (e.g., for instance, therefore) to shape and order the text to make it coherent,
while interactional markers refer to linguistic resources (e.g., surprisingly, you can see that) for
writers to make comments and to involve readers in the text. Since the latter is a pivotal device to
reflect writers’ credibility, personality, relationship to the ideational materials (Crismore et al.,
1993), the exploration of this category of metadiscourse will assist to reveal how patent drafters
can manipulate these devices to make their abstracts more effective and persuasive. The
interactional resources particularly include the use of self-mention, hedges, boosters and attitude
markers.
Hedges are lexical devices used to refer to uncertainty about the propositional information
, such as 'suggest, 'seem', 'may' and 'indicate'. “Hedging enables writers to express a perspective
on their statements, to present unproven claims with caution, and to enter into a dialogue with their
audiences.” (Hyland, 2005,p. 112). Boosters, on the other hand, are linguistic means that raise
certainty about the truth in communication such as ‘obviously, very and clearly’. Engagement
markers are linguistic resources employed by writers to explicitly address the readers and involve
them in the dialogue. This can be achieved by the use of ‘we, our and us’, reader pronouns such
as ‘you and your’ besides the question mark. Self-mention "refers to the degree of explicit author
presence in the text" (Hyland, 2005, p. 53), which can be realized by the use of the possessive
adjectives and first person pronouns ‘my, me, I, mine, our and us'. The last interactional markers
are attitude markers. Hyland (2005) states that they "indicate the writer’s affective, rather than
epistemic, attitude to proposition"( p.53). Examples are ‘I agree, interestingly and unfortunately’.
A number of research have been incorporated to the notion of metadiscourse in patents
(Aragonés, 2007, 2010; Kim, 2015& Patience, 2015). Arinas-Pellón &Sancho-Guinda (2010)
examine the use of two interactional metadiscourse markers (hedges and boosters) in U.S. patents
from various technical fields while Sancho-Guinda (2012) establishes the curial role of
metadiscourse in achieving flexibility in patent texts. Through corpus analysis, and following
Hyland’s (2005) original taxonomy that embraces (hedges, boosters, attitudinal adverbials and
self-mention) her study reveals how patent drafters employ metadiscourse elements to engage with
their readers as persuasion strategies. Kim (2015) finds that rhetorical elements such as hedges,
boosters, and evaluation play a crucial role in understanding patents and their implicit meanings,
as well as persuading designated audiences in order to change their values, opinions, or behavior.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

383

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Interactional Metadiscourse Markers in the Abstract Sections

Alzarieni, Zainudin, Awal & Sulaiman

The most relevant study to the present study is Aragonés (2009) who investigates the
function of hedges and boosters in patent abstracts in four languages (Chinese, Spanish, French
and English) and four fields (medicine, chemistry, telecommunications and IT), the study reveals
that boosters and hedges are both rhetorical strategies to convince the readers of the usefulness of
the invention, and they are rhetorical devices for modifying tone in the patent abstract genre.
Although these studies have undoubtedly provided a preliminary understanding of patents,
the focus is on patents produced in different languages apart from Arabic such as Chinese, Spanish,
French and English. Information on how these markers are employed in Arabic patent abstracts to
raise drafters' awareness of what makes acceptable patent abstracts is scanty. This study, thus, aims
to achieve the following objectives:
1- To identify the predominate interactional metadiscourse markers in Arabic patent abstracts
written by native Arabic drafters.
2- To explain how metadiscourse markers function in Arabic patent abstracts.
Methodology
Data Collection
This study is a descriptive study which aims to examine the use of metadiscourse in Arabic patent
abstracts both qualitatively and quantitatively. Sixty Arabic Patents drafted during the years 20082018 by native Arabic drafters in the field of human necessity were selected. This discipline was
chosen since it is of interest to different patent readers as it includes patents related to social life
and covers the following subsections: agriculture, foodstuffs, tobacco, personal or domestic
articles, health, life savings and amusement. A decision was made to choose abstracts from a single
discipline since it has been confirmed that different disciplines have their own writing conventions
(Anthony,1999; Samraj, 2002, 2004). The Arabic patents are retrieved from the Gulf Cooperation
Council Patent Office (GCCPO) website (https://www.gccpo.org) which is the only website that
represents a regional Arab patent office at the time of research. These patents are considered
standard and accepted ones because they are the final revised versions officially published in the
website. To create a corpus, the abstracts of these patents were copied and pasted onto a separate
file. Then they were randomly coded and classified according to the year of publication. Only
abstracts drafted by native Arabic drafters were picked up from the identified discipline. In cases
where abstracts written by more than one drafter, it was assured that all drafters share similar
nationality and language backgrounds. This criterion was essential in order to keep to a minimum
the rhetorical influence from other languages on those of the Arabic patents. Evidence was
gathered from short biodata entries such as the name and affiliation of the drafters since drafters
with Arab names are likely to be Arabic native speakers. The number of words used in each
abstract ranged from 50 to 200 words. The total number of words for the present study of patent
abstracts consists of 7,045 words. The size of corpus should be considered carefully. This smallsized corpus can be assumed, to a certain extent, to be sufficient since it complies with Aragonés
(2009) study in which a similar number of corpus was chosen in order to validate the findings
across four languages. More specifically, the size of this corpus is sufficient since a manual
examination is performed. Generally, the smallest number of abstracts to be valid is about 30
(Stollera, 2013).

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

384

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Interactional Metadiscourse Markers in the Abstract Sections

Alzarieni, Zainudin, Awal & Sulaiman

Data Analysis
Before analyzing each patent’s Abstract section, the whole patent was read several times in order
to get a rough understanding of the proposed invention. The types of Arabic IMDMs in the selected
patents were investigated in terms of frequency, forms and functions. It is worth noting that both
Hyland’s Interpersonal Model of Metadiscourse and previous literature on IMDMs in Arabic
context (e.g., Abbas, 2011; El-Seidi; 2000; Taweel et al., 2011) have been consulted to help in the
process of IMDMs identification. Additionally, each IMDMs was identified and counted manually
as Hyland( 2005) points out that “metadiscourse is a relative concept so what might be
metadiscourse in one rhetorical context may be expressing propositional material in another, and
analysis must always examine each item individually to determine its function” (p. 24). Therefore,
each marker was double checked carefully in context to make sure it functioned as a metadiscourse
marker. After identifying and classifying the metadiscourse markers, a quantitative analysis was
conducted. The main focus of this quantitative analysis is on type, frequency, and form of these
markers. The information obtained from the quantitative analysis is essential for the qualitative
analysis to examine the function of each interactional metadiscourse category to reveal the
persuasive effect of these markers.
Results and Discussion
Frequency of Use of the Different Categories of Interactional Metadiscourse
Table 2 shows the type, frequency and percentage of each interactional metadiscourse markers
employed in the abstract section of Arabic patents in the field of human necessity. As the size of
the Arabic abstracts is definitely unequal, the frequency of IMDMs was calculated per 1000 words
in order to make the length of the abstracts consistent and to ensure accurate comparison between
the IMDMs.
Table 2 Frequency and Percentage of IMDMs in Arabic Patent Abstracts
Interactional
frequency
Percentage
metadiscourse type
Boosters
376
53.37%
Hedges
300
42.58%
Attitude markers
74
11%
Self-mentions
13
2%
Engagement markers
0
0%
Total number of
763
occurrences:
Table 2 indicates that Arabic patent drafters do use IMDMs while drafting their patent abstracts to
show their attitudes in the texts and engage with readers, through the employment of hedges,
boosters, attitude markers and self-mention, which Hyland (2005,p.177) referred to as “stance
markers”. According to the statistical analysis presented in Table 2, boosters are the most
frequently used IMDMs in the present corpus (53.37%). This suggests that Arabic patent drafters
resort to emphasize on what they have invented with certainty to persuade readers of the
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

385

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Interactional Metadiscourse Markers in the Abstract Sections

Alzarieni, Zainudin, Awal & Sulaiman

importance of their invention. Likewise, hedges, which are used to express the writers’ uncertainty,
have also shown to be essential elements used in the Arabic patent abstracts with 300 instances
(42.58%). Attitude markers are very uncommon in the present corpus with only 11%, while the
type of self-mentions (2%) is the least common markers among all categories. The most
remarkable result is the absence of engagement markers. Their absence may signal that Arabic
native drafters tend to avoid explicit engagement with the reader as this may indicate a
conversational and an informal tone. Their absence is consistence with Alotaibi’s (2015) findings
who finds that engagement markers are absent in Arabic research articles. Sultan( 2011) also finds
that they are the least interactional metadiscourse marker within Arabic discussions.
Forms and Functions of Interactional Metadiscourse Use
In this section, each subcategory of IMDMs will be discussed in terms of lexical forms and
function in order to reveal the persuasive effect of these markers within Arabic patent abstracts.
Boosters
As indicated earlier, boosters dominate among all the IMDMs categories analyzed in the Arabic
patent abstracts. It includes slightly over 53% of the total markers identified in the corpus (see
Table 2). These quantitative results are in line with other studies where Arabic boosters are found
to be predominate, irrespective of the genre and the discipline analyzed. Boosting constitutes an
essential characteristic of Arabic academic discourse in college essays (Alhumidi,2016),
newspaper articles (Abdelmoneim, 2009; Al-Ghoweri, 2019 ), or argumentative texts (El-Seidi,
2000), where strong emphatics and assertiveness are highly valued.
As Hyland (1994) asserts, boosting can be conveyed across different syntactic frames such
as modals, verbs and adverbials. In this research, nouns such as ‫ قضاء‬,‫ تحسين‬,‫ ضمان‬and adverbs such
as ‫ خاصة‬,‫ بسهولة‬are the most popular grammatical items utilized to boost inventions. Boosting
nouns are mainly employed to praise the current invention and they are associated with certainty.
This finding is consistent with Arinas-Pellón & Sancho-Guinda (2010) who note that nouns such
as advantage, solution, efficiency and improvement are mostly noticed as boosting devices in U.S
patents from various technical fields. This study also confirms the tendency of Arabic native
drafters to extensively use these nouns to emphasize the usefulness of their invention. Findings of
this study reveal that Arabic native drafters employ boosters for different purposes including
justifying the usefulness of their invention as well as presenting its merits in a strong positive
light(Example 1) and providing a more assertive tone in explaining the utility of the invention
(Example 2).
‫ االختراع المطروح يحاول التغلب على األضرار التي تلحق بغير المدخنين لظروف وجودهم مع المدخنين ولمحاولة التغلب‬-1
‫على ضرر الدخان على المجتمع واألسرة فإن االختراع المطروح يساعد على القضاء على االضرار الناتجة عن التدخين وسط‬
.‫األسرة‬
‫ ويركب الواقي على المرحاض ويثبت على أرضية الحمام ويتيسر لكل شخص عملية التركيب واإلزالة بكل سهولة‬-2
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

386

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Interactional Metadiscourse Markers in the Abstract Sections

Alzarieni, Zainudin, Awal & Sulaiman

Hedges
Hedges are functionally the counterparts of boosters since they indicate the uncertain evaluation
of the truth of the informational content. As indicated in Table 2, hedges are one of the most
commonly used IMDMs in this study. They constitute slightly over 42% of the total IMDMs
examined in this research. This is due to the importance of hedges that signal the writer’s
preference to withhold overall commitment to a proposition. The results reveal that some specific
types of hedges are most commonly employed by native Arabic drafters such as approximators
‫ احيانا‬,‫ تقريبا‬,‫ عدد‬and modals, ‫يمكن قد‬, to convince readers about the value of the proposed invention.
This finding is in agreement with Al-Ghoweri’s( 2019) study which reveals that approximates of
degree, quantity and frequency are the most commonly used hedging devices across Arabic
articles. Similarly, in Arinas-Pellón’s (2010) corpus of electro-mechanical patents, vague
quantifications of many, most, several or certain are found as one of the common categories to
express tentativeness too.
Hedges in the present research are used to provide data in a truthful manner and to avoid
commitment to precise figures (Example 3) and to indicate probability while indicating that the
drafter’s statement is not to be taken universally true. This means that readers, due to the influence
of such probability, are left to evaluate the information provided (Example 4).
.‫ سم تقريبا‬20 ‫ وهذا االختراع هو عبارة عن قارورة تصنع من البالستيك القوي والمرن لها تجويفه بقطر‬-3
‫ يعتمد االختراع الحالي على امرار تيار هواء دافئ أو حار نسبيا على المواد المراد تجفيفها واخراجه من موضع اخر قد‬- 4
‫ ويتألف الجهاز من حاويات للمواد المراد تجفيفها ومصدر لدخول التيار الهوائي ومصدر‬.‫يكون معاكس له حتى يتم التجفيف‬
.‫اخر لخروج الهواء قد يكون معاكسا لمصدر دخول الهواء مما يسمح بالتجفيف بفعالية وسرعة‬
Attitude Markers
Attitude markers “indicate the writer’s affective, rather than epistemic, attitudes, encoding an
explicit positive or negative value that is gradable (e.g. important/very important to propositions”
(Hyland, 2005, p.149). Because of its persuasive aim, the style of patent abstracts genre is
characterized by evaluative function. This means that it employs linguistic devices that express the
drafter’s stance towards the invention s/he presents as well as establish interactional relations with
his/her readers. Identifying the attitude markers of the Arabic patent abstracts reveals that unlike
boosters and hedges, Arabic native drafters utilize limited lexicons to express their attitudes. They
represent 11% of IMDMs in the corpus. The low frequency of attitude markers is similarly found
in related studies in literature (see e.g., Sultan, 2011; El-Seidi, 2000; &Alotaibi, 2015)which
indicat that the employment of attitude markers is low among Arabic texts. The possible reasons
might be due to the nature of the abstract section where drafters are not too certain in presenting
their stance nor too critical in providing information.
Although the occurrence of use of attitude markers is low, some attitudinal adjectives and
adverbs such as ‫ سهل‬,‫ جديد‬and ‫ بفعالية‬are common in Arabic patent abstracts. The interaction achieved
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

387

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Interactional Metadiscourse Markers in the Abstract Sections

Alzarieni, Zainudin, Awal & Sulaiman

in Example 5 is conveyed by utilizing the attitude adjective ‫جديد‬, which can be considered an
affective strategy to persuade the reader of the novelty of the invention. Similarly, the attitude
marker ‫ متميز‬unique here expresses the drafters’ own personal assessment, that is, this invention
is really rewarding and deserves being patent.
.‫ فهو نوع جديد وشكله جذاب متميز ليس له شبيه وال مثيل في جميع األسواق من حيث الجودة والشكل والتصنيع‬-5
Overall, Arabic patent abstracts appear to make use of limited range of attitude markers to
provide readers with an opportunity to understand the propositional content and to present their
attitude towards the informational contents of their texts. Accordingly, attitude markers are
important in persuasive writing “otherwise a text would be dry and impersonal” (Heng &Tan,
2010, p.139 ). These findings might be comparable to Arinas-Pellón’s (2010) study which reveals
that attitude markers are used in US patents for persuasive values, yet with a preference of different
lexical markers.
Self-Mention
Hyland(2005) states that self-mentions refer “to the degree of explicit author presence in the text
measured by the frequency of first-person pronouns and possessive adjectives” (p.53). As for the
present study, 13 instances are utilized by Arabic patent drafters. They represent two percent (2%)
of IMDMs found in the corpus. Apparently, they cannot be considered as an essential rhetorical
strategy for establishing stance for the patent drafters in concern. This finding is in agreement with
the findings of other studies investigating self-mention across different genres or disciplines (e.g.
Al-harbi & Swales, 2011; Sultan, 2011; Alotaibi, 2015) which reveal a limited number of selfmention in Arabic texts written by Arabic native writers. These findings altogether show the
tendency among native Arabic-speaking writers to avoid self-mentions whether they are writing
in their first language or in English. Similarly, this finding is consistent with existing research on
patents within different languages. Arinas-Pellón (2014) for example, argues that U.S patents are
not characterized by self-mention since the focus is on the invention not the inventor.
However, a close investigation of the forms of self-mentions in the present corpus shows
that self-mentions are mainly utilized to state patent utility and offer readers a clear picture of what
the invention will cover and what they can obtain from it:
‫ وهذا يفيدنا كثيرا للحرائق التي تقع بأماكن مرتفعة كما انه يختصر عدد األفراد وأكثر سالمة إضافة إلى انه يساعد اإلطفائيين‬-6
‫بالبعد عن حرارة النار وذلك من خالل التحكم عن بعد بطريقتنا‬.
It is essential to note that all the instances of self- mentions in the present corpus are only
in the form of plural possessive pronouns even in single-authored patents. It seems that Arabic

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

388

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Interactional Metadiscourse Markers in the Abstract Sections

Alzarieni, Zainudin, Awal & Sulaiman

patent drafters tend to use the pronoun ‫ “ نا‬our” to avoid addressing their readers directly and make
their patents more objective in order to avoid criticism and being rejected.
As for the category engagement markers, their absence suggests that there is no place for
the drafters to interact directly with their readers or engaging them in the patent abstracts. The
absence of engagement markers in the abstract sections is in line with existing research( see e.g.
Sultan, 2011 & Alotaibi, 2015) which reveal that engagement markers are to be the least employed
IMDMs or even absent in Arabic abstracts written by native Arabic writers “as they may indicate
a conversational and an informal tone”(Alotaibi, 2015, p.8).
Conclusion
The present study analyzed Arabic patent abstracts written by native Arabic drafters. Based on
Hyland’s (2005) taxonomy. The analysis reveals that boosters and hedges are the most frequent
IMDMs within Arabic patent abstracts. Arabic patent drafters utilize boosters to assert on what
they have invented with certainty in order to persuade readers of the importance of their invention.
Hedges, on the other hand, are mainly used to convince readers about the value of the proposed
invention as well as providing readers with the possibility of accepting or rejecting the invention.
Unlike boosters and hedges, Arabic native drafters utilize limited lexicons to express their
attitudes. However, they prove to be a persuasive device in the present study. They are
strengthening expressions alongside boosters (Dafouz-Milne, 2008). Given the relatively high
number of boosters and hedges found in the present corpus. It can be concluded that the skillful
combination of strengthen expressions( i.e. boosters) and weakening ones( i.e. hedges) is the key
to produce a persuasive acceptable patents in the eyes of the reader. According to Dafouz-Milne
(2008), the final goal of a persuasive text should be to create “a discourse that is neither too
assertive nor too vague”(p. 108).
In relation to the categories of self-mention and engagement markers, it is again clear that
they are scarcely employed by the drafters; it was even observed that engagement markers are
absent in the Arabic patent abstracts. The little use of self-mentions indicates that Arabic native
drafters in general consider boosters, hedges, and attitudinal markers as more useful persuasive
devices, when they create their patent abstracts. The low frequency of this IMDMs also indicates
that drafters of the Arabic patent abstracts prefer to focus on the invention instead of making
references to the inventors.
In summary, this study indicates that Arabic patent abstracts are a persuasive genre
representing an interaction between drafters and readers. They employ various metadiscourse
markers to reach their persuasive function since the communicative function of these abstracts is
to summarize the invention and most importantly, to persuade readers of the usefulness of an
invention. Through the use of boosters, hedges and attitude markers, patent drafters try to obtain a
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

389

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Interactional Metadiscourse Markers in the Abstract Sections

Alzarieni, Zainudin, Awal & Sulaiman

balance between convincing and informing as well as building a reader-writer relationship to
interact with their expected readers. While the remaining categories ( i.e. self-mentions and
engagement markers ) show a low frequency of occurrence. Therefore, they could not be
considered as effective persuasive tools within Arabic patent abstracts.
This study examined the use of IMDMs within Arabic patent abstracts written by native
Arabic drafters in the field of human necessity; it was conducted on a small corpus. Therefore,
further research with a larger corpus size and on other sections of patents should be conducted in
order to offer a clear picture of the use of such rhetorical metadiscourse features. Furthermore,
patent abstracts written by native Arabic drafters across different disciplines can be compared to
examine whether the rhetorical features examined in this study can be extended to other disciplines
as well.
About the Authors
Manal Mahmoud Alzarieni is a PhD candidate at the Sustainability of Language Sciences Research
Center, Faculty of Social Sciences and Humanities, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia. Her areas of interest
include genre analysis and discourse analysis. https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6736-9783
Intan Safinaz Zainudin, PhD is a senior lecturer at the Sustainability of Language Sciences Research
Center, Faculty of Social Sciences and Humanities, Univeristi Kebangsaan Malaysia. Her areas of interest
include Translation, Bilingual lexiography and Corpus based translation studies. https://orcid.org/ 00000002-3673-5178.
Norsimah Mat Awal, PhD is an associate professor at the Sustainability of Language Sciences Research
Center, Faculty of Social Sciences and Humanities, Univeristi Kebangsaan Malaysia. Her areas of interest
include Translation, Pragmatics and Semantics.https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7693-2344.
M. Zain Sulaiman holds a PhD in Arts from Monash University, Melbourne. His doctoral research on the
translation of tourism won third place for the CIUTI PhD Award 2015. He was employed by the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs, Saudi Arabia in one of its diplomatic missions as Chief Translator & Interpreter for
eight years before lecturing at Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3709-9879.

References
Abbas, H. (2011). A contrastive study of metadiscourse in English and Arabic linguistics research
articles. Acta Linguistica, 5,(1), 28–41.
Abdelmoneim, A. (2009). Interpersonal Metadiscourse Categories in Two Egyptian Newspapers
Concerning the 2007 "Constitutional Amendments"(Unpublished master thesis). The American
University in Cairo, Egypt.
Abdi, R., Tavangar, R.M., & Tavakkoli, M. (2010). The Cooperative Principle in Discourse
Communities and Genres: A framework for the use of metadiscourse. Journal of Pragmatics,
42,(6), 1669-1679.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

390

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Interactional Metadiscourse Markers in the Abstract Sections

Alzarieni, Zainudin, Awal & Sulaiman

Al-Ghoweri, H. (2019). A Comparative Study of Hedges and Boosters in English and Jordanian Arabic:
Economic Newspaper Articles as a Case Study. Theory and Practice in Language Studies, 9,(1),
52-59
Al-Harbi, L. & Swales, J. (2011). Arabic and English abstracts in Bilingual language Science Journals:
Same or different? Languages in Contrast, 11,(1), 69-85.
Alhumidi, H. (2016). College Students’ Use of Metadiscourse Across Two languages: A Case of College
Students at the College of Basic Education, Kuwait. International Journal of English Language
Teaching, 4,(9), 14-29.
Alotaibi, H. (2015).Metadiscourse in Arabic and English article abstracts. World Journal of
English Language, 5, (2), 1-8.
Alrahman, H. (2015). Difficulties face inventors . Algornalgy, 8 October: p 6.
Anthony, L. (1999). Writing Research Article Introductions in Software Engineering: How Accurate is a
Standard Model? The IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication, 42, (1), 38-46.
Aragonés, M. (2007). Translating Patents: Translative Strategies. Proceedings of 48th ATA Anual
Conference, 30th October-3rd November, 327-334.
Aragonés, M.(2009). Estudio descriptivo multilingüe del resumen de patente: aspectos contextuales y
retóricos. Bern: Peter Lang.
Aragonés, M. (2010). How to Become a Patent Translator: Tricks and Tips. Notions of Text Genre and
Ceremony to the Rescue, Meta, 55,(2), 212-236.
Arinas-Pellón, I. (2010). How Does a Patent Move? Genre Analysis Has Something to Say about It.
Legal Discourse across Languages and Cultures Ed. by Maurizio Gotti & Christopher Williams,
313-334. Bern: Peter Lang.
Arinas-Pellón, A.( 2014). Interpersonal Patent Relations: Persuasion Pointers to Novelty, Creativity, and
Ownership in U.S. Patent Property Claiming. In Interpersonality in Legal Genres . 191, 255-277.
Bern: Peter Lang.
Arinas-Pellón, I., & Sancho -Guinda, C. (2010). Descriptive Strategies in U.S Patents. Reconceptualizing
LSP. Online proceedings of the XVII European LSP Symposium 2009. Ed. by Carmen Heine &
Jan Engberg. Aarhus.
Berkenkotter, C., & Huckin, T. N. (1995). Genre knowledge in disciplinary communication: Cognition,
culture, power. Hillsdale, N. J.: L. Erlbaum
Breeze, R. (2009). Issues of Persuasion in Academic Law Abstracts. Revista Alicantinade Estudios
Ingleses, 22, 11-26.
Bunton, D. (1999). The use of higher level metatext in PhD theses. English for Specific Purposes, 18, 4156.
Crismore, A., & Farnsworth, R. (1990). Metadiscourse in popular and professional science discourse. In
W. Nash (Ed.), The Writing Scholar: Studies in Academic Discourse, 118-36. Newbury Park, CA:
Sage.
Crismore, A., Markkanen, R., & Steffensen, M.S. (1993). Metadiscourse in persuasive writing: a study of
texts written by American and Finnish university students. Written Communication, 10,( 1), 39–
71.
Dafouz-Milne, E. (2003). Metadiscourse Revisited: a contrastive study of persuasive writing in
professional discourse. Estudios Ingleses de la Universidad Complutense, 11, 29-52.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

391

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Interactional Metadiscourse Markers in the Abstract Sections

Alzarieni, Zainudin, Awal & Sulaiman

Dafouz-Milne, E. (2008). The pragmatic role of textual and interpersonal metadiscourse markers in the
construction and attainment of persuasion: a cross- linguistic study of newspaper discourse.
Journal of Pragmatics, 40, 95-113.
El-Seidi, M. (2000). Metadiscourse in English and Arabic Argumentative Writing: A Cross-Linguistic
Study of Texts Written. Diversity in Language: Contrastive Studies in Arabic and English
Theoretical and Applied Linguistics: 111-126. Print.
González, R. A. (2005). Textual metadiscourse in commercial websites. Ibérica, 9, 33-52.
Gulf Cooperation Council Patent Office. Available online: http://www.gccpo.org (accessed on 16
December 2018).
Heng, S., & Tan, H. (2010). Extracting and comparing the intricacies of metadiscourse of two written
persuasive corpora. International Journal of Education and Development Using Information and
Communication Technology. 6,(3), 124-146.
Hyland, K. (1994). Hedging in academic writing and EAP textbooks. English for Specific Purposes, 13,(3),
239-256.
Hyland, K. (1998). Persuasion and context: The pragmatics of academic metadiscourse. Journal of
pragmatics, 30, (4),437-455.
Hyland, K. (1999). Talking to students: Metadiscourse in introductory course books. English for Specific
Purposes, 18 ,(1), 3 - 26.
Hyland, K. (2000). Disciplinary Discourses: Social Interactions in Academic Writing. London: Longman.
Hyland, K. (2004). Disciplinary interactions: Metadiscourse in L2 postgraduate writing. Journal of
Second Language Writing, 13, 133-151.
Hyland, K. (2005). Metadiscourse: Exploring Interaction in Writing. London: Continuum.
Hyland, K., & Tse, P. (2004). Metadiscourse in academic writing: A reappraisal. Applied linguistics,
25,(2), 156-177.
Kim, D. (2015). A Rhetorical Approach to Patents: A Guide to Reading a Patent .(Unpublished master
thesis). San Diego State University, San Diego, California.
Luuka, M. R. (1994). Metadiscourse in academic texts. In B. L. Gunnarsson, P. Linell, & B. Nordberg
(Eds.), Text and talk in professional context (pp. 77–88).Uppsala, Sweden: ASLA.
Nasiri, S. (2012). Exploring the significant role of meta-discourse in academic writing for a discourse
community by academic members. International Journal of Research Studies in Education, 2,(1),
67-74.
Quinn, G.( 2014). Patent Claim Drafting: Improvements and Jepson Claims. Retrieved Feb 12, 2017 from
.http://www.ipwatchdog.com.
Patience, S. (2015) .Communicate Science Papers, Presentations, and Posters Effectively. London.
Rashidi, N., &Alihosseini, F. (2012). A Contrastive Study of Metadiscourse Markers in Research Article
Abstracts Across Discipline. Bulletin of the Transilvania University of Braşov, Series IV:
Philology & Cultural Studies, 5, (2), 17-24.
Salek, M. (2014). A Diagram of Interactive and Interactional Markers in Different Parts of English
Research Articles. Journal of Language Sciences & Linguistics, 2,(3), 55-66.
Samraj, B. (2002). Introductions in research articles: Variations across disciplines. English for specific
purposes, 21,(1), 1-17.
Samraj, B. (2004). Discourse features of the student-produced academic research paper: Variations across
disciplinary courses. Journal of English for academic Purposes, 3, (1), 5-22.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

392

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Interactional Metadiscourse Markers in the Abstract Sections

Alzarieni, Zainudin, Awal & Sulaiman

Sancho -Guinda, C. (2012). Flexibility Features in Patent Writing. Ibérica, 24, 185-210.
Sancho -Guinda, C; Arinas, P. (2011). How Patent Can Patents Be? Exploring the Impact of Figurative
Language on the Engineering Patent Genre. Review of Cognitive Linguistics, 9,(1), 179-197.
Stollera, F.L., & Robinson, M.S.( 2013) Chemistry journal articles: an interdisciplinary approach to move
analysis with pedagogical aims. English for Specific Purposes, 32, (1), 45-57.
Sultan, A. (2011). A contrastive study of metadiscourse in English and Arabic linguistics research articles.
Acta Linguistica, 5,(1), 28–41.
Taweel, A.Q., Saidat, E. M., Rafayah, H.A., & Saidat, A.M.( 2011). Hedging in Political Discourse. The
Linguistics Journal, 5,(1), 169-196.
Vande-Kopple, W. J. (1985). Some Explanatory Discourse on Metadiscourse. College Composition and
Communication, 36,(1), 82-93.
Vande -Kopple, W. J. (1997). Refining and applying views of metadiscourse. Paper presented at the 84th
annual meeting of the Conference on College Composition and Communication, Phoenix, AZ.
Vande-Kopple, W. J. (2002). Metadiscourse, discourse and issues in composition and rhetoric. In E.
Barton, & G. Stygall (Eds.), Discourse Studies in Compositions (pp. 91-113). Cresskill, NJ:
Hampton Press.
Vazquez-Orta, I., Lafuente-Millan, E., Lores-Sanz, R., & Mur-Duenas, M. P. (2006). How to explore
academic writing from metadiscourse as an integrated framework of interpersonal meaning:
Three perspectives of analysis. in R. Alastrúe, C. Pérez-Llantada & C.P. Neumann (coords.),
Proceedings of the 5th AELFE Conference, 197-208. Zaragoza: Universidad de Zaragoza.
Retrieved from http://www.unizar.es/aelfe2006/ALEFE06/1.discourse/29.pdf
Williams, J. (1981). Style: Ten lessons in clarity and style. Boston: Scott Foresman.
Williams, J. (2007). Style: Ten lessons in clarity and grace (9th ed.). New York: Pearson-Longman.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

393

