"x"
"1" "The Unbearable Lightness of the Cosmopolitan Canopy:   Accomplishment of Diversity at an Urban Farmers Market"
"2" "Sofya Aptekar, UMass Boston  sofya.aptekar@umb.edu"
"3" "Article DOI: 10.1111/cico.12371"
"4" "Published in  City & Community   14 February 2019"
"5" "Abstract"
"6" "This  article  provides a  critique of work on  urban  public space that  touts   its potential as a  haven from racial and class conflicts and inequalities.  I argue that social structures and hierarchies  embedded in the capitalist system and the state’s social control over the racialized poor  are not suspended even in places that appear governed by civility and tolerance,  such as those under Anderson’s  “cosmopolitan canopy” .  D urable inequality, residential segr egation, nativism, and racism  inevitably   shape what happens in  diverse  public spaces .  Using an ethnographic study of an urban farmers’ market in New York  City ,  I show that appearances of everyday cosmopolitanism, tolerance, and pleasure in difference  coexist with  conflict and reproduction of inequalities  that are inextricable because the space is embedded within larger structures, institutions, and cultural paradigms .  By focusing on meaning-making in interaction, I analyze situated accomplishment of diversity and consider the implications for o ther types of urban spaces ."
"7" "The Unbearable Lightness of the Cosmopolitan Canopy: Accomplishment of Diversity at an Urban Farmers Market"
"8" "Despite  the  continuing salience of racial segregation and racist housing practices, m ultiracial urban neighborhoods  have  become more prevalent  in the US  ( Farrell and Lee ,  2011 ;  Fong and Shibuya ,  2006;  Logan and Zhang ,  2011 ) . Many of t hese neighborhoods  are also home to  unprecedented numbers of  i mmigrants  from across the globe . At the same time, race- and class- based conflict in diverse cities continues to concern scholars and the public alike.  Urban researchers argue about the role of public space in fostering tolerance, and  opinions range from those who question  its pot ential (Amin ,  2002 ;   Lofland ,   2000 ) to those who find that  some  diverse  public space s  promote  learning abou t and acceptance of difference (Anderson ,  2011).  In this article, I critique the  more optimistic views of diverse public space  as safe haven  from racial and other conflict  through an ethn ographic case study of an urban  farmers ’  market. I show that appearance s  of everyday cosmopolitanism, tolerance,  and pleasure in difference  coexist with  conflict and reproduction of inequalities  that are inextricable  because the space is embedded within larger structures, institutions, and cultural paradigms ."
"9" "P eople  make sense of and perform  diversity   in public space  in a complex way that may includ e tolerance and cosmopolitanism,  while   also necessarily engaging  with structures of inequality  beyond the particu lar island of diverse civility.  Congenial, and even convivial interactions across lines of difference exist within landscapes of threat and competition that make these  public  places inextricably connected to power hierarchies  beyond their boundaries.  Even when everyone gets along, social hierarchies such as race and class continue  t o shape everyday interactions .  In examin ing everyday interactions at an urban  farmers ’  market, I show how people make sense of their social location and interpret the actions of others.  In what appears to be an island of cosmopolitan civility, I find a social space embedded  in  the  reproduction of  larger structures of inequality .  The s tructural positions  of urban actors interacting in this farmers’ market  are not   necessarily backgrounded  when they step under the cosmopolitan canopy , but rather shape  how they  grapple with difference and diversity."
"10" "I  approach the study of diversity in public space through  a  fo cus on everyday meaning-making and interaction.  Following the theoretical lens of scholars who argue for studying how people  do  gender (West and Zimmerman ,  19 87), race (Flores-Gonzalez, Aranda, and  Vaquera ,  2014), and difference, in general (West and  Fenstermaker ,  1995), I  examine how difference is accomplished in routine interaction, in ways that are situated in a particular social setting but are inextricably connected to and legitimate structures beyond the setting.   In this way, I contribute to  a critical analysis of public spaces that appear  as  cosmopolitan havens in  divided cities (Valentine ,  2008;  Wise ,  2010).  In cities riven by skyrocketing inequality, racial segregation, criminalization  of poverty and immigration, and police brutality, it is tempting to hope that multicultural spaces like parks and markets will  help  build peace and tol erance.  But is the  idea of  cosmopolitan canopy theoretically and empirically a ppropriate?  I argue that the social patterns in the city  cannot be bracketed out of  even the most tolera nt and convivial seeming space ,  although the explicit interactional engagement with racial and ethnic categories does not in itself preclude tolerance and cosmopolitanism ."
"11" "In the  following sections, I present an overview o f existing research on interactions in  diverse public places .  I describe  the neighborhood  context  and the farmers ’  market case study, as well as  the   ethnographic  methodology  used .  I   present evidence that the farmers’ market is a cosmopolitan canopy, although this does not mean  that people do not talk about race and ethnicity or use stereotypes . At the same time, I show that under the canopy are tensions and conflict over cultural and lingui stic differences that reinforce  dominant hierarchies. In addition, this research site is inextricably shaped by structural inequalities embedded in the capitalist system and by social control over the racializ ed poor exercised by the state.  Far from being a place of symmetrical relationships, the market could be  a site of enforced performance of  racialized  poverty and marginality that coexist ed  with civility .  I conclude by examining the implication s  for the st udy of public space s in diverse and unequal cities ."
"12" "Diversity,  Conflict, and U rban  Public S pace"
"13" "Detailed census data  show that urban neighborhoods in t he US have become more racially  diverse  in the past two decades.  In major metropolitan regions, especially, neighborhoods have become more racially integrated, with a rise of racially mixed, or “global” neighborhoods, which remain relatively stable over time  (Fong and Shibuya ,  2005 ; Logan and  Zhang ,  2011 ). At the same time, racial  segregation persists, and whites continue to exhibit preferences for mostly white neighborhoods and move out of some  diverse neighborhoods ( Farrell and Lee ,  2011 ;   Logan and Zhang ,  2011 ). The story told through census measures of residential addresses is an incomplete picture of lived diversity. E thnographic studies of urban neighborhoods  have uncovered a disjuncture between statistical diversity and experience s  of diversity.  They point to the need to look  beyond measures of residence  to understa nd social dynamics of places  ( Berrey ,  2015;  Mayorga-Gallo ,  201 4 )."
"14" "Qualitative studies of diverse neighborhoods have often focused on public space , which is  thought  to  promise equal access and provide  opportunities for interaction with diverse others  ( Langegger ,  2013; Low ,  Taplin ,  and  Scheld ,   2009) . The focus on public space is accentuated by its connection to the idea of a shared public sphere essential to the building of democracy and tolerance ( Anderson ,  2011;   Kohn ,  2004;  Oldenburg ,  1999;  Young ,  1986).  Scholars decry the increasing surveillance and regulation of public space in the neoliberal city  as curtailing its potential to foster  encounters with difference  and c reate equitable access to public resources  ( Kohn ,  2004;  Shepard and  Smithsimon ,   2011 ;  Watson ,   2006 ) .  While there are  many of studies of public parks, others  have also considered c om mercial spaces, such as street markets, shopping streets and plazas, and indoor shopping arcades, where access may or may not be as open."
"15" "In his multi-sited ethnogra phy of public spaces, Anderson (2011) includes  the  Reading Terminal  Market , a large indoor shopping area comprised of tightly packed small food stalls. Reading Terminal epitomizes Anderson’s cosmopolitan canopy, where people  of  different race and class interact  convivially  in a relaxed atmosphere that is markedly different from the normal racial tensions of city life.  Not only do people seek  out difference  in “a calm environment of equivalent, symmetrical  relations” (Anderson ,  2011, p.   33 ) , but they learn to  practice civility and  share space with diverse others, nurturing  tolerance  citywide .  While arguing that racial and ethnic identities are “put on the back burner” unde r the cosmopolitan canopy (p. 164 ), Anderson acknowledges the tears in the canopy that can occur when the color line is drawn, particularly in the stigmatization and exclusion of black men.   In his ethnography, Anderson (2011) points out the important role of food in bridging barriers, such as when people from different cultures eat  each others’  food. In developing the concept of the “ third place ” ,  Oldenburg (1999) also emphasizes food.  More broadly, t hird places  are  informal gather ing places such as coffee shops,  distin ct from home and work. They  foster playful gatherings that level social differences and promote equity, democracy, and community."
"16" "Oldenburg’s (1999) positive and Anderson’s (2011) mostly positive accounts of the role of  certain  public places in fostering tolerance and community exist within a larger literature.  Many other  scholars have  written about t he role public places, especially markets  and shopping streets , can play in encouraging tolerant connections among diverse people  ( Hiebert ,  Rath , and Vertovec ,  2015;  Watson ,  2009;  Zukin , Kasinitz, and Chen ,  2015).  Many studies of farmers’ markets, in particular,  highlight them as spaces of sociability and community (Alia  et al . ,  2014 ; Alkon and  Vang ,  2016;  Alonso and O’ Neill ,  2011;   Feagan  and Morris ,  2009 ;  Slocum ,  2008 ), and even specifically as examples of Oldenburg’s third places ( Gagné ,  2011;   Tiemann ,  2008).  At the same time, Oldenburg’s argument for the inclusiveness of the third place and its equalizing function has been criticized for ignoring the reality of inequality and exclusion along race, ethnicity,  gender, and class lines, and for the role these places can serve in replicating structures of inequality ( Grazian ,  2009).  Although not always explicitly acknowledged, some of the more positive analyses of public  space are connected to classic  contact theory, which predicts increased tolerance with increased  contact between  members of different groups ( Al lport ,  1954;   Hewstone ,  2009) ."
"17" "O ther scholars have found   civility and tolerance  alongside  exclusion  and conflict in  market places . In her analysis of a  diverse  shopping street in London, Hall (2012)  show s  that there is both tension and conviviality as people make  sense of their identities and experience  belonging and  marginalization  through  routine encounters. Watson’s (2006) ethnographic book on public space in London profiles a street market in a  diversifying  working class  n eighborhood where emerging solidarities contrast with festering resentment over demographic change and socioeconomic decline.  And  Slocum  (2008) finds that pleasurable encounters at a diverse Minneapolis farmers’ market coexist with less obvious structural violence , particularly through processes of racialization .  Thus, contact with diverse others leads to complex patterns of social relations that encompass fleeting as well as more enduring civility as well as entrenched conflict."
"18" "Another group of scholars a re pessimistic about the potential for  real engagement with difference  in public space.  Zukin  (2010) notes that diversity complicates everyday negotiation over scarce public space in cities because of the presence of multiple conflicting visions and obstacles to communication.  The nature of public space itself, where encounters are fleeting, may reinforce prejudices or lead to parallel existences without much engagement (Ami n ,  2002;  Lofland ,  2000) .   Amin (2002) argues that public  space  rarely provides the type of engagement necessary for building integ ration and solidarity .  For the latter to take place, we need places where people engage with each other beyond fleeting interactions, and where it is not civility but conflictual and difficult engagement that leads to building bridges across social gro ups .   T h ere is also a body of research that  specifically  examines  market-place  conflict s   between middleman minority merchants, such as Korean immigrants in US cities, and native-born minority populations ( e.g.  Lee ,  2002; Yoon ,  1997 ).  As I show below, this literature points to the importance of considering  social  relations in any analysis of markets."
"19" "Even in the absence of outright conflict between ethno - racial groups or merchants and customers , diversity and seeming integration does not necessarily translate into friendship or even tolerance  (Mayorga- Gallo ,  2015;  Zelner ,  2015).  Diverse neighborhoods may  play host to  routine cosmopolitan behaviors, yet reproduce socioeconomic and racial inequalities through daily encounters (Talen ,  2010;  Tissot ,  2015).  These  more negative assessments of the role of diverse public spaces center analysis of structural inequalities as they shape everyday negotiation over space. In this article,  I  analyze everyday interactions in a  diverse market that appears to be characterized by conviviality and tolerance, but that is fundamentally shaped by structural inequalities that cannot be bracketed  out of its cosmopolitan canopy."
"20" "Setting"
"21" "The farmers’ market is located in  Queens, New York,  in a  neighborhood  with  high levels of  racial and ethnic diversity , a recent immigrant population, and socioeconomic  disparities.   According to the latest Census data, t he population in the two zip   codes surrounding the  market  was  41% non-Hispanic white, 31% Latino, 9% black, 16% Asian, and 13% some other race. More than a third of the over-25  population were  high school graduates or  dropouts, while almost half had  some college education or a  bachelor’s  degree. Median household income in 2015 dollars was around $53,000, with drastic variation by race (ranging from $30,000 for bl acks to $59,000 for whites ).  The foreign born comprised 42% of the population, mostly entering the US after 1990 from countries across the world  (Social Explorer ,  2017) .  The neighborhood is a mix of small industry, multi-family homes, small  apartment  buildings, and a   large public housing development that continues to be isolated and predominantly African American and Latino ."
"22" "The far mers ’  market was set up on a  sidewalk  next to a playground and a public health center  once a week on a weekday.  It was located on   a low-traffic street with several bodegas/delis, a pizza restaurant, and small industrial and car repair shops.  The farmers’ market had  two stall s with produce.  The larger stall was  operated by three male  Tibetan immigrants, hired by an area  farm to sell  fruits and vegetables . The smaller stall was operated by  a family of  Mexi can immigrant farmers who sold herbs and vegetables they grew on their own farm . Between the two stalls was a small tent of the market manager, who  oversaw market operations,  enforced  city rules,  and  disseminate d  information about healthy nutrition .  The manager  also  put t ogether  food samples and   facilitated payments  with  Electronic Benefit Transfer ( EBT ) cards containing  welfare benefits,  or credit cards . The  weekly  market  lasted from 8 in the morning until 2:30 or 3  in the afternoon   from  July until November ."
"23" "This market was  part of a large network of farmers ’  markets overseen by the city government and an affiliated non-profit organization.  The organization has two missions: promoting local agriculture and small farmers , and giving New Yorkers access to fresh and healthy local foo d. The  location near a  public  health center was selected to provide fresh produce to low income residents, particularly women and c hildren receiving food vouchers . For much of the research period, these vouchers could be doubled in  value  if redeemed at city farmers ’  markets.   M ost New York farmers ’  markets  accept EBT cards as payment,  but  they generally  not only cater  to the cultural consumption preference s  of the affluent  but also  signal   through products available, modes of display, and physical layout  that it is a space for that segment of the population. The large number of immigrant and working class customers disrupted t his more typical habitus of  farmers’ market s   and their image as  affluent white spaces or spaces of food tourism and politically-minded consumption ( Alkon ,  2008;   Alkon and  Vang ,  2016;   Gagn é ,  2011;   Slocum ,  2008;   Zukin ,  2010). I found concern about  freshness, sustainability, and food safety  among some low income and immigrant customers , as well as among middle class whites .  O thers looked for convenience in location, particular var ieties of produce, or the redemption of vouchers .  S ome people came to the market to  chat and hang out, whether or not the market was their destination or a spontaneous stop on a walk."
"24" "Methodology"
"25" "This article is based on ethnographic fieldwork conducted from  the  summer of 201 1 through  the  summer of 2013. It was  part of a larger project that investigated the dynamics  of diversity in  several   nearby public spaces .   I spent over one hundred  hours as a part icipant observer at this market . For most of the research period, I served as an informal volunteer, performing such tasks as  English-Spanish  transla tion, helping elderly customers , and sharing market information.  Serving in this capacity, as well as regularly shopping at the market myself, allowed me to form relationships with the vendors and managers, connect with in formants I knew from nearby  sites, and recognize and interact with regulars.  I was able to witness exchanges over time, and also talk to key participants about their interpretations.  As a middle class white immigrant woman in my  mid- 30s, I was perceived by many  customers as being associated with the market manager, a younger white woman, who often worked with other white female volunteers .  This often meant that people expected me to be helpful, friendly, and provide information. My identity as an immigrant who grew up in New York and my linguistic flexibility helped me build relationships with the vendors. However, my multilingualism did not extend far enough to understand, let alone communicate, with many people in the market, truncating my insight.  I took  notes in  a small notebook, which I  expanded into detailed  f ieldnotes ."
"26" "My ethnographic approach was informed by an  ethnomethodological  and symbolic intera ctionist lens. I focus ed on analyzing interactions and meaning-making practices   in  the farmers ’  market , with the goal of understanding  the  reproduction of inequalities (Zimmerman ,  1978). In particular, I was interested in how people  do  or accomplish  difference   (West and  Fenstermaker ,  1995; West and Zimmerman ,  1987), or how difference and diversity are constructed in interaction. Rather than taking for granted dominant social categories, I analyzed how people make sense of categories and use them  to accomplish their goals. I approached  the study of the  market through an interactionist lens, viewing people as social actors who interact with each other, perform roles, and creatively interpret social situations , with difference produced rather than simply expressed in interaction  ( Anderson and Snow ,  2001;  Goffman ,   1971)."
"27" "In analyzing the data ,  I reviewed my  fieldnotes , identifying interactions and discursive constructions relevant to understanding how people do diversity in everyday encounters. This process was ongoing, as I turned to fieldwork to test evolving explanations  arising from reviewing and analyzing my  fieldnotes  and other materials. In doi ng so, I followed an  abductive   approach, moving recursively between data, theoretical explanations, and the field ( Tavory  and  Timmermans ,   2014 ).  In analyzing civility, I drew particularly on  Lofland’s  (1998) conceptualization of civility toward diversity , which encompasses acting in a civil manner or “decently” towards visible human variation (p. 32). I used Anderson’s (2011) definition of  emplaced  cosmopolitanism as “acceptance of the space as belonging to all kinds of people” (p. 22). B elow, I present my findings,  starting by  describing the cosmopoli tan canopy, albeit one where  explicit use of racial and ethnic categories and stereotypes did not precl ude tolerance. Then, I show  how tensions and conflicts over cultural and linguistic differences are embedded in larger structures of inequality,  and  the ways in which market relations and state management of the poor shape interactions under the cosmopolitan canopy."
"28" "The Farmers’ Market as a  Cosmopolitan Canopy"
"29" "The Queens farmers ’  market examined  in this article  could be characterized as a cos mopolitan canopy .   Like  The  Reading Terminal  Market , a lbeit on a much smaller scale, it  played host to people sampling foods from each other’s cultures, interacting civilly in physical proximity,  and  occasionally initiating friendly exchanges with strangers (Anderson ,  2011).  I n one half-hour period on an unrema rkable fall morning, I observed  four white, one black, four Middle Eastern/North African, three South  Asian, and 21 Latino customers, mostly  female, and not counting children.  This was in addition to the usual composition of the staff of one white woman, three Tibetan men,  and two  to four members of a Mexican family.  Demographic diversity in itself does not make a cosmo politan canopy. Rather, it  is  the  prevailing attitude towards equally shared space, civility, and pleasure in the company of diverse others. M any  of the customers  appeared to enjoy people watching , exploring produce,  and exchanging small talk  with diverse others . Striking up  brief and pleasurable  conversations with strangers was  common , albeit complicated by the linguistic diversity.  For  example , I observed two middle- aged African American women spontaneously chat with an elderly Asian immigrant woman about the best way to wash pears, conducted partly with gestures due to the language barrier."
"30" "For the most part, interactions were characterized by civility and even friendly humor.  One could spend hours at the market without seeing any evidence that there was not an “acceptance of the space as belonging to all  kinds of people” (Anderson,  2011,  p. 22 ), although, as I detail  below , this could be a superficial impression.  The space was clearly governed by principles of restrained helpfulness and civility towards diversity identified by  Lofland  (1998) as emblematic of public space interactional order.  People  helped strangers with bags, carts, and strollers in the physically crowded space and the vast majority of inevitable collisions and passageway blocking were handled with patience and grace. Similarly to Anderson’s (2011) observations in Ritte n house Square, public  parent ing played a key role in creating an atmosphere of safety.  Parents taught preschoolers the names of produce as they shopped. Strangers kept unruly toddlers from running out into the street.  One set of vendors  would let preschoolers spray the produce with water to keep them entertained. Many customers came with young children, who served as foci for striking up conv ersation .  For instance, a young African American woman rocking a newborn in a carriage was approached by two elderly white women from a nearby senior center who told her that her baby was adorable. One reached right into the baby carriage to move the blanket away from the baby’s face. The mother did not seem to mind, smiling broadly and thanking the two women  for the compliment ."
"31" "T he market may have been more transitory than Oldenburg’s  (1999 )  coffee shops, bars, and post offices, yet it had ma ny of the characteristics of a  third place.  O ne could spend little – or nothing at all – to be there.  It was common for visitors to linger, not least due to the pleasurable affective environment.  Even though there were only two small stalls,  some people stayed  for as long as an hour, chatting with a cquaintances and strangers and people watching.   It was in the middle of a dense urban neighborhood  and centered on food.  I ts location next to the public health clinic  and resulting socioeconomic profile of the customers  facilitated a non-elitist feel.   There were regulars, and people  seemed to take  pleasure in planned and unplanned meetings with familiar others."
"32" "Neither Oldenburg (1999) nor Anderson (2011) deal with linguistic diversity, which was an important factor at the Queens farmers’ market.  Hiebert ,  Rath , and Vertovec (2015) argue that discursive practices  that are  routinized  or  engage linguistic skills, such as changing languages and code-switching ,  help bridge differences. Despite the fact  that vendors at this market were multilingual, as were  m any customers, there were  many instances of difficulties in communication , most of which were  resolved creatively and even playfully. One of the farmers’ market stalls was run by farmers who were bilingual in English and Spanish, and the other by vendors who were native speakers of Tibetan, fluent in English, and reasonably conversant in Japanese, Mandarin, Spanish, and Hindi.  I observed vendors make occasional mistakes, addressing customers i n a language they turned out not to know. Customers, too, addressed vendors in languages they did not always understand, as when one of the Tibetan vendors who did not speak Spanish was addressed by a Latina woman in Spanish. Neither scenario resulted in conflict, but was either corrected matter-of-factly, or became a source of humor.  Vendors recruited customers as assistants in translating, and t he market manager asked vendors, customers, and the researcher for  similar help.  For the most part, the market seemed to operate under a collective spirit of patience for language differences and a collaborative approach to communication."
"33" "The farmers ’  market appeared to be characterized by people  of different race and class  getting along, friendly communication, and even helpfulness.  But does observing these types of encounters mean that the farmers ’  market  necessarily  taught tolerance and civility (Anderson .  2011) or promoted social equity, democracy, and co mmunity vitality  (Oldenburg ,  1999 )?   In fact, a nalyzing how people made sense of  and performed  diversity   revealed tensions ,  reproduction of  inequality, and use of cosmopolitanism and diversity for instrumental ends , such as making a profit .  Interestingly, explicit engagement with racial and ethnic categories and stereotypes did not in itself mean the dearth of tolerance or cosmopolitanism, as I describe in the following section."
"34" "Race and Ethnicity: Not on t he Back Burner"
"35" "Although small, the farmers’ market was a space  of visual diversity, both  human diversity and diversity of produce . I t appeared to embody Anderson’s (2011) concept of a cosmopolitan canopy, as  diverse  people spent time alongside each other in what was often a friendly and seemingly pleasurable manner . At the same time,  analysis of how people accomplished difference revealed complex processes of learning about categorical others and grappling with stereotypes and conflicting ideologies of difference  that went beyond appearances of tolerance and cosmopolitanism ."
"36" "Although Anderson (2011) observes t hat race is “on the back burner”  under the cosmopolitan canopy, he does provide a poignant analysis of the rift in the canopy occasioned by exclusion  of  and racism towards black men – or “anyo ne with provision al  status” (p. 291 ). In my research site , I found that s ocial categories, such as race and ethnicity,  were  what West and  Fenstermaker  (1995) call ‘ omnirelevant ’ ( p.  18 ), serving as a ready resource for interpreting the action s  of others.  T he use of  race, ethnicity, and attendant stereotypes  was widespread,   but this was  not  necessarily a sign of intoleranc e or exclusion. Instead of downplaying race and ethnicity, p eople used these  categories to  make sens e of  actions and reactio ns of those different from them .  In this excerpt from my  fieldnotes , vendors and the market manager navigate conflicting cultural schema governing stereotypes and their use:"
"37" "I go over to stand near Marta (Mexican immigrant vendor) at her stand. Amy (white market manager) and  Palden  (Tibetan immigrant vendor) are there as well… Marta tells  Palden  that he is a very nice man, and asks Amy to back her up. The conversation is in English. Marta says that she knows another man from a place like China – at this point, Amy looks at me and widens her eyes – who was very bad, rude, and knew very few Spanish words but they were all bad words.  Palden  does not have a chance to respond, as Marta now turns to an elderly man looking at the corn, asking him if he needs help. The man shows her a partially peeled corn, and Marta begins to complain about peeling corn (this is not allowed for hygiene reasons). Marta says she does not let people peel corn. It is cheap and you get what you get.  Palden , who has sold out his corn already, says that the peeling corn problem is much worse with Chinese people at the F -  market (a much larger market in one of New York’s Chinatowns). He says that people would argue that they have a right to peel the corn to see what they were getting. He says that he learned how to explain it in Chinese and then it was fine."
"38" "Here, Marta is placing  Palden , who is Tibetan, into the same category as people who are from “places like China.” In fact, Marta regularly and openly referred to the Tibetan vendors  as   chino s .  S he is contrasting  Palden’s  niceness with the non-niceness of this  other man. In doing so, she is making sense of the ethno - racial diversity by incorporating new information from the people she is meeting at the market.  Palden  does not correct her to say he is not Chinese. He does not exhibit discomfort at Marta’s statement, unlike Amy, a you ng college-educated white woman . However, later in the conversation,  Palden  distances himself from Chinese people by providing an example where he was opposed to the same corn-peeling behavior that so incenses Marta, and neutralizes the negative stereotype of the category by showing that he solved it by learning more Chinese. In a way, he is performing a multicultural, tolerant ideology that centers culturally-sensitive communication as a solution to conflict, rejects the possibility of entrenched cultural differences, and brings inclusiveness into the frame.  H is statements show that there are not fundamental differences between people like  Palden  and Marta, on the one hand, and people like the Chinese on the other, which would compel the latter to break rules established and accepted by the former.  At the same time, he does not seem to have a problem with using explicit racial and ethnic c ategories in identifying people."
"39" "In this discussion of rogue Chinese customers, there is some evidence of negotiation, resolution, and learning, which  fits  Anderson’s (2011) characterization of cosmopolitan canopies as spaces of learning about diverse others and civility.  But this example illustrates that this learning takes place when racial and ethnic categories are foregrounded and actively engaged.  At times, e thnic and linguistic differences even served as fodder for humor.  O ne of the Tibetan vendors drew on his racial ambiguity to jokingly pretend he was Mexican with Spanish speakers. People often played along with him, with one Mexican immigrant couple who  were regulars  coming to greet him as  mexicano , demonstrating a playfulness with race, ethnicity, and language.  Thokmay  was performing  racial and cultural identities in  a fluid and flexible way that maximized his conn ection with customers in a  diverse setting."
"40" "Vendors  used  the  selling and b uying of foo d to construct social categories .  As a result of their constant interaction with diverse customers,  they  amassed information about consumer preferences, categorized into social categories of race and  ethnicity :  “Asians  want broccoli  raab , they call it  saag . Moroccans all want the little squash. They spend their checks on big bags of this squash. African Americans want the greens, like kale. Beets are for healthy people to make juice.” (Pongal)  1  Vendors placed customers into these categories and suggested  corresponding  varieties of prod uce . When customers hesitated over multiple varieties of pumpkin, both sets of vendors would say things like: “Your people like this.” Usually, the customer gratefully accepted this advice.  Thu s, people at the market used  food as cultural material to continually construct social categories and negotiate their shifting meanings. In many instances, the active reference to racial and ethnic categories in interaction was compatible with tolerance  and cosmopolitanism, although it  may have  violated social norms stemming from the dominant  i deology of colorblindness (Bonilla-Silva ,   2013 ) ."
"41" "Tension and Conflict over Cultural  and Linguistic  Difference s"
"42" "Explicit negotiation and use of racial and ethnic categories at the farmers’ market could be routine, purposeful, exploratory, and even playful. But not everyone was comfortable with it.  Amy, the white manager recently educated at an elite college, often  appeared distressed when  she  encountered the use of racial and ethnic categories by the vendors and customers – mostly working class people of color and immigrants  – even in the context of selling produce or humor . Amy’s  unease  was  emblematic of colorblind ideology, including the belief that mentioning racial difference is racist, which is widespread among white Americans (Bonilla-Silva ,   2013 ).  For instance, she  visibly cringed  duri ng a conversation with a Guyanese  customer who   identified her abusive employers matter-of-factly as  ‘those Arabs’ ."
"43" "While Amy may have been uncomfortable with the free use of  racial and ethnic categories  she use d  some stereotypes herself . On one occasion, a South Asian man in his 40s stood in line to talk to her. Struggling to express himself in English, he asked how to use the Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) checks he was holding (a federally-supported supplementary nutrition program for low income families). Amy quickly said: “Just use them in either stand to buy fruits and vegetables.” The man seemed uncertain and hovered around the table, but Amy ignored him. Eventually he figured out how to use his WIC checks by watching  others shop . Amy then told me that she knew he wanted her to walk him over and show him how to do it, but she did not have the patience for “East Indian” men who act helpless at the market. An avowed feminist, Amy interpreted the man’s need through the lens of patriarchy and stereotypes of Asian men.  But these stereotypes fit within discourse acceptable in Amy’s more elite and white milieu, the way  Thokmay ’s  clowning around and pretending to be a Mexican did not."
"44" "Other tensions emerged  over cultural differences . Part of the job of the market  manager was to promote a  program through which low income women could double their  WIC checks at the market. Amy was excited about this program, but frustrated when Marta (the Mexican immigrant vendor) wanted an official sign for her stand to explain  it , and was reluctant to promise that she would watch for the right kind of checks and let the customers know they could go double them at the manager’s table. In a conversation  with me, Marta explained that “ Spanish people ”  get nervous about getting free stuff because they think they are going to have to pay later. Amy was exasperated with Marta for not helping with a program that she viewed as good. Marta, positioning herself as an in-group expert, pointed out that Amy did not understand how the experience of Latinas can lead them to suspect schemes like doubling coupons. Marta did not explain this to Amy, however, and both were left with resentment towards each other. This entrenched their structural confli ct as vendor and market manager, and reflected their embeddedness and contrasting experiences in a larger set of institutions patterned by race, class, and gender."
"45" "In a related and recurrent episode, Amy prepared  free samples of healthy dishes , and was puzzled when many  customers hesitated to take the samples, or rejected them altogether. As a volunteer, I was often involved in distributing the samples, and I found that saying “it’s free” was much more effective than Amy’s “would you like some squash?” Free samples, common in affluent settings, neighborhoods, and commercial spaces are far less common of an experience for working class people ( Gagn é ,  2011 ; McClain and Mears ,  2012). There was a gulf in understanding around the cultural practice of handing out free samples, and the paternalistic intent to educate locals about healthy  cooking  did not always work. From  listening to  those who did approach the manager’s table, I learned that many were puzzled by how this food could be prepared on  the street, were concerned about its safety (especially with children who are taught not to take  food  from strangers), as well as not being sure the samples were free. Conflicting scripts about appropriate behavior led to tensions and misunderstandings."
"46" "Not all tension stemmed from differences in cultural norms between the white middle class manager and working-class people of color and/or immigrants.  The spectacle of diversity  – an attractive feature for many urban middle class  consumers  ( Zukin ,  2010 )  –  itself rub bed some people the wrong way.  Although food is often hailed as bringing together diverse others,  the variety of produce on sale  caused ire among some. One time, a white man became offended when he could not find arugula at the stand run by the Tibetan vendors. He picked up a bunch of  bok  choy and asked the vendor whether it was lettuce.  Thokmay  responded that it was  bok  choy, and the man said, irritated: “What the hell is  bok  choy?! Where  is arugula, regular arugula?”  Later the same day, a Latina  woman wished for more “ American ”  products at the market. In both examples, the diversity of the produce is connected to the diversity of the customers who buy this produce, as well as to the diversity of the vendors who are assumed to have selected and grown this produce. Expressing frustration about the selection of products is partly about contestation over moral ownership of the neighborhood and claims made on it by those who are seen as outsiders. The small but bustling farmers’ market makes visible the new racial, ethnic, and immigrant diversity of the neighborhood."
"47" "Languages , like produce, signal difference that can be stigmatized and feared , reinforcing  the marginalized position of i mmigrants. At one point, a white woman became upset that the market manager provided recipes in Spanish, as well  as  in English.  She objected to the legitimation of Spanish by the market and the claim of Spanish speakers on the space. White seniors visiting the market from  nearby  senior housing complained about the Spanish spoken at one of the stands, sometimes interrupting Spanish-language exchanges between vendors and customers or signaling for them to be quieter. These examples point to the disruption posed by the globalized habitus ( Zukin , Kasinitz, and Chen ,  2015) of the farmers’ market to some local residents for whom the presence of languages other than English, and the validation of Spanish, in particular, unsettles thei r sense of local social order.  The appearance of multilingual harmony is punctuated by linguistic hierarchies and xenophobia, particularly  aimed at  Spanish, which is the second m ost common language of the city  and is legitimate d  by local authorities through  the  provision of benefit and market information in English and Spanish."
"48" "While the farmers’ market appears to represent a cosmopolitan canopy in several ways, it is also a space of tension, conflict, and negotiation over culture and identity. Various social categories are highlighted and muted as difference is accomplished situationally. Contact and learning are not  out of the question, but macro structures of inequality  are continuously engaged on the micro-level as people make sense of difference (West and  Fenstermaker ,  1995).  In other words, in their encounters with diverse others at the market, people draw on systems of racial meaning and  racial ideologies  as material. This makes it difficult to level social differences or bracket out social categories comprising hierarchies entrenched well beyond the market itself."
"49" "Civility in the Marketplace and the Marginalization of the Poor"
"50" "Unlike other public spaces, such as parks or sidewalks, a farmers’ market features established structural positions which carry inherent tensions, albeit under-analyzed in much of the literature that focuses on interactions among customers only.  Particularly in the context of this farmers’ market  serving a large number of people on public assistance , customers were  trying to s ave money . Vendors  were precarious workers struggling to make a profit  or e ven just to cut their losses .  The city and its nonprofit arm regulate d what types of products were  sold by whom and how, and mandate d  that certain forms of  payment, such as EBT and WIC be  accepted. Given the imperative to maximize sales in a setting where produce could be obtained elsewhere, it is not surprising that the vendors were usually civil to the customers, sometimes drawing on what seemed like unlimited reserves of patience. This is not to say that pleasurable interactions with customers were out of th e question, just that these were  inextricable from market relations, and in fact, often constituted emotional labor on the part of the vendors. In addition, customers who paid with government-issued vouchers were sometimes marginalized further when their poverty was made visible at the market."
"51" "The interactions  between vendors and customers  were full of scripted exchanges, such as questions about price and stock, performance of giving the correct change, and routine greetings that could grow in exuberance  with regulars (see  Hiebert ,  Rath , and Vertovec ,  2015). Because so many people paid with government vouchers, there was the added complication of trying to spend all of the checks, which came in $4 increments, since change was not possible. Sometimes, customers got upset when the vendors refused them change. One man even emptied his bag of produce on Marta’s scale, prompting her  to say: “I didn’t make the checks. The government made the checks.” The Tibetan vendors faced off angry customers who arg ued about items adding up to $4 by  letting them take more than they should ,   trying to  avoid  creating a  scene  and undermining sales .  The market manager  came into conflict with both customers and  the  vendors as she  tried to enforce city regulations  on  the  use of sidewalk space and government vouchers ."
"52" "The civil, cosmopolitan, and convivial interactions between vendors and customers were, from the vendors’ perspective, a way to  increase returns . As one o f the Tibetan vendors explained, however,  conviviality ,  switching between multiple languages , and engaging with customers’ young children  could also create situations where customers expected to get discounts, leading to tension. After an extended altercation with a group of immigrant women who t r ied to bargain and told him it was not  a  real store,  Pangal  told me : “If you speak their language to be nice, they think they can get a discount.” There were also occasional arguments over prices, which are not as high as the more upscale farmers ’  market in the city, but higher than local supermarkets. Customers’ frustration over what was available for sale was a constant source of irritati on for the vendors and manager .  Occasionally, they joked about it, as when another one of the Tibetan vendors,  Thokmay   came over to the manager and said: “Table number seven would like spinach and cucumbers,” which  were not in season at the time."
"53" "In addition to the tensions between  customers and vendors, customers using government vouchers were further marginalized through the shopping experience.   Knowing how to use WIC checks  or EBT cards  to shop at the farmers ’  market is not obvious, and is a cause of discomfort for many recipients who are already in a  s upplicant  position, and having to navigate a new institutional setting in a space that exposes their poverty.  As  explained  above, the manager could increase the barriers to using benefits.  The diversity of the farmers ’  market is not a neutral, horizontal set of cultural differences, but is intertwined with hierarchies of power in society. The spectacle of people of color ,  mostly  women, and raci ali zed  religious minorities, such as Muslims,  paying for produce with government vouchers  could incite  outrage  about immigrant freeloaders  from  passersby and other customers . A white man walking by the market  slowed down by the managers table, looking down at the flyers  about public assistance  and the South Asian woman with a headscarf who was standing there , waiting to process her EBT payment . Sounding angry and loud, he said: “I work here thirty-five years and I can’t get no food stamps, and these people get it right away. This is a fucked up country!” He continued to walk, now past the Mexican immigrants’ stall,  repeating “fucked up country!”     On another , less overtly hostile,  occasion, a middle aged  Latina  woman  pointedly asked if you could pay in cash: “Everyone is paying with checks.”  These reactions may in part be about what  Zukin , Kasinitz, and Chen (2015) identify as a sense of loss of moral ownership of the street and a changed habitus, but they  also draw  on understandings of how the society at large works and who benefits and does not.  Racialized and marginalized groups bear the brunt in reproduction of difference and hierarchy in public."
"54" "In an  example that  unfolded  over repeated weekly observations, a regular shopper expressed a  feeling  of unfairness as she struggled to make sense of WIC checks and food stamps.  Celena  was  a Greek immigrant woman  who came every week with  her friend and their  young children.  Early in the season,  Celena  asked the market manager , Amy,  about  eligibility for WIC and EBT,  and whether her husb and’s income would be counted, becoming  indignant  upon learning that that was the case.  Amy remained patient and civil through her many questions, and suggested calling the information hotline. When  Celena  left, Amy remarked that she did not think the woman knew how poor “these people” were.  Notably, as a regular  who bought a lot using cash ,  Celena  was treated as a guest of honor, particularly by the Tibetan vendors, who played with her children and gave her discounts.  In the w eeks that followed,  Celena  and her friend  complained that they were poor too but did not get food stamps. The manager and vendors did not engage with them on this  issue,  steering conversations to  food and children.  Out of earshot, however, they remarked on the size of  Celena’s  house (which they saw while delivering a  pet  rabbit) and her friend’s new SUV."
"55" "Paying attention to built -in inequalities characteristic  of a market setting, as well to the way societal hierarchies that marginalize the  racialized  poor  make their presence felt in the market, belies first impressions of civility and tolerance.  Underneath the cosmopolitan canopy may not be the “equivalent, symmetrical rel ationships” Anderson (2011, p.   33 ) describes, even when interactions do appear  to be  friendly.   They are certainly not symmetrical when structural inequalities are reproduced through the enforced performance of poverty ,  and  marginalized people have to shop in a way that outs their  reliance on public assistance .  Civility itself, when not simply due to the powerful norms of interactional order, can be a sign of unequal structural relations."
"56" "Conclusion"
"57" "Based on  the types of interactions at the farmers’ market , it could  be defined as a cosmopolitan canopy.  People of  different  racial and class characteristics  share d  the  space   and  interact ed  peacefully,  civilly , and often  convivially .   Customers and vendors actively engaged with the categories of  race and ethnicity , in ways that did not necessarily signal intolerance or exclusion, even if this explicit use contradicted  the  colorblind ideology widespread among the white middle class. At the same time, e xtended analysis of everyday interactions revealed  routine reproduction of   race and class   h ierarchies in the farmers’ market.  Situated accomplishment of difference   was connected to  inequalities  in the macro context of the neighborhood, city, and even the nation, from  the  marginalization of immigrants  and the racialized poor  to growing class inequality and erosion of the social safety net.  In this way,  not everyone had equal  access to  and claim on  the physical and symbolic space of the market.  The spectacle of di versity itself  could  elicit  fe ar and stigmatization of Spanish speakers, the immigrant poor, and other vulnerable groups .   Key to analyzing this  site was full consideration of tensions embedded in market relationships themselves, which can be overlooked if the focus is primarily on customers, and not  all social actors, including  vendors and agents of the state."
"58" "Even a small farmers’ market is a space of commerce, and features established structural positions, including vendors, customers, and  managers , which carry inherent tensions – as well as instrumental uses of diversity. In this context, accomplishment of diversity is not simply about enjoyment of difference and tolerance, but a tool  for precarious market workers to make a  profit  (or even just minimize losses)  and  for the managers and the city they work for to  exercise social control over marginalized  populations by shaping their consumption and health-related habits . This analysis of everyday interactions at one farmers ’  market in New York City shows that diverse public spaces that appear civil and cosmopolitan are embedded in larger hierarchies and systems of domination. The cosmopolitan canopies they create cannot be bracketed as calm spaces away from the conflicts an d travails of the city at large  (Anderson,  2011 ).  The impression of the cosmopolitan canopy splinters when we consider how even civil interactions help reproduce inequality, let alone take into account the role of the structural position s  of different actors in how they deal with diversity.  As “third places” , the potential of coffee shops, beer gardens, etc .  for  leveling social differences  must be evaluated in light o f the implausibility of a such leveling   in the midst of a capitalist  marketplace  (Oldenburg ,  1999 ). Like the farmers’ market, these places are co-produced by workers, bosses, and state regulators, as well as by visitors who may or may not seek an informal place to engage with others on a level playing field.  Anderson’s (2011) claim that cosmopolitan canopies are “neutral settings, which  no one group expressly owns” ( 66 ) is  incongruous  when applied to a  marketplace where there are most  certainly owners and workers.  Without determining it, the context of capitalist exchange and state regulation underlies encounters and interactions among diverse actors and structures how people accomplish difference, as well as how they may consolidate their advantages or resist power hierarchies."
"59" "At first glance, spaces like public parks, playgrounds, recreation al  center s ,  and libraries seem like  better candidates for building oases of tolerance and social equity, as market relations are more peripheral there than at farmers’ markets, in coffee shops, or on  shopping streets.  Yet, even  there , we can expect larger structural inequalities to shape the situated accomplishment of difference . The mechanisms present at this farmers’ market are applicable to many other public settings, even those not dominated by commerce.  For one, interactions in public parks, libraries, etc. are shaped by imperatives of social control by the state, if not by the market  (Shepard and Smithsimon ,  2011 ) . In today’s neoliberal cities, there is scarcely any space that is not owned, controlled, and dominated by some  powerful  party, however invisible it may first appear to an observer. In addition , a key insight that t he  public nature of the farmers’ market  showcased diversity in a way that  elicited intergroup resentment could very well work in diverse public parks or any public setting that concentrates and makes visible neighborhood change.  More generally, it is not difficult to imagine that in diverse urban spaces, norms of public interaction create impressions of a cosmopolitan canopy that nonetheless coexists with tensions over difference and inequality, to be revealed through a methodological lens that centers how people make meaning of social categories and space."
"60" "The situated interactions at the farmers’ market are inextricably connected to larger  patterns of stratification .  Skyrocketing inequality, crushing poverty, gentrification and displacement, persistent residential and school segregation , criminalization and war on immigrants are durable features of most US cities.  There are plenty of examples of how  diverse  people do  not  get along : how rage over centuries of injustice explodes in uprisings, state surveillance instills fear in marginalized populations, and th e consumption preferences of   elites   appropriate  cultures of the less powerful while pushing out these same people from their homes. It is tempting to turn to public spaces with hope  that in parks, on sidewalks, and street markets, people can  “ rub along ” (Watson 2009) , savor their common  humanity across gulfs of race, ethnicity,  and class, and plant a seed of  tolerance  that spreads to the rest of the city.   Places are  socially produced  rather than simply containing social action. Ne utral ity of space becomes doubtful  when it is constituted by  social  actors  embedded in institutions patterned by race, class, and gender and  drawing on  omnirelevant  categories like race to interpret their social world  (West and  Fenstermaker ,  1995 ) ."
"61" "S cholars must remain critical of claims that contact between diverse strangers results in better getting along ( Lofland ,   2000 ) and be realistic about the potential of public space to foster a  safe space of cosmopolitanism.  S pecial skepticism should be exercised when evalua ting romanticized notions of food  consumption  as  b reaking down social boundaries.   More insidiou sly, claims about learning   tolerance  under the cosmopolitan canopy   elide the inequalities  that shape this process, which Anderson (2011)  himself  points out in his analysis of  “ the nigger moment ” .   We are better served by considering public parks, playgrounds, and markets as places to  discipline and  socialize marginalized populations. Or, to consider the interactional work that goes into misrepresenting hierarchies as horizontal difference and the consequences of diversity discourse on perpetuation of inequality ( Berr ey ,  2005 ). We might also examine the role of public space in managing rage and resistance of marginalized populations, or in constructing safe access for the consumption of difference by the affluent, predicate d on making privilege invisible. In investigating social relations in diverse urban public space, it is vital to keep in mind that dominant social categories like race, class, and sex always  serve as resources for everyday in terpretation of action, even as multiple identities wax and wane  situationally. The differences are stratified and cannot be suspended upon entering under the “ protective umbrella” of “a special type of urban space ”  (An derson, 2011, p.  66 ). However, this  need not mean a pessimistic acquiescence to the status quo. Rather, acknowledgement and study of the dynamics of inequality through diverse interactions in public space lays the foundation for  charting the possibilities for  neighborhoods and cities that are as distinguished by e quity as the y are by diversity. I t allows us to analyze existing resistance and strategize new interventions in the messy, everyday lived experience of diversity among urban strangers."
"62" "References"
"63" "Alia, Kassandra, Darcy Freedman, Heather Brandt, and Teri Browne. 2014. “Identifying Emergent Social Networks at a Federally Qualified Health Center-Based Farmers’ Market.”  American Journal of Community Psychology  53(3/4): 335–345."
"64" "Alkon, Alison. 2008. “Voting with Your Fork: A Critical Analysis of Sustainable Consumption at Farmers ’  Markets.” Conference Papers. American Sociological Association."
"65" "Alkon, Alison , and Dena  Vang . 2016. “The Stockton Farmers’ Market.”  Food, Culture & Society  19(2): 389–411."
"66" "Allport , Gordon. [1954] 1979.  The Nature of Prejudice . Reading, Mass: Basic Books."
"67" "Alonso, Abel, and Martin O’Neill. 2011. “Investing in the Social Fabric of Rural and Urban Communities: A Comparative Study of Two Alabama Farmers’ Markets.”  Community Development  42(3): 392–409."
"68" "Amin, Ash. 2002. “Ethnicity and the Multicultural City: Living with Diversity .”   Environment and Planning  A  34(6):959– 980."
"69" "Anderson, Elijah. 2011.  The Cosmopolitan Canopy: Race and Civility in Everyday Life . New York: W.W. Norton & Co."
"70" "Anderson, Leon, and David  Snow. 2001. “Inequality and the Self: Exploring Connections from an Interactionist Perspective .”   Symbolic Interaction  24(4): 395–406."
"71" "Berrey , Ellen C. 2005. “Divided over Diversity: Political Discourse in a Chicago Neighborhood .”   City & Community  4(2): 143–170."
"72" "Bonilla-Silva, Eduardo .  2013 .  Racism without Racists: Color-Blind Racism and the Persistence of Racial Inequality in America .  New York:  Rowman  & Littlefield Publishers."
"73" "Farrell, Chad, and Barrett  Lee. 2011. “Racial Diversity and Change in Metropolitan Neighborhoods .”   Social Science Research  40(4): 1108–1123."
"74" "Feagan , Robert, and David Morris. 2009. “Consumer Quest for Embeddedness: A Case Study of the Brantford Farmers’ Market.”  International Journal of Consumer Studies  33(3): 235–243."
"75" "Fong, Eric, and Kumiko Shibuya. 2005. “Multiethnic Cities in North America .”   Annual Review of Sociology  31(1): 285–304."
"76" "Flores-González,  Nilda , Elizabeth Aranda, and Elizabeth  Vaquera . 2014.  “ ‘Doing  Race’ Latino Youth’s Identities and the Politics of Racial Exclusion .”   American Behavioral Scientist  58(14): 1834–1851."
"77" "Gagné , Nana. 2011. “Eating Local in a U.S. City: Reconstructing “Community”-a Third Place-in a Global Neoliberal Economy.”  American Ethnologist  38(2): 281–293."
"78" "Goffman, Erving. 1971.  Relations in Public: Microstudies of the Public Order . New York: Basic Books."
"79" "Grazian , David .  2009 . “ Urban Nightlife, Social Capital, and the Public Life of Cities. ”   Sociological Forum  24(4): 908–917."
"80" "Hall, Suzanne. 2012.  City, Street and Citizen: The Measure of the Ordinary . London: Routledge."
"81" "Hewstone , M. 2009. “Living Apart, Living Together? The Role of Intergroup Contact in Social Integration.”  Proceedings of the British Academy  162:243-300."
"82" "Hiebert , Daniel, Jan  Rath , and Steven Vertovec. 2015. “Urban Markets and Diversity: Towards a Research Agenda .”   Ethnic & Racial Studies  38(1): 5–21."
"83" "Kohn, Margaret. 2004.  Brave New Neighborhoods: The Privatization of Public Space . New York: Routledge."
"84" "Langegger, Sig. 2013. “Viva La Raza! A Park, a Riot and  Neighbourhood  Change in North Denver .”   Urban Studies  50(16): 3360–3377."
"85" "Lee, Jennifer . 2002.  Civility in the City: Blacks, Jews, and Koreans in Urban America . Cambridge,   MA: Harvard University Press."
"86" "Lofland , Lyn H. 1973 .  A World of Strangers: Order and Action in Urban Public Space . Prospect Heights, Ill.: Waveland Press."
"87" "Lofland , Lyn. 2000. “Urbanity, Tolerance and Public Space. The Creation of Cosmopolitans ” .  Pp. 93-109 in  Understanding Amsterdam: Essays on Economic Vitality, City Life and Urban Form , edited by  Leon Deben, W. F.  Heinemeyer  and D van der  Vaart /  Amsterdam: Het  Spinhuis  Publishers."
"88" "Logan, John, and  Wenquan  Zhang. 2011. Global Neighborhoods: New Evidence from Census 2010. Discover America in a New Century. New York: Russell Sage Foundation."
"89" "Low,  Setha , Dana  Taplin , and Suzanne  Scheld . 2009.  Rethinking Urban Parks: Public Space and Cultural Diversity .  Austin, TX:  University of Texas Press."
"90" "Mayorga-Gallo, Sarah. 2014.  Behind  the White Picket Fence: Power and Privilege in a Multiethnic Neighborhood . Chapel Hill, North Carolina: University of North Carolina Press."
"91" "McClain, Noah, and Ashley Mears. 2012. “Free to Those Who Can Afford It: The Everyday Affordance of Privilege .”   Poetics  40(2): 133–149."
"92" "Oldenburg, Ray. 1999. T he Great Good Place: Cafes, Coffee Shops, Bookstores, Bars, Hair Salons, and Other Hangouts at the Heart of a Community . 3rd edition. New York: Marlowe & Company."
"93" "Shepard, Benjamin , and Gregory Smithsimon. 2011.  The Beach beneath the Streets Contesting New York City’s Public Spaces . Albany, NY : Excelsior Editions/State University of New York Press."
"94" "Slocum, Rachel. 2008. “Thinking Race through Corporeal Feminist Theory: Divisions and Intimacies at the Minneapolis Farmers’ Market.”  Social & Cultural Geography  9(8): 849–869."
"95" "Social Explorer. 2017. Tables: ACS 2015 (5-Year Estimates) (SE), ACS 2015 (5-Year Estimates), Social Explorer; U.S. Census Bureau."
"96" "Talen, Emily. 2010. “The Context of Diversity: A Study of Six Chicago  Neighbourhoods .”   Urban Studies  47(3): 486–513."
"97" "Tiemann , Thomas. 2008. “Grower-Only Farmers’ Markets: Public Spaces and Third Places.”  Journal of Popular Culture  41(3): 467–487."
"98" "Tavory ,  Iddo , and Stefan Timmermans. 2014.  Abductive  Analysis: Theorizing Qualitative Research . Chicago: University of Chicago Press."
"99" "Tissot , Sylvie. 2015.  Good Neighbors: Gentrifying Diversity in Boston’s South End . New York: Verso Books."
"100" "Valentine, Gil. 2008. “Living with Difference: Reflections on Geographies of Encounter .”   Progress in Human Geography  32(3): 323–337."
"101" "Watson, Sophie. 2006.  City Publics: The (Dis )enchantments  of Urban Encounters .  New York: Routledge."
"102" "Watson, Sophie. 2009. “ The Magic of the Marketplace: Sociality in a Neglected Public Space . ”  Urban Studies  46(8): 1577–1591."
"103" "West, Candace, and Sarah  Fenstermaker . 1995. “Doing Difference .”   Gender & Society  9(1): 8–37."
"104" "West, Candace, and Don H. Zimmerman. 1987. “Doing Gender .”   Gender & Society  1(2):125–151."
"105" "Wise, Amanda. 2010. “Sensuous Multiculturalism: Emotional Landscapes of Inter-Ethnic Living in Australian Suburbia .”   Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies  36(6): 917–937."
"106" "Yoon, In-Jin . 1997.  On  My Own: Korean Businesses and Race Relations in America.  Chicago:  University of Chicago Press."
"107" "Young, Iris Marion. 1986. “The Ideal of Community and the Politics of Difference.”  Social Theory and Practice  12(1):1-26."
"108" "Zelner , Sarah. 2015. “The Perpetuation of Neighborhood Reputation: An Interactionist Approach .”   Symbolic Interaction  38(4): 575–593."
"109" "Zimmerman, Don H. 1978. “Ethnomethodology .”   The American Sociologist  13(1): 6–15."
"110" "Zukin , Sharon. 2010.  Naked City: The Death and Life of Authentic Urban Places . New York: Oxford University Press."
"111" "Zukin , Sharon, Philip Kasinit z, and  Xiangming  Chen. 2015. “Spaces of Everyday Diversity: The Patchwork Ecosystem of Local Shopping Streets.”  Pp. 1-28 in  Global Cities, Local Streets: Everyday Diversity from New York to Shanghai , edited by Sharon  Zukin , Philip Kasinitz, and  Xiangming  Chen.  New York: Routledge."
"112" "Notes"
"113" "It is possible that by “healthy people”, Pongal meant white people, but preferred not to use the term when talking to me, a white woman."
