"x"
"1" "The Sleeping Giant  Under  the Peach Tree :"
"2" "A novel explanation for the prominence of the peach in Daoist iconography."
"3" "Will  Ceurvels , China Medical University Department of Classics, Taiwan"
"4" "Abstract:"
"5" "This paper draws on  chinese  folklore,  chinese  medical theory,  chinese   materia   medica  and western ethnobotany and comparative religion to construct a theory of how the common infestation of  ganoderma   lucidum  on peach trees in China would have led to an asso ciation of peach trees with immortality,  daoist  alchemy and the ability to vanquish ghosts and evil spirits. The author goes on to demonstrate how the importance of  ganoderma   lucidum  with regard to immortality, alchemy and exorcism can be understood throug h an analysis of the pathophysiological basis of ghost haunting and  daoist  inner alchemy and the corresponding pharmacological benefit that the fungus confers in relation to these  pathophysiologies ."
"6" "Keywords:  materia   medica ,  chinese  medicine,  daoist  alch emy, peach tree,  ganoderma   lucidum , ling- zhi"
"7" "Tumid, pendulous fruit, swelling with nectarine juice. Branches bent under the heft of blood red ripened drupes, round and  ruddied , suckling sap from the roots. To the ancients no doubt, the peach, whose flowe rs first burst forth from the hoary frost of winters past and usher in the new spring season, would have inspired intimations of the vast productive potential of the natural world recently awakened from its hibernal slumber. As many scholars have noted, th is particular phenotypic display must have contributed in no small part to the singular importance of the peach in  chinese  symbolism. As with any early society, the ancient  chinese  were likely to have fetishized the fruit for its connection to the spring s eason and thus to notions of fertility, rich harvest and so on."
"8" "Yet, the function of the peach in  chinese  semiology goes far beyond mere fertility: the peach, the peach tree and it’s wood confer magic powers connected to  daoist  ascetic, alchemical and s hamanic traditions. The Song Dynasty  Imperial Reader  ( 太平御覽）  cites the pre-Han script  Dian- shu （典術） characterizing the peach tree as, “the greatest of the five woods, the immortal wood, which dispels evil spirits and vanquishes all ghosts. Today people make t alismans from the wood to ward off evil spirits.”   Peach tree wood is also known as “immortal wood” ( 仙木） , “ dragonslayer  wood” （降龍木）  or “ ghostfright  wood” （鬼怖木） . Swords carved from peach wood are utilized by  daoist  practitioners in exorcism ceremonies or pla ced in the household to protect its inhabitants. As early as the Han dynasty, the tradition of hanging a peach tree wood charm on the front door of the household to counteract the resurgence of “Yin” or dark, negative energy (traditionally associated with  the  ghostworld ) following the vernal equinox was widespread."
"9" "In addition to its spirit-warding properties, the peach fruit is also associated with immortality, a primary conquest of the  daoist  adept. The Queen Mother of the West ( 西王母  or “Xi- wang -mu”)  , one if not the highest ranking deity in the pantheon of  daoist  gods is most closely associated with her garden of Peach Trees, the fruit of which is said to confer immortality.  Magu , ( 麻姑 ) the female goddess of longevity, is traditionally pictured carryin g a peach tree branch and the Old Man of the South Pole ( 南極仙翁 ), the male god of longevity, is also nearly always seen carrying an outsized ripened peach."
"10" "Given all this, one must wonder, can the mere fact of the peach tree’s phenotypic association with  “fertility” and “spring” account for its apparently extensive magical and alchemic properties?  daoist  alchemy is fundamentally practical, it is concerned with the use of specific substances and practices to achieve the prolongation of life and the theoreti cal attainment of immortality. Thus, the centrality of the peach in  daoist  iconography would imply that the plant directly confers some medicinal benefit to the practitioner, but from a review of relevant literature it appears that only the sap of the peac h was used by ascetics, and this only in a limited capacity."
"11" "The apparent lack of  spagyric  substances directly associated with the peach tree should not deter us from further investigation. For, a prominent feature of  daoist  texts is their extensive  use of code words and secret language in the  description of alchemic processes. As an example, the  daoist  classic  The Scripture of the Inner Effulgence of the Yellow Court  is a detailed manual of internal alchemy that contains specific meditation practices  for promoting longevity, and yet the names of parts of the body are often coded and unascertainable from the text itself. For instance, “yellow court” is alternately interpreted as the stomach or middle burner （中焦） , as the upper elixir field ( 上丹田   ） or lower  elixir field  （下丹田） . That the main concept in this  daoist  classic is, as a result of the intentional vagueness of the term, open for wide interpretation, speaks to the central importance of coding and secrecy in  daoist  symbolism."
"12" "Could it be, that the pe ach tree is in fact a stand-in for some other object with direct ties to  daoist  alchemy? One of the oldest and most well-known legends regarding the peach tree might just offer an unexpected answer to this question. The Han dynasty classic book of legends  Illustrations of the Motherland  ( 括地圖 ) contains the following story,"
"13" "“On Tao-du Mountain there grew a Peach tree so tall that its high branches  spiralled  into the heavens for thousands of miles. Atop the tree stood a golden cock that announced the break o f dawn and at its trunk two gods named Yu- l ü  and  Shen- shu  who carried whips made of reeds to slay inauspicious spirits and ghosts stood guard.”"
"14" "The centrality of this story in the lore of the peach tree cannot be overstated. The Han dynasty use of peach- wood talismans decorated with the figures of “door god” guardians is attributed directly to this story. Though the talismans are no longer made from peach wood, the door guardians are still a highly prominent decorative feature of the  chinese  household to  this day.  Despite the fact that the “door gods” are one of the most enduring and widespread symbols in all of  chinese  culture, the identity of these two Gods and their association with the peach tree is not well understood mainly because the contents of  I llustrations of the Motherland  survive only in fragmented references found in later tomes. The most popular current theory, based on etymological analysis of the gods’ names along with historical inference holds that the two gods represent the whip of reeds and the tiger god of early Ch ina, both of which were associated with spirit-warding and exorcism.   However, the whip of reeds is already a separate element in the original story, so it would seem odd that one of the gods would also additionally represent the whip of reeds. A more ent icing interpretation comes from an etymological analysis offered by the Song dynasty scholar Luo  Mi  who claimed that the names Shen- shu  and  Yu- l ü   （ 神荼，鬱壘）  were homonyms for two  opposing physical states: Yu - l ü  ( 鬱律） is an old poetic term which alternately refe rs to a powerful volatile force that is being suppressed, the echoes of a deep and muffled rumbling, or the state of being coiled and twisted ,   Shen - shu  ( 伸舒 ) by contrast refers to expansion, release, and unfurling. Taken together, he concluded that the two  gods represented thunder and lightning. This inference is in keeping with the traditional  chinese  understanding of thunder as the outward manifestation of the inward conflict of the opposing forces of yin and yang.  The neo- confucian  classic of metaphysic s  Zhang- zi’s  Correction of the Ignorant  describes thunder as such,"
"15" "“Yin” accumulates and suppresses the natural flow of dynamic Yang energy, the outward-bearing tension of Yang against suppressing Yin eventually culminates in a sudden climacteric dispers ion of Yin which outwardly manifests as thunder."
"16" "Given this description, it seems fairly feasible that the paired concepts of “release” and “suppressed force” could indeed be a coded representation of thunder and lightning. Indeed, Luo  Mi’s  theory was dominant from the Song dynasty onward until all but v ery recently when the Song scholar’s theory was criticized because there seemed to be no apparent connection between thunder and the Peach Tree. Yet, the connection between the peach tree and thunder extends beyond this one legend. In the making of the pea ch-wood swords mentioned earlier, the most valuable and purportedly most potent swords are made from peach-wood that has been struck by thunder. Thus, the notion that thunder somehow imbues the peach tree with magic potency seems to be a consistent and wid espread belief in Chinese culture.  What then is the magical connection between thunder and the peach tree? For students of western ethnobotany, the combination of trees and thunder in the setting of an alchemical or magical context should immediately trig ger certain associations. Take, for instance the oak tree, which is thus described in George Frazer’s comparative religion classic  The Golden Bough :"
"17" "In the religion of the ancient Germans the veneration for sacred groves seems to have held the foremost pl ace, and according to Grimm the chief of their holy trees was the oak. It appears to have been especially dedicated to the god of thunder,  Donar  or  Thunar , the equivalent of the Norse Thor; for a sacred oak near  Geismar , in Hesse, which Boniface cut down i n the eighth century, went among the heathen by the name of Jupiter's oak (_ robur   Jovis _), which in old German would be _ Donares   eih ,_  \"the oak of  Donar .\""
"18" "Frazer goes on to show how the oak tree was worshipped for its connection to the god of thunder thr oughout ancient Europe. As in the case of the Peach tree, the connection to thunder seems arbitrary until we take into consideration the following two facts: 1.) the acidic soil and mycorrhizal networks extending from the oak provide an ideal host for the  hallucinogenic mushroom  amanita  muscaria  or fly agaric, 2.) in the context of religion and magic, the invocation of thunder never entails just thunder - whether it be the Buddhist Vajra or Thor’s hammer, thunder is the catalyst for the production of sacred  mushrooms, the true objects of the alchemist’s pursuit.   Thus, there was nothing arbitrary about the worship of the oak tree in connection to thunder - only the confluence of oak and thunder could reliably produce the mushroom cult’s most sacred object,  the fly agaric mushroom."
"19" "This leads one to wonder, could the frequent synergy of the peach and thunder in Chinese iconography suggest that, like the oak, the real object of veneration is not the tree itself, but a third substance for which the confluence  of the peach and thunder provide the essential conditions? Certainly, the Chinese were well aware of the fact that mushrooms appeared on or near trees following thunderstorms. For instance, the name of a medicinal mushroom that grows on bamboo stumps is c alled simply “thunder ball”. The Qing dynasty  materia   medica  classic  Ben- cao  Chong-yuan  states, “the thunder ball is the excess qi of the bamboo, which coalesces in response to jolts of thunder.” Could then the real object of veneration encoded in the peac h  symbology  be some potent mushroom? A review of the relevant literature yields a fascinating revelation: one of the most common fungi to infect the peach tree is the  ganoderma   lucidum , the mushroom venerated by the  daoists  as the “magic mushroom” or Ling- zhi . ( 靈芝） Additionally,  ganoderma   lucidum   is mostly likely to infect peach trees that have been stressed and exhibit cracks in the bark. Invariably, one such stressor would be damage due to a direct or proximity strike from lightning. Just as  shen-shu  and  yu -lv sit at the trunk of the tree in the  tale of the giant peach tree, peach trees infected with  ganoderma   lucidum  will exhibit fungal fruiting bodies at the base of the tree. Given the fact that the ling- zhi  is one of the most venerated of all  chinese   medicinals  in the  daoist  and  chinese  medical  literature alike, the apparent association of the fungus with the peach could help explain the long-lived veneration of the tree and its fruit."
"20" "If indeed  ganoderma  is the  Ling- zhi  of  daoist  lore, its frequent growth on the peach tree could certainly con tribute to the tree’s elevated status in  daoist  lore. However, many commentators have been hesitant to accept  ganoderma   lucidum  as the true Ling- zhi  despite ample evidence. The experience of western ethnobotany holds that the sacred plants of the west - pe yote,  ayahuasca , cannabis, amanita  muscaria  and so on - are worshipped primarily for their “ entheogenic ” properties, or their ability to engender an experience of  the divine within. These are hallucinogenic, psychogenic substances which directly alter cons ciousness and serve thus as a means of direct communion with the divine.  Ganoderma   Lucidum  while boasting abundant health-conferring properties, is entirely  psychogenically  inert: scientifically speaking, a cup of coffee causes a more pronounced change in  consciousness than this supposedly sacred mushroom. As a result, there is a tendency in the western literature to question the identity of the Ling- zhi  - after all, the sacred plants at the heart of religious ceremony and inner alchemy, they reason, direc tly elevate human consciousness to the plane of the divine and thus a psychologically inactive substance like  ganoderma   lucidum  simply wouldn’t qualify as a sacred plant."
"21" "Yet in  daoist  thought, the path to immortality is, by contrast, in many ways a very  practical and physiological affair. The  daoist  classic  Comprehensive Mirror to Immortals through the Ages  puts it simply, “to become an immortal, one must first take herbs to vanquish the three worms.” ( or  “hidden corpse”( 伏尸）  or “ghost  infixation ”( 鬼疰 )) In  Daoist bel ief, the three worms or corpses  are, to paraphrase Paul  Unschuld , “etiological agents of disease”,  that if not banished, impair the adept in his quest for immortality. In the classic of Chinese medicine  The Origin, Development and Change of Dis ease , describes the hidden corpse as,"
"22" "“ the  product of disease, which causes an imbalance of yin-yang, and a deficiency of the meridians..  leading  to stagnation and fixation (within the viscera) ... lying concealed in the five viscera, they accumulate ove r years, causing bloating, fullness and sharp pain in the abdomen and chest”"
"23" "The ghosts or corpses represent places in the body where the dynamic flow of yang is constricted or interrupted do to a build-up or excess of yin. This is why, for instance, the  pores of the bo dy are called “ghost gates” in  C hinese medicine. The pores excrete this excess buildup of fluid from the body. If this fluid were to remain in the body and become stagnant, it would ever more obstruct the dynamic flow of yang and thus, over  time, become to the  daoist  adept a “ghost  infixation ”. The Ming Dynasty  daoist  scholar and doctor Zhang  Jie-bing , put it simply: “where qi stagnates, ghosts arise”."
"24" "Thus, as interpreted by  chinese  medicine, the three corpses represent nothing more than s tagnations in the viscera and chest - this might translate in modern medicine to atherosclerosis, impaired lymph drainage, buildup of stones in the bladder and kidneys, impaired blood flow in capillary beds and so on. That is to say, in  daoism  the seemingl y transcendental affair of achieving immortality is, in many ways, first a physiological concern. Thus, the Yuan dynasty  daoist  tome  Essentials of the Golden Elixir  holds, “As long as yin stagnation remains within the body, the achievement of immortality i s  impossible.” By contrast, the role of the mind in the adept’s practice is comparatively passive. Effort or engagement of the mind poses a barrier in the pursuit of immortality and is interpreted as having direct  physiological  consequences. Thus,  The Gold en Elixir  continues, “when the mind is still, yang flows unimpeded, but when the mind is consumed with thought, yin accumulates.” As such, it would seem that the hallucinogens listed above, insofar as they produce a profound engagement of the mind, would i n fact be entirely antithetical to the  spagyric  processes of the  daoist  adept. Western commentators have read their own biases into the coded language of  daoist  inner alchemy, and as such have failed to understand the centrality of the body as a vehicle fo r the attainment of immortality and thus the necessity of herbs which address the concrete pathologies which inhibit the  adepts  progress."
"25" "What kind of herbs, then, are most suitable for addressing the physiological impairments of the adept in his alchemi c quest? The celebrated Qing dynasty  materia   medica  scholar Zou Run- an  in his seminal work,  Commentary on the Classic of Materia  Medica  analyzed over 30 herbs used in the treatment of the three corpses and ghost  infixation , he c oncluded:"
"26" "“ to  vanquish the  stagnations which lie deep in the viscera, the herbs should be either 1.)  ethereal  and fast-penetrating, 2.)  brute  and powerful 3.)  aromatic  and pervasive or 4.)  down  bearing and noxious. Such herbs can penetrate through the interstices of the viscera to j olt the long-entrenched pathogens from their deep strongholds.”"
"27" "We can compare this analysis with  Miny  dynasty scholar Lu  Zhi -yuan’s description of the effects of  Ganoderma   in his seminal work Ben- cao  Cheng- ya  Ban- jie  in which he writes, “Once, on  Gu -ling Mountain, I had the great fortune of finding a Ling- zhi . ( ganoderma ) I broke off a piece and held it in my mouth, slowly chewing. As it passed down my throat I felt a cool,  moistness like the slow dispersion of mist. It coiled and  spiralled  through the five viscera as rarefied and pure as  qi  itself. None of the celebrated enriching and supplementing herbs could deliver the same kind of feeling, a mystic, protean, intangible s ensation that seemed to emerge out of nothing and recede without warn. There is great merit to the veneration this potent elixir has enjoyed through the ages.”  As is evident, the description is consistent with several of the qualities mentioned by Zou Run -an -  ganoderma  has an ethereal quality which allows it to penetrate and pervade the deepest interstices of the body unimpeded. Notably, it circulates within the inner viscera of the abdomen, which is the most common site of ghost and corpse fixation. Thus , it is with little surprise that we find commonly attested in the literature the claim that Ling- zhi  “vanquishes the three corpses, lightens the body and leads to immortality” and “treats stagnations of the upper abdomen and over time  lightens the body an d leads to immortality.”  Notably, none of the above descriptions seem to allude to hallucinogenic properties of herbs, which in medical literature is usually described as “causing visions of ghosts and spirits.”"
"28" "Given the tendency of  ganoderma  to grow o n peach trees, and also given the relation of the medicinal mushroom to thunder and ghost vanquishing as demonstrated in the above arguments, it is thus the opinion of the author that the privileged status afforded to the peach tree in the lore of  daoist  l iterature might derive not from the peach tree itself, but from its function as a host for this prized medicinal and sacred herb of the  daoist  adepts.  This essay endeavors to explicate how, when taken in the context of the theory of  chinese  medicine, the g hosts of  daoist  iconography can be interpreted as concrete pathological agents which correlate to specific categories of  chinese   medicinals , of which  ganoderma   lucidum  is undoubtedly a primary member. In light of this discovery, the mystery of the seemingl y innocuous peach tree’s involvement in  daoist  exorcism and ghost vanquishing takes on a new and unexpected light.  This research, was inspired in part by the very fine work of  Delaware Tea Society  and the author hopes that the ideas expressed here might pr ovide some inspiration and new direction for their research."
"29" "Magu  pictured with peach tree and  ganoderma   lucidum ."
"30" "A painting of  ganoderma   lucidum  growing on a peach tree by the empress Ci-xi."
"31" "The door gods of  chinese  lore:  shen-shu  and  yu -lv."
"32" "A  daoist  exorcism sword made from peach tree wood."
