Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number 4. December 2018
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.16

Pp. 221-231

Silence of Thai Students as a Face-Saving Politeness Strategy in a Multicultural University
Context

Eric A. Ambele (Corresponding author)
Department of Western Languages, Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences
Prince of Songkla University, Pattani, Thailand
Yusop Boonsuk
Department of Western Languages, Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences
Prince of Songkla University, Pattani, Thailand
Abstract
Silence as a communicative act in face-to-face spontaneous interaction has been underinvestigated in linguistic politeness research in Thailand. With the recent increase in the influx of
foreign students gaining admission into Thai universities yearly, the result is that such universities
will be a coexistence of cultures. This study therefore aims to investigate the situational face-threat
contexts where Thai students use silence as a politeness strategy. This aim is guided by the main
research question of what different situational face-threat contexts could lead to the use of silence
by Thai students in their foreign-peer interactions in a Thai multicultural university context.
Twenty students’ interactions were sampled using micro-socio-ethnographic technique, with data
from observation, interview, and questionnaire. The main findings revealed that: uncertainty of
language proficiency, expected hurting words from interlocutor, and unexpected negative change
in hearer’s mood, amongst others, were the main circumstances where Thai students use silence
as a face-saving politeness strategy. The findings imply better intercultural awareness in
multicultural university contexts.
Keywords: Foreign-peer interaction, multicultural context, silence, Thai university students
Cite as: Ambele , E.A., & Boonsuk, Y. (2018). Silence of Thai Students as a Face-Saving Politeness
Strategy in a Multicultural University Context. Arab World English Journal, 9 (4), 221-231.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.16

221

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Silence of Thai Students as a Face-Saving Politeness Strategy

Ambele & Boonsuk

Introduction
Silence has been the focal point of pragmatic research interest in the Western Societies within the
last two decades (Tannen & Saville-Troike, 1985; Jaworski, 1997). As one of the most essential
communication signal, silence represents a non-verbal human behaviour. For Hall (1959), silence
represents the cultural beliefs and activities of a given group. To this notion, Hall (1959) and
Lehtonen and Sajavaara (1985) demonstrate that culture and communication are inextricably the
same; culture determines behaviour. If someone wishes to interact with a person from a foreign
culture, he/she should recognise the significance of linguistic and non-linguistic patterns. Silence
can therefore be interpreted as culture-specific (Kurzon, 1998), a multifaceted, complex and
complicated linguistic issue (Basso, 1988; Braithwaite, 1990; Saville-Troike, 1985) because its
interpretation is ambiguous and relies to a greater extent on the socio-cultural norms of the society
in which it is used, and the situational context (Brown & Levinson, 1987; Sifianou, 1997).
Regarding the research context, Thailand, few studies have been found to investigate the use of
silence. To the best of our knowledge, more specifically, research studies investigating the use of
silence as a face-saving politeness strategy among Thai students interacting with their international
friends in a southern Thai university have been scarce.
Lehtonen & Sajavaara (1985) explain that silence as a communication tool can be used to
change the verbal intention to non-verbal channel of communication. To support this, Poyatos
(2002) asserted that ‘‘Linguistics has wasted many research opportunities offered by silence . . .
rarely have linguists referred to silence as a component of interaction’’ (p. 99). It is from this
background that in characterizing the notion of silence, researchers perceive it as part of
communication, as the speaker chooses to express him or herself by silence when it is his or her
turn to talk (Goffman, 1981; Crown & Feldstein, 1985).
Within this study, silence as a face-saving politeness strategy is operationalised within the
situational context of the students, deliberately avoiding or terminating conversation (the absence
of talk or where talk might relevantly occur) with their international peers on campus, in situations
that might threaten the face of the interlocutor if the conversation continues. This study, therefore,
seeks to explore how Thai students (in a multicultural Thai university setting) use silence as a facesaving politeness strategy during peer social interactions on campus.
The relationship between silence and politeness strategy employed by these students, as
well as the different situational contexts (situations which can lead to face threats) wherein these
students use silence as a face-saving politeness strategy in interactions, is also part of the aim of
this study. In other words, considering the fact that silence is a complex and complicated
phenomenon, this paper attempts to discuss in a preliminary way when and why Thai students
(engaging in English communicative interactions) use silence as a face-saving politeness strategy
in order to draw some implications for Thai students’ social interactions in a multicultural
university setting. This research aims will be achieved using the following research questions:
1. How do Thai students use silence as a face-saving politeness strategy in their foreign-peer
interactions?
2. How do different situational contexts influence Thai students’ use of silence when
interacting with their foreign peers?
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

222

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Silence of Thai Students as a Face-Saving Politeness Strategy

Ambele & Boonsuk

Silence and Politeness
It is crucial to investigate the pragmatic function of silence to study the use of silence as a facesaving politeness strategy (Ariel, 2010 and Ambele, 2014). As a politeness strategy, silence can
be used in social interaction to avoid confrontation and disagreement (Jaworski, 1993, 1997;
Sifianou, 1997; Jaworski & Stephens, 1998; Nankane, 2006), whereas the idea of politeness is
based on the concept of face which is a technical concept related to an individual’s public/private
self-image (Yule, 1996). Therefore, politeness can be defined as linguistic expressions that show
awareness of a person’s reputation and create a friendly atmosphere for better communication
(Lynch, 1985; Tannen, 1990; Jaworski, 1993). From this stand point, it is not exaggerated to
conclude that there is a significant relationship between keeping silence and showing politeness
when interaction happens. For clarification, studies have shown how different forms of avoidance
can be adopted as an advantage in problematic discourse. For example, Nankane (2006) argues
that ‘opting out’ from conversation is used strategically by interactants in face-threatening
situations, for example, in using complaints. Likewise, Tannen (1990), Jaworski (1993) and
Buddharat et al. (2017) demonstrate how silence is employed to keep the channel of
communication open, manage conflict and emotional tension, and to lead to or signal an end in
communication between groups of people. For example, intense (verbal) arguments between
friends may jeopardize their relationship, and the avoidance of confrontation through silence may
minimise the potentially damaging effects of an ensue fight. Similarly, being silent for a while is
common in situations preceding the exchange of leave-taking formulae, which are the verbal
markers signalling the end of an interaction. In Thailand, specifically, a study conducted by
Hongladarom & Hongladarom (2005) illustrate that Thais are more likely to utilize silence to
withdraw from disagreement and to prevent their further argument. The finding also showed that
silence among Thais is perceived as a polite nonverbal behaviour which they can minimize face
threat with the hearer.
Sifianou (1997) further explains how silence is used as a face-saving politeness strategy in
multicultural interactions in Greek and English societies based on Brown & Levinson's (1987)
politeness theory. Brown & Levinson (1987) do not focus on silence in their theory. They only
referred to it as "Don’t do the FTAs" without including it in their theory. Brown and Levinson
(1978, 1987) model of politeness theory is principally based on the notion of face as adapted from
Goffman, 1967, as cited in Ambele, 2014. Goffman (1967) defines face as “the positive social
value a person effectively claims for himself by the line others assume he has taken during a
particular contact. Face is an image of self-delineated regarding approved social attributes” (p. 5).
In other words, it refers to a speaker’s reputation, good name, and sense of social identity (Ambele,
2014, p. 17). It is the emotional and social feelings of self that can be lost, damage, maintained, or
enhanced which an individual has and expects others to recognize (Yule, 1996; Brown &
Levinson, 1978, 1987; Odebunmi, 2003). Regarding the definitions of face stated, it can be
concluded that the face is socially or interactively based which exists in response to the presence
of or interactions with others. It is a specific image we present to others; they prefer to be seen in
a certain way by certain groups of people. Therefore, one should be aware of any possible actions
that can pose a threat to a person’s face. In Thailand where this study was conducted, the concept
of “face” also plays a significant role on showing politeness and giving respect in social interaction
(Ukosakul, 2005). Simply put, there is a relationship between face and politeness in Thai culture.
Thais always perceive that maintaining other people’s face is one of the main politeness strategies
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

223

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Silence of Thai Students as a Face-Saving Politeness Strategy

Ambele & Boonsuk

because they often associate the face’s concept to their dignity, self-esteem, prestige, reputation
and pride. Consequently, face is measured as a root value underlying Thai social interactions.
Examples of some politeness strategies that are used to maintain one’s face include indirectness,
avoidance of confrontation or strong criticism, and suppression of negative emotions (Ukosakul,
2005).
According to Brown & Levinson (1978, 1987), face has two specific types of desires:
negative face (the need and the desire not to be imposed upon) and positive face (the need and
desire to be liked, appreciated, affirmed or approved of). They suggest that all verbal activities or
speech in general imply a positive or a negative face threat to either the speaker or the hearer. They
call this strategy "Face Threatening Acts" or (FTAs). To illustrate, FTAs mean that a person may
say something against the expectation of another speaker who is concern with saving his/her public
face. This can be considered as a threat to his/her face (Yule, 1996). In order to redress the potential
threat, the speaker can say something which is called "face saving act" (Yule, 1996). According to
Brown & Levinson (1987, p. 14), FTAs are controlled by three social variables or factors: 'social
distance' between the interlocutors, the ‘relative power’ and the status of imposition that are
involved in FTAs. They propose five strategies in dealing with FTAs which can be illustrated in
Figure 1.

Figure1. Possible strategies for doing FTAs (adapted from Brown & Levinson, 1987)
To explain the above strategies for the purpose of clarity, bald on record strategy is a direct
way, unambiguous, and concise way of an utterance. The speakers say whatever they prefer to say.
Face is ignored or irrelevant here. Bald on record strategy could be expressed by both positive and
negative politeness. The former means the speaker thinks that the listener wishes to be respected:
"Could you please close the window?" The latter, on the other hand, means that the listener wishes
to be respected and the speaker may impose on him/her by asking him/her to do something: "Close
the window". Off-record strategy, on the other hand, is an indirect way of an utterance. The
communicative intention of the act is ambiguous or vague. The speakers say something which is
more general or different from what they mean, for example, “It’s hot in here” to mean: ‘open the
window’ or ‘turn on the fan/AC’.
Arab World English Journal
224
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Silence of Thai Students as a Face-Saving Politeness Strategy

Ambele & Boonsuk

Brown & Levinson (1987) ignored the fifth strategy "Don’t do the FTAs", since it provides
"no interesting reflexes". Sifianou (1997) criticises Brown & Levinson for neglecting "Don’t do
the FTAs" strategy. According to Sifianou (1997), Brown & Levinson (1987) discovered the
relationship between silence and politeness, but they considered silence as lacking in politeness.
Tannen (1985, p. 97) indicates that ‘silence is the extreme manifestation of indirectness’, because
the speaker says nothing but means something. Thus, silence is correlated with off-record
politeness, "because both positive politeness and negative politeness are usually enacted through
the elaboration of redress action" (Sifianou, 1997, p. 73). Sifianou (1997) claims that it is wrong
to ascribe silence to the highest degree of “Don’t do the FTAs", as silence has many functions in
interaction. Silence also manifests positive, negative or off- record politeness (Sifianou, 1997).
Yule (1996, p. 62) refers indirectly to the relationship between silence and politeness through "self
and other: say nothing" strategy. That is, when a person asks for something without uttering a word
he/she depends on others to recognize his/her want (for instance, when someone searches his or
her pockets or bag for a pen and the other person who sits next to him/her offers him/her a pen. In
this event, this person employs silence to avoid a face threatening act).
Methodology
This study adopted a qualitative approach in investigating the research phenomenon.
Participants
The participants in this study were Thai university students studying in an international programme
in a Thai multicultural university in Southern Thailand. The programme is a true representation of
a cross-cultural setting with students from different countries around the world. The Thai students’
social (out-of-class) interaction with their foreign peers is the focus of this investigation. English
is the medium of instruction in this programme and all students admitted, including Thais are
supposed to be fluent in English. The students are between their second and fourth year of study,
thus, assumed to have had enough social interaction in English with each other on campus. The
twenty Thai students whose interactions were considered for analysis in this study were of different
age and gender.
Instruments and procedure
This study adopted a qualitative design. An ethnographic approach was used to answer the research
questions. The study adopted the micro-socio-ethnographic technique which involved an analysis
of small-scale events and processes, such as dyadic communication in social settings (AlHarahsheh, 2012, p. 254). Data for this study was collected through observing Thai students’ social
interactions with their foreign peers in a multicultural university setting, interviews with the
students, and questionnaire to elicit the circumstances in which they use silence as a face-saving
politeness strategy. Before we started collecting the data, the students were given a lecture of about
15 minutes on the topic of investigation to ensure that they understood the research purpose.
The Thai students were informally observed (for one semester) as they interacted with their
foreign peers out of class - during school activities and at lunch times in order to reduce their
uneasiness during interactions. Meanwhile, ethical procedures in data collection were strictly
observed. Within this time, the researchers made field notes of the different observed face threat
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

225

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Silence of Thai Students as a Face-Saving Politeness Strategy

Ambele & Boonsuk

situations where the Thai students chose to be silent (as a face-saving politeness strategy) during
interactions with their foreign peers, and why.
The information from the field notes were used to design the interview questions. The
interview questions focussed only on those observed situations where the Thai students used
silence as a face-saving politeness strategy. The interviews were done within the same day or week
of the observed interaction so that the students can still remember the situation and respond to the
questions appropriately. The students were asked about why they chose silence in these situations,
whether it was just because they didn’t know what to say or because they were trying to save face
or avoid face threat. This was done to validate the field note data. Only responses where the
students said they used silence as a face-saving strategy were considered, and the rest discarded,
in the final analysis.
The responses from the interviews were later grouped into different face threat situations
and used to design the open-ended questionnaire. The questionnaire required the Thai students to
list other circumstances (when) in which they use silence as a strategy to avoid face threat, and
why. This instrument was used here in order to elicit more data from the participants to enrich the
findings. Regarding the questionnaire administration procedure, the researchers met with the 20
Thai students in a study room where the questionnaire was administered, after which they were
submitted to the researchers and their responses used as data for analysis in this study.
Theoretical framework
Politeness as a strategic conflict avoidance (in this case, through silence) has a strong bearing
within Brown & Levinson (1987) face-saving politeness approach. The basic role of politeness is
in “its ability to function as a way of controlling potential aggression between interacting parties,
or in the view of Ide (1989), that connect politeness with smooth communication or that of Leech
(1983, p. 82) which entails avoiding disruption and maintaining social equilibrium and friendly
relations” (Al-Harahsheh, 2012, p. 251). As reported by Al-khatib (2001), Al-Harahsheh (2012)
and Ambele (2014), Brown & Levinson (1978, 1987) politeness approach gets its strength over
other approaches in that its explanation is based on the basic notion of face; which is all about the
self-image that everyone wants to protect and preserve in public. This framework is adopted as the
main theoretical foundation against which the findings from this study will be interpreted. It shows
when and how Thai university students use silence as a face-saving politeness strategy when
interacting with their foreign peers.
Findings and Discussion
The relevance of politeness in conversation cannot be overemphasised because it represents the
strength, or the depth of social interaction between speakers. In generally, conversation should be
based on respect between/amongst participants. Ideally, the degree of politeness between people
who are strangers is higher than that of friends. Strangers tend to produce more assessment or
acknowledgment backchannels than friends do, to show more respect and interest in and for each
other. However, in conversations between friends, the participants have more intimacy or
familiarity and stronger relationships, so they do not feel the need to produce additional assessment
backchannels. Silence is therefore tolerated and acceptable between friends. It is more awkward
between strangers because they are distant and they do not have a strong social interaction.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

226

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Silence of Thai Students as a Face-Saving Politeness Strategy

Ambele & Boonsuk

Apparently, in conversations between friends, there are longer periods of silence than in
conversations between strangers (the focus of this study).
This section sheds light on the different circumstances in which Thai university students in
southern Thailand use silence as a face-saving politeness strategy when interacting with their
foreign peers (be it departmental mates or friends) with the aim to maintain the relationship they
share and keep the conversation flowing. The study found out that the circumstances under which
these students’ recurrently use silence as face-saving politeness strategy are grouped according to
their frequency, into different categories, as will be discussed in the following sub-sections.
Uncertainty of language proficiency
This happens to be the most commonly realised silence strategies among Thai students in general,
especially when they are in situations where they have to communicate with foreigners. To be able
to communicate effectively with other English speakers in the sense that they understand you when
you speak and you understand them implies using the language in accordance with the norms of
grammar and pronunciation, and other conventions of English language usage (Ambele, 2014). As
a result, for fear of making mistakes in English or be judged wrongly as a ‘bad English speaker’
when a discussion is going on, the Thai student preferred to stay quiet. It should be noted here that
the silence is not as a result of no knowledge on the topic under discussion but simply for fear of
poor proficiency, as well as lack of confidence.
Expected hurting words from interlocutor
Silence (the deliberate avoidance of talk) is also considered a speech act because it entails not
saying something with words but doing something at the same time with action. The Thai students
in this study indicated this as one of the most common circumstances in which they employ silence
in their interactions with their foreign peers. To them, if a conversation has been going on
smoothly, and suddenly the speaker switched into something personal, such as, physical
appearance (e.g. ‘how do I look?’) that will demand their personal opinion, then, they will be silent
since he/she knows that what he/she will say (like ‘you have a weird hair style’) will hurt (threaten)
the face of the foreign peer.
Unexpected change in the hearer’s mood/tone/gestures with negative implication
Depending on the discourse topic (example in 4.1), the discourse participants most at times change
their mood especially when the discussion that used to please them, no longer interest them. For
instance, during one of the interviews with the Thai students, most of them said once they were
happily engaged in a seemingly interesting discussion with their foreign peers, say, about their
brilliant performances in one of their courses, then, a foreign friend asked them about their grade
in another course, they suddenly change their smile into a gloomy face; however pretending not to
have understood the question. This calls for a further repeat of the question as a reluctant-torespond technique. With this unexpected change in their (Thai students) mood/tone /gestures, they
stay quiet and never respond to the question for fear of saying something else which might cause
the friends (foreign students) to lose face in public.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

227

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Silence of Thai Students as a Face-Saving Politeness Strategy

Ambele & Boonsuk

Expected quarrel/fight during interaction
From the data, the students here say that some of their conversations with their foreign peers
(especially among competitors) sometimes end in a quarrel/fight. In order to avoid this impending
situation of a quarrel that may even end up leading to a fight, the Thai students stay silent, giving
a deaf ear to whatever the other person is saying. This, they adopt from a popular saying “that the
best answer to a fool is silence.” In another light, this can also be interpreted as a situation where
different cultural practices come into play.
Defenceless situations
This refers to a situation in which the Thai student is vulnerable to utter words that is facethreatening to their foreign peers in a discussion where the speaker enjoys and wishes it continues.
In such situations, the Thai students vehemently stay silent and just smile. Example of such
defenseless situation is when a European foreign peers wants to talk about sex (openly) with a
Muslim Thai student.
Unintelligent discussion where speaker’s presence is imperative
During a conversation of general interest, for instance, tourist sites in Thailand or food that is loved
to be talked about by all, some Thai students take the issue too personal (especially when their
foreign peer misrepresent Thailand or her culture in the discussion) that they no longer make sense
in whatever is said. In this case, the Thai students stay quiet. Their silence here is not because they
could not engage in the conversation, but is strategically use to avoid a situation where they could,
in the process of correcting and clarifying the misrepresented information publicly to their foreign
peers, get them angry. In this face threat situation, they simply stay silent to give the foreign peers
the impression that his/her opinion is okay.
Fear of correcting a senior student in public
This strategy was observed in a small discussion group where a senior international student was
explaining a concept to junior Thai students without knowing that one of these junior Thai students
has a good mastery of the said concept. After his explanation, he asked if he did a good job as a
way of assessing himself. All the junior students hailed his good oratory skill with words of praises
(like, ‘it was a forensic explanation’), excluding one who just stayed quiet, as we observed and
recorded in the field note. When we met him during the interview session and requested to know
why he stayed quiet and did not hailed the senior student like the others, he said ‘because the
senior student completely went off topic in his explanation and since I could not publicly correct
him for fear of being rude, I stayed quiet’.
Speaker’s desire not to be interrupted
This strategy was commonly realised among these Thai students especially when engaged in a
group discussion or public discussion with their foreign peers. Contributions to the discussion is
done through conversation, turn after turn by each discourse participants. When it is an individual’s
turn to speak, no matter what the speaker is saying, according to the principle of conversation,
until he/she ends (conversation closing), then, can no one interrupt, except otherwise permitted by
the speaker. Any attempt at interrupting when someone is speaking is considered impolite and
rude, which is usually face-threatening as it is not only imposing on the speaker to stop but showing
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

228

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Silence of Thai Students as a Face-Saving Politeness Strategy

Ambele & Boonsuk

dislike for what the speaker is saying. As a way of avoiding this situation, the Thai students say
they use silence.
Conclusion
Silence is practiced in conjunction with embarrassment to indicate hesitation and interruption.
Interruption, as a cultural practice, is unwelcomed by Thais, more so students, in conversations,
whether the interlocutors are friends or strangers as the general Thai society is one that views
politeness positively. The interrupted speaker may ask the interrupter to give him/her a chance to
complete his or her turn. For example, he/she may say, ‘I am still speaking’, ‘please listen,’ ‘do
not interrupt me’. Silence is therefore an indication of politeness to the current speaker while
he/she is talking. Also, silence as a face-saving politeness strategy was principally realised by these
students in order to show respect and strengthen social rapport, as well to guarantee the
continuation of the conversation. Moreover, the speaker may not have the desire to repeat him or
herself for fear of expected and unexpected face threats. This enables the speaker to think of what
to say next. Interestingly, the interlocutor tolerates this silence and hesitation, which are better than
dealing with infelicities. Again, in another light, silence can be used in conjunction with hesitation
in order to avoid infelicities that may disrupt the conversation or threatened the interlocutor’s selfimage. The speaker therefore keeps silent for a while for fear of not expressing ideas about which
he/she may not be sure of, because he/she aims to produce a planned and processed discourse,
which is faultless. Therefore, silence can also be used as a strategy in social interaction to avoid
confrontation and disagreement. The findings in this study corroborated with previous
investigations on the different circumstances in which people exhibit positive politeness during
interactions. Overall, besides being shy, exhibited by most Thais usually through overt silence, as
a part of the Thai culture, in this study, however, Thai university students use silence as a positive
politeness face-saving strategy when they interact in English with their foreign peers in a
multicultural university setting. The findings from this study have potential implication for sociocultural awareness, thus, avoidance of such face-threat circumstances for better social interactions.
About the Authors
Eric A. Ambele is an English lecturer in the Department of Western Languages, Faculty of
Humanities and Social Sciences, Prince of Songkla University. He is also a PhD candidate at King
Mongkut’s University of Technology Thonburi. His research interest focuses on Language
Variation in Discourse, World Englishes, and Innovative Research Methodology.
ORCid ID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2206-8746
Dr. Yusop Boonsuk is now working as an English lecturer in the Department of Western
Languages, Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, Prince of Songkla University. His research
interest focuses on World Englishes, English as a Lingua Franca, English as an International
Language, Sociolinguistics, English Language Teaching, Language Beliefs, Attitudes, and
Identity. ORCid ID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3923-6163

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

229

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Silence of Thai Students as a Face-Saving Politeness Strategy

Ambele & Boonsuk

References
Al-Harahsheh, A. M. A. (2012). The Perception and Practice of Silence in Australian and
Jordanian Societies: A Socio-pragmatic Study. PhD, Edith Cowan University, Perth,WA.
Al-Khatib, M. A. (2001). The Pragmatics of Letter-writing. World Englishes, 20(2), 179-200.
Ambele, A. E. (2014). Sex Differences and the Politeness Principle in Cameroon’s Media.
Saarbrucken, Germany: Lambert Academic Publishing.
Areil, M. (2010). Defining Pragmatics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Basso, K.H. (1988). “Speaking with names”: Language and landscape among the Western
Apache. Cultural Anthropology, 3(2), 99-130.
Brown, P., & Levinson, B. (1978). Universals of Language: Politeness Phenomena, in E. Goody
(Ed.), Questions and Politeness. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brown, P. & Levinson, S. (1987). Politeness: Some Universals in Language Usage. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Braithwaite, C. (1990). Communicative silence: A cross-cultural study of Basso's
hypothesis. Cultural communication and intercultural contact, 321-327.
Buddharat, C., Ambele, E., & Boonsuk, Y. (2017). Uncooperativeness in Political Discourse:
Violating Gricean Maxims in Presidential Debate 2016. Songklanakarin Journal of Social
Sciences and Humanities, 23(3), 179-216.
Crown, C. L. & Feldstein, S. (1985). Psychological correlates of silence and sound in
conversational interaction. Perspectives on Silence, 31-54.
Goffman, E. (1981). Forms of talk. University of Pennsylvania Press.
Goffman, E. (1967). Interaction Ritual. Garden City, New York: Doubleday.
Hall, E. T. (1959). The Silent Language. New York: Doubleday.
Hongladarom, K. & Hongladarom, S. (2005). Politeness in Thai computer-mediated
communication. In R. T. Lakoff and S. Ide. (eds.). Broadening the horizon of linguistic
politeness. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company. 145-162.
Ide, S. (1989). Formal forms and discernment: Two neglected aspects of universals of linguistic
politeness. Multilingua-journal of cross-cultural and interlanguage communication, 8(23), 223-248.
Jaworski, A. (1993). The Power of Silence: Social and Pragmatic Perspectives. Sage Publications,
Newbury Park, CA.
Jaworski, A. (1997). Silence: Interdisciplinary Perspectives. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin.
Jaworski, A. & Stephens, D. (1998). Self-reports on silence as a face-saving strategy by people
with hearing impairment. In International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 8(1), 61-80.
Kurzon, D. (1998). Discourse of Silence. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Leech, G. N. (1983). Principles of Pragmatics. London: Longman.
Lethonen, J. & Sajavaara, K. (1985). The Silent Finn. In D. Tannen & M. Saville-Troike (Eds.),
Perspectives on Silence (193-204). Norwood: Ablex Publishing Corporation.
Lynch, F.R. (1985). Affirmative Action, the Media & the Public: A Look at a “Look-Away”
Issue. American Behavioral Scientist, 28(6), 807-827.
Odebunmi, A. (2003). Pragmatic features of English usage in hospital interactions amongst
medical practitioners and patients in Southwestern Nigeria. Unpublished PhD thesis. IleIfe.
Poyatos, F. (2002). Nonverbal Communication Across Disciplines: Paralanguage, kinesics,
silence, personal and environmental interaction (Vol. 2). John Benjamins Publishing.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

230

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Silence of Thai Students as a Face-Saving Politeness Strategy

Ambele & Boonsuk

Saville-Troike, M. (1985). “The Place of Silence in an Integrated Theory of Communication”. In
D. T. a. M. Saville-Troike (Ed.), Perspectives on Silence (3-18). Norwood: Ablex
Publishing Corporation.
Sifianou, M. (1997). Silence and Politeness. In A. Jaworski (Ed.), Silence Interdisciplinary
Perspectives (63-85). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter & Co.
Tannen, D. (1990), August. Rethinking power and solidarity in gender and dominance. In Annual
Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics Society, 16(1), 519-529.
Tannen, D. (1985). Silence: anything but. In: Tannen, D., Saville-Troike, M. (Eds.), Perspectives
on Silence. Ablex, Norwood, NJ, 93-111.
Tannen, D. & Saville-Troike, M. (1985). Perspectives on Silence. Ablex, Norwood, NJ.
Ukosakul, M. (2005). The significance of ‘face’ and politeness in social interaction as revealed
through Thai ‘face’ idioms. In R. T. Lakoff and S. Ide. (eds.). Broadening the horizon of
linguistic politeness. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Yule, G. (1996). Pragmatics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

231

