Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.5

Pp. 55- 67

The “Communicative Circle” Method in Teaching English at a University
Elena Suvorova
Foreign Languages for Engineering Chair Institute of Humanities,
Nosov Magnitogorsk State Technical University,
Magnitogorsk, Russia
Tatyana Ahmetzyanova
Foreign Languages for Engineering Chair Institute of Humanities,
Nosov Magnitogorsk State Technical University,
Magnitogorsk, Russia
Kseniya Zharova
Foreign Languages for Engineering Chair Institute of Humanities,
Nosov Magnitogorsk State Technical University,
Magnitogorsk, Russia
Abstract
The article analyses the problems arising in teaching English at a technical university, offers and describes a new
integrated method of teaching listening, reading and speaking called the Communicative Circle method. The
development of the pragmatic, integrated method of Communicative Circle builds upon the linguo-didactic, integrated,
and activity approaches, and the theory of three levels of awareness of learning. These perspectives are reflected in
the integration of listening, reading and speaking skills, three stages of teaching, regarding the psychological phases
of awareness of the studied material, and the choice of tasks according to the students’ abilities, basic skills and the
tempo of learning. In the course of study students are gradually offered more complicated tasks for training speaking
and texts for reading and listening, and the whole teaching process builds upon broadening some professional and
scientific knowledge of students at a technical university. The efficiency of the developed Communicative Circle
method is verified in the course of a two-year experiment. The results of teaching by the traditional program
(developed on the basis of the Federal State Standards) and by the method of the Communicative Circle are compared
and evaluated. The article concludes a greater efficiency of the developed method which reveals itself in higher
English proficiency, confidence, and wider professional purview of the students who were taught by the
Communicative Circle method.
Key words: activity approach, the Communicative Circle method, integration of speech activities, listening, reading
and speaking skills development, three levels of awareness

Cite as: Suvorova, E., Ahmetzyanova, T., & Zharova, K. (2019) The “Communicative Circle”
Method in Teaching English at a University. Arab World English Journal, 10 (2) 55- 67.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.5

55

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The “Communicative Circle” Method in Teaching English

Suvorova, Ahmetzyanova & Zharova

Introduction
Nowadays, the problem of the communication skills development has received much attention in
a vast variety of scientific fields starting from preparing students whose communication skills
would be in demand on the labor market (Suarta, Suwintana, Sudhana, & et.al., 2017) and finishing
with the communication skills necessary to master a foreign language (Tavil, 2010). The paper
focuses on the last-mentioned problem. Unfortunately, nowadays, Russian technical universities
often come across the necessity to teach students having only basic skills of English. This problem
is not unique, as the same problem is mentioned by the teachers from other countries (Muslem,
Gani, Usman & et.al., 2018; Hubackova, 2012). As our teaching practice shows, the main problem
is connected with the basic speech skills involved both in students’ comprehending English
language texts and dwelling upon them.
While reading and listening are considered to be the two receptive skills in language
learning and use, writing and speaking are the two productive skills necessary to be integrated in
the development of effective communication (Giang & Tuan, 2018). Without excluding writing
from the training process, the main emphasis is made on three main types of verbal skills: listening,
reading and speaking, as, firstly, their use implies a quicker reaction from a listener/ reader/ speaker
(writing is usually prolonged in time) and as, a consequence, causes greater difficulty when
training, and, secondly, they are more often applicable to professional communication.
Our 25-year experience of teaching students at Nosov State Technical university shows
that the reasons underlying the students’ poor command of various speech skills can be:
- the inability of students to listen and comprehend original texts without textual support (a fast
speech, an accent, and, sometimes, a speech impediment has an influence on the correctness
of the comprehension of an unaccustomed listener);
- the inability of students to retell or dwell upon original foreign texts right after reading\
listening them or to speak upon a new topic right after its introduction for further discussion
(the lack of grammar knowledge and small basic vocabulary prevent students from fluent and
confident speaking);
- the inability of students to comprehend original technical, scientific and educational English
texts (as for the first and second year students, the problem seems to be especially urgent, as
their lack of professional knowledge only adds to the problem);
- the lack of knowledge about the peculiarities of the scientific and technical stylistics of the
original texts;
- the lack of knowledge of the grammar peculiarities used in original technical, educational and
scientific texts (it is obvious, that grammar as well as stylistics can be specific regarding these
types of texts) [Potrikeeva, Ahmetzyanova & Suvorova, 2018].
The scale of the abovementioned problems is different and, thus, needs different solutions.
Thus, the last three reasons can be integrated into one, caused by the lack of knowledge in the
professional field that results into difficulties in understanding aggravated by the complexities
connected with the special technical grammar and style. Overcoming these difficulties is possible
if students are involved into educational activities forming their professional view on the future
specialty and what it involves. These activities can include educational video films and clips, that
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

56

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The “Communicative Circle” Method in Teaching English

Suvorova, Ahmetzyanova & Zharova

prove to be efficient in teaching English (Masruddin, 2018; Safranj, 2015), and interesting
scientific, educational and later professional texts broadening students’ professional purview.
The first two reasons concern the lack of experience in listening, reading and speaking
English. This problem is solved in close link with the methods used to eliminate students’
professional incompetence. The involvement of students in various types of activities close to real
life allows them to form not only competence, creativity but also confidence in public English
speaking. According to the recent research, confidence, creativity, and speaking competence are
the key aspects of communication improvement (Boonkit, 2010). Confidence and competence
usually lead to strengths of English speaking skills. Building up the learner’s confidence to
eliminate fear of making errors is a priority that the teacher should consider in order to make the
learner feel comfortable with their language use. Confidence and competence in speaking can be
developed by appropriate methods of teaching, a variety of teaching materials (video and audio
files, properly selected texts, and tasks, based on real life situations).
In response to the abovementioned reasons, the Communicative Circle method has been
developed. Its main idea is to organize training of listening, reading and speaking skills according
to three stages, on which students gradually improve their comprehension of English audio/ video
and written texts and train to make their own utterances.
Literature Review
The search for the optimal ways of teaching technical university students to comprehend and later
make their own utterances on the basis of the read\ listened texts has resulted in the choice of the
linguo-didactic approach, forming the framework of the pragmatic, integrative Communicative
Circle method.
The idea of the Communicative Circle method development bases upon the research, which
suggests an idea of hermeneutic circle in the domain of communicative language education of
younger school children [Mishanova, 2011]. The practice of the use of the hermeneutic circle
method seems rather simple. The analysis of the content of any text includes exhaustive replies to
the questions: Who created the text? What is the text about? What is the reason of the text creation?
What linguistic means translate the theme and the idea of the text? Regarding the method, students,
at first, search for answers to the given questions under a teacher’s supervision, and, then,
following the set algorithm and, relying upon the answers, form a “skeleton” of the text analysis,
determining the content of the text comprehension activities. The developed method of
comprehending texts, as the teaching practice of Mishanova (2011) shows, significantly influences
the development of the qualitative skills of the text reproduction, as the younger students make
their own utterances, demonstrating clear understanding of the aim and the idea of the utterance,
as well as the conscious choice of language elements from different strata of the language system.
Unfortunately, it is impossible to use the hermeneutic circle method in teaching students a
foreign language at a technical university as they possess only basic language skills and are unable
to work with complex texts without various types of support (starting from preliminary work with
the vocabulary of the text and finishing by the translation of the text and a teacher’s supervision).
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

57

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The “Communicative Circle” Method in Teaching English

Suvorova, Ahmetzyanova & Zharova

Nevertheless, the idea of the hermeneutic circle as an algorithm of work with questions and
answers to a text is applied to the development of the method of the Communicative circle.
Communicative competence grows only in the integration of listening, reading and
speaking skills (Tavil, 2010). That is why, teaching English implies the development of the main
verbal skills to form the experience of producing oral and written utterances without a teacher’s
supervision. The term “integrated skills” is frequently used as if it were almost synonymous with
reinforcement. Viewed in this way, the process of integrating verbal skills involves linking them
together in such a way that “what has been learnt and practiced through the exercise of one skill is
reinforced and perhaps extended through further language tasks which bring different skills into
use» (Tavil, 2010, p. 765).
When selecting a leading type among language activities, the rest activities should also be
included in the teaching process, providing a qualitative support for the development of the leading
skills. Thus, listening activity should necessarily be accompanied by reading and translation of the
original texts, as well as making up dialogues and utterances on the studied topics. In this regard,
we cannot distinguish between these types of activities as between active and passive ones. For
example, listening comprehension is anything but a passive activity. It is a complex, active process
in which the listener must discriminate between sounds, understand vocabulary and grammatical
structures, interpret stress and intonation, retain what was gathered in all of the above, and interpret
it within the immediate as well as the larger sociocultural context of the utterance. In other words,
listeners need to be active processors of information (Kök, 2014).
It’s obvious, that in order to teach students to retell or speak on texts they should keep on
practicing speaking and reading skills, learning various grammar constructions, mastering the
necessary vocabulary and language means, and learning about the composition of texts of various
language nature, etc. The essence of the Communicative Circle method lies in the use of the basic
skills that serve as the foundation for the further complex development of all the verbal skills
regarding the leading language activity. The major point in teaching students English has become
the elaboration of the algorithm of work with the text to be comprehended and reproduced. The
algorithm involves defining the key vocabulary of the topic, the key vocabulary of the main idea,
the central grammar constructions, framing the topic and the idea of the text, and the language
means connecting the parts of the text.
The Communicative Circle is called a pragmatically-oriented, integrative method due to
several reasons:
Firstly, the main means in the course of teaching is a technical text related to the future
profession of the students (in our university practice, the texts are related to metallurgical, cokechemical production, building, architecture, power engineering, etc. specialties). Reading
technical scientific English texts, students get familiar with the specificities of the chosen
profession and the practice of the production processes at foreign and domestic enterprises, gain
experience communicating on general professional topics. Thus, the Communicative Circular
method gains pragmatic features.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

58

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The “Communicative Circle” Method in Teaching English

Suvorova, Ahmetzyanova & Zharova

Secondly, in the course of study students demonstrate different levels of skills in various
types of foreign language activities, and, regarding the motivation, get to different stages of
professional foreign language mastership. As a consequence, motivation and the proper
atmosphere become vitally important. Motivation serves as a main stimulus for self-determined
activity aimed at achieving new stages in mastering comprehension and speaking skills, while
atmosphere plays a major role in the development of the key aspects of the improvement of
speaking skills: confidence, creativity, and speaking competence (Boonkita, 2010). It is vital for
the teachers to create the right classroom climate for learning: raising students’ expectations;
developing a rapport with students; challenging students to participate and take risks (Gross &
Sonnemann, 2017)
Thirdly, the factor of the individual progress in mastering a foreign language should also be
taken into consideration (the skip in foreign language proficiency can be different regarding the
level of basic skills at the beginning and the level of advanced skills at the end of the educational
process). It means that the estimation of the progress in the achievement of pragmatic educational
purposes is individual in every case, and the educational process itself acquires an individual
differential approach. Differential training focuses on the improvement of the teaching outcome
by arranging the pedagogical work (setting of educational goals; selecting educational content,
forms and methods of teaching) according to the individual peculiarities of students (their interests,
creativity, proficiency, trainability, performance, etc.). Well thought-out implementation of
differentiation in the educational process allows solving the following tasks: to prevent gaps in
knowledge and skills of students; to align the level of training of the whole class; to develop the
abilities and interests of students; to improve the quality of knowledge; to use learning time of
each student more efficiently; to engage all students in active, intense mental activity; to bridge
the gap between the teaching methods and individual character of knowledge. For the
differentiation of the training implementation it is necessary: to clarify and specify what criteria,
abilities, knowledge, and skills will be used in the course of the differentiated training; to develop
or use ready-made tasks, assignments, tests, allowing differentiation of students by the chosen
criteria; to use differentiated tasks, assignments, exercises, taking into account the results of the
preliminary diagnosis of students; in case, the certain students obviously cannot cope with a
differentiated task or it is too simple for them, it is necessary to transfer the student to a stronger
or ,conversely, to a weaker group; to create, organize and continuously improve the "differentiated
tasks bank" according to the selected criteria, ability, skills, using tasks-cards, slides, computer
programs. Application of the differential approach during English lessons allows diversifying the
forms and methods of work with children, increasing the motivation of students, creating a
situation of success for weak students, and, most importantly, improving the quality of foreign
language teaching.
In the fourth place, regarding the theory of interrelated reasoning and speech (Leontyev,
2005; Zimnnyaya, 2001; Gnevek, 2013), the educational process, involving teaching listening and
speaking on the basis of a read\ listened text, looks like a conscientious intellectual foreign
language analysis of an utterance structure in compliance with the psycholinguistic law: the first
part of an utterance is a theme (content of the speech), the second part is a rheme (the purpose of
the utterance). The conscientious analysis of the theme and rheme allows identifying the key
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

59

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The “Communicative Circle” Method in Teaching English

Suvorova, Ahmetzyanova & Zharova

vocabulary, the auxiliary components, and the linking words. Besides, the detailed analysis focuses
students’ attention on the peculiarities of the used grammar constructions.
In the fifth place, the Communicative Circle method rests upon the activity approach, it
provides with the idea of the development of listening, comprehension and speaking skills in the
real life activity. The organization of cognitive work at the identification of the highly generalized
structure of any speech seems to be essential and fundamental for the described method of the
Communicative Circle. According to Leontyev (2005), the structure of the speech activity looks
like a structure of a reproduction mechanism. It can be filled with some specific content, and
comprise the ability to define the idea of the text and the used set of the linguistic means to translate
the idea. In the frame of the activity approach to the development of various types of speech
activities, the interrelation of language, speech and reasoning defined by Zimnyaya (2001) seems
to be the most relevant. According Zimnyaya’s studies, speech is a way, while language is a means
of articulating a thought in communication.
And the sixth, the discussed method of the Communicative Circle involves three levels of
cognition that reflect three main functions of the speech production mechanism. The process of
transforming the functions of the speech mechanism into concrete verbal skills becomes clear with
revealing of the content of the mechanism action.
The primary function of mastering some arbitrary ways of studying is called synergy. At
the intellectual level the synergy development looks like assessing operations of empirical
generalization, empirical abstraction, empirical participation, prototypes of the operations of
analysis and synthesis, i.e. operations of empirical differentiation and analogy. At the speech level
the development of synergy reveals itself in the primary speech experience, i.e. the ability to from
words - sentences, basic grammar models of collocations and sentences, as well as wordspredicates, reflecting the linguistic world image. Then, the situation with the arbitrary ways of
learning to speak undergoes a quality change in the course of gaining experience. It is the stage of
hierarchization of the learned means of speaking, and the creation conceptual links between the
used linguistic means. The conscientious control over the course of learning implies setting
intermediate purposes of study and their correction in response to the academic results.
The second function to be discussed is conceptualization, in other words, the conscientious
hierarchization of the separate learning process components into the whole structure. In the course
of conceptualization primary operations of generalization, abstraction, and participation do not
only develop, but also become the means of conducting analysis and synthesis, which belong to
the highly intellectual operations. In the process of the development of the inner speech mechanism
the operation of synthesis develops quicker than the operation of analysis.
Regarding the content of the learning process, the corrective function of learning can be
called “categorization”. The development of this function results into reorganization of the
hierarchy of the leading functions, thus, the prediction analysis starts dominating over the
prediction synthesis, resulting in mastering both the skills. Thus, categorization becomes
simultaneous mastering of skills going from the general to the special, and vice versa.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

60

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The “Communicative Circle” Method in Teaching English

Suvorova, Ahmetzyanova & Zharova

The theory of three levels of cognition allows considering any process of verbal skills
development from the perspective of:
• gradual accumulation of language means and verbal clichés on a given topic;
• subsequent awareness of the conceptualization, systematization and further use of the
formed language skills in practice,
• application of the gained experience in various types of foreign language activities.
In spite of the fact that the reliance on the theory of three levels of cognition looks like an activityoriented gradual education, it has some distinctions. According to the theory of three levels of
cognition, students achieve the third level of study under supervision of a teacher. On the contrary,
the Communicative Circular method suggests that students master the generalized verbal skills
and separate verbal skills (such as reading, listening, and speaking skills) independently. Such an
approach allows considering the Communicative Circular method to be also a diagnostic method
of the language proficiency according to the abovementioned levels of cognition.
The Communicative Circle Method
The novelty of the Communicative Circle method lies in the integration of the abovementioned
theories. In practice, the Communicative Circle method works in the following way. The
organization of teaching listening/reading and speaking is conducted in three interrelated stages.
In the first stage, a teacher uses scientific, professional and educational films and texts to teach
listening and reading. Before watching or reading the films, students learn some key words and
train basic grammar that is later used in the texts. Thus, a teacher, firstly, eliminates some
difficulties of understanding a text in a foreign language, simplifying its comprehension. And,
secondly, a teacher trains and reviews the studied material, allowing students to remember the
material better.
The films/ texts may demonstrate various production processes (relevant to the students’
future profession), describe scientific discoveries, tell about various interesting scientific facts and
so on. All the films have subtitles, while texts for reading may have only few references to words
or grammar constructions. A teacher may comment on the difficult grammar constructions and the
language means of connecting the parts of the text. Students have to translate the subtitles into
their native language, define the topic and the idea of the text, and the lexical and grammatical
means of the topic and idea description. As for the texts to be read, students may read them aloud
or to themselves. Then, students make tasks, based on understanding of the texts. In this stage, the
following tasks can be used: select the key words relevant to the production process, put the stages
of the production process in the right order, answer some questions to the text, etc. Afterwards,
they make a dialogue in English, disclosing the content of the film. Finally, students make a
retelling of the listened/read material or prepare their own utterance on the basis of the content of
the film. They also receive a home assignment to find and share with the classmates the news or
any other interesting information that concerns the work of the enterprises that use the discussed
production processes in their shops, or any other relevant information that can cause their
classmates’ interest. Besides, as a supplementary technique, the method of projects is of great use.
Students voice short films and video clips on the topic of the production technologies or prepare
videos supplied with their comments in English. Except for the films, the listening course is
complemented by some English educational texts or articles on the studied topic.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

61

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The “Communicative Circle” Method in Teaching English

Suvorova, Ahmetzyanova & Zharova

According to the theory of interrelated reasoning and speech, in this stage students master
the operations of empirical generalization, abstraction, participation, they learn to analyse and
synthesise the material, i.e. to master the operations of empirical differentiation and analogy. They
demonstrate the ability to make simple utterances, using basic grammar models and collocations.
In this phase of education, students cannot inference any implicit sense (Suvorova & Polyakova,
2018; Emets, Baryshnikova, Trutnev, & et. al, 2018) and, as a consequence, texts should not
include any implicit information and do not require any direct answers to the questions put to the
texts.
Getting to the next level of study depends on upgrading of the basic students’ listening
skills, andit is not simultaneous for all the students in a group. That is why, students, having low
proficiency in English, work according to the strategies used in the first stage of training, their
work is supervised by a teacher, while the students, having a better command of listening, work
independently: translating the texts they listen to; putting questions to texts and answering them;
preparing utterances on the topic of the texts. Working with students who have different levels of
knowledge and skills, a teacher has to differentiate the work within the group. In this case,
language lab is the most efficient technical means that can help a teacher in his work with the
students. The beginning of the second stage of teaching listening starts with the students’ wish to
refuse from the textual support when listening to an English text. At this moment, students are
ready to comprehend texts relying upon their own knowledge. The tasks given in this stage of work
are more creative and require better English competence. A teacher can demonstrate students a
picture of a production process and ask them to guess what it is, he/ she can also give students
some key words and ask them to describe a production process, using the given key words and,
then, ask the rest of the students to guess about the described production process (the task can be
presented in a form of a team work or a competition). Before listening/ reading a text, students
may be asked to learn a selective range of words, and a teacher can explain and train some grammar
constructions relative to the text. In this stage, students are expected to know the basic grammar
constructions and to understand some more complicated ones (the constructions in the Passive
Vice, the Gerundial, Infinitival and Participial constructions, and the Complex Subject and
Complex Object grammar constructions). Thus, students are being prepared to listen to English
texts basing upon their own vocabulary and using the known grammar constructions.
After listening, the students can be asked to describe a demonstrated production process,
or make their comments on the efficiency of the production process / suggest their own ways of
its improvement or upgrading. Thus, students pass over to the next stage of mastering English
speaking skills. In this stage, the primary operations of generalization, abstraction, and
participation do not only develop, but also become the means of conducting the basic analysis and
synthesis operations, which reveals itself in the ability not only to understand the text but to dwell
upon it, schematizing and analyzing the received knowledge. Now students are already able to
comprehend implicit senses and inference them (Suvorova & Polyakova, 2018), but they are not
yet ready to code the implicit information.
The situation with reading is a bit different, as this skill does not require so much effort as
listening. In this stage, students are asked to comprehend more difficult texts than in the previous
stage. The more complicated texts differ in the choice of words, grammar constructions and tasks
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

62

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The “Communicative Circle” Method in Teaching English

Suvorova, Ahmetzyanova & Zharova

given to these texts. Thus, students can be asked to match some headings and passages of a text,
but the headings can imply some implicit information. A task can be to fill in the gaps, without
giving the list of the proper words to complete the task.
In the third stage of training, the students start working with the text right after listening to
it, without preliminary work with the vocabulary of the text and the translation of the subtitles.
They already possess the necessary vocabulary to comprehend texts without any other additional
work with them. That is why, the work with the texts rests upon creative tasks, connected both
with training listening and speaking skills and the appliance of the received knowledge in practice.
The tasks given to students in this stage are: to simultaneously interpret the recorded texts, to
prepare a presentation of a production process in English, to take part in a scientific conference
with a report in English or prepare an article in English on a professional topic. In this stage,
students are required to demonstrate not only their English language proficiency, but their skills to
think in English and translate from their native language into English and vice versa without any
difficulties. The teaching process goes from the general to the special, which requires the
knowledge of the professional terminology (in particular, the synonymic and antonymic chains,
the distinct terms of some special technological processes or products, etc.) as well as the transfer
of the terminology from the passive vocabulary (when the terms are recognized but not used in
own utterances) into an active one (when the terms are used in a fluent English speech).
As our practice shows, only 30-35% of students get to the third level of listening, 59-60%
of the rest students manage to get to the second stage of the educational program, and only 3-11
% of students do not achieve any progress in listening.
Teaching speaking with the support of a text is carried out also in three stages. In the first
stage, students are trained to retell the text that they have just read or listened only after learning
the necessary vocabulary and with the support of the key words and a plan of retelling. The
beginning of the second stage is teaching students to review and analyses the read articles or
lectures integrated into one topic. It means, that students do not use any plan of speaking or
retelling. They get experience of fluent speaking without any textual support, but the students can
be informed about the topic of the discussed text, and are given time for the preparation. On the
third stage, students present a report on a chosen topic without any time for preparation. They
demonstrate the skills to speak on any professional topic, share their opinion, when taking part in
a discussion, and ague with their opponents on any urgent problem. Teachers do not supervise
their work. In this stage, students get an experience of public speaking in a foreign language, and
they master communicative skills not only on the level of foreign language proficiency, but also
master the skills of public speaking. Only 28-34% of students get to the third stage of the
educational program, the rest 84-90 % of students master verbal skills and the content of the
program according to the second stage. And only 10-16% remain in the first stage of the discussed
program until they graduate from the university.
To sum up, integration of listening, reading and speaking skills can solve the problem of steady
and continuous mastering of English. The differential approach to teaching students allows
building simultaneous work with a group of students having different basic skills, so that all the
students choose their own pace of work. In this case, they do not feel uncomfortable and can
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

63

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The “Communicative Circle” Method in Teaching English

Suvorova, Ahmetzyanova & Zharova

eliminate own gaps in knowledge. In general, the step-by-step training listening/ reading and
speaking makes students use all the types of language activities in the course of the foreign
language study.
Method
The main aim of the experiment was to compare the traditional methodology developed according
to the Federal State Standards and the method of the Communicative Circle, to evaluate the
efficiency of the Communicative Circle method and find the ways of its implementation into the
teaching process at Nosov Magnitogorsk State Technical University.
Subjects
To verify the efficiency of the Communicative Circle method three target groups of students have
been chosen. Each group consisted of 10 students aged 16-17 years old. When the experiment
started, all of them were the first year students of Nosov Magnitogorsk State Technical University.
The experiment lasted two years. For these two years two target groups have been taught in
accordance with the developed Communicative Circle method, and one target group of students
has been taught according to the traditional methodology developed on the Federal Educational
Standards. At the beginning of the experiment all the students were asked to write a diagnostic
text, which revealed the level of their English proficiency.
Materials and procedure
The diagnostic test looked like a range of tasks for listening, reading and grammar. Students had
to listen to a text (which sounded three times) and complete a small extract from the audio text
using the words they were expected to hear, then they had to read a small text (1500 symbols) and
do some tasks checking their understanding of the text. The range of tasks focused on English
grammar knowledge had to reveal the students’ understanding of the Present / Past / Future Simple,
the Present Continuous, and the Present Perfect, as these tenses cause fewer difficulties in learning.
Afterwards, students made small dialogues on the topic of the text (Eating out) to test their
speaking skills. We deliberately excluded writing tasks from the test, as the main focus of the study
was on the listening/reading and speaking skills, and we did not want to increase the time f the
test. We also deliberately did not give the students a technical or scientific text, as comprehension
of such texts was the final goal of the experiment. Besides, at the moment they were not closely
familiar with their future profession or technology.
In the course of the two year experiment students’ skills in listening, reading and speaking
were monitored and checked four times: at the beginning of the experiment, in the first and the
second stages, and at the end of the experiment. The logic of all the tests, which the students had
to do, was the same, but the content of the tasks and the tasks themselves were gradually
complicated. In particular, each time the vocabulary of the texts for listening and reading included
fewer common words, the tempo of the audio speech became quicker, and the number of English
tenses to be checked grew with each test.
The tasks were chosen according to the first, second and the final stages of the teaching
organisation (it is described above). In the first stage, when listening to an audio text (this time the
text was scientific), students could see a textual support (a range of words used in the audio text),
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

64

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The “Communicative Circle” Method in Teaching English

Suvorova, Ahmetzyanova & Zharova

and the task was to describe what they had heard in the audio text, using the given range of words.
After reading a text they had to retell it using some key words. In the second stage, neither the
audio text, nor the text to be read had any textual support. The task was to retell what the students
heard without any key words and to dwell upon the advantages and disadvantages of the
technological process they read about. In the final stage, students had to do a simultaneous
interpretation of a small text (4-5 sentences in length) and comment on a suggested process without
reading about it. In this stage, we excluded reading as a written text could simplify the given task.
The students’ results were rated on a five-point scale, where “1” meant “poor”, and “5” meant
“excellent”. The first three tests had 10 tasks, involving Listening, Reading, Grammar skills and
Speaking, the tasks were rated on a five-point scale. All three target groups of students were given
the same texts. In the final stage, students’ answers were rated on the three-point scale: poor –
satisfactory – excellent. There were two answers to be evaluated: the skills to do a simultaneous
interpretation and the ability to comment on a suggested scientific or technological process.
Results and discussion
Regarding to the received results, two target groups of students who were taught with the
application of the Communicative Circle method showed more significant academic results than
the group of students taught traditionally. The scores of the target groups in the stage of diagnostics
were approximately the same. The grade point average varied in the range from 30 to 42. But with
each stage the score in the target groups became higher. In the first stage, in the groups taught in
accordance with the Communicative Circle, the grade point average varied in the range from 25
to 40, while in the group taught traditionally it was not higher than 30. In the second stage, the gap
between the group taught traditionally (the range was from 27-32) and the groups taught according
to the developed method (the range was from 30 to 37) became deeper. In the final stage, we
observed two kinds of results. Firstly, the group taught traditionally did not cope with the given
task, there were too many mistakes, the students could neither do any simultaneous interpretation
nor comment on the suggested technological process. They were unaware of the specifics of their
future profession, had poorer professional knowledge and, that is why, they could not navigate in
the technical know-how and common processes, that were presented to them. On the contrary, 35
% of students who were taught by the developed method, knew all the mentioned technologies,
understood the technological processes and could explain their advantages and disadvantages.
Unfortunately, not all the students of these two groups showed equal skills in doing simultaneous
interpretations, their level of knowledge of their future profession specifics was not the same
either. The grade point average varied in the range from poor to excellent. Only 35 % of students
could do a simultaneous translation and comment on technological processes and got scores from
satisfactory to excellent. The rest of the students could not cope with the tasks. Reviewing the
results of the experiment and assessing the strong and weak sides of the Communicative Circular
method we have concluded that the failure with the simultaneous translation is connected with the
small number of hours allocated to teaching listening and speaking. The more practice students
could have, the higher would be their academic results and the higher would be their motivation.
As for the recommendations, in the third stage of teaching by the Communicative Circle method,
some subjects can be taught in English.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

65

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The “Communicative Circle” Method in Teaching English

Suvorova, Ahmetzyanova & Zharova

About the Authors:
Elena Suvorova, PhD, Associate Professor, Foreign Languages for Engineering Chair, Institute
of Humanities, NMSTU. About 20-year experience in teaching foreign languages and allied
subjects. Research interests include the English language, cognitive linguistics, semantics,
discourse, etc. Author of about 50 publications, including 3 monographs. https://orcid.org/00000002-5821-3952;
Tatyana Ahmetzyanova, a senior teacher of Foreign Languages for Engineering, Institute of
Humanities, NMSTU, Magnitogorsk, Russia. About 20-year experience in teaching foreign
languages and allied subjects. Research interests include the English language teaching methods,
Pedagogy, etc. Author of about 50 publications. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3569-1262
Kseniya Zharova, a senior teacher of Foreign Languages for Engineering, Institute of Humanities,
NMSTU, Magnitogorsk, Russia. About 5-year experience in teaching foreign languages and allied
subjects. Research interests include the English language teaching methods, didactics, etc. Author
of about 20 publications. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5687-2030
References:
Boonkita, K. (2010). Enhancing the development of speaking skills for non-nativespeakers of
English. Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences, 2, 1305–1309.Emets, T.V.,
Baryshnikova I.V., Trutnev, A.Yu. Suvorova, E.V., & Akhmetzyanova, T.L. (2018).
Logical and linguistic strategies for translating complex sentences in literary texts of
natural languages. X Linguae. European Scientific Journal, 11(2), 3-16.
Giang, B.T.K., & Tuan, V.V. (2018). Language Learning Strategies of Vietnamese EFL Freshmen.
Arab World English Journal (AWEJ), 9(3), 61-83.
Gnevek, O.V. (2013). The theoretical foundation of the self-developed mechanism of speech
making. Concept, 1, 1-6.
Gross, P. & Sonnemann, J. (2017). Engaging students: creating classrooms that improve learning.
Grattan Institute.
Hubackova, S. (2012). Listening in foreign language teaching process. Procedia - Social and
Behavioral Sciences, 47, 689 – 693.
Kök, I. (2014). Listening Comprehension Achievement and Brain Dominance. Procedia - Social
and Behavioral Sciences, 122, 329 – 334.
Leontyev A.N. (2005). Activities. Consciousness. Personality. Moscow: Academy.
Masruddin. (2018). The Efficacy of Using Short Video through Group Work in Teaching Speaking
to Indonesian English as Foreign Language (EFL) Students. Arab World English Journal,
9(3), 282-293.
Mishanova, O.G. (2011). The fundamentals of pedagogical managing of the students’
communication. Chelyabinsk: Education.
Muslem, A., Gani, S.A., Usman, B., Rismawati, & MdYunus, M. (2018). The influence of
authentic English video clips on students’ listening comprehension. New Educational
Review, 53(3), 105-114.
Potrikeeva, E.S., Ahmetzyanova T.L., & Suvorova E.V. (2018). The interrelated teaching of
speaking and reading in a technical university. Modern problems of science and education,
4, 70-75.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

66

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The “Communicative Circle” Method in Teaching English

Suvorova, Ahmetzyanova & Zharova

Safranj, J. (2015). Advancing Listening Comprehension Through Movies. Procedia - Social and
Behavioral Sciences, 191, 169 – 173.
Suarta, I.M., Suwintana, I.K., Sudhana, F.P., & Hariyanti, N.K.D. (2017). Employability skills
required by the 21st-centuryworkplace: a literature review of labour market demand
Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, 1st International
Conference on Technology and Vocational Teachers, 102, 337-342.
Suvorova, E., & Polyakova L. (2018). Types of inferences in Discourse. Arab World English
Journal, 9(1), 294-306.
Suvorova, E., & Polyakova L. (2018). Double inference in the processes of comprehension of
Russian and English discourse complicated by an idiom. 3L: Language, Linguistics,
Literature, 24(2), 43-57.
Tavil, Z.M. (2010). Integrating listening and speaking skills to facilitate English language learners’
communicative competence. Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences, 9, 765–770.
Zimnyaya, I.A. (2001). Linguistic psychology of speech activities. Moscow: Psychology and
Social Institute.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

67

