Ostro 0

The ​Situation​ of Woman and Desdemona in
Beauvoir’s ​The Second Sex

By Jules Ostro
The New School for Social Research
Fall 2018

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 1

I. INTRODUCTION
Simone de Beauvoir was a luminary in her serious and committed analysis of the
secondary status of women in society​. ​The following exposition seeks to convey Beauvoir’s
intellectual project vis-à-vis the “Introduction” and “The Independent Woman” chapters of ​The
Second Sex.​ The first part of this essay will explicate Beauvoir’s interpretation of woman’s
situation​ and ​becoming​, the dialectic of immanent woman as embodied Other vs. transcendent
man as disembodied Subject, and the dual problematics of woman’s dependence and
independence. Woman and desire will then be addressed as a segue into how the character of
Desdemona, in Shakespeare’s ​Othello,​ used her embodiment of love and desire to transcend her
body and reach eternal freedom.

II. THE ​SITUATION​ OF BECOMING
Simone de Beauvoir begins her discourse on the multifaceted problem of being a woman
by addressing the ​situation​ of how one ​becomes​ a woman. Beauvoir introduces her idea of
woman’s ​situation​ and how one grows into this situation by speaking to the artifice and
performativity of femininity, for “not every female human being is necessarily a woman; she must
take part in this mysterious and endangered reality known as femininity” (3). Beauvoir touches on
this notion of ​becoming​ a woman by examining how women are compelled to ​do​ femininity, for
“the individual is not free to shape the idea of femininity at will,” (724). This idea of gender
performativity as a social construct took several decades to be shepherded into the postmodern
lexicon vis-à-vis Judith Butler and Candace West & Don H. Zimmerman, whose respective work

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 2

in ​Gender Trouble1 and “Doing Gender”2 asserts the idea that gender has no natural form
preceding that which has already been culturally inscribed.
Yet, the matrix of social construct and cultural inscription can be difficult to disavow.
Beauvoir noticed that some may even lament the loss of woman​ a​ s the ​eternal feminine,​ that
which is the socially-sanctioned, ideal construct of woman and the corollary of her immanent
biological capaciousness for childbearing, “​Tota mulier in utero:​ she is a womb” (Beauvoir 3).
Ideological frames of normative femininity were, and still are, held close as if they were a
religious creed or some type of abstract, symbolic idol for worship or, even more likely, one’s own
lost child that must be found and paternalistically sheltered. Therefore, losing the stereotypical
image of femininity for one who may be lamenting the loss of the eternal feminine could mean
losing a part of one’s own self, in that they are losing a part of their own cultural myth, because
“the myth of the Woman, of the Other, remains precious” (14).
It could be argued that one’s ​situation​ only becomes a ​situation​ in itself because of the
social world, in that one being is recognized by another as something ​else​, which then places that
being into a specific social identity and ​situational being.​ When Beauvoir recognizes woman as a
situation​, she is recognizing that gender is a ​situation​, and that falling out of the boundaries
society constructs around being a woman can have devastating implications, for “a situation does
not depend on the body; it is rather the body that depends on it” (736). Butler addresses this notion
via ​gender dislocation​, for if existence is gendered, were one to fall outside of the locus of gender
norms, one would, in many ways, fall outside of existence (42). Yet, if woman remains inside the
locus of her ​situation,​ this ​situation​ essentially becomes woman’s ​being​, because her ​situation​ is

1
2

Sara Sahir, ​Judith Butler,​ 2002, p. 55-56
​Candace West and Don H. Zimmerman, “Doing Gender,” 1987, pp. 125-127
© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 3

oftentimes, and devastatingly so, the only social experience and expression she has access to.
Beauvoir addresses how even if women, or any other marginalized social group, e.g. Jewish
people and people of color, were to reject their social, situational, and stereotyped imprints, they
would still not be liberated, for to reject the notions behind one’s ​situation​ does not abolish one’s
situation: “​ this [...] is not a liberation for those concerned but an inauthentic flight” (4). It is
impossible to simply remove a human being from their situation, because it is their social being
that makes their ​situation​ manifest, so removing one from one’s situation would mean removing it
from its essential being​, ​for the social matrix that situates one’s body into a ​situation​ to begin with
cannot be separated from the situation itself​.
The ​situation​ of woman has also long been considered as the negation of that of men, for
anything that a woman does becomes placed in the limited particulars of her ​as​ woman. For
Beauvoir, woman’s particulars are her ovaries and uterus, which become the site for her constraint
and means of subjectivity, so that when women are in conversation with men, they must efface
their subjectivity in order to occupy a social space without having their particulars be the
underpinning of their words. Therefore, a woman’s situation essentially becomes the acceptance or
disavowal of this form of subjectivity, which society has made manifest through her reproductive
organs. This is ironic, because women do not enter into the social world as subjects to begin with.
Regardless of whether they remove their nominal ​situation​ from the conversation or not, their
bodies are still the makers of their situation: Only the physical removal of their body would allow
for the removal of this kind of subjectivity. Therefore, the ​situation​ of woman for Beauvoir is
really about negotiating one’s ​objectivity​ in the ​situation​, for the objectification of women is what

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 4

keeps them embodied as immanent Others, while men are able to remain as disembodied,
transcendent Subjects in what Beauvoir deems “a masculine world” (745).

III. WOMAN AS OTHER
The social inequality of men and women persists throughout western thought and can be
found at the beginnings of Abrahamic religions. The Genesis story of Eve as ostensibly created
from Adam is emblematic of woman as Other, with “humanity [...] male, and man defines woman,
not in herself, but in relation to himself; she is not considered an autonomous being” (5). While
man has never had to search for his meaning outside of himself, woman only knows heteronomy,
which is ​because​ ​of​ man’s subjectivity and what man decides woman’s utility should be. Woman
is therefore often perceived of being both from and ​for​ man, because the historical tendency of
man has been to objectify and expropriate the body of the woman; this is when woman became
sexed​. When man entrenched woman in her sex, she became the Other and implement of his
pleasure. This Otherness of woman made her a vassal, “imprisoned in her condition” (721) and
destined for an existence as the hollow auxiliary to man, the essential One.
Beauvoir recognizes the historical archetypes of Otherness in order to recognize alterity as
a “fundamental category of human thought,” for the only way one can be established as the
essential One and Subject is to have the Other. This is not unlike the aforementioned need for
relational social constructs to reify one’s ​situation, f​ or social reality, as Levi-Strauss concluded, is
really just a myriad of dialectical “systems of opposition: duality, alternation, opposition, and
symmetry” (7). One would be remiss to not associate Hegel when considering systems of duality
and nominal opposition, for as evidenced in his master-slave dialectic: “[...] it must proceed to

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 5

supersede the ​other​ independent being in order thereby to become certain of ​itself​ as the essential
being; secondly, in so doing it proceeds to supersede its ​own​ self, for this other is itself;
ambiguous otherness [as] an ambiguous return ​into itself”​ 3. This interdependent self-reflexivity
Hegel addresses begins with an initial supplanting of the Other in order to assert oneself as the a
priori essential being; yet, this Other à la Butler can be interpreted as an alienation4, or rejection,
of some part of the Subject’s own being. In this context, the Genesis story is ironically relevant,
for if the Other is the Other because it is really just a rejected aspect of the Subject, then the story
of Eve, appearing to exist from and of Adam, suggests Eve to be a very early representation of the
rejected Other in Western history.

IV. THE PROBLEM OF DEPENDENCE
Beauvoir questions why women surrender to the sublimation of this alterity. Unlike Jewish
people or people of color, women are not oppressed because they are outnumbered (by men), nor
are there any laws or injunctions behind their subjugation. For women, there was never a ​before​ of
shared kinship or cultural tradition to fall back on. There was never a collective ​we​ for women -women simply refer to themselves as ​women​ (9). There is no historical precedent beyond alterity
itself. It becomes self-declaring, as women decisively claim the status of object, because there
leaves no room for subjectivity; the pronouns of she, her, and we are personal, subjective
pronouns. For Beauvoir, if women cannot reclaim their subjectivity in an individual or collective
context, men will always hold the exalted status of Subject. Yet, women may not have anything to
incentivize collective action. Perhaps this is why Beauvoir mentions ​Mitsein, ​or the lack thereof,

3
4

Georg Wilhelm Hegel, ​Phenomenology of Spirit,​ 1807, p. 111
Judith Butler, “Sex and Gender in Beauvoir,” 1986, p. 43
© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 6

for which women strive to be a part of. Nancy Bauer articulates Heidegger’s theoretical
conception of ​Mitsein​: “the idea, very roughly speaking, is that an absolutely, ontologically, basic
feature of being human is experiencing oneself as part of a ​fellowship​ about which one is bound to
care”​ 5. During the time that Beauvoir wrote ​The Second Sex,​ there was not nearly enough
solidarity or shared motivation between women, nor a historical purpose to reappropriate what was
theirs, because it was never theirs to begin with. Women, in Beauvoir’s perspective, and in the
most reductive sense, simply have not had a good enough reason to collectively organize.
The social ties opportuned to women are not collective ties that are shared with other
women who occupy a similar status with opportunities, resources, and ​situations.​ Instead, the
social ties women have are dependent ties, with women inherently bonded to the men they live
with, work for, and are provisioned by: “the tie that binds her to her oppressors is unlike any
other,” for “she is the Other at the heart of a whole whose two components are necessary to each
other” (9). There is not any ​becoming​ to this aspect of woman’s ​situation​, for this is a dimension
of ​being​. Why? Historical systems of social organizing for subsistence strategies, apropos of Marx
and Engels’ theory of historical materialism, would suggest that human existence and social
relationships are intrinsically based around systems of production for one’s material life and
intercourse6, as “men [make] their own history, but they do not make it just as they please; [but
under] circumstances directly encountered, given and transmitted from the past.7” Just as Marx
and Engels were materialists in their theoretical project to free the proletariat from the oppressive
shackles of class inequalities, Beauvoir is also, in this respect, somewhat of a materialist to the
extent that women have been binded to and by men in their historical dependence of material life
5

Nancy Bauer, “Being-with as being-against: Heidegger meets Hegel in The Second Sex,” 2001, p.130
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Marx-Engels Reader, 1848, p. 150
7
Karl Marx, Der 18th Brumaire, 1851, p. 15
6

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 7

and intercourse, and in their reliance of their ​sexed b​ ody as an exchangeable commodity and basis
of selfhood -- all under circumstances that were likewise not chosen. Beauvoir’s intellectual vision
feels raw in this image of woman​ ​as Other, fragile and fettered by dependence.
Beauvoir addresses how this dependence is co-dependent, but not reciprocal. While men
have a biological, sexual need that is cause for their dependence on women, that dependence does
not make women more free, whereas women’s dependence on men liberates men and, in fact,
privileges them, for they occupy a better situation in the world socially, historically, politically,
and economically because “this world still belongs to men” (9-10). Both men and women are
aware of this bleak truth; what Beauvoir wants to understand is how women come to be okay with
this self-effacement. Being free, for Beauvoir, comes at a cost, but one that, in the end, will
unchain women into economic autonomy, for “when she is productive and active, she regains her
transcendence; she affirms herself concretely as subject in her projects; she senses her
responsibility relative to the goals she pursues and to the money and rights she appropriates”
(721). Women would need to relinquish their material dependence on men to become free. Kant
would maintain that this freedom, this enlightenment, requires one to find the courage and
confidence to leave behind immature dependence in order to become both personally and publicly
accountable for one’s life -- which is hard, because “it is so convenient to be immature!”8
Therefore, because woman needs man to provide for her subsistence through his co-dependent
Subject, and because accepting one’s ​situation​ as Other brings more ease and pleasure than
developing the courage to ​become​ free, most women avoid “the anguish and stress of authentically
assumed existence” (10), while men are conferred perpetual transcendence as Subjects.

8

Immanuel Kant, “An Answer to the Question,‘What is Enlightenment?’,” 1784, p. 54
© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 8

Men have used paternalistic ideological frames to relegate women into subordinate
positions because they believe they have natural rights -- natural and ​superior​ rights to freedom
and transcendence. Men also believe that anything a woman has is because she has received it
from men: “We listen in a tone of polite indifference [...] knowing that her intelligence, in a more
or less dazzling way, reflects ideas that come from us” (13). It is because of the essential nature of
the Subject to transcend that men have always had the upper hand, while women remain
objectified, sexed Others. This objectification forces women to exist in their sexed embodiment,
and because women’s embodiment and sexedness is immanently within, of, and from their very
physical being, “there is a degradation of existence into ‘in-itself,’ of freedom into facticity” (16).
Beauvoir considers the situation of woman’s immanence her doom into ​inessentiality,​ for woman
cannot transcend her situation because she will always be transcended by man, who is the essential
transcendent Subject; yet, one can perceive Beauvoir as hopeful for woman to one day be able to
transcend her immanent embodiment and alterity -- but certainly not without challenges.

V. THE PROBLEM OF INDEPENDENCE
Beauvoir traces the history of women’s incipient emancipation to the early
industrialization of the 18th century, when women were budding competitors to men, leaving the
work of the home for the work of the factory. This shift into modern society caused an uproar,
with anti-feminists committed to preserving the “true woman” (12) by rationalizing women’s
subordination through religion, philosophy, and science, just as people have done when attempting
to justify racial prejudice. However, Beauvoir believes that this industrial seachange of the modern
world and its subsequent effect on women’s work is complex and not expressly emancipatory, for

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 9

only in a socialist world could freedom and work co-exist; only in an egalitarian world could
social infrastructure adapt to serve women’s changing condition. “While work alone can guarantee
her concrete freedom” (721), the social organization of modern society still situated women in a
locus of heteronomy because the dominant society of the 18th and 19th centuries was a bourgeois
society. The bourgeoisie became the new arbiters of human life and labor, exploiting
working-class laborers under the capitalist enterprise of the commercial market, where “the value
of anything depended on how exchangeable it was”9. Factory life was so bleak that some women
even came to prefer the oppression of the home over the oppression of the factory (722). The dark
picture Beauvoir is painting of the independent woman renders the modern working woman as
capable of freedom through her work, though the conditions of her work are impenetrably dire and
still housed in hegemony. Woman, therefore, came to suffer oppression both at home and at work,
experiencing “the double servitude of a job and masculine protection” (723).
A sad truth that Beauvoir illuminates is that even once woman frees herself from the
constraints of her economic dependence on man, she is only emancipated economically, for she
will still be unequal to man socially, morally, and psychologically (723). Woman remains socially
lesser than man because her ​situation​ locates her in an immanent position of otherness, while what
is inherent for man is his ability to so easily reach transcendence. The reasons behind why woman
believes that she is morally lesser than man is two-pronged: woman subscribes to the normative
belief that she is psychologically inferior to man, and woman is constantly reminded of what
society wants of her ​sex​ (and has wanted since biblical times). Because of these reasons, she must
try and reconcile that which is inside of herself without subscribing to prescribed normatives. To

​Professor Paul Kottman, Lecture 29 August 2018, The New School for Social Research, ​The Making of the Modern
World
9

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 10

be a woman is to be psychically liminal, for the woman is constantly reminded that she is not a
man, but also that she may not be ​doing​ femininity right, with the burdens of femininity unable to
be deconstructed. This creates an interstitial, labyrinthian dynamic of having been tasked with a
nature that forces woman to negotiate how, à la Judith Butler, to “[live] one’s body in the world”
(40).
This is a very different kind of dependence than the dependence men experience. Men are
not divided, at least not in respect of their natural endowments as superior beings, with their
natural presence of “virile prestige [...] he is not divided” (723). Men’s natural status in society is
one in which men take and women are taken -- women are “required to be object and prey; that is,
she must renounce her claims as a sovereign subject” (723). Beauvoir outlines such a cruel and
honest truth here. Although men are “naturally” the transcendent Subject, with women as
embodied Others, a dimension of dependence and embodiment that men do fulfill is that of their
phallus. Their phallic strength is a historic and representative motif for power and security. It is a
mimetic sword with decided strength and absolutism, a notion that Hobbes captured very well:
“the covenant without the sword are just words.”10 With the phallus as Hobbesian sword, it seems
expressly obvious why this would foreground men’s embodiment; the phallus is what gives
meaning and madness to the covenant that men and women enter into within their dyadic
enterprise. If the phallus sexes man, might woman become man’s equal by embodying a symbolic,
isomorphic phallus? This is a trap, because no matter how capable the phallus is in sexing man, it
will never yield constraints that contain him and hold him captive in his body. The phallus is

10

Thomas Hobbes, ​Leviathan,​ 1651,​ p​ . 111
© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 11

instead the instrumental, immanent means of man’s transcendence, and like the sword, is more an
implement of power than an apparatus for dependence.

VI. WOMAN AND THE DUALITY OF DESIRE
One of the greatest of problematics for women is desire. Women’s desires enter into a
space of liminality because their desires can never be fully realized by their being, for their desires
are not ​of​ them. Because woman is constantly negotiating the state of her ​becoming​ by fulfilling or
challenging social demands, her desires are in flux and provisioned by whatever man needs.
Desire for woman is liminal, dualistic, and fractured by desiring the freedom of man while also
preserving the desires of the nesting ​eternal feminine​ that were infused into her internal world by
the women she grew up with (725). Which desire will win? Will the desire for freedom win, or the
desire for the feminine? The immanence of woman as embodied Other places her desire-situation
into one of remarkable duality. The feminine will triumph if women’s singular preoccupation is
their appearance. Their space of desire will become secured and fulfilled by the maintenance of
appearance, the weapons of seduction, for “the woman [...] knows that when people look at her,
they do not distinguish her from her appearance: she is judged, respected, or desired in relation to
how she looks” (724). Woman may become secure if she satiates her desire to keep ​becoming​ the
eternal feminine, but security does not always beget freedom. And what a terrible onus it is for one
to have to choose between freedom and security.
Woman and desire are arguably synonymous with woman and freedom, for desire can be
thought of as a type of self-directed movement because it is “what makes our limbs go.”11

11

Kottman, Lecture 12 September 2018, The New School for Social Research, ​The Making of the Modern World
© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 12

Pursuing the desire to achieve the same freedom as men is seen through the woman who
relinquishes her servility “by playing the game with masculine weapons: she talks instead of
listening, she flaunts clever ideas, unusual feelings; she contradicts her interlocutor instead of
going along with him, she tries to outdo him” (726). Mary Wollstonecraft doesn’t think it’s so bad
for women to ​do​ masculinity, for she believed that if one construed masculine women as those
who are as virtuous and successful as men, then “join me in wanting women to grow more and
more ‘masculine’ every day.”12 Yet, men look down on the defiant woman who fashions her own
sword to join the pleasure-ring. But why should a free woman care whether a man approves of her
newfound wielding of masculinity? Woman doesn’t pursue her desire for freedom in order to
please man; to do that would just be fulfilling the desire of the Subject while remaining the Other.
The only mediation a free woman would need is that which is of her own psyche, an internal voice
that can act as a mediating, intersubjective psychic third between her and herself that would help
harness her pursuit of freedom and desire. Perhaps woman can only reappropriate desire once she
conciliates this free and decisive third with the world, the man’s world in which she lives.
Until then, desire for woman is mimetic desire, for the only way woman’s desire can be
reified is for woman to ​do d​ esire in a masculine way. This frame for desire is not unlike Rene
Girard’s theoretical concept of ​mimetic desire, à​ la Robert Pippin: “desires are everywhere
dependent on ‘mediators,’ on others who certify or make worthy their desire, others whom, given
the extreme importance of the desirer’s self-image as independent, they eventually come to hate
and compete with.”13 The irony here comes when one considers the synthesis of both this mimetic
form of desire, along with the Hegelian role of the Other; the latter being instrumental to desire

12
13

Mary Wollstonecraft, ​The Vindication of the Rights of Women​, 1792, p. 5
Robert Pippin, ​Modernism as a Philosophical Problem,​ 1991, p. 34
© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 13

insomuch as it is a rejected part of the Subject (master). If woman’s desire simply mimics man’s,
which instrumentally requires the woman as Other, then woman is left, indirectly, with her own
subjection (or objectification) undergirding her capacity to ​do​ masculine desire. This mimesis
reaches a profound place when Beauvoir speaks of woman as a double for man, for “she will take
charge of his worries, she will participate in his successes just as much as taking care of her own
lot, and sometimes even more so” (734). What this doubling then produces within woman is
another duality of desire, for the feminine woman is forced to reconcile her desire to self-actualize
and transcend objectification with her desire to prioritize her husband’s desires and thereby
negotiate the mimetic ​doing​ of desire. Why stay mired in all of this, one might ask? Well, because
both man and woman believe in man’s transcendent status.
Beauvoir mentions how desire for women is made complicated by femininity. The problem
of the sexual feminine has existed far behind and beyond the modern world, so far that it is a
historical precedent that might as well be considered a fundamentally essential quality of
becoming​, in that woman is forced to learn how to please men “in order to succeed in her life as a
woman” (723). While men are able to often quickly and easily reach sexual fulfillment and
satiation without any threat to their emotional or physical wellbeing, women are at a higher risk
for sexually-transmitted diseases, don’t reach “relief” as automatically as men, and must reckon
with the prospect of pregnancy that is perpetually looming (728). Also, this leads to yet another
duality women must navigate in desire: If woman ​does m
​ asculinity properly, she will be assuming
a stance of domination that will prevent her from reaching an orgasm (731), for when women
initiate sexual intercourse or relationality, men become insecure or jealous: “they want to awaken
a personal sexual response in the woman, not to be selected to satisfy her need in its generality:

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 14

chosen, they feel exploited” (729). Yet, if she ​does​ femininity right, she either again doesn’t reach
an orgasm and feels “had,” or if she does reach an orgasm, she “will want to hold on to her lover
for a longer time” because it is “pleasure, far from freeing her, [that] binds her” (733). Or, if
women initiate their own desire or give in to the desire of men ​too much, s​ he risks being thought
of and talked about as lascivious. And yet another frightening truth and challenge to women’s
fulfillment of desire is that they are not as physically strong as men, so while men have nothing to
fear or be insecure over in their sexual and romantic pursuits, women must be constantly vigilant
of ensuring that their bodies and beings are safe and free from the potential harm of an aggressive
or abusive partner.
Beauvoir elucidates an alternative option for women’s desire trajectory through the idea of
monetizing erotic practices. Women can pay for the provisions men provide sexually, yet most
women who opportune themselves of this strategy are wealthy, and often older, women: “By
paying the male, they make an instrument of him, permitting them to use him with disdainful
abandon” (728). The reason why it is commonplace for older women to pursue this method is
because younger women may be more susceptible to growing an attachment or sentiment to their
lover. Therefore, even if women were to be able to afford a sexual, transactional relationship, the
fulfillment of desire and erotic freedom for most women is often constituted in a secure space of
sexual, physical, and emotional security.
One of the most compelling dimensions of Beauvoir’s stance on how women negotiate the
sphere of sex and desire is her illumination of the double standard around Subjectivity and Desire.
While men are able to become Subjects through both satisfying women and being satisfied by
women, women are not able to experience the same subject-identification. When women pleasure

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 15

men, they are both giving them pleasure and also reaffirming their own object-worth. Although
women may look at this sexual solicitation as a form of generosity (729), it is really just a way of
maintaining one’s body as an object-offering. The insidious aspect of this is that even once woman
uses her will and initiative to assert her desire, to use her body as an instrument for her ​taking​,
“she is [still] a utensil” (730), and is unable to elevate herself to the status of man.
This unfortunate ​situation​ foregrounds woman’s sexual life into a desire-deadlock. If
woman does not pursue her sexual desire, she is left as an object for the taking, “she limply gives
in to the spell of arousal, she is fascinated by the male who picks her like a fruit” (730), and if she
pursues her sexual desire, she has a chance at willing her flesh into whatever situational form and
place of her choosing. Yet, if she takes too much from man, or even gives too much to man, she
will regress back into object:“if she admits her pleasure, she is acknowledging her submission”
(730). This predicates the problem and duality of woman’s desire and subsequent freedom into a
sisyphean tragedy. While man’s nature is not to be chosen to receive, but to take and conquer,
(which is consistent with conceptualizing the phallic sword as material and symbolic strength),
woman is left entangled in an immanence that is what it is only because of its dialectical relation
and referentiality to man. Woman’s nature remains fashioned as a lacking receptacle, a cavity for
unbridled receiving and “losing” -- and “she remains lost” (730). So, how is woman ever to be
found? How is freedom ever to be found, if she, and it, remain lost? The character of Desdemona
in Shakespeare’s ​Othello​ may help illustrate the possibilities for woman and desire, love, and
freedom.

VII. DESDEMONA: IMMANENT AND TRANSCENDENT

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 16

When Beauvoir mentions woman as remaining lost by “consenting to make herself flesh
through her sexual arousal, anticipation, and promise,” she also writes that woman can only win
by losing (730). The following delineates how the character of Desdemona in Shakespeare’s
Othello​ wins through her tragic and profound death, by losing the very flesh that in fact allowed
her to ​become​ wholly free and transcendent. Desdemona’s death delivers her freedom, but only
through the loss of her two means of captivity -- the primary captivity of her body and the
secondary captivity of Othello’s transcendence. The immanence of Desdemona and transcendence
of Othello mutually-reinforced the objectification of her being as Other, while Othello was able to
remain as the disembodied, transcendent Subject until Desdemona’s death, which is when she uses
her immanent desire and love to self-actualize subjectivity, agency, and freedom. In the end,
Desdemona has won not because she loses her body, but because she ​uses​ the passions that her
body provided to find freedom and transcendence.
There is much one could say and write for the characters and relationship of Desdemona
and Othello. However, the remainder of this essay will focus on one interpretation of
Desdemona’s impending transcendence and subsequent culmination in freedom. Desdemona’s
first sign of transcendence is when she defied her father, Brabantio, by marrying Othello without
Brabantio’s permission. Desdemona did not seek her father’s approval beforehand. Instead, she
wed Othello through her own will and freedom. This event disgraced her father, who proclaimed
in anger and dismay upon hearing of her becoming newly betrothed, “O heaven! How got she out?
O treason of the blood! Fathers, from hence trust not your daughters’ minds by what you see them
act” (Act I, scene i); and when confronting Othello, “O thou foul thief, where hast thou stow’d my
daughter?” (Act I, scene ii) . In both of these utterances, Brabantio is using figurative language to

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 17

express Desdemona as an animal who has escaped captivity or as booty that was stowed away for
safekeeping.
However, Desdemona transcends this objectivity because it is ​her​ very word, and not
Othello’s, that legitimates her marriage to Othello in front of her father and the councilmen. This
instance marks Desdemona as a “cosmopolitan 17th century proto-feminist”14, for not only does
she deviate from the gendered expectations of her father and the time, she also eclipses Othello in
authorizing the legitimacy of their marriage. This is important, because at this point in the play,
Othello possesses a status that is more illustrious and esteemed than Desdemona, yet her voice
holds primacy for the sanctioning of their love and commitment. Othello’s status quickly falls
soon after this, as he becomes caught within Iago’s web of deceit, which further exalts
Desdemona. Yet, whatever Iago unveiled was arguably already there to begin with, with the
character of Iago as a type of imp uprooting the most horrific of the human condition within
Othello. Desdemona, in contrast, is stable in her integrity, and the security and confidence she has
in herself, for when wrongfully aggressed by Othello, she does not retort combatively; instead, she
stands her guard with calm and strong resolve: “I have not deserved this,” which is soon followed
by “I will not stay to offend you” (Act IV, scene i). Desdemona is patient in trying to understand
Othello’s fury and the possible remedy for this sudden calamity. Her incipient transcendence is
again here felt by a type of “hermeneutic capaciousness”15.
Desdemona’s body now enters into this picture, because the issue at the heart of Othello’s
anger is a ​carnal issue16. Othello is not infuriated by the idea of Desdemona falling in love with
Cassio; he is brought to a savage rage because what is called into question is Desdemona’s ​body.​
​Kottman, Lecture 24 October 2018, The New School for Social Research, ​The Making of the Modern World
​Kottman, Lecture 24 October 2018, The New School for Social Research, ​The Making of the Modern World
16
Kottman, Lecture 24 October 2018, The New School for Social Research, ​The Making of the Modern World
14
15

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 18

It is not her heart that he fears may have been reappropriated, it is her body. That it is her body
that he fears has been taken from him is similar to Brabantio’s prior exclamation of Desdemona,
with his analogous language likening her to the booty one might find on a ship or to a farm animal
that has been let out of its bin. What this play’s primary problematic becomes, then, is an issue
with Desdemona’s ​body​, which is essentially an issue with Desdemona as Other. However,
Desdemona solidly positions herself as Subject by remaining secure in her love and fidelity -- and
by never questioning Othello’s love and fidelity. Desdemona has taken it upon herself to be the
representation of love and security through both her love for Othello and the love Othello once had
for her that he was unable to stand by. Desdemona is more secure than Othello and does not need
to fight him on his false claims. Instead, she can only hope that he comes to see her as who she
really is: “I hope my noble lord esteems me honest” (Act IV, scene ii). Desdemona is so secure in
her ​being,​ as Subject, that she tries to rescue the Othello she knew and loved through her ​body ​and
its passions. Instead she rescues herself, ironically, through the loss of both.
In the final scene of Desdemona and Othello, Desdemona asks Emilia to dress her and
Othello’s bed with their wedding sheets. Desdemona is setting up the scene for her love and desire
to hold sway, though her agentive, desirous body and strong heart is not enough to reel Othello in
from the Iago-plague. The idea of Desdemona sharing her body-object, i.e. what Othello considers
to be his property, compromised Othello’s masculinity -- his masculine control, power, and
transcendence, for if Othello is “man-enough,” why would Desdemona need to seek sexual
pleasure elsewhere? Through the use of her body, Desdemona risks her life to try and meet
Othello halfway in love and desire. But he does not submit. His phallic pride and now
pseudo-transcendence brings Othello to kill the source of his love and desire. It is a tragedy that

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 19

Othello is so entirely blinded by his jealousy and ostensibly-fallen phallus that he destroys
Desdemona and the love they shared, as well as his own once-strong and transcendent character.
Desdemona, on the other hand, enters her final scene fully aware of the prospect of death
that awaits her. Desdemona bravely attempts to pacify Othello’s violent rage through both her
body and heart, through the desire and love she has for him, and through the desire and love she
believes might still be alive somewhere beneath his rage. Here, Desdemona’s desire and love can
be looked at as the inviolate means for manifesting both body and heart transcendence.
Desdemona uses the one thing her ​situation h​ as empowered her with -- her body, her physical
being17, the home of both her sexual agency and love -- to try and recover Othello and the love
they shared. That is her agency. That is her freedom. Desdemona risks her life and never doubts
herself or the integrity of her feelings and character. It is the strength of her immanence that frees
Desdemona and allows her to face death with courage, wisdom, and honesty. She is able to find
her freedom, her own transcendence, by risking her life, by standing by the love and desire that her
body provided -- by ​choosing​ love.
While Desdemona chose love, and let the love and desire of her body bring her to full
transcendence, indeed used her body to lose her body, Othello fell from eminent transcendence to
flaccid embodiment. The idea of Desdemona sleeping with Cassio originally made Othello feel
disempowered and emasculated, but his real downfall was letting the imp of jealousy destroy his
love and desire. At the end of the play, once he killed his love and realized his grave mistake,
Othello is left to reconcile his failure, which is, for him, a failed masculinity that lives within his
failed body. The body that was once home for his transcendence and the desire and love for

17

​Kottman, Lecture 24 October 2018, The New School for Social Research, ​The Making of the Modern World
© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 20

Desdemona failed him. “My life upon her faith!” (Act I, scene iii) proclaimed Othello in the
beginning of the play, wagering his life on Desdemona’s faithfulness. Yet both Othello and
Desdemona’s lives were lost despite ​her​ faithfulness. It was Othello’s lack of faithfulness that was
the cause of both of their deaths. Perhaps a more appropriate and prescient remark would have
been, “my life upon my faith,” or “our lives upon my faith”. The transcendence of Othello became
the uncontrollable transcendence of his flighty mind when dosed with a drop of fear and doubt. So
Othello, too, had a “hermeneutic capaciousness,” but one that ultimately destroyed his love and
freedom.

VIII. CONCLUSION
Simone de Beauvoir was illustrious in her theoretical analysis of ​the problem of sex,​ which
is why she is accredited among the pantheon of modern social thinkers. ​The Second Sex à​ la the
“Introductory” and “The Independent Woman” chapters offers a theoretical contribution to the
plight of women that is deep and complex, and one that ultimately contemplates “how, in the
feminine condition of subjugation, does the woman realize freedom?”18 It has been argued herein
that woman, à la Desdemona, can realize freedom and achieve transcendence by ​using​ her body,
the very ​situation​ that can likewise constrict and control her; fortunately, death is not always
necessary for freedom.
While ​The Second Sex ​contributes some of the most deep and disturbing truths concerning
the problem of gender in general and the ​situation​ of woman in specific, one can say the same for
Shakespeare’s ​Othello​. Desdemona used her delimited ​situation​ of immanence to surpass this

18

Kottman, Lecture 17 October 2018, The New School for Social Research, ​The Making of the Modern World

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 21

situation​ and reach freedom through her transcendent love and desire. Desdemona never let go of
what her body allowed her to be -- a loving, desirous, committed and faithful woman for and of
herself, risking her life and ​choosing​ love to stand by who she was. It is an absolute tragedy that
the only way for Desdemona to reach the apotheosis of her freedom and agency meant losing the
very means that brought her there. Although “she could only win by losing” (730), Desdemona
achieved transcendence by standing by her body and using her body to stand by herself.

© 2018 Jules Ostro

Ostro 22

WORKS CITED
Bauer, Nancy. “Being-with as being-against: Heidegger meets Hegel in The Second Sex,”
Continental Philosophy Review,​ (34): 2001. p. 130.
Beauvoir, Simone de. ​The Second Sex.​ New York: Knopf. 1952. pp. 3-17, 721-751.
Butler, Judith. “Sex and Gender in Beauvoir,” ​Yale French Studies,​ (72): 1986. p. 43.
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm. ​Phenomenology of Spirit. ​Oxford:​ O
​ xford University Press. 1977, p. 111.
Hobbes, Thomas. ​Leviathan,​ Oxford: Oxford University Press. 1998. p. 111.
Kant, Immanuel. “An Answer to the Question, ‘What is Enlightenment?’” in ​Political Writings.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 1970. p. 54.
Marx, Karl and Friedrich Engels. ​Marx-Engels Reader.​ 1848. p. 150.
Marx, Karl. ​Der 18th Brumaire. 1​ 851.​ p​ . 15.
Pippin, Robert. ​Modernism as a Philosophical Problem: On the Dissatisfactions of European
High Culture.​ Malden, Mass.: Blackwell Publishers Ltd., 1991. p. 34.
Sahir, Sara. ​Judith Butler, ​London: Routledge. 2002. p. 55-56.
Shakespeare, William. ​Othello​. St. Paul, Minn.: EMC/Paradigm Publishing. 2005. Web.
West, Candace and Don H. Zimmerman. “Doing Gender.”​ Gender and Society,​ 1, 2 (1987):
125-127.
Wollstonecraft, Mary. ​The Vindication of the Rights of Women. ​Jonathan Bennett 2017. Web.​ p​ . 5.

© 2018 Jules Ostro

