1

BLACK PROTEST EVENTS IN THE US 1994-2010:
ISSUES, CAMPAIGNS AND TRENDS 1
Pamela Oliver, University of Wisconsin – Madison
Pamela.Oliver@wisc.edu orcid.org/0000-0001-7643-1008
Alex Hanna, Google
alex.hanna@gmail.com orcid.org/0000-0002-8957-0813
Chaeyoon Lim, University of Wisconsin - Madison
chaeyoon.lim@wisc.edu orcid.org/0000-0003-4527-4390

ABSTRACT
This paper fills a major empirical gap in providing the first systematic data about US
Black movement protests between the 1994 and 2010. There is a dearth of systematic
information about the Black movement and Black protests between 1995 and its reemergence in
Black Lives Matter in 2012. Using a new automated system, we identified 1017 events in 1049
news wire stories relevant to Black protest between 1994 and 2010 from the Annotated English
Gigaword file. These data provide insight into Black activism in the between 1994 and 2010 and
identify themes that are salient for both the resurgence of the Black Lives Movement after 2012
and the rise of White supremacist movements. Over a third of all protest events are about
policing, generally about police violence. Other major themes include direct struggles over
White vs. Black symbolic representations and access to resources, including protests over
Confederate symbols, abolition of affirmative action programs, and White supremacists. The
1995 Million Man March shows up as having a significant connection to subsequent
mobilization, a relationship that is confirmed by historical accounts. A third of the protests are
around a wide variety of other specific issues that will require more detailed classification. Time
trends show active and rising Black mobilization in the 1990s through 2001 that was interrupted
by the 9/11 terror attacks and not significantly resumed until 2006-7. Overall, most protests in
this era appear to have been reacting against attacks on existing benefits rather than proactively
seeking new benefits. Methodologically, we show the importance of maintaining information
about both events and coverage of events and of identifying the relations between events using
the concepts of campaign, master event, and subevent.
NOTE: This is a draft paper based on a preliminary analysis of data. We are continuing to
refine the analysis and revise the paper. Please check with us for the latest version if you wish to
cite the paper. This is a wholesale revision of a 2017 paper based on what turned out to be only a
subset of the events in the newswire stories, due to an error in the selection of stories fed into the
MPEDS classifier.

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

2

BLACK PROTEST EVENTS IN THE US 1994-2010:
ISSUES, CAMPAIGNS AND TRENDS
INTRODUCTION
This paper fills a major empirical gap in providing the first systematic data about US
Black movement protests between the mid-1990s and 2010. Most research on protests in the US
since the Civil Rights Era has used the Dynamics of Collective Action dataset (Soule et al. n.d.),
which ends in 1995. Our data come from a new data collection effort on Black protests 19942010 based on machine coding of stories from US news wire services. We make no claim to
have the definitive data for this period, nor to providing a rigorous count of events, but offer
these data as a first descriptive step toward filling an important empirical gap.
An additional contribution is to show the importance of keeping track of when and how
protest events were described in news stories and how the stories portrayed the relations among
events. Most protest events were either discussed in multiple news stories or discussed in stories
that discussed them in the context of other protest events. Most events were parts of campaigns
involving multiple coordinated events and were typically discussed as parts of a larger whole. A
small number of events were mentioned repeatedly and were a disproportionate share of what the
media reported about the Black movement. Although collecting event data from news stories
always involves finding multiple stories about the same event and multiple events in the same
story, past protocols for constructing event data have eliminated these relationships. We show
that maintaining rather than discarding data on these patterns permits discovery of important
relationships that are otherwise difficult to see.
WHAT HAPPENED TO THE BLACK MOVEMENT?
Writing about the “doldrums” in the US women’s movement between the 1920s and the
1970s, Taylor (1989) called attention to the importance of movement survival during the
doldrums between periods of intense mobilization. While the Black movement never went into
the doldrums between 1980 and 2012 in the same way that the women’s movement did after the
1920s, there was a decline in its visibility and prominence as a generator of newspaper accounts
of protests and movement activity. Figure 1 is calculated from the publicly-available Dynamics
of Collective Action (DCA) data on protests coded from the New York Times 1960-1995 (Soule
et al. n.d.). It shows the decline in protests coded by the DCA team as being about an African
American civil rights issue relative to all other issues after the 1970s. 2 The Amenta et al. (2009)
social movement organization (SMO) dataset offers the same general conclusion in their study of
news coverage of organizations 1900-1995. Figures 1 and 5 in their article (pages 643 and 647)
show a rise in mentions in the New York Times for African American organizations after 1940
and then a steep decline after 1968.
In combination, the available data through 1995 from the Soule et al. DCA and Amenta
et al. SMO data sets both give the appearance of something of a steady-state level of Black
mobilization after the mid-1970s: the movement does not go away, but it is not a central focus of
mainstream news attention. McAdam et al. (2005) compare claims-making events in Chicago in
1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000 and report that the center of activity moved from the city to the
suburbs and that African American issues declined markedly as a proportion of total events, as
the frequencies of events about other issues rose, although the raw numbers of African American
Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

3
claims events is relatively consistent across the decades: 13 in 1970, 2 in 1980, 10 in 1990, and 4
in 2000. Jenkins, Jacobs and Agnone (2003) examine the national-level time series of protests
1948-1997 and attribute the decline of Black mobilization both to its success in the rise of Black
elected officials and the decline of grievances, and to the closing of political opportunities that
had been created by divided government, northern Democratic party strength, and Cold War
pressures on Republican presidents.
There is literally zero systematic quantitative data on Black protest between 1995 and
studies using social media data to track protests after 2012. The only source we are aware of that
promises to provide systematically-collected information about patterns of Black protest since
the 1990s is Patrick Rafail’s ongoing and laborious project to compile data on protest events
1996-2006 in 20 US cities using local newspapers (Martin, Rafail and McCarthy 2017, Rafail
2018). These events were located using a Boolean search with general protest terms to capture
candidate articles; triaging a million candidate articles by scanning headlines, lead paragraphs,
and keyword contexts; and manually coding 10,953 articles in full-text reads to identify 11,858
events. The data are not public yet, but in a personal communication, Rafail reports that he
identified a total of 779 events involving African-American participants, most addressing local
issues, which works out to an average of 70 events per year or 3.5 events per city/year using
local sources of information.
There is also little systematic qualitative or historical work about the period between
1980 and 2010. One exception is Keeanga-Yamahtta Taylor’s From #BlacklivesMatter to Black
Liberation (2016), which provides an overview of the Black movement between the Civil Rights
era and the Black Lives Matter period emphasizing radical organizations and grassroots
mobilizations. Beth Richie’s Arrested Justice Black Women, Violence, and America’s Prison
Nation (2012) provides an overview of organizing by Black and other women of color around
issues of violence and criminal justice, including the formation of Incite! and Critical Resistance
at the end of the 1990s. Taylor (2016), Rose Brewer (2003) and Bill Fletcher and Jamala Rogers
(2014) describe the founding and death of the Black Radical Congress 1998-2008. Zakiya Luna
discusses the politics of SisterSong, which was founded in this era (Luna 2009, Luna 2016).
Activist Jamala Rogers (2015) describes thirty years of community organizations in the St. Louis
area that provided the infrastructure for the Ferguson mobilization. The first 600 hits in a broad
keyword search 3of SOCINDEX turned up only a handful of qualitative studies of activism
between these eras. These include interviews with activists seeking to increase Black
participation in the immigrant rights movement (Zamora and Osuji 2014), Black women
participating in an anti-violence movement (White 2005) and African American women who are
AIDS activists (Harris 2014). A special issue of Black Scholar profiled a number of Black
women activists (Neville and Hamer 2006). There are also articles about protests relevant to
post-Katrina development in New Orleans (Brand 2008), Black organizations engaged in
defensive development in Chicago to avoid gentrification (Boyd 2008), and interactions
between White environmentalists and Black civil rights leaders in a Southern county (Hines
2015). The search also turned up an analysis of the politics and rhetoric of the 2008 State of the
Black Union conference (Ralph 2009). Even for recent publications, the keyword search turned
up more studies of the Civil Rights and even pre-Civil Rights eras (e.g., Baxandall 2001, Bell
2004, Berg 2005, Berger 2009, Bergin 2016, Brame and Shriver 2013, Breitzer 2011, Brown
2015, Williams 2004) and studies of the post-2012 Black Lives Matter mobilizations (e.g.,

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

4
Asoka 2015, Bell et al. 2013, Bonilla and Rosa 2015, Brooms and Perry 2016, De Choudhury et
al. 2016).
To sum up, there is a huge gap in systematic quantitative information about Black protest
events between 1995, when the DCA data end, and 2012, when people started using studies of
social media to track #BlackLivesMatter protest events. Systematic data on New York Times
coverage of protest events (Soule et al.) and organizations (Amenta et al.) suggest a steep decline
in news coverage of the Black movement that probably parallels an actual decline in the pace of
insurgency. At the same time, these systematic data sources through 1995, the as-yet unpublished
data being collected by Rafail, and the sparse qualitative literature all suggest that Black activism
continued after the Civil Rights heyday and probably provided some support or underpinnings
for the resurgence of Black mobilization in the #BlackLivesMatter movement after 2012.
Systematic studies of the form and content of Black mobilization between the two peaks of
mobilization will fill an empirical void and feed into theory about movement cycles.
DATA AND METHODS
The paper analyzes data obtained from the MPEDS (Machine-learning Protest Event
Data System) project (Hanna 2017). MPEDS is an automated protest event coding system that
aims to provide high quality protest event data using tools from supervised machine learning and
natural language processing. Machine-assisted approaches to political event data have been in
use for nearly 30 years, since the inception of the Kansas Event Data System (KEDS) (Schrodt
and Gerner 1994). More recently, there have been several approaches which incorporate machine
learning methods into their pipelines (Croicu and Weidmann 2015, Marakov et al. 2015,
Nardulli, Althaus and Hayes 2015, Wueest, Rothenhäusler and Hutter 2013). MPEDS differs
from other automated event data projects because it focuses on coding for protest events rather
than for a wider range of political events and because it aims to collect rich information about
each event. To train MPEDS, human coders read news articles and determined whether they
contain accounts of protest events and, if so, coded key features of those events. These humancoded data were passed as training materials to MPEDS to “teach” it to identify articles that
contain protest events. To qualify as a codable protest event, the event must involve some form
of claims-making or grievance expression and the news article also must have sufficient
information about the location and date, whether it occurred in public, and whether it involved
non-institutional actor. Hanna (2017) provides additional methodological details.
We used the MPEDS protocol as it existed in mid-2016 to identify protests in US wire
services (Associated Press Worldstream, New York Times, Los Angeles Times/Washington
Post,) for 1994-2010 in the Annotated English Gigaword database from the Linguistic Data
Consortium. 4 The end point is 2010 because that is the end point in Annotated English
Gigaword. We used Annotated English Gigaword because the wire service stories are already
digitized and stored in a single database, thus eliminating the need for article retrieval, and
because we had acquired the file while developing MPEDS. Wire services are separate
operations from news desks: they generate shorter stories that may be reprinted by subscribing
newspapers or used as a basis for articles written by newspaper staff. Many news wire stories are
written by “stringers”, writers scattered around the country who are paid by the article to
contribute stories. The wire service news sources are also more decentralized geographically
than a local newspaper, the articles are shorter and more focused on one issue at a time than New
York Times stories and are thus more easily parsed by machine coders. Although data from news

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

5
wire services have seldom been used in the social movement literature, they have been widely
used in the political event data analysis in political science (King and Lowe 2003, O'Brien 2010,
Schrodt, Simpson and Gerner 2001, Schrodt and Gerner 1994) The same wire service article or a
close paraphrase of it may appear in many different newspapers. We have no measure of the
extent to which there are variations in the volume of reprinting or use of wire service stories in
local newspapers. 5
The articles identified by MPEDS as containing protests were filtered for those which
included the words black, African-American, African American, or Afro-American and then read
by undergraduate coders who followed a standard protocol to identify protest events following
the criteria in Hanna (2017) and additionally determined whether the protest was by African
Americans. Because we were interested in casting an inclusive net to understand the full range of
Black mobilization, we included events if identifiable Black organizations or activists were
mentioned as participating or supporting the event, regardless of the issue, and also included
events that were likely to involve significant African American presence such as union
organizing campaigns among low-wage workers or community mobilizations around
homelessness in cities with large African American populations, as well as events that addressed
issue of racial bias or discrimination or benefits (e.g. affirmative action) without regard to the
race of the participants. We keep events in the data set even if they are only mentioned in passing
or as planned future events that received no subsequent coverage in our data and may not have
actually happened, but flag this for follow-up assessment or removal from the analysis. All
student coding was checked, corrected and hand-processed by the first author to match up events
across articles. A file of events identified by coders was sorted by location and date, and the first
author worked through the descriptions of events identified by coders to generate a master list of
distinct events, assigning each a unique identifier and associating that identifier with the articleevent record generated by the coder interface. This process of identifying and matching up
events across articles is cognitively difficult and requires a human being who can, when
necessary, refer to the original text. It also requires a protocol that records enough identifying
information about events that they can be distinguished or merged. Without this process, errors
in identifying events are inevitable. For example, the DCA data set includes three distinct event
records for a Black protest of size 400,000 in Washington, DC on October 15, 16, and 17 of
1995. One of these is the correct entry for the Million Man March, which took place on October
16. There were associated events occurring on the days before and after the big rally, but these
pre- and post- events were much smaller than the march itself and should not have been given
the same size value. Nothing in the DCA data set distinguishes these three entries: an uninformed
user of the data would assume there had been three rallies in a row.
Events that opposed Black protesters or that were the reason for Black protest were also
included in this event inventory, as it produced the most consistent way of parsing the articles.
The first author also identified subevents of larger events, the aggregation of initially separate
events into single references in subsequent news accounts, and the connections of events to each
other in campaigns. The first author also coded other features of the events from information
tagged by the undergraduate coders.
Defining Events
Although many researchers have sought to give rigorous operational definitions of “an
event” to permit event to be consistently counted, these definitions have differed between
researchers depending on their research goals and are impossible to execute with complete
Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

6
consistency in practice. It has long been recognized by protest event scholars that there are
inevitable problems in counting distinct events. Many events last multiple days, with ebbs and
flows of action and shifting personnel and tactics over time. Different researchers have made
different decisions about how to distinguish events, exactly which types of events to code, and
whether to use a size cutoff. Biggs (2016) argues for focusing only on the largest events rather
that attempting the impossible task of identifying all events. While we agree with Biggs about
the importance of size and number of participants, we show below that intensity of media
coverage is not a simple function of size: some big events are virtually ignored, some small
events receive extensive news coverage, and smaller events are often parts of larger campaigns
that in combination add up to bigger impacts. Smaller or barely-covered events are often clues to
mobilizations that are receiving little media coverage. Further, extracting size information from
news articles is an error-laden process. Different reports about the same event sometimes give
substantially different size estimates, and the same article sometimes reports different size
estimates (e.g. official estimates vs. what the organizers said). At least half of the news stories
about protests provided no size information at all, requiring the reader/coder to infer approximate
size from the context and other descriptive elements which, similarly varied between articles. An
event that sounded small and insignificant in one article might be described in ways that made it
sound much larger in another. Reporters’ use of size terms like “small” and “large” had wildly
varying meanings depending on context: a “small” group might involve 5 or 500 or 5000 or even
50,000 people, and a “large” group could be 50 or 500 or 5000 or 100,000 or close to a million.
Protest events are often fluid and evolving, and the news stories written about them are
often cryptic or ambiguous. Protests often involve several different forms of action by different
subsets of the protesters: there may be a large rally before or after a march by some subset of
protesters, and a much smaller splinter group that engages in a more radical form of actions such
as a sit-in or throwing rocks at police or through windows. Protests often involve counterprotests, sometimes at the same location and time, sometimes at a different nearby location or at
a different time. Protesters often organize coordinated multiple protests at different places at the
same time. Protesters often organize a series of protests about the same issue in the same on
different days in the same week or month. Sometimes there are multiple separately-organized
and distinct protests about the same issue on the same day by different groups doing different
things at different times in different places. Often when multiple forms of action and different
organizations or actors are named in an article, it is difficult to tell from the news story whether
they were coordinating their actions with each other or acting independently. Additionally, the
reporters who write these stories do not have protest researchers in mind, and stories often
describe incidents in cryptic or disjointed ways or interweave details and incidents from several
different events in different places or on different days into one story, jumping back and forth
between these distinct events in a manner that can be quite confusing to even the most careful
and educated human reader.
For the purposes of this paper, events were identified by identifiably distinct actions,
places, actors and issues that occurred within a bounded time frame. In constructing our data, we
have attempted to keep track of enough information to permit events to be aggregated or
disaggregated in different ways depending on the purposes of a particular analysis. When the
news stories provided enough information, we broke complex events into their component parts;
when a news story described a complex event in less detail, we created only one event but
mentioned the diversity of action or actors in the event description.

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

7
Unlike prior protest event researchers, we explicitly capture the hierarchical and
relational structure of events. We flag events that are all part of the same campaign, i.e. ongoing
events that address the same issue over time or place. In addition, we create the concept of a
master event to capture the ways in which smaller specific events are parts of larger events, a
concept that can be used to link a protest and counter-protest or to link the different forms of
action and actors within a protest, or to link coordinated protests occurring at the same time in
different places. There is always a problem about how to “count” multi-date protests. We count
an occupation or hunger fast that lasts for several days as one multi-date event, but generally
code a series of protests across multiple days as distinct events unless the news source is too
vague to permit disaggregation. A boycott is counted as one event, even if it lasted for years and
its scope was national. Threats to boycott can often be linked to specific dated events and we
treat protests tied to boycotts as distinct from the boycott itself. Multi-day marches or rides are
counted as one event, but separately-described daily rallies associated them are counted as
distinct events from the march or ride itself. We also count coordinated protests in different
places on the same day as distinct events if the places can be identified, again unless the news
source is too vague to permit disaggregation. Some “events” are statements alluding to multiple
events like “protests in the last month” or “events in all 50 states” or “protests in 25 cities.”
All this is to say that we treat the event data not as fixed rigorous counts but as
descriptive information about what was going on in the Black movement. We are attempting to
structure the data so that subsequent analyses can parse or group or select events in different
ways for different purposes. In addition, we give serious attention to the reality that our data are
about news accounts of protests, not directly about the protests themselves. We focus attention
on the extent and timing of news stories about these events.
This search identified 1049 articles that mentioned 1017 distinct events (including subevents of larger events and master events that were aggregations of prior individual events) in a
total of 1993 event-article pairs in which an event is mentioned in an article. The data are
structured relationally so the units of analysis can be events, articles, mentions of events in
articles, event aggregates (e.g. campaigns), or mentions of campaigns in articles. Of the events,
911 (88%) are by or for Blacks or their allies while 106 (10%) are anti-Black or counter-protests
to Black events.
Comparison With DCA
We compared the results of our event search strategy with what appeared in the
Dynamics of Collection Action (DCA) data set for the two years in both, 1994-5. Our project
used automated screening by MPEDS to select news stories about protests from newswire stories
in Annotated Gigaword. The DCA project identified protests in full text readings of the New
York Times, so differences between them reflect both the sources and the search method.
Calculating overlapping and non-overlapping events is only approximate for several reasons.
First DCA includes lawsuits and we usually did not, so DCA lawsuits are excluded. Second, in
both datasets there is ambiguity about what was counted as a "Black" protest, and in both data
sets there are "edge" events that may or may not be considered protests that were sometimes
recorded, but the two projects were not necessarily consistent in this. In several cases where both
sources clearly included and coded the same basic story involving a complex sequence of
interconnected events over time, the coding by the two projects yielded different numbers of
events from the same story; in this case the whole thing was just counted as an overlap in
coverage. Finally, there are several instances in DCA that just appear to be duplicate events and
Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

8
either we don't have the text of the story for the event or we do have the story and our read is that
there is only one event in the story. In these cases, we counted the DCA event only once. In
short, the comparison is not exact, but it provides a useful benchmark as the DCA data are still
being used for analysis by many scholars.
Of the 112 events in our data for these two years, we match 38 or 34% to DCA event
records. Conversely, these 38 events are 50% of the 74 DCA events that we count as events we
would have coded. Of the 148 total events located in either source, 76% are in our data and 50%
are in DCA. There do seem to be regional differences between the samples. Events in New York,
New Jersey, or Connecticut are 46% of the DCA events but only 27% of our events; 42% of the
overlapping events are from New York or New Jersey. 6 Of all the events for the 47 states besides
New York, New Jersey, or Connecticut found in either dataset, 81% are in our data and 59% are
in DCA. For events in New York, New Jersey, or Connecticut in either dataset, 61% are in our
data and 71% are in DCA.
As a more conservative comparison, there are another 24 events in DCA that have forms
or issues that were not targets of the MPEDS search strategy but might have been coded under
the inclusive coding rules we were using that include White events with Black opponents and
non-protest forms such as meetings or verbal complaints. The 38 overlapping events are 38% of
this larger 100 (76+24) set of DCA events. Using this broader criterion, of the 63 events from
NY, NJ or CT identified in either source, 48% appeared in our search and 78% appeared in
DCA, while of the 111 events from other states identified in either source, 74% are in our data
and 46% appeared in DCA.
We conclude that our search of the newswires found somewhat more events overall and
especially more events outside the New York/New Jersey/Connecticut region.
RESULTS
Articles vs events
It is important methodologically, theoretically, and substantively to recognize that there is
a non-equivalence between events and mentions of events in the news. Table 1 lays out the
information to demonstrate this point. The main body of the table is the 1993 distinct mentions
of events in articles: a single event that was mentioned in seven articles, for example, contributes
seven entries to the table; an article that mentions three events contributes three entries. The
columns are for the number of events per article and the rows are the number of articles per
event. An extra pair of columns tallies the 1017 events and the bottom two rows tallies the 1049
articles. Comparing the total number of mentions in a row to the total number of events, and the
number of mentions in a column to the total number of articles should help to clarify the relation
between events and mentions of events. For example, there were 56 events that were mentioned
three times each, yielding 168 mentions. There were 129 articles that mentioned three events,
yielding 387 mentions.
Of these 1993 event-article pairs, only 217 (11%) involved one article per event and one
event per article. Most (70%) events were mentioned only once and nearly half of all articles
(49%) mentioned more than one event. Of the 713 events that were mentioned only once, only
217 (30%) were the only event in that article, while the large majority (70%) of the one-mention
events were discussed in stories that involved other events. Conversely, of the 530 articles that
discussed only one event, only 217 (41%) were the unique source for that event, while a majority
Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

9
(59%) of the articles mentioning only one event discussed an event that was mentioned in other
articles.
The three articles that mentioned more than 7 events were: a 2000 Martin Luther King
Day round-up that included South Carolina flag protests, as well as mentioning a march of
100,000 people in Miami with no other information given; an article about the K-mart boycott
that mentioned protests in several cities; and an article about South Carolina and Georgia flag
protests and boycotts. The four articles that mentioned seven events included a summary of the
Florida affirmative action protests; an article about the South Carolina Confederate flag protests;
an article describing protests happening in different cities on the day of the big Jena Louisiana
march; and an article describing the various activities and groups that had been inspired by the
Million Man March six months later.
Figure 2 shows event coverage follows a power law: most events are mentioned only
once while a few events are mentioned repeatedly. (Andrews and Caren 2010, Seguin 2016, van
de Rijt et al. 2013, Walgrave and Vliegenthart 2010). Figure 3 conveys the proportion of total
event mentions accounted for by the most-mentioned events. Four of the 1017 events accounted
for 10% of the event mentions and 13 events (1%) accounted for nearly 20% of the event
mentions. Tables 2a and 2b summarize the 31 events that were covered in more than six articles.
Both the flow of specific events and the flow of writing or talking about events matters.
From the perspective of the physical act of protesting, each event happens only once, no matter
how often it is written about, and each event is anchored in time and space and involves a given
number of people. Events that get little or no news coverage when they happen may still be
important pointers to people organizing and trying to get attention about a problem. But from the
point of view of the audience of protest, the people to be influenced by it, the impact of an event
is more likely to be related to how often they read or hear about it. Events that were physically
comparable in the number of participants and what they did got vastly different volumes of news
coverage in these stories.
Timing of the Protests
Figure 4 shows the distribution of events across time. A red line marks 9/11/2001 as there
seems to be a clear discontinuity in the series, with protest numbers plummeting after that date.
Events in New York City are highlighted because they may especially have been affected by
9/11. Black protests as reported in the news wires did not really pick up again until 2006. Prior to
9/11, there may have been a protest wave building. There was a peak of events in late 1995 and
early 1996 and another peak right around January 2000. Figure 5 shows that number of articles
about protest per month following the same pattern. It is possible that the decline in events
appearing in the news is at least in part a "news hole" effect due to the news coverage devoted to
the War on Terror and the Iraq War. Relatedly, the 1990s was sometimes discussed as a "slow
news" decade after the end of the Cold War. However, other sources suggest that there was a true
rise in protest in the 1990s followed by its sudden decline after 9/11. The Rodney King beating
and the huge Los Angeles riot in 1992 evoked a great deal of public discussion of race and police
brutality. 7 The Million Man March in 1995 and the publicity around the OJ Simpson trial
similarly raised racial issues. Black racial consciousness was generally rising in the 1990s.
Several new Black or mixed-race organizations formed at the end of the 1990s and emphasized
criminal justice issues, including Incite!, Critical Resistance, and the Black Racial Congress
(Brewer 2003, Fletcher and Rogers 2014, Taylor 2016). The ACLU and the NAACP were also

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

10
building campaigns against racial profiling in policing. Both the rise in Black political activism
and its sudden decline after 9/11 are discussed in these sources.
Event Size and Event Coverage
The number of participants in an event is generally considered to be a big factor in its
impact and newsworthiness, and the number of participants certainly should say something about
the number of people who care about an issue. However, size of an event does not directly
correlate with how much news coverage it gets. We have not yet completed the process of
parsing the generally incomplete and inconsistent information about event size into a “size”
variable. Most events involved relatively few participants ranging from handfuls to several
thousands. Subsequent sections of this draft qualitatively describe the events and campaigns that
receive the most news coverage. Although some of the largest events (more than 100,000)
received a great deal of news coverage, many very large events did not.
The event that was both very large and very newsworthy was the 1995 Million Man
March called by Louis Farrakhan and ultimately attended by a minimum of 400,000 people and
probably more like 800,000. It became a huge topic of discussion among African Americans and
others, partly because of its focus on men, but as it developed it became a huge mobilization of
Black solidarity which had demonstrable impacts on subsequent mobilizations.
A 2010 Glenn Beck rally held at the Lincoln Memorial on the anniversary of the March
on Washington had a permit for 300,000 and is in the data because of a much smaller Black
counter-protest and complaints about Beck calling Obama racist; it received extensive coverage.
Other very large events (clearly involving more than 100,000 people) were mentioned
only once or twice. These included: (1) The 1996 Stand for Children rally, put on by a broad
coalition of liberal groups that included some Black organizations, estimated attendance 300,000.
(2) A 1997 Promise Keepers rally of several hundred thousand men that had racial reconciliation
as a major theme and many Black speakers, although reports said the crowd was overwhelmingly
white; (3) The Million Family March of 2000, jointly sponsored by Louis Farrakhan of the NOI
and Rev. Moon of the Unification Church, planning for 300,000. (4) A march of 100,000 in
Miami on Martin Luther King Day in 2000, which received one sentence of mention. (5) A 2004
March for Women’s Lives (pro-abortion rally that included a Black organizational sponsor) had
“vast crowds” and a planned size of 300,000. (6) The very large crowds in Chicago and
elsewhere the night Obama was elected president in 2008 were mentioned but the crowds
themselves were not a “story.”
There were also very large crowds at Black spring break festivals, including Freaknik in
Atlanta in 1994, 1995 and 1996 and Dayton Black Reunion in 1999 (and other years mentioned),
which were covered because of violence or disruption that occurred as spin-offs from the events.
Large crowds (more than 10,000) included: (1) the 46,000 organized by the NAACP on
Martin Luther King Day in 2000 to march against the South Caroline display of the Confederate
flag which received extensive coverage; (2) the 20,000 who marched in Jena, Louisiana in 2007
about the “Jena 6,” plus a large but not well-counted number who attended Jena 6 events in
other cities on the same day, which received extensive coverage; (3) Two of the 1999 Diallo
protests in New York appear to have had more than 10,000 present, although reports vary or are
unclear; these events were part of extensive coverage of an extended multi-event campaign; (4)
A 2000 protest of 10,000 led by Jesse Jackson outside a Dearborn department store about store
security killing a customer, two article mentions; (5) A 1994 protest in Philadelphia about
Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

11
staying the execution of Mumia Abu-Jamal attracted at least 10,000, covered as part of a broader
campaign. (6) A Nation of Islam rally in Chicago in 2000, 20,000, mentioned in one article about
Farrakhan; (7) A Christian Youth rally of 10,000 in 1996 in DC that included Black participants,
10,000. There were many events described as involving “thousands” of participants. Some
received more coverage than others.
Events involving fewer people that received extensive coverage included the riots in
Cincinnati and Oakland around police killings, the Million Youth marches of 1998 and 1999, the
events at Freddy’s, the jail riots in Los Angeles, the basketball sit-in at Rutgers, the Brown
students stealing the campus newspaper, the standoff between the KKK and Black militants in
Jasper, and the various boycotts, whose size is hard to determine.
Issues and Campaigns
Table 3 shows the counts and percentages of the broad issue groups into which events
were classified in this first round of coding. Most of the events are Black events, but we also
include anti-Black events that turned up in the searches. Most of these are White supremacist or
pro-Confederate or pro-police events. Figure 6 shows the proportion of events, articles, and
event-mentions that addressed a given issue. (Articles that mentioned multiple events may fall in
the Multiple Issue slice of the articles pie chart.) We will do more detailed coding of issues as
this project unfolds, but it was obvious in the first pass of reading and coding the articles that
policing and police violence were the most frequent issues that sparked Black protest, with more
than a third of all news coverage of protests that involved Black people centering on policing:
30% of all events, 35% of all articles discussing events and 37% of all event-article mentions
involved policing issues. The “economic” category includes a wide range of specific issues
including union campaigns, complaints about employment or consumer discrimination, and
concerns about poverty or homelessness or economic development or social programs that will
require more detailed coding. White Supremacy includes events initiated by White supremacist
groups and racially-motivated hate crimes. Confederate references events for or against
Confederate symbols. Black History references celebrations of Martin Luther King Day and
other events and commemorations of the Civil Rights Movement or Black history; most of these
events are celebratory, but there are some remember trauma and some counter events opposing
these celebrations or memorials. Group Conflict encompasses inter-group violence that did not
involve White supremacists and includes verbal or physical attacks on Blacks by others, by
Blacks on other groups, and inter-ethnic brawls. Solidary encompasses events whose purpose is
to build Black pride or morality or solidarity; most in the data are sponsored by the Nation of
Islam and are Million Man March events are spin-offs. The Other category is a collection of
many different kinds of issues, including broad coalitions with other groups, voting campaigns,
anti-violence and anti-crime campaigns, events for and against gay rights, educational issues and
many more.
Reading all the stories as part of checking student coders and not just relying on
disembodied codes made it clear that the news stories were constructing narratives about how
events connected to other events and that attending to these sequences and connections is
essential for understanding protest event data in context.
A majority, 61%, of the events were part of a campaign involving at least two related
events. Table 4 summarizes the 18 campaigns (sets of related events) that were discussed in eight
or more articles. Together they accounted for 41% of all the articles in these data. Five of these

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

12
widely-covered campaigns were about police killings (three in New York) and another two
(Jena6 and Mumia) were about race and the criminal justice system, adding up to 21% of all
news coverage.
Figure 7 shows the timing of protests for six of the issue categories, and Figure 8 shows
the timing of article publications for these same categories.
As we consider the issues about which Black people protested, we pay attention to
whether the protest campaigns appeared to be proactive or reactive. Proactive protests are
initiated by movements to push for new benefits. The movement chooses the issue and chooses
when and how to launch the campaign. Reactive protests are defensive responses to suddenly
imposed grievances or to threats of loss.
Police Violence
While the 2014 slogans “stop killing us” and “Black Lives Matter” were new, the data
show the ongoing importance of issues of policing and especially police violence in Black
protest. A small number of big campaigns accounted for 66% of the news coverage of this issue:
49% of the 395 articles that mentioned policing issues were for three campaigns (Cincinnati
2001 police killing of Timothy Thomas followed by four days of rioting, New York 1999 Diallo
police killing, Jena 6 2007 overcharging in a school fight and under-punishing hate crimes), and
another three (Sean Bell police killing New York 2006, Oscar Grant police killing Oakland 2009,
Mumia Abu-Jamal death penalty 1995-2001) accounted for 17%. But there were protests about
policing, usually police killings, reported in newswire articles for 56 different specific cities.
Often the articles were cryptic and vague about exactly how many people had protested and
when. Exploratory Internet searches revealed that some of these cryptic references referred to
extensive protest campaigns that were considered major issues in the cities involved, an example
of how even a slight reference in one source might point to a much bigger campaign.
The first panels of figures 7 and 8 show two peaks for events around police, one in the
late 1990s that included several overlapping New York campaigns and another in late 2007 and
early 2008 around the Jena protests.
We will do more detailed textual analysis of how protests against police violence were
discussed in a separate article, but there seemed to be differences in the coverage of New York
events versus others, partly tied to the behavior of the protesters but also to the behavior of the
police and the reporters. Coverage of New York protests often mentioned the protesters and their
specific actions, and the protests themselves often involved creative disruptive tactics and what
appeared to be planned arrests. By contrast, coverage of events in Cincinnati and Oakland
focused most heavily on the police and their tactics and the number arrested and the dollar value
of property damage, giving no clear description of the peaceful protests that preceded the “riot”
that became the focus, nor even of the “riots” themselves. It was difficult in both cases to
decipher how many people had been involved in rioting and exactly what most of them had
done. In several cases, there articles describe a sequence of events that implies that the police
may have provoked the riot by aggressive tactics against peaceful protesters. There is one wellattested case in which the Cincinnati police pulled up to a group of protesters standing around
peacefully after the victim’s funeral, shot beanbags at them, then drove off.
Although the beanbag incident in Cincinnati was surprising and egregious, in all the cases
with extensive news coverage, there are incidents of police show of force and there are many
Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

13
cases in the data of pro-police rallies following protests about police violence. The invocation of
"Blue Lives Matter" in the face of "Black Lives Matter" protests 2014-2016 was merely the latest
iteration of an ongoing protest dynamic.
Although most of the protests about policing were reactive, there were also proactive
campaigns against racial profiling in the late 1990s and into 2001, including both the generation
of statistical reports and disruptive protests.
White Supremacy, White Pushback, Contests About History
Affirmative action and related issues such as reparations accounted for 5% of events and
4% of articles. These were generally reactive protests to proposals to dismantle affirmative
action programs in California, Texas, Florida, and Louisiana. There were also protests provoked
by David Horowitz who toured college campuses to oppose the idea of reparations for slavery
and sought to publish an article with his ideas in college newspapers. There was a proreparations campaign at the time that was sparked by Randall Robinson's The Debt (2000) and
was receiving press attention, 8 but no proactive pro-Black events around reparations appeared in
our data.
Overt White supremacists accounted for 9% of events and 5% of articles involving Black
protest. In this period, the White supremacist groups were very small, and the counter-protesters
typically outnumbered them by a large margin. White supremacist violence took the form of hate
crimes, not disruptive protest, and the police role was generally to protect the White supremacists
from the counter-protesters. Their protests seemed intended to draw large numbers of police
(typically a few hundred) and create a situation where counter-protesters would be the ones
confronting police. In Toledo in 2005, for example, Nazis insisted on marching without a permit
in a Black neighborhood. Although the police refused to issue a permit, they nevertheless
showed up to protect the Nazis and escort them through the Black neighborhood. Once Black
people started confronting the police, the Nazis went home, and it turned into a "Black riot"
against the police. Most of these events received only one or two news mentions, but the
announced standoff between a dozen KKK members and 30 Black nationalists in the small town
of Jasper, Texas after a brutal and widely-publicized hate crime turned into a media circus with
hundreds of police and reporters and bystanders.
The victories of the Civil Rights Movement were never final and there was substantial
resistance to Blacks and other minorities in the study period. Seven percent of events and five
percent of articles about Black protests concerned Confederate symbols, especially the flag.
South Carolina and other Southern states re-introduced the Confederate flag into their state flag
displays in the 1960s as an act of defiance against the Black Civil Rights Movement. In 1994, the
NAACP and the SCLC launched proactive campaigns in South Carolina and Georgia to remove
the Confederate symbol from the state flag; these efforts provoked counter-protests. The
campaign heated up again in 2000, beginning with a call in late 1999 for a tourism boycott of
South Carolina by the South Carolina NAACP; this boycott was mentioned in 38 wire service
stories. There was a large 46,000-person anti-flag march on King Day in 2000 and other protests
on other days, as well as a series of smaller pro-flag counter-protests. There were also spin-off
protests and boycott threats in Georgia, including a threatened boycott of the NCAA games to be
played in Atlanta, and a march and counter-march in Florida. South Carolina tried to
compromise in mid-2001 by removing the flag from the Capitol itself and placing in on the
ground front of the Capitol, but that resolution pleased neither side and the protests continued at
Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

14
a lower frequency for the rest of the decade. The Confederate flag was finally removed from the
South Carolina Capitol grounds on July 10, 2015 (after the study period) in the wake of White
supremacist Dylann Roof’s massacre of nine people at Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal
Church in Charleston and Black activist Bree Newsome’s physical removal of the flag several
weeks before its official removal.
History and Solidarity
Seven percent of events and five percent of articles concerned the memorialization of Black
history, including celebrations of Martin Luther King Day, commemorations of the anniversaries
of major civil rights events, and the death of Rosa Parks. The campaign to have King’s birthday
declared a holiday began shortly after his death. President Reagan signed the federal holiday into
law in 1983 and it was first celebrated in 1986. The campaign to gain state recognition for the
holiday involved tourism boycotts of some states, especially Arizona 1987-1992, and debates
about the symbolism of reducing the days allocated to celebrating the birthdays of Washington
and Lincoln. A flurry of King Day coverage peaked in the news wires in 2000, the first year the
holiday was celebrated in all 50 states. Rosa Parks died in late October 2005, shortly before
events that were already planned for the December 2005 celebration of the 50th anniversary of
the Montgomery Bus Boycott. There were many specific events in Washington DC,
Montgomery, and Detroit that were part of Parks’s funeral, and then many more events a few
weeks later in early December memorializing both Parks and the boycott.
Five percent of events and 10% of articles discussed what we call Black solidarity events.
The single largest Black protest event of the mid-1990s was the Million Man March on October
16, 1995. This mobilization occurred in a context of heightened racial consciousness. The police
beating of Rodney King in 1991 and the 1992 Los Angeles riot (and a national wave of smaller
riots) after the not guilty verdict for the police who beat him were huge stories that predate these
data. The verdict in the widely-televised and racially-charged OJ Simpson trial (which would not
be counted as a Black movement event) occurred only 13 days before the big march. There were
many follow-up events to the Million Man March all around the country in which Black people
organized themselves to do pro-Black activities like voter registration or violence prevention or
youth development. At the same time, the coverage of some of the events classified as “Black
solidarity” events emphasized conflict, often over anti-Semitic statements by leaders of the
Nation of Islam and descriptions of it as a dangerous hate group. Two “Million Youth March”
rallies in New York of 6,000 in 1998 and 2,000 in 1999 sponsored by a member of the Nation of
Islam received extensive coverage because authorities were trying to prevent them. The 1998
event ended in a violent confrontation between police and attendees after police used strong-arm
tactics including officers in riot gear and helicopters to break up what had been a peaceful event
that had gone a minute over the agreed-upon curfew. The 1999 rally was peaceful when it finally
occurred, amid hundreds of police patrolling it.
Ethnic Conflict
The "ethnic conflict" category needs more analysis as in this paper it groups fights or
violence between ethnic groups and verbal and economic conflicts. Nearly half of the mentions
of events in newswire articles in this category as currently coded were about one case, the
Freddy's conflict, in which a small daily street protest against a White-owned store by supporters
of Black-owned businesses was entirely ignored by the news sources for several weeks until one
of the people who had been protesting entered the store, told the Black people to leave, then set a
Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

15
fire that killed eight people. This was viewed by many as an anti-Semitic hate crime and some
blamed Black activists, including Al Sharpton who had been supporting the protests. There was
zero coverage of the protesters until after the arson murder, but as coverage developed the
Freddy's event was tied discursively to many other stories about Harlem and Brooklyn protests
and boycotts about racial-economic conflicts. The second largest group of stories coded "ethnic
conflict" are a series of fights between Blacks and Hispanics in the Los Angeles jails that all
occurred within a few weeks of each other in 2006; several other prison or jail riots are also
included in this category. There category also includes several articles about fights between
Blacks and Hispanic high school students around the big immigration protests in Los Angeles.
Other Issues
Especially in the 2000s, many events with identifiable Black participants involved
coalitions or bridge-building. Black leaders and organizations were often named as participants
in support of union organizing drives or strikes or in broad coalitions around social issues such as
welfare or abortion (pro- and anti-) or gay rights (pro- and anti-). In some of these instances, the
racial dimension was named and overt, as when firms were said to be practicing racial
discrimination or anti-homeless actions were said to be racist. In other instances, the article made
no overt mention of race but named Black organizations or leaders who were participating. In
still other instances, we assumed that many of the participants were Black from the nature and
location of the event, e.g. low-wage workers or poor residents in a majority-Black city. Some of
these campaigns were proactive, many others were reactive. None of these became one of the big
stories that received extensive news coverage. We need to do more detailed analysis of these
diverse events.
There were huge immigrant rallies in 2006 in response to repressive anti-immigrant
legislation proposed that year. We did not select or code these large rallies as they were Latinofocused. However, there are many smaller events in the data about Black protest or mobilizations
that involve immigration, some in which Blacks advocate against immigrants, some in which
there are attempts to build coalitions between Black Americans and Latino immigrants, and some
that call attention to the needs of Black immigrants. The Black Alliance for Just Immigration was
founded in 2006 in the context of this mobilization and still exists with the specific agendas of
advocating for racial equality and the treatment of immigrants and of bringing Black immigrant
communities into dialog and alliance with longstanding Black American communities.
Additionally, many of the Black protests in the data are by Haitians, especially in New York,
where most of victims of police violence at the center of major protests were Haitian, and in
Miami, where Haitians protested their unequal treatment compared to Cubans.
DISCUSSION
We provide the first available systematic account of the Black movement for a 16-year
period and even in this preliminary analysis reveal patterns that have not previously been
recognized. The protest event data we have collected make it clear that there was significant
Black activism between 1994 and 2010. The data and qualitative historical sources coincide in
suggesting that Black mobilization was generally rising in the 1990s through 2001 and that this
wave of protest and mobilization was interrupted by 9/11, resuming in the latter half of the
2000s.
We need to pay particular attention to a movement’s position in the majority-minority
dynamics of a racially- and ethnically-hierarchical nation (Oliver 2017). Minority movements,
Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

16
by their sheer minority-ness, are usually not able to take power and impose their will on others.
Minority movements must thread their way through majority politics which all too often takes an
anti-minority turn. They are underrepresented in “mainstream” (i.e. majority-dominated) news
media and, when their movements are covered, the stories often reflect the majority standpoint or
gaze, rather than the self-perception of the minority group. They require allies. Their
mobilization may trigger threat responses from dominant majorities who have greater power and
resources. Minorities thus are vulnerable to losing the victories they have gained through
majority counter-mobilization. Politicians seeking electoral victories frequently stoke antiminority sentiments as a way of gaining votes from the majority.
These majority-minority dynamics play out in these data on Black protests. Our
preliminary analysis suggests that much of this struggle was reactive and defensive rather than
proactive, including especially responses to police violence, unsuccessful attempts to resist the
rollbacks of affirmative action programs, and reactions to White supremacist rallies. The
impression from reading the news stories about other issues is that many of them were also
reactive responses to specific incidents of discrimination in employment or against customers,
although these campaigns can also be understood as proactive attempts to make people stop
discriminating. Also apparently reactive were a series of protests of the failure to allow the return
of lower income Black residents to New Orleans after hurricane Katrina and the redevelopment
of New Orleans as a whiter and wealthier city, and protests against punitive measures against
homeless people.
There is evidence of attempts to move to a proactive stance in the attacks on Confederate
symbols through 2001, which got extensive coverage, and in the mobilizations around disparate
policing in the late 1990s, which received less attention at least in the form of news coverage of
protests, and around disparate policing of youth and hate crimes, which got a great deal of
attention in 2007. Careful coding may identify a proactive element in some of the campaigns
around diverse issues that received less extensive coverage, as well.
The largest instance of proactive mobilization was the Million Man March which,
although it did not articulate any demands on government or other targets, had the agenda of
calling Black men into taking responsibility for their families and communities, and appears to
have had the effect of inspiring a great deal of Black mobilization in the late 1990s. At the same
time, news coverage of Louis Farrakhan and the Nation of Islam often emphasizes their antiSemitism and sometimes even treats them as a violent hate group.
There are also many instances and clues in the data of Black organizations forming
alliances or coalitions with other racial groups, especially in union campaigns and urban
campaigns in defense of low income people, but also in participation in broad coalitions against
war, for expansion of social welfare programs, or for or against abortion or gay rights.
Methodologically, we show the importance of attending simultaneously to the news
media as sources of information about protest and to the news media as actors in the protest
system that contribute to outcomes. We show that it is possible to collect and construct data files
in a way that makes it possible to work back and forth between alternate representations of the
data as sets of events or sets of articles about events. We show the importance of recognizing the
relations among events and the ways in which most events are connected to other events. We
demonstrate that it is possible to define the concepts of campaign, master event, and subevent to
capture the hierarchical and relational nature of events and, in so doing, provide a rich and
Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

17
flexible way of conveying information from protest event data about what activists are doing. At
a practical level, this means keeping much more textual information from the source article in a
data accessible with an event identifier, something that is easy to do with modern computer
capacities. Article identifiers also allow the possibility of retrieving the original sources to permit
a textual analysis of how events were described, and how "stories" get constructed. Several of the
most frequently-repeated "stories" in these data, such as the Freddy's protesters and the sequence
of events in the Jena 6 case, were never described contemporaneously, only after the fact, but
nevertheless became treated in subsequent news stories as events that had triggered other events.
Or, as another example, a close reading of the accounts of "riots" even in mainstream media
writing from a police-identified standpoint sometimes reveal clear cases of police provocation or
highly repressive policing.
For more recent protests, there is a growing body of scholarship that examines social
media (e.g., Bonilla and Rosa 2015, Freelon, McIlwain and Clark 2016, Gill 2016, Hanna 2016)
as a source of data about protest. These studies show the interplay of social media and social
movements and also how each specific medium is different in how it is used by and interacts
with social movements and other organizations. However, social media platforms are changing
constantly, cannot provide any data for the 1990s or early 2000s, and provide only inconsistent
and evolving data traces after the mid-2000s. If we want to fill in the empirical gap about
movements of the recent past, we need to collect data from archives of news sources. A judicious
use of new technologies will make it possible to process more sources and expand our empirical
base of information.

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

18

TABLES

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

19
Table 1. Distribution of events per article and articles per event for total article-event mentions in news wire stories.
Number events per article
Articles per
event

Mentions

Events

Cumulative Proportion

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

12

#

prop

#

prop

Mentions

Events

1

217

185

107

83

56

26

14

8

9

8

713

0.36

713

0.70

1.00

1.00

2

87

99

60

40

21

7

2

0

0

0

316

0.16

158

0.16

0.64

0.30

3

37

34

28

40

16

10

3

0

0

0

168

0.08

56

0.06

0.48

0.14

4

40

42

31

17

8

0

2

0

0

0

140

0.07

35

0.03

0.40

0.09

5

14

17

9

9

3

2

1

0

0

0

55

0.03

11

0.01

0.33

0.05

6

19

26

20

8

4

0

1

0

0

0

78

0.04

13

0.01

0.30

0.04

7

2

18

6

10

4

0

1

0

0

1

42

0.02

6

0.01

0.26

0.03

8

5

10

13

9

5

6

0

0

0

0

48

0.02

6

0.01

0.24

0.02

9

6

5

5

2

0

0

0

0

0

0

18

0.01

2

0.00

0.22

0.02

10

2

7

17

9

2

2

0

0

0

1

40

0.02

4

0.00

0.21

0.02

13

2

5

6

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

13

0.01

1

0.00

0.19

0.01

15

1

6

15

7

1

0

0

0

0

0

30

0.02

2

0.00

0.18

0.01

16

8

8

4

6

4

0

1

0

0

1

32

0.02

2

0.00

0.17

0.01

23

6

7

6

3

1

0

0

0

0

0

23

0.01

1

0.00

0.15

0.01

24

1

15

6

1

1

0

0

0

0

0

24

0.01

1

0.00

0.14

0.01

29

17

8

3

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

29

0.01

1

0.00

0.13

0.01

30

5

15

7

1

2

0

0

0

0

0

30

0.02

1

0.00

0.11

0.00

38

4

8

7

13

4

0

1

0

0

1

38

0.02

1

0.00

0.10

0.00

47

13

15

11

5

1

1

1

0

0

0

47

0.02

1

0.00

0.08

0.00

50

35

9

3

1

1

0

1

0

0

0

50

0.03

1

0.00

0.05

0.00

59

9

19

23

7

1

0

0

0

0

0

59

0.03

1

0.00

0.03

0.00

Total

530

558

387

272

135

54

28

8

9

12

1,993

1.00

1017

1.00

# Articles

530

279

129

68

27

9

4

1

1

1049

P of articles

0.51

0.27

0.12

0.06

0.03

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.00

1
0.0
0

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

20
Table 2a. Events which were covered by more than 9 articles
Event Name

Number
Articles

Description
General reference to the riots in Cincinnati 2001 after a
Cincy010409_4daysriots police killing
59
MillionManMarch95
The Million Man March, at least 400,000 people attended 50
A rally of over 20,000 people from all around the country in
Jena, Louisiana around over-charging Black youths for a
Jena_bigrally070920
fight and under-punishing a noose hung on a tree
47
NAACP tourism boycott of South Carolina about the
SCBoycott00
Confederate Flag
38
Pickets in front of Freddy’s clothing store about conflicts
FreddysPickets95
between Black-owned and other-owned businesses
30
A rally of about 6000 Black youth in Harlem sponsored by
NOI. The city tried to prevent it and then the police attacked
a previously-peaceful rally in riot gear and with helicopters
MillionYouth98
one minute after the rally was supposed to end.
29
A man who had been picketing at Freddy’s went into the
store, told the Black people to leave, then set a fire that
FreddysArson95
killed 8 people and burned the store.
24
A month of daily ritualized protests at which several
thousand people total were arrested for blocking the doors to
the police station over the refusal to charge the police who
Diallo_9903daily
killed Amadou Diallo
23
A peaceful rally of about 2000 youths sponsored by NOI
received extensive news coverage because the city again
MillionYouth99
tried to prevent it.
16
A march of 46,000 people called by the NAACP to protest
SCFlag000117
South Carolina’s display of the Confederate flag.
16
A lawsuit about racial bias in Cincinnati policing that was
filed shortly before the killing that provoked the riot and
Cincy01_lawsuitfiled
was litigated and settled in the riot aftermath.
15
A code for a recap of the past events in Jena that led to the
Jena_recap
protest.
15
Disorderly confrontation with the Oakland police after a
OGrant_100708riot
transit police officer killed Oscar Grant in 2009.
13
Cincy010414_funeral
Funeral of victim of police killing in Cincinnati
10
OGrant_0901
Oscar Grant protest in Oakland
10
SCFlag000107_proflag March of 6000 in favor of Confederate flag in SC
10
General reference to there having been several riots in Los
jailriot_LA05
Angeles jails that month
10

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

21
Table 2b. Events which were covered by 7-9 articles
Event Name
Cincy010414_march
Rutgers_Sitin
Brown_newspapers01

Jasper980627_KKK

Jasper980627_NBP
Jena_noose
SeanBell080507
jailriot_LA05_20060204

Beckrally100828
Cincy010416_boycott
Cincy010507_protests
Diallo_9902daily
GAFlagBoycott00
SCFlag000402

Description
A protest march of 2000 people about the Cincinnati
police killing of Timothy Thomas
In 1995 Rutgers students sat on the basketball court
and disrupted the game in protest of the Rutger's
president's racially biased remarks
Brown students stole the press run of the campus
newspaper that printed Horowitz's anti-reparations
article in 2001
A handful of KKK members were met by 30 Black
militants and hundreds of reporters, police and
bystanders in a small Texas town where there had
been a hate crime in 1998
A handful of KKK members were met by 30 Black
militants and hundreds of reporters, police and
bystanders in a small Texas town where there had
been a hate crime in 1998
Somebody hung a noose on a tree at the Jena high
school; not covered at the time but often referred to in
stories about the Jena protests
A protest about the killing of Sean Bell in 2008 by
New York Police
A riot in a Los Angeles jail in 2005
Glenn Beck held an anti-Obama rally of hundreds of
thousands at the Lincoln Memorial on the
anniversary of the March on Washington in 2010.
There was a smaller Black counter-protest
A 2001 tourism boycott of Cincinnati about policing
A protest by 200 people in Cincinnati the day after
the police killing of Timothy Thomas
Reference to daily protests in the police killing of
Amadou Diallo in New York in 1999
Threatened boycott of Georgia for the Confederate
flag's incorporation into the state flag
A protest by more than 600 people against the
Confederate flag in SC

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

Number
Articles
9
9
8

8

8
8
8
8

7
7
7
7
7
7

22
Table 3 Broad issue group for events
Broad Issue Group

Number Events
Black* Anti**

Policing Issues
Affirmative Action, Reparations &
Related
Black History Commemoration

Percentage of Events

Total

Black* Anti** Total

287

22

309

32

21

30

47

3

50

5

3

5

70

1

71

8

1

7

Confederate Symbols
White Supremacy (groups and racial
hate crimes)
Group Conflict (Verbal or violent)

45

27

72

5

25

7

56

35

91

6

33

9

50

3

53

5

3

5

Economic Misc.

98

98

11

0

10

Black Solidarity Events

46

1

47

5

1

5

Other

212

14

226

23

13

22

Total

911

106 1,017

100

100

100

* Events where the protagonists were Black or included identifiably Black actors. Events
and counter-events can both be coded as pro-Black if the actors on both sides are or include
Black people, e.g. pro- and anti-gay events by Black people. In this preliminary analysis, events
that appeared to involve Black people are included even if the issue was not racial, as in union
campaigns for workers who are disproportionately racial minorities or urban campaigns around
economic issues.
** Events where the actors were expressing opposition to issues supported by Black
groups. These typically enter the data because there were Black counter-protests to them or they
were counter-protests to Black protests.

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

23
Table 4. Campaigns that received the most news coverage. Unit of analysis is 1271 campaignarticle pairs (2 page table)
Campaign
Cincy01

#
articles
70

Cum
%
%
0.06 0.06

Diallo

69

0.05 0.11

Jena6

55

0.04 0.15

MillionMan95 50

0.04 0.19

SCFlag00

42

0.03 0.23

MillionYouth

40

0.03 0.26

125thStreet

36

0.03 0.28

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

Description
2001 Police killing of Timothy Thomas in Cincinnati, 3-4
days of rioting, other protests. News articles focus on policing
and often describe police blocking or attacking peaceful
protests and are unclear about how many people were rioting.
There were a few hundred arrests. Largest march described as
1000 people
1999 Police killing of Amadou Diallo in New York, months
of protest in several waves into 2000 and after that included a
month of daily ritualized blockades and arrests of celebrities
at the police station. Most events relatively small, one rally
may have had more than 10,000 and a couple had 1000 to
perhaps 5000.
2007 protest organized on-line about over-charging 6 smalltown Jena LA high school students for a fight that followed a
noose-hanging incident. Over 20,000 people came to Jena and
there were coordinated protests in many other cities plus
follow-up rallies about the linked issues of punishing hate
crimes and unequal justice.
1995 One event. At least 400,000, probably closer to 800,000
gathered in DC at the call of Louis Farrakhan of the NOI for
Black men to repent and serve their families and
communities. Became a huge discussion topic among Black
people. There was much coverage at the time and many
references to it in follow up events.
2000-1 A series of protests tied to the NAACP attempts to get
the Confederate flag removed from the South Carolina state
house. One big anti-flag rally, 46,000 people on MLK Day in
2000 and several thousand pro-flag protesters the week before
plus a multi-year tourism boycott. Other events varied in size
from small to several thousand including counter-protests.
1998, 1999, 2000 The Million Youth marches in New York
sponsored by Kahlil Muhammad of the NOI; the city tried to
prevent the 1998 and 1999 marches and used excessive police
force to break up the 1998 event. There were 6000 attending
in 1998, 2000 in 1999 and 300 in 2000.
1995 A man who had been part of a small group of Black
pickets outside Freddy's clothing store set the store on fire
and killed 8 people. After the arson/murder, there was
extensive coverage that tied the violence to the Freddy's
pickets, to other protests about 125th Street vendors, broader
conflicts about Black vs. other owned businesses, and antiSemitic statements by Black protesters.

24

Campaign
SeanBell

#
articles
24

Cum
%
%
0.02 0.30

OGrant

22

0.02 0.32

Mumia

20

0.02 0.34

Vote2000

19

0.01 0.35

Rutgers95

12

0.01 0.36

jailriot_LA05

12

0.01 0.37

Dorismond

11

0.01 0.38

Decater99

10

0.01 0.39

UCAffAct

10

0.01 0.39

CocaCola

9

0.01 0.40

Jasper

9

0.01 0.41

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

Description
2006 Police killing of Sean Bell in New York and a series of
protests into 2008. No very large protests but many smaller
creative disruptive protests, including six coordinated
simultaneous traffic-blocking events at bridges and tunnels.
2009 Police killing of Oscar Grant in Oakland CA led to
disruptive protests and rioting in several waves. News articles
describe coercive policing in response to any disorder.
Hundreds arrested. Few size estimates, largest march seems
to be perhaps 1000 people.
1995-2001 A series of events seeking to block the execution
of Mumia Abu-Jamal for murder of a police officer. 10,000 in
the largest event, thousands in several others. Mixed-race
protesters. Often involves coordinated protests in multiple
cities on the same day.
2000 Protests around vote counting in Florida in the
presidential election and subsequent protests about the
outcome. Black groups part of larger coalitions. Tied to a
major political story and Constitutional crisis. Rally sizes
varied.
1995 Protests about the Rutger's president seeming to say the
Blacks were genetically inferior. Protests of a few hundred,
one disrupted a basketball game.
2005 A series of fights between Black and Hispanic inmates
in the jails of Los Angeles.
2000 Patrick Dorismond killed by New York police, series of
protests, largest was about 3000
1999 Jesse Jackson protests in Decatur IL about youths
expelled from school after a fight at a football game. Protest
sizes unclear but one article mentions "busloads."
1995-7 Protests in California around abolishing affirmative
action in the UC system. Largest rally has thousands.
2000 One 500-person rally and a five-day bus ride of 45
people between Greensboro NC and Wilmington DE with
daily rallies (probably small) along the way to protest racial
discrimination in employment by Coca Cola.
1998 After a widely publicized hate crime that is not in our
data, the KKK and the New Black Panthers scheduled dueling
rallies in the small town of Jasper TX. About a dozen KKK
and 30 Black militants showed up along with several hundred
each of media reporters, police, and bystanders. News
coverage built up to the event, and then stressed its
anticlimactic media circus character.

25

FIGURES
Figure 1. African American issues vs. other issues in Soule et al Dynamics of Contention protest data from the New York Times 19601995

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

26
Figure 2. Number of events by articles per event.

Frequency Distribution of Articles per Event
800

700

600

Number of Events

500

400

300

200

100

0
0

10

20

30

Articles Per Event

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

40

50

60

27
Figure 3. Cumulative proportion of coverage

Cumulative proportion of event mentions ranked by number of mentions
1.20

1.00

Cumulative Mentions

0.80

0.60

0.40

0.20

0.00
0.00

0.10

0.20

0.30

0.40

0.50

0.60

0.70

Cumulative Proportion of Events (ranked by mentions)

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

0.80

0.90

1.00

28
Figure 4 Timing of Events

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

29
Figure 5 Timing of Articles About Black Protest

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

30
Figure 6. Issues in Events, Mentions of Events in Articles, and Articles

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

31
Figure 7 Timing of Events for Different Issues

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

32

Figure 8 Timing of Articles Covering Protests About Different Issues

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

33

REFERENCES
Amenta, Edwin, Neal Caren, Sheera Joy Olasky and James E. Stobaugh. 2009. "All the Movements Fit to
Print: Who, What, When, Where, and Why SMO Families Appeared in the New York Times in the
Twentieth Century." American Sociological Review 74(4):636-56.
Andrews, Kenneth T. and Neal Caren. 2010. "Making the News: Movement Organizations, Media
Attention, and the Public Agenda." American Sociological Review 75(6):841-66. doi:
10.1177/0003122410386689.
Asoka, Kaavya. 2015. "Women and Black Lives Matter." Pp. 54-61, Vol. 62: University of Pennsylvania
Press.
Baxandall, Rosalyn. 2001. "Re-Visioning the Women's Liberation Movement's Narrative: Early Second
Wave African American Feminists." Feminist Studies 27(1):225.
Bell, Joyce. 2004. "’’Do’s and Don’ts:’’ the Black Press, Racial Etiquette, and Black Politics of Resistance,
1956-1969." Pp. 1: American Sociological Association.
Bell, Reston N., Tiffany J. Jones, Ricshawn Adkins Roane, Kidist M. Square and Rita Chi-Ying Chung. 2013.
"Reflections on the Murder of Trayvon Martin." Journal for Social Action in Counseling &
Psychology 5(1):88-102.
Berg, Herbert. 2005. "Mythmaking in the African American Muslim Context: The Moorish Science
Temple, the Nation of Islam, and the American Society of Muslims." Journal of the American
Academy of Religion 73(3):685-703. doi: 10.1093/jaarel/lfi075.
Berger, Dan. 2009. "Rescuing Civil Rights from Black Power. (Cover Story)." Journal for the Study of
Radicalism 3(1):1-27.
Bergin, Cathy. 2016. "‘Unrest among the Negroes’: The African Blood Brotherhood and the Politics of
Resistance." Race & Class 57(3):45-58. doi: 10.1177/0306396815609844.
Biggs, Michael. 2016. "Size Matters." Sociological Methods & Research:0049124116629166. doi:
10.1177/0049124116629166.
Bonilla, Yarimar and Jonathan Rosa. 2015. "#Ferguson: Digital Protest, Hashtag Ethnography, and the
Racial Politics of Social Media in the United States." American Ethnologist 42(1):4-17. doi:
doi:10.1111/amet.12112.
Boyd, Michelle. 2008. "Defensive Development: The Role of Racial Conflict in Gentrification." Urban
Affairs Review 43(6):751-76.
Brame, Wendy and Thomas Shriver. 2013. "Surveillance and Social Control: The Fbi's Handling of the
Black Panther Party in North Carolina." Crime, Law & Social Change 59(5):501-16. doi:
10.1007/s10611-013-9426-1.
Brand, Anna Livia. 2008. "Rebuilding Resilience through Urban Social Movements in Post-Katrina New
Orleans." Conference Papers -- American Sociological Association:1.
Breitzer, Susan Roth. 2011. "Race, Immigration, and Contested Americanness: Black Nativism and the
American Labor Movement, 1880--1930." Race/Ethnicity: Multidisciplinary Global Perspectives
4(2):269-83. doi: 10.2979/racethmulglocon.4.2.269.
Brewer, Rose M. 2003. "Black Radical Theory and Practice: Gender, Race, and Class." Socialism and
Democracy 17(1):109-22. doi: 10.1080/08854300308428344.
Brooms, Derrick R. and Armon R. Perry. 2016. "“It’s Simply Because We’re Black Men”." Journal of Men's
Studies 24(2):166-84. doi: 10.1177/1060826516641105.
Brown, Nicole Marie. 2015. "Freedom’s Stock: Political Consumerism, Transnational Blackness and the
Black Star Line." Critical Sociology (Sage Publications, Ltd.) 41(2):237-48. doi:
10.1177/0896920514529675.
Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

34
Croicu, Mihai and Nils B. Weidmann. 2015. "Improving the Selection of News Reports for Event Coding
Using Ensemble Classification." Research & Politics 2(4):2053168015615596.
De Choudhury, Munmun, Shagun Jhaver, Benjamin Sugar and Ingmar Weber. 2016. "Social Media
Participation in an Activist Movement for Racial Equality." in Proceedings of the Tenth
International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media (ICWSM 2016).
Fletcher, Bill, Jr. and Jamala Rogers. 2014. "No One Said That It Would Be Easy." Black Scholar 44(1):86112. doi: 10.5816/blackscholar.44.1.0086.
Freelon, Deen, Charlton McIlwain and Meredith Clark. 2016. "Quantifying the Power and Consequences
of Social Media Protest." new media & society:1461444816676646.
Gill, Emmett L. 2016. "“Hands up, Don’t Shoot” or Shut up and Play Ball? Fan-Generated Media Views of
the Ferguson Five." Journal of Human Behavior in the Social Environment 26(3/4):400-12. doi:
10.1080/10911359.2016.1139990.
Hanna, Alex. 2016. "Media Ecology and Backlash Mobilization: Black Political Repression and
#Blacklivesmatter." Pp. 94-127 in Automated Coding of Protest Event Data: Development and
Applications. University of Wisconsin - Madison. : Unpublished PhD dissertation.
Hanna, Alex. 2017. "Mpeds: Automating the Generation of Protest Event Data." Deposited at SocArXiv
https://osf.io/preprints/socarxiv/xuqmv.
Harris, Angelique C. 2014. "Aids Activism among African American Women: Identity and Social Justice."
Research in Social Movements, Conflicts & Change 37:181-204. doi: 10.1108/S0163786X20140000037006.
Hines, Revathi I. 2015. "The Price of Pollution: The Struggle for Environmental Justice in Mossville,
Louisiana." Western Journal of Black Studies 39(3):198-208.
Jenkins, J. Craig, David Jacobs and Jon Agnone. 2003. "Political Opportunities and African-American
Protest, 1948--1997." American Journal of Sociology 109(2):277-303.
King, Gary and Will Lowe. 2003. "An Automated Information Extraction Tool for International Conflict
Data with Performance as Good as Human Coders: A Rare Events Evaluation Design."
International Organization 57(3):617-42. doi: 10.1017/S0020818303573064.
Luna, Zakiya. 2009. "From Rights to Justice: Women of Color Changing the Face of Us Reproductive
Rights Organizing." Societies Without Borders 4(3):343-65. doi:
10.1163/187188609X12492771031618.
Luna, Zakiya. 2016. "“Truly a Women of Color Organization”." Gender & Society 30(5):769-90. doi:
10.1177/0891243216649929.
Marakov, Peter, Jasmine Lorenzini, Klaus Rothenhäusler and Bruno Wüest. 2015. "Towards Automated
Protest Event Analysis."
Martin, Andrew W., Patrick Rafail and John D. McCarthy. 2017. "What a Story?". Social Forces 96(2):779802. doi: 10.1093/sf/sox057.
McAdam, Doug, Robert J. Sampson, Simon Weffer and Heather MacIndoe. 2005. ""There Will Be
Fighting in the Streets": The Distorting Lens of Social Movement Theory." Mobilization: An
International Journal 10(1):1-18.
Nardulli, Peter F., Scott L. Althaus and Matthew Hayes. 2015. "A Progressive Supervised-Learning
Approach to Generating Rich Civil Strife Data." Sociological Methodology:0081175015581378.
Neville, Helen A. and Jennifer F. Hamer. 2006. "Revolutionary Black Women's Activism: Experience and
Transformation." Black Scholar 36(1):2-11.
O'Brien, Sean P. 2010. "Crisis Early Warning and Decision Support: Contemporary Approaches and
Thoughts on Future Research." International Studies Review 12(1):87-104.
Oliver, Pamela. 2017. "The Ethnic Dimensions in Social Movements." Mobilization: An International
Quarterly 22(4):395-416. doi: 10.17813/1086-671x-22-4-395.

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

35
Rafail, Patrick. 2018. "Protest in the City: Urban Spatial Restructuring and Dissent in New York, 1960–
2006." Urban Studies (Sage Publications, Ltd.) 55(1):244-60.
Ralph, Michael. 2009. ""It's Hard out Here for a Pimp … with … a Whole Lot of Bitches Jumpin' Ship":
Navigating Black Politics in the Wake of Katrina." Public Culture 21(2):343-76. doi:
10.1215/08992363-2008-032.
Richie, Beth. 2012. Arrested Justice Black Women, Violence, and America’s Prison Nation: New York :
New York University Press, c2012.
Robinson, Randall. 2000. The Debt : What America Owes to Blacks. New York: Dutton.
Rogers, Jamala. 2015. Ferguson Is America: Roots of Rebellion: Jamala Rogers.
Schrodt, Philip A, Erin M Simpson and Deborah J Gerner. 2001. "Monitoring Conflict Using Automated
Coding of Newswire Reports: A Comparison of Five Geographical Regions." Pp. 8-9 in Conference
‘Identifying Wars: Systematic Conflict Research and it’s Utility in Conflict Resolution and
Prevention’, Uppsala.
Schrodt, Philip A. and Deborah J. Gerner. 1994. "Validity Assessment of a Machine-Coded Event Data Set
for the Middle East, 1982-92." American Journal of Political Science:825-54.
Seguin, Charles. 2016. "Cascades of Coverage: Dynamics of Media Attention to Social Movement
Organizations." Social Forces 94(3):997-1020. doi: 10.1093/sf/sov085.
Soule, Sarah, Doug McAdam, D. McCarthy John and Susan Olzak. n.d. "Dynamics of Collective Action."
http://web.stanford.edu/group/collectiveaction/cgi-bin/drupal/.
Taylor, Keeanga-Yamahtta. 2016. From #Blacklivesmatter to Black Liberation. Chicago, Illinois:
Haymarket Books.
Taylor, Verta. 1989. "Social Movement Continuity: The Women's Movement in Abeyance." American
Sociological Review 54(5):761-75.
van de Rijt, Arnout, Eran Shor, Charles Ward and Steven Skiena. 2013. "Only 15 Minutes? The Social
Stratification of Fame in Printed Media." American Sociological Review 78(2):266-89. doi:
10.1177/0003122413480362.
Walgrave, Stefaan and Rens Vliegenthart. 2010. "Why Are Policy Agendas Punctuated? Friction and
Cascading in Parliament and Mass Media in Belgium." Journal of European Public Policy
17(8):1147-70. doi: 10.1080/13501763.2010.513562.
White, Janelle L. 2005. "Our Silence Will Not Protect Us: Black Women's Experiences Mobilizing to
Confront Sexual and Domestic Violence." Pp. 1-36: American Sociological Association.
Williams, Johnny E. 2004. "Vanguards of Hope: The Role of Culture in Mobilizing African-American
Women's Social Activism in Arkansas." Sociological Spectrum 24(2):129-56. doi:
10.1080/02732170490271753.
Wueest, Bruno, Klaus Rothenhäusler and Swen Hutter. 2013. "Using Computational Linguistics to
Enhance Protest Event Analysis."
Zamora, Sylvia and Chinyere Osuji. 2014. "Mobilizing African Americans for Immigrant Rights: Framing
Strategies in Two Multi-Racial Coalitions." Latino Studies 12(3):424-48. doi: 10.1057/lst.2014.47.

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

36

NOTES
1

This research was funded by National Science Foundation grant #1423784. Much earlier
versions of this paper with what turned to be incomplete data including only articles mentioning
boycotts were presented at the Mobilization Conference in San Diego, California in May 2017
and the American Sociological Association conference in Montreal, Quebec in August 2017.
2

It should be noted that an issue code as African American civil rights is not the same as events
peopled by African Americans. To the extent that the Black people organized events around
other issues such as police brutality or neighborhood development or anti-drug mobilization or
religion, the plot in Figure 1 may be an undercount of all Black protest activity. Adjusting for
this is unlikely to change the basic pattern in the data, however.
3

((Black OR African American OR African-American) AND (protest OR movement) )

4

The New York Times and Associated Press Worldstream files cover the entire period 19942010. The Los Angeles Times – Washington Post files are for 1994-8 and 2003-9. There are also
stories for 2010 from the Washington Post Bloomberg service.
5

It may be possible to do some methodological assessment of this issue, but for present purposes
we take the news wire stories as given. We are aware that in some cases, several virtuallyidentical stories are filed on the same day as one or two later-breaking sentences are added to a
previous story. In these cases, it is reasonable to assume that only one of these stories per day
was ever printed in local newspapers. We plan to adjust for this as we refine the analysis.
6

We found no Connecticut Black protest events for 1994 and 1995

7

First author’s personal memories.

8

The first author attended pro-reparations presentations by local activists in 2000 or 2001 which
were part of this movement. These activists attended the Durban World Conference Against
Racism which was held August 31 to September 8 in 2001. The first author also recalls debating
the idea of reparations with relatives during this time.

Oliver, Hanna, Lim Black Protest 1/14/19

