"x"
"1" "RUNNING HEAD: SOCIAL INTERACTION   ALTER S  SELF-IDENTITY"
"2" "S ocial interaction   alter s   self- identity:"
"3" "Adapted   methods  for measuring  active self-concepts"
"4" "Daina Crafa 1 ,2 * , Joshua Schiff 3 , & Mathieu B. Brodeur 3"
"5" "1   CrafaLab,  Interacting Minds Centre, School of Culture and Society, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark"
"6" "2   Integrated Program in Neuroscience, Douglas Mental Health University Institute, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada"
"7" "3  Department of Psychiatry, Douglas Mental Health University Institute, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada"
"8" "*Corresponding author:"
"9" "Daina Crafa"
"10" "Interacting Minds Centre"
"11" "School of Culture and Society"
"12" "Aarhus  University"
"13" "Jens Christian Skous Vej 4"
"14" "8000 Aarhus, Denmark"
"15" "email:  daina.crafa@cas.au.dk"
"16" "website:  www.dainacrafa.com"
"17" "Twitter:  @dcrafa"
"18" "Highlights"
"19" "N ew scale differentiates active from stable self-concepts"
"20" "N ew social interaction priming  reliably  induces identity changes"
"21" "Patients are as  socially  adaptable as controls but change differently"
"22" "Patients hold opposing identities after interaction"
"23" "Reproduced!"
"24" "Graphical abstract"
"25" "Special thanks to D.M. Higgins for graphics design."
"26" "Key words : identity, social interaction, schizophrenia, cognitive mediation, Sasta paradigm, self-construal , self"
"27" "Abstract"
"28" "Social interactions require fluid self-concepts to adapt to real-time dynamics – in theory. In practice, fluid processes have been difficult to experimentally quantify. Active self-concepts theoretically  respond to  social contexts while stable self-concepts are context-independent.  Such  fluctuations in ‘typical’ adults have rarely been reported.  S elf-concept research has broad implications ;  inducing and quantifying active   fluctuations is long-sought-after in social psychology.  However, s ince their inception, self-concepts  were  studied using bicultural participants (e.g., cultural priming experiments) and  characterized  in psychiatric patients (e.g., ‘fragmented self’). By increasing methodological saliency and ecological validity of popular methods, three studies tested  an  adapted scale  and  social interaction priming procedure  for differentiating between active and stable self-concepts. Psychometrics, reproducibility and clinical relevance are compared to a common measure of bicultural self-concept fluidity using optimized statistics. Pre-Study controls (N=42) characterize repetition effects. Study 1 :   Active self-concepts are suppressed  in c onvenience sample of 62 W.E.I.R.D. students. Study 2 :   D iverse, locally-representative and randomly-sampled adults (N=43)   replicates Study 1 findings . Study 3 :  Patients  with schizophrenia   (N=27) hold   opposing  self-concepts,  adopting  their interlocutor’s  while keeping  their own. Four distinct flexibility phenotypes emerge. These studies are the first to quantify active self-concepts. This article precedes a manuscript series interrogating replicability, neural activation s  and cultural-clinical implications."
"29" "S ocial interaction  priming  alter s  identity:"
"30" "Adapted   methods  for measuring  the fluidity  of  active self-concepts"
"31" "Humans  perceive  the world through a lens of  ‘ self ’ . We  consciously or unconsciously  focus on self-relevant information and screen out information that is self-irrelevant.  This process of screening the social world is called  cognitive mediation  (Chen, 2012;  Dragolov & Boehnke, 2015;  Gardner et al., 1999; Howard, 1994; Kitayama & Uskul, 2011; Kutnick, 2012; Legare et al., 2015; McConnell, 2011; Overton, 2013; Senzaki et al., 2013; Van Dijk, 2015, 1990, Wood, 2000) .  Defining  content of this screen are our  self-concepts  (Crafa & Nagel,  201 9 ,  20 20 ; Kitayama & Uskul, 2011) . As dynamic social  contexts  introduce new information,  our  lens of  self-concepts  fluctuates  with it  and yet   simultaneously  remains unchanged   ( Crafa & Nagel, 2019 , 2020 ).  For example,  if we encounter  a person who talks about wanting to be kind , we may  also  endorse social values of kindness  when  during conversations  with  that person  or we may decide that we are not, in fact, kind and assert our pre-existing values during conversations – or we may behave in a way that is somewhere in between.  Fluidity during the conversation have been theorized to reflect surface-level changes to self-concepts. Such  changes are context-specific  and, despite fluidly adapting our self-concepts to the social context,   our  default  self-concepts have probably not fundamentally changed. For this reason, self-concepts have been classically defined across two modalities:  active   self-concepts , which   are highly malleable and reactionary to immediate situations, social interactions, and contexts  and   stable  self-concepts , which  persist  across  time  like  steady undercurrents that reflect core social value and orientations (Gore & Cross, 2014; Markus & Kunda, 1986; Rogers, 1951; Turner 1956; Wheeler et al., 2007 ; Wheeler, DeMarree, & Petty, 2007, 2014 ).  In the preceding example, active self-concepts are demonstrated by our response to the conversation  (e.g., degrees of endorsing/opposing kindness) while stable self-concepts are our persisting default self-concepts that are unmoved by the interaction."
"32" "Self-concepts have been robustly studied across neuroscience, psychology, and anthropology for decades , but active and stably modalities have not been differentiated  in these studies  ( Hattie , 2014;  Han & Humphreys , 2016;  Heatherton , 2011;  Moore  et al., 2016) .  A lthough a ctive self-concepts are easy to observe during conversation and easy to prime through advertising ,  changes   to active self-concepts have historically been difficult to experimentally induce  or  measure , and when they have been studied, findings have been hard to  experimentally  replicate  ( Comello   & Farman , 2016;  Frings , 2018;  Horowitz , 2012;  Johe   & Bhullar , 2016 ;  Meyer , 2017;  Wheeler et al ., 2014 ).   Many previous studies have relied on cultural priming (pen-and-paper tasks) and either failed to induce changes, yielded inconsistent findings, or produced significant results only in studies of bicultural participants (Ng et al., 2009; Ng & Han, 2009; Smeesters et al., 2009; Realdon & Zurloni, 2016; Zhang, 2017); thus, it has sometimes been suggested that self-concepts are not sufficiently malleable or that changes are not measurable in the general ‘monocultural’ population (Kreitler & Dyson, 2016). These interpretations clash with  behavioral observation and manipulation of active self-concepts in advertising ."
"33" "For these  and many other  reasons, we posited that previous priming procedures might not be sufficiently salient or ecologically valid to prime the average adult. Although experimental measures have ostensibly interrogated self-concepts, before now, validated scales did not distinguish between active and stable modalities of self-concepts. Therefore, we set out to develop a scale that did.  The following  three studies  presented in this articles   1)  describe  a  new priming  approach and present a new scale for differentiating between active and stable self-concepts; 2) demonstrate reproducibility by reporting findings similar findings in a W.E.I.R.D. convenience  sample and a diverse random sample; and 3) demonstrate the utility of these tools by applying them to a clinical context."
"34" "F luidity of  self-concepts have been closely tied to mental wellbeing.  For example, patients with schizophrenia commonly exhibit pervasive extremes of rigid or fluid social behaviors (Bell et al., 2009; Brodeur et al., 2010; Escobar & Gureje, 2007; Green & Horan, 2010; Kennedy & Adolphs, 2012; Sergi et al., 2007).  Disruptions to self-concepts have been connected with poor mental health and  symptom   severity  (Bigler et al., 2001; Cermolacce et al., 2007; Cicero, 2017; Cicero et al., 2015; Ghosh & Muthukumaran, 2017, Hesse et al., 2015; Nelson, Sass, & Parnas, 2016; Rogers, 1951). For example, people experiencing psychosis commonly report a ‘loss of self’ ( ibid .). Disruptions to self-concepts may be related to the broader difficulties with social interaction that many patients with psychiatric disorders experience (Argyle, 2017).  To date, several studies have investigated sociocognitive fluidity in patients  using game theory designs , which  emphasize the flexibility of decision-making rather  self- other  processes, which are both fundamental to social interaction and reportedly difficulty for patients with schizophrenia ( Billeke & Aboitiz, 2013 ;  Eddy , 2018 ) ."
"35" "For these reasons, disruptions to self-concepts have been assumed to partially explain social deficits in psychiatric populations, such as patients with schizophrenia, ever since their conceptualization (Rogers, 1951). Although the role of self-concepts in mental health is poorly understood, logic dictates that since self-concepts cognitively mediate the social world, then disruptions to self-concept processes could produce or reflect difficulties accessing the social world (Crafa & Nagel, 2019 , 2020 ). If this proposition is correct, then it would explain why schizophrenia studies have produced contradictory reports of hyperflexible and hyper-rigid responses to dynamic social information (Brodeur et al., 2010; Bell et al., 2009; Escobar & Gureje, 2007; Green & Horan, 2010; Kennedy & Adolphs, 2012; Sergi et al., 2007)."
"36" "To date, limited evidence of changing self-concepts has been demonstrated in healthy adults or patient populations. This project examining whether the self-concepts of healthy and socially impaired adults are mutable during real-time social interactions. If self-concept changes emerged, then we also wanted to understand the content of these changes – do people’s self-concepts also change in the same ways in response to social interaction or are there systematic variations? Therefore, this project also characterized the response patterns of healthy and patient cohorts. This project resulted in a novel, effective, and  social interaction procedure for inducing changes in self-concepts during adulthood in ‘monocultural’ research participants and identified a possible explanation for the hyper-flexible and hyper-rigid findings reported by previous schizophrenia studies."
"37" "Domains of self-concepts"
"38" "Self-concepts can be divided into t wo   domains :   self-construal  and  social values schema .   Self-construal  refers to one’s social orientations as falling along a continuum between independence (INDE), wherein the identity of the individual is tied into their uniqueness from others (e.g., in terms of personal traits and preferences), and interdependence (INTER), wherein identity is defined by the individual’s social roles in their community and family (Cross et al., 2000; Han & Humphreys, 2016; Markus & Kitayama, 1991).  Social values schema  refers to the constellation of social behaviors that the individual believes are virtuous and self-representative (e.g., sociability or uniqueness;  Carr & Winkielman, 2014; De Jaegher, Di Paolo & Gallagher, 2010 ). Social values schema is sometimes conflated with self-construal in recent literature (e.g., Van Baaren & Ruivenkamp, 2007). However, social values schema represents one’s array of self-reported self-beliefs (“I am X”) whereas self-construal refers to interpersonal orientations based on behavioral patterns (“I would do X”). This distinction is important because beliefs and behaviors do not always match (Fernández et al., 2005). While self-construal reflects categorical orientations of INDE and  INTER that are often treated as opposing  ends of continua , social values can include a large number of nuanced and even contradictory beliefs that may support or conflict with self-construal (Gudykunst et al., 1996)."
"39" "S ocial values  may  be easier to interpret without assigning categorical labels because they represent lower level features of complex behaviors (compare: “I would offer my seat in a bus to my professor (or my boss)” with “I am respectful”).  S elf-construal is inherently speculative and a disparity or dissonance may emerge between how an individual believes they might behave and what they would actually do if faced with the situation in real life or with their reasons for doing so. For example, an individual may be motivated to respect authority by agreeableness on some days and loyalty (which is not necessarily an agreeable state) on others; this potential inconsistency is  among the  criticism s  of  popular  measures of self-construal (Levine et al. 2003). For these reasons, self-construal and social values schema provide separate but complimentary information about individual self-concepts and capturing both during experimentation may be facilitate data interpretation."
"40" "Attempts to  experimentally measur e  cognitive mediation"
"41" "The separation between active and stable self-concepts have long been proposed (Markus and Kunda, 1986; Rogers, 1951, Turner 1956).  A dominate principle behind active self-concepts is that this change occurs immediately and temporarily as a way to facilitate social interactions (Cross et al., 2011).   Several previous studies have reported that comparing oneself to others and frequent access to social stimuli are preconditions for self-concept change, both of which commonly occur in adults through  conversations  ( ibid. ). Repeated interactions lead to the subliminal or liminal observation of others’ beliefs, values, preferences and behaviors, and these subtle repetitions are common pathway to change (Cross et al., 2011; Wheeler et al., 2007, 2014; Weiss et al., 1998)."
"42" "Despite their strong theoretical foundation, changes produced through self-concept manipulation has been difficult to measure experimentally. This challenge is partially because such changes may be subtle and unconscious, and also partially because not all social situations will compel change (Crafa & Nagel, 20 20 ; Kihlstrom, 1990;  Kitayama & Uskul, 2011; Lazarus, 1995; Manfredo et al., 2017). For example, the current popularity of Beyoncé’s music might not be enough to entice you to listen to it, but if a close friend or respected colleague says that they like it, then you might start to self-identify as a Beyoncé fan; whereas, if someone you detest endorses it, then you might develop an aversion. Of course, you also might not do any of this or the change may be a subtle intensification or weakening of opinion. Moreover, these changes may occur unconsciously. This example illustrates  situational priming , which involves brief and usually subconscious exposure to social stimuli that change perceptions either immediately or gradually over time (Wheeler et al., 2007, 2014)."
"43" "Experimental manipulations of self-concepts have primarily been performed using pen-and-paper priming tasks using bicultural participants; the majority of these studies employ self-concepts primes that treated self-concepts groups as assume diametrically opposed. During the pen-and-paper priming, participants read a story that depicts the desired values schema or think about their uniqueness (INDE condition) or their commonality with others (INTER condition) before answering questionnaires or performing an experimental task (Fong et al., 2014; Harada, Li, & Chiao, 2010; Kühnen, 2009; Lin & Han, 2009; Sui & Han, 2007; Wang, Ma, & Han, 2014). Numerous studies demonstrate that bicultural participants can easily switch between INDE and INTER after pen-and-paper priming (Aydinli & Bender, 2015; Mok & Morris, 2010: Oyserman & Lee, 2008). For example, both Canadians with Japanese parents and Chinese with U.S. parents are assumed to have both INDE and INTER self-concepts because parents vertically transmitted one set  of self-concepts and peers horizontally transmitted the other. Exposure to pen-and-paper primes presumably activate the corresponding social context (INDE or INTER)."
"44" "However, these assumptions are not the only way to interpret cultural priming data. Bicultural participants may be more sensitive or habituated to social contexts due to their bicultural upbringing. Presumably most adults will fluidly adapt if the priming procedure is sufficiently robust and salient.   For example, when reading or thinking about social values, there is no pressure to change. However, when interacting with someone with different values, there is social pressure to accommodate the conversation. Therefore, cultural priming may simply not be salient enough to activate a change response in ‘moncultural’ samples  whereas situational priming may be ."
"45" "Revising  experimental methods  to test ‘monocultural’ participants"
"46" "Although changes to self-concepts have been identified across many bicultural populations (e.g., Mexican-U.S. Americans; Kreitler & Dyson, 2016), very few have successfully primed participants who were born and raised in the same country as their parents; the few that have are not widely replicated (e.g., Gardener, 1999; Lee & Jeyaraj, 2015; Van den Bos et al., 2015).  In these studies, self-concepts have frequently been measured using the Self-Construal Scale  (SCS)  ( Singelis, 1994 )."
"47" "Moreover, previous studies  of  bicultural  self-construal  have arguably been  capturing   active  self-concept s .   These pen-and-paper priming studies manipulate self-concepts by providing   contextualiz ing  soci ocultural  context s. In theory, any social context should be more likely to engage and measure  active self-concepts , which are fluid and context-sensitive,  and not stable self-concepts , which are deeper and less malleable . However, previous studies have not differentiated between active and stable modalities, which is a fundamental problem with existing approaches."
"48" "M any of these studies have reported differences using ‘East’/’West’ comparisons  by country,  e.g., Canadians with Chinese parents, Japanese with U.S. parents  (Wang et al., 2014;  Verhaeghen et al., 2011; Ng et al., 2010; Schröder & Thagard, 2011; Varnum et al., 2010). M any studies assume self-concept s  agree with  stereotypes of the dominant  cultural group  of that country  and do not take baseline measures (for discussion see Crafa & Nagel,  202 0 ), despite other studies demonstrating that self-concepts vary across individuals within the same  country and  cultural group (Lee & Jeyaraj, 2014; Na et al., 2010; Marquez & Ellwanger, 2014; Oyserman, 2016; Peng et al., 2018; Santamaría et al., 2010). In other words, these studies assume changes in self-concepts arise from the pen-and-paper primes without directly measuring within subject changes.  Binary categorization of self-concepts according to country relies heavily on the descriptive similarities, which may obscure self-concept changes, i.e.,  people who are ‘strongly’ and ‘weakly’ INDE are all still categorized as INDE (e.g., Oyserman, 2016).  Moreover, pen-and-paper priming relies on the participant imagining social situations and loses the ecological validity of real-life social encounters."
"49" "These common practices raise the question of whether more robust stimuli, different priming methods, or different approaches to measuring changes in self-concepts would capture changes in ‘mon o cultural’ adults. Several authors have proposed that preconditions for self-concept change include self-relevance of the social information, contextualized comparison of oneself to others, and frequent or repeated access to the social stimuli (Cross et al., 2011; Weiss et al., 1998; Wheeler et al., 2007, 2014). To combat these methodological issues, we posited  a priori  that, 1) social interactions  can be used as  situational  priming, which is are more powerful  than pen-and-paper tasks and 2) repeated measures comparisons of experimental results to baseline data are necessary to evaluate change, since participants may change the strength of their opinions rather than ‘flipping’ from between descriptive categories (e.g., INDE to INTER).   We also proposed that inducing changes to active self-concepts would be captured by the SCS and that a new scale that  differentiates between active and stable conditions in its structure could capture changes induced by situation priming."
"50" "S elf-concept fluidity  patterns  as potential sources of  individual  diversity and  clinical  pathology"
"51" "Typical social interactions involve a s  balance between formed self-concepts and their fluidity – if an individual’s self-concepts are too rigid, then the self-concepts of their interlocutors might not be accommodated and could result in conflicts but if they are too flexibility, then the individual could seem disingenuous or feel self-suppressed (Coleman & Williams, 2013; Forgas & Williams, 2014; Galderisi et al., 2015; Ng et al., 2012)."
"52" "Average, healthy adults experience  difficulties with social interactions when they are too ambiguous or novel or when their interlocutor is a stranger ( Aviezer & Hassin , 2017;  Gaither  et al., 2018 ).  Ranges of social adaptivity have been observed in the general population (Boyd et al, 2011; Crisp & Turner, 2011; Tam, 2015). Relatively rigid individuals may exhibit smaller changes to self-concepts after social interaction compared to relatively more fluid individuals."
"53" "Many mental health pathologies are associated with difficulties during social interactions (Couture et al., 2006; Savla et al., 2012; Schmidt et al., 2011; Thakkar et al., 2014). For example, certain psychiatric patient groups, such as those with schizophrenia, commonly exhibit pervasive extremes of rigid or fluid social behaviors (Couture et al., 2006; Sterry et al., 2010). These extremes may reflect an imbalance in the relationship between cognitive mediation and self-concepts or differences in the processing of self-other social information compared to unafflicted peers (for review see Park & Thakkar, 2010)."
"54" "The difficulties many psychiatric patients have during social interaction have been explained by theories surrounding the manipulation of self-concepts for decades (Rogers, 1951), and numerous studies have hyper-flexible or hyper-rigid social cognitions and identities in patient  groups (Billeke & Aboitiz, 2013; Green, 2016). Schizophrenia, in particular, has long been associated with feelings of loss of self and has sometimes been controversially described as having a “split self” that manifests dissonantly (Csordas, 2015; Laing, 2010; Sass & Parnas, 2003; for controversy see Cermolacce et al., 2007). Hyper-flexibility and hyper-rigidity during social interactions are common presentations of schizophrenia, as is difficulty interpreting information about self and other (Ameller et al., 2014; Billeke & Aboitiz, 2013; Boyd et al., 2011; Ebisch et al., 2013; Jardri et al., 2011; Liepelt et al., 2012; van der Meer et al., 2010; Whitfield-Gabrieli et al., 2009). Given these findings, postulated that extreme changes in active self-concepts may reflect or contribute to inappropriate social behaviors."
"55" "Like the healthy adult population, ranges of social adaptivity and rigidity have not been widely characterized in schizophrenia and little is known about how social interactions affect self-concepts of patient populations in general (Bardi et al., 2009). Since both stable and active self-concepts are considered cognitive meditators, it is furthermore likely that the filtration of social information provided by cognitive mediation may be measurably disrupted. Since cognitive mediation is inherently a process of change, any examination of it must also be comparative."
"56" "Clinical relevance of revised methods"
"57" "Examining changes in self-concepts may have direct clinical implications for many clinical groups, in particular patients diagnosed with schizophrenia who also exhibit social difficulties. The hyper-flexibility and hyper-rigidity associated with schizophrenia is not well characterized, and could have multiple causes. Many explanations have been proposed. For one, patients with schizophrenia may have difficulty integrating new social information and therefore respond extremely by either whole-heartedly endorsing it or rejecting it completely. Another possibility is that these patients hold extreme self-concepts to begin with, and only extreme changes to these self-concepts have been statistically detected due to experimental limitations. A third possibility is that  previous measures have not distinguished between the active and stable selves, and that these modalities exhibit different response patterns. Additionally, schizophrenia is a disorder that includes heterogeneous arrays of symptoms, and responses may be highly individualized. Finally, schizophrenia is disproportionately represented in second-generation migrants in many countries (i.e., bicultural individuals;  Anderson et al., 2015; Bourque et al., 2011; Dealberto, 2010; Henssler et al., 2019 ) ; that migration alters self-identity is well-established and  understanding the basic functioning of self-concept change during social interactions may elucidate a previously unknown underlying stressor. Few studies have examined self-concepts using psychiatric patient cohorts, and these have not tried to induce change (e.g., Robinson et al., 2015)."
"58" "Present study"
"59" "In order to study self-concept change during social interaction, the present article examines changes to perceptions of active and stable self-concepts through two domains, self-construal and social values schema, in response to a  situational priming  task in three adult cohorts –W.E.I.R.D university students, healthy adults from the general population, and patients with schizophrenia – through 3 studies."
"60" "The following experiments were deliberately structured: Study 1 establishes the efficacy of the experimental methods work in a convenience sample and Study 2 is a replication study to confirm reproducibility of results in a ‘general’ adult population.  Study 3 assesses universality of findings and potential clinical applications of the experimental methods and materials that we designed.  Since changes to self-concepts may be large or small and may be highly individualized, post hoc analyses were systematically performed on the samples from all 3 studies to characterize phenotypes of self-concept change. In order to improve previous research methods, baseline data were collected across all 3 studies and compared using repeated measures analyses, which are well- established as statistically robust approaches even with small sample sizes (see e.g.,  Bruton et al., 2000; Haverkamp & Beauducel, 2017 )."
"61" "We hypothesized three outcomes of these studies . Studies 1 and 2 share a hypothesis since Study 2 is a replication study. In S tudies 1 and 2, we hypothesized that exposure to opposite self-concepts through a social interaction prime would shift the self-concepts of Canadian participants toward their opposites; findings would demonstrate effects on active but not stable self-identity and provide a method of testing  changes to active  self-concepts . Furthermore, these findings would be reproduced across the two studies  (H1).  Since Study 2 had a more diverse sample, population differences could be interrogated.  In Study 2, we hypothesized that bicultural upbringing group would increase flexibility of active self-concepts; such findings would explain why previous studies captured changes to self-concepts of bicultural but not ‘monocultural’ participants and imply that increased ecological validity of the present studies effectively increased prime saliency (H2).  Study 3 assesses the universality of the results and clinical applications of the materials and methods – do patients with schizophrenia show similar flexibility patterns to matched controls, or do they fall into hyper- or hypo-flexibility groups, as theorized?  In Study 3, we hypothesized that patients would report more extreme self-concepts (i.e., higher Likert ratings at baseline) compared to controls and that changes in self-concepts would also be extreme with some patients ‘flipping’ self-concept categories while others would show no change; these findings would explain contradictions of previous studies that report either hyper- or hypo-flexibility by demonstrating that some patients fall into each of these camps (H3)."
"62" "These studies are highly novel and were conceptualized to clarify major debates in multiple areas of social-cognitive research. These are the first studies to use social interaction priming to distinguish between active and stable self-concepts across the domains of self-construal and social values schema. Our study is also the first 1) to use social interaction as the progenitor of change to  cognitive mediation by inducing changes in self-concepts in average adults (i.e., self-concept priming via social interaction), 2) to examine self-concepts and adaptive techniques of patients with schizophrenia using this original paradigm, and 3) to characterize phenotypes of adult social adaptability.  We are dedicated to scientific transparency. In this manuscript, we report all measures, manipulations, and exclusions as well as the original hypotheses and the  intention s  behind  experimental procedures."
"63" "Study 1"
"64" "Since previous pen-and-paper priming studies have  used  bicultural research participants, Study 1 was designed to establish whether social interaction altered self-construal of  ‘monocultural’  participants who were raised within the context of a single dominant culture.  T his study primarily assess ed  whether social interaction temporarily altered participants’  active  self-concepts  when interacting with a  friendly  peer.  Since we posited that self-concept change is more experimentally robust than self-concept category, which may be overly rigid, changes in scores after priming were assessed."
"65" "Methods"
"66" "Participants  and procedure"
"67" "Participants.   The first study used a convenience sample of W.E.I.R.D. students to test the method and materials, with the intention of conducting a replication study (cf. Study 2) including diverse, randomly sampled adults if Study 1 worked.  Canadian   students were recruited  from McGill University  and enrolled in this study  (Table 1) .   All participants in this study were  ‘monocultural’,  born and raised in Canada and spoke English as their first and primary language. The participants were separated into two groups according to their self-construal  group  (INDE or INTER) , which was determined  at Baseline. Age  was  matched across binary gender categories.  Some studies have reported that hometown population can influence self-construal (Esteban-Guitart et al., 2015),  so  participants were matched with hometown sizes of both construal groups averaging around 1 million people."
"68" "P arents  of all participants in this cohort  were  also  born and raised in Canada and spoke English as their first and primary language.  All but two participants were of European descent. Since the influence of ethnic group  is unknown ,  the  d ata from  the two non-European  participants  were assessed prior to statistical analyses; they  fell within normal ranges and were included in the final cohort .  Sample size was determined organically, and recruitment stopped when groups were roughly group matched by age, hometown size, and self-construal. Ethics approval was obtained from the Douglas Institute Research Ethics Board, and all participants provided written consent."
"69" "P rocedure.   The study was performed across two visits ( Baseline  and  Social Interaction 1 ). Baseline data collection was collected at the first visit: Participants completed two questionnaires – the Self-Construal Scale (SCS) (Singelis, 1994) and the Sasta Social Values Schema (SVS)  S cale, described in the next section. Experimental data collection occurred at the second visit: Participants underwent the Social Interaction Priming experiment consisting of a semi-scripted social interaction with a peer (confederate experimenter). The social interaction centered on self-concepts, and the peer was presented as being a newcomer from a fictional country (called  Sasta )  for several reasons:  1) to maximize comparability with a common pen-and-paper priming task, 2) to make the content of the conversation situationally appropriate, and 3) to minimize the influence of prejudices and appearance-based social stereotypes. Immediately following this experiment, participants complete the SCS and the SVS Scale again as well as a modified version of the SVS Scale."
"70" "Table 1"
"71" "Demographics for Studies 1-3"
"72" "Note:   All participants in this study were ‘monoculutral’, born and raised in Canada and English was their first and primary language.  Crafa et al. (2019) demonstrated that Baseline social values for these participants were culture-locked.  Participants were recruited and tested in 3 waves. Study 1 was composed of a carefully control sample of W.E.I.R.D. students and matched across self-construal group. Study 2 was loosely constructed to match the general population of Anglo-Saxon Canadians living in Montreal, where high rates of residents have foreign parents or  grandparents. Study 3 was recruited in tandem with Study 2 and included patients with chronic schizophrenia who reported experiencing social difficulties. Controls in this study were carefully screened for psychiatric symptoms to eliminate any possible conditions (whether or not they were diagnosed) and matched with patients by age, gender, education, and parental migration (MC / BC)."
"73" "Measures of  perceived  changes  in   self-concepts"
"74" "Self-Construal  Scale .   The SCS  (Singelis, 1994 , 1995 )  tests stable self-concepts. It  contain s  30 questions  used to  determine the self-construal of the participants and  classify  them  as either having primarily  INDE  or primarily  INTER  values.  Scores are calculated by subtracting  INTER  from IND, and negative scores indicate  INTER  (range  -90 to  90) .  Participants with a score of 0 indicate d  which values schema they identified with more strongly and  were  assigned a score or 1 or -1.   Because  INDE  was represented by positive scores and  INTER  by negative scores, the  Baseline  SCS scores were transformed into absolute values to eliminate systematic statistical biases caused by the signed values."
"75" "To preserve the relationship between  Baseline  and  post-priming  scores, SCS scores  were then adjusted  so that  all Baseline scores were positive and  negative scores  after the interaction   represented a change in self-construal group.   To do this, the absolute value of the Baseline score was used, but the relative values of post-priming scores were used   (i.e., participants with negative scores were those who ‘flipped’ to the primed construal ). Negative values reported in the present article  indicate adjusted SCS values (‘flipped’ construal  categories ) and  do not reflect INTER  cohort assignment ."
"76" "Social Values Schema  Scale .   The  SVS Scale  tests active and stable self-concepts. It  is  an experimental  assessment  that was developed based on  stimuli  from   neuroimaging studies  that  looked at changes in the self-identifi ed social values  of bicultural individuals (cf. Chiao et al., 2009, 2010) .   T h e  SVS Scale  consist s  of 12  INDE  statements and 12  INTER  statements. The  INDE  statement started with “in general I am” and ended with a n  INDE  self-description  word . The  INTER  statements started with “when I am with my mother I am” and ended with  a n  INTER  self-description  word .  These items echo pen-and-paper approaches and correspond with stable self-concepts.   For  the present  study , the  SVS Scale  was  also  adapted to the context of the experimental social interaction. In this modified version, statement s for both  INDE  and  INTER  self-description words   were  changed to “when I am with someone from Sasta I am”  to test active self-concepts, specific to the social interaction . The participants completed the standard  SVS Scale  at  Baseline   and  after each Social Interaction , and they also   completed  the modified version of the  SVS Scale   after each Social Interaction ."
"77" "Participants first answered ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to whether the word described them, and then rated on a  10 -point Likert scale how strongly it described them. Responses of ‘ yes’  were assigned values of 1  (describes me  slightly well )  to  5  (describes me  extremely well )  according to the Likert scale, while responses of ‘ no ’ were assigned adjusted values of  -1  (describe s  me  slightly poorly )  to -5  (describe s  me  extremely poorly ) .  Each scale results in two scores – one for social values that are associated with self-construal and one for social values that are associated with the opposite construal.  The total intensity ratings for self-construal and opposite construal  on the SVS and modified SVS   were summed  separately, so that each scale resulted in two scores ranging from  - 60  to  6 0 ."
"78" "Construction and psychometric evaluation of the SVS Scale.   The self- concepts  used in the present study were selected following a normative procedure.  First,   97   previously normalized  INDE  and  INTER  words   were  compiled  and adapted  from other studies ( cf.  Chiao et al., 2009, 2010;  Hogoveen & Obhi, 2011;  V an Baaren et al., 2003 ) .  Healthy volunteers (N=40) categorized the words as being INDE, INTER, both, or neither."
"79" "A second set of healthy volunteers (N=157; 96 INDE, 61 INTER) then indicated whether they identified with each word on the list, and then completed the SCS. Self- concepts  were selected from words with more than 25% agreement across participants and then counterbalanced by meaning so that descriptors classified as INDE or INTER were roughly opposite (Table 2). Self-descriptions were counterbalanced using the responses from this second cohort so that participants with INDE and INTER self-construal were equally likely to select the words from the INDE or INTER list at baseline. They were also counterbalanced by total agreement so that approximately the same number of participants would select words from both lists at T1."
"80" "Table 2"
"81" "Social value words used on the SVS scale"
"82" "Self-construal category by correlation"
"83" "INDE self-construal correlates"
"84" "INTER self-construal correlates"
"85" "Independent"
"86" "Dependent"
"87" "Individualistic"
"88" "Accommodating"
"89" "Autonomous"
"90" "Adaptable"
"91" "Assertive"
"92" "Passive"
"93" "Strong"
"94" "Cooperative"
"95" "Insightful"
"96" "Respectful"
"97" "Analytical"
"98" "Holistic"
"99" "Unique"
"100" "Connected"
"101" "Vocal"
"102" "Harmonious"
"103" "Special"
"104" "Casual"
"105" "Direct"
"106" "Indirect"
"107" "Solitary"
"108" "Social"
"109" "Note :   The SVS scale uses “I am” statements for words correlated with INDE self-construal and “When I’m with my mother, I am” statements for words correlated with INTER self-construal and participants rate their agreement on a 7-point Likert scale. Included word were validated, normalized, and rated as occupying approximately equal distances and valences relative to each other. The different phrasings of the INDE and INTER statements were designed to further construct the contextual differences characteristic of INDE and INTER self-construal types (cf. Chiao et al., 2009, 2010; Hogeveen & Obhi, 2011)."
"110" "Repetition Control Study .   Before the experiment,  we  verified that completing the SCS  and the SVS  a second time did not  bias  the scores. A repetition  study   was performed  including  42 volunteers  who  were age-matched across gender  and  recruited at McGill University (mean age=22.48; 50% female) . Participants  completed the questionnaires twice, two days apart, without any procedure in between.  The  SCS   scores did not change significantly between the first and second data points. Paired SCS scores were highly correlated ,  r s (41)= 0 .86, p<.001 ,  and a repeated measures ANOVA  (rmANOVA)  with  TIME   ( Day 0  vs.  Day 2 )  as a within-subjects variable was not significant, F(1,41)= 0 .26, p=.61 0 .  Figure 1 A  depicts SCS score stability."
"111" "Repetition of the  SVS Scale  revealed that both  INDE  and  INTER  scores were higher at the second day of testing  compared to the first day  and that most participants had higher  INDE  scores than  INTER  scores regardless of self-construal group .   The latter results were not surprising since Canada is an  INDE  culture.  The statistical  tests performed  are as follows:  Paired  SVS Scale  scores  were highly correlated  by   construal type ,   s elf-construal  at r s (41)= 0 .80, p<.001 and opposite construal at r s (41)= 0 .87, p<.001.  A  2 x2  rm ANOVA with  CONSTRUAL ( Self  vs.  O pposite )  and  TIME  ( Day 0  vs.   Day  2 )  as  within-subjects variable s   and  SCS GROUP  ( INDE vs. INTER )  as a between-subjects variable .   Mauchly’s test  revealed that  data met the assumption of sphericity  so no correction was applied.  A main effect of  TIME  emerged, with all scores becoming higher at  Day 2   compared to  Day 0 , F(1,41)=8.5 6  p=.006. An interaction effect of  CONSTRUAL  x SCS group also emerged, F(1,41)=4.2 6 , p=.046 ,  because  INDE  participants had higher  Self   CONSTRUAL scores compared to  INTER  participants .   A paired samples t-test revealed that participants had higher scores for  INDE  values compared to  INTER  values regardless of SCS GROUP,  Day 0  t( 4 1 )=3.0 4 , p=.004,  Day 2  t( 41)=2.56, p=.014.  Figure 1 B  depicts the increased intensity of scores (i.e., reification of self-concepts) on the SCS Scale after second administration."
"112" "Figure  1 .  Repetition control testing results: To establish repetition effects, participants completed each questionnaire two days apart.  SCS scores were highly positively correlated  (1A)  while all scores on the SVS Scale were higher at the second day of testing  (1B) , indicating a reification of self-concepts. Error bars represent standard mean error SEM."
"113" "S ocial interaction   priming  procedure .   All participants were primed with stimuli associated with the opposite self-construal from their own  (Figure  2 ) .  The experiment was structured to mimic the process someone might undergo when traveling to another country or  preparing to host a guest from another country  by first providing some background knowledge about another country and then introducing participants to someone from that country (in this case, a confederate researcher) .   Using a foreigner from a fictional country   scaffolded experimental methods onto the structure of the original pen-and-paper experiments for better control and comparable design.  It also  removed culture-locked stereotypes and  minimized   other social   biases  assumptions ."
"114" "Participants first met with one  experimenter  who said they would prepare them to meet someone from a country called  “ Sasta ”  by introducing them to the culture through two stories .  P articipants read the Warrior Story ,  a short paragraph text describing a n ancient  warrior being selected  to lead a detachment of soldiers based either on personal merit  (INDE ) or family ties  (INTER ),   for full text  see Trafimow, Triandis,  and  Goto  ( 1991 ) .  The Warrior story was modified slightly to be set in  a  fictional country , called   “ Sast a” instead of nonfictional ancient Sumer, which was less believable . Participants  also read the “Executive Story” – a second story that was designed for this  study , which depicted a modern-day office environment ,   echo ing  the structure  and  updat ing  the  content  of the Warrior story. This second story was added so that the social values of Sasta would become more apparent  through repetition .   Participants then answered a series of scripte d questions about the story with the  experimenter .   There were no wrong answers, and participants were encouraged to honestly report their observations."
"115" "Next, participants met a  confederate peer   experimenter  who they had not seen before. The confederate peer   claimed to be  from  a fictional country called   Sasta  and had a semi-scripted conversation that was either about how  the  experimenter  and participant are   a like   to  friends and family  (INTER  condition) or how  they are  unique  (INDE  condition).   The  confederate  experimenter  was encouraged to behave in  a  friendly  and approachable  manner  by smilin g and using open body language (i.e., seated with body squarely  facing the participant ,   maintaining eye contact and  uncrossed arms;  Pridham, 2013 ) . They  initiated the conversation, and p articipants respond ed  freely.  The  construal and  values  endorsed  by the experimenter during this interaction were always opposite to those of the participants. The whole interaction lasted  approximately  5  minutes.   University students completed the social interaction experiment only once; healthy adults and patients ret urned on a separate day and repeated the interaction with  only  minor changes to  the  wording  of the script  to acknowledge that this was a second conversation.  The Warrior Story ( Trafimow et al., 1991 ) and SCS ( Singelis, 1994 )  are  widely used  materials that have  been  previously published.   The Office story, experimenter scripts , instructions,  and  SVS Scale  were created for this study and  can be downloaded at  www.dainacrafa.com/sasta ."
"116" "Statistical methods"
"117" "Mixed-design r epeated-measures ANOVAs were used to estimate to data from each scale, using the variable structures reported in each Results section below .  Repeated-measures  tests  a ssess absolute reliability – the degree to which participants’ data remain stable across multiple timepoints and/or conditions (Bruton et al., 2000).   Repeated-measures design are robust and r epeated-measures ANOVAs  have reduced error rates and are capable of accurately assessing even large datasets with small number of participants ( Haverkamp & Beauducel , 2017). Therefore, they were the appropriate choice for the experimental design."
"118" "Corrections for violations of sphericity were applied according to the recommendations by Girden (1992): when Mauchly’s test is significant (p ≤ 0.05) ,  Type I and II statistical errors are optimally avoided by using the Huynh-Feldt correction if ε  > 0.75 and the Greenhouse-Geisser correction if ε  ≤ 0.75.  Post hoc  paired-sample  t-tests were applied to  clarify  all significant  within-subjects  interactions  and independent-samples t-tests were  likewise  used for between-subjects  interactions .  All other reported statistical tests used in Studies 1-3 refer to exploratory ad hoc  analyses used to clarify statistical findings. The exploratory analyses were rigorously planned after seeing the main results and all analyses are reported in this article."
"119" "Figure  2 . Experimental procedures of  past and  reported studies.   Numerous previous studies have used the Classic Procedure to study bicultural participants. The Adapted Procedure is reported for the first time in this paper. The present series of studies use the Adapted Procedure to  establish whether it can effectively prime all participants – ‘monocultural’ and  multi cultural alike.   Study 1 included a single social interaction with Baseline and post-interaction measures. In Studies 2-3, a second interaction followed by additional collection of data from the post-interaction measures  to further validate findings .    In all studies, participants were divided according to their dominant self-construal and the social interaction attempted to prime them with the opposite construal. Participants in the INDE group discussed the interdependence stories and conversed about  similarities with friends and family. Participants in the INTER group discussed the independence stories and conversed about how they are unique from friends and family."
"120" "Results"
"121" "Changes to self-concepts after  social interaction"
"122" "SCS.  The adjusted SCS scores  that were  collected at Baseline and after the  Social Interaction Priming  procedure were compared using a 2x2 mixed-design ANOVA with SOCIAL INTERACTION ( Baseline  vs.  After Social Interaction ) as a within-subjects factor and SCS GROUP ( INDE vs. INTER ) as a between-subjects factor.  SCS scores were hypothesized to move towards the opposite schema after the social interaction, which means that adjusted scores would be lower  After Social Interaction  (H1).  Analyses revealed a significant Main Effect of SOCIAL INTERACTION, F(1,59)=14.62, p<.001,   with lower mean scores  After Social Interaction  ( Figure  3 ) .  The assumption of sphericity was upheld so no correction was necessary.  The stringent one-tailed Dunnett’s test demonstrated that scores  After Social Interaction  were significantly lower compared to scores  At Baseline , d=3.77, p<.001, 99.9% CI [0.47, 7.07]. Although  INTER  scores appear slightly lower than  INDE  scores at Baseline, the effect of SCS GROUP did not achieve statistical significance, F(1,59)=2.15, p=.148."
"123" "Figure  3 . Study 1 SCS Results: Social interaction changed self-construal, regardless of dominant self-construal type.   Participants in Study 1 were categorized according to their dominant self-construal type (i.e., INDE or INTER). Scores were adjusted so that positive scores reflected Baseline self-construal group as measured by the SCS and negative scores reflected a switch to the opposite (i.e, primed) group. This bar graph depicts the average change in scores by dominant self-construal type. The self-construal of participants in both groups changed in favor of the opposite construal type.  Error bars represent standard error of the mean."
"124" "SVS Scale .  Fifty-three of the participants completed the  SVS Scale . Although social values schema represents a constellation of  INDE  and  INTER  values, most participants (N=35, 66.1%) held more social values that were congruent with their baseline self-construal while a smaller portion of participants held more social values that were associated with the opposite construal (N=18, 33.9%).    SVS scale scores were hypothesized to change for active but not stable self-identity as a result of the social interaction (H1)."
"125" "Results from the  SVS Scale  were compared using a 2x3 rmANOVA, which compared ratings of the social values that correlated with self-construal ( Self -Concepts ) with ratings of social values that correlated with the opposite construal ( Primed -Concepts ). Ratings on the classic  SVS Scale  indicated social values overall ( Stable ) while ratings on the modified  SVS Scale  indicated social values during the social interaction with the person from Sasta ( Active ). SOCIAL VALUES ( Self -Concepts  vs. Primed -Concepts ) by SOCIAL INTERACTION PRIMING ( Baseline vs.  Stable  vs.  Active ) were entered as within-subjects factors. SCS GROUP was entered as a between-subjects factor  and  Huynh-Feldt corrected for violating the assumption of sphericity.  A main effect  emerged for   SOCIAL INTERACTION PRIMING, F(2,102)=7.63, p=.001 . I nteraction effects were observed for,  SOCIAL VALUES x SCS GROUP, F(1,51)=5.76 , p=.020, and SOCIAL VALUES x SOCIAL INTERACTION PRIMING, F(1,102)=18.07, p<.001.  A significant three-way interaction between SOCIAL VALUES x SOCIAL INTERACTION PRIMING x SCS GROUP was  also  observed, F( 2 , 102 )=5.52, p = .014 (Figure  4 )."
"126" "Baseline  Self-Concepts   were  significantly higher compared to  Baseline  Primed -Concepts , t(52)=3.37, p=.001, according to a post hoc two-tailed paired sample  t -test. Responses by SCS GROUP only differed when comparing  Baseline  scores, as measured by an independent-sample t-test. Participants with  INDE  construal compared to those with  INTER  construal rated  Baseline  Self -Concepts   significantly higher, t(52)=3.69, p=.001, and  Baseline  Primed -Concepts   significantly lower, t(52)=-2.50, p=.016.  Active  Self -Concepts   w ere  significantly lower than  Stable   Self -Concepts , t(52)=5.54, p<.001,  Stable  Primed -Concepts , t(52)=2.04, p=.046, and  Active   Primed -Concepts , t(52)=-2.91, p=.005."
"127" "Figure  4 .  Study 1 SVS Scale Results: Participants suppressed Baseline self-concepts during interaction (active self), regardless of dominant self-construal type as measured by the SVS scale. Social value words were divided according to correlations with the construal type (i.e., INDE, INTER). In the table below, Self-Construal refers to words correlated with participants’ dominant construal type while Primed-Construal refers to the opposite construal that participants were exposed to through the social interaction. The bar graphs below show that the majority of participants suppressed their social values during the social interaction, regardless of their self-construal type. Participants with INTER self-construal were also slightly more likely to identify with the INDE social value words on the SVS scale at Baseline, but displayed cultural norms after the social interaction. This outcome was not substantial or systematic enough to achieve statistical significance.  Error bars represent standard error of the mean."
"128" "Study 1  Discussion"
"129" "As hypothesized, p articipants displayed changes in self-construal and social values schema after social interactions priming, as measured by comparing changes in SCS and  SVS Scale  ratings.  On the  SVS Scale , participants displayed a suppression of  self-concepts  during the social interaction with the interlocutor from Sasta. In contrast,  self-concepts  ratings did not change between the baseline scores and the overall ratings after the social interaction priming procedure , thus supporting   our first hypothesis  in showing  a move towards the opposite scheme  in active but not stable self-construal . Changes in primed-value ratings were not significant, which shows that participants do not endorse the opposite  self-concepts  during these interactions , but only suppress their own self-concepts . These results could not be attributed to repetition of either questionnaire; in the control trial repetition of SCS showed no change in scores while repetition of the  SVS Scale  resulted in an increase of both  Self - C oncepts   and  Primed - C oncepts   ratings."
"130" "These findings demonstrate that Canadians suppress their own  self-concepts  when interacting with someone who has opposite self-construal  and social values .  The s ocial interaction does not change their social values overall  (stable) ,  yet  social values do change within relevant social contexts  (active) .   On the other hand    s elf-construal ,  which refers only to the stable self-identity ,  did change ."
"131" "The SVS Scale may capture a performative component of self-identity that the SCS does not.  These  findings ,  along with the absence of findings from the exploratory regression analysis ,  suggest   that the two modalities of the social self –  the  self-construal and social values schema – operate independently of each other.  T hey  appear to  represent two separate domains of social learning – the integration of the social  context  into  one’s social orientation  versus  its   integration  into the performative social self.  While the SCS findings demonstrate a shift along the independent-interdependent continuum, the SVS Scale results suggest that Anglophone Canadians may compartmentalize their social selves."
"132" "Since the SCS and SVS appear to be different modalities (orientation vs performance), they may also play different roles in cognitive mediation , with SVS encompassing both perceptual and  behavioral changes from cognitive mediation, due to the combined self-reflection and performative aspects of the  SVS scale .   Previous studies examined flexibility of self-construal in  bicultural  participants to infer  vertical  transmission of social orientation.  However, t he present study demonstrates that  previous measures of  social orientation  may have captured active self-concepts. The present study also successfully differentiated between  active and stable self -concepts using the newly developed SVS Scale .  As hypothesized,  active self-concepts were altered while stable  self-concepts  persevered. The   temporary nature  of active self-concepts h as  not   been examined  before . For example, it is possible that participants’ ratings would return to baseline with subsequent , similar  interactions  (i.e.,   implying behavioral extinction  or a  reification of stable self-concepts ) or persist (i.e., implying behavioral reinforcement  of context-dependent active self-concepts ) .  Additionally ,  the influence of biculturalism on  self-concept  flexibility have not been examined. P articipants with different  familial  ancestries  or other social conditions  may be affected by social interactions differently.  Studies  2 examine s  these possibilities."
"133" "Study  2"
"134" "Student behavior is often not representative of the larger population .   T hey are ‘W.E.I.R.D.’ samples   with smaller ranges of diversity among  variables  that influence social behaviors  such as  culture and ethnicity,  age, income ,  and education level  (Henrich, Heine, & Norenzayan, 2010a, 2010b) .  Therefore, reproducibility in a less ‘W.E.I.R.D.’ population is necessary to evaluate  whether the findings from Study 1 are generalizable across Canadians, or only representative of ‘W.E.I.R.D.’ Canadian student samples. Assessing reproducibility is also imperative because  this project ultimately aimed to test a cohort  of socially impaired patients with chronic schizophrenia. H igher rates of schizophrenia have been reported in second generation migrants  in many countries  ( Anderson et al., 2015; Bourque et al., 2011; Dealberto, 2010; Henssler et al., 2019 )  and tend to have lower SES, IQ, and education ( Cahn et al., 2015; Davidson et al., 2015; Evensen et al., 2015;  Herrero et al., 2019 ); thus,  patient cohorts can be quite sociodemographically   diverse .   U nderstanding the generalizab ility  of research findings to Canadians with diverse sociodemographic backgrounds  is a crucial preliminary step before including vulnerable patient groups in the experimental procedure."
"135" "The refore,  Study 2  investigated whether  similar  results would be observed in a random sample  of Canadian-born Anglophones living in Montreal , including both bicultural participants and those with Canadian-born parents.  This  study  also assessed whether the  modification of active self-concepts   persisted  if participants had a second, similar interaction with a different stranger from Sasta,  presumably  forming a representation of what people from that country tend to talk about. The purpose of  this  study  was 1)  to assess whether  findings from  Study  1 could be reproduced in a more heterogeneous and thus more ecologically valid population  (H1) and 2) whether biculturalism influenced flexibility as measured by greater changes in self-concepts after the social interaction (H2) .  Since it was also possible that findings in Study 1 emerged in response to the experimental novelty of the social interaction, t his study also  evaluated  within-subject reproducibility after a second social interaction with the same friendly stranger.  Therefore,   the purposed of this study was  3 )  to establish whether  brief social interactions   persistently influence d  active self-concepts  across multiple interactions  or whether its influences diminish with  novelty decay ."
"136" "Methods"
"137" "Participants and procedure"
"138" "Participants.  To validate and extend findings  using a diverse local population ,  43  age- and gender-matched  Canadians (ages 18-50) were recruited from the general population in Montreal using Craigslist.  To construct a sample that contrasted with Study 1 participants, cultural ancestry, self-construal, hometown size, socioeconomic status, and education were sampled randomly . Student samples represent a specific and usually privileged demographic group that is not  necessarily generalizable (Henrich, Heine, & Norenzayan, 2010a, 2010b),  so  the adult cohort inclusion criteria were deliberately relaxed.  Having a diversity sample  was necessary to assess in preparation for the planned patient cohort, which are difficult to recruit and can be markedly diverse in social  demographics   (Statistics Canada, 2016). Montreal consist s  of approximately 30% migrant  residents  and a majority of residents have foreign parents or grandparents  (ibid.); although all participants were Canadian-born and raised,  39% of study respondents had foreign parents . All participants  were  healthy with no major medical or psychiatric problems.   Recruitment was stopped due to logistical constraints."
"139" "Procedure.  Study 2 was performed across three study visits ( Baseline,   Social Interaction 1, Social Interaction 2 ).  Baseline  and  Social Interaction 1  procedures were identical to those described in Study 1.  The  Social Interaction 2   procedure was similar to  Social Interaction 1 , but  both   researchers acknowledged that they had met  the participant  before  by using phrases, such as,  “Hi again” and  “Like last time, today  you  will… , ”  which were  added  to  the scripts to  reduce  any  awkwardness  created by  repeat ing   the  social stimuli.   As before, participants were encouraged to respond freely and sincerely.  T he SCS and SVS scale  (includ ing the  modified  version of the  scale )  were  administered for a third time immediately following  Social Interaction 2   just as they were after  Social Interaction 1 ."
"140" "Results"
"141" "Changes to self-concepts after social interaction"
"142" "SCS .  SCS scores were compared using a rmANOVA with SOCIAL INTERACTION PRIMING ( Baseline  vs.  Social  Interaction  1  vs.  Social Interaction 2 ) as a within-subjects factor, and  CULTURAL   EXPOSURE  entered as a between-subjects factor. Since self-construal group was not significant in  Study  1, participants with primarily  INDE  and  INTER  self-construal were analyzed together as a single group (Figure  5 ).  A Greenhouse Geisser correction for violating the  assumption of sphericity was applied. Like Study 1, SCS scores were hypothesized to decrease as a function of the interaction  and these post-interaction scores would remain stable across repeated interactions  (H1) with bicultural participants showing higher flexibility in the form of greater changes in scores (H2).  A Significant Main Effect of SOCIAL INTERACTION PRIMING emerged, F(2,8 6 )= 3.58 , p=.0 40 .  When  CULTURAL EXPOSURE  is not considered, the effect  strengthens ,  F(2,8 8 )= 4.35 , p=.0 22.  Although not significant,  CULTURAL EXPOSURE  ( ‘ Monocultural’  vs.  Bicultural )  displayed trend-level p-value that may or may not emerge as significant with a larger sample size ,  F(2,8 6 )= 296 ,  p=.067. Post hoc paired t-tests found that values  Social Interaction s  1  and  2  were significantly lower than  Baseline  values, respectively: t(42)=2.43, p=.019; t(42)=2.81, p=.007. No significant differences emerged between  Social Interactions 1  and  2 ."
"143" "Figure  5 .  Study 2 SCS Results: Replication and extension of changes after social interaction.   Like   the student cohort from Study 1, adults in Study 2 showed a shift in self-construal toward the opposite construal that was espoused by the confederate researcher. Contrary to the hypotheses  (H2), bicultural Canadians (BC) were somewhat less flexible than ‘monocultural’ Canadians (MC). Although there is a visible change in scores between T2 and T3, it was not statistically significant.  Error bars represent standard error of the mean."
"144" "SVS Scale .  Thirty-nine participants also completed the   SVS Scale  (26 with Canadian parents and 13 with foreign parents). Scores were compared using a 2x5 rmANOVA with SOCIAL VALUES ( Self -Concepts  vs .   Primed -Concepts ) and SOCIAL INTERACTION PRIMING ( Baseline,  Stable   and  Active  conditions   during   Social Interactions 1  and  2 ) as within-subjects factors, and  CULTURAL EXPOSURE (‘ Monocultural’  vs.  Bicultural )  was entered as a  between-subjects factor .  Since SCS  GROUP  was significant for the SVS Scale in Study 1,  SCS  GROUP  was  co-considered in these analys e s. However, SCS  GROUP  was  entered as a covariate  instead of a between-subjects factor  because some groups were too small to  statistically  compare (e.g., ‘Monocultural’ INTER N=4) .  A Greenhouse Geisser correction  was applied  for violating the assumption of sphericity.  SVS Scale scores for  Active Self-Concepts  were hypothesized to decrease as a function of the interaction  and persist after subsequent interactions  (H1) with higher flexibility in bicultural participants (H2)."
"145" "Like the previous  study ,  a significant interaction effect emerged between SOCIAL VALUES x SOCIAL INTERACTION, F(4,144)=3.74, p=.021. Post hoc paired-samples t-tests replicated findings from  Study  1, demonstrating lower scores for  Active   Self -Concepts  during  Social Interactions 1  and  2 , respectively:   (t(38)=4.97, p<.001)   and  t(38)=4.31, p<.001, compared with  Baseline . Neither SCS GROUP nor  CULTURAL EXPOSURE  achieved significance; however, trend-level significance was observed between SOCIAL VALUES and  CULTURAL EXPOSURE , F(1,144)=3.20, p=.082 .   V isual inspection  of group means  reveals  that this trend  may be driven by small differences between SOCIAL VALUES at  Baseline  vs.   Stable Self-Concepts (Social  Interactions 1 & 2)  for  ‘Monocultural’   compared to  Bicultural  Canadians   (see Figure  6 ).   C hange s  in   Active   Self-Concepts  does not appear to be affected."
"146" "Figure  6 . Study 2 SVS Scale Results: Replication and extension of active self-concept suppression.   Participants suppressed social values during the interaction regardless of ‘monocultural’ or bicultural status. Suppression persisted between T2 and T3.  Error bars represent standard error of the mean."
"147" "Study 2  Discussion"
"148" "Overall, the random sample of Canadians living in Montreal tested in  Study  2 replicated the findings of the student sample reported in  Study  1. For most participants, self-construal shifted toward the values of the opposite construal after interacting with a stranger who had opposite values , as hypothesized  ( H1 ) . Like the student cohort, the social interaction did not change how the participants in  Study  2 saw themselves in general, but they likewise suppressed their baseline social values during the social interaction, despite being from a much more heterogeneous sample  (H1) and  support  the hypothesis ( H2 )   that  claims bicultural upbringing would increase flexibility  of active self-concepts ."
"149" "Both SCS and  Sasta SVS Scale  scores showed significant changes  to active self-concepts after the social interaction . This demonstrates that both self-construal and social values schema appear to vary as functions of social context in a broad Canadian population, which may perhaps be generalizable to other populations as well. Repetition of the experimental task produced similar results  for the first and second social interactions  demonstrating stability of scores , suggesting that  active self-concepts are repeated ly  influenced  across multiple timepoints  and do not show short-term signs of extinction ."
"150" "Past research  reporting  that  self- construal is acquired horizontally may be correct, considering the observed trend-level variance according to  cultural exposure . Social values schema, on the other hand, did not show a relationship with  cultural exposure  and may therefore be less contingent on  vertical learning , or may be more likely to be acquired according to life experiences."
"151" "Study  3"
"152" "T he third  study   assessed  whether a cohort of patients diagnosed with  chronic  schizophrenia   spectrum disorder  performed differently compared to a  closely  matched cohort of  healthy  participants  who had  no indications of psychiatric disorders.  Schizophrenia  is a  complex  disorder that is often associated with social rigidity  and  unusual  or  inappropriate  social responses   as well as with a loss of the sense of self  ( Hur et al., 2014; Nelson, Parnas, & Sass, 2014; Postmes et al., 2014; Sass & Parnas, 2003 ) .  Many patients with schizophrenia  experience  difficulty decoding others  (Bora et al., 2008, 2009; Kohler et al., 2009; Walter et al., 2009)  and  may also  have difficulty distinguishing between self and other ( Jardri et al., 2011 ).  Like many  other  psychiatric disorders, patients with schizophrenia often report  a diminished sense of self- identity  and exhibit hyper- or hypo-flexibility  during social interactions and when performing socio-cognitive tasks  ( Raballo et al., 2009 ).   Since the inception of s chizophrenia  as a psychiatric diagnoses, the  self-concepts  of these  patients have been examined   and disruptions to the social self of patients with schizophrenia  are theorized to  influence the lens that cognitively mediates their reality  (Rogers, 1951)."
"153" "Study 3  assess es   1)  whether patients with schizophrenia accommodate the interlocutor to  different  degree s   or   modalities   compared to  matched healthy participants  and  2) whether changes observed in the patient cohort (e.g., to active self-concepts) persist or diminish after repeated social interaction .  This  study  is also intended to act as a potential model for testing social flexibility in other clinical populations characterized by social deficits or rigidity, such as autism, obsessive compulsive disorder, or social anxiety.   Due to the hypo- and hyper-flexibility observed in these patients, w e hypothesized that patients with schizophrenia would report more extreme self-concepts  compared to controls  (H3 ) ."
"154" "Methods"
"155" "Participants and procedure"
"156" "Participants.   A total of 27 patients diagnosed with schizophrenia and 27 carefully matched controls were included in Study 3.  Since schizophrenia is a spectrum disorder with heterogeneous symptoms across patients, the p atients  included in this study were  diagnosed with  schizophrenia, exhibited  chronic  psychosis  (>5 years) .  Patients were also evaluated for concomitant social phobia with 51.9% of  included  patients meeting criteria.  They  were  group- matched to control volunteers from the adult sample by age and gender . Since social behaviors are largely culturally-contingent, patients and controls were  carefully one-to-one matched by parents’ birth countries (China, Greece, India, Italy, Morocco, Philippines, and Ukraine)  and in one case by  region ( participants with parents from the  Caribbean Lesser Antilles islands of Grenada and Barbados  were paired ), which resulted in 15  ‘monocultural’ participants  and 12  bicultural participants  per group. Average IQ, socioeconomic status (SES), hometown size and education level were recorded  (Table 1) . Control participants were screened for clinically significant signs of schizophrenia, social phobia,  depression, anxiety, obsessive compulsive disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder and drug abuse. Participants included in the control cohort did not meet diagnostic criteria for any of these  disorders  and had never seen a counselor or psychiatrist.  Recruitment was stopped due to logistical constraints."
"157" "Procedures.   After informed consent procedures, patients and controls each completed a series of clinical assessments,  which are  described in the next  section .  Since these assessments can be mentally taxing  for  patients , they occurred across 2-3 study visits  prior to any experimental testing .  All other study procedures were  performed as described in  Study 2  (i.e.,   Baseline, Social Interaction 1, Social Interaction 2   across 3 visits ) ."
"158" "Clinical assessments"
"159" "Matched patients and controls were characterized using standard clinical measures. Intelligence was measured in both patients and controls using the Wechsler Abbreviated Intelligence Scale (WASI) to estimate IQ (Wechsler, 2011). Controls were evaluated using the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 (SCID-5) to rule out possible undiagnosed clinical disorders (First et al., 2015). Patients were diagnosed by a trained clinician and assessed using several standard clinical scales at the first day of testing to quantify symptom levels at the time of testing. The Scales for the Assessment of Positive and Negative Symptoms (SAPS/SANS) were used to measure positive and negative symptoms associated with psychosis (Andreasen, 1984a, 1984b). The Calgary Depression Scale was used to assess depressive state, and the Hamilton Anxiety Scale was used to assess anxiety. Both scales are commonly used for assessing these concomitant symptoms in patients with schizophrenia (Addington, Addington, & Atkinson, 1996)."
"160" "Many patients with schizophrenia experience concomitant social anxiety (Gorun et al., 2015). Since the experimental procedure involves social interaction with strangers, the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale (LSAS) was used to assess possible social anxiety in the patient cohort  (Liebowitz, 1987). The LSAS is a screening tool commonly used in clinical research to quantify social anxiety. It contains 24 scenarios that are rated twice on a 4-point  rating  scale, firstly for feelings of fear at the thought of such a situation (0=None, 4=Severe) and secondly for likelihood of avoiding the scenario (0=Never, 4=Usually). Total scores range from 0 to 144, with scores higher than 90 indicating the presence of social anxiety  (Cronbach’s alpha=0.95  for self-reported version of LSAS ;  Fresco et al., 2001 ) ."
"161" "Results"
"162" "Changes to self-concepts after social interaction"
"163" "SCS .  SCS scores were compared using a  rm ANOVA with  SOCIAL INTERACTION PRIMING  ( Baseline  vs.  Social  Interaction   1   vs.  Social Interaction 2 ) as a within-subjects factor and  GROUP   ( Patient  vs.  Control )  entered as a between-subjects factor. A Greenhouse Geisser correction for violating the assumption of sphericity  was applied .  Patients were hypothesized to report more extreme self-concepts (i.e., higher Likert ratings at baseline) compared to control (H3)."
"164" "A Significant Main Effect of  SOCIAL INTERACTION PRIMING  emerged,  F( 2,104)=8.84, p<.001   (Figure  7 ) .  GROUP  was not  significant .  Post hoc  paired t-tests  found  that values  Social Interactions   1  and  2   were significantly lower than  Baseline  values, respectively:  t(53 )=2.74, p=.008 ; t(53 )  =4.55, p<.001 . No significant differences emerged between the  two  Social Interactions ."
"165" "Figure  7 .  Study 3 SCS Results: Similar changes in self-construal between patients and controls.   Like   healthy controls, the self-construal of patients with chronic schizophrenia changed in favor of the opposite construal type after the social interaction. These changes persisted after both social interactions T2 and T3).  Error bars represent standard error of the mean."
"166" "SVS Scale .  SVS Scale  scores were compared using a 2x5  rm ANOVA with  SOCIAL VALUES  ( Self -Concepts  vs .   Primed -Concepts ) and  SOCIAL INTERACTION PRIMING  ( Baseline, Stable  and  Active  conditions   during  Social Interactions 1  and  2 )  as within-subject factors,  and  GROUP   ( Patient  vs.  Control )  was entered as a  between-subjects  factor .  The covariates  SCS GROUP  ( INDE  vs.  INTER )  and  CULTURAL EXPOSURE (‘ Monocultural’  vs.  Bicultural )  were include in this analysis. This was done based on current literature: patients with schizophrenia report loss of self, which may influence the impact of SCS Group, and different rates of schizophrenia are found in second generation migrants in many countries, which may influence the impact of Cultural Exposure. Since these variables  could theoretically influence patient groups  differently than healthy participants, both were entered as covariates to control for possible group differences .   A  Huynh-Feldt   correction for violating the assumption of sphericity  was applied ."
"167" "A significant  interaction effect emerged   for SOCIAL VALUES  x  SOCIAL INTERACTION  PRIMING ,  F(4, 200 )= 2.6 4, p= .0 41 .  GROUP  x  SOCIAL INTERACTION PRIMING  was also significant, F(4, 200 )=3. 1 4 , p=.0 21  (Figure  8 ) .  Controls’ results resembled the previous two  studies ,  with the  post hoc  paired-samples t-tests showing significantly  lower scores for  Active Self-Concepts  during  Social Interactions 1  and  2 , respectively:   t(26)=3.77, p=.001   and  t(26)=3.39, p=.002,  compared with  Baseline .  Patients, on the other hand,  showed a significant difference between  Baseline Self-Concepts  and  Primed-Concepts , t(26)=2.60, p=.015, while  Active  and  Stable Self-   and  Primed- Concepts  were roughly endorsed equally after the  Social Interactions.  No other between-group differences approached significance. In other words,  Primed Self-Concepts  were significantly augmented meanwhile no evidence of  Active Self-Concept  ‘suppression’ emerged.  Independent samples t-test revealed  only one significant difference between groups:  Patients had significantly higher scores for  Active  Self -Concepts   after  Social Interaction 1  compared to controls, t( 5 3 )=-2.07, p=.043. A trend-level finding emerged for  the same comparison  after  Social Interaction 2 , t( 5 3 )=-1.85, p=.070."
"168" "Figure  8 .  Study 3 SVS Scale Results: Unlike controls, patients modify their ‘stable’ self-concepts after social interaction.   Study 1 and Study 2, healthy controls suppressed their self-concepts during the social interaction, demonstrating a change to the active but not the stable self. Patients, in contrast, augmented the self-concepts of their interlocutor (i.e., primed), integrating them into both their ‘stable’ and active self while still also maintaining their original self-concepts across both modalities. These findings demonstrate that patients with schizophrenia may simultaneously endorse roughly opposite self-concepts after a social interaction, possibly suggesting entanglement or confusion between self and other.  Error bars represent standard error of the mean."
"169" "Study 3  Discussion"
"170" "Compelling findings emerged from the SVS Scale analysis.  S ocial  interaction influenced the  purported active and stable self-concepts  of patients differently  than controls . While the controls in this  study  suppressed their  self-concepts  during the interaction,  like in   Studies  1 and 2, patients instead augmented the  self-concepts   of   their  interlocutor  while still maintaining their own .  Essentially, patients with schizophrenia simultaneously endorsed two sets of roughly opposite self- concepts after the social interaction.   Moreover,  self-concepts  were  endorsed   pervasively  across active and stable  modalities . In other words, the social interaction influenced  how the patients see themselves in general  and altered self-concepts that in theory should remain stable . These findings suggest  that socially-impaired patients with schizophrenia have substantially less stable self-concepts compared to healthy participants."
"171" "The self-construal of patients also changed from Baseline  as measured by the SCS , but t here was no difference  in change patterns  between healthy and patient cohorts .  These findings demonstrate that socially-impaired patients with schizophrenia may have impairments in  some  domains and modalities of social cognition but not others, which may explain the heterogenous findings reported across studies in this research area."
"172" "P atients with schizophrenia are frequently described as socially rigid . Yet , taken together,  these findings suggest that  patients  are  flexible   during  social interactions, just in different ways than controls.  The fact that patients’ scores change from Baseline also demonstrate that they  recognize  the   self-concepts  of their interlocutor ."
"173" "From this  study , a few larger points about  the self-concept domains of  self-construal and social values schema can be logically inferred. First, although they are frequently correlated, they appear to represent independent modalities of social identity that are differently affected during interactions.  The finding that patients differ on the SVS Scale but not on the SCS reinforce the interpretation that self-construal and social values schema are correlated but distinct domains of self-concepts.  Second,  given that patients with schizophrenia often appear  to behave  rigid ly  or inappropriate ly  even though they display evidence of adaptive changes on both the SCS and  SVS Scale ,  implies that  patterns of   social  flexibility  may be  fundamental to   social  interaction  – especially as they translate into behavior .   For example, the adaptation of active self-concepts to suit the conversation may look ‘normal’ during a social interaction while the augmentation of opposite  values without self-suppress may appear ‘pathological’ or ‘extreme’.   Considering the outcome of this  study  alongside  findings from   Studies  1 and 2, clear evidence of cognitive mediation of self-concepts emerges after social interaction  for both patients and healthy participants; however, the characteristics of these mediations differ as a function of psychopathology ."
"174" "Post Hoc Analysis : Flexibility  phenotype profiles"
"175" "Real-life social interactions are highly individualized and contextualized, and may be more thoroughly understood by examining and characterizing within-group variations in addition to groupwise analysis.  Furthermore, patient cohorts are notoriously heterogeneous across measures, and analyzing their data solely using aggregated groupwise computations might limit understanding, interpretability, and discovery.   For these and numerous additional reasons,  this study ultimately aims to understand patterns of  adaptability  in  healthy   and patient  cohorts . Therefore,  we planned  a priori  to categorize the participants according to flexibility groups. However,  participants’ response patterns were subdivided according to  a posteriori  categorical division of response types. This approach was designed to characterize participants’ flexibility of the active self -concepts  to their stable selves  in the social values  domain (i.e.,  SVS Scale performance )  based on visual inspection of the acquired data .  Patients were  evaluated in comparison with  matched controls to further characterize the observed differences."
"176" "Method"
"177" "Flexibility  was defined as a ny  change s   to   s elf- c oncepts   from   Baseline  Self-Concepts  to  Active  and  Stable Self-Concepts.   Using the scores from the SVS Scale, participants were categorized into four flexibility  phenotypes ,  defined as follows: Type 1  “ complete  suppression” , wherein participants had lower  Active Self-Concept  scores compared with  both   Stable   Self-Concepts  and  Active Prime-Concepts ; Type 2  “ partial suppression ” , wherein participants had lower  Active Self-Concept  scores compared with  Stable   Self-Concepts  only; Type 3  “c onsisten cy ” , wherein  participants’  Active  and  Stable Self-Concept  scores were equal; and Type 4   “i ntensification ” , wherein participants had higher  Active Self-Concept  scores compared with their  Stable Self-Concept  scores."
"178" "Results"
"179" "Overall, most  healthy  participants  across all studies  fell into Flexibility Type  1  “ complete  suppression ” ( Table 3). Substantial subsets of participants  represented  Flexibility Type 2  “ partial suppression ”   but only in the ‘W.E.I.R.D.’ student convenience sample did a substantial number of participants fall into Type 4 “intensification” .  Very few  participants reported “ c onsistent” social values  (2-4%) , despite the high reliability in the control cohort  that participated in the ‘no social interaction’ repetition testing.  A  smaller proportion of patients fell into Flexibility Phenotypes 1 and 2  compared to matched controls ,  while   nearly half of the patient cohort (Patients=48.1% compared to Controls=7.4%)  displayed  intensification  of their social self (Flexibility Type 4) .  A chi-square test  verified   the statistical significance of  these group differences, χ(3)=11.360, p=.010."
"180" "Table 3"
"181" "Distribution of Social Values (SVS) Flexibility Phenotypes in Studies 1-3"
"182" "Type 1"
"183" "‘Complete Suppression’"
"184" "Type 2"
"185" "‘Partial Suppression’"
"186" "Type 3"
"187" "‘Consistency’"
"188" "Type 4"
"189" "‘Intensification’"
"190" "Study 1"
"191" "52.3%"
"192" "27.3%"
"193" "2.3%"
"194" "18.2%"
"195" "Study 2"
"196" "56.4%"
"197" "35.9%"
"198" "2.6%"
"199" "5.1%"
"200" "Study 3"
"201" "Patients"
"202" "33.3%"
"203" "14.8%"
"204" "3.7%"
"205" "48.1%"
"206" "Controls"
"207" "59.3%"
"208" "29.6%"
"209" "3.7%"
"210" "7.4%"
"211" "Note:   The scores of nearly all participants changed after the social interaction, with most scores changing to resemble the interlocutor’s social values schema."
"212" "Post Hoc  Discussion"
"213" "The processes of cognitive mediation differ in patients with schizophrenia compared to controls, but their presence is essentially pervasive – even individuals who demonstrate ‘no change’ in scores on the SCS show changes in scores on the SVS scale and vice versa, indicating that the self-concepts of  most  people are  altered  by social interaction  in some way . Adults in Study 2 appeared to have more adaptable self-concepts compared to the student population from Study 1. Study 3 examined whether patients exhibit different flexibility phenotypes relative to matched controls, explored through post hoc analysis. A substantial proportion of patients also showed higher  self-concepts  after  Baseline  compared to controls and an ‘intensification’ of the social self during the exploratory analyses. Despite the observed changes in  Study 3 to  self-construal (same reorientation as observed in controls) and social values schema (augmentation of others’ values without suppression of self), patients show  reduced  adaptability of  their own  social values schema during interactions compared to the control cohort  (48% in the intensification group) .  From this finding, we suggest that patients are highly flexible when it comes to integrating the self-concepts of others, but also have a rigid set of their own self-concepts. This finding may further explain why other literature heterogeneously shows that patients are either hyper-rigid or hyper-flexible – because they are actually both."
"214" "Discussion"
"215" "Three  studies  tested   changes in the active identities of  Anglophone  Canadian participants in response to dynamic social interactions, and  the later  two  studies  additionally  tested the persistence of these changes after  a second  exposure.  We hypothesized that Canadian participants would shift  their self-concepts  toward the opposite  construal and  schema ,   reproducing findings from Study 1  (H 1 ) .   Th is  hypothes i s  was  supported and nuanced by the findings , and  Studies 1-2 demonstrated reproducibility of  these  results. Across both studies, participants reoriented their  self- construal to more closely resemble their interlocutors’ and, in the domain of social values schema, participants suppressed their baseline self-concepts during the social interaction.  Post hoc analyses support these findings in demonstrating that 80-9 2 % of healthy participants partially or completely suppress their social values during the interaction.  Moreover,  across all participants and measures in Studies 2-3, response patterns after the first social interaction roughly persisted after the second interaction  indicating that the results are also reproducible with repeated exposure ."
"216" "Participants with foreign-born parents were hypothesized to show greater changes in self-concepts, echoing  studies of  bicultural  upbringing and frame-switching  (H2).  This hypothesis was neither supported nor refuted.   A trend-level  finding emerged suggesting that bicultural participants may suppress their self-concepts  slightly  more than ‘monocultural’ participants; however, this result may be  underpowered or  contingent on cultural background or other social variables not considered in this experiment. Since this experiment aimed for realism, we did not want to screen participants for certain cultural backgrounds, but instead wanted to represent a true random sampling of adult Anglophone Canadians living in Montreal.  Therefore, we interpret this trend-level outcome at face value: in a random sample of adults, some bicultural adults may  display   marginally  greater  adaptation  during social interactions compared to ‘monocultural’ adults , but this trend  may be  highly  individual or  may be contingent on other contextualizing factors, such as  parent-culture differences ,  social context ,  and  high or low level features of the  interaction ."
"217" "In the third study, w e hypothesized that  shifts in self-concepts  would be   more extreme  in patients with schizophrenia , in light of existing literature on  hyper- rigidity  and hyper-flexibility  in this patient grou p .   S pecifically , we  expected that some patients would show extreme changes from Baseline while others would show no change  (H3) .   Some f indings from this study broadly support these hypothese s  but were  much  more nuanced than  initially assumed  while others did not .  Patients with schizophrenia  displayed similar changes to self-construal as matched controls, indicating 1) that self-concepts related to social orientation were accurately derived from their interlocutor and 2) the manner of adapting to these self-concepts is performed normally.  Self-concepts related to self-construal are generally abstract hypothetical “I would” statements, suggesting that cognitive processes related to imagining hypothetical selves may and hypothetical self-other relationships may function normally compared to ‘healthy’ peers.  These findings, of course, refute the hypothesis that patients would display hyper-rigidity or hyper-flexibility and extreme scores."
"218" "Findings related to social values told a different story:  Patients with schizophrenia adapted to the social interaction at the same rate as matched controls (N for Flexibility Type 3 Consistent Self-Concepts = 3.7% for both patients and controls).  However, patients displayed markedly different patterns of adaption.  The statistical analyses revealed that patients augmented   primed concepts after the social interaction rather their suppressing their self-concepts. Additionally, while controls only modified their active selves, patients’ active and  ostensibly  stable concepts were  equally  altered by the conversation.  Arguably, these findings demonstrate that patients are more flexible that controls in certain social domains, because they change across more modalities of  self-identity .  The adoption of their interlocutor’s values while simultaneously maintaining their baseline values suggests that there may be some confusion between the identities of oneself versus the other  person, which echoes other literature. Alternatively, it could suggest a desire to please their interlocutor or to conform to the opinions of others – in both of these cases, the accommodation of the interlocutor is only partial  because they simultaneously maintain their self-concepts .  The construction of Flexibility Phenotypes also revealed that patients are much more likely to Intensify their self-concepts despite adopting the values of their interlocutor. The act of endorsing the other’s values but endorsing their own values more may create the appearance of hyper-flexibility and hyper-rigidity, depending on whether a conversation becomes about oneself or the other."
"219" "Taken together, these findings suggest that patients with schizophrenia may be imprecisely labelled as hyper-rigidity and hyper-flexibility. Instead, their adaptivity patterns are simply  different than what we usually expect during conversations.  Moreover, they are only different some of the time. While patients appear to have no trouble processing hypothetical information (e.g., self-construal), they may have difficulty with immediate statements about their identity. The SVS scale uses “I am” statements, which invoke beliefs about current states rather than abstractions. Patients with schizophrenia may have increased difficulty introspecting in this way."
"220" "In summary,  the self-construal and social values schemata of nearly all participants changed after the social interaction, with the self-concepts of most participants resembling those of their interlocutors after the interaction. Apart from the patient cohort, most participants across all three studies suppressed their social values during the social interaction (i.e., active self modality) but not in general (i.e., stable self modality), making this the first study to empirically parse changes in the active and stable selves. Across all samples, a small sub-cohort of participants exhibited identity differentiation after the interaction, with their self-construal or social values schema becoming less like their interlocutor’s. This cohort of participants reified their social values instead of suppressing them. The majority of the patient cohort endorsed conflicting social values, maintaining their own while also adopting the values of the interlocutor. Secondary analyses revealed that changes to  active self-concepts in the domain of social values appears to have a greater mediating influence on other behaviors compared to self-construal."
"221" "Theoretical relevance: Cognitive mediation"
"222" "This study has implications for the role of the self in the cognitive mediation of conscious experience.  As described  at the beginning of this paper ,  cognitive mediation  refers to the interpretive lens that intercedes between external social experiences and internal social cognitions ; self-concepts partially constitute this cognitively mediating lens   (Chen, 2012; Gardner et al., 1999; Howard, 1994; Kitayama & Uskul, 2011; Kutnick, 2012; Legare et al., 2015; McConnell, 2011; Overton, 2013; Senzaki et al., 2013; Van Dijk, 2015, 1990, Wood, 2000) .  Although  the fluidity of active self-concepts  has  been  long-theorized, the present studies are the first to  (successfully)  directly measure changes to  self-concepts  in ‘monocultural’ participants and to quantifiably differentiate between active and stable modalities of those self-concepts ."
"223" "These findings nuance the current understanding of the role of cognitive mediation in social interaction. As previously described, cognitive mediation is commonly conceptualized as a lens through which new information is viewed. However, we found that participants 1) change their self-construal after social interaction and 2) suppress their values or augment the opposite values. Most participants become more like their interlocutor, while some become less like them. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that cognitive mediation is not just a lens for interpretation, but that the lens itself is reshaped through interaction. Instead, it appears to be interaction-bound for many people, but not for everyone. This  nuance  is important  because it  suggests that cognitive mediation is more malleable than previously suggested and allows for reappraisal when one is exposed to new social information."
"224" "Furthermore, cognitive mediation does not result in the same outcome for all individuals. Often, cognitive mediation is described as the process during which individuals decide, either  consciously or unconsciously, whether they subscribe to a system of values or of culturally scripted behaviors (Kitayama & Uskul, 2011). The problem with this conceptualization is that values and behaviors are messy and cultural scripts are often imperfectly learned (Crafa & Nagel, 2019 , 2020 ). The individual variability observed among healthy Canadians in the present study reflects the range of malleability to cognitive mediation and how it might lead to cultural learning that looks differently from the stereotypical cultural scripts often discussed in this literature."
"225" "Identity  theor ies have described  active self-concepts  as  fluctuat ing  and chang ing  during each social encounter and similar changes that are either exceptionally salient (e.g., induced by trauma) or repeated (e.g., induced by long-term friendship) should eventually accumulate, build a neural network, and eventually alter stable-concepts  (Crafa & Nagel, 201 9 , 20 20 ) . We interpret the findings from the present studies as evidence of immediate changes to active self-concepts that are likely short-term under the circumstances.  This implies that long-term social learning may occur through repeated suppression of self-identities during conversations, and raises the question of whether reifying one’s self-identities during conversation inhibits learning. While these interpretations are logical, and therefore seem probable, they are yet to be tested.  Others have proposed that the cognitive mediation of social experiences results in either a  (conscious or subconscious)  subscription to espoused social values, beliefs, or behaviors or a rejection of those values, etc. (Kitayama & Uskul, 201 1 ; Crafa & Nagel,  201 9 , 20 20 ). In theory, suppression or reification of active self-concepts may correspond to the subscription to or rejection of others’ values, etc (i.e., partial or complete suppression may correspond with degrees of subscription while consistent or intensification of self-concepts may correspond with degrees of ignoring/rejecting). Again, this is theoretically consistent with existing literature but needs to be directly tested."
"226" "The results from the cohort of patients with schizophrenia have interesting theoretical implications  for cognitive mediation. S chizophrenic patients on average respond ed  with a complex  web of contradictions 1) only certain domains self-concepts were different from controls (social values schema but not self-construal),   2 )  both ‘ stable ’  and active  modalities changed,   3 )  they  endors ed  the opposite  while also  intensifying their own.   Considering identity literature while s uperimposing these results onto the standing theory that cognitive mediation of social experiences results in either a subscription to or rejection of cognitive mediation of social experiences results in either a subscription to espoused social values, beliefs, or behaviors or a rejection, logically leads to these distinctions: 1) social values schema may be more subject to mediating evaluations than self-construal (also supported by healthy findings), 2)  changes to the stable self-identity after short-term interactions may produce feelings of ‘loss of self’ potentially related to instability of the  self-concepts , 3) difficulties interpreting and executing social behaviors may relate to the simultaneous endorsement of the opposite while also intensifying their own.  In these respects, cognitive mediation of the social world may be simultaneously too flexible (changes in stable concepts) and too rigid (intensification of active self-concepts). If correct, the impression of  hyper-rigidity and hyper-flexibility may emerge from the  complex nature of their  self-concepts ,  despites patients in this study exhibiting equally flexible identities compared to closely matched controls.  Moreover, the differences in how patients cognitively mediat e  social information may produce some of the differences in social learning. The results clearly demonstrate that  others influence  patients  differently compared to controls and, previous theories have posited that differences in these processes may produce different social behaviors, beliefs, etc (Crafa & Nagel,  201 9 , 20 20 ). Therefore, logically, differences in how patients cognitively mediate social information ought produce some of the differences in social learning  (e.g.,   systematic  divergen ces from  social scripts) .  Again, this conclusion is logical from the findings and  supported  theorized by previous literature, but needs to be directly tested."
"227" "Clinical applications"
"228" "Schizophrenia is a notoriously heterogeneous diagnosis characterized by an array of features, symptoms, and presentations that vary widely across individual patient and across cultural groups of patients.  Identifying and addressing underlying mechanisms of these differences can help to  improve psychiatric   nosology and available treatments.  The findings  from this study suggest that differences in  self-concept fluidity  affect a substantial number of patients with schizophrenia, and point to a possible mechanism of social difficulties for many patients. Systematically characterizing these difference in individual patients and in groups may help to refine the current characterization of social difficulties that many patients face. For example, the findings from Study 3 suggest that patients on average may be correctly extracting social information but applying it differently.   Changes in self-construal mirrors the controls, and changes in social values schema  do reflect  the values of their interlocutor. However, the integration of these values into their own schema occurs differently. Therefore, patients seem to have difficulty with  self-other   integration  but not with the  extraction  of social information, at least in these social domains.   Findings surrounding patterns of self-concept change and flexibility phenotypes of the patient cohort can be applied to further develop clinical interventions focused on social learning and flexibility training for patients (for reviews of existing clinical programs see Devoe et al., 2019; Webber & Fendt-Newlin, 2017). For example,  some patients may benefit from  exercises designed to augment the integration of social information ,  to practice  the accommodation of others’ values  during conversations ,  or  to promote  the  resilience of  values  ‘in general’."
"229" "Future  directions"
"230" "Findings from this study raise several research questions that should be investigated by future studies. One of the core questions is whether these findings will be reproduced across  cultures . O ther s include  whether it is reproducible in schizophrenia across cultures or  whether different  patient groups exhibit  different patterns of  self-concept fluidity ."
"231" "The particular way active self-concepts are adapted to accommodate the interlocutor may be viewed as a cultural script. For example, suppressing self-concepts may be related to expression of politeness or social alignment, which can be highly culture-specific in form.  If theories that self-concepts are cognitive mediators is correct, then these patterns of self-suppression versus intensification should be roughly universal in ‘healthy’ populations , pointing to a fundamental and shared cognitive mechanism.  Additionally, although self-construal has historically been used to study cognitive mediation and social learning, social values schema flexibility groups were predictive of other behavioral changes while self-construal groups were not. Thus, future studies should examine social value schema in tandem with or in place of self-construal when examining social learning, changes in self-concepts, and cognitive mediation."
"232" "T hese patterns of self-suppression versus intensification are  possibly a fundamental social mechanism differentiating ‘healthy’ from ‘disorder’ .  Using cultural consensus analysis to quantify agreement, Crafa et al. (20 20 ) compared the Baseline self-concepts of schizophrenic patients across cultures and found that patients had more in common with healthy participants from their native culture than with patients from other cultures in the domain of social values schema according to baseline SVS measures. However, flexibility phenotypes may tell a different story. If the complex adaptive styles of the patients from this study generalize across cultures, then it suggests an underlying cognitive mechanism of certain social features of schizophrenia. This would be enormously informative for future nosological revisions. On the other hand, if the complex adaptive styles do not generalize across cultures, then it suggests either that schizophrenia is even more heterogeneous than previously assumed (and maybe that categorization by social dimensions needs  further revision) or that culture  modulates the  mechanics of  self-concept fluidity   and cognitive mediation.   These interpretations would be largely contingent on the findings from healthy cohorts."
"233" "Other patient groups many exhibit different patterns of adaptation and should also be tested. For example, like schizophrenia, autism is often characterized by social rigidity when in fact patients maybe adapting in currently uncharacterized ways.  This possibility is supported by studies reporting that social skills improve in high functioning autists during adulthood.  Understanding what adaptation looks like could radically shift modern understanding of social  learning  in autism."
"234" "As mentioned,  f uture studies should adapt and extend the approach defined in this paper to examine long term social learning  to test whether active self-concept suppression facilitates long-term social learning. A cross all participants and measures in Studies 2-3, response patterns after the first social interaction roughly persisted after the second interaction indicating that the results are also reproducible with repeated exposure , suggesting that the suppression persists across time.  This raises and interesting question: what happens with long-term exposure? Three possibilities emerge: 1) the persistent suppression fades over time (i.e., the effect is temporary and scores eventually return to Baseline), 2) suppression persists at roughly the same level (i.e., suppression becomes part of the social dynamic and scores are roughly the same across future conversations), or 3) social values are integrated (i.e., new self-concept endorsement patterns emerge and scores fall somewhere between suppression and Baseline).  Such a study would identify fundamental mechanics of  self-concept fluidity , which leads to a further question: can we eventually simulate  longer-term or even permanent changes , for example to stable self concepts in typical adults through   cultural learning (e.g., in children) or acculturation (e.g., after migration) by adapting the methods proposed here? Future studies should attempt these feats."
"235" "Limitations"
"236" "Although we took every precaution that we could to form responsible and rigorously-defined experimental samples, t he main limitations of this study lie in the limit of its  participants .  A  majority of participants were Caucasian. Although race and ethnicity are social constructs,  they can reflect cultural subgroups within a country  that should be represented in order to truly represent social patterns within a country .   T his study was  also  limited to Anglophone Canadians, and their normative social responses may be country specific  or may reflect their cultural-linguistic subgroup within Canada  (i.e., French Canadians may show different patterns) .   While  findings were highly reproducible in healthy participants, the reproducibility in the patient cohort must still be established and was not possible in this study due to availability of patients. Furthermore, all patients in this study were high functioning enough to participate in a research study, and therefore might not represent those more severely affected.   Future studies should diversify the study population, to evaluate whether these findings apply equally across peoples, cultures and  patient groups , in order to provide a more comprehensive understanding of horizontal learning in humans."
"237" "Summation"
"238" "This study identified differences in the active and stable self-concepts that mediate social  perceptions and  found evidence of changes in cognitive mediation attributable to changes in active  self-concepts. A majority of healthy participants across three  stud ies  suppressed their self-concepts in response to an interaction with a friendly foreign stranger who endorsed opposed self-concepts.  Taken together, these findings suggest that self-suppression may be  a  precursor for social  (and therefore cultural)  learning.  Patients with schizophrenia   displayed an augmentation of their interlocutors’ self-concepts, indicating that they may hold two sets of conflicting self-concepts simultaneously  and suggesting self-other confusion and different social adaptation strategies ."
"239" "Four distinct f lexibility phenotypes  emerged for both healthy participants and patients that can be useful for understanding individual differences in social learning and behaviors. Self-construal and social values schema s  were revealed to be distinct but highly correlated self-concept modalities .  Finally, this study provides a reliable Social Interaction Priming procedure that  has a wide array of applications for studying individual flexibility types as well as the impact of social interactions on people across cultures and patient groups."
"240" "Authors Statement"
"241" "DC  initiated and  conceptualized the project, designed the paradigm and experimental protocol, designed the stimuli, collected the data, performed the statistical analyses, interpreted the data, and wrote the manuscript."
"242" "JS  contributed essential insights throughout the early project development,  assisted with creation of  key  stimuli (word selection, and Researcher 2 script),  and assisted with data collection."
"243" "MB directly supervised the project and provided essential feedback regarding project conceptualization, experimental protocol, stimuli design, statistical interpretation, manuscript preparation , and financial and material support ."
"244" "Acknowledgements"
"245" "Thanks to to Dr. Andrew Ryder for providing feedback on this manuscript   and to Dr. Joseph Rochford for statistical advice.  Special thanks to Drs. Jesper Sørensen, Christopher Nielbo, Josh Skewes, and Andreas Roepstorff for their feedback during  the initial conceptualization of the project , to Drs. Eric Jarvis, Ian Gold, and Laurence Kirmayer for their feedback throughout study design and completion,  and  to Dr. Martin Lepage for providing rooms, resources, and assistance with patient recruitment . Thanks also  to  Karyne Anselmo and Danielle Penney  for recruiting eligible patients, to Caitlin Stoddart  for assisting with data , and  to  Caitlin Stoddart and Orla Mallon  for proofreading."
"246" "Funding"
"247" "This study was funded by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC)  (#388752-2012 ) ,  the RBIQ-QBIN Quebec Bioimaging Network ( # 11.19) ,  and the Douglas Hospital Brain Imaging Center (in-kind award)."
"248" "Disclosure statement"
"249" "There are no financial interest s  or benefit s   for  the authors from direct applications of this research."
"250" "Data availability and o pen practices"
"251" "All study materials as well as training videos for how to conduct the study, materials in additional languages, notes about translation and design, and about reproducibility in other cultures are available at  www.dainacrafa.com/sasta .  Statistics were verified using  http://statcheck.io/  prior to submission and discrepancies were individually verified.  Data is openly available upon request ; we are currently confirming whether the open  publication  of anonymized data is permitted by involved ethics boards and under the multinational privacy laws  of involved countries .  Datasets are available by email.   All statistics were confirmed using  http://statcheck.io/   prior to  submission .  This study was designed in 2013, before the authors were aware of preregistration."
"252" "References"
"253" "Addington ,  D . , Addington, J . , Atkinson ,  M. (1996) A psychometric comparison of the Calgary Depression Scale for Schizophrenia and the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale.  Schizophrenia Research, 19 ,  205-212.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1016/0920-9964(95)00070-4."
"254" "Amiot, C. E., De la Sablonniere, R., Terry, D. J., & Smith, J. R. (2007). Integration of social identities in the self: Toward a cognitive-developmental model.  Personality and Social Psychology Review, 11 (4), 364-388.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1177/1088868307304091."
"255" "American Psychiatric Association. (2015).  Structured clinical interview for DSM-5 (SCID-5) . Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association."
"256" "Andreasen, N.C. (1984a)  Scale for the Assessment of Positive Symptoms (SAPS) . Iowa City: University of Iowa."
"257" "Andreasen, N.C. (1984b)  Scale for the Assessment of Positive Negative (SANS).  Iowa City: University of Iowa."
"258" "Anderson, K. K., Cheng, J., Susser, E., McKenzie, K. J., & Kurdyak, P. (2015). Incidence of psychotic disorders among first-generation immigrants and refugees in Ontario.  CMAJ, 187 (9), E279-E286.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1503/cmaj.141420."
"259" "Argyle, M. (2017).  Social encounters: Contributions to social interaction .  Oxford:  Routledge."
"260" "Aviezer, H., & Hassin, R. R. (2017). Inherently ambiguous: An argument for contextualized emotion perception. In J.-M. Fernández-Dols & J. A. Russell (Eds.),  Oxford Series in Social Cognition and Social Neuroscience. The Science of Facial Expression  (p. 333–349). Oxford University Press."
"261" "Aydinli, A., & Bender, M. (2015). Cultural priming as a tool to understand multiculturalism and culture.  Online Readings in Psychology and Culture, 2 (1), 13.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.9707/2307-0919.1134 ."
"262" "Bandura, A., & Walters, R. H. (1963).  Social learning and personality development .  New York: Holt Rinehart and Winston."
"263" "Bardi, A., & Goodwin, R. (2011). The dual route to value change: Individual processes and cultural moderators.  Journal of  Cross-Cultural Psychology , 42 (2), 271-287.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0022022110396916."
"264" "Bardi, A., Lee, J. A., Hofmann-Towfigh, N., & Soutar, G. (2009). The structure of intraindividual value change.  Journal of  P ersonality and  Social Psychology , 97 (5), 913.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0016617."
"265" "Barsalou, L. W. (2016). Situated conceptualization offers a theoretical account of social priming.  Current Opinion in Psychology, 12 , 6-11.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2016.04.009."
"266" "Baumrind, D. (1967). Child care practices anteceding three patterns of preschool behavior.  Genetic  Psychology Monographs, 75 (1), 43-88."
"267" "Bell, M., Tsang, H. W., Greig, T. C., & Bryson, G. J. (2009). Neurocognition, social cognition, perceived social discomfort, and vocational outcomes in schizophrenia.  Schizophrenia Bulletin, 35 (4), 738-747.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbm169."
"268" "Bigler, M., Neimeyer, G. J., & Brown, E. (2001). The divided self revisited: Effects of self-concept clarity and self-concept differentiation on psychological adjustment.  Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 20 (3), 396-415.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1521/jscp.20.3.396.22302."
"269" "Bilsky, W., Gollan, T., Roccas, S., Grad, H., Teixeira, M. L. M., Rodriguez, M., Schweiger Gallo, I., &  Segal-Caspi, L. (2015). On the relative importance of personal v alues.  Journal of Individual Differences , 36 , 119-129 .  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1027/1614-0001/a000162."
"270" "Bora, E., Gökçen, S., & Veznedaroglu, B. (2008). Empathic abilities in people with schizophrenia.  Psychiatry Research, 160 (1), 23-29.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1016/j.psychres.2007.05.017 ."
"271" "Bora, E., Yucel, M., & Pantelis, C. (2009). Theory of mind impairment in schizophrenia: meta-analysis.  Schizophrenia Research, 109 (1), 1-9.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1016/j.schres.2008.12.020 ."
"272" "Boer, D., & Fischer, R. (2013). How and when do personal values guide our attitudes and sociality? Explaining cross-cultural variability in attitude–value linkages.  Psychological Bulletin, 139 (5), 1113-47.  Doi : 10.1037/a0031347."
"273" "Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. J. (1982). Cultural transmission and the evolution of cooperative behavior.  Human Ecology, 10 (3), 325-351.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01531189."
"274" "Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. J. (1983). Why is culture adaptive?   Quarterly Review of Biology, 58 , 209–214."
"275" "Boyd, R., Richerson, P. J., & Henrich, J. (2011). The cultural niche: Why social learning is essential for human adaptation.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108 (Supplement 2), 10918-10925.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1073/pnas.1100290108."
"276" "Bourque, F., van der Ven, E., & Malla, A. (2011). A meta-analysis of the risk for psychotic disorders among first-and second-generation immigrants.  Psychological  M edicine, 41 (5), 897-910.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0033291710001406."
"277" "Brodeur, M., Pelletier, M., Bodnar, M., Buchy, L., & Lepage, M. (2010). The effect of viewpoint on visual stimuli: A study of episodic memory in schizophrenia.  Psychiatry Research, 176 (2), 126-131.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2008.11.013."
"278" "Brown, C. M., Bailey, V. S., Stoll, H., & McConnell, A. R. (2016). Between two selves: Comparing global and local predictors of speed of switching between self-aspects.  Self and Identity, 15 (1), 72-89.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15298868.2015.1082499 ."
"279" "Bruton, A., Conway, J. H., & Holgate, S. T. (2000). Reliability: what is it, and how is it measured?  Physiotherapy, 86 , 94-99."
"280" "Cahn, W., Bruggeman, R., De Haan, L., Kahn, R., Myin-Germeys, I., & Van Os, J. (2015). Long-term Outcome in Schizophrenia: a Six-year Follow-up in over 1000 Patients.  European Psychiatry, 30 , 238.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0924-9338(15)30193-0."
"281" "Carr, E. W., & Winkielman, P. (2014). When mirroring is both simple and “smart”: how mimicry can be embodied, adaptive, and non-representational. Frontiers in  Human Neuroscience , 8, 505.   https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00505."
"282" "Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., & Feldman, M. W. (1981).  Cultural transmission and evolution: A quantitative approach .  New Jersey:  Princeton University Press."
"283" "Cermolacce, M., Naudin, J., & Parnas, J. (2007). The “minimal self” in psychopathology: re-examining the self-disorders in the schizophrenia spectrum.  Consciousness and  C ognition, 16 (3), 703-714.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2007.05.013."
"284" "Chen, X. (2012). Culture, peer interaction, and socioemotional development.  Child Development Perspectives, 6 (1), 27-34.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1111/j.1750-8606.2011.00187.x ."
"285" "Cheng, A. S., & Fleischmann, K. R. (2010). Developing a meta ‐ inventory of human values.  Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 47 (1), 1-10.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1002/meet.14504701232."
"286" "Chiao, J. Y., Harada, T., Komeda, H., Li, Z., Mano, Y., Saito, D., & Iidaka, T. (2010). Dynamic cultural influences on neural representations of the self.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22 (1), 1-11.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1162/jocn.2009.21192."
"287" "Chiao, J. Y., Harada, T., Komeda, H., Li, Z., Mano, Y., Saito, D., & Iidaka, T. (2009). Neural basis of individualistic and collectivistic views of self.  Human  Brain Mapping , 30 (9), 2813-2820.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hbm.20707 ."
"288" "Choi, H., Connor, C. B., Wason, S. E., & Kahan, T. A. (2016). The effects of interdependent and independent priming on Western participants’ ability to perceive changes in visual scenes.  Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 47 (1), 97-108.   http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1177/0022022115605384 ."
"289" "Chudek, M., Heller, S., Birch, S., & Henrich, J. (2012). Prestige-biased cultural learning: bystander's differential attention to potential models influences children's learning.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 33 (1), 46-56.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2011.05.005."
"290" "Ciaramelli, E., Muccioli, M., Làdavas, E., & di Pellegrino, G. (2007). Selective deficit in personal moral judgment following damage to ventromedial  prefrontal cortex.  Social C ognitive and  Affective Neuroscience , 2 (1/4), 84.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1093/scan/nsm001."
"291" "Cicero, D. C. (2017). Self-concept clarity and psychopathology. In  Self-Concept Clarity  (pp. 219-242).  New York:  Springer."
"292" "Cicero, D. C., Martin, E. A., Becker, T. M., & Kerns, J. G. (2016). Decreased self-concept clarity in people with schizophrenia.  Journal of  N ervous and  Mental Disease , 204 (2), 142.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/NMD.0000000000000442."
"293" "Cohen, J. (1988).  Statistical  Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences   (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum."
"294" "Coleman, N. V., & Williams, P. (2013). Feeling like my self: Emotion profiles and social identity.  Journal of Consumer Research, 40 (2), 203-222.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/669483."
"295" "Comello, M. L. G., & Farman, L. (2016). Identity as a moderator and mediator of communication effects: Evidence and implications for message design.  Journal of Psychology, 150 , 822-836."
"296" "Couture, S. M., Penn, D. L., & Roberts, D. L. (2006). The functional significance of social cognition in schizophrenia: a review.  Schizophrenia  B ulletin, 32 ( S uppl .  1), S44-S63.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbl029."
"297" "Crafa, D., Liu, J. Q., & Brodeur, M. B. (2019). Social values and determinants of cultural fit in Quebec: The roles of ancestry, linguistic group, and mental health status.  Frontiers in Cultural Psychology ,   10 .  https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00287."
"298" "Crafa, D., & Nagel, S.K. (201 9 ). The adaptive self: Culture and social flexibility in feedback networks. Commentary on Borsboom, Cramer and Kalis.  Behavioral and Brain Sciences,  41.   http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X18001255 ."
"299" "Crafa, D., & Nagel, S.K. ( 2020 ). Traces of culture: The feedback loop between brain, behavior, and disorder.  Transcultural Psychiatry ,  epub .  https://  doi.org/10.1177/1363461519879515"
"300" "Crisp, R. J., & Turner, R. N. (2011). Cognitive adaptation to the experience of social and cultural diversity.  Psychological  B ulletin, 137 (2), 242.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0021840."
"301" "Cross, S. E., Bacon, P. L., & Morris, M. L. (2000). The relational-interdependent self-construal   and relationships.  Journal of  P ersonality and  S ocial  P sychology, 78 (4), 791.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1037//0022-3514.78.4.791."
"302" "Cross, S. E., Hardin, E. E., & Gercek-Swing, B. (2011). The what, how, why, and where of self-construal. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 15(2), 142-179.   http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1177/1088868310373752 ."
"303" "Csordas, T. (2015). Cultural Phenomenology and Psychiatric Illness. In L. Kirmayer, R. Lemelson, & C. Cummings (Eds.), Re-Visioning Psychiatry:  Cultural Phenomenology, Critical Neuroscience, and Global Mental Health  (pp. 117-140). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1017/CBO9781139424745.008 ."
"304" "Davidson, M., Kapara, O., Goldberg, S., Yoffe, R., Noy, S., & Weiser, M. (2015). A nation-wide study on the percentage of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder patients who earn minimum wage or above.  Schizophrenia  B ulletin, 42 (2), 443-447.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbv023."
"305" "Dealberto, M. J. (2010). Ethnic origin and increased risk for schizophrenia in immigrants to countries of recent and longstanding immigration.  Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 121 (5), 325-339.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0447.2009.01535.x."
"306" "Dean, L. G., Kendal, R. L., Schapiro, S. J., Thierry, B., & Laland, K. N. (2012). Identification of the social and cognitive processes underlying human cumulative culture.  Science, 335 (6072), 1114-1118.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1126/science.1213969."
"307" "De Jaegher, H., Di Paolo, E., & Gallagher, S. (2010). Can social interaction constitute social cognition?  Trends in  Cognitive Sciences , 14 (10), 441-447.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2010.06.009."
"308" "Demick, J., Trent, N., Chapman, I. & Most, R. (2014). Establishing reliability and validity of the online Group Embedded Figures Test. Manuscript in preparation."
"309" "DeSoto, M. C., Hitlan, R. T., Deol, R. S. S., & McAdams, D. (2010). Testosterone fluctuations in young men: The difference between interacting with like and not-like others.  Evolutionary Psychology, 8 (2), 147470491000800203.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/147470491000800203."
"310" "Devoe, D. J., Farris, M. S., Townes, P., & Addington, J. (2019). Interventions and social functioning in youth at risk of psychosis: A systematic review and met a- analysis.  Early  Intervention in Psychiatry , 13 (2), 169-180."
"311" "Dragolov, G., & Boehnke, K. (2015). Social Axioms as Mediators Between Culture-Level and Individual-Level Values.  Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 46 (6), 772-788.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0022022115587027."
"312" "Drouin, H., & Davidson, P. S. (2015). Any effects of social orientation priming on object   location memory are smaller than initially reported.  Journal of Experimental Psychology:   General, 144 (6), e107.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1037/xge0000102 ."
"313" "Ebisch, S. J., Mantini, D., Northoff, G., Salone, A., De Berardis, D., Ferri, F., et al. (2013). Altered brain long-range functional interactions underlying the link between aberrant self-experience and self-other relationship in first-episode schizophrenia.  Schizophrenia Bulletin, 40 (5), 1072-1082.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbt153."
"314" "Eddy, C. M. (2018). Social cognition and self-other distinctions in neuropsychiatry: insights from schizophrenia and Tourette syndrome.  Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 82 , 69-85."
"315" "Enquist, M., Strimling, P., Eriksson, K., Laland, K., & Sjostrand, J. (2010). One cultural parent makes no culture.  Animal Behaviour, 79 (6), 1353-1362.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.anbehav.2010.03.009."
"316" "Escobar, J. I., & Gureje, O. (2007). Influence of cultural and social factors on the epidemiology of idiopathic somatic complaints and syndromes.  Psychosomatic Medicine, 69 (9), 841-845.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/PSY.0b013e31815b007e."
"317" "Evensen, S., Wisløff, T., Lystad, J. U., Bull, H., Ueland, T., & Falkum, E. (2015). Prevalence, employment rate, and cost of schizophrenia in a high-income welfare society: a population-based study using comprehensive health and welfare registers.  Schizophrenia  B ulletin, 42 (2), 476-483."
"318" "Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Lang, A. G., & Buchner, A. (2007). G* Power 3: A flexible statistical power analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences.  Behavior Research Methods, 39 (2), 175-191.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/BF03193146."
"319" "Fern á ndez, J. (2005). Sel f- Knowledge, Rationality and Moore's Paradox.  Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 71 (3), 533-556.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1933-1592.2005.tb00470.x."
"320" "Fernández, I., Paez, D., & González, J. L. (2005). Independent and interdependent self-construals and socio-cultural factors in 29 nations.  Revue Internationale de Psychologie Sociale, 18 (1), 35-63."
"321" "First, M.B., Williams, J.B.W., Karg, R.S., & Spitzer, R.L. (2015).  Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5—Research Version (SCID-5 for DSM-5, Research Version; SCID-5-RV).  Arlington: American Psychiatric Association."
"322" "Fong, M. C., Goto, S. G., Moore, C., Zhao, T., Schudson, Z., & Lewis, R. S. (2014). Switching between Mii and Wii: The effects of cultural priming on the social affective N400 . Culture and Brain, 2 (1), 52-71. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s40167-014-0015-7."
"323" "Forgas, J. P., & Williams, K. D. (Eds.). (2014).  The social self: Cognitive, interpersonal and intergroup perspectives .  New York:  Psychology Press."
"324" "Fraley, R. C., Vicary, A. M., Brumbaugh, C. C., & Roisman, G. I. (2011). Patterns of stability in adult attachment: An empirical test of two models of continuity and change.  Journal of  P ersonality and  Social Psychology , 101 (5), 974.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0024150."
"325" "Frings, D. (2018).  Social psychology: The basics . Routledge."
"326" "Galderisi, S., Heinz, A., Kastrup, M., Beezhold, J., & Sartorius, N. (2015). Toward a new definition of mental health.  World Psychiatry, 14 (2), 231-233.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/wps.20231."
"327" "Gardner, W. L., Gabriel, S., & Lee, A. Y. (1999). “I” value freedom, but “we” value relationships: Self-construal priming mirrors cultural differences in judgment.  Psychological Science, 10 (4), 321-326.   http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1111/1467-9280.00162 ."
"328" "Gaither, S. E., Babbitt, L. G., & Sommers, S. R. (2018). Resolving racial ambiguity in social interactions.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 76,  259-269."
"329" "Ghosh, C. C., & Muthukumaran, R. (2018). Self in schizophrenia: Current issues and future directions.  Archives of Mental Health, 19 (2), 102."
"330" "Girden, E. R. (1992).  ANOVA: Repeated Measures . Newbury Park, CA: Sage."
"331" "Goldin, P. R., Ziv, M., Jazaieri, H., Werner, K., Kraemer, H., Heimberg, R. G., & Gross, J. J. (2012). Cognitive reappraisal self-efficacy mediates the effects of individual cognitive-behavioral therapy  for social anxiety disorder.  Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80 (6), 1034.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1037/a0028555 ."
"332" "Goodwin, R., Polek, E., & Bardi, A. (2012). The temporal reciprocity of values and beliefs: A longitudinal study within a major life transition . European Journal of Personality, 26 (3), 360-370.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/per.844."
"333" "Gore, J. S., & Cross, S. E. (2014). Who am I becoming? A theoretical framework for understanding self-concept change.  Self and Identity, 13 (6), 740-764.   http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1080/15298868.2014.933712  ."
"334" "Gorun, A., Cieslak, K., Harkavy-Friedman, J., Deptula, A., Goetz, D., Goetz, R., & Malaspina, D. (2015). Frequent comorbidity and predictors of social anxiety in persons with schizophrenia: A r etrospective cohort study.  The Primary Care C ompanion for CNS  D isorders, 17 (5).   http://dx.doi.org/ 10.4088/PCC.15m01799 ."
"335" "Green, M. F., & Horan, W. P. (2010). Social cognition in schizophrenia.  Current Directions in Psychological Science, 19 (4), 243-248.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0963721410377600."
"336" "Gudykunst, W. B., & Shapiro, R. B. (1996). Communication in everyday interpersonal and intergroup encounters.  International  Journal of Intercultural Relations , 20 (1), 19-45."
"337" "Han, S., & Humphreys, G. (2016). Self-construal: A cultural framework for brain function.   Current Opinion in Psychology, 8 , 10-14.   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2015.09.013."
"338" "Han, S., Northoff, G., Vogeley, K., Wexler, B. E., Kitayama, S., & Varnum, M. E. (2013). A cultural neuroscience approach to the biosocial nature of the human brain.  Annual Review of Psychology, 64 , 335-359.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1146/annurev-psych-071112-054629 ."
"339" "Harada, T., Li, Z., & Chiao, J. Y. (2010). Differential dorsal and ventral medial prefrontal representations of the implicit self modulated by individualism and collectivism: An fMRI study.  Social Neuroscience, 5 (3), 257-271.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1080/17470910903374895."
"340" "Hattie, J. (2014).  Self-concept . Psychology Press."
"341" "Haverkamp, N., & Beauducel, A. (2017). Violation of the sphericity assumption and its effect on type-I error rates in repeated measures ANOVA and multi-level linear models (MLM).  Frontiers in Psychology, 8 , 1841."
"342" "Heatherton, T. F. (2011). Neuroscience of self and self-regulation.  Annual Review of Psychology, 62 , 363-390."
"343" "Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010a). Most people are not WEIRD.  Nature, 466 (7302), 29-29.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1038/466029a."
"344" "Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010b). Beyond WEIRD: Towards a broad-based behavioral science.  Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33 (2-3), 111-135.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1017/S0140525X10000725."
"345" "Henssler, J., Brandt, L., Müller, M., Liu, S., Montag, C., Sterzer, P., & Heinz, A. (2019). Migration and schizophrenia: meta-analysis and explanatory framework.  European  Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience , 1-11."
"346" "Herrero, P., Contador, I., Stern, Y., Fernández-Calvo, B., Sánchez, A., & Ramos, F. (2019). Influence of Cognitive Reserve in Schizophrenia: A Systematic Review. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews."
"347" "Hesse, K., Kriston, L., Wittorf, A., Herrlich, J., Wölwer, W., & Klingberg, S. (2015). Longitudinal relations between symptoms, neurocognition, and self-concept in schizophrenia.  Frontiers in  P sychology, 6 , 917.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00917."
"348" "Hofstede, G. (2011). Dimensionalizing cultures: The Hof stede model in context.  Online Readings in P syc hology and C ulture, 2 (1), 8.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.9707/2307-0919.1014."
"349" "Hogeveen, J., & Obhi, S. S. (2011). Altogether now: activating interdependent self construal induces hypermotor resonance.  Cognitive N euroscience, 2 (2), 74-82.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1080/17588928.2010.533164."
"350" "Hong, Y-y., Morris, M. W., Chiu, C-y., & Benet-Martinez, V. B. (2000). Multicultural minds: A dynamic constructivist approach to culture and cognition.  American Psychologist, 55 , 709-720.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1037/0003-066X.55.7.709."
"351" "Horowitz, M. J. (2012). Self-identity theory and research methods.  Journal of Research Practice, 8 , M14-M14."
"352" "Howard, J. A. (1994). A social cognitive conception of social structure.  Social Psychology Quarterly, 57 (3), 210-227.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.2307/2786877 ."
"353" "Hur, J. W., Kwon, J. S., Lee, T. Y., & Park, S. (2014). The crisis of minimal self-awareness in schizophrenia: A meta- analytic review.  Schizophrenia R esearch, 152 (1), 58-64.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1016/j.schres.2013.08.042."
"354" "Hutteman, R., Hennecke, M., Orth, U., Reitz, A. K., & Specht, J. (2014). Developmental tasks as a framework to study personality development in adulthood and old age.  European Journal of Personality, 28 (3), 267-278.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/per.1959."
"355" "Jardri, R., Pins, D., Lafargue, G., Very, E., Ameller, A., Delmaire, C., & Thomas, P. (2011). Increased overlap between the brain areas involved in self-other distinction in schizophrenia.  PloS One, 6 (3), e17500.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1371/journal.pone.0017500 ."
"356" "Jiang, C., Varnum, M. E., Hou, Y., & Han, S. (2014). Distinct effects of self-construal priming on empathic neural responses in Chinese and Westerners.  Social Neuroscience, 9 (2), 130-138.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1080/17470919.2013.867899 ."
"357" "Johe, M. H., & Bhullar, N. (2016). To buy or not to buy: The roles of self-identity, attitudes, perceived behavioral control and norms in organic consumerism.  Ecological Economics, 128 , 99-105."
"358" "Kärtner, J., Crafa, D., Chaudary, N., & Keller, H. (2016). Reactions to receiving a gift - Maternal scaffolding and cultural learning in Berlin and Delhi.  Child Development, 87 (3), 712-722.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1111/cdev.12525."
"359" "Keegan, P. J. (2017). Belonging, place, and identity: The role of social trust in developing the civic capacities of transnational Dominican youth.  High School Journal, 100 (3), 203-222.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1353/hsj.2017.0008."
"360" "Kennedy, D. P., & Adolphs, R. (2012). The social brain in psychiatric and neurological disorders.  Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16 (11), 559-572.   http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1016/j.tics.2012.09.006 ."
"361" "Kepner, M. D., & Neimark, E. D. (1984). Test-retest reliability and differential patterns of score change on the Group Embedded Figures Test.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 46 (6), 1405-1413.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1037//0022-3514.46.6.1405 ."
"362" "Kihlstrom, J. F. (1990). The psychological unconscious. In L. A. Pervin (Ed.),  Handbook of Personality: Theory and Research  (pp. 445-464). New York, New York: Guilford"
"363" "Kircher, T., & David, A. (Eds.). (2003).  The Self in Neuroscience and Psychiatry . Cambridge: University Press."
"364" "Kitayama, S., & Park, J. (2010). Cultural neuroscience of the self: Understanding the social grounding of the brain.  Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 5 (2-3), 111-129.   http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1093/scan/nsq052 ."
"365" "Kitayama, S., & Uskul, A. K. (2011). Culture, mind, and the brain: Current evidence and future directions.  Annual  Review of Psychology, 62 , 419-449.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1146/annurev-psych-120709-145357."
"366" "Kohler, C. G., Walker, J. B., Martin, E. A., Healey, K. M., & Moberg, P. J. (2009). Facial emotion perception in schizophrenia: a meta-analytic review.  Schizophrenia  B ulletin, 36 (5), 1009-1019.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1093/schbul/sbn192."
"367" "Kreitler, C. M., & Dyson, K. S. (2016). Cultural frame switching and emotion among Mexican Americans.  Journal of Latinos and Education, 15 (2), 91-9 . http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1080/15348431.2015.1066251 ."
"368" "Kühnen, U. (2009) Culture, self-construal and social c ognition: Evidence from  cross-cultural and priming studies . In A. Gari, & K. Mylonas, A. Gari (Eds.).  Q.E.D. From Herodotus: Ethnographic Journeys to Cross-Cultural Research . Athens: Atrapos Editions, 303-310."
"369" "Kutnick, P. (2012). Moral development. In J .  Coleman (Ed.).  The School Years . Chicago, Illinois: Routledge, 24-55 ."
"370" "Lazarus, R. S. (1995). Vexing research problems inherent in cognitive-mediational theories of   emotion-and some solutions.  Psychological Inquiry, 6 (3), 183-196.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1207/s15327965pli0603_1 ."
"371" "Laing, R. (2010).  The divided self: An existential study in sanity and madness .  London:  Penguin UK."
"372" "Lee, J. J. Y., & Jeyaraj, S. (2014). Effects of self-construal differences on cognitive dissonance examined by priming the independent and interdependent self.  Sage Open, 4 (1), 2158244014521434.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1177/2158244014521434 ."
"373" "Legare, C. H., Wen, N. J., Herrmann, P. A., & Whitehouse, H. (2015). Imitative flexibility and the development of cultural learning.  Cognition, 1 42 , 351-361.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1016/j.cognition.   2015.05.020."
"374" "Levine, T. R., Bresnahan, M. J., Park, H. S., Lapinski, M. K., Wittenbaum, G. M., Shearman, S. M., & Ohashi, R. (2003). Self - Construal Scales Lack Validity.  Human Communication Research, 29 (2), 210-252.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2958.2003.tb00837.x."
"375" "Liebowitz, M.R. (1987). Social p hobia.  Modern Trends in Pharmacopsychiatry, 22 , 141-173.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1159/000414022."
"376" "Liepelt, R., Schneider, J. C., Aichert, D. S., Wöstmann, N., Dehning, S., Möller, H. J., et al. (2012). Action blind: disturbed self-other integration in schizophrenia.  Neuropsychologia, 50 (14), 3775-3780.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.10.027."
"377" "Lin, Z., & Han, S. (2009). Self-construal priming modulates the scope of visual attention.  Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 62 (4), 802-813.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1080/174702108022   71650."
"378" "Luna, R. D. (201 8 ). Collectivism, individualism, and length of stay in recovery homes among Latinos.  Journal of Ethnicity in Substance Abuse, 17 (3), 223-236.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1080/15332640.2016.1138267."
"379" "Maag, J. W. (1989). Use of cognitive mediation strategies for social skills training: Theoretical and conceptual issues.  Monograph in Behavioral Disorders, 12 , 87-100."
"380" "Manfredo, M. J., Bruskotter, J. T., Teel, T. L., Fulton, D., Schwartz, S. H., Arlinghaus, R., & Sullivan, L. (2017). Why social values cannot be changed for the sake of conservation.  Conservation Biology, 31 (4), 772-780.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1111/cobi.12855 ."
"381" "Markus, H. R. , & Kunda, Z. (1986). Stability and malleability of the self-concept.  Journal of  Personality and Social Psychology , 51 (4), 858.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1037/0022-3514.51.4.858."
"382" "Markus, H.R.,   & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: Implications for cognition, emotion   and motivation.  Psychological Review, 98 , 224–253.   http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1037/0033-295X.98.2.224 ."
"383" "Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (2001). The cultural construction of self and emotion: Implications for social behavior. In W. G. Parrott (Ed.),  Emotions in  S ocial  P sychology: Essential  R eadings  (pp. 119-137). New York, New York: Psychology Press."
"384" "Marquez, R. C., & Ellwanger, J. (2014). Independent and interdependent self-construals do not predict analytic or holistic reasoning.  Psychological Reports, 115 (1), 326-338.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.2466/17.07.PR0.115c16z8 ."
"385" "McConnell, A. R. (2011). The multiple self-aspects framework: Self-concept representation and its implications.  Personality and Social Psychology Review, 15 (1), 3-27.   http://dx.doi.org/  10.1177/1088868310371101 ."
"386" "Mesoudi, A., Magid, K., & Hussain, D. (2016). How do people become WEIRD? Migration reveals the cultural transmission mechanisms underlying variation in psychological processes.  PloS  ONE , 11 (1), e0147162."
"387" "Meyer, M. L. (2017). Neurobiological Causes and Consequences of Cultural Differences in Social Cognition.  The Handbook of Culture and Biology ."
"388" "Mok, A., & Morris, M. W. (2010). Asian-Americans' creative styles in Asian and American situations: Assimilative and contrastive responses as a function of bicultural identity integration.  Management and Organization Review, 6 (3), 371-390.   http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1111/j.1740-8784.2010.00190.x ."
"389" "Moore, S. M., Behrends, A. A., Mazur, D., & Sanbonmatsu, D. M. (2016). When do people bet on their selves? The role of global self-concepts in decision making.  Self and Identity, 15 , 548-560."
"390" "Na, J., Grossmann, I., Varnum, M. E., Kitayama, S., Gonzalez, R., & Nisbett, R. E. (2010). Cultural differences are not always reducible to individual differences.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107 (14), 6192-6197.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1073/pnas.1001911107."
"391" "Nelson, B., Parnas, J., & Sass, L. A. (2014). Disturbance of minimal self (ipseity) in schizophrenia: clarification and current status.  Schizophria Bulletin, 40 (3), 479-82.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1093/schbul/sbu034."
"392" "Nelson, B., Sass, L. A., & Parnas, J. (2016). Basics   elf disturbance in the schizophrenia spectrum: a review and   future directions.  In  The  Self in Understanding and Treating Psychological Disorders. Cambridge: University Press."
"393" "Ng, J. Y., Ntoumanis, N., Thøgersen-Ntoumani, C., Deci, E. L., Ryan, R. M., Duda, J. L., & Williams, G. C. (2012). Self-determination theory applied to health contexts: A meta-analysis.  Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7 (4), 325-340.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1745691612447309."
"394" "Ng, S. H., & Han, S. (2009). The Bicultural Self and the Bicultural Brain .   In  Understanding  C ulture: Theory,  R esearch, and  A pplication , 329."
"395" "Ng, S. H., Han, S., Mao, L., & Lai, J. C. (2010a). Dynamic bicultural brains: fMRI study of their flexible neural representation of self and significant others in response to culture primes.  Asian Journal of Social Psychology, 13 (2), 83-91.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1111/j.1467-839X.2010.01303.x."
"396" "Ng, S. H., Han, S., Mao, L., & Lai, J. C. L. (2010b). A fMRI study of the flexible neural representations of self and significant others in bicultural brains.  Asian Journal of Social Psychology, 13 (2), 83-91."
"397" "Ng, S. H., & Lai, J. C. (2009). Effects of culture priming on the social connectedness of the bicultural self: A self-reference effect approach.  Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 40 (2), 170-186.   http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1177/0022022108328818 ."
"398" "Osland, J. S., Bird, A., Delano, J., & Mathew, J. (2000). Beyond sophisticated stereotyping: Cultural sensemaking in context / executive commentaries.  Academy of Management Executive, 14 (1), 65-79.   http://dx.doi.org/ 10.5465/ame.2000.2909840 ."
"399" "Overton, W. F. (2013).  The relationship between social and cognitive development.  Hillsdale, NJ: Psychology Press."
"400" "Oyserman, D., Coon, H. M., & Kemmelmeier, M. (2002). Rethinking individualism and collectivism: evaluation of theoretical assumptions and meta-analyses.  Psychological Bulletin, 128 (1), 3-72.   http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1037/0033-2909.128.1.3 ."
"401" "Oyserman, D., & Lee, S.W.S. (2008). Does culture influence what and how we think? Effects of priming individualism and collectivism.  Psychological Bulletin, 134 , 311–342.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1037/0033-2909.134.2.311."
"402" "Oyserman, D., & Lee, S. W. (2008). Priming “culture”: Culture as situated cognition. In S. Kitayama & D. Cohen (Eds.),   Handbook of  Cultural P sychology  (pp. 255–276). New York , New York : Guilford Press."
"403" "Oyserman, D. (2016). What does a priming perspective reveal about culture: culture-as-situated cognition.  Current Opinion in Psychology, 12 , 94-99.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1016/j.copysyc.2016.10.002 ."
"404" "Park, S., & Thakkar, K. N. (2010). \"Splitting of the Mind\"  r evisited: Recent  neuroimaging evidence for functional dysconnection in schizophrenia and its relation to symptoms .   American Journal of Psychiatry, 167 (4), 366-368. http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2010.10010089."
"405" "Peng, S., Hu, P., & Guo, Z. (2018). Within-culture variation in field dependence/independence: A region-level investigation across China.  Social Behavior and Personality, 46 (2), 293-300.   http://dx.doi.org/ 10.2224/sbp.6561"
"406" "Postmes, L., Sno, H. N., Goedhart, S., Van Der Stel, J., Heering, H. D., & De Haan, L. (2014). Schizophrenia as a self-disorder due to percept ual incoherence.  Schizophrenia R esearch, 152 (1), 41-50.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1016/j.schres.2013.07.027."
"407" "Raballo, A., Sæbye, D., & Parnas, J. (2009). Looking at the schizophrenia spectrum through the prism of self-disorders: an empirical study.  Schizophrenia Bulletin, 37 (2), 344-351.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1093/schbul/sbp056."
"408" "Realdon, O., & Zurloni, V. (2016). Cultural Diversities Across and Within Cultures: The Bicultural Mind. In  Understanding Cultural Traits  (pp. 117-134).  New York:  Springer."
"409" "Reed, M., Evely, A. C., Cundill, G., Fazey, I. R. A., Glass, J., Laing, A., ... & Stringer, L. (2010). What is social learning? Ecology and  S ociety.  http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/ES-03564-1504r01."
"410" "Reitz, A. K., Zimmermann, J., Hutteman, R., Specht, J., & Neyer, F. J. (2014). How peers make a difference: The role of peer groups and peer relationships in personality development.  European  Journal of Personality , 28 (3), 279-288.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/per.1965."
"411" "Robinson, J. D., Wagner, N. F., & Northoff, G. (2015). Is the sense of agency in schizophrenia influenced by resting-state variation in self-referential regions of the brain?  Schizophrenia Bulletin, 42 (2), 270-276.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1093/schbul/sbv102"
"412" "Rogers, C. R., & Dorfman, E. (1951).  Client-centered: Its current practice, implications, and theory .  Boston: Houghton Mifflin."
"413" "Rule, N. O., Freeman, J. B., & Ambady, N. (2013). Culture in social neuroscience:  A  review.  Social Neuroscience, 8 (1), 3-10.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1080/17470919.2012.695293"
"414" "Savla, G. N., Vella, L., Armstrong, C. C., Penn, D. L., & Twamley, E. W. (2012). Deficits in domains of social cognition in schizophrenia: a meta-analysis of the empirical evidence.  Schizophrenia  B ulletin, 39 (5), 979-992.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbs080."
"415" "Santamaría, A., de la Mata, M. L., Hansen, T. G., & Ruiz, L. (2010). Cultural self-construals of Mexican, Spanish, and Danish college students: Beyond independent and interdependent self.  Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 41 (3), 471-477.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1177/0022022109359694 ."
"416" "Sass, L. A., & Parnas, J. (2003). Schizophrenia, consciousnes s, and the self.  Schizophrenia B ulletin, 29 (3), 427-444.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1093/oxfordjournals.schbul.a007017."
"417" "Schröder, T., & Thagard, P. (2013). The affective meanings of automatic social behaviors: Three mechanisms that explain priming.  Psychological Review, 120 (1), 255. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0030972."
"418" "Schmidt, S. J., Mueller, D. R., & Roder, V. (2011). Social cognition as a mediator variable between neurocognition and functional outcome in schizophrenia: empirical review and new results by structural equation modeling.  Schizophrenia  B ulletin, 37 ( S uppl .  2), S41-S54.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbr079."
"419" "Senzaki, S., Masuda, T., Takada, A., & Okada, H. (2013).  The development and transmission of culturally unique attentional styles in Canada and Japan: A demonstration of children’s cultural learning and parents’ scaffolding behaviors.  Unpublished manuscript, Department of Human Development, University of Wisconsin–Green Bay."
"420" "Sergi, M. J., Rassovsky, Y., Widmark, C., Reist, C., Erhart, S., Braff, D. L., et al. (2007). Social cognition in schizophrenia: relationships with neurocognition and negative symptoms.  Schizophrenia Research, 90 (1), 316-324.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2006.09.028."
"421" "Sheng, F., & Han, S. (2012). Manipulations of cognitive strategies and intergroup relationships reduce the racial bias in empathic neural responses.  NeuroImage, 61 (4), 786-797. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.04.028."
"422" "Singelis, T. M. (1994). The measurement of independent and interdependent self construals.  Personality and  Social Psychology Bulletin , 20 (5), 580-591.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1177/0146167294205014."
"423" "Singelis, T. M., Triandis, H. C., Bhawuk, D. P., & Gelfand, M. J. (1995). Horizontal and vertical dimensions of individualism and collectivism: A theoretical and measurement refinement.  Cross -Cultural Research , 29 (3), 240-275.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1177/106939719502900302."
"424" "Smeesters, D., Yzerbyt, V. Y., Corneille, O., & Warlop, L. (2009). When do primes prime? The moderating role of the self-concept in individuals’ susceptibility to priming effects on social behavior.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 45 (1), 211-216."
"425" "Specht, J., Bleidorn, W., Denissen, J. J., Hennecke, M., Hutteman, R., Kandler, C., ... & Zimmermann, J. (2014). What drives adult personality development? A comparison of theoretical perspectives and empirical evidence.  European Journal of Personality, 28 (3), 216-230."
"426" "Sterry, T. W., Reiter-Purtill, J., Gartstein, M.A., Gerhardt, C. A., Vannatta, K., & Noll, R. B. (2010). Temperament and peer acceptance: The role of social behavior.  Merrill Palmer Quarterly, 56 , 189-219. http://dx.doi.org/10.1353/mpq.0.0047."
"427" "Sui, J., Zhu, Y., & Chiu, C. Y. (2007). Bicultural mind, self construal, and self-and mother-reference effects: Consequences of cultural priming on recognition memory.  Journal of  Experimental Social Psychology , 43 (5), 818-824.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1016/j.jesp.2006.08.005."
"428" "Sui, J., & Han, S. (2007). Self-construal priming modulates neural substrates of self-awareness.  Psychological Science, 18 (10), 861-866.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01992.x."
"429" "Tam, K. P. (2015). Understanding intergenerational cultural transmission through the role of perceived norms.  Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 46 (10), 1260-1266.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0022022115600074."
"430" "Tennie, C., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2009). Ratcheting up the ratchet: on the evolution of cumulative culture.  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 364 (1528), 2405-2415.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1098/rstb.2009.0052."
"431" "Thakkar, K. N., Peterman, J. S., & Park, S. (2014). Altered brain activation during action imitation and observation in schizophrenia: a translational approach to investigating social dysfunction in schizophrenia.  American Journal of Psychiatry, 171 (5), 539-548.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2013.13040498s."
"432" "Trafimow, D., Triandis, H. C., & Goto, S. G. (1991). Some tests of the distinction between the private self and the collective self.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60 , 649–655.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1037/0022-3514.60.5.649."
"433" "Triandis,  H.C. (1995).  Individualism and C ollectivism.  Boulder,   CO: Westview."
"434" "Schönpflug, U. (2009). Theory and research in cultural transmission: A short  history.  Cultural Transmission , 9-30.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1017/CBO9780511804670.003."
"435" "Turner, R. H. (1956). The real self: From institution to impulse.  American Journal of Sociology, 61 , 316-328."
"436" "van Baaren, R. B., Maddux, W. W., Chartrand, T. L., De Bouter, C., & van Knippenberg, A. (2003). It takes two to mimic: behavioral consequences of self  construals.  Journal of Personality and Social P sychology, 84 (5), 1093.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1037/0022-3514.84.5.1093."
"437" "v an Baaren, R. B., & Ruivenkamp, M. (2007). Self-construal and values expressed in advertising.  Social Influence, 2 (2), 136-144.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15534510701279722."
"438" "van den Bos, K., van Veldhuizen, T. S., & Au, A. K. (2015). Counter cross-cultural priming and relative deprivation: The role of individualism-collectivism.  Social Justice Research, 28 (1), 52-75.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1007/s11211-014-0230-6"
"439" "van der Meer, L., Costafreda, S., Aleman, A., & David, A. S. (2010). Self-reflection and the brain: a theoretical review and meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies with implications for schizophrenia.  Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 34 (6), 935- 946.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2009.12.004."
"440" "Van Dijk, T. A. (1990). Social cognition and discourse. In H. Giles & W. P. Robinson (Eds.),  Handbook of Language and Social Psychology  (pp. 163-183). Oxford, England: John Wiley & Sons."
"441" "Van Dijk, T. A. (2015). Critical discourse studies: A sociocognitive approach. In R. Wodak & M. Meyer (Eds.),  Methods for Critical Discourse Analysis , (pp. 63-74). London, England: Sage."
"442" "Varnum, M. E., Grossmann, I., Kitayama, S., & Nisbett, R. E. (2010). The origin of cultural differences in cognition: The social orientation hypothesis.  Current Directions in Psychological Science, 19 (1), 9-13.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1177/0963721409359301"
"443" "Verhaeghen, P., Aikman, S. N., & Van Gulick, A. E. (2011). Prime and prejudice: Co-occurrence in the culture as a source of automatic stereotype priming.  British Journal of Social Psychology, 50 (3), 501-518.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1348/014466610X524254 ."
"444" "Walter, H., Ciaramidaro, A., Adenzato, M., Vasic, N., Ardito, R. B., Erk, S., & Bara, B. G. (2009). Dysfunction of the social brain in schizophrenia is modulated by intention type: an fMRI study.  Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 4 (2), 166-176.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1093/scan/nsn047."
"445" "Wang, C., Ma, Y., & Han, S. (2014). Self-construal priming modulates pain perception: Event-related  potential evidence.  Cognitive N euroscience, 5 (1), 3-9.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1080/17588928.2013.797388."
"446" "Webber, M., & Fendt-Newlin, M. (2017). A review of social participation interventions for people with mental health problems.  Social  Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology , 52 (4), 369-380.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00127-017-1372-2."
"447" "Wechsler D. (2011).  Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence–Second Edition (WASI-II) . San Antonio, TX: NCS Pearson."
"448" "Weiss, M. R., McCullagh, P., Smith, A. L., & Berlant, A. R. (1998). Observational learning and the fearful child: Influence of peer models on swimming skill performance and psychological responses.  Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, 69 (4), 380-394.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02701367.1998.10607712."
"449" "Wheeler, S. C., DeMarree, K. G., & Petty, R. E. (2007). Understanding the role of the self in prime-to-behavior effects: The active-self account.  Personality and  Social Psychology Review , 11 (3), 234-261.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1177/1088868307302223."
"450" "Wheeler, S. C., DeMarree, K. G., & Petty, R. E. (2014). Understanding prime-to-behavior effects: Insights from the active-self account.  Social Cognition, 32 (Supplement), 109-123.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1521/soco.2014.32.supp.109."
"451" "Whitfield-Gabrieli, S., Thermenos, H. W., Milanovic, S., Tsuang, M. T., Faraone, S. V., McCarley, R. W., & Wojcik, J. (2009). Hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity of the default network in schizophrenia and in first-degree relatives of persons with schizophrenia.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106 (4), 1279- 1284.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0809141106."
"452" "Wood, W. (2000). Attitude change: Persuasion and social influence.  Annual Review of Psychology, 51 (1), 539-570.  http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1146/annurev.psych.51.1.539 ."
"453" "Zhang, R., Noels, K. A., Lalonde, R. N., & Salas, S. J. (2017). Self-consistency in bicultural persons: Dialectical self-beliefs mediate the relation between identity integration and self-consistency.  Frontiers in  P sychology, 8 , 321.  http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00321."
