Estimating Treatment Heterogeneity of
International Monetary Fund Programs on Child
Poverty with Generalized Random Forest
Adel Daoud1,* and Fredrik Johansson2
1. Center for Population and Development Studies, Harvard University, USA.
2. Clinical Machine Learning group, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA.
* corresponding author: adaoud@hsph.harvard.edu.

Version: 13 February, 2019
Abstract
A flourishing group of scholars of family sociology study how macroeconomic shockwaves
propagate via households dynamics and landing a blow on children’s living conditions;
simultaneously, scholars of political economy unravel impacts of such shockwaves on
population outcomes. Since these two strands of literature have evolved independently, little is
know about the relative importance of societal and family features moderating this impact on
children’s material living conditions. In this article, we synthesize insights from these two
strands by examining the effect of economic austerity following International Monetary Fund
programs—a type of economic shock—on child poverty across a sample representative of about
half the world’s population of mainly the Global South. This article addresses the following
fundamental sociological questions: to what extent do the pathways of economic austerity
propagate through families’ living conditions and societies’ structural and political
characteristics. To capture these multiple non-linear heterogeneous relationships between
macro and micro traits, we deploy machine learning in the service of policy evaluation. First,
our analysis identifies an adverse average treatment effect (ATE) following the implementation
of IMF programs on children’s probability of falling into poverty: 0.14, 95% CI 0.03- 0.24.
Second, our algorithms identify substantial impact heterogeneity distributed about this ATE.
Macro constellation moderate about half of the impact variation on children, and families’
capabilities moderate the other half of this variation. We named this finding the 50-50 impactmoderation rule of thumb. Our algorithm identified family wealth closely followed by
governments’ education spending as the critical moderating factors. IMF program affects
children residing in the middle of the social stratification more than compared to their peers
residing in both the top and bottom of this stratification; for those children residing in societies
that have selected into IMF programs and have historically spent most on education, are at a
higher risk of falling into poverty. These findings identify the value of combining family
sociology and political economy perspectives. Scholars will likely cross-fertilize this research
further by testing this 50-50 rule of thumb to other types of economic shocks.

Acknowledgments: Prof. Christopher Winship, Harvard University; Prof. Jason Beckfield, Harvard University;
Prof. Lisa Berkman, Harvard University; Sebastian Kohl, Max Planck Institute for the Studies of Societies; Elias
Nosrati, University of Oxford; Bernhard Reinsberg, University of Glasgow; Leslie Adams, Harvard University;
Emilie Courtin, Harvard University; Angela Dixon, Harvard University ; Beth Truesdale, Harvard University.

1

Contents
1

Introduction ........................................................................................................................ 3

2

Background ........................................................................................................................ 5

2.1

The International Monetary Fund (IMF) programs as a strategic research site .......... 5

2.2

Moderators of impact heterogeneity ............................................................................ 6

2.2.1

Micro moderators: Families’ capabilities to protect their children ...................... 6

2.2.2

Macro moderators: the political economy of economic shocks and poverty ....... 8

2.2.3

Linking macro and micro: the quincunx metaphor ............................................ 10

3

Conceptual framework: identification of IMF treatment on child poverty ...................... 10

4

Method and Data .............................................................................................................. 14
4.1

4.1.1

Micro: families and their children’s living condition......................................... 14

4.1.2

Macro: economy, society, and public policy...................................................... 15

4.2

5

Data ............................................................................................................................ 14

Method ....................................................................................................................... 16

4.2.1

Machine learning in the service of policy evaluation......................................... 16

4.2.2

Generalized random forest ................................................................................. 17

Results .............................................................................................................................. 18
5.1

The average impact of IMF programs on child poverty ............................................ 18

5.2

Impact heterogeneity ................................................................................................. 19

5.3

Sensitivity analysis .................................................................................................... 21

6

Discussion ........................................................................................................................ 22

7

References ........................................................................................................................ 26

8

Tables ............................................................................................................................... 36

9

Figures .............................................................................................................................. 39

10

Appendix .......................................................................................................................... 48
10.1

Appendix A: Measures .......................................................................................... 48

10.2

Appendix B: Heckman Selection model ................................................................ 50

2

1 Introduction
Since the formation of their discipline, sociologists have been theorizing about the impact of
economic change on people’s living conditions (Smelser and Swedberg 2005). Scholars have
upheld this intellectual tradition by producing a variety of influential studies on the relationship
between poverty and, for example, the impact of incarceration (Western 2002),
deindustrialization, urban segregation (Desmond 2012), neoliberalism (Wacquant 2009),
European and American public policy (Amenta and Carruthers 1988; Brady 2005; Desmond
and Western 2018; Dobbin 1993). Although research on the impact of economic crises on
inequality is growing (Grusky, Ku, and Szelényi 2008; Jenkins et al. 2012), the link between
economic crises and poverty is less well understood through a sociological lens (Redbird and
Grusky 2016). Sociologists have analyzed the erosion of trust of the 2008 Great recession and
the social construction of the Great Depression (Dobbin 1993; Swedberg 2013). Economists
and political scientists have found that economic turmoil affect proximate outcomes such as
unemployment, inflation, and fiscal cuts (Bermeo and Pontusson 2012; Claessens et al. 2010;
Laeven and Valencia 2013; Pontusson and Raess 2012; Ravallion 2015; Reinhart and Rogoff
2008), but also distal outcomes such as infant mortality (Baird, Friedman, and Schady 2010).
Furthering this state-of-the-art from a sociological perspective is likely to yield insights about
the relative importance of macro and micro conditions affecting poverty amid crises.
Varieties of social science theories economic crisis and poverty have evolved relatively
independently. Of the micro studies, Elder’s pioneering study, (1974) Children of the Great
Depression, have inspired a stream of social psychological and social demographic analyses of
family dynamics. This body of research assumes that economic shocks operate mainly through
individual-level pathways (Garfinkel, McLanahan, and Wimer 2016; McLanahan and
Percheski 2008). When the breadwinners of the household lose their jobs, it leads to a cascading
effect of worsened material standards. Financial strain increases family stress and that
significantly increases the risk of deteriorated child well-being and poverty. Scholars of macro
studies have sought inspiration instead in institutional and policy determinates of crises and
poverty (Babb 2005; Hall and Lamont 2009). These sociologists have devoted energy to analyze
the effects of economic crises and austerity policies emanating from the International Monetary
Fund (Babb 2005; Halliday and Carruthers 2009; Kentikelenis, Stubbs, and King 2016). These
studies have, for example, analyzed the impact of IMF on public policy (Daoud and Reinsberg
2018; Shandra, Shandra, and London 2012), institutional change in Eastern European after the
dissolvent of the Soviet Union (Hamm, King, and Stuckler 2012). Macro perspectives tend to
focus on child outcome insofar that this measures is a “… sensitive indication of social
development” (Conley and Springer 2001:770). Nonetheless, scholars of micro and macro
studies have had little exchange about the effect of crises on families.
The relatively independent evolution of micro and macro bodies of research have influenced
the state-of-the-art of poverty in at least two ways. First, a lack of engagement between these
bodies of research has restricted our social scientific knowledge of the topic (Brady
forthcoming). Both bodies of research make significant contributions to our understanding of
how crisis affect vulnerable populations such as children, yet they tend to accentuate one of two
analytical units. Accordingly, a key puzzle of the state-of-the-art refers to the relative
importance of macro and micro. What portion of the impact of economic turmoil on families
and their children’s living conditions consist of differences between societies versus differences
between households (Burgard and Kalousova 2015; Garfinkel et al. 2016; McLanahan and
Percheski 2008). This is a core sociological issue of structure versus agency (Durkheim 1979;
Weber 1949). Due to the variability in families’ resources and behavior capacities following
their position in the social strata, economic shocks will likely produce a large amount of impact
3

heterogeneity. As Goldthorpe, and others have emphasized, the discipline requires a framework
“through which variability and heterogeneity can be accommodated and in various ways
exploited.” (Goldthorpe 2015:31). Such a systematic approach is currently lacking.
Second, the intellectual insulation between macro and micro perspectives of the study of crisis
and poverty has created a geographical fault line between studies of Global North and South
(Brady and Burton 2016; Viterna and Robertson 2015). While macro oriented political
economy studies tend to focus on the global system, micro oriented family sociology and
welfare studies have a Global-North focus (Esping-Andersen 1990; Garfinkel et al. 2016; Korpi
and Palme 1998; McLanahan 2009; McLanahan and Percheski 2008). Extending this topic to
non-Western societies is a key mission of social demographic and social stratification
researchers (Beckfield 2018; Brady forthcoming). Hence, acquiring deeper knowledge about
how families residing in the Global South cope with economic shocks would enhance
sociological theory on whether these families respond differently to such dramatic events
(Ayuso-Mateos, Barros, and Gusmao 2013; Cherlin 2012).
The overarching research goal of this article is to advance the state-of-the-art by fulfilling two
aims. The first aim is to identify the effect of economic shocks of International Monetary Fund
austerity programs on child poverty in the Global South. Foreshadowing the scholarly debates
outlined, we selected the IMF as exposure of economic crisis and child poverty as an outcome
since these two features have been the focus of considerable debate in political economy and
family sociology, respectively. The family stress model has almost exclusively focused on
children’s risk of poverty thought out their life course (Garfinkel et al. 2016). Welfare and
political economy studies have devoted considerable energy to investigating the effects of IMF
austerity programs (Babb 2005). This article focus on the Global South as a complement to the
Global North focused family sociology literature (Viterna and Robertson 2015). To this end,
we analyze large data combining societal, family, and child-level samples of about 2 million
children residing in 67 of these societies. These data are representative of about half the world’s
population.
The second aim is to evaluate the relative importance of societal characteristics and family
features in moderating IMF program’s impact (treatment effect) heterogeneity on children. We
analyze to what extent the impact of an economic shock on child poverty moves the entire
distribution of a population versus merely certain individuals or social strata within a population
(Xie 2013). By identifying how this type of economic turmoil affect children, we will gain a
deeper understanding of how much their lives are governed by structural versus family
conditions (Goldthorpe 2015). If the entire population distribution of children’s outcome is
shifted due to economic turmoil, then this is evidence of macro conditions eclipsing families’
leeway to deal with economic stress. The opposite holds if we find instead that this distribution
of outcomes shifts due to differences between families, for example, due to their wealth or
parents’ education (Beckfield 2018; Gkiouleka et al. 2018).
The second aim requires a methodology possessing the capability to identify heterogeneous
effects of IMF economic shock inductively. Such a methodological tool has to satisfy, what
Abbott has called, “transcending general linear reality” (Abbott 1988). A burgeoning
methodological literature proposes that machine learning in the service of policy evaluation is
well equipped to handle this challenge (Athey and Imbens 2017; Belloni et al. 2017; Hill 2011;
Johansson, Shalit, and Sontag 2016; Kraamwinkel et al. 2019; Mullainathan and Spiess 2017).
We outline in the method section in which way our analysis will rely on this technique.

4

Consequently, a methodological contribution of this paper is that it exemplifies how
sociologists can benefit from these learning algorithms to identify population heterogeneities.
Our main findings corroborate the intuition of those who seek to bridge macro and micro
poverty studies. Firstly, the economic shockwaves following IMF interventions produce
adverse risks for children. Children will face an increased probability of poverty by 14 percent,
on average. Secondly, the variation in impact heterogeneity partitions neatly into a simple 5050 rule. Macro differences between-societies—e.g., policies, culture, institutions, demography,
economy—account for about half of the variation of IMF effects on children’s risk of poverty.
Micro differences between- and within-families capture the other half of the impact variation—
e.g., parents’ choice of residence, their resources, choices, and behavior. This 50-50
heterogeneity rule reinforces the proposition that the two bodies of political economy and
family sociology will benefit from each other’s frameworks.
The next section outlines the state-of-the-art on the macro and micro factors of society-wide
economic shocks on poverty. At the end of this section, we define our conceptual framework
and its identification strategy. This framework includes (1) how we isolate the effect of IMF
programs on child poverty, and (2) how we determine to what extent the impact heterogeneity
is driven by the economy, politics, and families’ capabilities. The method section highlights
what advantages our analysis gains by using a machine learning approach to estimating crisis
impact compared to other estimations techniques. This section will also explicate the limitation
of this approach, and what assumptions we have to rely on. This section will show the data we
have assembled. The results section outlines our findings laying out a series of the distributions
faceted by societal versus family characteristics. We close this paper by discussing what we
have learned from these findings and suggest ways forward for a synthesized theoretical
framework of political economy and family sociology.

2 Background
2.1 The International Monetary Fund (IMF) programs as a strategic
research site
The case of IMF programs offers a “strategic research site” (Merton 1987); it provides a set of
advantages. An advantage of using IMF programs as a proxy for economic shocks is that these
programs provide validated cases of economic crisis (Ragin 2008). The incentive for a
government experiencing an economic downturn to enroll in often draconian austerity programs
usually is only justified when its economy is indeed in a downward spiral (Vreeland 2007).
Likewise, as IMF’s resources are scarce, it tends to focus efforts on those types of societies’
that experience large macroeconomic imbalances. Many of the previous studies of crises and
poverty use unemployment or economic growth rates as proxies of economic crisis (Claessens
et al. 2010; Grusky, Western, and Wimer 2011; Kindleberger and Aliber 2011; Laeven and
Valencia 2013). However, one disadvantage of using such rates is that it is unclear what
thresholds classify a crisis. Many societies, especially in the Global South, usually have a higher
level and variability of unemployment rates compared to the Global North (Ravallion 2015).
Thus, it is unclear if the analysis is comparing apples to apples when using unemployment or
growth rates as a proxy for economic crises.
Nonetheless, there is one major challenge of using IMF as a proxy for crises: risk of selection
bias. Some governments have larger political motivation to self-select into IMF programs than
other governments (Stubbs et al. 2018). Governments self-select for a variety of reasons. For
5

example, they might have a weak state-capacity insufficient to collect taxes; they can be market
liberal seeking to use the IMF as a scapegoat when implementing unpopular reforms (Vreeland
2007). We outline how we handle self-selection bias—our identification strategy—in our
conceptual framework and method sections.
Another reason to analyze IMF programs is that they provide a quasi-experimental design
where sudden shifts in public policies occur. While economists have mainly focused on the
macroeconomic effects of IMF policies (Butkiewicz and Yanikkaya 2005; Vreeland 2003),
sociologists and other social scientist have researched the implications for vulnerable
populations (Babb 2005; Cline 2004; Daoud et al. 2017). Thirty years ago, the publication of a
landmark UNICEF report first drew attention to the adverse effects of the policies of these
programs on the poor (Cornia, Jolly, and Stewart 1987). IMF policies are known to be promarket, and thus, they require often that governments reduce their public and social spending
(Babb and Carruthers 2008; Williamson 1990). This reduction tends to affect the poor more
than other social strata. Along this causal pathway, a stream of research finds a short-term
adverse effects of these programs on poverty and health (Babb 2005; Basu et al. 2013; Daoud
et al. 2017; Daoud and Reinsberg 2018; Shandra et al. 2004; Shandra, Shandra, and London
2011; Shandra et al. 2012; Stubbs and Kentikelenis 2018; Stuckler, King, and Basu 2008;
Thomson, Kentikelenis, and Stubbs 2017). From a welfare state and public policy perspective,
these adverse effects mediated by reduced social spending are not surprising. However, since
most of these studies do not use microdata, less is known about impact heterogeneity following
IMF programs (Bal Gündüz 2016). By impact heterogeneity, we mean the variation in how
families and their children respond differently to the same policy (treatment) changes due to
IMF programs (Grimmer, Messing, and Westwood 2017).

2.2 Moderators of impact heterogeneity
Although scholars of poverty research have produced a torrent of insightful work (Alkire 2015;
Banerjee and Duflo 2012; Bradshaw 2000; Brady and Bostic 2015; Desmond and Western
2018; Ravallion 2015; Sen 1999; Townsend 1987; Wacquant 2009), the field lacks a clear
sociological theory of causation. This theory ought to, among other things, explain how
economic downturns affect poverty. David Brady has recently proposed a framework dealing
with this lack (Brady forthcoming). His framework categorizes the type of mechanisms
affecting poverty in three categories. The first category contains micro, or behavioral, oriented
theories of poverty causes. These micro theories focus on individuals’ actions, choices, and
resources (Bertrand, Mullainathan, and Shafir 2004; Conger et al. 1992; Gibson‐Davis, Edin,
and McLanahan 2005; Mitchell et al. 2015). The second category holds structural explanations
of poverty. These explanations refer to the macro-level demographic and economic conditions
moderating economic crises (Babb 2005; Brady and Bostic 2015; Tomaskovic-Devey 1991).
The third category comprises a second type of macro explanations of poverty: polity, policy,
and institutions. These explanations hold that the impact of crises has to be understood as a
function of the aggravating or cushioning policies and governance (Brady, Blome, and Kleider
2016). In the following sections, we adapt Brady’s framework to our economic-crises-andchild-poverty context.
2.2.1

Micro moderators: Families’ capabilities to protect their children

Parents’ capabilities influence their children’s development and well-being; macroeconomic
shocks multiply this influence. The Elder-Conger model, generally known as the family stress
model, describes how the onset of an economic downturn pressures household dynamics (Boss,
Bryant, and Mancini 2016; Conger, Conger, and Martin 2010; Conger and Donnellan 2007).
The focus of this model is to analyze the family conditions—resources, behavior, and choices—
that govern the relationship between parents and their children. These conditions create
6

pathways through which the effects of a macroeconomic shock propel ultimately affecting
children’s material and emotion outcomes directly, but also throughout their life course. Among
the most important pathways are parents’ employment, income, and children’s access to other
resources through public resources. Children’s entitlements to quality healthcare and schooling
are especially important in developing societies since many social programs are tied to these
two sectors (Banerjee et al. 2015). Changes in these conditions, for example, when parents
unexpectedly lose their jobs, aggravates family dynamics that can trigger drastic measures
(Conger et al. 1992). Emotionally, adults can become abusive of their children (Wood et al.
2012) or neglect them (Straus, Gelles, and Steinmetz 1980). Materially, responding to a
reduction in family income, parents cut expenses for food (Conklin et al. 2018; Nandy, Daoud,
and Gordon 2016; Ponce et al. 2017), clothing, medical care, and education (Puaca and Daoud
2011; Schneider, Hastings, and LaBriola 2018).
Material and emotional childhood disadvantages can lead to personal and social issues in
middle and later life, compared to those families that did not experience economic hardship
(Ferraro, Schafer, and Wilkinson 2016; McLoyd, Jocson, and Williams 2017). For example,
boys are more likely to act out than girls, putting them at higher risk of deviant behavior as
adults (Schneider, Waldfogel, and Brooks-Gunn 2015). Disadvantaged children tend to have
weaker mental health (McLeod and Shanahan 1993), more criminal offenses (Laub and
Sampson 2009), lower educational attainments and employability (Daoud and Puaca 2011;
McLoyd 1998), compared to their peers that have been spared from economic turmoil in their
childhood. They tend to also live in more segregated neighborhoods, further restricting their
life-chances (Owens 2016). All these factors increase their risk of poverty during childhood and
adulthood. Nonetheless, what scholars know less about is how these types of childhood
disadvantages affect children’s risk of poverty later in life, from a global perspective.
Elder and Conger seminal work have inspired a stream of research on the stressors of American
and European families. Elder (1998) analyzed the impact of the great recession, while Conger
led a study on the impact of the Iowa farm crisis of 1980 on adolescent boys (Conger et al.
1992; cf. Leininger and Kalil 2014). These studies have spurred a number of country-specific
analyses: for example, Kinnunen et al. (2004) analyzed the economic stress of Finnish families;
Aytaç et al. (2009) tests the family stress model, focusing on marital problems, in Turkish
households; Hraba et al. (2000) identify the effect of the Czech economic transformation on
families’ material outcomes, and; Garfinkel et al. (2016) provides an in-depth analysis of how
American children’s well-being has deteriorated following the 2008 financial crisis. Yet, except
some studies of the Asian economic crises (Kwon et al. 2003; Ramesh 2009) and aggregated
studies (Shandra et al. 2012), little is known about the effects of economic crises on families
and their children’s material living conditions in a global comparative perspective. Focusing on
the potential economic shockwaves arising due to IMF interventions is a particularly important
research task. If these shockwaves ever materialize—in other words, if IMF programs fizzle—
they arise due to mainly man-made intentionally ascribed economic policies. Other types of
economic crises tend to arise due to the unintended consequences of human actions
(Kindleberger and Aliber 2011). To what extent IMF shocks increase children’s probability of
poverty, is an open question. Kwak et al. (1999) identify an adverse effect, but the sample
captures only South Korean families. Daoud et al. (2017) finds a similar adverse effect in a
global sample, but focus on children’s health. The relationship between IMF and poverty is
unique. IMF programs can be independent of child poverty if austerity measures affect policy
areas not relevant to children—health and education systems. However, these programs can
still increase the risk of poverty if they target areas that increase job precariousness for
vulnerable families (Babb 2005).
7

Unearthing how crises affect poverty globally would enable sociologists to portrait a broader
image of how families deal with economic downturns. This will eventually enable them to
compare these children with their European and American peers, and thus, and theorize to what
extent the mechanisms are comparable across this broader landscape of societies (Beckfield
2018; Sosnaud and Beckfield 2017).
The family stress model, motivated by a social psychological foundation, ascribes most of the
causal action to intra-household dynamics (Conger et al. 1992). Children’s outcomes are a
function of their parents’ actions, and these actions are in turn a function of the parent’s
command over family resources. This model captures an essential part of how economic shocks
are likely mediated from societal events to individual outcomes in a chain of causal links.
However, this focus on the family members as atomic units potentially misses the broader
institutional conditions moderating impact heterogeneity of children’s material outcomes due
to macroeconomic shockwaves (Brady forthcoming).
2.2.2

Macro moderators: the political economy of economic shocks and poverty

The impact of economic crises propagate through two macro pathways: structural and
political(Brady forthcoming).
Structural pathways: these pathways of poverty refer to the macro-level demographic and
economic conditions moderating economic crises (Benatar, Gill, and Bakker 2011;
Tomaskovic-Devey 1991). These structural explanations do not preclude individuals’ agency,
but they tend to underscore the macroeconomic and demographic conditions explaining such
actions as fundamental causes. These economic conditions could refer to crises causing breaks
in economic development, sudden trade liberalization affecting domestic industries, and the
emergence of precarious labor market due to intensifying economic globalization. For example,
the 2008 financial crisis hampered not only activities at Wall Street but also rapidly spread
throughout the global financial system. This crisis also had a significant impact on developing
societies that were export-dependent. Due to falling demand from industrialized countries,
Zambian, for example, lost 27 percent of its jobs in the mining sector in 2008-9 (Green 2009);
Cambodia construction sector lost about 5 percent of its jobs during the same period (ODI 2009,
p. 1). These economic shocks tend to increase unemployment more than any other type of
societal shock (Kindleberger and Aliber 2011). The IMF offers its support to the governments
of these nations when banking or currency crises lead to sovereign debt crises. However, little
is known about how families with different capabilities respond to these particular IMF related
economic stressor. To what extent do these stressors affect parents’ capacity to care for their
children’s material living standards, is insufficiently researched.
The Washington Consensus influences the policy content of IMF programs (Kentikelenis et al.
2016). To promote international trade, many of IMF’s policies will reduce hinders to trade in
the form of lowering tariffs, eliminating subsidies, and removing obscuring regulation to open
up societies. This makes it easier for foreign companies to enter these markets. More businesses
imply more job opportunities and higher economic growth. That is the vision of the Washington
Consensus. To promote domestic markets, the IMF will aim to reduce the state’s interventions
in the economy. This can comprise the privatization of health care and education (Rowden
2011; Stubbs et al. 2017). Researchers have devoted considerable effort to evaluate the impact
of IMF on populations, yet mainly using aggregated country-level data. These aggregated data
masks the precision of capturing the heterogeneous impact of these structural economic changes
can cause to families due to their varying endowments and demographics.
8

Explanations of structural pathways include demography. These population trains comprise, for
example, the composition of the labour market, neighborhood context, age-cohort-period
composition, and rural versus urban differences. All these factors influence how an economic
crisis is likely to affect society and its sub-strata. For example, the impact of IMF programs is
known to amplify the rural and urban divide (Babb 2005). As the IMF and government officials
seek to optimize government spending, they tend to rollback available public services in remote
areas. These public services tend to be costly and reach a relatively low portion of the population
(Shandra et al. 2004). Therefore, there is a clear financial incentive to scale back governments’
scarce resources (Daoud 2017, 2018). However, these policy actions will lead to that rural—
often less resourceful households—will experience a lowering in quality of health and
educational services. Children will be less likely vaccinated (Daoud and Reinsberg 2018), and
they will be less likely educated (Nielsen 2006; Rowden 2011). This has a detrimental effect
on rural children’s life chances. Although the rural-urban amplification hypothesis has strong
theoretical support, only a few studies have tested it empirically (Daoud et al. 2017).
Political pathways: Institutions, polity, politics and public policy moderate responses to
economic turmoil. Public policy can offset the increased risk that parents become unemployed
following economic shocks (Mun and Jung 2018). Such policies also reduce the likelihood of
material deprivation for children in the short-term. However, the IMF’s primary concern when
designing its programs is to balance the government’s public spending with its tax revenues, in
the short-term, and; to promote economic growth, in the long-run. All other issues are of
secondary concern.
Thus, when the IMF encourages governments to spend less public resources, they will allocate
less to social welfare (Lewis and Verhoeven 2010), education (Daoud et al. 2017), or healthcare
(Stuckler and Basu 2013a). This leads to a decreased quality of services. Often quality
deteriorates faster than what parents can compensate for through private spending (Heckman
2006). From a Keynesian policy perspective, fiscal spending on critical societal functions ought
to be counter-cyclical (Amenta and Carruthers 1988). For example, this means that
governments are encouraged to spend more on education during times of economic volatility
to re-train the unemployed and prepare them when the economy improves. These countercyclical measures include social policy programs. Many governments’ provide conditional cash
transfer programs to keep children in school, and provide them with adequate food, and
simultaneously keep them away from child labor (Nielsen 2006). However, with IMF policies
in place, these types of policy tools of extra investment in education, health, and social
programs, might not be available (Daoud et al. 2019). Hence, a decrease on education spending
is likely to produce a detrimental effect on children’s material well-being, yet the magnitude of
this effect is unknown in the context of families residing in the Global South (Lewis and
Verhoeven 2010; Rowden 2011).
In democracies, vulnerable families can vote for political parties favoring a generous welfare
state. Power resource theory argues that families of less advantaged social classes are likely to
mobilize around shared interests (Korpi and Palme 1998). These interests can include anything
from forming labor unions to electing governments supporting their goals. Such governments
can subsequently shape societies’ policies producing cooperates institutions to provide
cushioning effects during economic turmoil (Esping-Andersen 1990). For example, previous
research finds that unemployed mother during a crisis increases the likelihood that children
receive more care at home, especially when there are policies guaranteeing unemployment
insurance (Brady and Bostic 2015). Hence, families of common interest can shape polity to
their favor. Political effects are more difficult to disentangle during economic crisis since
9

changing policy has a long etiological period, that is, “the length of time required by the body
politics to translate coalitional cause into institutional effect” (Beckfield, 2018 p 21). Despite
these difficulties, political pathways remain an essential causal factor linking shocks and
material outcomes. Quantifying to what extent these pathways are moderating the link between
economic crises and child poverty in the Global South remains an important research task.
2.2.3

Linking macro and micro: the quincunx metaphor

Macro conditions structure families’ material life chances. This is especially true for the loci of
institutions and policies that organize the relationship between states and markets during
economic turmoil. No matter what beneficial effect parents’ bring through their actions to
protect their children from economic shocks, adverse societal conditions can drown these
benefits. Sir Francis Galton’s (1822-1911) quincunx serves as a metaphor of how life chances
set by macro conditions can override families’ life choices (Galton 1894; Krieger 2012). The
quincunx contains a set of pegs on a board. When a perfectly shaped marble is dropped from
the head of the board, each peg yields an equality likely probability that the marble travels to
the right or the left. The process is repeated for many marbles. The default formation of pegs
produces a normal distribution of marbles. However, small changes to the formation of pegs
can produce entirely different population distributions. In the context of our study, a marble
represents a child’s poverty outcome; the pegs represent the macro parameters of society, and;
the distribution of marbles capture the material outcome of the entire population of children.
Children are not merely physical objects driven by chance. Parents’ will seek to influence their
children’s life chances of flowing to the left or right at each peg. In the context of IMF programs,
parents will influence their children’s outcomes such that they fall as close as possible to no
adverse effect in the population distribution. Parents will be more or less successfulness in
protecting their children because they possess different capabilities (resources). Their actions
produce variations within-societies. At the same time, parents cannot directly alter the
parameters of where they face each peg. The macro features of a society set these pegs. As each
society has a specific formation of pegs, these produce variations between-societies (Beckfield
2018).
The quincunx metaphor provides an intuition of how IMF programs produce impact
heterogeneity in children’s poverty outcomes. The next section defines our research design and
conceptual framework, that is, under what assumptions we intend to estimate the impact of IMF
programs on child poverty.

3 Conceptual framework: identification of IMF treatment on child
poverty
Figure 1 outlines our directed acyclic graph (DAG) that distills our conceptual framework and
it clarifies our causal assumptions. Each node represents a qualitative concept. In the method
section, we define how we measure each concept empirically; we measure each node of our
DAG by one or more statistical variables—the data section lists these variables. A directed
arrow implies a causal link. The directions of the arrows are acyclic, meaning that each causal
path starting from any given node cannot terminate at the same node. It signifies, for example,
that ECONOMYt-2 cannot cause itself. Dashed lines imply that the causal path is unobserved; a
circle around a node implies that the node is unobserved. A node is unobserved because either
we lack measurements of it or we intentionally leave them unobserved. We graph them in our
DAG as they are central to our conceptual framework and modeling strategy (Morgan and
Winship 2014).
10

[Figure 1 about here]
Elder-Conger’s family stress model specifies the causal dynamics in how family conditions
affect children’s material outcome. At the bottom of our DAG, we imprint the outcome of
interest, CHILD POVERTYt. Children’s well-being ties closely to their households’ LIVING
CONDITIONSt and to PARENT INCOMEt. We assume that LIVING CONDITIONSt are fixed—slowmoving—family characteristics that will not change during a year’s period, from t-1 to t,
following macroeconomic impact: AUSTERITY OF IMF PROGRAMt-1. These characteristics are,
for example, whether the household is urban, how many individuals live in the household,
child’s age, and sex. These variables change with the state of the economic at subsequent
periods, ECONOMYt-2. Conversely, PARENT INCOMEt represents fast-moving changes in parents’
resources that arise due to impact. If an impact is adverse, tumultuous labor markets will cause
fast-moving changes, cutting income, sharpening inequality, and soaring unemployment.
Macroeconomic impact, AUSTERITY OF IMF PROGRAM, occurs at time point t-1. All nodes
measured after this time point qualifies as post-treatment, implying it is an effect of this impact.
Pre-treatment nodes, < t-1, are causes of impact. As our analysis aims to quantify the total effect
of IMF programs, we abstain from controlling for PARENT INCOMEt as this would block some or
all of the effects of AUSTERITY OF IMF PROGRAMt-1 on CHILD POVERTYt. We do control for
LIVING CONDITIONSt as our analysis aims to not only quantify the average IMF effect on children
but also impact heterogeneity of slow-moving family characteristics. Our frameworks assume
that LIVING CONDITIONSt does not lie directly on the causal path, risking to block the IMF
program effect.
The red arrows represent the path of the total effect—of IMF programs on child poverty. Our
framework assumes that that the shockwave of this effect propagates via two pathways,
culminating at a potential impact on CHILD POVERTYt. Along the first pathway lays mechanisms
affecting children’s parents: AUSTERITY OF IMF PROGRAMt-1 PUBLIC POLICYt  LABOR
MARKETt PARENT INCOMEt  CHILD POVERTYt. PUBLIC POLICYt refers to agreements that will
affect the labor market. Privatization of state-owned companies or liberalization of trade,
exemplifies such agreements.
Along the second pathway lays mechanisms affecting children directly via their contact with
health, education and other public services: AUSTERITY OF IMF PROGRAMt-1 PUBLIC SPENDINGt
 PUBLIC SERVICESt  CHILD POVERTYt. PUBLIC SPENDINGt represent governments spending
allocated to public services. Children have direct encounters with the education and health
systems via compulsory schooling and health visits. If these changes reduce the quality of
public services, then they will force parents to use their income to compensate for the loss of
quality or else their children will experience a higher risk of deprivation. However, since the
beginning of the new millennia, the IMF has implemented a new social policy agenda. This
agenda grants the IMF the mandate to negotiate with governments that are underspending to
increase their allocation to education and health (Clements, Gupta, and Nozaki 2013; Stubbs et
al. 2017). These policies can reduce child poverty. Overall, however, the aim of the IMF is to
enforce the government to balance its expenses and spending. In the majority of the cases, IMF
policies cause reduced social spending.
To estimate the total effect, we refrain from controlling for any of the nodes that position along
these two pathways, and hence they are circled.

11

Accordingly, our DAG defines the pathways—mechanisms—via which IMF treatment effect
child poverty; in synthesis with the Neyman-Rubin potential outcome framework (Imbens and
Rubin 2015), this DAG aids also in defining when this effect is identified. The potential
outcomes framework provides a set of helpful definitions to this end. We define IMF treatment
as a binary variable, 𝐷𝐷 = 1, when a government has implemented a program, 𝐷𝐷 = 0 otherwise.
Instead of taking each child’s poverty outcome as a given by the data, 𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖 , we imagine that each
child having two potential (poverty) outcomes: when they live under the influence of a
government that has implemented an IMF program, 𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖 (𝐷𝐷 = 1), and without it 𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖 (𝐷𝐷 = 0),
𝜏𝜏𝑖𝑖 = 𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖 (1) − 𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖 (0), where τ is the IMF impact effect for child i.

If we observed 𝜏𝜏𝑖𝑖 , then we would be in a position to identify this individual-level treatment
effect. However, the fundamental problem of causal inference is that we can only observe one
of these outcomes for each child. Therefore, for each child, we only get to observe half of the
necessary data, 𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖 = (𝐷𝐷 − 1)𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖 (0) + 𝐷𝐷𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖 (1). Without strong assumptions about the datagenerating process, this individual-level treatment effect is unidentifiable. Instead, we aim to
analyze 𝜏𝜏𝑖𝑖 in expectation—as-if we ran many experiments.

We specify two types of quantities of interest—estimands. First, the average treatment effect
(ATE) of economic shock of IMF programs, 𝐸𝐸[𝜏𝜏𝑖𝑖 ]. We analyze the direct impact of a society
entering an IMF austerity program in the year before we observe a child’s poverty outcome. In
other words, we examine economic shocks as a society-wide event, rather than an event
occurring to individual families. We quantify additional two versions of the ATE: the average
treatment effect on the treated (ATT) and control (ATC). Second, we identify the most critical
moderating effects sourcing from societal or family level traits. These are the conditional
average treatment (impact) effect (CATE), defined in three forms: 𝐸𝐸[𝜏𝜏𝑖𝑖 | 𝑿𝑿, 𝑈𝑈, 𝐹𝐹] where F is
an indicator of family level variables; 𝐸𝐸[𝜏𝜏𝑖𝑖 | 𝑿𝑿, 𝑈𝑈, 𝑆𝑆], S being an indicator of structural
variables; and 𝐸𝐸[𝜏𝜏𝑖𝑖 | 𝑿𝑿, 𝑈𝑈, 𝑃𝑃], where P indicates political variables. The matrix 𝑿𝑿 captures all
other observed nodes highlighted in our DAG; 𝑈𝑈 represents unobserved nodes, such as
POLITICAL WILLt-2.
Hence, our methodological strategy of identifying 𝜏𝜏𝑖𝑖 in expectation relies on our research
designs capacity to control for, U. This is an untestable assumption named conditional
ignorability. Our DAG highlight how governments self-selecting into IMF program threatens
our identification strategy. We can block the following three backdoor paths by controlling on
observables. The first backdoor path, SELECTION INTO IMFt-2  POLITYt-2  POLITICAL WILLt-2
 CHILD POVERTYt, we block by conditioning on the observed POLITYt-2 node. The second
backdoor path, SELECTION INTO IMFt-2  PUBLIC SPENDINGt-2  POLITICAL WILLt-2  CHILD
POVERTYt, we block by conditioning on the observed PUBLIC SPENDINGt-2 node. The third
backdoor path, SELECTION INTO IMFt-2  ECONOMYt-2  LIVING CONDITIONSt  CHILD
POVERTYt, we block by controlling for ECONOMYt-2 and LIVING CONDITIONSt—controlling for
one of these nodes are enough, but we aim to model impact heterogeneity of both of these
nodes.
However, the fourth backdoor path challenges the identification strategy of only controlling on
observables, SELECTION INTO IMFt-2  POLITICAL WILLt-2  CHILD POVERTYt. This path is
unblocked since we cannot directly observe POLITICAL WILLt-2. It is the key unobserved factor
𝑈𝑈. A government’s political motivation to select into a program is likely correlated with poverty
12

rates in the population, which will contaminate our estimation with endogeneity. The state-ofthe-art finds that poorer societies are likely to be overrepresented in the enrolment of IMF
programs (Babb 2005; Kentikelenis et al. 2016; Vreeland 2003). Although each family in our
dataset did not individually cause the macroeconomic shocks in question, their collective
actions cannot be viewed as independent of their government’s selecting into IMF programs.
They can influence polity and the economy through their collective actions, or in the absence
of these actions. Thus, a naïve estimand, 𝛿𝛿, of the observed child poverty data difference, 𝑌𝑌,
using only X will likely be a biased.
𝛿𝛿 = 𝐸𝐸[𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖 | 𝑿𝑿, 𝐷𝐷 = 1] − 𝐸𝐸[𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖 | 𝑿𝑿, 𝐷𝐷 = 0]

Instead, we require an additional procedure that controls for the unobserved node, POLITICAL
WILLt-2. We posit that conditional ignorability holds given our DAG, and when blocking the
backdoor path, sELECTION INTO IMFt-2  POLITICAL WILLt-2  CHILD POVERTYt. We block this
backdoor path by modeling governments’ willingness to collaborate with the IMF using a
Heckman selection model (Heckman 1979). We outline the statistical details of this model in
the appendix. The intuition behind the Heckman model is to produce an indirect proxy for
unobserved factors affecting selection. This proxy is named the INVERSE MILL RATIO,
representing U. We produce this proxy by modeling self-selection separately, in a first stage
equation, with a Probit model. The idea is similar to a propensity score, but Heckman’s model
poses two additional assumptions for identification kin to an instrumental variable approach.
First, it requires that the error term of the first stage is normally distributed. Second, it needs an
exclusion restriction of one or several instruments that affect selection into programs but not
child poverty. We rely on a commonly used instrument in the IMF literature: UN voting patterns
with G7. This variable correlates with a government’s decision to participate in IMF programs
but do not cause the dependent variable of the outcome equation, (child poverty).
Relying on this identification strategy, we assume that ignorability holds, 𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖 (1), 𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖 (0) ⫫ 𝐷𝐷|𝑿𝑿,
U, by conditioning on a proxy of POLITICAL WILL (viz. U) and key societal and individual-level
features, X, as outlined in our DAG.
Our last assumption is overlap. This assumption requires that the probability of receiving an
IMF treatment is strictly between zero and one, 0 < 𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃(𝑇𝑇) < 1. Intuitively, this implies that
the treatment assignment is not deterministic, or predictable. This assumption is also known as
common support, implying that the joint distribution of children residing in societies with IMF
program, 𝑝𝑝1 (𝑿𝑿, 𝑈𝑈), is comparable to children living in societies without IMF program,
𝑝𝑝0 (𝑿𝑿, 𝑈𝑈). If common support does not hold, then we cannot be guaranteed that our quasiexperiment holds. This requirement has to hold for the statistical population studied, and strictly
speaking untestable in sample. An indirect measure of overlap, however, is to check whether
the two distributions of propensity scores of the treated and untreated overlap. We conduct such
a test in the result section.
In sum, our DAG states our identification assumptions explicitly, and thus, aids in connecting
the three aspects of our research design: theoretical framework, empirical material, and
statistical estimation.

13

4 Method and Data
4.1 Data
4.1.1

Micro: families and their children’s living condition

We collected household data from the Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) and the Multiple
Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS). These two surveys have an identical sampling strategy and
thus combinable (Corsi et al. 2012). They build on a two-stage cluster sampling process that
constructs a nationally representative sample of society’s living conditions. In the first stage of
the sampling process, DHS and MICS statisticians define a sampling frame capturing the
population stratification by a range of demographic measures. They use the latest census for
that. The sampling frame enumerates a country’s regions into disjunctive primary sampling
units (clusters). The statisticians assign each cluster a sampling probability proportional to their
population size. In the second stage of the sampling process, they then list all the households
residing in each cluster. The statisticians sample about 20 to 30 households for an on-location
face-to-face interview. Depending on the society’s population size, the final sample varies
between 4,000 to 30,000 households. The response rate tends to exceed 90 %. These
standardized procedures generate reliable data, which enable global analyses of the sort this
article aims at.
Our final household sample captures 1,940,734 children, cared for by 567,344 families, and
residing in 67 societies mainly from the Global South. This sample represents about 2.8 billion
(~50%) of the world’s population by the year 2000. Figure 2 highlights the sample’s
geographical distribution of child poverty. The living conditions of children and families are
sampled once (cross-sectional), with different timing depending on DHS and MICS sampling
schema. The particular surveys we collected are from around the new millennia, within a time
window of five years. There are at least two advantages to analyzing data by this period. First,
there is a reduced interference from global efforts to improve children’s health, also affecting
child poverty. After the year 2000, the global community spearheaded by the Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundations have invested substantial resources in improving children’s health. Second,
there is a reduced interference due to changes in how IMF programs are designed. During the
1980s and 90s, the IMF encountered extensive critique from policymakers, journalists, and
human rights watch groups for its austerity programs. By the late 90s, the IMF announces that
it will start to accompany some of its programs with social policies, to reduce the adverse effect
for vulnerable groups (IMF 2008). Focusing on the period before these policies were fully
implemented purifies that direction of the effect.
[Figure 2 about here]
In the following outline, we signify nodes of our DAG with small caps; we use bold for
statistical variables that measure these nodes. We extract a number of variables from the pooled
DHS and MICS microdata. Table 1 highlights the balance between IMF treated children and
control by central tendencies and spread of the demographics.
[Table 1 about here]
We use a deprivation-based approach to define child poverty. Contrasted with an income-based
approach that measures household income, a deprivation approach measures children’s access
to a minimum and necessary resources. Households’ income does not reveal within-family
resource distributions. A deprivation approach, in contrast, provides a direct measure of need
satisfaction. We rely on the Bristol method to define the deprivation dimensions and their
14

thresholds. This method measures child poverty in seven dimensions (deprivations). Table 2
outlines these seven dimensions, their definitions, and empirical sample frequency. An
advantage of the Bristol method compared to the Alkire-Foster approach is that Gordon et al.
(2003) developed this method in collaboration with UNICEF and thus is better attuned to
measuring children’s living conditions globally (Alkire 2015). Hence, CHILD POVERTY is our
binary indicator outcome variable. Children that are deprived on two or more of these seven
dimensions are poor in absolute terms.
[Table 2 about here]
In the robustness section, we model each deprivation separately and compare the results
between younger and older children splitting at age 5. Before children reach this age, they are
highly dependent on their parents. This fact bears relevance to how much of the IMF effect
flows directly on to children or flows indirectly via LIVING CONDITIONSt.
We measure children’s LIVING CONDITIONSt by eight variables. We use the head of household’s
educational attainment. This person tends to be the individual leading the household’s family
affair and commonly the oldest person in the family. We use the head of household’s education
attainment rather than the mother’s education, as the head will likely to have more influence on
the choices and the behavior of the family (Randall, Coast, and Leone 2011). Educational
attainment is a three-valued ordinal variable: no education, only primary, and at least secondary.
We use the DHS and MICS asset-index to proxy family wealth. Surveyors sample the material
living conditions of the household by counting the family’s ownership of cars, bicycles,
television, and other valuable commodities. Using principal component analysis, the
statisticians then construct an index for each family. The rank position of each family in the
pooled distribution of this index provides a proxy for how much material wealth each a family
has (Rutstein 2008). We record the location of the household, whether it resides in an urban or
rural area. We count the number of adults dwelling in the household where more implies an
increased likelihood of additional breadwinners, and thus, that children receive proper care. We
count the number of children: more children will increase families’ economic burden. We also
control for year of the interview to adjust for time differences. We include variables for the
child’s age (up to 17 years) and child’s sex. Younger children are more dependent on their
parents compared to older. The impact heterogeneity of IMF programs might, therefore, vary
with this dependence. Likewise, due to cultural norms, parents might treat either of the sexes
more favorably during economic stress.
Our analysis use Amelia II to impute missing data, for both micro and macro level. To test the
robustness of the imputed data, we re-run the imputation algorithm on five different versions
of the data to check the stability of our results.
4.1.2

Macro: economy, society, and public policy

exposure is a binary variable. This variable indicates that the
recipient government and the IMF have agreed to implement a set of policies to adjust fiscal
imbalances. If the program was signed the first half of a given year, then that year signifies the
starting year of a program. Otherwise, the year after it was signed will signify the starting year
(Stubbs et al. 2018). SELECTED INTO IMF PROGRAMt-2 captures the POLITICAL WILLt-2 underpinning
the self-selection process that we discussed in the conceptual framework section. It represents
our first stage Heckman model and the set of control variables used, outlined in the appendix.
IMF AUSTERITY PROGRAMSt-1

ECONOMYt-2 captures structural and demographic variables. These consist of

a set of commonly
used variables. GDP growth: societies with lower economic growth are more likely to become
15

economically constrained, and ask for IMF credit. Current account balance: the higher the
fiscal imbalance, the more likely the country is to ask for IMF help. Log GDP per capita: lowincome countries tend to seek concessional IMF assistance, whereas middle-income countries
with short term economic disturbances following, for example, a currency crisis tend to ask for
non-concessional loans. Trade: the sum of exports and imports of goods and services measured
as a share of the gross domestic product. Economic globalization index: how integrated a
nation is in the global economy will affect how many trade liberalization policies the IMF will
aim to include in a program (Dreher 2006). High inflation indicator: a rapid price rise indicates
structural imbalances in the economy. Negative growth: lose of GDP indicates the economic
downturn. We adjust for demographic variables mainly via the microdata, but at a dependency
ratio measure a societal variable that measures the combined shares of populations aged 0-14
and 65 and above.
consists of three measures. Education spending as a percentage of total
government spending, health spending as a percentage of total government spending, and total
government spending. Public policies can be measured with spending measures and
institutional qualitative indicators of policies (e.g., family policies, or unemployment insurance
indicators) (Beckfield 2018). In the absence of institutional indicators, we selected public
spending measures.
PUBLIC SPENDINGt-2

comprises central political and institutional measures (Daoud 2015; Halleröd et al.
2013; Rothstein 2014). Democracy: Autocratic regimes can with less political cost invite the
IMF, compared to more democratic societies. Political terror: a proxy measuring how likely
social movements mobilize to change public policies. Government efficiency: an indirect
measure of how effective a government is in implementing public policies. Corruption: more
corruption is likely to divert resources from critical public services. Minimum age labor law:
a binary variable indicating whether this law is in place regulating child labor. During economic
turmoil, poorer families are more likely to let their children work. International war and Civil
war: IMF avoids countries engaged in armed conflict.

POLITYt-2

4.2 Method
4.2.1

Machine learning in the service of policy evaluation

We combine a policy evaluation and machine learning methodology to estimate the impact of
IMF program on child poverty. This methodology equips us with four capabilities that
traditional estimation techniques lack.
The first capability: under an assumption of conditional ignorability, learning algorithms allow
us to impute counterfactuals for each child, directly (Künzel et al. 2018). Matching methods
can also use nonparametric techniques, but they rely instead on finding comparable cases insample (all children). Matching methods use all the covariates it is fed with, even those with
low statistical relevance for the outcome. Learning algorithms, conversely, use mainly those
variables that are predictive of the treatment or outcome. As long as the treated and control
populations are comparable—the overlap assumption—imputing counterfactuals provides a
flexible method to conduct policy evaluation of IMF programs. We capitalize on this and
impute counterfactual for each child in our sample. The difference between these
counterfactuals is the individual-level treatment effect, 𝜏𝜏𝑖𝑖 = 𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖 (1) − 𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖 (0).

The second capability: learning algorithms find impact heterogeneity inductively. Traditional
regression requires from the researchers that they specify interaction variables explicitly and
deductively. Researchers do so guided by theory of where they plausibly will find impact
16

heterogeneity. To manage complexity, they tend to specify two-way or at most three-way
interactions (Neumayer and Plümper 2017). Learning algorithms, however, suggest where
impact heterogeneity is largest by analyzing the data. These algorithms then suggest a list of
variables that were important in building the model. Our learning algorithm will provide such
a list to identify the most important variables moderating IMF impact heterogeneity. We will
organize our variables in the three key sets, following Brady’s framework of poverty (Brady
forthcoming): family, structural, and polity.
The third capability: learning algorithms guard against the influence of outliers, p-hacking, and
cherry-picking results. Although this capability does not remove researcher discretion
completely, it renders such bias to be less influential. Traditional regression procedures tend to
use all the data simultaneously to generate results. Machine learning procedures, however, split
the data into training and testing sets. The algorithm is first applied to the training set to find
optimal regularization parameters. Then the same model is used on the testing set to estimate
the quantities of interest. This procedure finds an optimal balance in the bias-variance tradeoff
(Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman 2009). We rely on this splitting procedure to produce our
results.
The fourth capability: it finds an optimal flexible functional form, 𝑓𝑓, given one or several
selected functional classes, Ғ, such that 𝑓𝑓 ∈ Ғ. A function class is a family of related models
with distinct loss functions, auxiliary parameters, and regularization. A traditional family of
functions is, for example, generalized least squares (GLM). The common loss function of GLM
is mean squared error, ∑𝑛𝑛𝑗𝑗=1(𝑦𝑦𝑗𝑗 − 𝑓𝑓(𝑥𝑥𝑗𝑗 ))2 . A global estimator family is LASSO, Ridge, and
elastic net. They are called global since they fit the model to the entire sample. Local estimators
on the other hand fit the model to parts of the sample at a time. Decision trees, k-nearest
neighbours, and random forest are example of local estimators. Combined estimators synthesize
the results of several functional classes. Given a choice of a function class, the estimators
evaluates which variables to use in the final model and how much weight they ought to have,
given the data. It can do so as these algorithms optimize through a number of iterations by first
splitting the sample into several folds. Relying on novel methodological developments in policy
evaluation, we select a function class named generalize random forest (Athey, Tibshirani, and
Wager 2019; Nie and Wager 2018).
4.2.2

Generalized random forest

Generalized random forests (grf) adapts the well-known family of random forest (RF)
estimators (Breiman 2001) for efficient non-parametric estimation of causal effects (Athey et
al. 2019). RF models learn ensembles of regression (or classification) trees, each fit a different
resampled population and covariate set, to estimate and mitigate model variance. Each tree
learns a set of rules (e.g., Age > 5) which partition the population of units into different leaves
of the tree. The predicted outcome for a new unit is the average of outcomes for observed units
assigned to the same leaf; the prediction of the forest is the average of the predictions of all
trees. A strength of non-parametric (or machine learning) estimators such as RF is that they are
designed to optimize predictive accuracy on held-out data by trading off bias and variance
through regularization, rather than learning the parameters of a fixed-size model (Hastie et al.
2009). For tree-based estimators, many heuristic regularization strategies exist, including
limiting the depth or number of leaf nodes in each tree. Generally, a larger number of smaller
trees is preferable for out-of-sample generalization. In order to select such tuning parameters,
we use sample splitting, evaluating the predictive accuracy on a randomly subsampled set of
held-out data, never exposed to the model. In the case of grf, it uses a version of sample splitting
17

named out-of-bag predictions. As it randomly picks a subset of cases from the full sample—
hence, the name random forest—to grow each tree, it does not use all cases for all trees. Outof-bag prediction applies each specific case to only those trees in which the grf did not sample
that case to grown those trees. This is a more efficient way to use data.
When machine learning is applied (naïvely) to causal estimation, the trade-off described above
may induce regularization bias in treatment effects since minimization of predictive error is
agnostic to the difference between exposure variables and covariates. For example, regularized
generalized linear models tend to prefer smaller coefficients and may, therefore, bias treatment
effects in either direction, depending on the correlation between treatment and covariates. To
address this issue, researchers have developed so-called debiased machine learning estimators
which decouple the estimation of treatment propensity and effect heterogeneity (Chernozhukov,
Newey, and Robins 2018; Nie and Wager 2018). grf implement this structure through the Rlearner framework, blending regression and propensity score methods to obtain debiased
estimates of causal effects (Nie and Wager 2018). The R-learner builds on the treatment effect
decomposition of Robinson (1988) which relates CATE and covariates through a regression of
a transformed outcome based on the observed treatment assignment. To achieve statistical
efficiency, the R-learner draws on the strength of residualization, in which regressors are fit to
residuals, rather than outcomes themselves. In particular, the R-learner first fits one model of
treatment propensity 𝐸𝐸[𝑇𝑇| 𝑿𝑿] and one of marginal effect 𝐸𝐸[𝑌𝑌| 𝑿𝑿]. To obtain de-biased effect
estimates, the residuals of these models are then explained by a third model—a model of the
CATE with respect to X. This approach is also called quasi-oracle estimation as it relies on
fitting a model to imputations of the treatment effect for each unit.
Once an estimate of CATE—with respect to the full covariate set—has been obtained, the
population may be clustered at different levels of granularity to compile average treatment
effects within groups. grf uses cluster-robust errors that ensures that the standard errors are
computed correctly and that they are less sensitive to outliers. In our study, the treatment—IMF
programs—is assigned at the country-level. Clustered standard errors reflected this uncertainty
when estimating the quantities of interest. Additionally, we may be interested in the ATE
stratified only by educational level. In this case, we average CATE predictions over all
individuals in each stratum, effectively coarsening our view of treatment effect heterogeneity.
If the set of confounders includes more variables than education, this two-stage approach is
necessary to deconfound treatment effect estimates. It has the added benefit that the CATE
model does not need to be retrained if several different stratifications are of interest.

5 Results
5.1 The average impact of IMF programs on child poverty
Our generalized random forest (grf) estimates an adverse average treatment effect (ATE) of
IMF programs on child poverty. Figure 3 highlights this effect. When a government implements
an IMF program the average probability that children fall into poverty increases by 0.14,
compared to when this government abstains from it. ATE is the expected difference between
each child’s potential outcomes, 𝜏𝜏𝑖𝑖 = 𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖 (1) − 𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖 (0). Hence, 𝐸𝐸[𝜏𝜏𝑖𝑖 ]. The 95% confidence
interval (CI) of the ATE spans from a probability of 0.03 to 0.24. This confidence intervals
comprise robust clustered standard errors (Athey et al. 2019).
[Figure 3 about here]

18

The average treatment effect on the treated (ATT) is starker than ATE. The probability that
children fall into poverty during IMF programs increases to 0.24 with 95% CI, 0.02–0.46. The
ATT captures the effect of children residing in countries with an actual—observed in our data—
IMF program: 𝐸𝐸[𝜏𝜏𝑖𝑖 | 𝐷𝐷 = 1]. The ATT confidence interval is wider than for ATE since there
are fewer observed societies (twenty-five) with IMF programs compared to the full sample of
societies (sixty-seven). The substantive difference between ATE and ATT can be
comprehended with reference to the observed data. The ATE is the expected what-if difference
in poverty that would be observed if we could treat a randomly selected child residing in any
society but now imagining it living in both societies with and without IMF program.
Conversely, the ATT is the expected what-if difference in poverty that would be observed if we
treat a randomly selected child only residing in societies with IMF programs but now imagining
the same two scenarios: the child living in both societies with and without IMF program. In
other words, the ATT quantifies the average effect of IMF programs on child poverty of those
children who reside in an society with IMF present—as observed in our data—rather than across
all children living in any society (Morgan and Winship 2014:55). Following the same what-if
logic, the average treatment effect on the treated (ATC) is the effect of a randomly selected
child observed living in societies without IMF programs, 𝐸𝐸[𝜏𝜏𝑖𝑖 | 𝐷𝐷 = 0], now imagined living in
a society with and without these programs. The ATC is adverse with a 0.07 probability of
increasing child poverty, yet smaller, and with a 95% CI overlapping zero, -0.05–0.18.
[Figure 4 about here]
The histogram in Figure 4 reveals substantial impact heterogeneity. It displays the estimated
effect for each child, 𝜏𝜏𝑖𝑖 , in our sample (n = 1,940,734). The blue line signifies the ATE. These
individual-level effects span from beneficial impact of a probability reduction in poverty by
negative 0.1, to an increasingly adverse probability effect of 0.45 probability. The next section
interrogates what aspects of our theoretical framework carries the largest moderating effect:
family, structural, and political.

5.2 Impact heterogeneity
The quincunx metaphor conveys how life-chance (structural and political) and life-choices
(family) link to influence children’s probability of falling into poverty during economic crises.
This metaphorical heuristic translates to what “moves” the variation of IMF program’s impact
heterogeneity. A key feature of machine learning in the service of policy evaluation is that these
learning algorithms aid with identifying variables describing subgroups that react differently to
policy changes—impact (treatment) heterogeneity. The grf algorithm is specifically devised to
quantify this heterogeneity (Athey et al. 2019).
[Figure 5 about here]
While the histogram of Figure 4 shows the variation of impact heterogeneity between children,
Figure 5 highlights the variation between societies. Children residing in societies experiencing
the starkest adverse effect of IMF programs—for example, Tanzania, Sudan, and Lao People’s
Democratic Republic—have an approximately doubled probability of falling into poverty
compared to the ATE represented by the blue-line. Conversely, children living in Iraq, Lesotho,
and Mongolia, have zero or a slightly larger than zero probability of falling into poverty. Thus,
this density plot suggests that structural and political factors—life-chances—drive a substantial
part of the impact heterogeneity.

19

Figure 5 also reveals substantial within-society variations of impact heterogeneity. As families
within the same society are exposed to the same structural and political contextual pressure,
impact heterogeneity within-society signifies a difference in families’ and their children coupe
with IMF impact. Our data describe mainly the resources these families’ possess. Societies such
as Iraq, Philippines, and Chad have large within-society variation. This implies that families in
these societies have a wider range of experience in how adverse IMF programs will affect their
children. Jordan and Ukraine exemplify societies with a more concentrated impact
heterogeneity. This suggests that most children in such societies will experience a similar effect
of IMF and poverty.
We partitioned the variance of the impact heterogeneity to quantify to what extent family traits
versus societal features account for this variation. Using a multilevel random intercept null
model (DiPrete and Forristal 1994), we find that 50 percent of the total impact variance sources
from between-society differences and the other half arises due to differences within- and
between families. 1 We denote this finding as for the 50-50 impact heterogeneity rule—it
corroborates the claim that both the macro (political economy) and micro (family sociology)
frameworks carry equal explanatory weight in accounting for how economic turmoil affects
families and their children.
[Figure 6 about here]
The grf algorithm identifies which macro and micro variables moderate most of the impact
heterogeneity. Figure 6 highlights variable importance ranking. Variable importance measures
how often our grf selected each variable to grow its trees. For each branch (node) split of a tree
that the grf grows, the grf evaluates how much impact heterogeneity each covariate induces.
The grf then selects the covariate that maximizes this heterogeneity. The variable importance
metric calculates the proportion of time our grf selected a variable, counting all the branch
splits.
[Figure 7 and Figure 8 about here]
Our grf identifies one of the PUBLIC SPENDINGt-2 measures—governments’ education
expenses—and one of the LIVING CONDITIONt measures—family wealth—moderating most of
the impact heterogeneity. Family wealth has a variable importance value of 0.11, implying that
the grf selected this variable in 11 percent of all branches since it was most relevant for
identifying impact heterogeneity in those branches. Figure 7 shows the conditional ATE
(CATE) by family wealth quantile. Statistically, this quantity equals the conditional expectation
of individual treatment effects, 𝐸𝐸[𝜏𝜏𝑖𝑖 | 𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊𝑊ℎ𝑞𝑞 ], for q equaling each quintile, {1,..,5}. The shape
of these five distributions reveals that children living in households of the richest quintile
(number 5) will still experience and adverse IMF impact but less so compared to any other of
the remaining quintiles. Children residing in any of the three middle quintile (2 through 4) will
experience a harsher impact than the richest and poorest (quintile 1), indicating that IMF impact
hits the middle class harder than any other class.
Analogously, Figure 8 depicts how much governments’ education expenses, 𝐸𝐸[𝜏𝜏𝑖𝑖 | 𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝑞𝑞 ],
moderate impact heterogeneity by quintile, for q quintile, {1,..,5}. Government of the upper
quintile —those that spend most on education before they implement IMF programs—will find
1

To be exact, the variance partition coefficient is 46.8% for the society level and 53.1 % (1-46.8) for within
society-variation.

20

their youngest inhabitants experiencing the most adverse effects. A likely interpretation is that
any government in these quintiles will have to cut their education spending, and thus,
amplifying IMF impact. This interpretation gains support in what we observe in quintile 1,
where governments spend the least. Although impact heterogeneity in this group is wide, and
possibly bi-modal, IMF policies aid some of these children (e.g. Iraqi families) by imposing
social spending floors or abstaining from cuts in public spending.

5.3 Sensitivity analysis
We analyzed the sensitivity of our results in seven ways. First, we estimated a new grf for each
child deprivation measure, and re-calculated the quantities of interest. This exercise provides
insights to which deprivation measures drives the part of the variation in child poverty that also
correlates the highest with IMF programs. We find that water, shelter, and health deprivations
had ATEs and ATTs different from zero at the 95% confidence interval. Education deprivation
has an ATT significant at the 90% confidence interval. That health deprivation correlates
stronger with IMF programs than education deprivation, suggest that it is more children’s lack
of access to vital public health services that lead to poverty more than the lack of access to
schooling (Stuckler and Basu 2013b). This lack of health services can occur directly via
children contact with health facilities—clinics and hospitals—or happen indirectly via the
education system that also provides access to vaccines and other health related goods (Burgard
and Kalousova 2015). This indirect pathway is common in the Global South (Banerjee and
Duflo 2012). The provisioning of health, water, education, and to some extent shelter, all rely
on public resources: that these deprivations dominate the association with IMF, corroborates
the hypothesis that the causal pathway of reduced public spending carries a heavier explanatory
weight than shifts in labor markets affecting parents income. See our DAG in Figure 1.
Nonetheless, to exhaust fully how IMF induces treatment heterogeneity into the possible
interlinkages of variances of these seven deprivation, we would need to conduct a machinelearning multinomial analysis.
Second, we conducted a permutation test, also known as a randomization test, to control for
false positives, type I error (Imbens and Rubin 2015). We randomly reassigned the IMF
treatment indicator, re-estimated the model, and calculate all four quantities of interest: ATE,
ATT, ATE overlap, and ATC. The results of this test, outlined in Figure 9, shows that we can
reject the null hypothesis for ATE; our reported effects are different from zero. The ATT
permutation distributions mimics the ATE distribution, and hence, its results too are safe against
type I error.
[Figure 9 about here]
Third, we re-calculated the ATE using only the intersection of the propensity distributions
where treatment and control groups join. This is a test of the overlap assumption. The point
estimate of the ATE-overlap, 0.132, is close to the ATE of the full sample, 0.135—rounded to
three decimal points. However, the confidence interval for ATE-overlap is wider and only
different from zero at a 90% CI, 0.01-0.25.
Fourth, our analysis also varied the number of trees grown—from 1000 to 8000 trees—to check
against our results being dependent on the size of the forest. The size of the forests affects the
variance estimate slightly. Fewer trees induce more uncertainty, which is a statistically expected
behavior (Athey et al. 2019; Breiman 2001). The quantities of interest remain stable across the
size of the forests.

21

Fifth, all the results we produced are estimated out-of-sample to protect against overfitting. Outof-bag estimation trained on a bootstrapped set of 4000 trees supplies an added benefit of
providing some protection against researcher discretion. Given a choice of function class and a
set of variables, it is more difficult to cherry-pick results.
Sixth, we tested an alternative specification of our first stage—the Heckman selection model.
We added and subtracted a set of country variables that could plausibly affect our results.
However, we find no significant deviations that affected our results.
Seventh, as we used Amelia II to impute missing data, we re-ran our grf on five different
versions of the imputed data. We then calculated the ATE, ATT, and ATC, and compared them
to the main results. The differences are negligible, demonstrating that main results are stable.

6 Discussion
Sociologists have in several influential studies shown the close connection between the
economy and society (Smelser and Swedberg 2005), yet little is known about the impact of
economic crises on children’s risk of poverty in a global perspective (Grusky, Vitterna). Micro
oriented studies tend to deploy the family stress model—a social psychological approach—to
study the effect of economic crises on child poverty in the Global North. Macro oriented studies,
fueled by debates within international political economy, tend to assemble child indicators as a
proxy for aggregated societal performance during economic turmoil such as IMF programs.
The present study contributes to the state-of-the-art by supplying two insights: (1) it empirically
evaluates the aggregated impact of IMF programs on child poverty; (2) it analyzes the
moderating effects of key societal features (life chances) and families’ capabilities (life choices)
in accounting for impact heterogeneity amid IMF program. In summary, our analysis has
identified that IMF programs increase the probability of children residing in a randomly
selected society of the Global South falling into poverty by 0.14 (95% CI: 0.03–0.24)—average
treatment effect (ATE). This effect is larger for children living in societies that typically have
IMF programs: 0.24 (95% CI: 0.02–0.46)—average treatment effect on the treated (ATT). We
found that the variance of impact heterogeneity partitions to about 50% between societies, and
50 within them: between and within-families. We dubbed this finding the 50-50 impact
moderation rule of thumb.
Our study provides at least four contributions to sociology. First, through the lens of the
sociology of poverty (Brady forthcoming), our study offers a practical way to synthesized
macro and micro theories. Our directed acyclic graph (DAG) explicates our assumptions of how
macro and micro conditions chain into each other, subsequently forming channels via which
the shockwaves of austerity can propagate and eventually land an impact on children, pushing
them into poverty. The ATE and ATE are different versions of the total effect of IMF program
on child poverty. Nonetheless, our learning algorithm—generalized random forest (grf)—found
considerable heterogeneity distributed across these two quantities of interest. The 50-50 rule of
thumb, we argue, leads us to conclude that the value of macro and micro theories are of equal
importance. We recommend that future research investigate how well this rule of thumb holds
in analyzing other types of economic shocks and child outcomes.
The second contribution consists of a demonstration of applied sociology. Our study showcases
how sociologists, and others, can use novel methodology from computer science—machine
learning in the service of policy evaluation—to inductively identify impact heterogeneity
22

(Athey and Imbens 2017). Goldthorpe, among others, has recently called for a methodological
framework that can capture population heterogeneity (2015:31). Our study has demonstrated
how this can be achieved. Our grf—a machine-learning powered tool—enabled our analysis to
identify which variables are likely to moderate most of the IMF impact heterogeneity.
Traditional regression methodologies require deductive guidance of which variables to test
(Western 1998).
However, learning algorithms possess the capability of finding impact heterogeneity
automatically from the data (Hill 2011). This capacity enables sociologist to predict which
individuals or social groups will benefit most of an event or public policy. In our case, we can
formulate what-if thought experiments of what is the optimal IMF program assigned to
societies, with children’s well-being in mind. This included personalized (individuals) as well
as socialized (populations) policy allocation (McBride and Nichols 2016). Learning algorithms,
especially tree-based techniques, provide a ranked list of how important each measure is in
moderating policy impact. Such a list portrays an extensive picture of what measures are the
most and least important, in a given system of variables. In a linear-deductive framework, there
is no equivalent to this. What scholars using this framework tend to do instead is to approximate
such a list by modeling each pairwise interaction individually; but such a pair-wise analysis is
different from an analysis that takes all the variables and models their n-pairwise interactions,
simultaneously (Hastie et al. 2009).
The third contribution is that our learning algorithm suggests that family wealth is—followed
closely by governments’ education expenses—the highest-ranking impact moderators of all
structural, political and family measures. We find that the impact of austerity affects children
of the middle-strata more than the upper- and lower-stratum. This effect is comparable to what
stratification research find in the Global North (Grusky et al. 2008; Redbird and Grusky 2016).
Although richer families are likely to lose more of their resources in absolute terms during an
economic crisis, they still have enough capabilities to shield their children from adverse
effects—at least dampen this effect. Conversely, the poorest stratum tends to be worst socially
and economically integrated: they tend to lack a bank account; their children are less likely to
attend school or benefit from healthcare services (Garfinkel et al. 2016; Lorenz 2015). A
macroeconomics shock will affect them less than if they were properly integrated.
Consequently, families of the middle-stratum are those that are at greatest risk of falling victims
to the shockwaves of austerity. Our analysis reveals this pattern for the Global South. Children
of all strata are affected adversely, but children of the middle-class are those that are affected
the worst.
The austerity mechanics of how cuts in governments’ education expenses affect children in the
Global South are not that different from what we expect to happen in the Global North (Grusky
et al. 2011; Stuckler and Basu 2013a). For those societies that have selected into IMF programs
and have historically spent most on education, will likely be at higher risk of having to reduce
this spending due to austerity policies (Nielsen 2006). In the interest of balancing governments’
budget, the IMF aims to reduce public spending, including health and education expenses (Babb
2005). When governments spend less on education, public schools will have fewer resources to
hire teachers and result in a contraction of teachers’ salaries (Rowden 2011). Consequently, this
situation results in teachers having to educate more children with fewer resources, resulting in
worsened schooling quality. The IMF has also promoted the enactment of tuition fees on
primary education and privatizing the supply of education. This puts an additional economic
burden on families. Instead of choosing to send children to relatively costly schools, parents in

23

developing societies are more likely to keep them home or make them useful by sending them
to work at young age (Alexander 2001).
Reducing education spending has adverse effects on children’s well-being. Our analysis
resonates with this pattern. A well-established fact is that early childhood development, from
the brain’s evolving neural connectivity to children’s social capacity for empathy, is affected
by environmental conditions (Heckman). This involves what children learn from their parents
but also from their encounters outside the household. Their encounters and experiences in
school are one of the most important social settings beside children’s ties to their families.
Schools are also the place where children spend most of their time when not with their families.
Additionally, reduced education spending involves fewer resources to nutritional, vaccine and
direct cash transfer programs to keep children in school out of child labor (Buchmann 1996;
Buchmann and Hannum 2001). In the Global South, these types of social policy programs have
been crucial in lifting families and their children from deprivation (Banerjee et al. 2015). In the
absence of them, children will be more likely living in poverty: undernourished and with illhealth.
The fourth contribution of our study is that it extends our sociological knowledge of economic
crises and child poverty to the Global South. To this end, we assembled household data that are
representative of about half the world’s population. Poverty research on the United States and
other rich democracies rarely engage with poverty studies in developing countries, and vice
versa (Brady and Burton 2016). Although societies of the Global South offer living conditions
that differ from the ones available in the Global North, our study provides an empirical window
to the similarities of how children’s living conditions shifts with the presence of economic
turmoil. While poverty studies of rich democracies have an established research tradition
focusing on social and public policies (Esping-Andersen 1999; Korpi and Palme 1998), these
types of policies play an important role in the Global South as they do in the Global North. A
common critique of social policy studies focusing on developing countries is that governments
tend not to implement anti-poverty policies well enough (Rothstein 2014), or that corruption
erodes any benefits social policies may bring (Dumas, Wedel, and Callman 2010). Therefore,
studies of developing societies tend to—or should—focus instead on other proxies affecting
poverty: economic development, informal economies, corruption, and institutions (Viterna and
Robertson 2015). However, our findings show that more can be gained by further crossfertilizing these two research traditions, mainly divided by regional interest but not necessarily
any substantive differences.
Our study has several noteworthy limitations. Our directed acyclic graph (DAG) explicates our
causal assumptions—namely, ignorability. It defines how macro and micro conditions chain
into each other, and subsequently, aggravate or mitigate children’s probability of poverty. If,
and only if, our assumptions hold in reality, then our quantities of interest are causal. This claim
translates to the following question: to what extent our assumptions and modeling strategy to
deal with selection bias reassure our readers. Nonetheless, definitive identification of causal
effect remains challenging with observational data. Statisticians have proposed several
methodological innovations to improve identification strategies, yet they often rely on
untestable assumptions. In our case, the Heckman selection model relies on the excludability
of instruments and normality of error terms (Fu, Winship, and Mare 2004). As outlined in the
appendix, we have conducted several robustness checks to evaluate how sensitive our results
are to misspecification both in the first and second stage.

24

The second limitation is that our study focused on estimating the total effect of IMF programs
on child poverty, and thus, did not estimate the complete mediation of paths specified in our
DAG. Since the primary interest of this study is to analyze impact heterogeneity, we selected
the state-of-the-art learning algorithms—grf. However, this algorithm is not optimized for
mediation analysis. A grf for mediation would need to optimize both the regularization of the
treatment variable and the mechanism (Pearl 2012; VanderWeele 2015). Thus, this is an
exciting task for future research—both developing the algorithm and to apply it.
The third limitation refers to the fact that our study evaluated the impact of IMF programs as a
homogenous package of policies. Scholars have shown that the type and number of policies per
programs vary depending on where they are implemented (Kentikelenis et al. 2016). Some
programs contain more privatization policies that will likely affect the supply of public schools,
compared to programs with fewer such policies. Related to this limitation, our broader
motivation of this study was to study the impact of economic crises on child poverty. We
focused on IMF programs—following Merton’s (1987) advice on selecting strategic research
case—since these programs are the focus of extensive literature in political economy. However,
more research is required to compare the effect of these programs to other types of crises, such
as currency cries, bank crises, and sovereign debt crises where governments opt for abstaining
from IMF support (Redbird and Grusky 2016; Reinhart and Rogoff 2008).
In conclusion, although governments—under the supervision of the IMF—may stabilize
sovereign debt crises in the short run, the increased number of children that will fall into poverty
from the middle class will likely produce economic and social instabilities in the long-run (Babb
2005). In this case, policymakers face a trade-off: shall they cut public spending to mitigate
fiscal deficits, or shall they keep their investments in public services saving children. This tradeoff has no simple answer. Yet, investing in children’s early life is as much an investment in
future lives as an investment in public resources; both economists (Heckman 2006) and
sociologist (McLanahan and Percheski 2008) agree with this claim.

25

7 References
Abbott, Andrew. 1988. “Transcending General Linear Reality.” Sociological Theory
6(2):169–86.
Alexander, Nancy C. 2001. “Paying for Education: How the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund Influence Education in Developing Countries.” Peabody Journal of
Education 76(3–4):285–338.
Alkire, Sabina. 2015. Multidimensional Poverty Measurement and Analysis. First edition.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Amenta, Edwin and Bruce G. Carruthers. 1988. “The Formative Years of U.S. Social
Spending Policies: Theories of the Welfare State and the American States During the
Great Depression.” American Sociological Review 53(5):661–78.
Athey, Susan and Guido W. Imbens. 2017. “The State of Applied Econometrics: Causality
and Policy Evaluation.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 31(2):3–32.
Athey, Susan, Julie Tibshirani, and Stefan Wager. 2019. “Generalized Random Forests.” The
Annals of Statistics 47(2):1148–78.
Aytaç, Işik A. and Bruce H. Rankin. 2009. “Economic Crisis and Marital Problems in Turkey:
Testing the Family Stress Model.” Journal of Marriage and Family 71(3):756–67.
Ayuso-Mateos, J. L., Pedro Pita Barros, and R. Gusmao. 2013. “Financial Crisis, Austerity,
and Health in Europe.” The Lancet 382(9890):391–92.
Babb, Sarah. 2005. “The Social Consequences of Structural Adjustment: Recent Evidence and
Current Debates.” Annual Review of Sociology 31:199–222.
Babb, Sarah L. and Bruce G. Carruthers. 2008. “Conditionality: Forms, Function, and
History.” Annual Review of Law and Social Science 4(1):13–29.
Baird, Sarah, Jed Friedman, and Norbert Schady. 2010. “Aggregate Income Shocks and Infant
Mortality in the Developing World.” The Review of Economics and Statistics
93(3):847–56.
Bal Gündüz, Yasemİn. 2016. “The Economic Impact of Short-Term IMF Engagement in
Low-Income Countries.” World Development 87(Vol. 87 – 2016):30–49.
Banerjee, Abhijit and Esther Duflo. 2012. Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way
to Fight Global Poverty. Reprint edition. New York: PublicAffairs.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Esther Duflo, Nathanael Goldberg, Dean Karlan, Robert Osei, William
Parienté, Jeremy Shapiro, Bram Thuysbaert, and Christopher Udry. 2015. “A
Multifaceted Program Causes Lasting Progress for the Very Poor: Evidence from Six
Countries.” Science 348(6236):1260799.
Basu, Sanjay, David Stuckler, Martin McKee, and Gauden Galea. 2013. “Nutritional
Determinants of Worldwide Diabetes: An Econometric Study of Food Markets and
Diabetes Prevalence in 173 Countries – Corrigendum.” Public Health Nutrition
16(01):189–189.
26

Beckfield, Jason. 2018. Political Sociology and the People’s Health. Oxford, UNITED
STATES: Oxford University Press USA - OSO.
Belloni, A., V. Chernozhukov, I. Fernández-Val, and C. Hansen. 2017. “Program Evaluation
and Causal Inference With High-Dimensional Data.” Econometrica 85(1):233–98.
Benatar, Solomon R., Stephen Gill, and Isabella Bakker. 2011. “Global Health and the Global
Economic Crisis.” American Journal of Public Health 101(4):646–53.
Bermeo, Nancy and Jonas Pontusson. 2012. Coping with Crisis: Government Reactions to the
Great Recession. Russell Sage Foundation.
Bertrand, Marianne, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Eldar Shafir. 2004. “A Behavioral-Economics
View of Poverty.” American Economic Review 419–423.
Boss, Pauline, Chalandra M. Bryant, and Jay A. Mancini. 2016. Family Stress Management:
A Contextual Approach. Sage Publications.
Bradshaw, J. 2000. “Child Poverty in a Comparative Perspective.” in Breadline Europe: The
Measurement of Poverty, edited by D. Gordon and P. Townsend. Bristol: The Policy
Press.
Brady, David. forthcoming. “Theories of the Causes of Poverty.” Annual Review of Sociology
38.
Brady, David. 2005. “The Welfare State and Relative Poverty in Rich Western Democracies,
1967-1997.” Social Forces 83(4):1329–64.
Brady, David, Agnes Blome, and Hanna Kleider. 2016. “How Politics and Institutions Shape
Poverty and Inequality.” The Oxford Handbook of the Social Science of Poverty 117.
Brady, David and Amie Bostic. 2015. “Paradoxes of Social Policy: Welfare Transfers,
Relative Poverty, and Redistribution Preferences.” American Sociological Review
80(2):268–98.
Brady, David and Linda M. Burton. 2016. “Introduction.” 19.
Breiman, Leo. 2001. “Random Forests.” Machine Learning 45(1):5–32.
Buchmann, Claudia. 1996. “The Debt Crisis, Structural Adjustment and Women’s
Education.” International Journal of Comparative Sociology 37(1):5–30.
Buchmann, Claudia and Emily Hannum. 2001. “Education and Stratification in Developing
Countries: A Review of Theories and Research.” Annual Review of Sociology
27(1):77–102.
Burgard, Sarah A. and Lucie Kalousova. 2015. “Effects of the Great Recession: Health and
Well-Being.” Annual Review of Sociology 41(1):1–21.
Butkiewicz, James L. and Halit Yanikkaya. 2005. “The Effects of IMF and World Bank
Lending on Long-Run Economic Growth: An Empirical Analysis.” World
Development 33(3):371–91.
27

Cherlin, Andrew J. 2012. “Goode’s World Revolution and Family Patterns: A
Reconsideration at Fifty Years.” Population and Development Review 38(4):577–607.
Chernozhukov, Victor, Whitney Newey, and James Robins. 2018. “Double/De-Biased
Machine Learning Using Regularized Riesz Representers.” ArXiv:1802.08667 [Econ,
Math, Stat].
Claessens, Stijn, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, Deniz Igan, and Luc Laeven. 2010. “Cross-Country
Experiences and Policy Implications from the Global Financial Crisis.” Economic
Policy 25(62):267–293.
Clements, Benedict, Sanjeev Gupta, and Masahiro Nozaki. 2013. “What Happens to Social
Spending in IMF-Supported Programmes?” Applied Economics 45(28):4022–33.
Cline, William R. 2004. Trade Policy and Global Poverty. Washington, DC.: Institute for
International Economics :
Conger, Rand D., Katherine J. Conger, Glen H. Elder, Frederick O. Lorenz, Ronald L.
Simons, and Les B. Whitbeck. 1992. “A Family Process Model of Economic Hardship
and Adjustment of Early Adolescent Boys.” Child Development 63(3):526–41.
Conger, Rand D., Katherine J. Conger, and Monica J. Martin. 2010. “Socioeconomic Status,
Family Processes,and Individual Development.” Journal of Marriage and Family
72(3):685–704.
Conger, Rand D. and M. Brent Donnellan. 2007. “An Interactionist Perspective on the
Socioeconomic Context of Human Development.” Annual Review of Psychology
58(1):175–99.
Conklin, Annalijn I., Adel Daoud, Riti Shimkhada, and Ninez A. Ponce. 2018. “The Impact of
Rising Food Prices on Obesity in Women: A Longitudinal Analysis of 31 LowIncome and Middle-Income Countries from 2000 to 2014.” International Journal of
Obesity 1.
Conley, Dalton and Kristen W. Springer. 2001. “Welfare State and Infant Mortality.”
American Journal of Sociology 107(3):768–807.
Cornia, Giovanni Andrea, Richard Jolly, and Frances Stewart. 1987. Adjustment with a
Human Face. Vol. 1, Protecting the Vulnerable and Promoting Growth. Oxford:
Clarendon.
Corsi, Daniel J., Melissa Neuman, Jocelyn E. Finlay, and S. V. Subramanian. 2012.
“Demographic and Health Surveys: A Profile.” International Journal of Epidemiology
41(6):1602–13.
Daoud, Adel. 2015. “Quality of Governance, Corruption, and Absolute Child Poverty in
India.” Journal of South Asian Development 10(2):1–20.
Daoud, Adel. 2017. “Synthesizing the Malthusian and Senian Approaches on Scarcity: A
Realist Account.” Cambridge Journal of Economics 42(2):453–76.

28

Daoud, Adel. 2018. “Unifying Studies of Scarcity, Abundance, and Sufficiency.” Ecological
Economics 147:208–17.
Daoud, Adel, Elias Nosrati, Bernhard Reinsberg, Alexander E. Kentikelenis, Thomas H.
Stubbs, and Lawrence P. King. 2017. “Impact of International Monetary Fund
Programs on Child Health.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
114(25):6492–97.
Daoud, Adel and Goran Puaca. 2011. “An Organic View of Students’ Want Formation:
Pragmatic Rationality, Habitus and Reflexivity.” British Journal of Sociology of
Education 32(4):603–22.
Daoud, Adel and Bernhard Reinsberg. 2018. “Structural Adjustment, State Capacity and
Child Health: Evidence from IMF Programmes.” International Journal of
Epidemiology dyy251:1–10.
Daoud, Adel, Bernhard Reinsberg, Alexander E. Kentikelenis, Thomas H. Stubbs, and
Lawrence P. King. 2019. “The International Monetary Fund’s Interventions in Food
and Agriculture: An Analysis of Loans and Conditions.” Food Policy.
Desmond, Matthew. 2012. “Disposable Ties and the Urban Poor.” American Journal of
Sociology 117(5):1295–1335.
Desmond, Matthew and Bruce Western. 2018. “Poverty in America: New Directions and
Debates.” Annual Review of Sociology 44(1):305–18.
DiPrete, Thomas A. and Jerry D. Forristal. 1994. “Multilevel Models: Methods and
Substance.” Annual Review of Sociology 20:331–57.
Dobbin, Frank R. 1993. “The Social Construction of the Great Depression: Industrial Policy
during the 1930s in the United States, Britain, and France.” Theory and Society
22(1):1–56.
Dreher, Axel. 2006. “Does Globalization Affect Growth? Evidence from a New Index of
Globalization.” Applied Economics 38(10):1091–1110.
Dumas, Lloyd J., Janine R. Wedel, and Greg Callman. 2010. Confronting Corruption,
Building Accountability: Lessons from the World of International Development
Advising. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Durkheim, Émile. 1979. Suicide: A Study in Sociology. Repr. London: Routledge.
Elder, Glen H. 1998. Children Of The Great Depression: 25th Anniversary Edition. 25th
Anniversary, Updated edition. Westview Press.
Esping-Andersen, Gøsta. 1990. The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press.
Esping-Andersen, Gøsta. 1999. Social Foundations of Postindustrial Economies. New York:
Oxford University Press.

29

Ferraro, Kenneth F., Markus H. Schafer, and Lindsay R. Wilkinson. 2016. “Childhood
Disadvantage and Health Problems in Middle and Later Life: Early Imprints on
Physical Health?” American Sociological Review 81(1):107–33.
Fu, Vincent Kang, Christopher Winship, and Robert D. Mare. 2004. “Sample Selection Bias
Models.” Pp. 408–30 in Handbook of Data Analysis. 1 Oliver’s Yard, 55 City
Road, London England EC1Y 1SP United Kingdom: SAGE Publications, Ltd.
Galton, Francis. 1894. Natural Inheritance. Macmillan and Company.
Garfinkel, Irwin, Sara McLanahan, and Christopher Wimer. 2016. Children of the Great
Recession. New York: Ruseel Sage Foundation.
Gibson‐Davis, Christina M., Kathryn Edin, and Sara McLanahan. 2005. “High Hopes but
Even Higher Expectations: The Retreat From Marriage Among Low-Income
Couples.” Journal of Marriage and Family 67(5):1301–12.
Gkiouleka, Anna, Tim Huijts, Jason Beckfield, and Clare Bambra. 2018. “Understanding the
Micro and Macro Politics of Health: Inequalities, Intersectionality & Institutions - A
Research Agenda.” Social Science & Medicine 200:92–98.
Goldthorpe, John H. 2015. Sociology as a Population Science. Cambridge University Press.
Gordon, David, Shailen Nandy, Christina Pantazis, Simon Pemberton, and Peter Townsend.
2003. Child Poverty in the Developing World. Bristol, UK: Polity Press.
Grimmer, Justin, Solomon Messing, and Sean J. Westwood. 2017. “Estimating
Heterogeneous Treatment Effects and the Effects of Heterogeneous Treatments with
Ensemble Methods.” Political Analysis 25(4):413–34.
Grusky, David B., Manwai C. Ku, and Szonja Szelényi, eds. 2008. Social Stratification:
Class, Race, and Gender in Sociological Perspective. 3rd ed. Boulder, Colo:
Westview Press.
Grusky, David B., Bruce Western, and Christopher Wimer. 2011. The Great Recession.
Russell Sage Foundation.
Hall, Peter A. and Michèle Lamont, eds. 2009. Successful Societies: How Institutions and
Culture Affect Health. 1 edition. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Halleröd, Björn, Bo Rothstein, Adel Daoud, and Shailen Nandy. 2013. “Bad Governance and
Poor Children: A Comparative Analysis of Government Efficiency and Severe Child
Deprivation in 68 Low-and Middle-Income Countries.” World Development 48:19–31.
Halliday, Terence C. and Bruce G. Carruthers. 2009. Bankrupt: Global Lawmaking and
Systemic Financial Crisis. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Hamm, Patrick, Lawrence P. King, and David Stuckler. 2012. “Mass Privatization, State
Capacity, and Economic Growth in Post-Communist Countries.” American
Sociological Review 77(2):295–324.

30

Hastie, Trevor, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. 2009. The Elements of Statistical
Learning. 2 edition. Springer New York.
Heckman, James J. 1979. “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error.” Econometrica
47(1):153–61.
Heckman, James J. 2006. “Skill Formation and the Economics of Investing in Disadvantaged
Children.” Science 312(5782):1900–1902.
Hill, Jennifer L. 2011. “Bayesian Nonparametric Modeling for Causal Inference.” Journal of
Computational and Graphical Statistics 20(1):217–40.
Hraba, Joseph, Frederick O. Lorenz, and Zdeňka Pechačová. 2000. “Family Stress During the
Czech Transformation.” Journal of Marriage and Family 62(2):520–31.
IEO. 2003. Fiscal Adjustment in IMF-Supported Programs. Washington DC: IMF
Independent Evaluation Office.
Imbens, Guido W. and Donald B. Rubin. 2015. Causal Inference for Statistics, Social, and
Biomedical Sciences: An Introduction. 1 edition. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
IMF. 2008. “IMF Helping Countries on Health, Social Spending Policies.” International
Monetary Fund. Retrieved
(https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/survey/so/2008/POL072508A.htm).
Jenkins, Stephen P., Andrea Brandolini, John Micklewright, and Brian Nolan, eds. 2012. The
Great Recession and the Distribution of Household Income. Oxford Univ Press.
Johansson, Fredrik, Uri Shalit, and David Sontag. 2016. “Learning Representations for
Counterfactual Inference.” Pp. 3020–3029 in International Conference on Machine
Learning.
Kentikelenis, Alexander E., Thomas H. Stubbs, and Lawrence P. King. 2016. “IMF
Conditionality and Development Policy Space, 1985-2014.” Review of International
Political Economy (Online first).
Kindleberger, Charles P. and Robert Z. Aliber. 2011. Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History
of Financial Crises. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Kinnunen, Ulla and Taru Feldt. 2004. “Economic Stress and Marital Adjustment among
Couples: Analyses at the Dyadic Level.” European Journal of Social Psychology
34(5):519–32.
Korpi, Walter and Joachim Palme. 1998. “The Paradox of Redistribution and Strategies of
Equality: Welfare State Institutions, Inequality, and Poverty in the Western
Countries.” American Sociological Review 63(5):6661–87.
Kraamwinkel, Nadine, Hans Ekbrand, Stefania Davia, and Adel Daoud. 2019. “The Influence
of Maternal Agency on Severe Child Undernutrition in Conflict-Ridden Nigeria:
Modeling Heterogeneous Treatment Effects with Machine Learning.” PLOS ONE
14(1):e0208937.
31

Krieger, Nancy. 2012. “Who and What Is a ‘Population’? Historical Debates, Current
Controversies, and Implications for Understanding ‘Population Health’ and Rectifying
Health Inequities.” Milbank Quarterly 90(4):634–81.
Künzel, Sören R., Jasjeet S. Sekhon, Peter J. Bickel, and Bin Yu. 2018. “Meta-Learners for
Estimating Heterogeneous Treatment Effects Using Machine Learning.”
ArXiv:1706.03461 [Math, Stat].
Kwak, I. S., Y. S. Song, and K. A. Kim. 1999. “The Financial Crisis Effects on the Family
Life-a Comparison between before and after IMF.” Journal of Korean Home
Economics Association 17:121–37.
Kwon, Hee-Kyung, Martha A. Rueter, Mi-Sook Lee, Seonju Koh, and Sun Wha Ok. 2003.
“Marital Relationships Following the Korean Economic Crisis: Applying the Family
Stress Model.” Journal of Marriage and Family 65(2):316–25.
Laeven, Luc and Fabián Valencia. 2013. “Systemic Banking Crises Database.” IMF
Economic Review 61(2):225–70.
Laub, John H. and Robert J. Sampson. 2009. Shared Beginnings, Divergent Lives. Harvard
University Press.
Leininger, Lindsey Jeanne and Ariel Kalil. 2014. “Economic Strain and Children’s Behavior
in the Aftermath of the Great Recession.” Journal of Marriage and Family 76(5):998–
1010.
Lewis, Maureen and Marijn Verhoeven. 2010. “Financial Crises and Social Spending: The
Impact of the 2008-2009 Crisis.” World Economics 11(4):79–110.
Lorenz, Stephan. 2015. “Having No Choice: Social Exclusion in the Affluent Society.”
Journal of Exclusion Studies 5(1):1.
McBride, Linden and Austin Nichols. 2016. “Retooling Poverty Targeting Using Out-ofSample Validation and Machine Learning.” The World Bank Economic Review.
McLanahan, Sara. 2009. “Fragile Families and the Reproduction of Poverty.” The ANNALS of
the American Academy of Political and Social Science 621(1):111–31.
McLanahan, Sara and Christine Percheski. 2008. “Family Structure and the Reproduction of
Inequalities.” Annual Review of Sociology 34(1):257–76.
McLeod, Jane D. and Michael J. Shanahan. 1993. “Poverty, Parenting, and Children’s Mental
Health.” American Sociological Review 58(3):351–66.
McLoyd, Vonnie C. 1998. “Socioeconomic Disadvantage and Child Development.” American
Psychologist 53(2):185–204.
McLoyd, Vonnie C., Rosanne M. Jocson, and Abigail B. Williams. 2017. Linking Poverty
and Children’s Development. Vol. 1. edited by D. Brady and L. M. Burton. Oxford
University Press.

32

Merton, Robert K. 1987. “Three Fragments from a Sociologist’s Notebooks: Establishing the
Phenomenon, Specified Ignorance, and Strategic Research Materials.” Annual Review
of Sociology 13:1–28.
Mitchell, Colter, Sara McLanahan, John Hobcraft, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, Irwin Garfinkel, and
Daniel Notterman. 2015. “Family Structure Instability, Genetic Sensitivity, and Child
Well-Being.” American Journal of Sociology 120(4):1195–1225.
Morgan, Stephen L. and Christopher Winship. 2014. Counterfactuals and Causal Inference:
Methods and Principles for Social Research. 2 edition. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Moser, Christoph and Jan-Egbert Sturm. 2011. “Explaining IMF Lending Decisions after the
Cold War.” The Review of International Organizations 6(3–4):307–40.
Mullainathan, Sendhil and Jann Spiess. 2017. “Machine Learning: An Applied Econometric
Approach.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 31(2):87–106.
Mun, Eunmi and Jiwook Jung. 2018. “Policy Generosity, Employer Heterogeneity, and
Women’s Employment Opportunities: The Welfare State Paradox Reexamined.”
American Sociological Review 83(3):508–35.
Nandy, Shailen, Adel Daoud, and David Gordon. 2016. “Examining the Changing Profile of
Undernutrition in the Context of Food Price Rises and Greater Inequality.” Social
Science & Medicine 149:153–63.
Neumayer, Eric and Thomas Plümper. 2017. Robustness Tests for Quantitative Research.
Cambridge, United Kingdom ; New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press.
Nie, Xinkun and Stefan Wager. 2018. “Quasi-Oracle Estimation of Heterogeneous Treatment
Effects.” ArXiv:1712.04912 [Econ, Math, Stat].
Nielsen, H. Dean. 2006. From Schooling Access to Learning Outcomes: An Unfinished
Agenda: An Evaluation of World Bank Support to Primary Education. Washington
D.C.: World Bank Independent Evaluation Group.
Owens, Ann. 2016. “Inequality in Children’s Contexts: Income Segregation of Households
with and without Children.” American Sociological Review 81(3):549–74.
Pearl, Judea. 2012. “The Causal Foundations of Structural Equation Modeling.” P. 740 in
Handbook of Structural Equation Modeling, edited by R. H. Hoyle. New York: The
Guilford Press.
Ponce, Ninez, Riti Shimkhada, Amy Raub, Adel Daoud, Arijit Nandi, Linda Richter, and Jody
Heymann. 2017. “The Association of Minimum Wage Change on Child Nutritional
Status in LMICs: A Quasi-Experimental Multi-Country Study.” Global Public Health
0(0):1–15.
Pontusson, Jonas and Damian Raess. 2012. “How (and Why) Is This Time Different? The
Politics of Economic Crisis in Western Europe and the United States.” Annual Review
of Political Science 15(1):13–33.

33

Puaca, Goran and Adel Daoud. 2011. “Vilja Och Framtid i Frågor Kring Utbildningsval.”
Pedagogisk Forskning i Sverige 16(2):100.
Ragin, Charles C. 2008. Redesigning Social Inquiry: Fuzzy Sets and Beyond. University Of
Chicago Press.
Ramesh, M. 2009. “Economic Crisis and Its Social Impacts Lessons from the 1997 Asian
Economic Crisis.” Global Social Policy 9(1 suppl):79–99.
Randall, Sara, Ernestina Coast, and Tiziana Leone. 2011. “Cultural Constructions of the
Concept of Household in Sample Surveys.” Population Studies 65(2):217–29.
Ravallion, Martin. 2015. The Economics of Poverty: History, Measurement, and Policy. 1
edition. Oxford University Press.
Redbird, Beth and David B. Grusky. 2016. “Distributional Effects of the Great Recession:
Where Has All the Sociology Gone?” Annual Review of Sociology 42(1):185–215.
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2008. This Time Is Different: A Panoramic
View of Eight Centuries of Financial Crises. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Robinson, P. M. 1988. “Root-N-Consistent Semiparametric Regression.” Econometrica
56(4):931–54.
Rothstein, Bo. 2014. “The Chinese Paradox of High Growth and Low Quality of Government:
The Cadre Organization Meets Max Weber.” Governance.
Rowden, Rick. 2011. Impacts of IMF Policies on National Education Budgets and Teachers.
Brussels: Education International Research Institute.
Rutstein, S. O. 2008. The DHS Wealth Index: Approaches for Rural and Urban Areas.
popline.org.
Schneider, Daniel, Orestes P. Hastings, and Joe LaBriola. 2018. “Income Inequality and Class
Divides in Parental Investments.” American Sociological Review 83(3):475–507.
Schneider, William, Jane Waldfogel, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. 2015. “The Great Recession
and Behavior Problems in 9-Year Old Children.” Developmental Psychology
51(11):1615–29.
Sen, Amartya. 1999. Development as Freedom. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Shandra, Carrie L., John M. Shandra, and Bruce London. 2011. “World Bank Structural
Adjustment, Water, and Sanitation: A Cross-National Analysis of Child Mortality in
Sub-Saharan Africa.” Organization & Environment 24(2):107–29.
Shandra, Carrie L., John M. Shandra, and Bruce London. 2012. “The International Monetary
Fund, Structural Adjustment, and Infant Mortality: A Cross-National Analysis of SubSaharan Africa.” Journal of Poverty 16(2):194–219.

34

Shandra, John M., Jenna Nobles, Bruce London, and John B. Williamson. 2004.
“Dependency, Democracy, and Infant Mortality: A Quantitative, Cross-National
Analysis of Less Developed Countries.” Social Science & Medicine 59(2):321–33.
Smelser, Neil J. and Richard Swedberg. 2005. “Introducing Economic Sociology.” Pp. ix, 736
s in The handbook of economic sociology, edited by N. J. Smelser and R. Swedberg.
Princeton, New York: Princeton Univ. Press,.
Sosnaud, Benjamin and Jason Beckfield. 2017. “Trading Equality for Health? Evaluating the
Trade-off and Institutional Hypotheses on Health Inequalities in the Global South.”
Journal of Health and Social Behavior 58(3):340–56.
Straus, Murray A., Richard J. Gelles, and Suzanne K. Steinmetz. 1980. “Behind Closed
Doors: Violence in American Families.” Garden City, NY: Anchor/Doubleday.
Stubbs, Thomas and Alexander Kentikelenis. 2018. “Targeted Social Safeguards in the Age of
Universal Social Protection: The IMF and Health Systems of Low-Income Countries.”
Critical Public Health 28(2):132–39.
Stubbs, Thomas, Alexander Kentikelenis, David Stuckler, Martin McKee, and Lawrence
King. 2017. “The Impact of IMF Conditionality on Government Health Expenditure:
A Cross-National Analysis of 16 West African Nations.” Social Science & Medicine
174:220–27.
Stubbs, Thomas, Bernhard Reinsberg, Alexander Kentikelenis, and Lawrence King. 2018.
“How to Evaluate the Effects of IMF Conditionality.” The Review of International
Organizations.
Stuckler, David and Sanjay Basu. 2013a. The Body Economic: Eight Experiments in
Economic Recovery, from Iceland to Greece. London: Allen Lane.
Stuckler, David and Sanjay Basu. 2013b. The Body Economic: Why Austerity Kills :
Recessions, Budget Battles, and the Politics of Life and Death.
Stuckler, David, Lawrence P. King, and Sanjay Basu. 2008. “International Monetary Fund
Programs and Tuberculosis Outcomes in Post-Communist Countries” edited by M.
Murray. PLoS Medicine 5(7):e143.
Swedberg, Richard. 2013. “The Financial Crisis in the US 2008–2009: Losing and Restoring
Confidence.” Socio-Economic Review 11(3):501–523.
Teorell, Jan, Stefan Dahlberg, Holmberg Sören, Rothstein Bo, Natalia Alvarado Pachon, and
Richard Svensson. 2018. The Quality of Government Standard Dataset, Version
Jan18. University of Gothenburg. The Quality of Government Institute.
Thomson, Michael, Alexander Kentikelenis, and Thomas Stubbs. 2017. “Structural
Adjustment Programmes Adversely Affect Vulnerable Populations: A SystematicNarrative Review of Their Effect on Child and Maternal Health.” Public Health
Reviews 38:13.

35

Tomaskovic-Devey, Donald. 1991. “A Structural Model of Poverty Creation and Change:
Political Economy, Local Opportunity, and US Poverty, 1959-1979.” Research in
Social Stratification and Mobility 10:289–322.
Townsend, Peter. 1987. “Deprivation.” Journal of Social Policy 16(02):125–146.
VanderWeele, Tyler. 2015. Explanation in Causal Inference: Methods for Mediation and
Interaction. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.
Viterna, Jocelyn and Cassandra Robertson. 2015. “New Directions for the Sociology of
Development.” Annual Review of Sociology 41(1):243–69.
Vreeland, James Raymond. 2003. The IMF and Economic Development. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Vreeland, James Raymond. 2007. The International Monetary Fund: Politics of Conditional
Lending. New York, NY: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group.
Wacquant, Loïc. 2009. Punishing the Poor: The Neoliberal Government of Social Insecurity.
First edition, paperback issue edition. Durham NC: Duke University Press Books.
Weber, Max. 1949. The Methodology of the Social Sciences. New York: Free Press.
Western, Bruce. 1998. “Causal Heterogeneity in Comparative Research: A Bayesian
Hierarchical Modelling Approach.” American Journal of Political Science
42(4):1233–59.
Western, Bruce. 2002. “The Impact of Incarceration on Wage Mobility and Inequality.”
American Sociological Review 67(4):526–46.
WHO. 2013. Global Vaccine Action Plan: 2011-2020. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health
Organization Press.
Williamson, John. 1990. “What Washington Means by Policy Reform.” in Latin American
Adjustment: How Much Has Happened?, edited by J. Williamson. Washington DC:
Peterson Institute for International Economics.
Wood, Joanne N., Sheyla P. Medina, Chris Feudtner, Xianqun Luan, Russell Localio, Evan S.
Fieldston, and David M. Rubin. 2012. “Local Macroeconomic Trends and Hospital
Admissions for Child Abuse, 2000–2009.” Pediatrics 130(2):e358–64.
Xie, Yu. 2013. “Population Heterogeneity and Causal Inference.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 201303102.

8 Tables
Table 1. Descriptive demographics stratified by IMF treatment status

IMF = 0
36

IMF =1

n
Child_age (mean (sd))
Child_sex = Male (%)
Urban_household = rural (%)
Family_wealth (%)
1
2
3
4
5
Nr_of_children (mean (sd))
Nr_of_adults (mean (sd))
Head_education (%)
noEducation
Primary
SecondaryPlus
Year_of_interview (mean (sd))
Health_spending (mean (sd))
Democracy (mean (sd))
Trade (mean (sd))
Expenses_balance (mean (sd))
Economic_develop (mean (sd))
War (mean (sd))
Dependency_ratio (mean (sd))
Negative_growth (mean (sd))
Inflation (mean (sd))
Political_will (mean (sd))
Education_spending (mean (sd))
Economic_globalization (mean (sd))
Gov_effectivness (mean (sd))
Political_terror (mean (sd))
Corruption (mean (sd))
Child_labor_law (mean (sd))
Public_spending (mean (sd))

985805
8.27 (5.06)
501117 (50.8)
613439 (62.2)

955929
8.08 (5.07)
483457 (50.6)
603594 (63.1)

256662 (26.0)
192713 (19.5)
187835 (19.1)
170723 (17.3)
177872 (18.0)
3.77 (2.44)
2.91 (1.87)

223967 (23.4)
192630 (20.2)
190872 (20.0)
173794 (18.2)
174666 (18.3)
4.04 (3.21)
2.97 (2.42)

314602 (31.9)
360369 (36.6)
310834 (31.5)
2003.49 (3.68)
8.32 (5.61)
5.12 (3.23)
66.07 (39.99)
-2.29 (6.31)
6.51 (0.86)
0.13 (0.80)
76.07 (11.95)
6.99 (6.82)
0.10 (0.29)
-0.42 (0.49)
12.80 (5.97)
41.26 (13.59)
-0.53 (0.60)
3.64 (0.91)
-0.66 (0.47)
0.51 (0.50)
24.35 (8.44)

273742 (28.6)
330722 (34.6)
351465 (36.8)
2003.35 (2.72)
10.03 (3.51)
5.89 (2.01)
56.73 (27.38)
-3.40 (2.79)
6.09 (0.85)
0.21 (0.90)
80.31 (12.89)
5.04 (2.58)
0.05 (0.22)
0.27 (0.20)
15.15 (5.06)
39.88 (13.12)
-0.66 (0.36)
3.22 (0.97)
-0.80 (0.46)
0.62 (0.49)
22.12 (8.22)

37

Table 2. Definition of child poverty and its deprivations
Child Deprivation

N

Proportion

Water: Children who only have access to surface water (e.g., rivers) for drinking or who
lived in households where the nearest source of water was more than 15 minutes away.
Children < 18 years old.
Malnutrition: Children whose heights and weights for their age were more than -3 standard
deviations below the median of the international reference, that is, severe anthropometric
failure. Children < 5 years old.
Shelter: Children in dwellings with more than five people per room and/or with no flooring
material. Children < 18 years old.
Sanitation: Children who had no access to a toilet of any kind in the vicinity of their
dwelling, that is, no private or communal toilets or latrines. Children < 18 years old.
Health: Children who has not been immunized against diseases or young children who had
a recent illness involving diarrhea and had not received any medical advice or treatment.
[polio, measles, DPT (against diphtheria, pertussis, and tetanus), tuberculosis (Bacillus
Calmette-Guérin) recommended by the WHO (cf. 2013)]. Children < 5 years old
Information: Children with no access to radio, television, telephone, or newspaper at home.
Children 3-17 years old.
Education: Children who had never been to school and were not currently attending school,
in other words, no professional education of any kind. Children 7–17 years old.
Absolut poverty: Children who suffers from two or more deprivations, as defined above.
Children < 18 years old.

1,941,734

0.24

815,264

0.07

1,926,435

0.51

1,940,599

0.28

944,895

0.13

1,837,578

0.18

1,476,235

0.12

1,941,581

0.48

38

9 Figures

39

Figure 1. Causal assumptions pictured in a directed acyclic graph (DAG)

40

Figure 2. World distribution of child poverty

Figure 3. Quantities of interest

41

Figure 4. Histogram of individual-level treatment effect – IMF impact heterogeneity

42

Figure 5. IMF impact heterogeneity by society

43

Figure 6. Variable importance moderating impact heterogeneity

44

Figure 7. Family wealth moderating impact heterogeneity by quintile

45

Figure 8. Education spending moderating impact heterogeneity by quintile

46

Figure 9: Permutation test results

47

10 Appendix
10.1 Appendix A: Measures
Variable

Definition

Source

Measured as a share of GDP, and as a share of total
government expenditures.
Dummy variable produced by the IMF: ‘the starting year of
an IMF-supported program [is defined] as the year in which
the program was approved, provided this occurred in the
first half of the year. If the approval date was in the second
half of the year, the starting year is the following year. The
end year is the year in which the program expired.’

IMF,
2011,
and
Development Indicators
IMF, 2011.

Gross domestic product per capita (constant 2000 USD) –
logged (to correct for the skewed distribution).
General government balance (share of GDP). Calculated by
subtracting general government expenditure from general
government revenue.

WDI, Sep. 2012.

Dummy variable: = 1 if year-to-year change in inflation
over 20%, 0 otherwise.
Combined shares of populations aged 0-14 and 65 and
above.
Trade is the sum of exports and imports of goods and
services measured as a share of gross domestic product.
Democracy, Range: 0-10 (Freedom House/Imputed Polity).
Average of Freedom House and Polity (transformed to a
scale 0-10). Hadenius & Teorell (2005) show that this
average index performs better both in terms of validity and
reliability than its constituent parts.
Dummy variable: = 1 if negative growth in a given year, 0
otherwise.

Authors’ calculation using IMFWEO data.
Authors’ calculations using WDI
data.
WDI, Sep. 2012

ODA

Net ODA received (% of GNI).

WDI, Sep. 2012

Low income country

Dummy variable. Country is eligible for concessional
lending from the IMF
Dummy variable. Refers to countries located south of the
Sahara Desert.

IMF, 2011

Civil war

Magnitude score of episode(s) of civil warfare

Center for Systemic Peace

Education
expenditure (% of
GDP)

Public education spending as a percentage of GDP

Clements, Gupta & Nozaki 2011,
What happens to social spending
in IMF-Supported programs?

Country-level
variables
Health spending
IMF program

GDP per capita
Government
balance
High inflation
Dependency ratio
Trade
Democracy

Negative growth

Sub-Saharan Africa

48

World

Authors’ calculation using IMFWEO data.

Quality of Governance Database,
2011.

Authors’ calculation using IMFWEO data.

World Development Indicators

Education
expenditure (% of
gov. spending)

Public education spending as a percentage of total
government spending

Clements, Gupta & Nozaki 2011,
What happens to social spending
in IMF-Supported programs?

Economic
globalization

The KOF Globalisation Index measures the economic,
social and political dimensions of globalisation.

Government
effectiveness

“Combines into a single measure of the quality of public
service provision, the quality of the bureaucracy, the
competence of civil servants, the independence of the civil
service from political pressures, and the credibility of the
government’s commitment to policies. The index focus on
the ”inputs” required for the government to be able to
produce and implement good policies and deliver public
goods”. (Teorell et al. 2018)
“measures perceptions of corruption, defined as the
exercise of public power for private gain. It measures
aspects of corruption ranging from the frequency
of ”additional payments to get things done”, to the effects
of corruption on the business environment, to
measuring ”grand corruption” in the political arena or in the
tendency of elite forms to engage in ”state capture”.
(Teorell et al. 2018)
Measures political terror on a scale 1 to 5, where 5 is the
most severe form of terror. This level is defined as, “Terror
has expanded to the whole population. The leaders of these
societies place no limits on the means or thoroughness with
which they pursue personal or ideological goals” (Teorell
et al. 2018)
Dummy variable: = 1 a law in place regulating minimum
required working age , 0 otherwise

Economic globalization, Dreher
2006,
KOF
Index
of
Globalization (Version: March
2016)
Interpolated,
World
Bank,
Worldwide
Governance
Indicators

Corruption

Political terror

Minimum age labor
law

Government
spending

Government expenditure (Percent of GDP)

Interpolated,
Worldwide
Indicators.

World
Bank,
Governance

Political terror scale (U.S. State
Department), Gibney, Cornett &
Wood 2013, Political Terror
Scale..

Minimum Age Convention, 1973
(No. 138), International Labour
Organization (ILO), Information
System on International Labour
Standards
(NORMLEX)
(Retrieved
2014:
http://www.ilo.org/normlex
IMF in Quality of Governance
Database, 2011

Family-level
variables

Nr children

Number of individuals under the age of 18

Nr of Adults

Number of individuals over the age of 18

49

Demographic and Health Survey;
Multiple
Indicator
Cluster
Survey
Demographic and Health Survey;
Multiple
Indicator
Cluster
Survey

Education

Ordinal variable (no education, primary, and secondary+).
Measures the head of household’s level of education.

Wealth index

Ordinal variable (Quintiles). The index is a composite
measure of the household’s material standard. It is
calculated from selected assets such as ownership of
television, mobile phones, bicycles.
Dummy variables. Captures the geographical location of
households.

Urban rural

Demographic and Health Survey;
Multiple
Indicator
Cluster
Survey
Demographic and Health Survey;
Multiple
Indicator
Cluster
Survey. (Rutstein 2008)
Demographic and Health Survey;
Multiple
Indicator
Cluster
Survey

Child-level variables

Sex of the child

Dummy variable. Children under the age of 5 who had not
been immunized against diseases or had a recent illness
involving diarrhea and had not received any medical advice
or treatment two weeks prior to the survey
Dummy variable.

Age

Age of the child in number of years.

Severe child health
deprivation

Demographic and Health Survey;
Multiple
Indicator
Cluster
Survey. (Gordon et al. 2003:8)
Demographic and Health Survey;
Multiple
Indicator
Cluster
Survey
Demographic and Health Survey;
Multiple
Indicator
Cluster
Survey

10.2 Appendix B: Heckman Selection model
Governments’ select into IMF programs. This produces selection bias where poorer countries
might be more often cooperating with the IMF. If so, IMF treatment effect might erroneously
be attributed to cause poverty. While observable variables affecting both selection into an IMF
programme and child poverty are already included as controls in our model, we cannot directly
control for unobservable factors such as ‘political will’, as outlined in our DAG.
Four approaches have been used in the IMF program evaluation literature to address this type
of selection bias: matching methods; instrumental variable approaches; system GMM
estimation; and Heckman selection models. For our purposes, Heckman’s two-step method is
the most suitable choice to address concerns of selection bias as it produces a proxy for
unobserved factors that we can include into our set of controls. The Heckman model involves
first modelling IMF participation, and second modelling the outcome of interest using the
inverse Mills ratio from the first step. Accordingly, in the first step, we estimate a probit model
to predict the likelihood of IMF participation:

As a point of reference, we rely on a version of the specification suggested by the Independent
Evaluation Office of the IMF (IEO 2003): one that retain the best data coverage but which still
gives analogous results. The outcome variable, 𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖. 𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝𝑝. 𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑐𝑘𝑘,𝑡𝑡 , measures if country k had
an IMF program at year t. Our choice of which central mechanism affect selection into
programs, builds on Moser and Strum’s suggestions (Moser and Sturm 2011):
50

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Previous IMF participation (imf.prog.cgn, t-1): a country’s past involvement with the
IMF tend to positively determine future program participation. The nearer historically,
the more likely participation is. We use whether the country had a program last year.
GDP growth (gdp.growth): Countries with lower growth are more likely to become
economically constrained, and ask for IMF credit.
Current account balance (cab.gdp as share of GDP): One of the key objective of the IMF
is to support countries to overcome balance of payment issues deriving from trade. The
higher the imbalance, the more likely the country is to ask for IMF help.
Democracy (demo.fhpol): Autocratic regimes can with less political cost invite the IMF,
compared to more democratic countries.
Log GDP per capita (lngdppc): low income countries tend to seek concessional IMF
assistance, whereas middle income countries with short term economic disturbances
(e.g. currency crisis) tend to ask for non-concessional loans (e.g. Brazil, Argentina).
Civil war (civilwar): Even if countries with a high degree of domestic civil conflict
might need more economic help, the IMF might avoid involvement during violent
periods. Also, the political cost to call for IMF assistance might be high.
International war (int.war): Countries involved in armed conflicts between sovereign
nations deters the IMF.
UN votes with G7 (UN vote G7): this variable captures how often countries vote in line
with G7. This shows political proximity with the key nations driving the IMF.
Countries on IMF programs (CountriesWithIMF): In any given year, the more countries
that have IMF funding, the less likely the IMF is to issue new programs as its funds are
limited.

The total number of countries on IMF programmes and UN voting patterns with G7 act as our
exclusion restrictions: these variable explain significantly the country’s participation decision
in IMF programs but are not correlated with the dependent variable of the outcome equation, in
our case child poverty. Voting pattern has stronger relevance as it is significantly correlated in
all alternative selection specifications.
We choose not to include government balance (lagged one year) as it reduced many
observations due to missing data. We would lose 6 countries reducing our data size by 10%.
We calculate the inverse Mills ratio and include it in the outcome equation to control for the
remaining unobserved variation (Heckman 1979). The equation below defines the inverse Mills
ratio, 𝜆𝜆, which isolates unobserved factors determining IMF participation:

The Mills ratio is calculated for each observation: country k at time point t, and depending on
their treatment status 𝑇𝑇𝑗𝑗 (present or absent IMF program). The function 𝜙𝜙 denotes the standard
normal density function, and Φ the standard normal cumulative distribution function; 𝑍𝑍𝑘𝑘,𝑡𝑡
^

represents the covariates and 𝛾𝛾 are the vector of estimated parameter from the first equation.
The inverse Mills ratio, 𝜆𝜆, is then used as a covariate, in the outcome equation (in our case, the
multilevel models with child poverty as outcomes) controlling for self-selection. In a linear
model, its coefficient is interpreted as follows: if significantly negative, then unobserved
variables that make IMF participation more likely are associated with lower government health
51

expenditure; if significantly positive, then unobserved variables that make IMF participation
more likely are associated with higher government health expenditure; if non-significant, then
there is no association.
Alternative selection specifications

Dependent variable
IMF program (t)
M1

M2

M3

IMF program (t-1)

1.910*** 1.959***
(0.064) (0.094)

GDP growth (t-1)

-0.018*** -0.042*** -0.026***
(0.006) (0.010) (0.009)

Current account balance (t-1) -0.007*
(0.004)
Democracy (t-1)
Log GDP per capita (t-1)

0.027**
(0.013)

-0.008
(0.005)

-0.008*
(0.005)

0.033* 0.046***
(0.019) (0.016)

-0.256*** -0.253*** -0.336***
(0.034) (0.053) (0.054)

Log aid per capita (t-1)

0.004
(0.004)

Civil war (t-1)

-0.026
(0.035)

0.042
(0.069)

International war (t-1)

0.042
(0.072)

-0.213
(0.156)

Dependency ratio (t-1)

0.030
(0.054)

-0.002
(0.004)

Countries on IMF programs

0.011***
(0.004)

0.006
(0.005)

UN voting pattern with G7

0.886**
(0.419)

1.041* 3.303***
(0.546) (0.686)

Constant

-0.570*
(0.309)

-0.418
(0.478)

Observations
Log Likelihood
Akaike Inf. Crit.
Note: probit models

0.001
(0.005)

-0.130
(0.741)

2,482
1,264
1,066
-1,000.302 -471.559 -631.869
2,020.605 963.118 1,283.739
* ** ***

p p

52

p<0.01

