"x"
"1" "Accelerating the Arrival of Fusion Energy within a Quintuple Helix Innovation Ecosystem to Address Climate Change"
"2" "Elias G. Carayannis 1   John Draper 2   Ion A. Iftimie 3  Charles David Crumpton 4"
"3" "1  European Union Research Center,  George Washington University Business School, Washington, DC,  caraye@gwu.edu"
"4" "2   Economics and Business Research Committee, Center for Global Nonkilling ;  College of Local Administration, Khon Kaen University ,   Khon Kaen,  johndr@kku.ac.th"
"5" "3  Eisenhower Ph.D. Fellow with the NATO   Defense College in Rome, Italy, and a Doctoral Candidate   (ABD) with the Central European University  in Vienna, Austria,  iftimie@gwu.edu"
"6" "4   Senior Research Associate,   Institute for Governmental Service and Research, University of Maryland,  College Park,  ccrumpto@umd.edu"
"7" "Abstract"
"8" "In  July 2019, the I nternational  E nergy  A gency  established an independent Global Commission for Urgent Action on Energy Efficiency.  T he same year ,   a  US  National Academies ’  report on  U . S .   fusion   r esearch  recommended  the construction of  a national  fusion  power   plant  and  emphasized  the private sector ’s role  in fusion innovation .  Further, in 2020, as the ITER consortium timetable for constructing DEMO phase machines  ramps up , the UK launched its own FPP .   While  fusion power   from 4040  could  contribute substantially towards transitioning from  fossil fuels within this century ,  presently,  the global fusion ecosystem  is not  sufficiently  funded  to overcome the ‘valley of death’ innovation-to-commercialization obstacle .  Consequently,  international investment to  accelerate  fusion  should be   investigated ,  via  a  global  governance framework  rooted in technology forecasting .   This  review  article   applies  the  Quadruple and  Quintuple Innovation Helix  Ecosystem   framework  to   developing a ‘Future Fusion Economy’ .   We  consider  how   Global South  financing  via  fossil fuel state  sovereign wealth funds  can  accelerat e   fusion.  We  advocate a multi-sectoral  and  multi-state  governance  approach  to accelerate fusion  technology   via  a  ‘ managed co- opetive ’   approach   like  the IEA’s  commission .   To ensure  that this  technology forecasting  approach is structured into an effective , stable, and durable  international governance regime, w e  also  emphasize  the importance of  leadership ."
"9" "Keywords:   climate change ,  fusion  power ,  private sector,  Quintuple Helix , technology management and innovation"
"10" "Introduction"
"11" "Using agent-based modelling, with early entry scenarios featuring technological breakthrough from 2030 onwards   and other approaches, e conomic m odelling for the  diffusion  of fusion power plants in the second half of this century now exists   ( Spangher ,   Vitter ,  Umstattd , 2019).  Depending on assumptions regarding national government policy influence (such as the adoption of a ‘Green New Deal’ ) ,  the ability to overcome the collective  social change  problem represented by fusion development and diffusion through the creation of an effective international governance regime  for fusion technology forecasting and guidance ,  and the  rate of technological maturation, these models  indicate fusion  could  contribute substantially to  global decarbonisation  from 2050 onwards and  to  transitioning away from  a fossil-fu el based energy market by 2100."
"12" "The policy  challenge  impeding  plant diffusion  involves a two-layered collective  social change  problem   focusing on technology innovation management and leadership (‘just do it’)  and requires a deep view of systems and complexity and an appreciation of multiple technology innovation and management perspectives (Phillips &  Linstone , 2016) . A first layer involves  the  rate  of  governments adopt ing  ‘Green New Deal’ -style  principles .   The second layer concerns developing a n effective,  stable and durable  international governance regime  ( Hasenclever, et al, 1996)  that  provide s   reliable forecasting  for  both the continued development of fusion capability and capacity and its diffusion.  T he  main technological obstacle is the massive  investment  required  for  upgrading the global fusion ecosystem such that it is capable of  constructing the first  generations of fusion reactors   with no  return  on investment . In innovation  theory  this is  the ‘valley of death’ problem . For fusion energy innovation  the main solution appears to be much smaller , theoretically postulated,  ‘compact’ power plants  ( Lopes  Cardozo, 2019) .  In light of these developmental barriers, t his  review  article  applies t hree  theoretical lenses:  problem theory ,   the quintuple helix,  and  collective problem-solving  leadership  to  elaborate   potential solution s   that reflect  recent devel opments in the fusion industry.  It leans upon practical understandings resulting from how international  technological  governance solutions ha ve emerged to address economic  and environmental challenges  in order to effect global social change ."
"13" "Responding to  the severity of climate change, in July 2019, the International Energy Agency  (IEA, 2019)  established an independent Global Commission for Urgent Action on Energy Efficiency .   Chaired by then Irish Prime Minister Leo  Varadkar  and i nvolving national leaders  and  key ministers,  including from the Global South,  and representatives of  fossil fuel  business es, e.g.,, the CEO of Royal Dutch Shell and the President of the   King Abdullah Petroleum Studies and Research  Center , as well as  international society, the Commission was designed to accelerate progress on energy efficiency through stronger global policy action  within a one-year timetable . I n June 2020 it  announce d ten  recommendations to  accelerate  energy efficiency progress  globally (IEA, 2020).  Encouraged by this IEA ‘global commission’ approach, t his  ‘perspective’  article  sees emphasis on fusion power  technology development  as a key component of  similarly scoped  policy action. It  presents  how  progress on  fusion  power  could be accelerated   by  through a major global exercise in technology forecasting with real-world funding and technology pathway development implications, potentially  injecting significant new   governmental and extra-governmental  funding  to overcome the ‘valley of death’  technology commercialization  problem ."
"14" "The development of fusion is a  complicated   scientific and  engineering problem  (Miyamoto, 2005)  that has challenged  plasma  physicists  and fusion engineers   for  over  half a century  ( Claessens , 2020 ). In the past two decades,  following  the  1985  USSR-US decision to jointly develop fusion ,  public sector funding to  demonstrate the scientific feasibility of  fusion  power   has concentrated on  a  ‘one big machine’  approach . The ‘big machine’ that emerged is  the  international   France-based  ITER  tokamak  experiment .   Scheduled to attain net energy gain for a brief duration in the late 2030s,  ITER is projected to cost a t least  $22  billion ,   with contributions from  six countries and the E U ( “ITER governing council” , 2017) . Its  near monopolisation   of public funding  has  inadvertently   limited  innovation in other  mainstream  fields of fusion ( Clery , 2014).  Still, it represents the main technological maturation pathway for fusion , and its DEMO phase, the design of next-generation energy generating prototypes  (EFDA, 2020) ,  has already commenced via the Broader Approach Agreement, with the ambition of  achieving  fusion power in the 2040s (ITER,  n.d. ) .   However, b ased on th e ITER timeline and ITER costs, and with out  global intervention to spur the acceleration of the global fusion ecosystem, overcoming  the  ‘valley of death’  rollout of a first cohort of ten grid-connected power plants (Gen1) from around 2070 will require tens of billions of dollars in investment  and may be prohibitively expensive  (Cardozo, 2019)."
"15" "Still, progress is being made.  F usion innovation follows its own Moore’s Law  of technological emergence and diffusion . Fusion’s key metric,  the   “ triple product, ”  double d  every 1.8 years  in the early decades of fusion research .   I n the 1990s   this indicated  that  a prototype fusion power plant  w ould be available in the 2020’s  via ITER (Wurzel, 2019) .   Due to delays ,  ITER ’s   earliest  deuterium-tritium experiments will  only  occur in 2035 , with commercialization  beginning  two decades later  ( Claessens , 2020 ) .  That  the arrival of fusion can be accelerated outside the ITER programme  via much smaller , more efficient,  and  potentially  national cost-sharing or  private-sector devel oped   ‘compact’  reactors  via accelerated DEMO-phase planning  has become of critical interest to the fusion community  since t he  basic concept   was  first advocated   in an  American Security Project  white paper   in  2014 ."
"16" "P resent  interest  in  accelerating  fusion  technology  progress  primarily  focuses on  seed  money for innovative technologies  or funding  next-generation  tokamak-related   technology and  engineering solutions such as  spherical tokamaks  (STs)  and  high-temperature superconductors ( Costley, 2016;  Costley, Buxton, &  Hugill , 2017;  Windsor, 2019).  Assumed   commercial opportunities  associated with increasing  confidence in plasma physics and fusion engineering, as well as the emergence of enabling technologies,   has resulted in an  increasing number of private- sector compani es entering this market   (Wurzel, 2020).   This article  reviews   the emergence of private sector  interest  and considers  how   innovative  global  approaches  that emphasise inter-sectoral and inter-regional cooperation  could leverage   accelerat ion in   fusion power  progress .  It also considers matters of governance-building  and technology forecasting  toward the establishment of an  effective,   stable and durable  international regime needed to support continuing fusion power development and guide its global diffusion  so as to effect substantial change in the energy space, with  enormous  implications for social change ."
"17" "A lthough fusion power is not a ‘proven’ technology, a  nascent  fusion power industry  has recently emerged  based on progress in fusion science .  November 2018 witnessed two  notable developments  in fusion  that offer hope for transforming technology development into commercial viability . The first was the publication of the US National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine’s  Report of the Committee on a Strategic Plan for U.S. Burning Plasma Research  ( henceforward  ‘the Report’) , a  technology management  report authored by the Committee on a Strategic Plan for US Burning Plasma Research, the Board on Physics and Astronomy, and the Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences (National Academies of Sciences,  Engineering, and Medicine, 2019 ).   The Report’s main  forecasting  recommendation is that the US fusion programme is now mature enough to  transform  its efforts from science experiments into energy production via a national  ‘ burning plasma ’  facility , i.e., one that  generates  a self-sustaining alpha-powered net energy reaction ,  meeting  the ‘Lawson criterion’   for system ‘ignition’  (see  Entler , 2015) ."
"18" "As reflected in the US President’s 2020 budget request to Congress that proposed slashing budgets for fusion (Fusion Industry Association [FIA], 2020 , 10 February ), f ull  public sector funding of this national facility  is unlikely .  Rather , the Congress has directed the Fusion Energy Sciences Advisory Committee to investigate   whether such a facility  could be developed  via a public-private partnership (US Congress, 2019 , FIA, 2020b ) .  This idea was emphasized in t he Report’s chapter on organizational structure and program balance  which  includes a  discussion  on the  role  of  the private sector in   accelerating  U nited States (US)  fusion research .   T he possibility  also exists  of the US private sector developing it s  own burning plasma facilities  ( Claessens  2020) .  However, no  proposal  yet exists for addressing the  innovation  ‘valley of death’ problem , which would require a global, coordinated response to assess the present ‘state- of-the-art’ of fusion technology and then forecast multiple potential technological development pathways, with associated timelines and costs ."
"19" "The second   2018  milestone  was  a  public announcement  of the  launch of the  Fusion Industry Association  (FIA)   (Holland, 2018).  Most full  FIA members are pursuing the goal of developing  a  compact  prototype  fusion reactor  to produce  energy   before or around  203 0  and  have  amassed  over   $1 .5 billion  in  private  capital  from  diverse  sources ( Michaels, 2020;  Fusion Energy Base, 2020) .  M ost of  this  has been obtained by one company (TAE Technologies) , and only  three   other companies  have  estimated to have  raised over $100 million  each .  This is far short of the capitalization   required to  achieve a fusion breakthrough by 2030.  Funding  m ultiple  such  programs  through  to grid-connected prototypes to identify the most cost-effective technology  in the  2030 s   would  certainly  involve tens of billions of dollars."
"20" "These  milestones   nonetheless  signify maturation in the  fusion  industry , timely for their coinciding with the need to develop DEMO-phase machines .  Yet ,  to overcome the ‘valley of death’ problem  and result  in grid-conn ected prototypes in the 2030-204 0 window,  the funding obstacle must be  addressed .  First a ddressing this as problem in   technology and  innovation management,  which combines  technology forecasting, technology assessment, evaluation, technology transfer , and related disciplines ( Zweck , 2013),  we  consider a novel role for  the  sovereign wealth funds  (SWFs)  of  Global South  petrostates , whose economies would otherwise be severely disrupted if they did not  participate  in commercial fusion , and who could exercise monopolistic price-limiting behaviour, especially with regard to  natural  gas prices .   We assess that addressing the innovation management requires an inter-sectoral and inter-regional solution seeking framework  grounded in innovation economics  and management   that addresses the critical transaction cost maximizing required to overcome the chasm between technology development and commercial viability. In light of this challenge,  the   first   question  we employ to guide our review  is:"
"21" "How can applying  the  Quintuple Helix model  of innovation economics  and management   address the ‘valley of death’   innovation obstacle ?"
"22" "Within this overarching model, t his  perspective  article  advocate s   ‘managed  co- opetiveness ’ ,  with co- opetiveness  denoting a “formalized arrangement of N competitors collaborating to achieve some c ommon objective” (Priestley, 200 8),  with   ‘managed’ denoting steering  role s  for the  U.S.,  IEA and International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)  in devising policy ,  prioritising  co-development and funding by  the Global South , in a similar fashion to the IEA’s  global  commission approach .   This  adds a  public sector ‘steering’   aspect  to  the knowledge transfer concept  of co- opetiveness  developed by   Brandenburger  and Nalebuff (1996) and expanded on by, for example,  Loebecke , Van  Fenema , and Powell (1999) .  It  also  elaborates  on a recent article in an  IEEE TEM  journal special issue on  ‘ Grand Challenges ’   that advocates  a GEO- PEST-driven external independent review of fusion power to the same end , i.e., a ‘Future Fusion Economy’ beginning in the 2040s  ( Carayannis , Draper, and  Iftimie , 2020) ."
"23" "The article also recognizes the  need for a  relatively non-complex  international governance regime to overcome the collective  social change  problem represented by fusion power  technology forecasting,  development and diffusion . In so doing,   it  embraces the international relations literature that considers the importance of national  level (Strange, 1987; Skodvin & Andresen, 2006; Karksson, et al, 2012; Grundig & Ward, 2015; Morton, 2017)  and individual level  (e.g., Young, 1991; Tallberg 2010)  leadership to the creation of  effective   technology and social  governance regime s .  As a result,  the  second question  we employ  to sharpen our perspective is :"
"24" "What  might be  the roles of national level and individual level leadership in the formation of an international governance regime to overcome the collective  social change  problem of  the  technological  development and diffusion of fusion power?"
"25" "Assessing the Literature"
"26" "2.1  Climate Change  This Century"
"27" "Climate change  is affecting  most of the world’s most vulnerable biomes, economies, and people , and its effects and implications involve timescales of hundreds of years and even millennia  (IPCC, 2014, 2018) .  It is  problematic in terms of  effecting social change due to complexities in  human behavioural psychology and environmental law-making   for   consistent rational  long-term  climate policy.  In particular, the science of the greenhouse effect, the stock/flow nature of atmospheric chemistry, and the spatial dimension of climate change present challenges to human comprehension due to cognitive psychology factors like myopia regarding  climate change ’s  temporal dimension ;  the ‘availability  heuristic’, i.e., the  perception of a  risk of  over  legislating owing to the complex spatial nature of  climate change   and th e representativeness heuristic, i.e., the difficulty in comprehending  caus e and effect in complex systems   (Lazarus, 2009) .  Moreover, a ddressing  climate change   within democratic systems  requires  “ambitious policies within stable policy frameworks” , which in turn depends on favourable public opinion and political system s  capable of promoting multilevel governance  and  political cross-party consensus ( Rietig  and Laing, 2017, p. 575).  Levin,  Cashore , Bernstein, and Auld  (2012) advocate progressive incremental path-dependent policy interventions to entrench  political and public  support over time  that   expand  a consensus  for social change  in  support  of   durable  long-term policy interventions.  The alignment of acceptance of evidence on climate change and the political will and the mobilization of governance structures and processes to address it is a complex and incremental matter  relies in large part on the forecasting  and development of innovative technology solutions  that must actually  forestall  complexity (Phillips &  Linstone , 2016) ."
"28" "While the Paris Agreement  can be seen as a triumph of the  approach  to establish  political will and the mobilization of governance structures , incremental  climate policy via carbon pricing,  its most effective instrument,  cannot effect the deep decarbonisation required  immediately  to stabilize the climate  and realization of its objective of  negative  emissions within a few years  i n order to achieve its 1.5°C  ‘ideal’  target ( Tvinnereim  and  Mehling , 2018).   In its current form, for  the longer term, t he Paris Agreement is not   capable of reducing greenhouse gas emissions below 3°C above preindustrial levels, let alone the 2°C defined in the Agreement. The likelihood of more extreme  climate change   scenarios  developing  by 2100  is accentuated by  the  US  withdrawal  from the agreement and its recent retreat from domestic policy development associated with addressing climate. Change is also threatened  by  most developed countries not meeting their  2016  Paris Agreement Nationally Declared Contributions (NDC) target  and wide resistant to carbon taxes .  This picture of a weak consensus threaten ed  by individual states acting against premise and governance mechanisms  has led to the characterization of the Paris Agreement as “wishful thinking and bravado” ( Victor, Akimoto, Kaya, Yamaguchi,  Cullenward , and Hepburn ,  2017) ."
"29" "Another  fundamental problem  with the Paris Agreement  is  a  lack of dedicated financing  for   its  Green Climate Fund  (GCF) . GCF is  designed to  subsidize renewable energy technologies  and  fund technology transfer  to developing countries  so that they can  pursue  their NDC targets .   The  GCF  was created in 2010 within the framework of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). The Fund is  viewed  as essential to  short and long term  climate governance ,  but presents challenges in terms of effective governance   in terms of  shared  conceptualization of  what forms  transformative change  should take  ( Boodoo ,  Mersmann ,  and  Olsen, 2018), institutional effectiveness ( Sovacool   and  Van de Graaf ,  2018), and access by developing countries  (e.g.,  Fonta ,  Ayuk , and van  Huysen , 2018) .   The Fund   is i ntended to raise  at least  USD 10 0  billion  per year by 2020 to provide sufficient funding.  At USD 6.2  billion committed as of  August  2020,  international commitment to the Fund  thus far  has fallen  far short .  The US exit from the Agreement has made o btaining  USD 10 0  billion  p er year extremely problematical   ( Cui  and  Huang 2018) ,  and further threatens   the  capitalization  and governance   needed for a coordinated response to climate change  ( Bowman  and  Minas, 2019) .   A recent global stocktake found that the international community will not meet the Paris Agreement targets and that only the development and application of non-fossil fuel-based technology and massive energy efficiencies can put the planet back on track ( Roelfsema , van  Soest , and  Harmsen , M., 2020)."
"30" "A ltruistically funded  and  globally coordinated  “ambitious policies within stable policy frameworks”  to mitigate and address climate change  appear to be  no longer viable.   Aligning individual national self-interest with international consensus, and then operationalizing rigorous climate change policy and programs  to effect social change  is apparently  overly optimistic .  However, developing a   ‘Future Fusion Economy’ (FFE ;  Carayannis , Draper, &  Iftimie , 2020 )  model   that could be rolled out soon after  2040 appear s   to be a  viab le  option . China  (Liu et al., 2018; Wan, 2017 ; Stanway, 2019 ),  the  UK (UK Atomic Energy Authority , 2019 )  and the United States (Department of Energy, 2020) now  have  commitments to  publicly funded  grid-connected power plants  by 2040 .  FFE might serve as   an industry-led ‘solution’ to the problem of  the persistence of  fossil fuels  in the second half  this century."
"31" "2.2  The Quintuple Helix  Ecosystem   and   Climate C hange"
"32" "T his article  employs  the  analytic device  of the  Quintuple Helix model   of  innovation economics , an emerging field of economics that emphasizes how entrepreneurship and innovation  should be managed  to  contribute to technological development (Freeman, 2009) , thus also making it a lens for technology forecasting and social change . The  Quintuple Helix  model  is an inter-disciplinary ,  trans-disciplinary , and inter-sectoral  framework of analysis that relates knowledge, innovation,  civil society , and socio-ecology to each other  within a  coherent  ecosystem  to promote  technological  innovation that responds to both public needs and socio-ecological imperatives  ( Barth, 2011;  Campbell, Carayannis,  and  Rehman, 2015; Carayannis  and  Campbell, 2010, 2011, 2017 ).  T he model  has been applied to  sustainable development  social issues , including the  Green New Deal ,  and  management of  climate change   (Barth, 2011; Carayannis, Barth,  and  Campbell, 2012)."
"33" "The Quintuple Helix  is  a  successor to k nowledge production models   that  began with the Mode 1  model ,  wherein knowledge production is stimulated by basic scientific research not primarily concerned with the application of its findings . Mode 1  was succeeded by Mode 2 , which was  characterized by (1) knowledge produced in the context of application; (2) transdisciplinarity; (3) heterogeneity and organizational diversity; (4) social accountability and reflexivity; and (5) quality control (Gibbons et al. 1994).  The next iteration in the evolution of knowledge production , the Triple Helix ,  focused  on university-industry-government relations ( Etzkowitz   and   Leydesdorff ,  2000), while  a know le dge-based  extension to Mode 2,  Mode 3 ,  emphasized the coexistence and coevolution of a plurality and diversity of knowledge and innovation modes (Carayannis  and  Campbell, 2006) ."
"34" "T he quadruple h elix added  the  media-based and culture-based public and civil society  interaction  necessary for quality of democracy , to the Triple Helix  (Carayannis  and  Campbell, 2009).  T he Quintuple H elix  then added   socio-ecological interactions  to the knowledge production mix  (Carayannis  and  Campbell, 2009).  The resulting framework   stresses  that, to  innovate technology to effect social change,  the necessary socio-ecological transition of society and economy regarding the circulation of knowledge and innovation to maintain sustainable development   must occur  within a coherent ecosystem , especially  in the face of  problems  like  climate change  (see Figure 1)."
"35" "F igure 1.  The circulation of knowledge within the Quintuple Helix  as applied to sustainable development, here fusion energy development .   Source: Carayannis, Barth and Campbell, 2012"
"36" "As the  Quintuple Helix  model  emphasizes sustainable development via knowledge flows leading to  technological  innovation  within a holistic social context , it is an ideal  framework  for  reviewing  recent developments in fusion and especially the emer ging role of the private sector.   It can  also   be utilised to  develop   a managed  co- opetiveness   technology forecasting  solution  to the  long-term  climate change   problem  in a way   that  enhances   global equity ."
"37" "2.3 International cooperation  on technology forecasting  to overco me  global  collective  social change  problems: T he role of  l eadership  in governance regime formation"
"38" "For the Quintuple Helix framework to ‘stick’ in the  contentious  context of international relations , i.e.,  to overcome the collective  social change  problem represented by fusion power  technology  forecasting,  development and diffusion ,  it must be e mbedded in  the sort of international  governance regime that has typified the post-World War II global order  ( e.g.,  Young, 1980 , 1991, 2011;  Stokke, 2012; Ikenberry, 201 4).  The force s  of globalisation and the growing threat of  complex  problems that do not respect national boundaries ,  such as global warming and nuclear proliferation ,   and  that defy single state or NGO capacity to address , have  given  additional  impetus to the importance of international cooperation through  new ‘whole-of-world’  governance regimes  (e.g.,  Dingwerth & Pattberg, 2006; Sachs, et al, 2010).  Yet international governance regimes are not spontaneous phenomena. They are products of overlapping national self-interests that emerge to respond to individual and collective national actor interests  (e.g., Strange, 1987; Young, 1980, 1991, 2011;  Dingwerth & Pattberg, 2006; Skodvin & Andresen; 2006; Tallberg, 2010; Karlsson, et al, 2012;  Stokke, 2012; Ikenberry, 2014;  Grundig & Ward, 2015;  Morton, 2017).  Key to the emergence of  technology-based  international governance solutions to collective  social change  problems is leadership, usually demonstrated by national and individual actors concurrently."
"39" "The leadership of national actors is essential to create structural terms for cooperation, particularly in regard to providing the physical and normative capacity and legitimacy to address international problems  that require technological innovation and social change . National actors, particularly great powers ,  provide leadership in determining the terms of cooperation and the rules and norms of governance solutions  ( Strange, 1987; Skodvin & Andresen, 2006; Karlsson, et al, 2012; Grundig & Ward; Morton; 2017). Individual or collective s  of national actors set governance formation agendas and serve to broker national and collective interests to  realize  long-term  social change  objectives (Morton, 2017)."
"40" "Leadership provided by individual actors is also essential to the search for cooperative governance solutions to international collective  social change  problems  (Young, 1991) .  Young (e.g., 1980, 1991,  2011 ) has led in  dimensionalising  individual leadership in international affairs. His typology of leadership  comprises  three forms  (Young, 1991) .  Structural leaders  form effective coalitions and act to prevent or eliminate alterative coalitions. The y  form coalitions around proposal that possess – or have the potential for possessing – consensus value among coalition members.  Entrepreneurial leaders  possess bargaining skill s  demonstrated through agenda-setting,  popularization  of the importance of issues at hand, devising innovative options that overcome impediments to bargaining, and mak ing  deals and find ing  support for desirable policy options.   The entrepreneurial leader’s work is facilitated by association with a powerful state.  The   intellectual leader"
"41" "[ produce s ] intellectual capital or generative systems of thought that shape the perspectives of those who participate in institutional bargaining and, in so doing, plays an important role in determining the success or failure of efforts to reach agreement on the terms of constitutional contracts in international society (Young, 1991, 298)."
"42" "Young (1991) summarizes the importance of and interaction among the three forms of individual leadership in three hypotheses:"
"43" "Institutional bargaining cannot yield agreement concerning the provisions of constitutional contracts in the absence of leadership ( p. 302)."
"44" "No one form of leadership is adequate by itself to produce constitutional contracts in institutional bargaining at the international level ( p. 303)."
"45" "Much of the real work of regime formation in international society occurs in the interplay of bargaining leverage, negotiating skill, and intellectual innovation ( p. 306)."
"46" "National and individual actors serving as leaders must be engaged with, serve as representatives of, and/or be part of the  Quintuple Helix  innovation economics  and management  framework  if an international governance regime for fusion  technology  development and diffusion  capable of attaining social change  with regard to global warming and in the energy space   is to be established."
"47" "Reviewing the Progress of Fusion"
"48" "Given the  current  geopolitical constraints  on  the Paris Agreement ,  accelerating  a  fusion  breakthroug h   to  the  2030 -2040   timeframe  c ould  greatly  assist in reducing  global energy  carbon  emissions to zero within  this century  ( Spangher ,   Vitter,  Umstattd , 2019 ) .  L eapfrogging ITER to develop one or more  compact fusion reactor  technologies  in this timeframe may be the  only  way for fusion to contribute  t his century. This is because , in light of the valley of death problem,  it is unlikely that fusion can be rolled out fast enough based on the ITER tokamak-based pathway  because  the  funding problem,  generation divide between prototype and mature reactors, and  the  innovation cycle, are deep, wide, and long, respectively (Cardozo, 2019).  Fundamentally, d eveloping fusion  power  technology  involves  highly complex science, is not globally co-ordinated ,   as even  the ITER project  is limited to six countries and the EU bloc,  and is expensive."
"49" "The merits of a global multi-pathway technological forecasting exercise for the entire fusion ecosystem as the ITER project enters DEMO phase planning appear obvious. T his section applies  the  Quintuple Helix   innovation economics  and management  framing  to  forecasting and accelerating  fusion  technology  development  to address  climate change   within  this century .  Focusing on progress in the private sector, w e  first  review  progress   illustrated in the burning plasma report and  then   analyse  progress  exemplified  by the  emergence  of the  FIA .  W e  then apply the  Quintuple Helix   and  leadership in international  governance  regime  framing  to  outline a major global technology forecasting and development initiative, the ‘Global Commission for Urgent Action on Fusion Energy’, to  overcome the ‘va lley of death’ funding obstacle  via national and individual actor leadership."
"50" "Assessing   Private Sector Fusion Progress:  The National Academies Burning Plasma Report"
"51" "This section focuses  on  assessing  the state of technology maturation of  fusion, with  a  focus on  forecast developments in  private- sector  fusion .   Progress in the private sector   can be used in technology forecasting as   a n  indicator of the  potential  timeline to fusion commerciali s ation  because venture capital ists  expect immediate return s  on investment .  While we begin by considering the DoE’s  Fusion Energy Sciences Advisory Committee Report on Transformative Enabling Capabilities Efficient Advance toward Fusion Energy  (Department of Energy, 2018), the  main source  for this assessment  is the  National Academies’ Report  (‘the Report’) ,  a follow up to the 2004 National Research Council’s  (NRC)  preliminary burning plasma report (Na tional Research Council, 2004) ."
"52" "The  fusion industry  has realised notable  technological and innovation advancements. While highlighting significant technological developments still required to enable  fusion power  development, including key areas as diagnostics, actuators, and control, as well as plasma-material interactions, the  2018  D o E report  identified  progress already made in diverse areas by  diverse  actors. These include advanced algorithms, high critical temperature superconductors (HTCs), advanced materials and manufacturing, novel technologies for tritium fuel cycle control, and fast flowing liquid metal plasma facing components.  The  report mentions the need for dialogue involving both the public and private sectors in order to leverage these developments , i.e.,  to enable  effective   knowledge production  in Mode 3 ."
"53" "T he  National Academies’  Report  was  commissioned by the Secretary  of  Energy as  a follow-up to the 2004 NRC report  and  follo wed  a May 2016 report to Congress on US participation in  ITER   (D o E, 2016). In  Quintuple Helix  terms,  the Report  represents a summation of  Mode 3 type  knowledge,  al though with emphasis on  the  public sector, via the governance and guidance of the US Department of Energy (D o E)   and  the  involv ement of  various national laboratories. The Report  represents  a consensus study designed to formulate a US national fusion program within the international context of ITER and other developments in fusion, including the  private sector’s  commodification of necessary advanced materials."
"54" "As a consensus report, its assessment of  fusion’s  state of development is  naturally  conservative.  A ccording to its terms of reference, the assessment is dominated by the current global mainstream fusion technology, i.e., magnetic confinement via the tokamak, as opposed to other fusion approaches, such as laser-based inertial confinement fusion  (‘laser ignition’)  or  non-tokamak magnetic confinement approaches . Its two main recommendations, for continued US support for the international ITER tokamak program, and for the US to initiate its own burning plasma facility, are largely informed by US senior management  technology forecasting   in the publicly funded tokamak community.  I n itself   the Report  does not provide a full presentation of Mode 3 knowledge  on options for fusion . Such an assemblage of  knowledge  requires  fuller  contextualization via prior reports,  which are , however,   referenced and listed in its annexes.  Together, this assemblage represents the best  available broad-brush  US technology forecast for fusion energy."
"55" "Fundamentally, t he Report’s recommendation for funding of a US  ‘ burning plasma ’  facility is a result of  the  slow progress and high costs of the ITER project and  a response to  China ’s ( an ITER member )   intent  to build a prototype energy-to-electricity tokamak reactor (an ITER 'DEMO' phase machine) . The Chinese scheme would  follow an accelerated timeline that  could   leapfrog ITER ’s . The China Fusion Engineering Test Reactor (CFETR), planned for the 2020’s, include s  two operational phases. Phase O ne would demonstrate steady-state operation and tritium breeding using a liquid lithium blanket. Phase  T wo would update the technology to obtain fusion power production of 1 GW, twice that of ITER's proposed 500 MW, and approximately 10-15 years faster. Using the latest in materials sciences, such as superconducting toroidal and poloidal magnets, it envisages a fusion gain greater than 12, as well as tritium self-sufficiency (Liu et al., 2018; Wan, 2017).   Subsequent to the publication of the Report, the  UK ’s Atomic Energy Authority ( AEA;  2019)  adopted  a similar approach  via STEP ."
"56" "These  ambitious  DEMO-phase  plan s  are  predicated on China ’s   progress with  the Experimental Advanced Superconducting Tokama k (EAST; the HT-7U reactor ;  Zhaoyi , 2018) and  the U . K .  AEA ’s experience  running the J oint European Torus (JET).  T he Report is unambiguous in pointing out that US dominance in fusion research is  threatened   (p.2 ):"
"57" "Although the United States provides only part of the cost of ITER, if the United States is to profit from its share of the ITER investment, the nation’s strategic plan for fusion should combine its ITER experience with the additional science and engineering research needed to realize reliable and economical fusion electricity. Without this additional research, the United States risks being overtaken as other nations advance the science and technology required to deliver a new and important source of energy."
"58" "I n terms of Mode 3 knowledge, the involvement of a plurality of  international  players should be welcomed  to support   technological  innovation  of the global fusion ecosystem, provided intellectual property is respected ( Carayannis , Draper, &  Iftimie , 2020) ."
"59" "T he Report sees public funding playing a key role in fusion development towards the burning plasma facility, via “a national program  [ of ]  research and technology leading to the construction of a compact pilot plant that produces electricity from fusion at the lowest possible capital cost”  ( National Academies, 2018, p. 1).  Emphasizing the Mode 3 coordinating role of  the public sector, t he DoE would control t his facility  and  steer , a t the  national level,  ‘managed co - opet iveness ’  between the public and private sectors  in fusion development .   A s pointed out earlier,  a public-private partnership may present the most realistic route to this facility ."
"60" "In  Quintuple Helix  terms, t he Report is significant because f or the first time, a major US government fusion report  forecasts   the private sector playing  a  major   fusion  innovation  role.   T he two largest US private-sector fusion companies  were invited to  provide evidence to t he National Academies committee :  TAE Technologies, the world’s largest fusion company with over 100 employees and  over  $ 7 00m in private venture capital (McMahon, 2019 ; Wang, 2019 ), and Commonwealth Fusion Systems, an MIT-backed  start-up  with  $ 11 5 million in venture capital.   Viewed via the  Quintuple Helix  lens, b oth companies are pushing the boundaries of  the  innovation  cycle  in the private sector  by applying the latest developments from  university  research.  For instance,  TAE Technologies is applying bleeding-edge  cloud-sourced  AI algorithms to optimize its fusion shots (Becker, 2019),   while  C ommonwealth   is incorporating  high-temperature  superconducting  magnets  in to  a tokamak-based  reactor ( Rathi, 2018)  to substantially  reduce  costs  (National Academies, 2018, p .106 )."
"61" "T he Report ’s  sixth chapter  includes a  section on “the need  to encourage growth of private- sector capabilities in fusion energy technology” ( National Academies, 2018, p. 153 ). This  emphasizes   the  third strand   of  the Triple Helix model ,  i.e.,  private industry . This is noteworthy because  fusion  was   until the 2010s  dominated by academia and the public sector ( Claessens , 2014) .  This change reflects more mature energy sectors in which  the private sector  is a standard part  of  the  innovation   cycle . The Report underlines the technology maturation pathway with a graphic from the 2017  Annual Report of the State of U.S. D o E National Laboratories  that illustrates how “universities emphasize early discovery and tend to focus on research associated with individuals or small groups of faculty members” while “ [c] ompanies  respond to market needs and typically focus their R&D on near-term solutions or the integration of multiple technologies” (National Academies, 2018,  p p. 6-8, citing  D o E , 2017, Figure 2.2 ; see Figure 2 below ).   This can be read as   forecasting that  a  public- private-sector burning plasma is now  potentially  a “near-term solution”."
"62" "Figure 2. The D o E framework for technology maturation.  Source: National Academies, 2018."
"63" "The  report  also notes “the importance of public outreach to better communicate the long-term potential for economical  fusion energy  and to better engage students and educational institutions in the integrated science, technology, engineering, and mathematics at the founda tion of fusion energy science ”   ( National Academies, 2018, p. 154 ).  This introduces the  fourth  strand within  the  Quintuple Helix  ecosystem ,  the interrelationship of technology innovation  with civil society and the media   (Campbell, Carayannis, and Rehman, 2019) . This would  not just  apply to  the US but, potentially, globally .  A cademia and the public sector  already  regularly engage in communicating fusion developments to the public  in conventional media and via social media .  Given the public sensitivity to most things ‘nuclear’,  public  engagement  is important  to the generation of public and policy support  and was a focus in the IEA’s Global Commission for Urgent Action on Energy Efficiency ."
"64" "A cademia and the private  fusion  sector have  already  begun partnering to this end  in the US ,  via  advocacy  initiatives such as t he American Fusion Project (AFP). The AFP is “an educational organization that informs the public about the benefits of accelerated development of fusion as a solution to our energy, economic, and environmental challenges” (American Fusion Proj ect, 2018). The AFP comprises 16  members of fusion academia and industry and focuses on three area of communication :  i ) “policymaker education to show the benefits of fusion and the benefits of scientific leadership”; ii) “increasing public awareness of fusion as a potential source of energy”; and iii) “public-private cooperation to develop fusion power” (A merican Fusion Project, 2018)."
"65" "The growing role of the private fusion industry  is also evident  in the Report's recommendations as regards ITER. Given the rapid rate of technical  progress in the private sector and  t he slow rate of progress on ITE , the Report recommends  that  the US not  participate  in  the  ITER  DEMO phase, the purpose of which is to “ produce electricity, operate routinely, and eliminate all technical barriers to the commercialization of fusion power ” (N ational Academies, 2018, p. 10 ).  It notes ,"
"66" "… science and technology innovations and the growing interest and potential for private-sector ventures to advance fusion energy concepts and technologies suggest that smaller, more compact facilities would better attract industrial participation and shorten the time and lower the cost of the development p ath to commercial fusion energy .  ( National Academies, 2018, p. 12 )"
"67" "At present, one way forwards appears to be cost-sharing, but the US has not yet budgeted for this and is still working on its Fusion Energy Sciences Advisory  Long Range Plan ."
"68" "A  Quintuple Helix  perspective  assists in describing   the US’  alternative  fusion  technology maturation  pathways .  T he Report states that magnetic fusion energy research is currently in the second, ‘development’ stage of technology maturation ( National Academies, 2018 ), while t he  proposed  successor  to EAST , the CFETR,  appear s  to be  a  two-phase  ‘ system testing ’  and  ‘ demonstration ’  machine  for a burning plasma ."
"69" "Given that no national DEMO-phase projects  are  yet  fully funded to the prototype reactor stage, private  sector claims regarding technological maturation   stages  are extremely  ambitious .   Their claims  are not  generally  viewed as credible by mainstream  f usion experts, most of whom are  tokamak-oriented .  That said,  TAE Technologies  states  that it will soon  progress  with a  field-reversed configuration (FRC)  reactor capable of sustaining a deuterium-tritium energy-producing reaction, the Copernicus device, with commercialization envisaged to begin around 2024 (McMahon, 2019). Like the  Chinese  CFETR,  the  Copernicus appear s  to be a  demonstration  burning plasma  machine, with its current device, the   C-2W (‘Norman’), being a system testing device.  O ther US private-sector companies ,  such as  Commonwealth  and EMC2 ,  are  also  at the development stage  or, in the latter’s case, at the cusp of system testing.   I f Commonwealth’s proposed SPARC system and EMC2’s  proposed  tenth  iteration ‘wiffleball’ device , which   involves e-beam heating in an IEC  polywell   device , are successful, both  plan  demonstration machines using deuterium-tritium around 2025 and  aim for  commercialization of their technologies  around  2030."
"70" "Regarding non-US companies,  using magnetized target fusion,  the Canadian General Fusion, the world’s second largest fusion company  and a cost-sharing arrangement involving the Canadian government , has completed its system testing phase  and  plans   to complete a  demonstration plant by approximately 2025,  with  commercializati on around 2030 (Boyle, 2018). T he ENN Group, a  Chinese  natural gas distribu tion company, has begun a  major   fusion program ,   and  has field ed   FRC  and  ST  device s . The ENN G roup envisages a t least one   ‘ system testing ’  device by 2022  and is working towards a ten-year timeframe for a commercial reactor ,  al though it s website  only  forecasts  a com mercial demonstration device around  2043 (ENN Group, 2018),  perhaps to avoid challenging  the  state- funded CFETR. The technological maturation status of other private-sector fusion  companies  is not  public   or is more speculative  ( se e Supplementary Material Table ) ."
"71" "Finally, the Report   acknowledges  the  FIA’s  launch and states that it can “provide important input to implementation of the national fusion research strategy” ( National Academies, 2018, p. 164 ) , thus  giv ing  credence to  the notion of accelerated  fusion   power .   It   forecasts  that the next phase of  US  fusion commercialization could either be similar to that of the space industry, with the emergence of players like  SpaceX , or  similar to  that of the nuclear power industry “with a substantial entry of smaller, modular advanced fission concepts”, including the emergence of “private venture burning plasma machines” ( National Academies, 2018, p. 165 ), with the US D o E still playing a major role in funding and  in   organizational   forms of  support.  T he US public sector will  likely  dominate  in this Mode 3  knowledge production pipeline  for  years ,  suggesting  managed co- opetiveness  present s  the most  realistic approach to accelerating   fusion power’s  arrival ."
"72" "3.2   Private Sector Fusion Progress:  The Fusion Industry Association"
"73" "Concurrent with the issue of  the  National Academies  Report ,  the  F usion  I ndustry  A ssociation (FIA) ,  with  22  members and  14  affiliates from  five  countries ( see  Table 1 ),  w as registered  as a  non-profit organization .  F usion ’s history  has been  largely  influenced by publicly funded programmes in the US, the UK, the USSR, and more recently, the European Union, via ITER ( Claessens , 2020 ). However,  over  the past two decades, the  emergence  of several major private-sector fusion companies,  with approximately   USD 1.5 billion  in  venture capital  invested , ( Michaels, 2020 ) ,   and  scie ntific progress and  substantial   Intellectual Property (IP) ,  provide  indicat ions of   the   maturation of private-sector fusion companies into a true industry .  In the Quintuple Helix, this is the third helix, after academia and the private sector ."
"74" "The FIA  coordinates with  the  American Fusion Project (AFP)  a nd   includes  many of the  same  players.  It represents  the beginning of a campaign to grow support for commercializing fusion energy as a power source  through a  leverag ing   of  potential synergies  among  diverse players . Beyond  academia, the private sector, and government,  the  FIA  also  involves  the general public  via civil society and the media ."
"75" "The FIA has three strategic priorities for accelerating the development of fusion energy  that reflect a   Quintuple  Helix  approach and are consistent with the National Academies Report :"
"76" "Partner with Governments for Applied Fusion Research: The private sector should have access to the pathbreaking research that governments have pursued for decades. Likewise, the public sector should be able to benefit from exchanges with private scientists working on fusion."
"77" "Drive Financial Support: Sustained financing is needed to accelerate fusion from early-stage research to demonstration levels of energy production. Public-Private Partnerships that include government support can multiply private financial support by reducing risk."
"78" "Ensure Regulatory Certainty: Fusion research, development, and deployment should be subject to appropriate regulation when experiments are built and sited. (FIA, 2018)"
"79" "The  FIA  advocates  focus ing  on energy problems  through three prisms:   the environment, geopolitics , and availability. Like the National Academies ’  Report,  the  FIA does not spec ifically  address  climate change ,  though several of its members’ websites mention  it  (see Table 1 ) . A ccording to  affiliate member Stellar Energy Foundation’s  website, its  main mission is to “bring fusion energy to the zero-carbon power portfolio soon enough to make an impact on climate change” .   However,   the FIA  website  feature s  a quote by the late  Dr.  Stephen Hawking that mentions  global warming : “I would like nuclear fusion to become a practical power source. It would provide an inexhaustible supply of energy, without pollution or global warming.”  I n the future the FIA may take a  stronger  stance on  how fusion  can address  climate change .   The FIA website also does not  consider  th e geopolitical implications of  fusion, save for an aspirational quote by the CEO of Seattle-based CT Fusion: “This is about changing the geopolitical landscape of the entire planet and transitioning from a fuel source based on scarcity like fossil fuels to a fuel source that is  easily available to everyone.”"
"80" "Since  the  FIA is still relatively small, the coming years will test its ability to  compete  with   larger companies  already in or entering the fusion industry , such as General Atomics and Lockheed-Martin, as well as its  skill at   develop ing  synergies  with the public sector ITER  DEMO phase  and  at negotiating  the geopolitics of fusion.  For instance,  it  must consider whether or not to  include   private companies in  non-Western countries,  such as  China’s ENN Group. At the macro level,  the  FIA   might  benefit   from  a better understanding of the geopolitics of  both  fusion  and  climate change   so as to win alli es in  the  global  advocacy  ‘Green Lobby’  that involves civil society and the media ,  to reflect  ‘ quality of democracy ’   p romoted by the  Quintuple h elix .  Encouraging   diverse interests in  the  climate change   problem   to deliberate   on  fusion as one ‘renewable energy’ technological  solution will build  a  depth and breadth of commitment ."
"81" "The US Department of Energy is  a lready moving in this direction . The FIA’s first podcast , on February 23, 2019,  was an in terview with Scott Hsu , a fusion program manager at  ARPA-E . ARPA-E’s mission is to bridge the gap between academia and industry in order to increase U.S. energy efficiency, reduce imports, and reduce pollution across the whole energy space, i.e.,  to maximise Mode 3, within the Quintuple H elix.  Its  ‘ Accelerating Low-cost Plasma Heating and Assembly ’  (ALPHA) fusion program’s objective was “to  catalyze  research and development efforts to enable substantially lower-cost pathways to economical fusion power” ( Nehl ,  Umstattd , Regan, Hsu, & McGrath, 2019, p.506.)  Hsu  voiced support for  multiple initiatives that  exist as synergies  within a  Quintuple Helix  ecosystem:   i ) competitive public-private partnerships to bridge the gap between academia’s ability to innovate and industry’s ability to assess the market and scale up ( i.e., promoting the Triple Helix);  ii) a diversity of fusion techniques to address uncertain fusion market requirements, including in non-energy markets ( i.e.,  Mode  3);  iii) both international collaboration   and  private-sector competition;  iv) the ability of small c ommercial companies to innovate   in ways which contribute to larger academic and public secto r fusion programs;  and v) innovative ways of funding small fusion companies with high potential  for which  federal agencies could  provide early  fund ing and  increasing amounts of   private  capital  as development progresses  (FIA, 2019)."
"82" "Hsu  also  acknowledged  a possible role for   some form of  independent  ‘vetting’  of private sector companies  to catalyse  increased  access to  private  capital , i.e., the  centralized  ‘ authoritative’ aspect of our managed co- opetiveness . Hsu  also  stated  that fusion might be facing a ‘tipping point’ and could address climate change.   ARPA-E’s February 13, 2020 launch of its GAMOW program  builds on ALPHA and  a related program (BETHE) and  aims to  assist in establishing fusion energy’s “technical and commercial viability within the next several decades” (ARPA-E, 2020)."
"83" "F ollowing the  publication of the Report  and the launch of the FIA ,  concrete  signs of  managed co- opetiveness   between the D o E’s influential  ‘mainstream’  Office of Fusion Energy Sciences and the private sector  have  emerged   that should  both  accelerate  private - sector technology maturation pathways and support public sector projects . The new “Innovation  Network for Fusion Energy” (INFUSE) program (see  https://infuse.ornl.gov/ ) promotes collaboration between the public and private sectors by allowing private companies to apply for vouchers redeemable at public lab oratories within the  DoE  complex . INFUSE  thus  addresses the intellectual property rights  issue  that can  impede   cooperation between  the public and private sectors by enabling US companies to work directly with government scientists on government assets, potentially facilitating access to computational modeling, design validation, and  experimental testing as well as collaborative public-private publication of cutting-edge research ( FIA , 2019 , June 5 ).  As noted earlier, a route to one or more national facilities  via cost sharing is being planned  (FIA, 2020, May 1) , and  a supportive regulatory regime is being established (Gordon,  Peckinpaugh ,  Stimers , O’Neill, and Berry, 2019 ; FIA, 2021a )."
"84" "The 2018 ‘burning plasma’ Report’s  forecasting  was  broadly reinforced in the March 2020 ‘A Community Plan for Fusion Energy and Discovery Plasma Sciences’ (American Physical Society Division of Plasma Physics, 2020). This recommends to the DoE’s Of fice of Fusion Energy Sciences  “multi-institutional, multidisciplinary program for exploring FPP [Fusion Pilot Plant] designs, together with industry, to drive and integrate the latest scientific innovations, identify the critical cost drivers of an FPP, and inform research priorities accordingly” (p.44). The aim is to establish US-based FPPs in the 2040s that rely on tokamak, stellarator, or alternate concepts “utilizing partnerships with private industry and interagency collaboration” (p.85) in inertial fusion energy and magnetic fusion energy, including via INFUSE and a FPP conceptual studies program involving private industry, and through public private partnerships and dialogue with venture capital, with a view to fusion power commercialization.  This approach was subsequently adopted by the Department of Energy’s Fusion Energy Sciences Long Range Planning Committee’s fusion and plasma report (Department of Energy, 2020). In addition , on April 20, 2020, the DoE issued a Request for Information on Cost-Sharing Partnerships with the Private Sector in Fusion Energy (Federal Register, 2020).  The public-private partnership approach was subsequently endorsed  in the December 27  H.R.133  Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 , which  authorizes $325 million over five years for a partnership program to build fusion demonstration facilities, with a match of a minimum of $325 million from private industry   . (FIA, 2021 b )."
"85" "The   Global Fusion Technology Forecasting Commission"
"86" "As a disruptive technology, nuclear fusion forecasting has been on the radar for years ( National  Research Council , 2010 ) . In developing an integrated approach to  technology and innovation management  ( Zweck , 2013),  t hree potential management strategies can be employed to  forecast the social change   that may be necessary to address  a  complex  problem  like the ‘valley of death’  commercialization problem for fusion , with different advantages and disadvantages . Roberts (2000) describe these as the  authoritative approach, the competitive approach, and the  collaborative approach. Our  global fusion technology forecasting commission  involves centrally managed  (authoritative)  co- opetiveness  ( collaborative competition;  see Priestley, 2008 ), which combines the advantages of all three approaches.  The  approach is  managed  via an IEA-style Global Commission for Urgent Action on Fusion Energy that combines academia and the public sector (centrally managed), the private sector (competitive) and civil society and the public to accelerate the global fusion ecosystem (collaborative) via a major technology forecasting exercise. In terms of funding, accelerating the global fusion ecosystem requires ‘new’  money, and we point out that involving the Global South   opens up the possibility of accessing  the   sovereign wealth funds  (SWFs)  of Global South  fossil fuel states , which   possess the wealth necessary to fund   multiple  viable candidate  fusion  development pathways , perhaps via a  fusion  portfolio approach , already suggested to the IAEA (Ingersoll, 2018) ."
"87" "In practise, managed co- opetiveness  would be achieved by  a single lead  G7  country  with a stake in fusion ,  perhaps empowered by  a preliminary presidential commission (as with the 1946 Acheson  Lilienthal  Report for fission) and by, for example,  the COP 26 UNFCC United Na tions Climate Change Conference. It could also   initially consult  a fossil-fuel regional  or thematic  bloc ,  such as the Gulf Cooperation Council  or OPEC .  Alternatively,  the  G7 country  could directly approach  the  G77 UN voting bloc (the largest Global South bloc; see Toye, 2014)  in order for it to act geopolitically to  serve as an honest broker,  open up the possibility of  funding  via its fossil fuel states’  SWFs , and manage an equitable distribution of returns .  Thus, we  suggest  that a single G7 nation act as leader in setting the structural conditions that would frame a collaborative solution  in the form of an international fusion power  forecasting,  development and diffusion regime ."
"88" "We also suggest that the G7  nation — likely selected because it has  the  best  available   individual leader  with the necessary entrepreneurial and/or intellectual capabilities to take advantage of their national leadership advantages  ( Karlsson , et al, 2012) — to go beyond service as honest broker and financial guru  in order  to lead in building  a  governance regime that offer s  structural stability and durability  grounded on  overlapping national self-interests and  ‘ knowledge-based cognitivism ’   ( H asenclever , et al, 1996, 177)   produced by  the  operation  of the Quintuple Helix approach  and necessary to funnel the  products of the  Quintuple Helix   fusion  ecosystem  into fusion power development and diffusion."
"89" "The  global governance regime would begin as   an independent IEA/IAEA -supported  commission , similar to the IEA global  commission on energy efficiency ,  but  involving the IEA Fusion Power Coordinating Committee , an existing body .  We have combined the IEA energy commission with our understanding of IAEA committee structures and advice from senior representatives of different fusion energy development sectors to create a set of Draft Terms of Reference (see Supplementary Materials for  Draft  Terms of Reference).  We suggest that the  EIR adopt a GEO-PESTLE analytical and forecasting approach that incorporates the geopolitical, economic, sociological, technological, legal and environmental challenges facing fusion power ( Carayannis , Draper, &  Iftimie , 2020).  The  resulting  suggested Commission structure incorporates six subcommittees and necessarily strongly relies on the technology forecasting component:"
"90" "The Subcommittee on the Technological Forecasting of Accelerating Fusion Energy;"
"91" "The Subcommittee on the Economic Forecasting of Accelerated Fusion Energy;"
"92" "The Subcommittee on International Cooperation and Peacebuilding in Accelerating Fusion Energy;"
"93" "The Subcommittee on Intellectual Property Rights in Accelerating Fusion Energy;"
"94" "The Subcommittee on Regulatory Issues in Accelerating Fusion Energy;"
"95" "The Subcommittee on the Environment and Accelerated Fusion Energy;"
"96" "The technology forecasting component  would  employ standard technology forecasting  mechanisms and  strategies  such as the Delphi method, extrapolation, forecast by analogy, and growth curves  to create scenarios  (Thomas Roper, Cunningham, Porter, Mason, Rossini, & Banks, 2011). To increase validity  for forecasting a disruptive technology (National  Research Council , 2010) , it would interact with  all  the other  subcommittee components, all  of which can affect technology  forecasting .  The resulting combined forecast   would, in effect, constitute an external independent review (EIR) of global progress on fusion and create a  global technology governance   regime by  building on the ITER countries’ existing academic-public-private sector synergies, combined with expanding the global fusion ecosystem through new partnerships with the Global South, through existing organizations like the G77 bloc’s Consortium on Science, Technology and Innovation for the South (COSTIS) and the Asian African Association for Plasma Training , while t he Global South’s SWFs  would meet the challenge of devising a new business model that could support the development and the adoption of technology within any highly innovative sector ( Philbin , 2013) .  While the Commission would be a one-off event, the global governance regime it creates would have a close relationship with the IAEA, potentially even institutional incorporation, rejuvenating the IAEA’s brief on fusion, administered through its Physics Section."
"97" "We suggest the  commission be  co-chaired by a Global  North  soft power  with an extensive fusion ecosystem ,  like the UK, and the Chair of the G77  Global South  bloc  (presently Guyana) , with the secretariat b eing provided by the US DoE,  the UK  AEA , and a Global South country with existing  SWF  investments in fusion, like Singapore ( see  Wade & Tyrone, 2019) .  The commission  would also rely on IAEA advice and  could serve as a governing entity formed as a product of the governance regime formed through the structural leadership of a G7 nation and a key individual entrepreneurial/intellectual leader acting on its behalf."
"98" "The Global South is home to most of the world’s socio-economically disadvantaged populations and fossil-fuel-producing states .   Yet  it also  home  to  Middle Eastern petrostates . It is as a bloc already engaged  in  environmentalism and  in seeking to address  the damage caused by  climate change  (Guruswamy, 2015; Kheng-Lian and Robinson, 2015). Particularly relevant to commercializing fusion is the Global South’s perspective on ‘energy justice’ :  that the Global North needs to find ways to transfer clean energy technology to attain United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 7 of affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern ‘energy for all’ (Guruswamy, 2015 ) ."
"99" "The Global South ’s  willingness to involve itself in a  global  forecasting exercise   for  commercializing  fusion could  occur  at different levels of managed co- opetiveness . It could be centrally coordinated under the IEA/IAEA commission approach via  multiple  policy Delphi rounds, leading to  funding rounds  involving  various forms of public private partnership  (PPP) ,  joint venture,  special purpose vehicle , or portfolio approaches (Ingersoll, 2018) . This could be   overseen by a G77 Fusion Energy Task Force comprising innovating regionally representative Global South countries like  Uruguay , South Africa, the UAE, Singapore, and Kazakhstan, all of which demonstrate high degrees of innovation according to the  World Economic Forum’s  Global Competitiveness Report  ( Schwab , 2018)."
"100" "G77 involvement in the commission and funding regime management structure  would create a sense of truly global ownership of the concept of  overcoming the ‘valley of death’ to accelerate  the  commercialization  of fusion energy to address  climate change  within this century . It  would also reinforce the centralized authoritative ‘managed co- opetiveness ’ route, both by adding an external oversight perspective (the G77 Global South UN voting bloc) and by creating a new cl earing house for information on  fusion, i.e.,  the EIR , that would then a feed into a   rejuvenated IAEA Physics Section fusion office,   which  would be of use in updating different sectors of the  Quintuple   H elix  technology innovation ecosystem, including by  sparking dialogue with civil society ,  the media , and the Global Green Lobby . For instance,  recipients of  Global South  funding  c ould be required to publicly publish technical reports , while  US  DoE  involvement in the secretariat would compartmentalise  core  US private sector  IP ."
"101" "In return  for the funding ,  the  Global South  fossil fuel states ’   SWFs   would  obtain shares  in the private companies , which could be obtained collectively on behalf of the G77, especially if it involved a fusion portfolio  (Ingersoll, 2018) . This could be achieved for less than 1% of the value of these  SWFs  (see Supplementary Material  Worksheet 1) .   The managed co- opetiveness  approach to  forecasting and  commercializing fusion would both  inform  the Global South  about  the technology and provide a source of future revenues th rough sales to the Global North.  Global South  countries, now owners of fusion IP, would be incentivized to  invest in  purchasing commercial fusion reactors, thereby rapidly creating a global mass market, facilitating mass production , ensuring a stable transition from fossil fuel economies, and growing the overall economy .  This would address the  ‘valley of death’ innovation problem   in commercializing fusion  and so help with global warming ."
"102" "Global South countries would also be incentivized to participate because t he approach   ‘insures ’ them against the socioeconomic effects of fusion  energy commercialization ,   which would be  a disruptive  innovation in  energy technology   (Adams, Bromley, and Moore, 2014).   It  is   disruptive  both  in the sense that it  would, over time, replace the fossil fuel energy market and   also in the sense that it would  meet baseload  requirements  without  significant  fuel  import  costs .  By involving the Global South,  together with global  civil society and the media, t he approach  would also increase   the overall  global  quality of democracy  as regards global innovation in fusion , at present dominated by the Global North, in the form of ITER, and, over time,  improve  the  equitability  of the global energy market  ( Carayannis , Draper, &  Iftimie , 2020) .  This would maximise  Quintuple H elix synergies  in the fusion ecosystem ."
"103" "Fusion energy  is now  approaching  a stage of maturation. To emphasize  the potential ,  theoretical   fusion energy breakeven has already been achieved in a tokamak, in the 1990’s, in both the Joint European Torus (JET) and the Japan Torus 60 (JT-60), as deuterium-tritium equivalent (see Kikuchi, 2018). There is no  formally  established fusion version of the Technology Readiness Level (TRL), but  fusion energy as a whole is around TRL 3 (scientific feasibility),  while  ITER will bring the  tokamak- based fusion approach  to  perhaps   TRL  6 ( engineering feasibility ) (Scott Hsu, personal communication, 24 June, 201 9 ).  M ultiple large FIA members (Commonwealth Fusion Systems,  CTFusion , General Fusion, TAE Technologies; Tokamak Energy; se e Table 1 )  all aspire to   net gain fusion  by around 2025 and a prototype commercial grid-connected reactor by around 2030 ,  al though  these claims are  extremely ambitious ,  and the  ‘valley of death’ presents a significant obstacle ."
"104" "A s  David  Kirtley ,  the CEO of Helion Energy ,  has made clear,  these  ambitious timelines assume full funding (Boyle, 2018).  P resent ly , no  Western  fusion companies are funded to  this  extent  (Scott Hsu, personal communication, 12 July, 201 9 ) .   A  private-sector prototype demonstration reactor  will cost  anywhere from $50 million to $500 million, depending on the technology (Rathi, 2018) , and a grid-connected power plant  will cost several times  more .   Nevertheless,  f ully funded  continuous   fusion  innovation  operations  recently   approached  reality   in China . In 2018-2019, the  Center  for Compact Fusion  at the  ENN Energy Research Institute, part of the Chinese gas company the ENN Group, constructed a new fusion innovation facility using continuous const ruction."
"105" "Moreover, it is funding the facility to the tune of $ 15 m  for 2018 to 2019, then   $45m for 2020 to 2028-2030, then 150m per year for the subsequent decade and a half,  with associated  aggressive construction   of medium-sized and large reactors  until it develops a commercial compact fusion reactor (Zhu, 2019). The purchasing power parity between China and the West for the fusion industry was estimated by the Chinese in 2006 to be 1:15 to 1:20 (People’s Daily Online, 2006), because of cheaper construction costs, labour costs, materials costs, and overheads , though the gap has since reduced ( see  OECD, 2019) .  ENN intends to employ 300 researchers during the $45m per year  phase .  ENN’s ambitions are backgrounded by substantial Chinese expansion of its plasma physics innovation ecosystem (Song, 2019)."
"106" "To indicate the ballpark  figures  that the global commi ssion will need to operate in are  realistic, w e  provide a preliminary   estimate   of  the cost of our approach,  beginning with the  cost  to reach a  commercialization  phase  for a compact reactor, one with  substantially  low er  costs and a faster innovation cycle than the tokamak. Our estimate is  based on  the  progress of the  world’s largest fusion innovation company,  TAE Technologies , although  this  in no way   implies endorsement .  Over  $ 8 00 million of the just over $2, 00 0  million raised by FIA members has been raised by TAE Technologies ( Rathi , 201 8 ; DOE, 2020 ) .  TAE Technologies  is at present  in  system testing. I n addition to the nearly $800m already raised, i t  would likely require  hundreds of millions of dollars  to build a  demonstration plant and then  hundreds of millions more  for a grid-connected  commercial prototype plant ,  as well as several hundred million USD to fund operating costs over a decade . This implies a total budget of  well  over $ 3 ,000  million.   However, this is only one project and to ensure success, as well as grow the global fusion ecosystem, w e   suggest globally co-ordinated forecasting and development for approximately six-to-ten projects, from the  mainstream , like spherical tokamaks and  stellarator s , to ‘wild cards’ like the TAE approach. This would require  additional global expenditure  of  $ 3 0 ,000  million  in new money, around five time more than is presently invested in the Green Climate Fund and just over  seven  times more than   has been invested to date in  the  Multilateral Fund for the Implementation of the Montreal Protocol  (United Nations Environment Programme, 2019) ."
"107" "Thus,  the   global fusion  technology forecasting,  development and diffusion  governance  regime  would kick-start full funding for multiple potentially viable candidate technologies in both the private and public sectors, globally, as this  would more likely result in a successful  commercial  prototype. Funding a mix of projects  via a portfolio approach , as  DEMO-phase  machines, while aiming to leapfrog the ITER timetable, as with the UK STEP, would maximise synergies in the  Quintuple Helix fusion ecosystem  by building on initiatives like the US INFUSE, GAMOW, and proposed cost-sharing programs.  A portfolio approach to PPPs is deemed most realistic as this approach has already been adopted by the FIA ,  in its May 1, 2020 submission to the  DoE in response to the DoE’s April 2020 RFI (FIA, 2020)."
"108" "The approach respects national sovereignty and IP. It  envisages  a clear  coordinating  role for the public sector , i.e., managed co- opetiveness .   In the case of the US, this would include   the  DoE , the D epartment  o f  S tate  (DoS) , and the D epartment  o f  Defense  ( DoD ) . The DoE  would  serve as co-secretariat for the commission and  provide technical information and  forecasting  input for IEA/IAEA-organized and sponsored  workshops, seminars, and conferences to update non-specialist audiences in verified fusion developments  via the commission approach , including by involving the increasing number of civil society organizations tackling  climate change .  The DoS would provide the necessary permissions for fusion technology to be exported, while  DoD  involvement would ensu re national security-related IP  was protected."
"109" "Conclusion"
"110" "This  perspective   article   has  addressed  the  ‘valley of death’  obstacle to  fusion  commercialization   within this century via  a  Quintuple Helix   technology  innovation  and management  ecosystem that  includes   an international fusion development and diffusion governance regime  capable of effecting social change in the global energy space with a view to contributing to management of global warming .  The  two milestones of the publication of the National Academies’ ‘burning plasma’ report ,   with its follow-up community planning process report and fusion and plasma draft long range planning DoE report, together with  the  formal emergence of a n  innovating private sector  employing advanced developments in their technology maturation pathways, marked by the launch of the  FIA ,  combined with national DEMO-phase planning by ITER consortium   members,  suggest s   a  fusion   energy  breakthrough  within   two  decade s .   However, without significant improvement, the core ITER technology is not viewed as lending itself to commercialization, and multiple alternative technology pathways exist. A global governance regime capable of forecasting  fusion technological  development,  providing  leadership, and  creating novel  f unding  solutions  are thus  the n the  main obstacle  to commercialization."
"111" "T he global ‘quality of democracy’  of the fusion innovation and management ecosystem , i.e., greater  global  participation  regarding fusion  technology forecasting and development  and the energy market more generally ,   would be enhanced through the Global South playing a greater role in  co- funding fusion energy technology ,  as  it  would reduce the  global  North-S outh divide, which is particularly evident in high-technology sectors .   The global regime   we recommend  would engage competitors, within both public and private fusion sectors and internationally, as stakeholders, together with academia, including national laboratories and entrepreneurial universities, as well as civil society and the media.  Consequently ,  fusion   energy technology  would not be supplied to the  Global  South as a form of aid ; instead,   core  fusion technology  w ould be co-owned  by  the  G7 ,  ITER  consortium countries ,   and  the Global South ."
"112" "The approach  would   accelerate   the international  progress  begun by  ITER,   and   it   would greatly  advance the frontiers of knowledge   in  plasma physics , which has  diverse applications in research, technology, and industry (e.g. Gurnett and Bhattacharjee, 2017) .  It  would  also  greatly empower the Global South  in terms of knowledge, education, and  energy sector IP .  In this way , humanity would have a  more accurate  understanding of its options  regarding   social change capable of  addressing  climate change   within this century ."
"113" "Funding"
"114" "This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors."
"115" "Reference s"
"116" "Adams, F.P., Bromley, B.P., & Moore, M. (2014). Assessment of disruptive innovation in emerging energy technologies. In  Proceedings — 2014 Electrical Power and Energy Conference, EPEC 201427 February 2014, Article number 7051685  (pp. 110-115). Piscataway, NJ: IEEE."
"117" "Altshuller , G.S., and Shapiro, R. B., О  Психологии   изобретательского   творчества  (On the psychology of inventive creation),  Вопросы   Психологии  (The Psychological Issues) (in Russian), 1956, 6, 37–39."
"118" "American Fusion Project,   A B old  G oal: Power America with  F usion  E nergy , 2018 (American Fusion Project)."
"119" "American Physical Society Division of Plasma Physics,  A Community Plan for Fusion Energy and Discovery Plasma Sciences , 2020 (Author)."
"120" "ARPA-E, GAMOW,   2020.  https://arpa-e.energy.gov/?q=arpa-e-programs/gamow."
"121" "Barth, T. D. ,  The idea of a green new deal in a Quintuple Helix Model of knowledge, know-how and innovation ,   International Journal of Social Ecology and Sustainable Development ,  2011,  2 (1), 1-14."
"122" "Becker, R.,  Can AI help crack the code of fusion power?  The Verge , 29 January, 2019,  https://www.theverge.com/2019/1/29/18201220/nuclear-fusion-energy-artificial-intelligence-machine-learning-tae-google ."
"123" "Boodoo , X., Flor ian  Mersmann , F., and Olsen, K. H., The Implications of how climate funds conceptualize transformational change in developing countries.  Climate and Development , 2018,   10 (8), 673-686."
"124" "Bowman, M.,  and  Minas, S., Resilience through interlinkage: The Green Climate Fund and climate finance governance,  Climate Policy , 2019,  19 (3), 342-353."
"125" "Boyle, A. ,  Canadian government invests $38M in General  Fusion to boost energy research,   GeekWire , 26 October, 2018,  https://www.geekwire.com/2018/canadian-government-invests-38m-general-fusion-boost-energy-research/ ."
"126" "Boyle, A. 2018, February 14. Commercial fusion ventures learn lessons about engineering and expectations.  GeekWire . Retrieved from https://www.geekwire.com/2018/commercial-fusion-ventures-learn-lessons-engineering-expectations/ ."
"127" "Brandenburger , A. M., and Nalebuff, B. J. Co-opetition, 1996 (Doubleday)."
"128" "Campbell, D.F.J., Carayannis, E. G.,  and Rehman, S. S.,  Quadruple Helix structures of quality of  democracy in innovation systems ,   Journal of the Knowledge Economy ,  2015,   6 (3), 467-493."
"129" "Carayannis, E.G., Barth, T. D.,  and  Campbell, D.F. J. ,  The Quintuple Helix innovation model: Global warming as a challenge and driver for innovation.  Journal of Innovation and Entrepreneurship ,  2012,  1 (2)."
"130" "Carayannis, E . G . ,  and  Campbell, D.F. J., Mode 3, i n  Knowledge  Creation, Diffusion, and Use in Innovation  Networks and Knowledge Clusters , (eds . )   E. G. Carayannis and D. F. J. Campbell, 2006   ( Praeger ) ."
"131" "Carayannis, E.G., and Campbell, D.F. J. “Mode 3” and “Quadruple Helix”: Toward a 21st century fractal innovation ecosystem,  International Journal of Technology Management , 2009,  46 (3/4), 201–234."
"132" "Carayannis, E. G.,  and  Campbell, D.F. J . Triple Helix, Quadruple Helix and Quintuple Helix and how do knowledge, innovation and the environment relate to each other ? ,   International Journal of Social Ecology and Sustainable Development ,  2010,  1 (1), 41–69."
"133" "Carayannis, E. G.,  and Campbell, D.F. J.,  Open innovation diplomacy and a 21st century fractal research, education and innovation  (FREIE) ecosystem ,   Journal of the Knowledge Economy ,  2011,   2 (3),  327–372."
"134" "Carayannis, E. G.,  and Campbell, D.F. J.,  Quadruple and qui ntuple helix innovation systems,   Innovations ,  2017,  54 (3), 173-195."
"135" "Carayannis , E.G., Draper, J., and  Iftimie , I.A. ,  Nuclear fusion diffusion challenges and o pportunities:  Theory, policy, practice and p olitics.  IEEE TEM ,  2020 ."
"136" "Claessens , M., ITER: The Giant Fusion Reactor: Bringing a Sun to Earth, 2020 (Springer)."
"137" "Clery , D.,  A  Piece of the Sun:  The  Quest for Fusion Energy , 2014   ( Overlook Duckworth ) ."
"138" "Costley, A. E . ,   On  the fusion triple product and fusion power gain of tokamak pilot plants and reactors.  Nuclear Fusion ,  2016,  56 (6), 066003."
"139" "Costley, A.E., Buxton, P.F . ,  &  Hugill , J. (2017). Reply to 'Comment \"on the fusion triple product and fusion power gain of tokamak pilot plants and reactors\"'.  Nuclear Fusion , 57(3), 038002."
"140" "Cui, L.,  and  Huang, Y., Exploring the schemes for Green Climate Fund financing: International lessons.  World Development , 2018,  101 , 173-187."
"141" "Department of Energy,   U.S. Participation in the ITER  P roject. Report to Congress , 2016 (Department of Energy) ."
"142" "Department of Energy, Annual Report on the State of D o E National Laboratories, 2017 (Department of Energy)."
"143" "Department of Energy,  Transformative  Enabling Capabilities for Efficient Advance toward Fusion Energy, 2018 ( Office of Science, Department of Energy ) ."
"144" "Department of Energy, Powering the Future: Fusion and Plasmas, 2020 ( Department of Energy Fusion Ene rgy Sciences Advisory Committee) ."
"145" "Dingwerth , K., and  Pattberg , P.,  Global governance as a perspective on world politics.  Global Governance ,  2006,  12 (2) ,  185–203."
"146" "EFDA, Fusion Electricity: A Roadmap to the Realisation of Fusion Energy, 2012 (EFDA)."
"147" "ENN Group,  Compact controlled fusion technology , 2018   (ENN Group) . http://www.ennresearch.com/uploads/pdf/Compact%20Controlled%20Fusion%20Technology.pdf ."
"148" "Entler , S.,  Engineering breakeven.  Journal of Fusion Energy ,  2015,   34 (3), 513-518."
"149" "Etzkowitz , H, and   Leydesdorff , L .,  The dynamics of innovation: From  n ational  s ystems and “Mode 2” to a  t riple  h elix of universit y-industry-government relations,   Research Policy ,  2000,  29 , 109–123."
"150" "Federal Register. Department of Energy:  Cost-sharing p artnerships with the  private sector in fusion e nergy.  Federal Register , 2020,  85 (76), 21842."
"151" "Fonta , W.M.,  Ayuk , E. T.,  and  van  Huysen , T. L., 2018. Africa and the Green Climate Fund: Current challenges and future opportunities.  Climate Policy , 2018,  18 (9), 1210-1225."
"152" "Freeman, C. ,  Schumpeter's business cycle s and techno-economic paradigms,   i n  Techno-E conomic  P aradigms , (eds.)  W. Drechsler, E. Reinert, and R.  Kattel , 2009 ( Anthem Press ) ."
"153" "Fusion Energy Base. 2020. Organizations: Funders. Retrieved from https://www.fusionenergybase.com/organizations/#funders ."
"154" "Fusion Industry Association,  Fusion Indust ry Association announces launch,   FIA , 9 November, 2018,  https://www.fusionindustryassociation.org/blog/fusion-industry-association-announces-launch ."
"155" "Fusion Industry Association,  Starlords  p odcast #1: Scott Hsu,  FIA , 23 February, 2019,  https://www.fusionindustryassociation.org/blog/starlords-podcast-1-scott-hsu ."
"156" "Fusion Industry Association, Fusion Industry Association Applauds Creation of the “Innovation Network for Fusion Energy” (INFUSE),  FIA , 5 June, 2019, https://www.fusionindustryassociation.org/blog/infuse-public-private-fusion-program."
"157" "Fusion Industry Association,   White House Budget Proposal for Fusion Disappoints,  FIA , 10 February, 2020, https://www.fusionindustryassociation.org/post/white-house-budget-proposal-for-fusion-disappoints ."
"158" "Fusion Industry Association, Public Submission by the Fusion Industry Association and its Members in response to Fusion Energy Sciences (FES) Program, Office of Science (SC), Department of Energy (DOE)  Request for Information on Cost-Sharing Partnerships With the Private Sector in Fusion Energy , 1 May, 2020, https://www.fusionindustryassociation.org/post/building-a-cost-share-program-for-fusion-power ."
"159" "Fusion Industry Association,   NRC Hosts Virtual Public Meeting on Developing Options for a Regulatory Framework for Fusion Energy ,  FIA , 28 January, 2021a,  https://www.fusionindustryassociation.org/post/nrc-hosts-virtual-public-meeting-on-developing-options-for-a-regulatory-framework-for-fusion-energy ."
"160" "Fusion Industry Association,   Fusion Legislation Signed into Law ,  FIA , 5 January, 2021b,  https://www.fusionindustryassociation.org/post/fusion-legislation-signed-into-law ."
"161" "Gibbons, M, Limoges, C,  Nowotny , H, Schwartzman, S, Scott, P, and   Tro w , M.,   The   New Production of Knowledge.  The  Dynamics of Science and Research in Contemporary Societies ,   1994 ( Sage ) ."
"162" "Gordon, B.J.,  Peckinpaugh , T.L.,  Stimers , R.P., O’Neill, M.L., and Berry, K.A. Capital and R&D support emerging for private energy fusion development, but questions remain a s  fusion sector evolves.  Pratt’s Energy Law Report , 2019,  19 (2), 37-46."
"163" "Grundig , F. & Ward, H.,   Structural group l eadership and  regime e ffectiveness.  Political Studies ,  2015,  63 (1) : 221–239 ."
"164" "Gurnett, D . A., and Bhattacharjee, A. (2017).  Introduction to plasma physics: With space, laboratory and astrophysical applications  (2 nd  ed.) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press."
"165" "Guruswamy, L. 2015, The contours of energy justice, in International Environmental Law and the Global South, (eds.), S.  Alam , S. Atapattu, C. G. Gonzalez, and J. Razzaque, 2015, (Cambridge University Press)."
"166" "Hasenclever, A., Mayer, P. and  Rittberger , V., Interests, power, knowledge: The study of international r egimes.  Mershon International Studies Review ,  1996,  40 (2): 177-228."
"167" "Holland, A.  Fusion Indust ry Association announces launch ,   American Security Project ,   9 November, 2018,  https://www.americansecurityproject.org/fusion-industry-association-announces-launch/ ."
"168" "Horn, R.E., and Weber, R. P., New Tools For Resolving Wicked Problems: Mess Mapping and Resolution Mapping Processes, 2007 (Strategy Kinetics L.L.C.)"
"169" "Ikenberry ,   G.J. ,   The  Quest for Global Governance .  Current History ,  2014,   113 (759): 16–18."
"170" "Ingersoll, E.,  A portfolio approach to funding and commercializati on, 2018. 1st IAEA Workshop on Fusion  Enterprises. https://nucleus.iaea.org/sites/fusionportal/Shared%20Documents/Enterprises/2018/Presentations/13.06/Ingersoll2.pdf"
"171" "International Energy Agency. 2019.  IEA unveils global high-level commission for urgent action on energy efficiency . Retrieved from https://www.iea.org/newsroom/news/2019/july/iea-unveils-global-high-level-commission-for-urgent-action-on-energy-efficiency.html ."
"172" "International Energy Agency. 2020.   Recommendations of the Global Commission for Urgent Action on Energy Efficiency . Retrieved from https://www.iea.org/reports/recommendations-of-the-global-commission-for-urgent-action-on-energy-efficiency ."
"173" "Internat ional Panel on Climate Change,   Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report , 2014 (IPCC) ."
"174" "Internation al Panel on Climate Change,   Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5 °C , 2018 (IPCC) ."
"175" "ITER.  n.d.  After ITER. https://www.iter.org/sci/iterandbeyond ."
"176" "ITER governing council pushes schedule back five years and trims budget. (2016).  Physics Today , http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/pt.5.029905 ."
"177" "Karlsson ,  C.,  Hjerpe,  M.,  Parker,  C., and   Linnér , B.,   The legitimacy of leadership in international c limate  change n egotiations , 2012,   Ambio ,  41 (S1) :46–55."
"178" "K heng-Lian, K., and Robinson, N. A.,  South–South  c ooperation: Foundations for  s ustainable  development, i n International Environmental Law and the Global South ,  (eds.) S.  Alam , S. Atapattu, C. G. Gonzalez, and J. Razzaque, 2015   ( Cambridge University Press ) ."
"179" "Kikuchi, Mitsuru,  The large tokamak JT-60:  A  history of the fight to achieve the Japanese fusion research mission.  The European Physical Journal  H ,  2018,   43 , 551-577."
"180" "Lazarus, R. J. ,   Super wicked problems and climate   change: Restraining the present to   liberate the future,  Cornell Law Review , 2009,  94 (5), 1153-1233."
"181" "Liu, X., et al.,  Mechanical performance evaluation of the CFETR cen tral solenoid model coil design,   Nuclear Fusion ,  2018,  58 (1), 016035 ."
"182" "Loebecke , C., Van  Fenema , P.C., and Powell, P., Co-opetition and knowledge transfer,  ACM SIGMIS Database , 1999,  30 (2), 14-25."
"183" "Lopes Cardozo, N.J., Economic aspects of the deployment of fusion energy: The valley of death and the innovation cycle. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, 2019, 377, 20170444."
"184" "McMahon, J. ,  Energy from fusion in 'A couple years,' CEO  says, commercialization in five,   Forbes , 24 January, 2019,  https://www.forbes.com/sites/jeffmcmahon/2019/01/14/private-firm-will-bring-fusion-reactor-to-market-within-five-years-ceo-says/#2da093741d4a ."
"185" "Michaels, D., Fusion  startups  step in to realize decades-old clean power dream,  The Wall Street Journal , 6 February, 2020, https://www.wsj.com/articles/fusion-startups-step-in-to-realize-decades-old-clean-power-dream-11581001383."
"186" "Miyamoto, K.,   Plasma  Physics and Controlled Nuclear Fusion , 2005   ( Springer ) ."
"187" "Morton, K., Political leadership and global governance: Structural power versus custodial l eadership.  Chinese Political Science Review ,  2017,   2 (4) : 477–493."
"188" "National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine,  Final Report of the Committee on a Strategic Plan for U.S. Burning Plasma Research , 2019  (The National Academies Press)."
"189" "National Research Council,   Burning  Plasma:  Bringing  a Star To Earth , 2004   ( The National Academies Press ) ."
"190" "National  Research Council ,  Persistent Forecasting of Disruptive Technologies , 2010  (The National Academies Press)."
"191" "Nehl , C. L.,  Umstattd , R. J., Regan, W. R., Hsu, S. C., and McGrath, P. B. Retrospective of the ARPA-E ALPHA Fusion Program.  Journal of Fusion Energy , 2019,   38 (5-6) ,  506-521."
"192" "OECD .  (2019),  Purchasing power parities (PPP) (indicator) . Retrieved from   https://data.oecd.org/conversion/purchasing-power-parities-ppp.htm. doi:10.1787/1290ee5a-en (Accessed on 15 July 2019)"
"193" "People’s Daily Online,  2006,  China to build world's first \"artificial sun\" experimental device , 21 January, 2006,  http://en.people.cn/200601/21/eng20060121_237208.html ."
"194" "Philbin , S.P.,  Emerging requirements for technology management: A sector-based scenario planning approach .  Journal of Technology Management and Innovation ,  2013,  8 ( 3 ) , 34-44 ."
"195" "Phillips, F., &  Linstone , H.,  Key ideas f rom a 25-year collaboration at Technological Forecasting & Social C hange .  Technological Forecasting and Social Change , 2016,  105 ,  158-166 ."
"196" "Priestley, J. L., Knowledge transfer within interorganizational networks, in  Knowledge Management: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications ,  (ed .),  M.E .  Jennex ,  2008  ( Information Science  Reference)."
"197" "Rathi, A.,  In search of clean energy, investments in nuclear-fusio n  startups  are heating up,   Quartz , 26 September, 2018,  https://qz.com/1402282/in-search-of-clean-energy-investments-in-nuclear-fusion-startups-are-heating-up/ ."
"198" "Rietig , K., and Laing, T., Policy stability in climate governance: The case of the United Kingdom,  Environmental Policy and Governance , 2017,  27 (6), 575-587."
"199" "Roberts, N. C., Wicked problems and network approaches to resolution,  International Public Management Review , 2000,  1 (1)."
"200" "Roelfsema , M., van  Soest , H.L.,  and  Harmsen , M. et al. Taking stock of national climate policies to evaluate implementation of the Paris Agreement. Nat ure  Commun ications, 2020,  11 , 2096 ."
"201" "Sac hs, S.  Rühli , E. , and  Meier,   C.,  Stakeholder governance as a response to wicked i ssues .  Journal of Business Ethics ,  2010,   96 ( S1 ) : 57-64 ."
"202" "Schwab, K. 2018.  The Global Competitiveness Report 2018 , 2018   ( World Economic Forum ) ."
"203" "Skodvin, T. and Andresen, S., Leadership r evisited.  Global Environmental Politics ,  2006,  6 (3): 13-27."
"204" "Song, Y., China’s fusion roadmap, 3 October, 2019, Nuclear Engineering International. https://www.neimagazine.com/features/featurechina-fusion-roadmap-7436879/"
"205" "Sovacool , B. K.,  and  Van de Graaf, T., Building or stumbling blocks? Assessing the performance of polycentric energy and climate governance networks,  Energy Policy , 2018,  118 , 317-324."
"206" "Spangher ,  L. , Vitter , J.S., and  Umstattd , R. Characterizing fusion market entry via an agent-based power plant fleet model .  Energy Strategy Reviews , 2019,  26 ,  100404."
"207" "Stanway, D., China targets nuclear fusion power generation by 2040,  12 April, 2019, Reuters. https://uk.reuters.com/article/us-china-nuclearpower-fusion/china-targets-nuclear-fusion-power-generation-by-2040-idUKKCN1RO0NB."
"208" "Strange, S., The persistent myth of lost h egemony.  International Organization ,  1987,   41 (4):551–574."
"209" "Sto kke , O.S.,  Disaggregating  International Regimes: A New Approach to Evaluation and Comparison , 2012 ( The MIT Press ) ."
"210" "Sundaram, J. K.,  Carpe diem: Bandung, historical inequalities and development goals ,   Inter-Asia Cultural Studies ,  2016,   17 (1), 27-32."
"211" "Tallberg , J., The power of the chair: Formal l eadership  in international c ooperation.  International Studies Quarterly ,  2010,  54 (1) : 241–265 ."
"212" "Thomas Roper, A.T., Cunningham, S.W., Banks, J., Rossini, F.A., & Porter, A.L., Forecasting and Management of Technology, 2013 (Wiley)."
"213" "Toye , J . , Assessing the G77,   Third World Quarterly ,  2014,  35 (10), 1759-1774."
"214" "Tvinnereim, E., and  Mehling , M., Carbon pricing and deep  decarbonisation ,  Energy Policy , 2018,  121 , 185-189."
"215" "United Nations Environment Programme, The Emissions Gap Report 2016, 2016 (UNEP), https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/10016/emission_gap_report_2016.pdf."
"216" "United Nations Environment  Programme ,  Report o f the  Eighty-Fourth Meeting o f the Executive  C ommittee  of the Multilateral Fund for the Implementation of the Montreal Protocol,  2019  (UNEP),  http://www.multilateralfund.org/84/English/1/8475ri.pdf ."
"217" "U.K. Atom ic Energy Authority,  U.K. to take a big ‘STEP’ to f usion  e lectricity, 2019,  U.K. Ato mic Energy Authority. https://ccfe.ukaea.uk/uk-to-take-a-big-step-to-fusion-electricity/ ."
"218" "U.S. Congress   Joint  explanatory  statement for H.R. 1865 , 2019   https://docs.house.gov/billsthisweek/20191216/BILLS-116HR1865SA-JES-DIVISION-C.pdf."
"219" "Victor, D. G., Akimoto, K., Kaya, Y., Yamaguchi, M.,  Cullenward , D., and Hepburn,  C..  Prove Paris was more than paper promises.  Nature , 2017, 548, 25–27."
"220" "Wade, W., & Tyrone, J. Bezos-backed fusion  startup  raises $100 million for demo system. Bloomberg, 16 December 2019, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-12-16/bezos-backed-fusion-start-up-raises-100-million-for-demo-system ."
"221" "Wan, Y., et al.,  Overview of the present progr ess and activities on the CFETR,   Nuclear Fusion ,  2017,  57 (10), 102009."
"222" "Wang, B. CEO of TAE Technologies says they will begin commercialization of fusion by 2023,  Next Big Future , 16 January 2019, https://www.nextbigfuture.com/2019/01/ceo-of-tae-technologies-says-they-will-reach-commercial-fusion-by-2024.html ."
"223" "Windsor, C . Can the development of fusion energy be accelerated? P hilosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences ,  2019,  377 (2141), Article number Y."
"224" "Wurzel, S., Measuring progress in fusion energy: The triple product,  Fusion Energy Base , 19 December, 2019, https://www.fusionenergybase.com/article/measuring-progress-in-fusion-energy-the-triple-product/."
"225" "Wurzel, S., The number of fusion energy  startups  is growing fa st ⁠— Here's  why,  Fusion Energy Base , 7 February, 2020,  https://www.fusionenergybase.com/article/the-number-of-fusion-energy-startups-is-growing-fast-heres-why/ ."
"226" "Young, O.R.,   International regimes: Problems of c once pt f ormation.  World Politics ,  1980,   32 (3): 331-356."
"227" "Young, O . R. ,  1991. Political Leadership and Regime Formation: on the Development of Institutions in International Society.  International Organization ,   1991,  45 (3): 281–308."
"228" "Young, O.R.,  Effectiveness of international environmental regimes: Existing knowledge, cutting-edge themes, and research strategies .  PNAS ,  2011,   108 (50): 19853–19860."
"229" "Zhaoyi , P.,  China's 'artificial sun' operates at temperatures  of 100 million degrees Celsius,   CGTN , 15 November, 2018,  https://news.cgtn.com/news/3d3d414f3455544e30457a6333566d54/share_p.html ."
"230" "Zhu,  Yubao . 2019.  Perspectives and plans for fusion energy development at ENN . Paper presented at the First International Conference on Innovative Fusion Approaches, 26-28 May, Xi'an  JiaoTong  University, Xi’an,  China ."
"231" "Zweck , A.  Towards an integrated technology and innovation management .  International Journal of Innovation and Technology Management , 2013, 10( 2 ) , 1340002 ."
"232" "Author endnotes"
"233" "Elias G. Carayannis  is  Full Professor of Scien ce, Technology, Innovation and E ntrepreneurship with the George Washington University  (GWU)  School  of Business, in Washington, DC . He is a Co-Founder and Co-Director of the Global and Entrepreneurial Finance Research Institute and the Director of the Research on Science, Technology, Innovation and Entrepreneurship, European Union Research Center, School of Business,  GWU. He holds an  M.Sc.  in Electrical E ngineering from the National  Technical University of Athens ,  an  MBA  in Finance and Risk M anagement ,  and  a  Ph.D.  in Technology and Innovation M anagement from Rensselaer Polyt echnic Institute, in New York."
"234" "John Draper  is  a Visiting Professor in Public Administration with the University of Nottingham Asia Research Institute, a Research Affiliate on the Nonkilling Economics and Business Research Committee of the Center for Global Nonkilling in Honolulu, H awai’i , and Director of the Social Survey Center,  at  Khon Kaen University in Northeast Thailand . He holds   a BA in Modern H istory from the Un iversity of Oxford, Oxford ,  an MA in Applied L inguistics from the Uni versity of Southern Queensland, and the Doctorate degree in Public A dministration from Khon Kaen University. He  specializes  in inclusion   studies   and   global   public   administration   (nuclear   fusion  and peacebuilding) ."
"235" "Ion A.  Iftimie   is  an  Eisenhower Ph.D. Fellow with th e NATO Defense College in Rome  and a Doctoral Candidate (ABD) with the Central European University in Vienna, Austria . He   holds a   BBA   in International B usiness from George Washington University, W ashington, DC, an MA in Strategic S ecurity from the National  Defense University, Washington , and  an MA   in International S ecurity from  Bundeswehr University, in Munich . He is a recent graduate of the Harvard Kennedy School   Executive   Program   in   Cybersecurity   Policies   and   of   the   Swedish   Defense University,  in Stockholm .  R ecently, he served as  a  Visiting Research Fellow with the NATO Energ y Security Center of Excellence."
"236" "Charles David Crumpton  is a Senior Research Associate with the  Institute for Gov ernmental Service and Research, at the  University of Maryland , College Park. He holds a Bachelor of Arts in Sociology from Clemson University, a Master of  Public Administration  from the  University of Georgia,  and a  PhD in Pu blic Administration and Policy from Portland State University.   He holds a variety of  teaching and research positions in the United States, Brazil, and  Southeast Asia .  David researches complex problems in governance together with responsiveness, accountability, and transparency, and organizational theory and  practise , in governments in Global South countries. He is a recipient of multiple Fulbright scholarships."
