Volume 1 (2019)
ISSN 2612-6966

OJH
Open Journal of Humanities

Open Journal of Humanities
ISSN 2612-6966
Publisher
Universitas Studiorum S.r.l. - Casa Editrice Scientifica
via Sottoriva, 9 - 46100 Mantova (MN), Italy
P. IVA IT02346110204
tel. (+39) 0376 1810639
www.universitas-studiorum.it
International Scientific Committee
Carla Carotenuto, Università degli Studi di Macerata (Director)
Gabriella Cambosu, Università degli Studi di Cagliari
Clementica Casula, Università degli Studi di Cagliari
Matteo De Beni, Università degli Studi di Verona
Federica De Iuliis, Università degli Studi di Parma
Francesca Dell'Oro, Université de Lausanne (Switzerland)
Sonia Gambino, Università degli Studi di Messina
Carmela Giordano, Università degli Studi di Napoli "L'Orientale"
Alberto Jori, Università degli Studi di Ferrara
Valetina Laviola, Università degli Studi di Napoli "L'Orientale"
Giovanni Lupinu, Università degli Studi di Sassari
Chiara Melloni, Università degli Studi di Verona
Michela Meschini, Università degli Studi di Macerata
Mario Negri, Università IULM
Erika Notti, Università IULM
Isotta Piazza, Università degli Studi di Parma
Paola Pontani, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore
Daniela Privitera, Middlebury College at Mills, San Francisco (USA)
Riccardo Roni, Università degli Studi di Urbino "Carlo Bo"
Marco Sabbatini, Università degli Studi di Pisa
Sonia Saporiti, Università degli Studi del Molise
Domenico Scalzo, Università degli Studi di Urbino "Carlo Bo"
Edoardo Scarpanti, Accademia Nazionale Virgiliana
Marco Stoffella, Università degli Studi di Verona
Editorial and Publishing Committee
Ilari Anderlini
Giannella Biddau
Luigi Diego Di Donna
Edoardo Scarpanti
Open Journal of Humanities (OJH) is a peer-reviewed electronic Scientific Journal, which is
devoted to the field of Humanities. OJH will be published three times a year, and will be
distributed online with a full Gold Open Access policy, without any embargo period, through
a Creative Commons License (CC-by 4.0), according to scientific best practices.
Peer-reviewing process for OJH is normally operated on a "double blind" basis, for each
proposed article, and is conducted by external referees and by members of OJH's Scientific
Committee. Both the reviewer and author identities are concealed from the reviewers, and
vice versa, throughout the review process. Received articles will be made anonymous by our
Editors, before Peer-reviewing process.
Accepted topics of OJH include the whole field of Humanities, and namely: Anthropology,
Archaeology, Arts (Visual Arts, Architecture), Classics, Philology, Philosophy, Law and Politics, Linguistics, Literature, Sociology, Economics. Corrispondent scientific classification in
Italy covers the following fields (cf. D.M. 855/2015): Area 10 "Scienze dell'antichità, filologico-letterarie e storico-artistiche"; Area 11 "Scienze storiche, filosofiche, pedagogiche, psicologiche"; Area 12 "Scienze giuridiche"; Area 13 "Scienze economiche e statistiche"; Area 14
"Scienze politiche e sociali".

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

The moral philosophy of nature:
Spiritual Amazonian conceptualizations
of the environment
Luis Gregorio Abad Espinoza
Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca
Abstract
It is well known the harmful effects that savage capitalism has been causing
to the environment since its introduction in a sphere in which a different logic and approach to nature are the essential conditions for the maintenance of the ecosystem and its complex relations between humans and
non-human organisms. The amazon rainforest is a portion of the planet
in which for thousands of years its human dwellers have been interacting
with nature that it is understood beyond its physical condition. Thus, to
what extent Amazonian’s approaches to nature could be considered as a
moral philosophy through which the way of conceptualizing nature and its
non-human denizens enhances the continuity of life and the intimate relations between entities? To answer this question, I will explore the cosmological system of the Shuar of the Ecuadorian Amazon with whom I lived for 5
months between July and November 2018, and thereby elucidate the spiritual relations that this society has with the metaphysical domain of nature.
Keywords: Shuar, Ecuador, Amazonia, human-non-human relations,
nature-culture dichotomy, cosmology, waterfalls.

Emphasizing nature’s agency and its relations with humans
among the Shuar
The Shuar are an Amazonian society who are part of the
Jivaro ethnic group that number roughly 85.000 persons
149

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

and are spread between Ecuador and Peru. This group can
be divided in two main branches: the Candoa sub-family,
including the Shapra and Candoshi, and the Jivaro proper, including the Shuar, Achuar, Aguaruna, Huambisa,
and Shiwiar (Taylor 2001). The present article is mainly
concerned with a research which I carried out among the
Shuar who live in the communities of Tawasap, Yawintz
and Wawaim which are located in Morana Santiago province of the Ecuadorian amazon.
The natural environment of the Amazon is a place where
relations between entities go far beyond the mere physical realties in which they are immersed. “All things hang
together” (Næss 1989: 36), thereby whichever activity undertaken by humans whether harmless as human-non-human relations among the Shuar or harmful as the capitalist
market will always confront to a nature with its own intentionality and not an inert object. Indeed, the Shuar could
teach us that dwelling in nature is not only an utilitaristic
pursuing to attain the necessary conditions for their subsistence, but to dwell within it is to deeply immerse themselves in a sphere where all beings can be connected by the
essential elements of this anthropomorphic nature. In this
sense, we must emphasize the intentionality of nature`s
beings who are dwelling and interacting in a natural environment by which since mythical times provide the raison
d’être of humans who are physically related to them in the
biosphere and metaphysically related in the process of reciprocal sharing of spiritual energy.1
1. These relations that I call “reciprocal”, contrast with the classic predatory mode of relation that Descola (1992, 1996) attributed to the Jivaroan societies. In his analysis, he argued that unlike the Tukanoan so150

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

Furthermore, the agency of nature ought to not be reduced
as a mere cultural construct in which the rational domain of
humans imposed its own abstract categories into the irreducible but misconceived natural environment which remains
hidden from the shallow conceptualization of it. It is worth
noticing that inasmuch this anthropocentric model to approach to the world continues to permeate our way of thought, will be very hard to plunge into other realities or conceptualizations of a more complex world that not only gives
room to the human domain and its cultural traits, but also
different intentionalities of the non-human domain of nature or supernature will take part in the reciprocal concatenations that exist in the different worlds of the others. Hence,
it could be said that for the Shuar there is no natural domain
that exists apart from humans, so, nature is not out there as a
passive independent matter with no intrinsic value that only
serves as a supplier of the resources for their survival. One
day when I was walking in the forest with some children
who decided to accompany me from Mura2 to the village,
we passed across some ants which they quickly recognized as
edible, in fact, they started to eat some of them like the chilcieties of eastern Colombia (see, Århem 1990, 1996; Reichel-Dolmatoff
1971, 1976) to whom a reciprocal mode of relation is manifested by a
cosmological system in which there is reciprocal chain of interactions
between humans and non-humans, namely, a constant exchange and
compensation of finite energetic resources is at stake in this cosmology;
for the Jivaro, predation is characterized by the total negation of reciprocal feedbacks between humans and non-humans, i.e., when the former
consumes the energetic resources of the latter, there is no need of a compensation for this loss of energy.
2. In Shuar “mura” means mountain, and it is a sacred place located in
the Twasap community where most of my research took place.
151

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

dren of our cities who eat the candies found in some part of
the house. In the same way they recognized the edible leaves
of certain plants, the sound of the animals and insects and
even described the spirits who still roam in Mura, that is, the
ancestors who have transformed in butterflies.3 One might
say that this approach to nature even for the children is not
a trivial one, indeed, in this case the phisicalities of the natural world ought not to be considered as separated from the
domain of humans, thereby there are profound interactions
between the environment and its non-human dwellers that
these are not only known, but perceived and connected with
the energy that sustain the life of the universe. Hence, this
way of interactions with nature that do not deny the agencies
that populate it, are in stark contrast with our conceptions
of a somewhat timid different nature. The ontological distinction that exists between our human culture or rational
thought and the somewhat mechanical and brute non-human domain of nature, might be considered as an illusory
condition of superiority and a some kind of straitjacket in
which the radical abstractions of nature and all its denizens
warrant the arbitrary, unethical and predatory approach to
the matter that must be tame and take advantage of it for the
final conquest and victory of the civilization and progress.
Some of the features of this abstract conceptualization of the
world are well described by Descola who argues that:
3. For the Shuar most of the living and non-living beings are considered persons (aents) and possess a soul (wakan). According to some informants when a human die, his/her soul leaves the body to temporary
dwell in different non-human entities like butterflies, animals and trees. I
think that this is the reciprocal sharing of energy by the organisms in the
ecosystem that I discussed above.
152

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

Typical of western cosmologies since Plato and Aristotle, naturalism
creates a specific ontological domain, a place of order and necessity
where nothing happens without a reason or a cause, whether originating in God (such as Spinoza’s famous ‘Deus sive Natura’ ) or immanent to the fabric of the world (‘the laws of nature’) (1996: 88).

This specific domain which is situated essentially apart from
us, and therefore the phenomena that occur or the things
which are part of this kingdom, owe their existence and development to a principle extraneous both to chance and to
the effects of human will (Rosset 1973). It could be argued
that the history of our Western philosophy, in particular
since the Ionian natural philosophy, the domain of nature
shifted from being the sensible physical nature with all its
attributes, diversity and richness that the classic mythical
thought conceived as a profound and meaningful anthropomorphic order; to the somewhat universal abstract principle
or the basic stuff of all things that the philosophical logos as
a new hegemonic way of understanding the world permeated our conceptualizations of it and therefore supplanted the
mythical thought and its complexity (Arntzen 1999, 2003).
Furthermore, it is worth emphasising the sad truth of the
development of naturalism in our civil society, thus, nowadays naturalism, far from being represented by the classic
Spinoza’s natura naturans and natura naturata, i.e., the former (nature naturing) which is to be understood as the will
and power of God to whom all things whether living or not
are caused by him; moreover the latter (nature natured) represents all the processes, chains and connections between the
objects and the means of comprehending them which are
guided by God (1910: 24). It seems that God as an almighty
ruler of the world has been dismissed by a more personal and
153

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

irresponsible power that is located no more in a metaphysical
omnipresent force, but in a concrete and physical organ that
we call brain and whence comes the superior thought that
separates us from other entities like animals. In addition, our
alleged superiority that places us on the tip of the rational
iceberg, segregates the other entities of the natural environment in the cumbersome brute chamber that remains congealed by our scientific knowledge which treats this passive
realm as a laboratory to undertake the modern experiments
acting like a theistic predatory force. In this respect, following the words of Ingold referring to the so-called rationalistic
treatment of nature:
Enlightenment thought has proclaimed the triumph of human reason over a recalcitrant nature. As a child of the Enlightenment, neoclassical economics developed as a science of human decision-making and its aggregate consequences, based on the premise that every
individual act in the pursuit of rational self-interest (1996: 25).

Needless to say, according to our western mode of thought,
i.e., the radical individualism which more or less permeates
the way in which we conceive the “good”, or the wellbeing
that must be attained at the expense of the others and their
environment, is the core of our existence in the world, that
is to say, technological evolution has provided us the hedonistic satisfaction to supposedly be the sole masters of the world, or to put it otherwise, the Midasian transformation of the
green forests in a river of black noxious oil which is pumped
by giant tubes, hence, the green cake becomes a dead polluted desert and the pockets of the few become the tentacles
of the octopus that suffocate the world with its black ink of
contamination. Moroever, like other territories in the world,
154

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

the Amazonian landscape is increasingly threatened by this
unsustainable logic of the market that continues to perpetuate the whims of the mechanical Cartesian dualism. Thus, as
Christopher Tilley baldly argues:
The neoliberal-capitalistic Western conception of landscape is that
of a surface or volume like any other, open for exploitation and
everywhere homogeneous in its potential exchange value for any
particular project (1994: 21).

It seems that the selfish economic rationality that pervades
in our mechanical naturalist cosmology, strengthens the dualistic conception of our way of being in the universe, that
is to say, unlike most of the tribal societies in the world
who approach to nature like a home that needs to be in intimate relation with them to provide the necessary conditions for a cyclical process of dwelling in which humans as
well as non-humans are part of the entire ecosystem which
is enhanced and therefore maintains its equilibrium by these
complex relations of entities (see, Rappaport 1979, 2000);
Western approaches to nature remain encapsulated in the
exclusive bunkers of science and technology that dictate the
rules to penetrate the obscure and timid domain of nature,
thus, this kind of depredation ought to be understood as an
aggressive harassment that remains unpunished for the alleged silent of the timid victim. This supposed silence of nature is well described by Christopher Manes who argues that:
Nature is silent in our culture (and in literate societies generally)
in the sense that the status of being a speaking subject is jealously
guarded as an exclusively human prerogative (1995: 43).

Moreover, putting a thorny fence to separate the cultural domain and the natural one is a dangerous business that not
155

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

only prevents us to look broader and deeper to different ways
to approach to nature, but this radical dualism thoroughly obscures the two-sided interrelationships which exist between people to whom the environment it is to be lived, perceived and above all provides the affordances (Gibson 1979),
that influence and shape the way in which these societies
adjusts and interacts with their environment.
The importance of the moral values that most of the tribal
societies like the Shuar attribute to the whole nature which
they conceptualize beyond our rigid categories; must be “taken seriously”, as Viveiros de Castro (2011) argues to conceive animism as an ontology whose complexity and seriousness
is a matter of extrasensory interactions, indeed, he convincingly puts it:
The anthropologist’s idea of seriousness must not be tied to the hermeneutics of allegorical meanings or to the immediative illusion of
discursive echolalia. Anthropologists must allow that “visions” are
not beliefs, not consensual views, but rather worlds seen objectively:
not worldviews, but worlds of vision (and not vision only—these
are worlds perceivable by senses other than vision and are objects of
extrasensory conception as well) (Ibid.: 133).

As a result, I may argue that the relations that the Shuar have
with their natural environment are far from being only visual
perceptions of their world, instead their deep immersion in
nature is attained by all their senses which are interrelated
with the entities of the environment and their senses as well.
Furthermore, an ecological anthropology must not neglect
the non-passive role that nature plays in shaping the perceptions of the entities who are encompassed by it, in addition,
dwelling in the rainforest means to be absorbed in a world
where humans and non-humans walk, jump, fly and crawl
156

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

down the storms, the sunlight and the dark of the night which provide the conditions for life in a jungle where to live
means interaction and socialization between the human and
non-human spheres. Namely, both spheres are not radically
separated by the cultural or natural illusory fences as Val Plumwood has argued regarding our Western dualism:
Nature/culture dualism distorts the way we can represent agency in
the land, obliging us to view it as either pure nature or as a cultural
product, not nature at all, thus hyperseparating nature and culture
and representing nature as an absence of the human. Hyperseparation and homogenization lead us to classify the land as pure nature
or ‘wilderness,’ in ways that obscure its continuity with and dependency on culture, and erase the human stories interwoven with it,
specially those of its indigenous people. On the other side, conceiving a place according to the opposite homogenized pole of culture has the same distorting result because nonhuman influences and
creativities must be erased or reduced (2006: 141).

Conversely, Shuar’s conceptualizations of nature place the
human domain in an ontological sphere which is not exclusive only to humans, indeed, non-humans are part in a reciprocal metaphysical intercommunication where humanity
represents an elementary category through which all entities
regardless their external and internal differences are intimately related by a primordial past. Hence, unlike a radical naturalism which puts a fence to hyper separate the cultural
and natural domain and thereby it polarizes both spheres as
though they were ontologically different; Shuar’s metaphysics neither discriminate nor put a boundary among entities
who are part of a natural environment whose spiritual energy
is shared by them. The moral philosophical conceptions of
nature of this cosmology have deep ecological implications
157

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

in challenging Western contemporary ecology which obscures most of the native’s conceptualizations of nature giving
room only to the rigid categories of science. For instance,
about this issue the philosopher Arne Næss clearly writes:
Many of those who emphasize the tremendous breadth of ecology
tend, simultaneously, to limit it somewhat. They conceive of it as a
natural science or use primarily examples characteristics of natural
science. As long as one retains current concepts of nature instead
of Spinoza’s Natura or other broad, profound concepts of nature,
the placement of ecology within the framework of natural sciences
favors the shallow ecological movement (1989: 39).

The shallowness of certain ecological movements stem from
their own philosophical Western conceptions of nature which
scientifically try to seize the natural environment as though
it were a mass physically composed by molecules, nutrients
and nature’s beings whose conservation must be understood
as a naturalization of an environment in which the relations
with its human denizens are denied. Indeed, native’s profound
interactions with their environment are thoroughly obscured
by the scientific precepts of ecology which give no room to the
complex cosmological system of the natives which according
to the words of Tzama: “It goes beyond science”.4 Whereas a
debate between two logics of nature is at stake here, I think
that it is important to give room to Shuar’s moral philosophical approaches to nature which during my fieldwork surprised
me the most. Moreover, I will try to describe and analyze some
rituals, myths and stories which in my opinion enclose a very
profound moral message that teaches us how this society not
only interact with nature but mostly respect it.
4. Conversation with Tzama, Mura, Tawasap community, Morona Santiago, Ecuador, 25 August 2018.
158

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

Natemamu and kata the stone of fertilization
One of the most important rituals undertaken by the Shuar
is natemamu, namely, the consumption of natem5 by the
communities held once a year. It is important to note that
only the communities of Tawasap and Wawaim celebrate this
ritual on January 5th and 6th the former and in the end of
November the latter. It could be possible that the community of Yawintz does not celebrate this because of the nearby location to Tawasap and Mura which is the sacred place
where this ritual is held each year, in fact, as Nawech has
argued: “I think that the reason why here in Yawintz we do
not celebrate the ritual is for the far away distance of the
waterfalls”.6 In this respect, unlike Tawasap which has a sacred place like Mura and Wawaim which has a hill where
Nawech’s father Sharimiat prepare the ritual and moreover
the waterfalls are in the nearby; the nearest “twin” waterfalls
are located almost 10 km away from Yawintz and therefore it
is difficult to get there by foot. Unfortunately, I had not the
opportunity to participate in the rituals owing to my departure from the field to Italy in the second week of November,
however, the procedures of natemamu were described to me
in Mura where a sacred circle in whose underground have
been buried the ancestors of these people is the place where
the ritual is held and in which men and women take part to
be baptized by the power of kata7 or stone of fertilization.
5. A sacred plant also called ayahuasca (Banisteriopsis caapi), through
which a decoction is prepared to attain the supernatural realm.
6. Conversation with Nawech, Yawintz community, Morona Santiago,
Ecuador, 7 July 2018.
7. The word kata in shuar means penis, moreover, it is interesting to note
that according to Tzama this stone has been handed down from genera159

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

This peculiar stone which has a form of a big penis is situated
in the middle of the circle where is leaned on a piece of trunk
near a mortar and pestle to grind tobacco and a pilche or
tsapa.8 Furthermore, it seems that natemamu in Mura differs
to other celebration of this ritual in the different communities, that is to say, because of the presence of kata this ritual
acquires an interesting connotation which emphasizes the
role of fertility, gender interrelations and the process of life
which is sustained by the incorporation of natural elements
that afford the interconnection between realms which foster
a good biological and spiritual growth and reproduction of
the entities involved. The words of Tzama are important to
describe the interesting procedures of the ritual:
Here in the circle men and women must sit down on kata to be baptized, then we give men tobacco that they must snuff and we shower
the women with ground manioc. Thus, in this way men always will
be men and women always will be women.9

It is worth noticing that in this ritual a special role is attributed to certain elements of nature such as the plants of tobacco and manioc and kata which according to the informants
this stone encloses too much power. “That stone is extremely
powerful”10 one day Sharian told me when he was visiting
Mura to talk with his nephew Tzama. Moreover, tobacco is
tion to generation and thereby he did not know exactly how much time
it has been there.
8. Traditional receptacle made of the gourd of the mate tree (Crescentia
cujete).
9. Conversation with Tzama, Mura, Tawasap community, Morona Santiago, Ecuador, 30 August 2018.
10. Conversation with Sharian, Mura, Tawasap community, Morona
Santiago, Ecuador, 13 October 2018.
160

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

conceived as a plant of male’s virility and manioc as a plant
of female’s fertility whose power must be assimilated by men
and women not only for their biological reproduction, but
also for the emphasizing of their gender roles that foster the
sociocultural continuity and division of labour of this society.

Fig. 1. The ritual circle and “kata” the stone of fertilization.

It might be said that there could be a connection between the
reproduction of manioc by the intervention of women who
beg Nunkui11 for her help in a kind of cooperation between
the terrestrial realm and the chthonian realm that provide
11. Nunkui is a mythical being who provides to this society the growth and
abundance of the staple crops. Nevertheless, women must respect certain
ritual conditions like the chanting of anent or sacred chants in their gardens to beg to this supernatural being for the fertility of the soil and good
growth of the tubers. For different accounts of the Jivaroan societies about
Nunkui, see, Karsten (2000 [1935]: 112-119); Harner (1972: 70-76);
Pelizzaro (1978); Brown (1986: 105-132) and Descola (1994: 192-220).
161

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

the conditions for a fertile soil and a good reproduction and
growth of the tubers; and the fertility of women which depends on the assimilation of the fertilizing properties of manioc that has been obtained by women ritual contributions
and reciprocal collaborations with Nunkui. Namely there
is a cyclical process of reciprocal physical and metaphysical
collaborative interactions which in the first case goes from a
terrestrial human intervention to a chthonian non-human
one, and in the second case from a chthonian non-human
intervention to the human terrestrial one.
What about the spiritual power of the big and heavy stone
kata? This stone of fertilization ought to be understood as a
mere physic inanimate object according to the abstract scientific representations of the world; or as a more profound entity whose power goes beyond the physical and detached perception of it? What anthropologists must do to take seriously
a conception of an inanimate object that is beyond our way
of understanding and approach to nature which are devoid
of any profound conceptions of its agency or spirituality? I
think that the problem here is our own perception of nature
which is pervasively imbued by scientific radical abstractions
of it, thus, to surmount this thorny fence that prevents us
a broader and deeper view of the worlds of the others, we
must challenge the stark naturalism which arbitrary removes
us from the natural environment and its non-human denizens. “The whole is greater that the sum of its parts.” (Næss
1995a: 241), this conception of the world is what Arne Næss
calls gestalt ontology, namely, the spontaneous experiences of
reality and intimate perceptions of concrete things that persons and other conscious beings have with the world; these
162

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

perceptions of the world are considered as more profound
than those of abstract scientific representations of it (Ibid). In
this sense, the profound spiritual perceptions of nature that
the Shuar manifest in a ritual where a somewhat trivial stone
is intimately connected with humans, could teach us that the
perceptions and relations with this “inanimate” object transcend the brute physical condition of the stone, thereby, the
scientific abstractions of nature conceive only certain aspects
of it, i.e., the detached physical attributes of nature that obscure the intimate metaphysical relations with it.
Furthermore, as Næss has argued to the impossibility of
Western positivists anthropologists to understand the gestalts of the natives to whom a stone is more than a simple
hard stone conceived by the former, thus, for the anthropologists would be an illogical absurdity to conceive an inert
object as a spirit (1989: 61). In this respect, the philosopher
convincingly puts it:
European anthropologists did not often achieve an experience of the
shared gestalts of foreign cultures. Natives were ‘alogical’. Gestalt
thought furnishes the key to communication between dissimilar
cultures. Verbal deterioration of gestalts (‘a stone is a stone!’) implies deterioration of the culture. This is also true of our own culture
(Ibid.: 61).

It seems that for the Shuar living and non-living beings are
profoundly interconnected beyond their own phisicalities,
for instance, a stone that could appear as a simple stone by
an outsider, could enclose a powerful essence that cannot
be appreciated if one continues to be trapped in a naturalist
prison whether it be culturalist or materialist which silences
and denies nature’s agency and the intimate perceptions of it.
In this sense, as kata the stone of fertilization, the waterfalls
163

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

play an important spiritual role among this society, therefore I will describe an interesting ritual where this element of
nature is approached respectfully and wisely for a profound
connection with the supernatural.
The imploring chants before the sacred waterfalls
The Jivaro, people of the sacred waterfalls is the name of Michael Harner’s book published in 1972, as we can note in
the title the waterfalls appear to be a sacred place according to this society. Nevertheless, the book only shallowly
explores the complex relations that the Shuar have with
the waterfalls for their ritual activities, let alone their profound interactions with these sacred places which unfortunately nowadays are facing the harmful mechanistic logic of nature that Western naturalism has been promoting
since its devastating immersion in the heart of the Amazon. Be that as it may, the waterfalls continue to be considered as sacred and important places where the encounter
with the supernatural sphere can be attained, however, it
seems that in the past the sacred aspects of the waterfalls
were more emphasized than today, thus, this aspect is well
described by Nawech who remembers an anecdote of his
early childhood:
I remember that when I was a child, my grandmother used to tell us
that we needed to go to the waterfalls only for ritual purposes. For
instance, when the boys went to bath on the waterfalls my grandmother used to say: “It will come a big storm! thanks to those guys
who do not respect the waterfalls!12
12. Conversation with Nawech, Yawintz community, Morona Santiago,
Ecuador, 13 July 2018.
164

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

According to the informant the waterfalls must be approached carefully and with respect, in fact, these are regarded as pure places where one could receive the power of arutam13 respecting the ritual conditions and practices that this
society undertakes in these spiritual places. It is important to
note as Tzama perfectly explains that the purity and cleanness of sacred places such as the waterfalls are one of the most
important elementary conditions for the arutam visions:
Arutam does not appear in whichever place, he could only appear
in clean and sacred places such as waterfalls and mountains, these
places are our sacred temples. Only if you are worthy and have consumed sacred plants you can encounter him in these places.14

The comparison between sacred places and temples could
help us to better understand the importance of these natural
places among the Shuar. That is to say, as in a temple one
must approach with vehemence to pray and worship a God
or any powerful being; to approach to the waterfalls these
people chant anent or sacred chants before the waterfalls because these natural places represent the door to encounter
13. According to most of the informants in the communities who continue to follow the ancestral religion, they consider arutam as the most
powerful being or energy who can appear in visions, moreover is considered as a God, the father or creator of the Shuar and everything. Nevertheless, only the ones who have undertaken certain ritual procedures and
have consumed sacred plants are worthy to receive its power. According
to Harner (1962: 260-264, 1972: 135-143) arutam is the “ancient specter” soul that appear in visions, but only in special conditions like the
ones described above. In my opinion, it could be possible that being
arutam the most powerful entity, was not difficult for the Shuar to more
or less equate it to a kind of God, but not the Christian God of course.
14. Conversation with Tzama, Tawasap community, Morona Santiago,
Ecuador, 18 October 2018.
165

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

arutam as long as one has respected the ritual procedures to
be intimate engaged with the supernatural sphere.
At this point I will describe an interesting ritual activity that
I had the opportunity to attend in the ayahuasca waterfall
which is situated roughly 1 hour by foot from the Wawaim
community.15 This was a very exciting but tiring trip that we
undertook from Yawintz to Wawaim, moreover, leaving aside
the time spent on the pickup to cross the harsh and gravelly
paths of the Amazon to reach Nawech’s father community.
When me and Nawech’s family arrived at Wawaim, we needed to go by foot on a muddy and difficult terrain to reach
the hill in which Sharimiat was waiting us to bring us to the
Ayahuasca waterfall where he intended to undertake the ritual. After we have taking a very good lunch made of fish, meat
and manioc, that is to say, the traditional ayampaco16 and the
classic manioc beer nijamanchi or chicha; we prepared ourselves to walk through the deep jungle to finally arrived on
the astounding waterfall where Sharimiat, who had brought
a pot of tobacco began to chant the sacred anent before the
waterfall and its persisting “sound of rushing water” (Harner
1968), the translation of the chant is described as follows:
I am begging you Grandfather17
Crying
Suffering
15. This ritual took place in the ayahuasca waterfall, Wawaim community, Morona Santiago, Ecuador, 1 September 2018.
16. Traditional Shuar dish made of fish, onion, spices and cover with a
leaf of a plant called bijao.
17. It is worth noting as has been addressed in the chant, that in Shuar
the word apachiru that means grandfather, is interchangeable to the word
arutam.
166

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

Imploring
Please come to the waterfalls18
(repeat several times)

Although Sharimiat is 90 years old, nonetheless, his voice
did not break during the chanting of this anent whose repetition was accompanied by the suffering tone of his voice
which seemed a sentimental melodious begging to arutam
whose presence is closely connected to the waterfalls. Furthermore, after the conclusion of the chant a row made of
boys, Nawech and his family in which I included myself was
formed before the waterfall where Sharimiat one by one gave
tobacco to be snuffed. After everybody had snuffed tobacco,
Nawech wielding a lance began to undertake the ritual greeting anemamu19 towards the rushing water of the waterfall
to obtain the power of arutam who had been summoned. It
is worth noticing that in this case only tobacco was used to
undertake the ritual and therefore must be emphasized that
the consumption of natem or maikiua20 are considered better
to encounter arutam in visions, however, this must not be
considered a problem for the appreciation of the procedures
of the ritual in which the profound relations that this society
has with this element of nature is at stake.
18. Anent chanted by Sharimiat in the Ayahuasca waterfall, Wawaim
community, Morona Santiago, Ecuador, 1 September 2018.
19. Anemamu is a ritual greeting in which a couple of men talk each
other with a loudly voice wielding a lance in a somewhat menacing way.
In the past the Shuar used this greeting when a man for the first time met
other man and therefore wanted to know who he was or if he was not
an enemy. For a detailed description of this ritual greeting, see, Karsten
(2000 [1935]: 219-222).
20. A sacred plant (Brugmansia arborea) which is considered the most
powerful to reach the desired arutam’s vision quests.
167

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

Fig. 2. Sharimiat chanting before the Ayahuasca waterfall.

The subtle procedures of this ritual might show us that a
waterfall which for an outsider may be a place for sightseeing
or even for a fresh bath in its calm waters or a somewhat
violent shower under the rushing water; for this society is a
sacred place where its profound and sensible attributes are far
from being understood by a shallow naturalist or scientific
representations of it, in fact, Shuar’s phenomenological perceptions of a waterfall ought to be understood as a complex
interrelations of sensible qualities where different feelings
decoded by the senses grasp the deep engagement that they
have with this natural element. In this sense, as Næss puts it:
168

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

“A joyful experience of nature is partially dependent upon
a conscious or unconscious development of a sensitivity for
qualities” (1989: 51). In fact, this society experiences its engagement with the waterfalls as manifold profound sentiments that go from feelings of suffering and pain during the
chants to feelings of joy and strength when arutam’s power
has been obtained.

Fig. 3 Nawech during the ritual

One might say that this profound engagement with nature
which emphasizes the spiritual dimension of it is in stark
contrast with the Western mechanic logic of nature in which
the exclusive anthropocentric domain of humans denies any
169

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

non-human’s intentionality and therefore coercively silences its metaphysical dimension. This aspect is emphasized by
Arntzen who rightly points out:
Human’s relationship to the land as spiritual and meaningful in itself is not a historical stage that has been overcome in the Western
tradition, but a condition of human’s relating to the world that this
tradition has largely suppressed (2003: 45).

The suppression of the profound spiritual and moral values
regarding the natural environment obliges us to rethink our
own concepts of nature which are pervasively permeated by
the Western “rational” logic whose rooted values impose to
the natures of the others the commoditization and destruction of their own being in their world. In addition, the moral
Shuar’s approach to nature may not be considered only as a
daily life conception, but as the next example will show us, it
seems that this is ontologically rooted and conditioned since
mythical times.
The noble jaguar in the deep of the Tayos caves
In my opinion the myth that I will discuss here has a deep
moral connotation regarding the relations that this society
has with one of the most feared and appreciated but unfortunately in danger of extinction animals. Namely, the jaguar
represents the mighty predatory power of the jungle, moreover, his image is one of the most important arutam’s visions
by which the Shuar acquire this powerful source of spiritual
energy. Thus, one day when I asked to Nawech about the
famous Tayos caves21 in which in the past the Shuar used to
go there to hunt the tayos birds (Steatornis caripensis) much
21. Tayos caves are located in Morona Santiago province.
170

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

appreciated for their meat and their bones that were used
for making ornaments (see, Karsten 2000 [1935]: 66-67 and
Stirling 1938: 110); he began to remind his youth in the
military service when during a mission where he had to build
paths through the jungle and control the border near Peru;
he visited a Shuar’s community who according to him used
to live in traditional way, i.e., they were barefoot and dressed
traditional clothes. Moreover, he asked to them how to get to
the Tayos caves and therefore they told him the right direction to arrive there, thus, when he arrived near the caves he
saw two very big holes where he and his companions threw
some stalks inside and as a result a lot of tayos birds came out
like bats.22 After Nawech finished to recount his adventures
in the military service, he also remembered a myth about
these caves that his grandfather and father used to narrate:
In olden times there were tayos birds in abundance, mostly the small
ones were more appreciated for their fatty meat. One day a group
of persons went to hunt these birds, so, they tied a liana with some
stalks which functioned like a ladder to climb down in the deep of
the caves. Among the group of persons there was a man who was
hated by the others, thus, when all of them were inside the deep
of the caves they hunted a lot of tayos and filled all their changuinas (bags) with them. All the group with his filled bags began to
climb up the liana leaving the hated man down on the cave, at one
point when they arrived up they cut the liana and the poor man
remained alone in the deep of the cave. Given that the group had
abandoned him alone, this shuar did not know how to do to go out
the dark cave, how could he climb such a height which was very
rocky? So, this man all the time was crying desperately because he
could do nothing inside there. Moreover, it passed a lot of time maybe months or even years since this man had been left inside the cave,
22. Conversation with Nawech, Yawintz community, Morona Santiago,
Ecuador, 27 October 2018.
171

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

thus, the tayos used to fly above the man and pooped on his head,
then given that the tayos pooped too much his head had peeled! One
day the man had fell asleep on the sand of the cave, then a jaguar
appeared to him in a dream and said to him: “hi brother! when I will
go shouting, you must touch and follow the footprints that I leave!
you must follow me because I will go out in a river which is the
exit!” so, when he woke up and heard the jaguar’s voice: “hmm! hmm!
hmm! hmm! hmm! hmm!” then he touched the sand and found the
jaguar’s footprints, therefore the tired, naked and dirty man began to
walk through the dark paths of the cave touching and following the
footprints. At one point, after a very long walk the jaguar’s voice disappeared! thus, he arrived in a place where it seemed that there was a
light which crossed a river “Guangos” in fact, even today people still
believe that this is the exit of the cave which ends in the river! Then
given that he saw this light he dived in the water and went out in a
big pond where he swam a lot to cross to the other side to finally see
the jungle, moreover he arrived just in the place where he used to go
hunting. Then he arrived at home alive but very tired and with his
head peeled due to the very long time in which he stayed inside the
cave. At his home his relatives thought that he had died, thus, when
they saw him after all of this time they began to cry and organized
a big celebration with a lot of dancing and food in honour of his
return. This sad myth teaches us how selfish, envious and evil can be
the people, look how these persons left alone this man in the cave!
they had no compassion of him! from this myth people’s envy and
selfishness came.23

It is important to emphasize that the moral message that this
myth conveys regards the selfishness and evilness of certain
people who led themselves by hatred without no feelings of
compassion to their fellows. Furthermore, the loneliness and
desperation of the man to find a way to go out from this dark
cave were finally relieved by a dream in which a non-human be23. Conversation with Nawech, Yawintz community, Morona Santiago,
Ecuador, 27 October 2018.
172

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

ing whose kindness and mercy had helped him to escape from
his doomed fate. Indeed, the jaguar whose power represents
the most powerful arutam’s energy or even the dangerous power of a shaman who can transform in this fierce and predator
animal; was the only entity who in this myth saved the dying
man to escape from the deep of the Tayos caves. “I believe that
mythology, more than anything else, makes it possible to illustrate such objectified thought and to provide empirical proof
of its reality” (Lévi-Strauss 1969: 11). In this sense, the proof of
the reality of this myth stems from the empirical condition of
the jaguar of being an entity whose supernatural power can be
understood not as a metaphorical projection of its power that
this society undertakes in visions, but as an ontological relation
with this entity whose power is spiritually and morally assimilated during the visions or dreams in the case of the myth.
Thus, as in the myth the man followed the footprints and voice
of the jaguar who led him to the exit of the cave and thereby
helped and gave him the force to finally arrive to the jungle and
encounter his family; in Shuar’s post mythical life, the image
and voice of this animal in visions function as the metaphysical conditions for the configuration of the paths that these
people will follow during their lives. Then one might say that
nature’s beings are not only physical entities whose importance
depend on humans’ classifications of them, to the contrary,
non-human beings are deeply immersed in the worlds of humans as the latter are deeply immersed in the worlds of the
former. In this sense, according to Næss gestalt ontology as
an intimate perception of nature considers “so-called mythic
thought is gestalt thought” (1989: 61), in addition, he claims:
“If the gestalts rather than their fragments are identified as the
173

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

contents of reality, mythic thought then characterises contents
which are largely unavailable in our culture” (Ibid.). That is
to say, these contents are the complex spiritual dimensions of
the Shuar’s mythic thought and cosmology in which profound
conceptualizations of nature permit the reciprocal concatenations between humans and non-humans in their natural environment. Moreover, the next peculiar story seems to enclose
a deep eco philosophical message regarding the protection of
the Amazon rainforest.
Nujank: the guardian of the Amazon rainforest
One might say that when we talk about Western influence in
the Amazon, probably the first thing that comes to our mind
is colonialism and its devastating consequences to the natural
environment and its denizens. Fortunately, not all the people
from the West have embraced the harmful logic of nature by
which this is treated as a mean for exploitation to attain the
never-ending development of civilization. In this sense, the
story that I will narrate here was told to me by Tzama one
evening in Mura where the darkness of the hut was only illuminated by a candle and therefore different kind of insects and
a dog whose name is Simba were roaming around it accompanying us all the time. According to the informant the events of
this story occurred roughly 100 or 150 years ago in the Shuar’s
territories where a married couple of Europeans arrived in the
jungle. The woman was pregnant, thereby she had given birth
a child in the middle of the jungle where there was a great
storm which made the waters of the rivers rise24:
24. Conversation with Tzama, Mura, Tawasap community, Morona Santiago, Ecuador, 12 August 2018.
174

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

This great current is called “Nujank” and for this reason the tribal
leader of the community named the child Nujank. When he was
born his umbilical cord was cut and buried in the earth because for
each umbilical cord of a child born a new tree would grow according
to the ancestral traditions. Then the tribal leader said to the couple
that it is better that they return to their home with their child because the dream had come to an end. When Nujank grew up and
became a young man, he wanted to know where he was born, thereby he asked to his parents about his story when he was a small child.
Then his mother told him the truth and hence he packed up his luggage and went in the deep jungle to discover what had grown from
his navel. When he arrived in the community he met a very old man
and asked to him: “where I was born? what happened to my navel?”
and the old men said to him: “you need to cross that small river and
on the other side you will find a very big white tree, this is the tree
of your navel!” then Nujank was very happy and crossed to the other
side of the river and finally found a very beautiful big tree. He was
so excited that he embraced the tree and said to him: “you are my
brother!” thus, he looked up and saw that all the trees were embraced
by their branches. So, in looking up all these similar trees embraced,
he became so excited and began to cry, thereby he said: “now all the
trees are the brothers of my brother, for this reason I will call them
my brothers” Then he came back to the community and said to the
old man: “what can I do to protect these trees?” and the old man
said to him: “go to the city and tell to the white men to stop eating
and destroying nature, tell to them to stop felling the trees because
to fell a tree is like felling the children’s navel who are not yet born,
is like killing them from the inside, that is, for each tree that they
are felling they are killing the lives of the future generations” Thus,
Nujank was so astonished that he went to the city to protect the Amazon rainforest and fight against the powerful companies and people
that were destroying it. At one point, the police men or militaries
attacked him, but while he was still alive he gave to the man that
severely wounded him a letter that he had on his pocket. Before he
died he said to this man: “please! take this letter to this community”
so, the man felt so bad that they had killed a man who was unarmed
and only fought for the protection of the forest, thereby he took the
175

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

letter and travelled to the community to give it. In the letter the final
words of Nujank said: “thank you for teaching me the value of the
trees, I will spend my life in protecting the Amazon rainforest and
if I die will be for this reason” This is what our grandfathers used to
narrate about the story of Nujank.25

Fig. 4. The trees of the rainforest.

It is important to note how a different, respectful and sustainable logic of nature could be embraced by Western people as
in the case of Nujank who understood well the meaningful
and profound conception of the forest whose protection and
conservation depend whether on the people who dwell with25. Conversation with Tzama, Mura, Tawasap community, Morona Santiago, Ecuador, 12 August 2018.
176

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

in it and on the people, who understand its importance for
the sustaining of life. Moreover, even if he grew up somewhere in Europe where the predatory naturalist approach to
nature was born and moreover took more force during the
industrial revolution and colonialism; Nujank was very curious to know where he was born and what happened to his
navel which had been buried in the earth as the traditional
Shuar’s practice. Thus, he prepared himself for a long trip
to the place where he was born and where he would find a
big tree that after all this time had been growing from the
earth in which his navel had been buried. It is worth noticing that the traditional practice of burying the umbilical
cord in the earth is still undertaken among the contemporary
Shuar though in a less degree than in the past. For instance,
according to Tzama: “In the Tawasap community we still cut
the umbilical cord of new-borns and buries it in the earth
mostly in the ant holes where a new tree will grow”.26 Furthermore, contrary to the Achuar who bury the placenta instead of the umbilical cord and therefore consider the former
as a house in which the soul of the deceased could re-occupy (Descola 1994: 121); the Desana of eastern Colombian
Amazon though they bury both27 (Reichel-Dolmatoff 1971:
140), nonetheless, it seems that like the Shuar they attribute
26. Conversation with Tzama, Mura, Tawasap community, Morona Santiago, Ecuador, 29 August 2018.
27. It is interesting to note that according to Karsten’s observations
among the Shuar; both the umbilical cord and the placenta are buried in
the earth lest that the dogs or other animals could eat them and thereby
could be harmful for the child’s life (2000 [1935]: 180). Nevertheless, it
seems that he did not find any cosmological attribution to the placenta
or umbilical cord.
177

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

special symbolic and metaphysical characteristics to the umbilical cord. In this respect, Reichel-Dolmatoff writes about
the connection that the umbilical cord has with Ahpikondía
which is for the Desana a kind of paradise:
Primordial placenta was united by an umbilical cord to Ahpikondía,
and this idea is expressed even in current belief according to which
all human beings are connected during their lives by means of an
umbilical cord running invisibly through the rivers and liking the
individual to Ahpikondía (1971: 57).

Interestingly even if the Shuar do not endow to the placenta
any cosmological or mythological attributes; they nonetheless
conceive the umbilical cord as a connection between the earthly
life of human beings and the primordial celestial life in which
both realms were connected by the liana28 and thereby all entities were intercommunicated and interconnected. “With the
umbilical cord all of us are connected with the cosmos”29 one
day Tzama told me. Thus, it seems that the association between
the umbilical cord and the trees which grow from the earth
where the former has been buried; goes beyond any symbolic
representation which tries to depict the mythical connection
between the earth and the sky. In fact, I think that the connection between these spheres is ontologically related and represented by the elements of nature which try to bridge the gap
between the realms whose communication had been interrupted by the misdeeds of primordial times. The interconnection
between these elements may be described as follows:
28. In mythical times the earth and the sky were connected by a vine
through which all entities could communicate. For a description of the
myth see, Karsten (2000 [1935]: 370-371) and Descola (1994: 69).
29. Conversation with Tzama, Mura, Tawasap community, Morona Santiago, Ecuador, 3 September 2018.
178

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

Fig. 5. Interconnection of the elements of nature for the communication between the spheres.

In (fig. 5) we can see how different elements of nature take
part in human and non-human relations according to the
Shuar’s cosmological system which emphasizes the communication between the spheres even in post mythic times. For
instance, on the left side of the figure we can see the primordial liana who was the essential condition for the full communication between beings, indeed, when this was cut off
the connection between the celestial realm and the earthly
one was interrupted. Nevertheless, during post mythic life
the Shuar can surmount this interruption by the consumption of natem or the sacred liana located in the middle of the
figure, however, this liana can only provide a partial communication between humans and non-human beings, thereby is
less effective than the primordial one. The parallel between
the Shuar and the Barasana of eastern Colombia is striking
regarding the Banisteriopsis caapi vine and its homology with
the umbilical cord for the connection with primordial times.
179

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

For instance, according to Christine Hugh-Jones:
Indians do actually say that the river system of the earth is a yagé
vine connecting longhouse communities to the ancestral east in the
same way as an umbilical cord: they say that when the vine is cut for
use, the scar this leaves is a navel (1979: 230).

Moreover, it is worthy to note that the umbilical cord and
the tree located on the right side can be understood as the
cyclical intercommunication that human beings have with
the cosmos during their physical existence; though this communication is constant, this goes beyond the concrete representations of human and non-human communication of the
other two elements.
The story of Nujank describes very well the cosmological
and moral connotations of the trees which grow from the
earth where the umbilical cord had been buried, namely
when Nujank looked up to the sky he could appreciate how
a big tree had grown from his umbilical cord and which he
had named his brother; was embraced with all similar trees,
thereby he called all these trees his brothers. Thus, he fulfilled
his destiny to protect the forest from the predatory values
of its own culture that he had rejected and hence he had
embraced the deep spiritual values which had been taught to
him by the so-called primitives of the jungle. Moreover, the
profound moral message that Nujank’s story tries to convey,
is that nonetheless he had died by the hands of the people
who coercively supressed nature’s voice and rights, that is to
say, imposing the harmful predatory logic of civilization over
the natural environment of the others; his fight to protect
the Amazon rainforest might be considered as a rethinking
of our own noxious logic to approach to nature and the em180

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

brace of a more sustainable, moral and spiritual approach
to it which really cares about the future generations and the
continuity of all nature’s beings lives.
Some reflections from the lungs of the world
During my fieldwork in the Amazon jungle, many things
came to my mind regarding our life in the metropolis and
the hyper consumerist and polluting societies in which we
are forced to live. When I say that we are forced, I am intending that it is almost impossible to make a radical change
in our paths of progress and even survival that we are used
to follow in a world where it seems that there is no room to
other possible worlds. Be that as it may, even Pope Francis
in many of his discourses has strongly restated the failure of
the Western mode of development and his struggle to awake
the masses and hence to rethink to our own Western values.
I think that it is not enough to rethink about our rooted cosmologies, but nonetheless it is the first step to have a deeper
and broader view in other possible worlds, that is, the tools
of ethnographic research could help a lot to plunge into these
different worlds and therefore being immersed in other realities in which our ontological categories are from being universal and useful to understand what is beyond our physical
and mechanical world and its realities.
Living among the Shuar, I could realize that our lives in the
metropolis are guided by an intolerant clock which does not
accept any delay in the mechanic paths of our destiny, that is,
our physical life in the universe is subjected by the seeming
transcendental rules of the market which give no room to
different approaches to the world or ways of conceptualizing
181

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

it that could undermine the illusory democracy which hides
the oppressing modern apparatus of the states. It seems that
if we try to break the chains which are suffocating the planet
and its denizens; a strong sense of loneliness will overwhelm
our existence segregating our human condition into a jail
in which the other species are forced to stay. This sense of
segregation is not only physically perpetuated given that our
presence is seen as something weird, fool or even at the limits
of madness because we are rejecting the whole cosmological
Western precepts which control the entire world, likewise,
this segregation is also spiritually perpetuated because our
existence is only considered in isolation with the whole world
and its entities who share a nature that has been destroyed by
the same logic which forces to put ourselves as the only rulers
of what seems to be outside us. The dichotomization of body
and spirit is not dissolved by a more profound conception
of our existence, instead this is disintegrated by an abstract
force which is represented in the institutions that we try to
promote or even die for them. In fact, what we follow in our
lives are the models that have been written to guide our existence to the paths of progress in which only “humans” may
unequally partake the pieces or even micro pieces of what has
been tamed and exploited for the only sake of the few who
decide what is the “good” to be blindly followed.
Perhaps the reader may ask what these words have to do with
the conclusion of this article? What do I try to convey in
this conclusion? It is worth it a moral commitment to defy
our own apparently rooted values? In my humble opinion,
what I intended to show throughout these pages is that a
thoroughly different world exists in a natural environment
182

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

which is resisting the cannibalistic logic of the moderns,
thus, the anthropomorphic nature of the Shuar challenges
our seeming scientific logic of what it seems to be nature
to us, thereby it seems that a trivial perception of what is
beyond its physical features does not do justice to the profound interactions that a society has with non-humans in a
complex natural environment which encloses different realities that are ontologically shared by its denizens. Furthermore, the different realities in which the Shuar are immersed
ought to be considered as concatenations between ontological levels and non-human entities that provide the meaningful paths of life in the world and cosmos. Hence, for this
society the physical realities of life must not be regarded as
false or a lie, and thereby only the supernatural sphere must
be considered as the real representation of the world (Harner 1972: 134).30 In fact, as we could see throughout the
pages of this work, for the contemporary Shuar both realties
are connected, namely one could not attain the supernatural
sphere without follow certain rules and restrictions in the
physical sphere, in addition, what one could see in a vision
represent a metaphysical reality which its representation derives from the physical world.
In this sense, both realties are interconnected by the ontological juxtaposition and jump of entities which travel between different spheres of reality in a constant external and
internal transmutation. I think that this conceptualization
of the world could allow us to rethink about the rigid categories which guide our existence in the universe, indeed,
30. It is worth noting that Harner’s interpretations of the Shuar’s conceptions of the realities was also questioned by Descola (1994: 100).
183

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

this society continues to resist the persisting influence of
Western values that destroyed their natural environment
and therefore fostered the loss of most of their traditional way of life. Nevertheless, the Shuar struggle for their
profound engagement with nature that provides to them
a sphere where the physical life of humans and non-humans can be maintained, moreover, is in this sphere that
a communication with the supernatural is possible, i.e., in
post mythic times a deep relation with nature is the only
way to analogically attain the communication of primordial times. In this respect, following the words of Eduardo
Khon, the relations that humans have with non-human beings in the different spheres of reality: “Can tell us about
how that which lies “beyond” the human also sustains us
an makes us the beings we are and those we might become” (2013: 221). In this sense, according to the Shuar
what lies beyond the human not only sustain their physical
lives in their environment, but non-human entities with
their intentionalities help and guide the somewhat unstable human condition to metaphysically build its destiny
and hence to physically reproduce what has been revealed
during the intimate encounter between the permeable ontological spheres.
From the lungs of the world we can better appreciate what
is the meaning of life in a spiritual and profound sense,
that is to say, our own existence depends and it is guided by
a powerful source of energy that the natural environment
encloses, moreover, even if one may argue that nature is
separated from us and hence it is an independent domain
in which the natural laws reign; how can we explain the
184

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

relations that we have with it even in the plights of climate
change and natural disasters which we are facing nowadays?
So, it seems that the Western logic of nature which tries to
obscure its complexity and makes the other worlds invisible
or savage to our eyes, does not take into account the force
which is beyond its perception or perhaps tries to ignore
it. However, nature gives us the possibility to look for other ways to approach to it, in fact, since the beginning of
humankind we could choose the paths to be related with
it and therefore adapt ourselves not in a passive medium
in which we imprinted our superiority among the other
entities; but in a sphere where humans are only a part of a
more complex concatenations of beings who share a natural environment which is beyond its physicality. In this
sense, Shuar’s moral philosophy of nature could teach us
that an “anthropology beyond the human” (Kohn 2013)
is not only possible to think, but it is highly necessary to
promote for a better valorisation of more sustainable ecological approaches to nature which ensure the full richness
and diversity of life-forms on the earth (Næss 1995c: 464)
both humans and non-humans.
At this point, one might question my argument by which
these complex and profound interactions with the natural
environment could be considered as a moral philosophy
and a more sustainable and spiritual way to approach to
nature. In addition, one might think that I am trying to
idealize or even essentialize Shuar’s conceptualizations of
their relations with non-humans, hence, as much as utopic
my argument might seem I think that our Western ethnocentrism does not permit to take serious other possible
185

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

relations with the non-human kingdom that could prevent
the collapse of the entire ecosystem in which our rationalities are not capable to grasp the different dimensions of
what we call simply nature. Moreover, there is a big difference between a logic of nature that has been coercively imposed and a logic that has been passively adopted without
resistance. For instance, in one article Descola (2005: 33)
has argued that in the mid-seventies he had the opportunity to give several lectures to the leaders of the Shuar
Federation (FICSH) to warn them of the harmful consequences to the environment that the massive program
of cattle-ranching launched by the Federation years before
could cause. Moreover, it seems that the Shuar proceeded
with the program until they finally realized that the forest
began to disappear, and the soil were irreversible damaged.
Thus, the French anthropologists concluded that the Shuar
did not avail to their profound knowledge of the environment which has been build up generation after generation
given that this knowledge was mainly practical, non-reflexive, non-objectifiable, and thus non-applicable to new
contexts where it might have proven useful (Ibid.). Furthermore, even if Descola’s conclusion could seem plausible in a context in which the Western market values have
been apparently assimilated by the Shuar; I think that the
assimilation of these values passed through a process of
imposition in which a predatory logic of nature had been
masked by the deceiving modern progress which could
have seemed attractive to the Shuar who wanted to join
the institutions of the State and thus increase their possibility of being heard by the latter to foster their rights.
186

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

Indeed, I think that it is not that they knowledge is only
practical and non-reflexive, but this is reflexive inasmuch
their conception of being in the environment does not encounter other conceptions which are part of other systems
of rationalities that conceive the natural environment as
a segregated commodity. For instance, is not the same to
throw away in the jungle a bag made of fibres and a bag
made of plastic, that is, the first one is produced by the
Shuar that know very well its materials which are obtained
from nature with no industrial intervention; but the things
are way different with the plastic bag which is made by
heavy technological interventions in nature that extract a
natural resource that had been underground for millennia,
hence, when the Shuar for the first time saw a plastic bag
they did not realize what was behind the apparent innocuous plastic which has been one of the many causes for the
destruction of the Amazon rainforest.
One may say that if it were for the Shuar and for other Amazonian societies, the oil would still be underground, and
a great part of the rainforest would be much less destroyed
and probably the planet would be much less polluted. In
fact, one cannot deny in this case how harmful can be a
radical different approach to nature when is imposed into
the worlds of the others in which the relation with nature
is not an economic one but a cosmic one. Indeed, as Næss
has argued that most of the approaches to nature in the
world could be compatible with nature, namely, only the
Western approaches promoted by industrialized countries
are against it (1995b: 398), thus, the only thing that remain to ask is which logic is wrong according to nature?
187

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

References
Århem, K. 1990. “Ecosofía makuna.” In Correa, F. ed. La selva
humanizada: ecología alternativa en el trópico húmedo colombiano. Bogotá:
Instituto Colombiano de Antropología. 106-126.
Århem, K. 1996. “The Cosmic Food Web: Human-nature relatedness in
the Northwest Amazon.” In Descola, P. and Gísli, P. eds. Nature and society:
Anthropological perspectives. London/New York: Routledge. 185-204.
Arntzen, S. 1999. “Is Presocratic Philosophy of Nature a Source of ManNature Dualism?” In Boudouris, K. and Kalimtzis, K. eds. Philosophy
and Ecology. Vol. II. Athens: Ionia Publications. 22-31.
Arntzen, S. 2003. Cultural Landscape and Approaches to Nature –
Ecophilosophical Perspectives. Norway: Telemark University Collage.
Brown, M. 1986. Tsewa’s gift: magic and meaning in an Amazonian society.
Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Descola, P. 1992. “Societies of nature and the nature of society.” In
Kuper, A. ed. Conceptualizing societies. London: Routledge. 107-126.
Descola, P. 1994. In the Society of Nature: A native ecology in Amazonia.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Descola, P. 1996. “Constructing natures: Symbolic ecology and
social practice.” In Descola, P. and Gísli, P. eds. Nature and society:
Anthropological perspectives. London/New York: Routledge. 82-102.
Descola, P. 2005. “Ecology and Cosmological Analysis.” In Surrales,
A. and Hierro, G.P. eds. The Land Within: Indigenous Territory and the
Perception of Environment. Denmark: IWGIA. 22-35.
Gibson, J. 1979. The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.
Harner, M. 1968. “The Sound of Rushing Water.” Natural History 77/6:
28-33; 60-61.
Harner, M. 1972. The Jivaro, people of the sacred waterfalls. Garden City:
Doubleday, Natural History Press.

188

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

Hugh-Jones, C. 1979. From the Milk River: Spatial and Temporal Processes
in Northwest Amazonia. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ingold, T. 1996. “The optimal forager and economic man.” In Descola, P.
and Gísli, P. eds. Nature and society: Anthropological perspectives. London/
New York: Routledge. 25-44.
Karsten, R. 2000 [1935]. La vida y la cultura de los Shuar. Quito: Abya-Yala.
Kohn, E. 2013. How Forests Think: Toward an Anthropology Beyond the
Human. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Lévi-Strauss, C. 1969 The Raw and the Cooked. New York: Harper & Row.
Manes, C. 1995. “Nature and Silence.” In Oehlschlager, M. ed. Postmodern
Environmental Ethics. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Næss, A. 1989. Ecology, Community and Lifestyle. Cambridge/New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Næss, A. 1995a. “Ecosophy and Gestalt Ontology.” In Sessions, G. ed.
Deep Ecology for the Twenty-First Century. Boston/London: Shambhala.
240-245.
Næss, A. 1995b. “The Third World, Wilderness, and Deep Ecology.”
In Sessions, G. ed. Deep Ecology for the Twenty-First Century. Boston/
London: Shambhala. 397-408.
Næss, A. 1995c. “Deep Ecology for the Twenty-Second Century.”
In Sessions, G. ed. Deep Ecology for the Twenty-First Century. Boston/
London: Shambhala. 463-468.
Pelizzaro, S. 1978. Nunkui. Sucua (Ecuador): Centro de documentación
e investigación cultural shuar, Mundo shuar, Series F, Nº 8.
Plumwood, V. 2006. “The concept of a cultural landscape.” Ethics and the
Environment 11/2: 115-150.
Rappaport, R. 1979. Ecology, Meaning and Religion. Berkeley: North
Atlantic Books.
Rappaport, R. 2000 [1968]. Pig for the Ancestors: Ritual in the Ecology of a
New Guinea People. Long Grove, Illinois: Waveland Press, Inc.
189

Open Journal of Humanities, 1 (2019)
issn 2612-6966

Reichel-Dolmatoff, G. 1971. Amazonian Cosmos: The Sexual and Religious
Symbolism of the Tukano Indians. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Reichel-Dolmatoff, G. 1976. “Cosmology as ecological analysis: a view
from the rain forest.” Man 2/3: 307-318.
Rosset, C. 1973. L’anti-nature: Eléments pour une Philosophie Tragique.
Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
Spinoza, B. 1910. Ethics. London: J.M. Dent & Sons Ltd.
Stirling, M. 1938. Historical and ethnographical material on the Jivaro
Indians. Smithsonian Institution Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin
117. Washington.
Taylor, A.-C. 2001. “Wives, Pets, and Affines: Marriage among the
Jivaro.” In Rival, L. and Whitehead, N. eds. Beyond the Visible and the
Material: The Amerindianization of Society in the Work of Peter Rivière.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 45-56.
Tilley, C. 1994. A Phenomenology of Landscape. Places, Paths and
Monuments. Oxford: Berg Publishers.
Viveiros de Castro, E. 2011. “Zeno and the Art of Anthropology: Of
Lies, Beliefs, Paradoxes, and Other Truths.” Common Knowledge 17/1:
128-145.

190

