Is Free Speech in Danger on University Campus? Some Preliminary Evidence from a
Most Likely Case
Matthias Revers1, University of Leeds & Richard Traunmüller2, University of Mannheim

Abstract
While universities play a key role in questions of free speech and political viewpoint diversity,
they are often associated with the opposite of a free exchange of ideas: a proliferation of
restrictive campus speech codes, violent protests against controversial speakers and even the
firing of inconvenient professors. For some observers these trends on university campuses are
a clear indicator of the dire future for freedom of speech. Others view these incidents as
scandalized singular events and regard the campus intolerance as a mere myth. We take an
empirical look at some of the claims in the debate and present original survey evidence from a
most likely case: the leftist social science studentship at Goethe University Frankfurt. Our
results show that taking offense is a common experience and that a sizable share of students is
in favor of restricting speech on campus. We also find evidence for conformity pressures on
campus and that both, the desire to restrict speech and the reluctance to speak openly, differ
significantly across political ideology. Left-leaning students are less likely to tolerate
controversial viewpoints and right-leaning students are more likely to self-censor on politically
sensitive issues such as gender, immigration or sexual and ethnic minorities. While preliminary,
these findings may have implications for the social sciences and academia more broadly.

Keywords: Free Speech, Freedom of Expression, Viewpoint Diversity, University, Higher
Education, Political Ideology, Tolerance
Character Count (with Spaces): 69’715

Funding: RT acknowledges partial support from the Forschungsinstitut Gesellschaftlicher
Zusammenhalt (FGZ)/Research Institute Social Cohesion (RISC) funded by the Federal
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF).

1
2

Corresponding author, E-mail: m.revers@leeds.ac.uk
E-mail: traunmueller@uni-mannheim.de

1

Introduction
Universities play a key role in the question of free speech and political viewpoint diversity
(Chong 2006, Lea 2009, Lukianoff and Haidt 2018, Baer 2019). Not only are universities
central places for the intellectual exchange of ideas and the debate of issues of societal
relevance, they are also laboratories for new standards and norms of speech that eventually
diffuse into the wider public. In addition to research and teaching, universities are also
responsible for the civic education of students. Students must learn to form well-founded
opinions and to defend them with factual arguments in open debates. A requirement of this is
that they are exposed to a variety of opposing views and compelled to wrestle with a range of
counterarguments.
For these reasons, it is all the more alarming that universities have recently received public
attention for the exact opposite of a free exchange of ideas. Issues which caught the attention
of news media range from a proliferation of increasingly intricate campus speech codes, over
disinvitations and violent protests against controversial speakers to the forced resignation,
demotion and firing of professors. Additionally, as we will show further below, these
developments are by no means restricted to the English-speaking world.
Although the critique of these trends on university campuses is not limited to conservative
voices as it was in the 1990s (e.g. Etzioni 2014, Lilla 2016, Lukianoff and Haidt 2018), a
common thread that runs through the debate is a political divide: One side sees universities as
places dominated by left-leaning students and faculty who, supported by university
administrations, shut down speech in the name of anti-discrimination and are intolerant of
dissenting views, most notably those considered conservative (Dow and Lendler 2002). They
worry about a stifling atmosphere in which members of the institution must be increasingly
careful of what they say or write.

2

Other voices are more critical of these campus controversies. They view them as singular
scandalized events and a problem only among a small minority of radical students. To them,
campus intolerance in the wider sense does not exist but is a construct of the political right
(Wilson 1995, Feldstein 1997). For these observers, the main purpose of the debate is to
discredit attempts to fight discrimination and to make the university a safer learning
environment for an increasingly diverse student body.
What unites both positions, however, is a relative lack of systematic empirical evidence to
support their claims about the current state of free speech and viewpoint diversity on university
campuses (but see Stevens and Haidt 2018a, 2018b, 2018c for a notable exception). In this
paper we aim to contribute to this debate through the exploration of some preliminary empirical
evidence from the German university context. In particular, we are interested in answering the
following questions: What do students consider offensive speech to be and how tolerant are
they of controversial viewpoints? Is there evidence for social pressure to conform to ‘political
correctness’ and does this restrict free discussion on university campus? Are left-leaning
students truly more willing to restrict what can be said on campus? And are right-leaning
students more reluctant to speak openly than their left-leaning peers?
Our empirical analysis is based on original survey data collected from social science students
at Goethe University Frankfurt. We are certainly not under the impression that our sample is
representative of university students in general (or the wider public, for that matter). On the
contrary, we purposefully consider the social science studentship at Frankfurt as a most likely
case (George and Bennett 2005, Gerring 2007). Firstly, the University of Frankfurt became a
focal point of the leftist student movement in the 1960s and still has the reputation as being a
training ground for the political left. Secondly, as the birthplace of the Frankfurt School of
critical theory, the university is traditionally associated with the activist more than the scientific
impetus of the social sciences. Thirdly, teaching and research at Frankfurt puts great emphasis

3

on ideas that directly relate to the control of undesired speech: cultural recognition as a means
of redistributive justice; to treat speech as a type of action (speech act theory); standpoint theory,
which seeks to amplify oppressed voices; and intersectionality which evaluates discrimination
according to the cumulative disadvantage of overlapping identities.3 Finally, even students take
note of the idiosyncratic discussion culture at Frankfurt.4
Thus, our reasoning is simple: If we were unable to detect tendencies for the restriction of
speech in our sample, it would be unlikely to find such evidence anywhere else. If this turned
out to be the case, we would be in a good position to dismiss claims of a repressive discursive
climate on university campuses. If, however, we uncovered empirical evidence for the undue
suppression of speech and self-censorship in our sample, the hypothesis would have to be
upheld and scrutinized in other university contexts. In addition, and importantly, a broader
discussion over viewpoint diversity in the social sciences would be in order.
Our preliminary results give few reasons to be optimistic. We show that taking offense is a
common experience and that a sizable share of students is in favor of restricting free speech on
university campus. Depending on the topic of discussion, between a third and half of the
students would not allow a controversial speaker on campus and even higher shares think that
such individuals should not be allowed to teach at the university. Roughly a third of students is

3

We do not intend to caricature or disparage these theories but expose how they are employed in campus

discussions, including as justification to silence voices.
4

As one of them put it in our survey, “this is only in Frankfurt. In Augsburg, you could explore whatever you

thought and discuss it with other students and the professor. Frankfurt has horrible people when it comes to
sensitive topics.” The bitter irony of the extent to which pressures of conformity pervade the intellectual birthplace
of critical theory has not escaped participants in our study: “I actually found the point … amusing, about this
university [being] known for critical thinking, so left-wing people come here so that they can critically think among
themselves.”

4

also in favor of banning controversial books from their university library. We also find evidence
for conformity pressures on campus. A quarter of all students report personal attacks for voicing
an unpopular opinion and a third feels reluctant to openly give their view on controversial
political topics in class discussions. Both the desire to restrict speech and the reluctance to speak
openly differ significantly across political ideologies. Left-leaning students are less likely to
tolerate controversial speakers, teachers or books at the university on politically sensitive issues
such as gender, immigration or sexual and ethnic minorities. Right-leaning students are more
likely to self-censor on these topics, are more concerned about the consequences of expressing
political views and are more likely to be criticized for doing so.
Some points of clarification are important to put these results in perspective: First, our tolerance
measures focus on very specific topics: gender equality, homosexuality, Islam and immigration.
While these topics lie at the center of the current campus controversy, they also tap into the
sensitivities of the left. Since one can only tolerate what one rejects (Sullivan et al. 1979), the
fact that right-leaning students appear more ‘tolerant’ may be simply due to the fact that they
are either indifferent or even agree with the controversial statements. This could very well be
the case for criticism of Islam and immigration which figures prominently in the political
discourse on the right. Clearly, we could think of other controversial ideas that students on the
right would find objectionable (e.g. abortion or the expropriation of the rich) and therefore less
willing to tolerate. We will discuss the implications of these particular measures of tolerance
again in the literature review, the methods section and the final discussion.
Second, our student sample exhibits a very strong ideological skew to the left. The median score
on the standard left-right-scale (which runs from 0-10) is three. Half of our students openly
identify as ‘left-wing’ – but only one percent identifies as straight-out ‘right-wing’. While we
have no reason to doubt that this reflects the ideological distribution in our specific student

5

population, it also skews our comparison. We are essentially comparing extremely left-leaning
to only moderately right-leaning students.
Our point, therefore, is not to make sweeping statements about the tolerance of the political left
or the right in general, but to look empirically at a very specific allegation of intolerance levelled
at leftist students. With these important caveats in mind, our results still point to worrying
tendencies in academic culture which may have implications for university students and
teachers as well as the social sciences more broadly. We will consider these in the discussion.
Background
Free Speech Controversies on University Campuses
In the 1980s and 1990s American universities witnessed lively debates about ‘political
correctness’ (PC), speech codes and the restriction of ‘hate speech’ which also caught the
attention of the wider public (Lea 2009, Hughes 2010). These debates laid the foundation of
divisions which still hold today. Critics of speech codes bemoaned an increasingly repressive
intellectual climate on university campuses, the pressure to conform to PC culture and a
growing intolerance toward dissenting views (Bloom 1987, D'Souza 1991). Defenders argued
that speech codes protect minority students from discrimination and pushed back by framing
the concern with ‘chilling effects’ as mere conservative hysteria (Williams 1995, Wilson 1995).
More recent debates over free speech on university campus revolve around so-called ‘trigger
warnings’, ‘micro-aggressions’, ‘safe spaces’ and ‘cultural appropriation’ (Campbell and
Manning 2014, Lukianoff and Haidt 2015, Furedi 2016). Trigger warnings are introductory
remarks, which warn audiences of potentially distressing contents of a book or lecture. Microaggression encompasses speech acts which are intentionally or unintentionally degrading,
prejudicial or hostile towards certain (usually minority) groups. The purpose of safe spaces is
that disadvantaged groups can come together to discuss their shared experience, protected from

6

criticism and harassment. A majority group commits cultural appropriation if it adopts
minority groups’ symbols and forms of expressions in decontextualized and exploitative ways.
Controversies about these concepts deal with exactly where to draw the line, the imputation of
malevolent intentions and how to sanction the violation of associated norms. Some argue that
these concepts can be interpreted as expressions of a culture of victimhood on university
campus, which combines the predisposition to be highly sensitive to offense with the tendency
to outsource conflict resolution to authorities (Campbell and Manning 2018). This culture is
also defined by a conflation of physical and emotional harm and an accentuated identification
with minority groups and victim status.
Considerable public attention also focuses on student protests that have sometimes turned
violent, led to the disinvitation of ‘controversial’ speakers and the cancelling of university
events hosting prominent guests due to security threats. Even university professors became
targets of student-led campaigns for perceived transgressions, which often resulted in sanctions
by university administrations. Some gave in and resigned, others were suspended or fired.

Deplatforming and Canceling at German Universities
A series of prominent cases in Germany suggests that this trend is not restricted to the English
speaking university context: 5 In 2015 a group of anonymous social science students at

5

Here we only report on the most recent cases, but the phenomenon is certainly not new in the German university

context. During the student protests of the 1960s and 1970s, for instance, sociologist Erwin K. Scheuch of the
University of Cologne was the target of sharp attacks by students who criticized his work on military sociology
and that eventually led to a series of court trials (we thank one reviewer for bringing this to our attention).
Interestingly, Scheuch positioned the empirical-analytical approach to sociology in Cologne in direct opposition
to the critical theory of the Frankfurt school. It is perhaps not without irony then, that one of the most famous cases
of student attacks at that time involved its key founder, Theodor W. Adorno of Goethe University Frankfurt. In

7

Humboldt-University in Berlin set up a watchblog documenting allegedly ‘sexist, racist and
militarist’ views by Herfried Münkler, a professor of political theory and well-known public
intellectual. In 2016 the university president of the University of Marburg yielded to the
pressure of the university’s women’s affairs officer and uninvited evolutionary biologist Ulrich
Kutschera from a lecture series because of his critical views on gender ideology. Again at
Humboldt-University in 2016, students protested and publicly accused migration expert and
sociology professor Ruud Koopmans of furthering ‘anti-Muslim racism’ and ‘conceptual
nationalism’ because of his research on the labor market integration of Muslim immigrants.
Later in 2016, a talk by historian Jörg Barberowski organized by a conservative student group
was cancelled at the University of Bremen. Barberowski, an expert on Stalinism and the history
of Eastern Europe who had already been the target of attacks by leftist students in the past, was
accused of spreading ‘right-wing extremist ideology’ for his critical views on the German
refugee policy.
It is the following two incidents that hit too close to home and that prompted us into researching
the state of free speech and political viewpoint diversity on university campus. In fall 2017 a
talk by Rainer Wendt, head of the police union, was cancelled at Goethe-University in Frankfurt
yielding to the pressure of student groups and an open letter demanding his disinvitation which

April 1969, in what became known as the ‘Busenattentat’ (‘breast attack’), three radical female students
surrounded him during the lecture, flashed their breasts and tried to kiss him. This may have been a feminist
statement or simply a reaction to his earlier calling of the police to clear the Institute of Social Research from
student protestors. Either way, it turned out to be Adorno’s last public lecture before his death a couple of months
later.

8

was signed by several members of the social science faculty. 6 Wendt who had been invited to
talk about immigration from the practical perspective of police experience was criticized for
his view on the refugee crisis and accused of furthering ‘racist modes of thinking’. Later, in
April 2019 students at Goethe University demanded that ethnographer Susanne Schröter, an
expert on Islam, be fired from her position as university professor. Schröter was accused of
‘anti-Muslim racism’ because of organizing a critical panel discussion on the Muslim headscarf.
In October 2019, the German public vividly discussed the newest addition to the list. At the
University of Hamburg, student activists repeatedly prevented university professor Bernd
Lucke from giving his introductory lecture on macroeconomics. As a former founding member
of the right-wing party AfD, the students accused Lucke of xenophobia, called him a ‘Nazi pig’
and even physically attacked him.
For some observers, these trends on university campuses are a clear indicator of the dire future
for freedom of speech. Others view these incidents as scandalized singular events and regard
campus intolerance as a myth. So far, however, both fail to present systematic empirical
evidence to support their claims.

What Do We Know Empirically About Free Speech and Intolerance on University
Campus?
Evidence from Empirical Research on Political Tolerance
Surprisingly little is known about the actual state of free speech and political viewpoint
diversity on university campuses. Much of the existing evidence can be found in news articles

6

Both authors were part of the social science faculty at that time. One of us received considerable push-back for

publicly criticizing the disinvitation and canceling of the event via the faculty mailing list. While many
colleagues expressed support for this criticism in private, no-one made it public over the mailing list.

9

or blogposts and yields mixed results. This is despite the fact that the empirical study of free
expression and tolerance has a long tradition in the social sciences, dating back to Stouffer
(1955), who studied citizens’ willingness to allow nonconformists – in his time and context this
meant communists, socialists and atheists – to publicly speak, teach at universities and have
their books in public libraries (see also Gross & Kinder 1998, Mondak & Sanders 2003, Gibson
1992, 2006, 2013). A key result in this line of research of is that people “express strong
endorsement of the general principles of free expression and great reluctance to sustain these
principles when asked to apply them to noxious groups” (Marcus, Sullivan, Theiss-Morse, &
Wood 1995: 8).
Some have used the classical Stouffer method to study the tolerance of university students.
Looking at data from the General Social Survey (GSS) 1970-2002, Chong (2006) found that
US college students were less tolerant of racist speech than the rest of the population, especially
the generation educated after the PC debate began, and that this effect was largest for those selfidentifying as liberal (in the US sense of the term). He found no evidence, however, for a general
climate of intolerance on college campuses. Using the same GSS data, but extended to 2016,
Sachs (2018) and Yglesias (2018) show that general tolerance of free expression has increased
over time and that liberals, the youngest generation and college students are consistently the
most tolerant of all. This is supported by a recent study in the UK that did “not find any evidence
that students are more hostile to free speech than the general population” (YouGov 2018).
However, in a series of contributions Stevens and Haidt (2018a, 2018b, 2018c) call the use of
GSS data into question. This is because most of the chosen targets of intolerance in these data
(e.g. socialists, atheists, homosexuals) are not considered controversial anymore, rendering the
data inappropriate for longitudinal analyses (echoing the seminal criticism of Sullivan et al.
1979) and virtually meaningless for the study of intolerance among university students,

10

especially those on the left who are likely to see other targets as objectionable (e.g. racists,
sexists, homophobes).
This criticism is supported by studies from social psychology that suggest that while political
ideology structures general attitudes toward free speech (e.g. Lalonde et al. 2000, Downs and
Cowan 2012, Bilewicz et al. 2017), there is an important interaction between political ideology
and content of speech that one wants to see restricted. Suedfeld et al. (1994) suggest that liberals
are more likely to support the censorship of racist, sexist and homophobic messages whereas
political conservatives are more likely to support the censorship of pornography and offensive
content regarding religious faith and conservative values. While Fisher at al. (1999) find that
support for censorship is generally higher for the political right than the left, they also document
left support for politically correct censorship, especially on university campus. Concern for
political correctness is associated with leftist beliefs and ideologies and with less right-wing
authoritarianism (Strauts und Blanton 2015).
Once the targets of intolerance are adjusted, a different view of the state of free expression on
university campus emerges. Drawing on newly designed items from the FIRE/YouGov (2017)
survey of undergraduate students in the US and the Cato Institute’s (2017) Free Speech and
Tolerance Survey, Stevens and Haidt (2018c) find that students on the left are intolerant toward
many speakers who are seen to violate their values and more so than their right-leaning peers.
Another recent survey discovered that US students tend to value inclusion and diversity more
than free expression and that ten percent deem violence and 37 percent shouting down an
acceptable measure to prevent someone from speaking (Gallup/Knight Foundation 2018).
What students think about free speech and its limits is critical because changing social norms
gradually find their way out of academia and into wider society. Students eventually assume
occupational roles and responsibilities in private companies, public administrations and the
media and bring their ideas with them. Student bodies are also often the origin of social

11

movements and social media trends which have a direct influence on how political issues are
framed and talked about in public.

Evidence on Conformity Pressures at the University
The true significance of ideas for limiting free speech may lie in their contribution to a general
culture of conformity and the constraints people impose on each other (Noelle-Neumann 1974,
Gibson 1992, 2006, Loury 1994). PC debates on university campuses, for instance, may have
„created a culture in which everyone must think twice before speaking up, lest they face charges
of insensitivity, aggression, or worse“ (Lukianoff and Haidt 2015: np). A possible result is selfcensorship. In an environment in which one ideological perspective dominates, individuals with
divergent or minority views will be likely to suppress their opinions to avoid social exclusion
(cf. the classic ‘spiral of silence’ argument by Noelle-Neumann 1974, Matthes et al. 2018). In
public debates this is often described as “chilling effect,” where people do not speak openly for
fear of negative consequences.

Interestingly, the question whether intolerance indeed constrains the expression of political
views has been only rarely tested (but see Gibson 1992 and Classen and Gibson 2019 who
provide supporting evidence for this general claim). Regarding students’ willingness to discuss
controversial subjects, a representative survey of US college students found that over half are
reluctant to share their views on at least one of five controversial topics on campus: politics,
race, religion, sexuality and gender (Stiksma 2020). Students were most concerned about other
students criticizing their views as offensive. The study also suggests that conservative students
were more reluctant to talk about controversial topics, which is also supported by a previous
survey (Gallup/Knight Foundation 2018).

12

To the best of our knowledge, there is no current data on German students which asks questions
similar to the ones discussed above. However, a recent survey of German university teachers
indicates that 31 percent feel restricted in their teaching by political correctness (Petersen 2020).
Interestingly, differences between the humanities (36 percent), the legal, economic and social
sciences (33 percent), medicine (28 percent) and the natural sciences and engineering (27
percent) are not as great as one might expect.
Our study is an initial step toward charting the state of free speech and viewpoint diversity in
the German university context. At this stage, we are not concerned with the testing of causal
hypotheses, but aim at a descriptive exploration: How easily offended are students and how
tolerant are they of controversial viewpoints? Is there evidence for conformity pressure and
does it restrict discussion on university campus? Are students left-of-center more sensitive and
more prone to restrict speech? Are their peers right-of-center more reluctant to speak openly?
To address these questions, we now turn to our own survey data of social science students at
Goethe University Frankfurt.

Data and Methods
The Sample
The target population of our study are all current social science students at Goethe University
of Frankfurt. According to the university’s most recent student statistics (Göhring and Götz
2018), a total of N = 6’674 students was enrolled in one of the social science programs in
2017/2018. We sent out an online questionnaire constructed using the survey software Qualtrics
to all students in the department. Participation was voluntary and incentivized with a lottery of
three Amazon gift vouchers in the worth of 50 euros each. We were able to collect a total of N
= 932 responses in the period from May 16 to July 2 2018. However, the actual net response
rate drops from 14 percent to 7.5 percent when we consider only those who completed at least
13

80 percent of the survey (N=501), which is clearly not great and has to be kept in mind when
drawing conclusions from the data. All analyses will be based on pair-wise deletion of missing
values.
To get a sense of the representativeness of the survey, we compare the composition of our
sample to official university statistics (see table A1 in the appendix). In the student population
54.7 percent are female and 45.3 male. This is very close to our sample where 54.1 percent
identify as female and 42.2 as male. We should note that the missing percentage is due to
students that identify as “other” gender or preferred not to say. The sample includes more first
year students (32.7 percent) as compared to the true student body (25.8 percent). The
distribution across the two main study programs at the department is again well captured by our
data (compare 36.2 to 33.5 percent for political science and 43.3 to 40.6 percent for sociology).
The remaining percentage refers to students in either one of the specialized master programs or
in the teacher’s track. The sample also matches well the gender distribution and first year
students within political science and sociology, with only male sociology students slightly
underrepresented by -4.3 percentage points.
While our sample represents the social science studentship at Frankfurt well in terms of key
demographics, a graver concern is sample selectivity based on political motivation. In the
introduction to the survey we stated that “the purpose of this research study is to examine if and
how students think free speech should be regulated within the university and beyond.” Given
the public controversy, it is unlikely that only students on one side of the debate were more or
less likely to participate. However, especially highly politicized students on the left may see
quantitative surveys as ‘instruments of surveillance and control’ and actively boycott
participation, thus distorting our sample. Unfortunately, the official student survey conducted
by Goethe University in 2017/2018 does not include political variables that would allow us to
evaluate our sample and to correct it by applying survey weighting. However, if the above-

14

mentioned assumption is true (and we think it is quite plausible), we would expect this to work
against our main finding and indeed underestimate campus intolerance.

Outcome Variables
We will structure the empirical analysis along several outcome measures tapping into students’
experiences with and attitudes toward free expression on university campus. We start our
analysis by establishing students’ sensitivity to potentially offensive acts of speech or
viewpoints. We asked students the following question: „Have you ever felt offended or
intimidated by a statement that another person made on campus?“7 Although using this question
does not allow us to separate students’ sensitivities from actual incidences it gives us a sense
of the subjective experiences students make on university campus. One in three students or 35
percent (N=165) of our sample answered affirmatively to the question.
Next, we adapted Stouffer’s (1955) method to elicit tolerance toward viewpoints that focus on
controversial ideas about gender equality, sexual identity, immigration and Islam. Thus, it
should be stressed that these measures do not capture tolerance in general (see the classical
critique by Sullivan et al. 1979) but only concerning these very specific targets. However, these
targets are central in current free speech free on university campuses because arguments in
favor of restricting speech have for the most part focused on expressions involving minorities
and historically disadvantaged groups (Gross and Kinder 1998). We will return to this point in
the discussion.
The four targets were described as follows: „Somebody who thinks that there are biological
differences in talents between men and women,“ „A person who is against all forms of
immigration to this country,“ „A person who believes that Islam is incompatible with the

7

This question wording was taken from the Campus Expression Survey (Stevens et al. 2017).

15

Western way of life“ and finally „A person who thinks that homosexuality is immoral and
dangerous.“ For each target we asked whether they „should be allowed to speak at the
university,“ whether they „should be allowed to teach at the university“ and whether students
favored „removing their book from the university library.“ We present the descriptive results
to these question in Figure 1 and discuss them in detail further below.
To gauge whether there is indeed evidence for the pressure to conform or the reluctance to
speak openly at the university, we looked at three measures: the reluctance to speak openly
about controversial political issues during a class discussion, concern over the consequences
when speaking up about a controversial political issue and whether students had ever been
personally criticized for their view on a controversial political issue.8
The first survey question read: “Next, we are interested in how you would feel about expressing
your personal opinions in class discussions at your university. Think of a class with about 2030 students. Consider the following scenario: Think about being at your university in a class
that was discussing a controversial political issue. How comfortable or reluctant would you
feel about speaking up and giving your views on this topic?” Students could answer on a 4point scale. Our data suggests that a clear majority of two-thirds of students would feel
“somewhat” (42 percent) or “entirely” comfortable (24 percent) discussing controversial topics
in class. However, one in three students report they would be “somewhat” (24 percent) or even
“entirely” (11 percent) reluctant to openly express their opinion at the university.
We measure students’ concerns with the likely consequences if they gave their view on a
controversial issue using a simple additive scale of four items: „The professor would criticize
my views as offensive,“ “Other students would criticize my views as offensive,” “Someone
would file a complaint claiming that my views violated a campus harassment policy,”
“Someone would post critical comments about my views on social media.” For each item

8

The wording of these questions was taken from the Campus Expression Survey (Stevens et al. 2017).

16

respondents could answer on a 5-point scale from 1 “not at all concerned” to 5 “Extremely
concerned.” The additive scale ranges from 0 to 20 with a mean of 9.4, a standard deviation of
4.4 and Cronbach’s 𝛼 of 0.81, suggesting good internal scale consistency.
Last we asked „Have you ever felt that your opinion was dismissed or you were personally
criticized because you shared your views on a controversial political issue in a class
discussion?“ Overall, one in four or 25 percent (N=126) of the students answered „yes.“

Predictor Variables
Given the prominent role of political ideology in debates about free speech on university
campus we consider students` political orientation as key predictor of their views and
experiences. We first directly asked the students how they identify politically. Six percent or
N=28 students preferred not to say. Among the remainder, 51 percent identify as „left-wing“
(N=245) and 24 percent as „liberal“ (N=118). Only four percent stated they see themselves as
„conservative“ (N=18) and „libertarian“ (N=17), respectively. One percent identified as „rightwing“ (N=4) and eleven students as „other“ (N=53). Next, we measure the ideological selfplacement using the standard 11-point left-right scale. The median value of the left-right-scale
(which runs from 0 to 10) is three. Finally, we also asked students which party they had voted
for in the 2017 federal election. While seven percent (N=35) preferred not to say, another six
percent (N=27) were not eligible to vote and four percent (N=18) did not turn out to vote.
Among the students who did vote, 38 percent voted for Die Linke (N=152), 24 percent for
Grüne (N=98), 16 percent for SPD (N=63), eight percent each for CDU/CSU and FDP (N=33
and 31, respectively) and two percent for the AfD (N=9). Five percent or N=19 students voted
for another party. So, taken together, three-quarters of the students (78 percent) voted for a leftof-center party. Since all three measures yield essentially the same results and in order to save
space, we only report the results for the standard left-right-ideology scale in the regression
17

tables below.9 We standardize the left-right-ideology scale dividing by two standard deviations
to make it roughly comparable to the dummy variables in the models (Gelman 2007). Because
of the heavy skew and to ensure a minimum of responses on both sides of the ideological
spectrum, we decided to code the neutral scale midpoint of 5 as “right-of-center” whenever we
conduct categorical comparisons. Thus, students with scores 0-4 are considered “left-of-center”
and students with scores 5-10 as “right-of-center.”
We include several additional variables in our analyses. We created a dummy variable for
students who were born after 1995. A central claim in the current debate about the free speech
crisis on university campus is that younger age cohorts have a distinct and restrictive opinion
on free speech. This has partly to do with a change in parenting styles and digital social media,
which made them overly sensitive and emotionally fragile. As a result, they are more likely to
feel offended and to demand measures such as speech codes, trigger warnings or safe spaces
(Lukianoff and Haidt 2018, Stevens and Haidt 2018a, 2018b). Relatedly, we constructed
another dummy variable for students who began their university education before 2015. This
year marks a key transition when important concepts and arguments for restricting what
students should be allowed to say or even wear (e.g. ‘microaggressions’, ‘cultural
appropriation’, etc.) were widely popularized on university campuses (Stevens and Haidt
2018a, 2018b). We reason that students who were already socialized earlier would be less likely
to adopt these ideas than students that start their socialization with these concepts already in
place and thus be more tolerant (Chong 2006). Finally, we include categorical variables for
students’ gender and ethnic minority status. Since debates about restricting speech on campus
are intimately related with questions of equal treatment and non-discrimination, we are
interested in any differences along these identity variables. 20 percent (N=96) of the students

9

Full results for political identification and vote choice are available upon request.

18

in our sample identify as belonging to an ethnic minority (3 percent or N=16 students preferred
not to say).10

Open Questions and Focus Groups
We also included two open questions in the survey for a more detailed understanding of the
content of students’ experience with offensive statements and conformity pressures. If students
reported that they had experienced offensive or intimidating statements on university campus,
we asked them: „Do you remember the gist of the statement that offended or intimidated you?
If so, can you please provide a brief summary of the statement and who made it, using the space
below?“ If students indicated that they were dismissed because of their political view, we
followed up by asking: “Do you remember the gist of the statement you made? If so, can you
please provide a brief summary of the statement you made, using the space below?”
Responses to these open questions were coded in terms of the political-ideological thrust of the
(perceived and committed) ‘offense’. Based on a classification of statements typically
associated with left-leaning or right-leaning political positions, we distinguished two directions
of offense: “offensive to the right” and “offensive to the left.” 11 Both authors coded all
examples of respondents’ experiences with offensive statements and being personally
dismissed for their views on campus and reached a satisfactory degree of intercoder reliability.

10

We also asked for students’ sexual orientation. But since only 3 percent (N=16) identified as homosexual we

decided against including sexual minority status in our models below.
11

Some examples, especially those which involved two or more political topics, could not be clearly politically

assigned in the German context. A frequent example of this are statements about anti-Semitism in combination
with the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians: “A student gave a public speech about the conflict between
Israel and Palestine. In his speech he used anti-Semitic language which was far [beyond of] just a critical statement
against the political agenda of the Israeli state.”

19

Cohen’s Kappa was .80 for left offenses and .79 for right offenses which suggests strong
agreement.
At the end of the survey we asked students if they were interested in participating in a focus
group. Two focus group interviews with four participants in each were conducted on the 11 th
of July, 2018. Due to the small sample, these interviews are not subjected to a systematic
analysis but instead are used to support the interpretation of survey results and to illustrate
points made in this paper.

Results
Who is Offended by What on University Campus?
A third of the students in our sample reports that they have encountered offensive statements
on university campus. Model 1 in Table 1 presents linear probability models that relate students’
experience with offensive statements to their individual characteristics. While ideological selfplacement and voting for a left party is not associated with experiencing offensive statements,
students who identify as “left-wing” tend to be more sensitive to speech on campus and have a
nine percent higher probability of reporting an experience (𝛽 = 0.09, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.04, not shown in
table). We also find that students who were already enrolled in the university before 2015 are
more likely to have encountered offensive or intimidating comments, which may be due to the
simple fact that they have already spent more time on campus (𝛽 = 0.17, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.05). Male
students are generally less likely to feel offended or intimated by comments and remarks (𝛽 =
−0.11, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.05). Interestingly, neither younger age cohorts nor students with an ethnic
minority background stand out regarding experiences with offensive statements.
To get a better sense of the content of the speech that students found troubling, we asked them
to describe their experience in an open question (see Table 2). While respondents right-ofcenter provided only few examples, the vast majority of responses (75%) come from left20

leaning students being offended by statements they deemed as too conservative, as violating or
insufficiently adhering to speech norms. This is, of course, mainly due to the skewed
distribution of political ideology in the sample. 12 By far the most prominent subject of scenarios
was gender and sexuality (half of all responses). The few students right of center were offended
by students and lecturers arguing that gender is merely a social construct, whereas students left
of center were offended by the opposite argument: “Elderly male professor denying any social
influence in gender creation. It is all biological, he said,” to give an example. Left-leaning
students were further offended by homophobic, misogynist, sexist comments and
‘mansplaining.’ Many responses did not describe specific scenarios but were general, as in:
“sexist comments by fellow students and professors.” There was some overlap between male
students on both sides of the political spectrum taking offense about feeling dismissed as men.
Table 1: Regression Models of Offense Taking and Tolerance on University Campus

Left-Right-Ideology

Born after 1995

Studied before 2015

Male gender

Other gender

Prefer not to say gender

Ethnic minority

(M1)
Feeling offended or
intimidated by a statement
on campus

(M2)
Tolerance of
controversial
viewpoints

-0.07

2.56***

(0.05)

(0.29)

-0.02

-0.70**

(0.05)

(0.30)

0.17***

0.83**

(0.05)

(0.34)

-0.11**

2.07***

(0.05)

(0.29)

0.24

1.60

(0.17)

(1.21)

0.17

1.37

(0.21)

(1.29)

0.05

-0.28

21

(0.06)

(0.36)

0.21

-0.47

(0.15)

(0.91)

0.33***

5.81***

(0.05)

(0.30)

N

451

436

R2

0.06

0.27

Prefer not to say ethnicity

Constant

Note: M1: Linear Probability Model; M2: OLS; *p<0.1; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01
Table 2: Students’ experience with offensive statements on university campus by direction of offense and
students’ political ideology

Offensive to the
Left

Student
Left-of-center

Student
Right-of-center

72 % (N=55)

4% (N=3)

“When a prof said he is able to
prove philosophically that women
cannot think.”

“In a discussion about the Trump
election someone tried to play down
Trumps "grab them by the pussy
statement" as normal behaviour for
men”

“Students claiming that Muslims
are not compatible with the
Western culture because of their
different values. ‘Muslims are too
aggressive and violent.’ etc.”
“In another class the topic was
reproductive rights and a female
student argued against free access
to the (contraceptive) morningafter pill by equating it with
abortion.”
“All people reading Marx would be
Communists, or did not understand
how economics really work in our
society.

“Someone said that all overweight
persons are just lazy, inconsequent,
unable to set and reach goals. It was
not possible to discuss with this
person and the real problem was, that
this person was not able to accept
different view and became very
insulting (no objective discussion
was possible)”
“A student said that all people who
suffer from mental illnesses and or
depression are weak and unbearable.”

22

Offensive to the
Right

12% (N=9)

12 % (N=9)

“The statement was about me being
a dick because I was white, male
and heterosexual (therefore I
logically must be an asshole)”

“A female professor frequently made
public comments in a big class about
how bad men generally are.”

„A fellow student in a seminar
compared consuming animal
products to the holocaust.”
“I dislike it if people are calling for
violence or vandalism to push
through political agendas. It
regularly happens during campus
(AStA) election campaigns and
frequently in private discussions,
sometimes even in classes and
lectures.”

“When I criticized social media
restrictions in Germany due to the
‘Netzwerkdurchsetzungsgesetz’, the
Professor said, that I would not
understand what hate speech is. I
asked her to define hate speech. She
got angry, pointed her finger at me
and said: ‘I know what to think about
your views now.’”
“That gender is made up and
conservatives are racist”

Are Students Really Intolerant of Controversial Views on University Campus?
In this section we explore whether and how students` sensitivities translate into intolerance and
the restriction of controversial topics on university campuses. Figure 1 presents the descriptive
results to these questions. Overall, majorities of between 60 and 80 percent of the students think
that controversial speakers should be able to speak at the university and that books with
controversial content should be available at the university library. While this seems to point to
comfortable levels of tolerance, it also means that 20 to 40 percent favor the restriction of free
expression. In addition, clear majorities also state that persons who hold controversial views
should not be allowed to teach at the university. In more detail, only 69 percent would allow a
speaker who is critical of Islam on campus (78 percent would allow their book in the library),
67 percent a speaker who thinks there are biological skill differences between the men and
women (81 percent the book) and 59 percent someone who is opposed to immigration (74
percent the book). Only 44 percent of the students would tolerate a speaker who thinks
homosexuality is a sin and 66 percent have their book in the university library.

23

When it comes to the question who should be allowed to teach at the university, only a third of
the students think that this should be the case for someone who believes in biological
differences in talents between the sexes (36 percent) or who views Islam as incompatible with
Western society (32 percent). Only a quarter of the students would accept a university teacher
that is strictly opposed to immigration (23 percent) and even less a person who believes that
homosexuality is immoral (17 percent). Our focus group conversations with students suggest
that a common motivation behind this attitude is that students fear that university teachers will
not be able to separate their opinion from their professional role as supervisors. In other words,
the concern is that female, Muslim, immigrant, or homosexual students or students who take
their sides might be treated unfairly.
Figure 1: Description of students’ tolerance for controversial topics on university campus.
A) Should be allowed to speak at the university
A person who believes that Islam
is incompatible with the Western way of life

69

Somebody who thinks that there are biological
differences in talents between men and women

67

A person who is against all forms
of immigration to this country

59

A person who thinks that
homosexuality is immoral and dangerous

44
0

20

40

60

80

100

80

100

Percent

B) Should be allowed to teach at the university
A person who believes that Islam
is incompatible with the Western way of life

32

Somebody who thinks that there are biological
differences in talents between men and women

36

A person who is against all forms
of immigration to this country

23

A person who thinks that
homosexuality is immoral and dangerous

17
0

20

40

60
Percent

C) Against removing their book from the university library
A person who believes that Islam
is incompatible with the Western way of life

78

Somebody who thinks that there are biological
differences in talents between men and women

81

A person who is against all forms
of immigration to this country

74

A person who thinks that
homosexuality is immoral and dangerous

66
0

20

40

60

80

100

Percent

24

Are Left-leaning Students Really More Willing to Restrict Free Speech on University Campus?
To analyze ideological differences in intolerance toward controversial speakers on university
campus, we add up all items to construct a simple tolerance of non-conformism scale which
runs from 0 to 12 (with a mean of 6.5, a standard deviation of 3.3 and a Cronbach’s 𝛼 of 0.85).
Model 2 in Table 1 presents the results of an OLS regression of the tolerance score on the leftright self-placement along with indicators of whether students were born after 1995, whether
they had studied before 2015 as well as their gender and ethnic minority status. We indeed find
that the left-right ideology is clearly and significantly related to preferences for restricting free
expression on campus (𝛽 = 2.56, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.29). Right-leaning students are more tolerant of
controversial opinions about gender, homosexuality, immigration and Islam than their leftleaning counterparts. Additional analyses not shown here suggest that students that explicitly
self-identify as left-wing are significantly less tolerant of controversial views and speakers (𝛽 =
−2.23, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.29). Students that voted for Die Linke, Grüne or SPD are also significantly less
tolerant of controversial ideas on university campuses (𝛽 = −1.28, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.32). In addition,
we find that students born after 1995 and students who started in 2015 or later are less tolerant,
whereas male students are more tolerant of these ideas. Ethnic minority status is not related to
preferences for speech regulation.
Are Students Really Reluctant to Speak Openly at the University?
A third of our students reported that they would be at least “somewhat” reluctant to openly
express their political opinion during a class discussion. Model 1 in Table 3 shows the result of
regressing students’ reluctance to openly give their political views on their individual
characteristics.13 We find that right leaning students are significantly more likely to withhold
their political views during class discussions (𝛽 = 0.29, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.09). Conversely, students who

13

For the sake of simplicity and ease of interpretation, we ran OLS models instead of Ordered Logit or Ordered

Probit models. The substantive interpretation is unlikely to be affected.

25

self-identify as politically left-wing are generally more comfortable in speaking up on
controversial political issues (𝛽 = −0.32, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.09). The same holds for students who had
voted for Die Linke, Grüne or SPD in the last election (𝛽 = −0.27, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.09). Apart from
political ideology, male students are generally more comfortable giving their view than female
students. We find no differences across either student age cohorts or ethnic identities.

Table 3: Regression Models of Conformity Pressures and Self-Censorship on University Campus

Left-Right-Ideology

Born after 1995

Studied before 2015

Male gender

Other gender

Prefer not to say gender

Ethnic minority

Prefer not to say ethnicity

Constant

(M1)
Reluctance to speak
political views openly in
class

(M2)
Concern of
consequences for
political views

(M3)
Experience of being
dismissed for
political views

0.29***

2.10***

0.15***

(0.09)

(0.42)

(0.04)

0.03

0.03

-0.02

(0.09)

(0.44)

(0.04)

-0.00

-0.77

0.01

(0.10)

(0.49)

(0.05)

-0.32***

-0.95**

0.09**

(0.09)

(0.42)

(0.04)

0.06

0.42

0.25

(0.33)

(1.56)

(0.16)

0.20

0.45

-0.10

(0.40)

(1.88)

(0.19)

0.06

0.15

0.12**

(0.11)

(0.53)

(0.05)

0.16

2.84**

0.20

(0.27)

(1.28)

(0.13)

2.32***

9.93***

0.20***

(0.09)

(0.44)

(0.04)

26

Observations

454

449

452

R2

0.05

0.08

0.06

Note: M1 & M2: OLS; M3: Linear Probability Model; *p<0.1; **p<0.05; ***p<0.01

Model 2 in Table 4 presents the results of an OLS regression that regresses students´ concern
of consequences if they give their political view on their characteristics. Right-leaning students
are significantly more concerned that giving their political views will result in disapproval (𝛽 =
2.10, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.42). Those who explicitly identify as “left-wing” are significantly less likely to
feel concerned (𝛽 = −1.89, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.41) as are the students that voted for a left-of-center party
(𝛽 = −0.98, 𝑆𝐸 = 0.44). In addition, we find that males are less worried about consequences
when giving their political views in the classroom. Those students who did not want to disclose
their ethnic identity are significantly more concerned about potential consequences.
A quarter of the students have experienced criticism for their political views. Model 3 in Table
4 shows differences across student characteristics. Students who are further towards the right
than the average have a significant and 15 percent higher probability of having experienced
their opinions dismissed in a class discussion. This happened significantly less often to leftleaning students and students who had voted for left-of-center parties. Males are significantly
more likely to be personally criticized for their political opinion than female students and so
are students with an ethnic minority background.
To learn more about which opinions were dismissed during class discussions, we asked students
in an open question to describe what they had said in that situation (see Table 4). Many
examples are in line with the findings mentioned above: (conservative) students being
dismissed by others for making critical, insensitive or merely empirically qualifying remarks
about discrimination of women, ethnic or sexual minorities as well as (to a far lesser extent)
arguments critical of immigration. Being labelled as ‘homophobic’, ‘racist’ or ‘sexist’ is often
the consequence. This also happens to faculty members. One focus group participant told us
27

that one of her male professors who refused to use gender neutral language was immediately
labelled as ‘sexist’ by students. She also described a situation in a class discussion where one
student made a comment which others took as apologetic of a homophobic catchphrase: “He
said ‘I just meant it as a joke. I’m not homophobic’ and then everybody ganged up on him and
said ‘How can you? What an intolerant opinion!’ No matter what my position is in this matter;
I also don’t think it is ok to say that, but yet he wasn’t taken seriously. He was immediately
portrayed as a homophobic person somehow“ (female student, 27).
What was remarkable, furthermore, is that even statements of left-leaning students were subject
to speech policing on the part of (presumably even more left-leaning) students. To illustrate,
compare the following two examples: “I said that feminism can be a kind of extremism if it’s
going too far” and “I claimed, that left-extremism is as bad as right-extremism or Islamism,
because all these three want to violate the life and health of people.” The first scenario involved
a student who classified herself as left-wing (with a score of 2 on the left-right scale and who
voted for Die Linke in the last federal election), the second a conservative male student (with a
score of 7 and who voted for CDU/CSU). Both believe, however, that most of their fellow
students are more left than them.
Other left-leaning students were reprimanded for using the word Rasse (race) or for arguing
that immigrants should be deported if they were denied asylum and their home country is not
at war. A female student left-of-center rubbed her fellow students the wrong way when she
spoke out against gender quotas in companies and a male student left-of-center “got
aggressively approached by a female person sitting next to me for saying that I liked the
egalitarian use of gender-specific speech where sometimes the author uses a male and a female
version of a word.” She accused him of “violating women’s rights” by not using the ‘*’

28

convention of gender-neutral language.14
Students on both sides of the ideological spectrum were also dismissed for their views on free
speech itself. One right-of-center student (left-right score of 6, FDP voter) argued in a
discussion on the 2016 US presidential election that freedom of expression included all political
opinions. The lecturer rebuked this statement by saying that “some opinions aren’t opinions.”
When the student asked the lecturer, what constituted an opinion in his opinion, a historical
exegesis of the term followed. Instead of enhancing his understanding, the student felt “this
rhetorical figure, in the manner it was presented, had the goal to silence me.” Though most
situations described involved students’ opinions dismissed by other students, there were several
instances in which professors and lecturers restricted speech. This also came up frequently in
our focus groups. As one participant (female, 27) told us, “I have one lecturer who, I would
say, is on one political side and … there are restrictions in what you can say. Because the boss
in the room has a very clear opinion.”
Students were not only criticized for violating or not adhering to speech norms but also for
overly demanding conformism and making too progressive arguments, though to a lesser extent
(less than one third of responses). These statements were in favor of abortion, on admitting
European guilt for the situation in African countries and for refugee deaths in the Mediterranean
Sea, against an overly punitive penal system and for condemning statements as racist. One
female student was dismissed for arguing that it was cultural appropriation when white people
wear dreadlocks without reflecting on their historical meaning. Coincidentally, another leftleaning male student in the survey felt dismissed for making the opposite argument against the
inflationary use of the term ‘cultural appropriation’ in a discussion about dreadlocks (possibly

One such convention in the German language is to insert an asterisk before or after gender-specific syllables
and adding – e.g. ‘Student*in’ (student) – or highlighting – e.g. ‘Beamte*r’ (civil servant) – the female suffix to
signify inclusiveness of both genders as well as non-binary people. We should note, however, that this form of
‘gender inclusive’ language is itself controversial.
14

29

in the same debate).
Table 4: Students’ experience of being dismissed or criticized for their views in class discussion by
direction of offense and students’ political ideology

Offensive to
the Left

Student
Left-of-center

Student
Right-of-center

38% (N=23)

37% (N=22)

“We talked about the custom in a LatinAmerican country to bury inadvertent
children alive. My opinion is, that this
should be prohibited, because human
rights are more worth than customs …
My fellow students started arguing and
offending me with the Eurocentric
argument ‘People from the western
world can’t force others to do what they
think is the right.’”

“I made the point that an institution in
itself is not discriminating against
some groups but rather individuals in
the institution that set up rules that
might be discriminating or make
decisions that are discriminating …
Prof and some students insisted on it
without tackling my concerns. They
were very satisfied when I did not want
to continue the discussion.”

“I once argued that unions were bad for
the unemployed and nowadays also
rather bad for economic growth and
therefore should enjoy less rights and
privileges than they do in France today.”

“While discussing the last American
election in class I made the statement
that freedom of expression involves all
opinions in the political spectrum
which got dismissed (by the lecturer)
because “some opinions aren't
opinions” … After asking what
constitutes an opinion in the lecturer’s
opinion I was pointed to the long
history of the word. This rhetorical
figure, in the manner it was presented,
had the goal to silence me.”

“I said that honour killings happen in
Germany”

23% (N=14)
“Every kind of immigrant should be
allowed to live in this country”
Offensive to
the Right

2% (N=1)
“I denounced religion”

“I said that the border regime of the
European Union is responsible for the
deaths of refugees on the Mediterranean
Sea.”
“I defended the idea that girls/women
wearing a headscarf in Germany were
not always repressed in their opinion and
forced to do so, but might themselves
prefer to wear one.”

30

Discussion and Conclusion
Our study has shed some light on the state of free speech and political viewpoint diversity on
university campus by focusing on a most likely case for PC culture: social science students at
Goethe University of Frankfurt. Our reasoning was simple: If we cannot find evidence for a
restrictive ideological discussion climate and social pressures to conform here, we are unlikely
to find these tendencies in other places. We would then be safe to declare the new campus
intolerance a mere myth.
Our preliminary results contradict this optimism and may be succinctly summarized in three
main points. First, while taking offense and feeling intimidated by statements made on campus
is a common experience made by a third of all students, a clear majority is tolerant of different,
even controversial viewpoints. But this should not hide the fact that a considerable segment of
students is in favor of restricting speech. Depending on the controversial topic, between 30
percent (“Islam is incompatible with the West”) and 54 percent (“homosexuality is immoral”)
of the students would not allow a speaker to speak on campus. And even higher shares, ranging
from 64 percent (“there are biological differences in talents between men and women”) to 83
percent (“homosexuality is immoral”), think that individuals holding such views should not be
allowed to teach at the university. Roughly a third of students would also favor a banning of
their books from the university library.
Second, a quarter of all students has experienced personal dismissal for voicing their opinion
and a third feels at least somewhat inhibited to give their view on controversial issues in a class
discussion. Thus, our findings resonate with well-known theories of public opinion (such as the
spiral of silence by Noelle-Neumann 1974) in that students choose to remain silent out of fear
of being socially isolated and stigmatized. Our findings further suggest that students are
concerned with the reactions of both, fellow students and professors, although slightly less for
the latter. Whereas 31 percent are ‘moderately’ or ‘extremely’ concerned that other students

31

would criticize their views as offensive, only 20 percent fear that their professors will criticize
them for their views.
Third, both the intolerance of controversial views and the reluctance to speak openly on
university campus are clearly structured along students’ political ideology. Students who place
themselves on the left of the ideological spectrum are significantly less likely to tolerate
controversial speakers, teachers, or books at the university. Feeling pressure to conform is
especially true for right-of-center students who, in the face of an overwhelming majority of leftleaning opinions, are reluctant to speak their mind on politically sensitive issues, such as gender,
sexuality and immigration. But even students who are mostly siding with majority opinions are
cautious and/or have experienced pushback for speaking out about such issues.
Given that the impetus of proponents of campus speech codes and the restriction of hate speech
stems from their desire to fight discrimination and to foster an inclusive learning environment,
it is instructive to also summarize our findings from a gendered perspective as well as from the
perspective of ethnic minority students. We find that the issue of free speech and conformity is
significantly structured by students’ gender. Indeed, gender rivals political ideology in terms of
its effect sizes. Male students are significantly less likely to feel offended, more tolerant of
controversial speech (in accordance with Downs und Cowan 2012), more likely to openly give
their opinion and also less likely to be concerned with the consequences of their statements. At
the same time, however, they are also significantly more likely to experience personal
dismissals or criticism for their views.
Contrast this with the experiences and attitudes of university students with ethnic minority
status. Students with ethnic minority background do not differ from majority background
students in any of the measures of sensitivity, tolerance (supporting the findings in Chong 2006)
or conformity pressures that we have considered in this analysis. Maybe ironically, the only
exception to this pattern is experiencing personal criticism for their political views. Ethnic

32

minority students are significantly more likely to report that they were dismissed for their
political views, and this difference is comparable in size to the difference based on political
ideology.
Several points of qualification of our analysis are in order. First, we are well aware that our
data has limitations. For one, the low response rate of our student survey cautions us to be
modest in our claims. In addition, due to the cross-sectional nature of our survey data we are
only able to present a snapshot of the current climate on university campus. We therefore cannot
say whether the current situation is new or whether it has gotten worse over the last years. Even
more importantly, we cannot say much about the prevalence of intolerance and ideological
pressures to conform at other departments at Frankfurt (e.g. economics, law or the natural
sciences) or how our findings generalize across other university contexts in Germany. Yet, to
appreciate our contribution one has to bear in mind that, so far, the German discussion has
rested on no data at all. We view our evidence as suggestive and meriting further study in
alternative contexts and future time points.
Second, one could argue that our measure of tolerance for controversial topics is unfairly
stacked against sensitivities of the left (i.e. by referring to gender equality, sexual minorities,
Islam and immigration). While this choice of controversial topics was driven by the actual
content of current debates over free speech on campus, it would be interesting to also test some
hot button issues on the right (e.g. abortion, calls to violence against the police or the abolition
of the nation state). Research on US students which used a broader range of tolerance items
suggests that students on the right are indeed more tolerant towards guest speakers with, in their
mind, objectionable views than students on the left (Stevens and Haidt, 2018c).
As a first step toward a more ideologically balanced assessment of intolerance we also
replicated the Pew Freedom of Expression Scale (Wike and Simmons 2015) in our student
sample. This scale asks whether people should be able to say certain things publicly or whether

33

the government should be able to prevent them from speaking freely. Regressing the ideological
left-right-placement separately on each of the five items, we found no significant ideological
differences for statements criticizing the government, statements that are offensive to
respondents’ religious beliefs or statements that are sexually explicit – all of which can be
regarded as targeting sensitivities of the right (Suedfeld et al. 1994). However, we found that
right-leaning students are more willing to allow statements that are offensive to minorities than
their left-leaning peers (𝛽=0.12, p=.01). The only instance where students right-of-center are
significantly less tolerant than their fellow students left-of-center concerns statements that call
for violent protests (𝛽=-0.33, p=.01).
Third, it is important to understand that we are not saying that extreme right-wing views are
illegitimately shut down on university campus. While the acceptance of extremist views on
university campus is an important debate in itself, we are concerned with the silencing of
legitimate political views which simply deviate from leftist orthodoxy on issues like gender,
immigration and sexual or ethnic minorities. It is students who place themselves right-of-center,
who identify as conservative, classical liberal, libertarian or who vote for parties like CDU or
FDP who are reluctant to speak openly about these political issues.
In sum, the empirical tendencies we have uncovered suggest that we cannot simply dismiss
concerns about a restrictive discursive climate on university campus. Instead, we should heed
these warnings signs and carefully consider their implications. A recent study about
conservative students in the US suggests that being in the political minority on campus does
not only entail social isolation but also resilience through “honing one’s argument” (Binder and
Wood 2013: 154). Thus, aside from excluding and silencing dissenting voices, the narrowing
of viewpoint diversity may be an even greater problem for students who generally agree with

34

the dominant views:15 Failing to learn how to assert one’s position argumentatively against
objections is ultimately a significant disadvantage in all later stages of life.
While preliminary, our findings may have more far reaching implications for the social
sciences. A lack of viewpoint diversity and pressures to conform are to the clear detriment of
teachers, scholars and researchers, whose thinking would benefit from more challenge in the
classroom and among colleagues. We all have biases and blind spots - but if we all share the
same ideological lens on critical issues of social scientific interest, we as a field lose our
capacity to detect and correct them. Homogenous faculties of politically like-minded students,
teachers and researchers cannot be conducive to sound social science. A lack of viewpoint
diversity not only undermines intellectual creativity and scientific rigor but may ultimately also
damage the public’s trust in the social sciences.
References

Baer, Ulrich (2019). What Snowflakes Get Right: Free Speech, Truth, and Equality on
Campus. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bloom, A. (1987). The closing of the American mind: how higher education has failed
democracy and impoverished the souls of today’s students. New York: Simon and
Schuster.
Bilewicz, Michal, Wiktor Soral, Marta Marchlewska, und Mikołaj Winiewski. 2017. When
Authoritarians Confront Prejudice. Differential Effects of SDO and RWA on Support
for Hate-Speech Prohibition. Political Psychology 38: 87–99.
Binder, Amy J. and Kate Wood (2013). Becoming right: How campuses shape young
conservatives. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Campbell, B. and Manning, J. (2014). Microaggression and moral cultures. Comparative
Sociology 13: 692–726.
Campbell, B., and Manning, J. (2018). The rise of victimhood culture: microaggressions, safe
spaces, and the new culture wars. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan US.

15

This, of course, just echoes what John Stuart Mill (1859) had already realized more than a century ago.

35

Chong Dennis. (2006). Free Speech and Multiculturalism In and Out of the Academy.
Political Psychology 27(1): 29–54.
Claassen, Cristopher and Gibson, James L. (2019). Does Intolerance Dampen Dissent?
Macro-Tolerance and Protest in American Metropolitan Areas. Political Behavior,
41(1): 165–185.
Dow, Erin and Marc Lendler. (2002). Civil Liberties and the Moderate Thought Police.
Political Science & Politics 35(3): 549–553.
Downs, Daniel M., und Gloria Cowan. 2012. Predicting the Importance of Freedom of Speech
and the Perceived Harm of Hate Speech. Journal of Applied Social Psychology 42:
1353–1375.
D’Souza, D. (1991). Illiberal Education: The Politics of Race and Sex on Campus. New
York: The Free Press.
Etzioni, Amitai (2014, April 8). Don’t Sweat the Microaggressions. The Atlantic. Retrieved
18 June 2018: https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2014/04/dont-sweat-themicroaggressions/360278/
Feldstein, R. (1997). Political correctness: a response from the cultural Left. Minneapolis:
University of Minnisota Press.
Furedi, Frank (2016). What’s Happened to the University? A Sociological Exploration of its
Infantilisation. Routledge.
Gallup and Knight Foundation. (2018). Free expression on campus: What college students
think about first amendment issues. Retrieved from https://kf-siteproduction.s3.amazonaws.com/publications/pdfs/000/000/248/original/Knight_Founda
tion_Free_Expression_on_Campus_2017.pdf
Gelman, Andrew (2008). Scaling regression inputs by dividing by two standard deviations.
Statistics in Medicine 27:2865–2873.
George, Alexander and Andrew Bennett (2005). Case Studies and Theory Development in the
Social Sciences. MIT Press.
Gerring, John. (2007). Is There a (Viable) Crucial-Case Method? Comparative Political
Studies 40(3): 231-53.
Gibson, J. L. (1992). The political consequences of intolerance: Cultural conformity and
political freedom. American Political Science Review 86 (2): 338-56
Gibson, J. L. (2006). Enigmas of Intolerance: Fifty Years after Stouffer's Communism,
Conformity, and Civil Liberties. Perspectives on Politics 4(1): 21-34.

36

Gibson, J. L. (2013). Measuring political tolerance and general support for pro–civil liberties
policies: Notes, evidence, and cautions. Public Opinion Quarterly 77(S1): 45-68.
Gross, Kimberly A., und Donald R. Kinder. (1998). A Collision of Principles? Free
Expression, Racial Equality and the Prohibition of Racist Speech. British Journal of
Political Science 28: 445–471.
Göhring, Rebekka and Götz, Christoph (2018). Studierendenstatistik. Wintersemester
2017/18. Goethe Universität Frankfurt.
Hughes, G. (2010). Political correctness: a history of semantics and culture. Maldon, Mass:
Wiley-Blackwell.
Lalonde, Richard N., Lara Doan, und Lorraine A. Patterson. (2000). Political Correctness
Beliefs, Threatened Identities, and Social Attitudes. Group Processes & Intergroup
Relations 3: 317–336.
Lea, J. (2009). Political correctness and higher education: British and American
perspectives. New York: Routledge.
Lilla, Mark (2016, November 18). The End of Identity Liberalism. The New York Times.
Retrieved 18 June 2018: https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/20/opinion/sunday/theend-of-identity-liberalism.html
Loury, Glenn C. (1994). Self-Censorship in Public Discourse: A Theory of “Political
Correctness and Related Phenomena. Rationality and Society 6(4): 428–461.
Lukianoff, Greg, and Jonathan Haidt. (2018). The Coddling of the American Mind: How
Good Intentions and Bad Ideas Are Setting up a Generation for Failure. New York:
Penguin Press.
Marcus, George E, John L Sullivan, Elizabeth Theiss-Morse and Sandra L Wood. 1995. With
malice toward some: How people make civil liberties judgments. Cambridge
University Press.
Matthes, Jörg, Johannes Knoll, and Christian von Sikorski. 2018. The ‘Spiral of Silence’
Revisited: A Meta-Analysis on the Relationship Between Perceptions of Opinion
Support and Political Opinion Expression. Communication Research 45(1): 3–33.
Mill, John Stuart. (1859). On liberty. London: John W. Parker and Son.
Mondak, J. J., & Sanders, M. S. (2003). Tolerance and intolerance, 1976–1998. American
Journal of Political Science 47, 492–502.
Noelle-Neumann, Elisabeth. (1974). The Spiral of Silence. A Theory of Public Opinion.
Journal of Communication, 24(2), 43–51.

37

Petersen, Thomas. (2020). Forschungsfreiheit an deutschen Universitäten: Ergebnisse einer
Umfrage unter Hochschullehrern. Konrad Adenauer Stiftung. Retrieved June 17, 2020:
https://www.kas.de/documents/252038/7995358/Studie+des+Instituts+für+Demoskopi
e+Allensbach+zur+Forschungsfreiheit+an+deutschen+Universitäten.pdf/01252a6a38eb-a647-fb74-7d39b1890382?t=1581610619899
Stevens, Sean T., Quirk, Paul, Jussim, Lee, & Haidt, Jonathan (2017). The Campus
Expression Survey. Heterodox Academy.
Stevens, Sean and Haidt, Jonathan (2018a). The Skeptics are Wrong Part 1: Attitudes About
Free Speech on Campus are Changing. Blog Post: Heterodox Academy.
Stevens, Sean and Haidt, Jonathan (2018b). The Skeptics are Wrong Part 2: Speech Culture
on Campus is Changing. Blog Post: Heterodox Academy.
Stevens, Sean and Haidt, Jonathan (2018c). The Skeptics are Wrong Part 3: Political
Intolerance Levels on Campus are High, and Here is Why. Blog Post: Heterodox
Academy.
Stiksma, M. (2020. Understanding the Campus Expression Survey. Heterodox Academy.
Retrieved June 17, 2020: https://heterodoxacademy.org/campus-expression-survey/
Stouffer, S. A. (1955). Communism, Conformity & Civil Liberties: A Cross Section of the
Nation Speaks its Mind. Doubleday & Co.
Strauts, Erin, und Hart Blanton. 2015. That’s not funny: Instrument validation of the concern
for political correctness scale. Personality and Individual Differences 80: 32–40.
Suedfeld, P., Steel, G. D., & Schmidt, P. W. (1994). Political ideology and attitudes toward
censorship. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 24(9), 765-781.
Sullivan, John L., Piereson, James, & Marcus, George E. (1979). An alternative
conceptualization of political tolerance: Illusory increases 1950s–1970s. American
Political Science Review, 73(3), 781-794.
Wike, Richard and Katie Simmons (2015). Global support for principle of free expression,
but opposition to some forms of speech. Pew Research Center 18.
Williams, Jeffrey (ed.). (1995). PC Wars: Politics and Theory in the Academy. New York:
Routledge.
Wilson, J. K. (1995). The myth of political correctness: the conservative attack on higher
education. Durham, N.C: Duke University Press.

38

YouGov. 2018. Are Students Really More Hostile to Free Speech? YouGov. Retrieved 2
September 2019: https://yougov.co.uk/topics/politics/articles-reports/2018/06/27/arestudents-really-more-hostile-free-speech
Appendix

Table A1: Comparison of Sample to Official University Statistics

Official Statistics

Sample

Difference

N

%

N

%

Total

6’674

100

--a

--a

Total Female

3’653

54.7

265

54.1b

-0.6

Total Male

3’021

45.3

207

42.2b

-3.1

Total First Year

1’724

25.8

153

32.7

+6.9

Political Science

2’415

36.2

155

33.5

-2.7

Political Science Female

1’115

16.7

69

14.9

-1.8

Political Science Male

1’300

19.5

84

18.1

-1.4

Political Science First

695

10.4

55

11.8

+1.4

Sociology

2’893

43.3

188

40.6

-2.7

Sociology Female

1’797

26.9

121

26.1

-0.8

Sociology Male

1’096

16.4

56

12.1

-4.3

Sociology First Year

730

10.9

61

13.1

+2.2

Year

Note: a Number of observations and percentages are based on pair-wise deletion of missing values.
b Shares of female and male does not add to hundred because of respondents who reported “other” or “prefer not
to say”.

39

40

