Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number 4. December 2018
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.27

Pp. 361-379

A Training Program in the Framework of Rogers’ Theory of Blended Learning: A Case of
Teachers of Information Technology in Oman
Khalid Muslem Al Mashikhi
College of Arts and Applied Sciences
Dhofar University, Salalah, Oman
Sobhy Ahmed Soliman
College of Arts and Applied Sciences
Dhofar University, Salalah, Oman
&
Menoufia University, Egypt

Abstract
This study aimed at designing a training program according to Rogers Theory of Blended Learning
for the teachers of Information Technology in Oman and studying its effectiveness. The study
sample was composed of 40 primary school teachers of Information Technology working in public
schools of Dhofar Governorate of Oman during the academic year 2016/2017. The researchers
used the achievement test and observation card as a tools of measuring the program effectiveness,
study results indicated statistically significant differences with a value of (T) for the difference
between the average of dimensional applications of the achievement test and skill performance
(51.36-15.45) in Information Technology teachers’ practice, which resulted in a value at
statistically significant level of (0.001) and the training program was effective, as the profit rate of
black was 1.33-1.41 respectively. It is a statistically significant value as it is more than 1.2. The
effect of the training program was high in terms of both cognitive achievements and skills. The
study recommended using educational models as one of the self-education techniques in
Information Technology Teacher Training programs along with the integration of other training
styles which are compatible with it by implication, the study suggested to exploit Roger’s Theory
for education technology innovations and designing other models for, sustainable educational
development.
keywords: Training program, Roger’s Theory, Information Technology, teachers, Blended
Learning
Cite as: Al Mashikhi , K. M., & Soliman, S. A. (2018). A Training Program in the Framework of Rogers’
Theory of Blended Learning: A Case of Teachers of Information Technology in Oman. Arab World
English Journal, 9 (4), 361-379.

DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.27

361

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

A Training Program in the Framework of Rogers’ Theory

Al Mashikhi & Soliman

1.1 Introduction
Information technology and communication play an essential role in all aspects of life; this large
development is also reflected in the education process as the teachers search for new methods,
strategies, techniques and models to face various challenges which confront the education process
and help in its improvement to achieve the best results.
Innovations for learning, cooperation, and sharing have appeared as the early experiences and
dealing with these innovations have revealed better chances for profound enhancement in the
quality of educational skills and its competencies and the extent of suitability. As Sayed (1998)
rightly state that only now have we started to realize how the education experiences will develop
through the mixed investment of traditional learning techniques and techniques based on modern
technology.
With the spread of the e-learning systems, the increase in the numbers of users and recruiting it
in educational process, many difficulties have emerged including the absence of a direct social
connection between the element of educational process – teachers and students and the
management which has adverse effects on the social connection skills of the students. Also, their
needs to of infrastructure and equipment require a high sum, in addition to the ability of teachers
and students of using e-learning technology skills, along with the hardships of using the formative
and summative evaluation process and the guarantee of its credibility, especially when the subject
involves higher skills.
Given these difficulties the need to for an education system emerged based on exploiting the
strengths of e-learning as well as the advantages of traditional learning, what has been termed later
the “blended learning”, where e-learning is integrated with conventional class-based knowledge.
According to Zaytoun (2005), blended learning is known as the education in which the
characteristics of both traditional learning and learning through the Internet are used in one
integrated model, using the maximum available techniques for both the processes. Milheim (2006)
defines blended learning in terms of using modern technologies in education and teaching without
leaving the common educational reality of attending the class room and focusing on direct
interaction inside the class room by using modern mechanisms like the Computer and the Internet.
Salama (2006, p.54) claim that blended learning is characterized by low educational expenses
in comparison with e-learning. It also provides a face to face connection in addition to enhancing
human aspects and social relationships between learners and teachers, flexibility to attend to all
issues of individual needs and learning styles of students with differences in their age and levels.
It also provides opportunities of for making use of technological progress in design,
implementation, usage and the enrichment of human knowledge towards enhancing the quality of
education process i.e. the quality of educational product and the competence of teachers. Al Batea
& Abdelmawla (2008) are of the view that the blended learning encompasses the advantages of
both the traditional learning and e-learning and helps students exploit electronic educational
technology in the learning process vis-à-vis the traditional way of learning used by teachers.
Tangible practical reality appears in preparing Information Technology Teachers in the field of
Education as most of them are not well developed in recruiting blended learning as it requires
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

362

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

A Training Program in the Framework of Rogers’ Theory

Al Mashikhi & Soliman

specialization in Information Technology. Hassan (2009) remarks that the colleges and universities
either do not have this specialization or it is not ensured that Information Technology teachers are
trained to recruit blended learning after their graduation.
Furthermore, as Shawky (2004) argues, practicing blended learning at the present time is comes
at the expense of the serving teacher’s time and rarely comes as a response to the need of the hour
and the planning of training programs and their implementation fall upon the efforts and desires
of educational leaders and managers; therefore, these programs haven’t achieved desirable success
in enhancing the performance of Information Technology teachers. This has resulted in the lack
and inadequacy of Information Technology Teachers’ knowledge, skills and competence of
exploiting blended learning as a result of which the educational process still circulate in the range
of school textbooks, lectures and the interaction between the student and teacher. (Ibrahim, 2000,
p.21).
The call for exploiting Rogers Theory to design and develop educational programs and to adopt
and recruiting innovations in teaching is not new, as many scientists and researchers in the field of
education technology have called for its usage because these innovations also depend on the
process of publication in this context (Sayls& Ritchy, 2000, P. 130). The works of Rogers have a
significant effect in understanding the phenomenon of publishing innovations and its adoption in
addition to a group of social factors and individual regulatory structure the theory has presented
which affects the rate of adopting innovations recruitment to be integrated in the process of
educational design.
Surrv& Farquhar (2002) remarks that studying the theory of publishing and adopting the
innovations is necessary for the field of education technology for many reasons, including that
many specialists in the field of Information Technology do not realize the reasons behind not
adopting innovations and products of education technology. The theory of publishing and adopting
innovations helps to understand a number of factors which effect adopting innovations and make
the information technology teachers able to clarify, suggest and check the factors that effect or
facilitate adopting all new developments relevant to the field of education. In addition, the study
of publishing and taking innovation theory may lead to the development of an educational model
which may serve as a systemic model for guiding the process of adoption and recruitment rightfully
and effectively.
1.2 The problem of statement:
The studies assured the vitality to take care of training education programs from the stage of
identifying training needs and caring about the content of training and its methods, its period, the
time of convening and following it, the vitality to adopt new theoretical attitudes in designing
educational programs for teachers during the service.
Therefore, it is necessary for the teacher of information technology to gain knowledge and
information during their service, and performance skills are required in blending e- learning and
traditional learning to be able to adopt blended learning in the educational process through the
educational program based on Rogers’s theory through answering the following questions:
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

363

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

A Training Program in the Framework of Rogers’ Theory

Al Mashikhi & Soliman

1- What are the required skills for blended learning of information technology teachers?
2- What are the training needs required of information technology teachers for recruiting the
skills of blended learning?
3- What is the training program set according to Roger’s theory to adopt blended education
by information technology teachers?
4- What is the effectiveness of the proposed program in developing the cognitive achievement
connected with knowledge and information required to adopt blended learning by
information technology teachers?
5- What is the effectiveness of the proposed program in developing blended learning skills of
information technology teachers?
1.3 Research limits:
1- Applying the program to a sample of information technology teachers at the primary level
schools (first round) in Dhofar Governorate in Oman.
2- The structure of the training program was restricted to the training needs of blended
learning skills achieved through e-learning which has some recurrences in identifying the
training needs.
3- Caring only about the cognitive side and performance to recruit blended learning skills
during the education process.
1.4 Research Items:
The training program: The recent research defines the education program as an organized plan
to a number of education and training situations where e-learning and traditional learning are
integrated and organized according to Rogers’ theory in the form of a group of minimized
educational models, meetings, discussions and scientific statements. It also includes the basics
components for the training programs to train the teacher of information technology on the skills
of blended learning recruiting it in education through a period or an educational level.
2- Blended Learning: Education combines both characteristics of traditional classroom education,
and e-learning in an integrated model, making use of the maximum technology available for both
of them. (Milheim, 2006).
3- Roger’s theory: Adopting and publishing innovations: The recent research adopts defining the
process of adoption as a type of education types and taking decisions. It is also a mental process,
the teachers of education technology pass by from the time they hear about an idea or method, or
a new tool (blended learning), till its final adoption in other words the usage and full recruitment
of the idea or the new tool (Rogers, 1997, p. 155)
1.5 Hypotheses:
1- There are statistically significant differences to the level of 0.05 in cognitive acquisition
connected with the required knowledge to recruit blended learning between the average
degrees of pre-and post-test acquisition to the side of the post-test.
2- There are statistically significant differences to the level of 0.05 in the performance
connected with the required skills to recruit blended learning between the average degrees
of remarks card to the pre-and post-performance to the side of post-performance.
3- The training program makes a high effect (n2>0.14) in knowledge acquisition connected
with the required knowledge to adopt recruiting blended learning skills.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

364

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

A Training Program in the Framework of Rogers’ Theory

Al Mashikhi & Soliman

4- The training program makes a high effect (n2>0.14) in the level of performance skills
required to adopt recruiting blended learning skills.
1.6 Significance:
The importance of the research has several reasons:
1- Organizing a training program for information technology teachers to recruit blended
learning skills during their service.
2- Making use of these procedures in recruiting Rogers’ theory to adopt information
technology teachers for blended learning during their service.
3- The training program may be useful for those who work on developing the educational
program at the concerned faculties by preparing the teachers of information technology,
especially concerning the field of blended learning.
2- Literature Review
2.1 Blended learning
Blended learning is the learning accomplished through using various communication methods to
teach a specific subject. These methods may include a mixture of direct lecturing in the time of
lectures, communicating through the internet and self-leaning which mixes traditional learning and
its usage and the usage of various educational technologies which gives freedom to the teacher to
use communication skills inside the classroom. This was defined by (Khames, 2003, p. 211) as an
integrated system that aims at helping the student in every stage of high education level, based on
mixing the traditional learning and e-learning in different forms inside the classrooms.
It is also defined by (Ismail, 2009, p.96) as using the mixture of learning methods of
collaborative learning, e-learning and traditional classrooms face to face, education management
systems, self-learning in learning strategies to get the suitable content in a suitable form for suitable
individuals and at suitable times. Synthesis learning includes various presentation methods to
complete each other and enhancing the learning of the learned behavior and its application.
Showing these detentions about blended learning makes us conclude that blended learning is a
process done by mixing techniques with traditional learning, learning by using the technology in
various forms from technological devices, audio-video, communication and internet technology
and by using the technology as a supportive technique for traditional teaching.
2.1.1 Mixing traditional education and e-education methods:
Introduce (Zaytoun, 2005, p. 171) presented various available alternatives for the teachers to
choose from when using blended learning in teaching; the most dominant alternatives are as
follow:
The first alternative: Achieved by educating and learning a specific lesson or more in the subject
through classroom educational methods and teaching another lesson or more through e-learning
tools, the student would be evaluated finally through traditional evaluation methods, or Eevaluation methods.
The second alternative: Both classroom learning and E-learning mutually share in teaching and
learning the lesson; beginning with classroom learning followed by E-learning, then the students
would be evaluated finally through traditional evaluation methods or E-evaluation methods.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

365

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

A Training Program in the Framework of Rogers’ Theory

Al Mashikhi & Soliman

The third alternative: Similar to the second alternative but it first begins with E-learning followed
by classroom learning then the students would be evaluated finally through traditional evaluation
methods or E-evaluation methods.
The fourth alternative: Similar to both the second and third alternative, however a rotation
between classroom learning and E-learning happens more than one time during the events of the
lesson, not just once like what happens in those other alternatives.
Most studies dealt with revealing the effectiveness of E-learning, like the study of (Hong&
Ridznan, 2003, P.46) and (Abdo& Soliman, 2008, p. 55), while concerning the studies that used
e-learning in developing the scientific performance it is connected with technological skills
variable was like developing the skills of designing and producing internet websites, etc. Like the
study of (Shiang-Wang, 2006, 597) which aimed at learning the scientific skills in the environment
of E-learning.
2.1.2 Success factors of blended learning:
There are several factors which contribute to the blended learning success including the
following (Muianga, 2005, p. 658), (Naser, 2010, p. 143)
• Communication and guidance: Of the most important factors of the success of blended
learning is communication between teacher and student, as the teacher guides the student
with the time of learning, draws the steps he should follow to learn and the programs he
should use for the best achievement.
• Collaborative work in the form of teamwork: In blended learning every member (teacher
– student) should be convinced that working with this type of learning needs the interaction
of all participants.
• Encouraging the creative and amazing work: Caring to encourage the students to selflearning and learning among groups, as the available technological multimedia in blended
learning allows that.
• Flexible choices: Blended learning enables the students to obtain information, to answer
questions, no matter where and when or the preceded learning of the student. Moreover,
blended learning should include various choices and flexibility at the same time.
• Communication then communication then communication: There should be clarity
between the available choices for the concerned subject; there should be a fast
communication method and should be available most of the time between teachers and
students for guidance under all circumstances.
2.1.3 The advantages of blended learning:
Blended learning has many advantages summarized in the following: (Buket 2006, pp.43), (AL
Awad, 2005, p.76)
- Making computers and local and global information networks in reach of the student.
- Enabling learning groups from using multimedia collaborative software, E-mail, hypothetical
libraries, and all internet data available.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

366

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

A Training Program in the Framework of Rogers’ Theory

Al Mashikhi & Soliman

- Coping with the problem of permanent change in the content of educational subjects, where
information and numbers change regularly, which makes blended learning helpful in searching
for the information rapidly, and the possibility to use it at any time.
- Making the best use of technology and its database, where blended learning choices are various
and it is possible to choose suitable educational technology for the determined lesson to teach.
- The possibility to modify the teaching methods as the chance for changing is available under the
light of this type of education.
- Making the use of time, as blended learning technologies shorten time to summon information
in a short time.
- Making the student permanently connected with knowledge and its sources.
- Producing various software suitable for our society and culture, especially for our students and
downloading these programs to the internal network of the university or to internet to enhance
its benefit.
2.2 Rogers’s Theory
2.2.1 Basic factors for Rogers’s theory to publish and adopt innovations
Sees rogers (1995) that the process of publishing and adopting innovations is based on four
main factors, these factors play an important role in the process of publishing and adopting and
they are innovation characteristics, communication channels, time and a social educational system.
• Innovation characteristics: Innovation may be an idea, practice or a skill realized by a group
or an individual who adopt this innovation. The innovation characteristics are realized by the
members of the social system like schools – identify the level of adopting this innovation, which
was identified (Rogers, 1995, p. 15). In his list are five characteristics: relative advantage,
compatibility, complexity, the ability to remark and the ability to experience.
• Communication channels: In his theory, Rogers pointed to the substance of adopting
innovation recruitment as a process of communication basically. They are preceded by
exchanging ideas, information and skills about the innovation between the source and the
receiver by using suitable communication channels to achieve a common understanding
between them. This leads to adopting the innovation as the source may be an individual or a
group of members, or an organization, also the receiver, with no doubt. Adopting the
recruitment of innovations is based on the success of the communication process and on
convincing the receiver. Also, the success of the communication process is based on using
suitable communication channels to achieve the desired goal as communication is a sharing
process, a creativity to information between the participating individuals in the communication
process is to reach to a mutual understanding (Rogers, 1995, p. 18).
• Time: The element of time is considered the third basic element in the process of adopting
innovations, as the process of adopting requires enough time to be adopted and to be installed
inside the working system. The portion of time is connected with the process of adopting
innovations from four sides, the first side is the practical levels to build the innovation, the
second side is the categories of innovation adopters, the third side is the role of changing agents
and the forth side is the rate of adopting the innovation. All sides connected with the side of
time will be discussed.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

367

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

A Training Program in the Framework of Rogers’ Theory

Al Mashikhi & Soliman

2.2.2 The levels of adopting blended learning
identify (Rogers1995, p. 20) five levels have been by Rogers to the process of taking decision
of adopting the innovation, these levels are: knowledge, persuasion, decision, implementation and
confirmation.
During the level of knowledge, students will be supplied with knowledge and information about
the innovation and its characteristics, possibilities, benefits, goals and aspirations that might be
achieved, and the problems it may solve and the advantages of the adopted innovation about
prevailing practices. The main purpose for this level is to open the way to a series of levels which
will be fulfilled and to raise the sense with urgent need to the innovation.
During the persuasion level, the student forms a positive or negative attitude about the
innovation through discussion and interaction with others in terms of the information that has been
presented to him or he acquired by himself (Batty& et, al, 2000, p. 7), and the basic purpose for
this level is developing the student information about the new innovation.
During the level of decision, the individual makes a kind of mental experiment of the available
information for him and between his current attitude to decide whether to accept or refuse adopting
the innovation. If the individual felt that the advantages of the innovation higher than the common
practices, decides to experience it to make sure of its benefits and the easiness of using it, as it was
assured by (Ganee, 2000, p. 162) that the student has to commence his activity with a practical
experiment for the innovation to lead him to accept adopting the innovation and the importance of
taking care of individual education methods and personal communication methods.
During the implementation level, we should care that students applies the innovation on a
narrow scale to identify its benefit rate under his special circumstances. The main purpose of the
application level is to show the new innovation within the special circumstances of the student and
to identify the possibility to benefit from it for the purpose of full adoption to recruit the innovation
(Batty& et, al, 2000, p.8).
At the level of confirmation, the student usually decides to continue adopting and recruiting the
innovation and using it, as the basic purpose for this level is to put the results of both levels of
adoption and implementation. It should be taken into consideration by the student to embark on
continuous recruitment in the future to this innovation during educational situations. Rogers, 1995,
18, preferred to use the style of training in small groups of 5-15 members, where the trainer reached
to a level of mastery in cognitive and knowledgeable competencies which helped him to discuss
the innovation to increase the knowledge of the students and their skills, answering their questions
and inquires and presenting suitable solutions for the expected problems to eventually reach the
level of stabilization and full persuasion by adopting the recruitment of the innovation.
2.2.3 Adopters categories for blended learning:
The concept of adopter’s categories refers to dividing individuals in social regulations - like the
school on the base of their ability to adopt recruiting innovations. When a technological innovation
is presented, some members inside the system initiate to adopt and accept recruiting innovations
with others (Kosma, 2000). In this term Rogers describes some individuals inside the system of
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

368

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

A Training Program in the Framework of Rogers’ Theory

Al Mashikhi & Soliman

five categories, the category of innovators, first adopters’ category, early majority category, late
majority category and the laggards’ category.
The following diagram shows the rate of the laggard’s individuals towards any innovation inside
the educational society.
34

40

34

30
13.5

20
10

2.5

0
Innovators

Early Adopters Early Majority

Late Majority

Figure 1. The rate of the laggard’s individuals towards any innovation inside the educational society

3. Design and build of the measurement tools:
In terms of procedural goals, the tools of evaluation were built for the training program,
which included two tools: an achievement test and an observation card. In the following steps
every tool was passed by:
3.1 The Achievement Test:
- The achievement test aimed at measuring the achievement of the cognitive goals which are
required to recruit blended learning skills connected with E-learning, and was built through the
educational needs
- The articles of the test were drafted in the form of multiple choices, considering the time of
drafting the test to clarify one specified problem, drafting the questions in an intelligible and
clear style, avoiding the questions based on each other and to be of one identified answer,
(Shabara, 2000, p. 114)
-The initial form of the test was submitted to a group of specialists in the education technology,
curriculum, and teaching methods to assure that the phrases of the test were suitable for
information technology teachers, also adding or removing vocabularies which are not suitable
for the purpose of the test or modifying it, the drafting for some tests were modified as it has
no relationship with the subject of the item, which facilitate the intimation with the right choice,
the suggested modifications was implemented on the items of the test, the final form of the test
was 44 items
- The stability of the test upon the experimental sample of ten students of girls specialized in
information technology at Dhofar University was measured, while the achievement test was
applied and the experimental sample result were observed and the half-retail method was used.
The stability rate of the test reached 0.8, which means that the test was extremely stable.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

369

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

A Training Program in the Framework of Rogers’ Theory

Al Mashikhi & Soliman

3.2 The Performance Observation Card:
- The observation card aimed at acknowledging the extent of acquiring information technology
teachers to recruit blended learning connected with e-learning in teaching.
- An observation card to the teachers on information technology was set during the service to
the basic skills to recruit the blended learning, every basic skill was divided into several
subsidiary skills and their equivalent performances and procedural phrases has were formed to
describe every performance of subsidiary performances to the skill. It was taken into account
at the time of articulation to use short phrases when defining, and that the phrases include one
behavior and to be clear and identified.
- The observation card included 6 basic skills, each one of it has subsidiary skills, and under
every subsidiary skill was a group of phrases; the card includes 135 phrases, and one mark was
calculated for each step performed by the information technology teachers if he achieved the
step correctly and no mark was given if he missed it or didn’t do it. Or the trainer corrected the
mistake because the serial and logic sequence to the performance of every step and not doing a
specific step correctly doesn’t lead to keep in implementing the following steps, so it was
necessary for the trainer to alert the teacher that there was something wrong. The mission of
performance observer – the trainer - had to observe the information technology teacher in his
performance of every step and put the sign () in the suitable place.
-After finishing the designing performance observation card in its initial form, it was to offer it
to the specialists in education technology and curriculum and teaching methods, to explore their
opinion about the extent of achieving the articles of the card to the educational goals and
accuracy of their articulation, adding or removing or modifying any performances; under the
light of the judges’ opinions then rearranging some phrases to be suitable for logic sequence,
modifying the articulation of some acts to be suitable for the performance, after performed
modifications which the judges recommended, the observation card was now truly valid for
application.
The stability of the observation card was calculated with the style of multi observers on the
performance of the one student, as an accordance factor was calculated between their evaluations
to the performance. The researchers employed two of the colleagues from the education
department and trained them on using observation card and identified them with its content and
connectivity to the goals which are to be measured. The researcher and his colleagues, by
observing the performance of three students from the experimental sample, then calculated the
accordance factor of the observer to the performance of each student alone. The average of the
accordance factor in the three cases was more than 93 % which means it is an extremely stable and
viable to measure.
3.3 Identifying the content and organizing it:
After checking the references and after organizing meetings with a group of specialists in the
education technology field to identify the most important skills for blended learning which the
teachers of information technology need, in addition to the personal experience of the researcher
in using blended learning with the students of Dhofar university and his information about the
basics and procedures. In terms of what preceded, the content was identified and chosen in six
educational modules after checking many studies about building and using the models, like the
study of (Soliman, 2001), (Mohamed, 1999). In terms of what preceded the researcher designed
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

370

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

A Training Program in the Framework of Rogers’ Theory

Al Mashikhi & Soliman

and built programs models, the first one was under his name and design and he published the
educational pages on the internet. The second dealt with searching for information from the
internet. The third came under subtitle e-mail and is used in the education and the fourth dealt with
building an educational blog, while the fifth came under subtitle building an educational forum,
and finally the sixth dealt with the file of the electronic evaluation for the student.
3.4 Identifying the sources of learning and education:
Educational methods were identified in the practical program on a computer for every trainee,
display unit for the computer data, and a monitor in addition to the printed models distributed to
every trainee before learning.
3.5 Designing and choosing the educational strategies:
The researcher followed the procedures of developing the adoption of technological innovations
which Rogers has identified as a general educational strategy, as shown by the following
procedures.
• The level of cognition: Individuals are supplied with knowledge and information about every
educational model, this include presenting the printings concerning the model, showing the basic
information for the including skills, its characteristics, advantages, importance, and show how to
implement them through a group meeting with the assistance of presentation shows and the
private computer for the researcher. The goal from this stage is to recognize the awareness of the
trainee for the implemented skills inside every model.
• The level of persuasion: This level depends on the existence of the modeling, presenting all
accurate and detailed information, and some transitional trainings, organizing free discussions
about the idea or the skill needed to be adopted through an assembly in small groups in beside
the individual study in some situations. This stage significantly depends on the success of those
in charge with the connection in the first level till the trainee feels the need and the positive
attitude of the idea or the skill.
• The level of decision: To achieve this level, every trainee should be supported to try and apply
the idea or the skill to feel its importance and its necessity for him, with acknowledging the
difficulties which may confront him and how to overcome them, till he decides his full ability of
it. So, every model was considered another meeting to give the chance for every trainee according
to his ability and his speed in adopting the idea and the skill through work by small groups and
some time the individual learning.
• The level of achievement (recruitment): It means the recruitment of the idea or the skill in
another situation, through information and sills he has acquired from the preceded levels, As a
result , every trainee reviewed every skill or idea he was able to perform in front of his colleagues
either who could perform this skill or who couldn’t; this level was used to encourage the laggards
in adopting the idea or the skill to step into it to acquire skills and information about this skill.
• The level of confirmation: Rogers called it the level of installation. To achieve this level, the
trainees were asked to repeat the same steps they used to do with the trainer, discuss the
difficulties and how to overcome them. This level stands in the position of evaluation for
improvement, development and blooming, in case of not adopting the idea or the skill by anyone,
and before moving to the second model, he is retrained on the skill. Rogers called this as a
reinvention, by simplification of the skill or redesign the situation of adoption which simplifies
removing obstacles in adopting the idea or the skill. To achieve this general strategy, many
Arab World English Journal
371
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

A Training Program in the Framework of Rogers’ Theory

Al Mashikhi & Soliman

discussions were done about the idea, scheduled to practice on it, acting of some trainees with
the role of the trainer in some situations to be assure their understanding to the idea.
3.6 Choosing education experiences, the method of assembling trainees and the training
styles:
Educational experiences were chosen, which can help in achieving the goals with more than
experience, commensuration of education sources, as it was chosen from the abstract and
alternative experiences for all goals of the models. The styles of practicing included the following:
- Leaning in big groups through the collective shows in the stage of knowledge
- Practicing in small groups (3-5) in case of increasing the numbers of trainees, in the lab
during the stage of persuasion and decision.
- The individual training for the trainee in case of being late or the time was inappropriate for
him in the stage of decision and recruitment.
4. The level of production for adoption methods:
The level of production means transferring conditions and educational specification of education
sources to educational product-sources. Education and learning methods need to be complete and
ready for recruiting, through the processes of production, evaluation and revisions to reach the
product to the required form to allow for use. Concerning adoption methods to achieve the
educational goals for the prepared program a website has been set to deal with many basic skills,
and included many multimedia and many connected links with the skills.
5. The level of recruiting the blended learning:
A group of procedures including identifying the room of education sources inside the Salalah
private school and the main training center at the general directorate of education and coordinate
with the information technology teachers at the school to revise the seats, to identify the assistants
to achieve the program and the educational subjects, publications, and the materials needed to
practicing. The moral support was presented by the preparation of the trainee sample and rising
their motivation to effectively participate, providing them of what is expected from them at the
end of the training with using praise phrases, encouraging any progress during the achievement or
the performance, providing tools, substances and printings for every trainee, attempting to remove
all organized obstacles or the procedures which impede the training and recruitment process.
Training facilities also were provided according to the time of the trainee, and the time of
implementation, its time and its place was identified according to the set timetable to recruit some
of the blended learning skills.
6. The level of evaluation:
This level concentrates on performing the experiment processes to be able to implement the
required modifications all over the program. The evaluation processes was performed through the
following:
6.1.The structural evaluation:
At this level the program was adjusted and assured of its safety, performing required modifications
to make the program ready for the final experiment. The program was submitted to a group of
judges and in terms of their opinions, the required modifications were performed and the program
Arab World English Journal
372
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

A Training Program in the Framework of Rogers’ Theory

Al Mashikhi & Soliman

became ready in its final from. It was experimented upon the experimental sample to be assure of
the program clarity, its suitability to their levels, as it was clear during teaching the program that
the absorption of information technology teachers with no ambiguity in the implemented
educational activities and was formed in its final form and became viable to experiment upon the
basic research sample. Consequently, the third question was answered from the recent research.
6.2. Final evaluation and the research experiment:
The basic sample of the research was formed of 20 teachers of information technology from the
first level of the primary education stage at Dhofar Governorate, in addition to an experimental
group composed of 10 students from the students of the fourth grade in the specialization of
information technology from the Faculty of Arts and Practical Science at Dhofar University, who
finished their study of information technology subjects connected with E-learning, to perform the
structural evaluation for the program, they all were volunteers.
After the pre-application of the research tools exemplified in the achievement test and the
observation card, the students were prepared to study the program by explaining its idea, and to
continue to study it upon the desire of every student; in other words, participating in experiencing
the program is optional and not compulsory.
Every trainee in the study of models followed the specific arrangement from the first part to the
last one of the model, and according to its self-speed, activities and the connected educational
methods, the difficulties which can be obstructive were overcome through group meetings.
After the study of information technology teachers of the program, the post application for the
research tools exemplified in the achievement test and the observation card followed; appendix
No. 3 shows models of the works and images of information technology teachers during practicing.
7. Statistical Treatments:
The researcher used the T-test to calculate the differences between pre- and post-measurement
degrees in the achievement test and the observation card. The statistical treatment was done by
using (SPSS), and Eta square to calculate the effectiveness of the program, and the test rate of
average for Blake.
8. Results &Discussion
Hereinafter, the results of the study explaining it in terms of assumptions are shown:
8.1 Assumption test concerning cognitive achievement connected with recruiting blended
learning skills
This assumption stipulates for the following: There are statistically significant differences in the
level (0.05) in cognitive achievement connected with required knowledge for recruiting blended
learning between the average degree of the pre-achievement test and the post-achievement test for
the post-test result. These results connect with the fourth question of the research questions which
is: What is the effect of the proposal program in developing the cognitive achievement connected
with the required knowledge to adopt blended learning by information technology teachers? That
is what table.1 shows:

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

373

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

A Training Program in the Framework of Rogers’ Theory

Al Mashikhi & Soliman

Table 1. shows the difference between the average degree of pre- and post- measurement in
the cognitive test.
Application type

N

M

A

T-test

Significance level

Prior
Pre

20
20

27.3
64.75

2.13
1.55

15.45

Significant to level
0.001

As table 1 shows the existence of statistically significant differences, where the value of (T) for
the average degree of information technology teachers in both pre- and post-applications is 15.45,
as it is a statically significant value to level 0.001. To be assured of the effectiveness of the training
program, the trainer used the Blake Equation to calculate the average profit percentage for the
students of the experimental group during the achievement test, as shown in table 2:
Table 2. shows the average profit percentage for information technology teacher during
achievement test:
Sample

20

Pre-application
Total marks

Post-application
Total marks

27.3

64.75

Maximum Total actual
test degree
profit
70

37.5

Total
expected
profit
42.7

Modified
profit rate
1.41

As table 2 shows that the percentage of the modified profit for Blake reached 1.41, and it is a
statically significant value as it is higher than 1.2 which points to training program effectiveness
in developing the cognitive achievement connected with knowledge and information to adopt
blended learning. So, the first assumption could be accepted for the following reasons:
- Caring of the training program with the individual factors concerning the targeted categories by
providing knowledge according to one’s needs and identifying the level of his portal behavior.
- The contained strategy in preset training program according to Rogers theory helped in acquiring
information by allowing the required time replacing the skill and assuring on installing it.
- The help of some information technology teachers to their colleagues raised their enthusiasm in
acquiring information in addition to considering the trainee of reading the program printings.
- Using methods in presenting the skills from connectivity between both of the theoretical and
scientific sides, continuing the constructive evaluation after every module, maybe as a result of
small number inside educational situations, which made them in an educational situation that
helped the researcher to discuss them and interact with them.
- Teaching technology with modules contribute in forming effective field experience, like
responsibility and taking decisions as it allows the learner to work freely and according to his
possibilities
- Sowing blended learning characteristics in the stage of knowledge pushed them to acquire the
biggest amount of information about it.
- The importance of using the training program which was set according to Rogers theory and the
systems’ style like advantages in organizing the work, the educational situations and developing
the level of understanding the information is connected with cognitive goals to recruit blended
learning. This result agrees with both Barawy (2001), Shawky (2004) and Shomly (2007) and
these results point to the effectiveness of using the style of learning with modules and systems
style in the cognitive achievement of learners.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

374

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

A Training Program in the Framework of Rogers’ Theory

Al Mashikhi & Soliman

8.2 Testing assumption concerning skill performance connected with recruiting the skills of
blended learning:
This assumption stipulates that there are statistically significant differences of the level of 0.05 in
the performance connected with required skills to recruit blended learning between the average
degrees of pre-performance and post-performance and the observation card for the postperformance.
These results connect with the fifth question of the research questions which states: What is the
effectiveness of the propose program in developing the skills of blended learning of information
technology teachers? That is what table 4 shows.
Table 3. shows the difference between the average of pre-measurement and post-measurement
in the skilled performance.
Application type
Pre.
Post.

N
20
20

M
259.8
531.85

A
10.87
5.13

T-test
51.36

Significant level
Significant to level
0.001

As table 3 shows statistically, significant differences of the value of (T) to the difference between
the average of information technology teachers’ marks reached in both pre- and post-applications
51.36. This is a value statistically significant to level (0.001). To be assure of the effectiveness
of the training program, the researcher used Blake’s equation to calculate the rate of modified
profit for the students’ marks of the experimental group in the cognitive test, as table No. 4 shows.
Table 4. shows the rate of the modified profit of information technology teachers in skilled
performance
Sample

20

Pre-application
total marks
259.8

Post-application
total marks
531.85

Maximum Total actual Total
test degree
profit expected
profit
578

272.05

318.2

Modified
profit rate
1.33

As table 4 shows that the rate of the modified profit for Blake reached 1.33, and it is a statistically
significant value which means the effectiveness of the training program in developing performance
is connected with required skills to recruit blended learning. Therefore, the second assumption
could be accepted and may point to the following:
- The level of ability of information technology teachers from computer skills made the training
on special skills easier through blended learning connected with E-learning
- The style of training information technology teachers on skills inside the training situation
allows them to practice in appropriate time and led them to practice on the skills and mastering
them. This goes with the study of Shawky (2004) which assured the effective results of the
program, which was held in work locations, in improving the teacher’s information and their
skills about the programs which was held outside work locations.
- Designing a training program according to Rogers’ theory at the various levels of adoption
helped in improving the skills and acquiring them. It provided the following items: theory,
model, scientific practicing, reference and renewing the skill, and come up with Mills (2000).
This may refer back to the characteristics of blended learning skills which are connected with
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

375

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

A Training Program in the Framework of Rogers’ Theory

Al Mashikhi & Soliman

E-learning which was practiced according to their needs and which helped in acquiring
motivation and enthusiastic learning skills.
- Supporting technique which was presented by the program, allowing practicing time for the
skills, relying on personal communication methods also helped in overcoming many obstacles.
- The decision to practice on the skills was optional and not obligatory from the higher authority
and agreed with the study of both Beggs (2000) & Tolba (2001).
- The training program used the steps of module styles to adopt recruiting blended learning
according to Rogers theory and was full of advantages in organizing work in educational
situations and in developing performance skills connected with the goals required in recruiting
blended learning; this result agrees with Tolba (2001) & Shawky (2004) All these studies
combined indicated the effectiveness of these methods in developing skilled performances for
learners.
8.3 Choosing the assumption connected with the training program’s effect to the level of
achievement of information technology teachers for the connected knowledge to recruit
blended learning skills:
This assumption stipulates: The training program achieved a high effect (n2≥ 0.14) in cognitive
achievement connected with the required knowledge to adopt recruiting blended education skills:
Table 6. shows the effect value on cognitive achievement connected with recruiting blended learning
skills
Training program
The value of η2
Level of effect
First module
0.92
High
Second module
0.95
High
Third module
0.95
High
Fourth module
0.98
High
Fifth module
0.97
High
Sixth module
0.98
High

As table 6 shows that the level of effect in all modules is high where the value of η2 in the first
module is 0.92, in the second and the third they are 095, in the fourth and sixth module they are
0.98, and in the fifth module it is 0.97. This proves that the training program has achieved a high
level of effect in the cognitive achievement connected with the required knowledge to adopt
recruiting blended learning skills. Therefore, the third assumption could be accepted, also
conjoining these results with the results of the program effectiveness concerning cognitive
achievement connected with the required knowledge to adopt recruiting blended learning skills.
Therefore, in case of considering the factors that affect the level of blended learning adoption
which are identified by Rogers in the model of design and suggested educational development,
which is added to the high-level effect, so the required effectiveness could be achieved. This result
agrees with Shawky (2004) and Batty (2000).
8.4 Testing the assumption related to the effect of the training program about performance
level of information technology teachers for the skill connected with recruiting blended
learning:
This assumption stipulated that: The training program achieved a high effect level, (η2 ≥ 0.14), at
the level of the required performing skills to adopt recruiting blended learning.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

376

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

A Training Program in the Framework of Rogers’ Theory

Al Mashikhi & Soliman

Table 7. shows the level of effect on the skilled performance related to recruiting the skills of blended
learning
Training program
The value of η2
Level of effect
First module
0.97
High
Second module
0.97
High
Third module
0.95
High
Fourth module
0.94
High
Fifth module
0.97
High
Sixth module
0.98
High

Itis clear from the precede table 7 that the effect level is high in all modules, where the value of
n2 in the first, second, and fifth module reached 0.97, in the third module it is 0.95, in the fourth
module it is 0.94, and the sixth module it is 0.98. This clarifies that the training program achieved
a high effect level in the skilled performance related to the required skills to adopt recruiting
blended learning. Therefore, the fourth assumption could be accepted, and this result could be
joined with the program effectiveness result concerning performance skills required to adopt
recruiting blended learning. Therefore, in case of considering the individual, social and organizing
factors in a proposal educational design and developed model, adding to it the level of high effect,
then the required effectiveness could be achieved, and this result agrees with shawky (2004).
Conclusion
The study aimed at designing a training program according to Rogers theory for recruiting the
skills of blended learning to the teachers of information technology in Oman and knowing its
effectiveness. The study results led to the existence of statistically significant differences, with a
value of (T) for the difference between the average degrees of information technology teachers in
both of dimensional applications for the achievement test and skill performance, it is a value with
statistically significance of the level of (0.001), and the training program was effective, as the
profit rate for Black was 1.33-1.41 respectively. It is a statistically significant value as it is more
than 1.2. The effect of the training program was high in all models concerning both cognitive
achievements and skills.
The study recommended using educational models as one of self-education techniques with
information technology teachers training, with integration with other training styles which agree
with it in characteristics, and the attempt to use Rogers Theory in publishing education technology
innovations, preparing other models for designing, educational development to publish and
adopting these innovations.
About the Authors:
Dr. Khalid Almashikhi: Dr. Khalid Almashikhi is the dean of the college of arts and applied
Sciences at Dhofar University. Khalid received his M.A and Ed. D in educational leadership from
the University of Nebraska at Omaha. Dr. Almashikhi’s teaching and research interests include
leadership, and teaching and learning. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2440-8487
Dr. Sobhy Ahmed Soliman: Sobhy has taught Education Technology and education courses in a
career spanning 15 years in higher education (Menoufia University, Egypt & Dhofar University,
Oman). He contributed to publications in the areas of educational research, Education Technology,
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

377

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

A Training Program in the Framework of Rogers’ Theory

Al Mashikhi & Soliman

teacher professional development and continues to research by working with school teachers in
Oman in building capacity among teachers. https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9036-4964
References:
Al Awad, F. (2005). The effect of using mixed education in the achievement of the primary eighth class
students in both conjunctions’ units, solving equation, their attitude towards mathematics,
unpublished master thesis, the Jordanian University, Amman Jordan.
Barawy, A. A. (2001). Recruiting system methods in teaching the production of multimodal educational
computer programs, unpublished doctorate thesis, Helwan University.
Al Batea, H, Abdelmawla, E. (2008). The effect of using both of e-learning and blended learning, in
developing the skills of designing and producing educational websites for the students of
professional diploma and their attitudes towards e-learning technology, education technology:
studies and researches, special edition about the third scientific conference of the Arabian
association for education technology in the period from 5-6 of September, at the Conferences
Center – Cairo University.
Batty M.& Wilson B& Sherry L., Dobrovolny J & Ryder. (2000). Adoption of learning technologies in
schools and universities, Adelsberger, B. Collis, & J. M. Pawlowski (Eds.), Handbook on
information technologies for education & training, New York. Available
http://carbon.cudenver.edu/~Isherry/pubs/newadopt.htm
Beggs, A. T. (2000). Influences and Barriers to the Adoption of Instructional Technology, Available:
http://www.mtsu.edu/~itconf/proceed../beggs/beggs.htm.
Buket, A. & et al. (2006). A study on students’ views on blended learning environment, Turkish online
Journal of Distance Education,TOJDE July,7(3), 43-54.
Farag, M & Soliman, S. (2008). A suggested program to develop the awareness about e-education and its
application on the students of the department of Islamic education at the faculties of education,
the magazine of reading and knowledge issued by the Egyptian Association for reading and
knowledge - Faculty of Education Ain Shams University, 76, 55-94.
Ganee, R. N. (2000). Education technology basis, translated by Mohamed Ben Salman El Meshekeh, and
others, Riyadh, King Saud University for scientific publishing and printings.
Gusti N. & Keeves J. (2002). Two- level Model of information technology adoption in the local
government of Bali, International Education Journal, 3(1), 47- 60.
Hassan, R. H. (2009). Designing programs based on blended learning to acquire the skills of maintaining
the educational devices to the students of the Faculty of Education, unpublished Master thesis,
Faculty of Education, El-Mansoura University.
Hong, K. S.& Ridznan, A. S.& Knek, M. K. (2003). Students Attitudes Towards The Use of the Internet
for Learning, A Study at the University in Malaysia. Educational Technology & Society, 6(2),
45-40.
Ibrahim, E. A. (2000). Problems which the graduates of education technology departments face, and their
relation with the educational labor market needs in terms of technological renaissance,
education technology, research and studies series, Cairo, Egyptian Association for education
technology, 10 (3), 617.
Ismail, E. Z. (2009). E-learning from applying to mastering and quality, Cairo, the world of books.
Khames, M. A. (2003) The real training for primary level teachers in Saudi Arabia during the service in
the fields of education technology from the teachers’ point of view, the fifth scientific
conference for the Egyptian Association of Education Technology, education technology
innovations and the challenges of the future, Cairo, the Egyptian Association of Education
Technology.
Kitchenham, A. (2005). Adult-Learning Principles, Technology and Elementary teachers and their
Students: the perfect blend? Education, Communication Information; 3 (5), 285-302

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

378

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

A Training Program in the Framework of Rogers’ Theory

Al Mashikhi & Soliman

Kosma, W. (2000). Diffusion and Adoption Research: What does it have to do with instructional
technology? Available: http://www.gsu.edu/mstswh/courses/it7000.papers.rogers.htm
Salama, H. (2006). Mixed education, the natural development of e-education, the educational magazine,
faculty of education, Sohag, Ganob Al Wadi University, 54.
Sayed, F. A. (1998). The role of education technology in education renewal”, education technology:
studies and researches, Cairo, Egyptian Association for Education Technology, 8, 21-24.
Sayls, B. & Richey, R. (2000). Education technology, definition and the components of the field,
translated by Badr Ben Abdalla Al Saleh, Riyadh, Al Shakry office.
Shabara, A. M. (2000). A raining program in self-learning, and its role in developing some adequate
science education, and the attitude towards achieving it for science teachers at high schools in
Oman, (experimental study), the magazine of the Faculty of Education in Damietta, El
Mansoura University, 27(3), 114.
Shawky, E. S. (2004). The effectiveness of a proposal education program to recruit the technology
innovations based on Rogers Theory, unpublished Doctorate thesis, Faculty of Education, Al
Mansoura University.
Shiang-wang, H. (2006). The Effects of a Web-Based Learning Environment on Student Motivation in a
High School, Earth Science Course, Educational Technology Research and Development,
54(6), 597-621.
Shomly, C. (2007). New styles in high education, multimedia e-learning, the sixth conference of the
Faculty of Arts deans for the university’s member of the Arabian Universities Union,
education quality guarantee, and academic accreditation symposium - Bethlehem University.
Soliman, S. A. (2001). Effectiveness of generalizing presentation style in education situations through
computer multimedia on testing situations in providing the students from the department of
education technology the skills of preparing a photolithography camera, and how to use it,
unpublished Master thesis, Faculty of Education, Al Azhar University.
Surrv, D. & Farquhar, J. (2002), A Model for Integrating Instructional Technology into Higher
Education, Available: http://iphase.org/present/aera021pp.pdf
Milheim, W. D. (2006). “Strategies for the design, and delivery of blended learning course, Educational
technology, 46(6).
Mills& Ragan Tillman. (2000). A Tool for Analyzing Implementation Fidelity of an Integrated Learning
System, Educational Technology Research and Development, 48(4), 21-41.
Mohamed, F. H. (1999). Training programs of social studies teacher during the service, evaluation study,
curriculum studies and researches, and education technology, Cairo books world.
Muianga, X. (2005). Blended online and face-to-face learning - a pilot project in the Faculty of Education,
Eduardo Mondale University, international journal of education and development using ICT,
1(2), 658
Naser, N& Barawy, A. (2010). The effect of blended education strategy on the achievement of the
cognitively accredited students – at the faculty of society at El Dawdmy governorate, first
symposium in education technology application, and connection in education and training,
April, 12-14, Faculty of Education, King Saud University.
Rogers, E. M. (1995). Diffusion of innovation, 4ed. New York, free Press.
Rogers, E. M. & Scott K. L. (1997). The Diffusion of Innovations Model and Outreach from the National
Network of Libraries of Medicine to Nam American Communities, Paper present at the
National Network of libraries of Medicine, Pacific Northwest Region, Seattle, 10 -12.1 -19.
Tolba, A. A. (2001). The effect of using a program based on system analysis in developing some concepts
and skills required to deal with the Internet and email, the magazine of the Faculty of
Education, Al Mansoura University, 45, 97-129.
Zaytoun, H. H. (2005). New vision in education “e-education, the concept – cases – application –
evaluation, Saudi Arabia, Riyadh, Al Dar El Sawlatya for education.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

379

