CHALLENGE OF COMMUNITY BASED FISH CULTURE PROGRAM IN BANGLADESH:
CASE STUDY ON FLOODPLAIN BEEL MAIL IN RAJSHAHI
Md. Istiaque Hossain*
Associate Professor
Department of Fisheries, Faculty of Agriculture
University of Rajshahi, Bangladesh
Email: bitanrubd@yahoo.com

Chamhuri Siwar
Emeritus Professor
Institute for Environment and Development (LESTARI)
National University of Malaysia (UKM), Malaysia
E-mail: csiwar@ukm.my

Md. Mahmudul Alam
PhD Candidate
Institute for Environment and Development (LESTARI)
National University of Malaysia (UKM), Malaysia
E-mail: rony000@gmail.com

* Corresponding author

Citation Reference:
Hossain, M.I., Siwar, C., and Alam, M.M. 2013. Challenges of Community based Fish
Culture Program in Bangladesh: Case Study on Floodplain Beel Mail in Rajshahi. Journal of
the Institute of Bangladesh Studies, Vol. 36, pp. 129-136.

This is a pre-publication copy.
The published article is copyrighted by the publisher of the journal.

1

CHALLENGE OF COMMUNITY BASED FISH CULTURE
PROGRAM IN BANGLADESH: CASE STUDY ON
FLOODPLAIN BEEL MAIL IN RAJSHAHI
1,2

MI Hossain*, 2C Siwar, 3MM Alam

1

Department of Fisheries, University of Rajshahi, Bangladesh, bitanrubd@yahoo.com
Institute for Environment and Development (LESTARI), Univesiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
(UKM), Malaysia
3
School of Economics, Finance & Banking (SEFB), College of Business (COB),
Universiti Utara Malaysia (UUM)

2

Abstract
Bangladesh is one of the largest and richest floodplain lands in the world. There are 3 million hectares
of medium and deep flooded areas. In the dry season these land are used for rice production, but these
lands remain unutilized or underutilized for a long period because of flooding. Recently, rice and fish
culture is practiced in dry and flooding season under community based fisheries management (CBFM)
in Kalmina Beel, Fulbaria, Mymensingh and Angrar Beel, Pirganj, Rangpur areas as case studies.
Assessment of the challenges and problems of these beels will help to implement it in other floodplain
areas of Bangladesh that will help utilize land and waterbodies with a good source of food,
employment and better income source for poor people. To understand the challenges of
implementation of CBFM, this study was conducted on Beel Mail at Rajshahi in Bangladesh as a case
study. This study conducted focus group discussion among the CBFM stakeholders. It was revealed
that lack of skills, education, technological knowledge, and conflict among the stakeholders are the
main internal constraints. Lack of coordination among the government agencies, improper facilities
for marketing, infrastructure, and financial services, and environmental externalities were identified as
major external constraints of successful implementation of CBFM. Some policy recommendations for
the successful implementation of the CBFM have been formulated.

Keywords: Floodplain, Beel, Fish-Rice culture, Community based fish culture
1. Introduction
Floodplains are important aquatic ecosystem that support wide range of biodiversity and
provide indispensable benefits to the people. Bangladesh is said to be the world‟s largest
floodplain with 80% floodplain land area. The country has a great opportunity to
improve its economy by aquaculture. As seasonal flood is part of life here, flood water
can be blessings if managed properly for producing food. The seasonal water bodies
which remain inundated for 4-6 months each year remain unutilized in terms of
managed aquatic resources. These floodplains are used only for dry season rice
cultivation and wild fish catch in monsoon. These waterbodies are assumed to be
2

unsuitable for fish culture as fish leave out with flooding and also because of short term
existence of water.
The inland open waterbodies of Bangladesh were rich sources of fishes from ancient
time. Therefore culture of fish was never the management issue for the concerned
authority for long years. After liberation, the Ministry of Land (MOL) managed
these inland open water fisheries with the view of raising revenue by leasing these
fisheries to the highest bidder for short term period (one year for jalmahal and three
years for beel). But during flooding these jalmahal areas could not be defined and
would become the public property. Even during post monsoon period, poor
subsistence fisher had open access to the jalmahal for collecting small indigenous
fishes. This would benefit the landless poor fishers (Hossain et al. 2010; Ali 1997;
Bernacsek 1994) but hindered the appropriate management of these fisheries (Hardin
1968) because of lack of control over the beel and lack of initiatives by the lease
holders. This resulted in over exploitation of these water bodies (Aguero 1989;
Bernacsek 1994; Hossain et al. 1998). In 1973 government restricted the leasing to
registered fisher co-operatives, the revenue oriented strategy continued to result in
over fishing and exploitation of the poor fishers by the lease holders and their
intermediaries.
In floodplain beels of Bangladesh fish production has dropped down to 50-55% and
this is due to environment degradation which includes human interventions through
construction of flood control embankments, drainage system and sluice gates,
conversion of inundated land to crop land-thereby reducing water area and
indiscriminate use of pesticides and insecticides, pollution from domestic, industrial
and agro-chemical wastes and run-off have resulted in extinct of a considerable
amount of an aquatic biota in some stretches of the open water system (Mazid &
Hossain 1995). Hoque (1995) also described that fish diversity is decreasing. There
are now 13 critically endangered, 28 endangered and 14 vulnerable fish species out
of a total of 296 freshwater/brackish fish species existing in Bangladesh.
Sadeque (1992) pointed out to resource use, conflict, improper infrastructure, and lack of
restocking, indiscriminate pesticide use and over fishing as the cause of this decline. Ali
et al. (1995) noted that apart from the disruption of the natural cycle of fish migration,
reproduction and growth, agricultural expansion and agro-industrial pollution have
contributed to this decline estimated to be between 3 and 10 percent per year. Alam and
Thomson (2001) demonstrated that a host of factors are responsible for the underutilization of fishing areas, including resources limitation, poor implementation of
fisheries laws, the limited spread of fish farming technology, low financial capacities and

3

ineffective production practices. Shankar et al. (2005) stated that, abstraction of surface
water for irrigation poses a serious threat to the sustainability of floodplain fisheries in
Bangladesh. This externality imposed on the fishery has important consequences for
millions of poor who depend on fishing for their livelihoods, and several trends indicate
the problem is likely to worsen in the future.
The continuing decrease in fish catch increasingly threatens the livelihoods of more
than 12 million fishers in Bangladesh (Hossain et al. 2010; Hossain et al. 2006).
Government policies were not appropriate to initiate fish culture in these seasonal
waterbodies. Even economic condition of floodplain fishes, inadequate knowledge
for managing these waterbodies and influence of elite money lenders hindered the
appropriate management of these waterbodies. Despite taking some management
actions by the government to remove exploitation of the original fishers from
influential elites, all the actions failed and it was understood that floodplain
management should include these intermediaries rather to avoid them.
In the community based approach, participation of different stakeholder groups of a
defined area is to be ensured in decision making and in thorough management for the
sustainable development of local resources. So, community based fisheries
management (CBFM) refers to management approach for maintenance and
sustainable enhancement of fisheries resource with greater community participation
which aims at strengthening community responsibility for resource management and
reducing government control over them. CBFM has become a common strategy for
improving management of natural or common pool resources and empowering local
communities through co-management, using local knowledge, recognizing local
institutions and establishing common property regimen (Hossain et al. 2010; Berkes
et al. 1998; Ostrom 1990; Pomeroy & Berkes 1997). Therefore in 1996, the
community based fisheries management (CBFM) started functioning in some water
bodies with the involvement of government (Hossain et al. 1999), non-government
organizations and local community members with the aims of equitable distribution
of benefits to all the stakeholders and to developing fishery management system that
is more equitable and ecologically sustainable. World Fish and International Fund
for Agricultural Development (2002) report, have shown that with CBFM approach
in shallow and deep flooded rice fields‟ fish production can be increased to as much
as 600 kg ha-1 yr-1 and 1.5 ton ha-1 yr-1, respectively. Community-based cooperative
fisheries approach has led to increased fishing effort, encouraged excessive fishing
investment and thus, declining catch trends.

4

After introducing CBFM, there were very few studies conducted on the problems that
faced by this approach. It can be also expected that, if successful, CBFM will create
opportunity for Bangladesh economy to get more returns from this unutilized
waterbodies and this field will provide a good source of food, employment and income
source to poor fishermen. Assessment of the current problems of these wetlands CBFM
needs to be known considering the existing and potential water resources so that
management actions can also be taken to improve. To understand the implementation
effect of CBFM, this study identifies the constraints prevailing there.
3. Methodology
Study Area
Beel Mail was selected for this study is under Mohanpur Sadar district of Rajshahi in
Bangladesh. Mohanpuris situated between 240 28‟ and 240 38‟ north latitude and
between 880 34‟ and 880 43‟ east latitude having an area of 162.65 sq km. The
location of the study areas showed in the map (Figure 1).

5

Figure 1: Map showing selected study areas in Mohanpurupazila
Source: http://banglapedia.search.com.bd/HT/N_0049.htm
It is open beel that is shallow depressions where land is converted to agriculture
while permanent water is limited to deeper areas during dry season connected nearby
a local Shiba River, which further connected to Padma river basin. This floodplain
beel is mainly privately owned lands with total 100 ha area of which 15 ha
government Khas lands having water availability for 5-6 month. For long time this
beel is being used for fishing by group of poor fishers (both from caste Hindus, few
of them from Muslim community). They have access and control in the entire
floodplain during monsoon without conflict with the private landowners. There are
rivers and perennial floodplain in the nearby area. Melandi, Goalpara, Dangapara
and Moheskundi villagers are the main beneficiaries of this beel. The community
based fish culture was intervened by DoF with the funding support of Challenge
program for water and food project, South-east Asia, World Fish.
Data Collection
Data were collected through focus group discussion (FGD) to identify major
constraints of implementing CBFM. Constraints and opportunities for CBFM sorted
out here are the combination of problems mentioned by the community members and
the problems experienced by researcher during community formation and
introducing fish culture in the respective floodplain beels.
Two FGD sessions were conducted in beel area with participation of village leaders,
landowners, landless fishermen, and other beneficiaries of beel, Department of
Fisheries (DOF) and World Fish staffs. Meeting was officially arranged by World
Fish stuffs in office of Upazila fisheries officer with community leaders and
executive group members.
4. Findings and Discussions
From the FGD, it was found that the people faced several constraints for successful
implementation of the CBFM in that beel. These challenges come from their own
management as well as socioeconomic, cultural and policy issues.
Among the constant faces the fisherman, lack of skills and technological capacity are
the major issues that come from their own. These fishermen are not educated
enough, and they do not have scientific and technical knowledge regarding
floodplain aquaculture and modern fishing technique. At the same time they also do
not have enough equipment and training facilities as well as supervision. Department
6

of Fisheries (DOF) organized a training program with the support of experience
resource persons on community based fish in open water floodplain beels. Training
was provided on water quality of floodplain beels for fish culture, fish stoking,
quality and quantity of fish fingerlings, water body management, modern fish
harvest, fish marketing and group saving scheme. But this training is not adequate
for them.
Here fishermen follow the traditional method of fish culture. If this traditional fish
culture is possible to improve with supplementary feeding and fertilizer, stocking
density can be raised and hence more production from unit water area during short
time is possible. Stocking of fish fingerlings is one of the most important factors to
manipulate for increasing fish production. Stocking strategy affirms to stocking
density, species composition, fingerlings weight and time of stocking. Stocking
density of 5000 fingerlings/ha for carp fish culture for optimizing yield (Hasan et al.
1999), but stocking density of fish fingerlings in project beel was only 747
fingerlings/ha water body that is far below the recommended stocking density.
Stocking weight of fingerlings is also responsible for enhanced production as
recovery of fingerlings decreases at lower stocking weight due to either predation or
transportation mortality or both (Hasan et al. 1999). They recommended for stocking
weight of carp fingerling in oxbow lake to be 35- 45 g (12-15 cm). In the beel Mail
though most of the carp fingerlings were of recommended weight or more than that,
Mrigal (Cirrhinus mrigala) was of low weight.
Stocking density and fish growth depends on food availability in water body. Thus
supplementary fish feeding can ensure optimum growth of fish during short period,
but in the beel Mail no fish feeding was applied. Fertilizers are also important for
fish production. Urea, TSP is chemical fertilizers which enhance growth of
phytoplankton and zooplankton on surface of water body. Thus surface feeder fish
get enough food for growth. Manure is organic fertilizer that enhances benthos
(snails) production. This is the food mainly for bottom feeder fish. In project beel no
fertilizer was applied during fish culture.
Disease can create a serious threat to aquaculture. As these waterbodies are short
lasting, water is naturally fresh and less polluted. But when intensive or semi
intensive fish culture will be practiced, disease can occur. Usually disease occurs due
to excess stocking of fish fingerlings, decomposition of unutilized fish feed and
application of more fertilizer resulting in reduction of dissolved oxygen in water, but
in this study traditional fish culture was practiced. However this beel area is mainly
used for rice cultivation so that in the dry season usage of chemical fertilizer and

7

insecticides during rice cultivation harms fish growth and increase the risk of fish
mortality.
Environmental externalities and disasters also considered as strong barriers for the
economic return of fish productions. Water level of the seasonal floodplain varies
with time and influences the water quality, aquaculture and the management
approaches. This variation in water level happens due to fluctuation of rainfall and
water level change of connecting river. Excess rainfall and raise of water level in the
connecting river can cause over flooding and can create a problem to aquaculture and
financial loss. Seasonal floodplain beels when have poor embankments and are
connected to river become difficult to manage and to fence. Again fencing in these
beel is costly and farmers cannot fence the area properly due to funding constraint.
And during over flooding, water level can raise beyond fencing height which leads to
escape of cultured as well as SIS fish species and cases lesser the production.
Funding is one of the major constraints for fish culture. Money is required for leasing
the water body, for buying fish fingerlings, for fencing, netting, and providing
supplementary feeding, for fertilizer and all other harvesting and post harvesting
activities. But economic conditions of fish farmers are not well enough to support the
costs of fish culture. Though World Fish funded for fingerlings, fencing, net, boat
and also arranged for revolving fund for lease money and for fingerlings, still enough
money is required to optimize fish production by improved traditional fish culture
i.e. by providing supplementary feeding, fertilizer and by increasing stocking
density. When fishermen don‟t have sufficient money for fish culture, they have to
search for money from Bank, NGOs or local money lenders. In Bangladesh, the
credit situation of public sector is very complicated.
Infrastructural problem is another major constraint for the success of the CBFM.
Most of the local markets don‟t have enough facilities for electricity, water, ice, etc.
It is believed that 30 to 33% of all fish caught become unsuitable for human
consumption due to infrastructural problem (FAO 2001). Due to lack of preservation
facility and poor transportation, fishers had to sell their product in local market, but
the purchasing ability of the villagers is also poor. There is no standard of pricing
thus middle men buy from the local market in very low price.
Poor marketing facility is another major constraint faced by the fishermen in the
floodplain beels. At the primary level market is mainly controlled by a group of
middle men known as Arothdars and Mahajons. Broadly used fish market channel is
„Fishermen→Bapari→Aratdar→Paiker/ whole saler→Retailer→consumer‟. Small
number of whole saler and lack of good communication facilities cause noncompetitive and monopoly types of market.
8

Government policy and institutional coordination problems are also strong barriers for
the sustainable growth of the success of CBFM. Long-time leasing is a pre-requisite for
success of CBFM and also for sustainable development of seasonal waterbody. If long
term leasing right can be ensured, community members feel committed for developing
these water body for improving their livelihoods. Current leasing system allow only for
three years. The floodplain lands become the government property during flooding and
are dealt by the MOL, but waterbody should be managed by DOF. At the same time
Ministry of Fisheries (MOF) also needs to coordinate the issues. If CBFM also register,
it needs to go to the Ministry of Lands.
There are few challenges within the CBFM per se. There are conflicts among the
stakeholders is very common. Generally water levels vary with the seasons that
directly affect the total area of shallow fringe lands around the beel where paddy can
be grown during the dry season. When there is little flood, rapid drainage of the beels
by paddy cultivators, immediately after the rainy season, causes conflict with
fishermen. The fringe lands are part of the beel for which fishers groups pay the
lease fee, but these plots are in fact “informally owned” mostly by non-fishers
farmers, who have no interest in maintaining high water levels for fish. Also usages
of pesticides in the rice fields during dry season causes to accumulate it in the deeper
portion of the beel through washing away by rain water during rainy season that
reduces fish growth and also causes fish mortality.
Another very important internal constraint of CBFM is the conflict between the land
owners and the landless fishermen. The land owners did not agreed to include
original fishermen and the landless people of that community. General problems
regarding community formation were in developing a concept of common property
rights, social and political conflicts in following sharing systems, disobedience of the
property rights by land owners, lack of trust and sacrificing mentality among the
group members, non-cooperation by the village people outside the community. After
several meetings, community was formed including both landowners and landless
fishermen and this community successfully carried on fish culture during first year
and profit was shared among these two groups according to pre-agreed sharing
arrangements.
5. Conclusion and Policy Recommendations
This study reveals that community based fish culture in the seasonal floodplain beel
is socially acceptable and economically profitable, and this approach benefits the
landless poor fishermen by involving wide range of original fishermen in fish culture
activities. It helps in better sharing of benefits among the landowners and landless

9

fishermen. It is expected that community based fishery management approach also
able to restrict exploitation of the poor original fishers by money lenders and other
elite influential in these open waterbodies by strengthening the bonding within
fishermen society and by making them economically strong. For successful CBFM it
is also essential to identify, explain and removal of constraints of fish culture in
seasonal open waterbodies. Low stocking density, dependence on natural fish
feeding, less technical skill of fishermen, less control over market, funding constrain,
environmental externalities, leasing system of water body and conflict between
stakeholders, lack of coordination among respective government ministries were
identified as major constrains of successful implementation of CBFM, and for
achieving optimum return from fish culture in the floodplain beel areas.
Several policy options are needed to overcome the constraints for better management
in CBFM in Bangladesh. In the beel Mail, stocking density should be raised to
enhance total fish production as well as fingerlings weight should be maintained to
increase fish production during short period of flooding. To conserve the brood of
small indigenous fish species (SIS) sanctuary can be established, and nursery pond
development also needed to be added to promote timely stocking of these water body
with good quality fingerlings. At the same time, fertilizers should be applied to
ensure food availability at all level of water body for optimum growth of fish. Rice
husk, duck weed can be used in the water body as supplementary fish feeding and
organic fertilizers. To solve financial constraint for fish production, government
should arrange easy and soft fund for the CBFM community. Microcredit also can
provide at lower interest rate for inland open water fisheries sector. Government also
should take initiative to perform infrastructural development and monitoring the
market. The period of leasing contract needs to increase for a successful growth.
Finally, for successful implementation of CBFM in this common property, both
landowners and landless people should be involved. If landowners get benefits of
fish culture, they will promote fish culture in rainy season instead of going for
confrontation with fishermen. Thus the rice cultivators will be acknowledged and
motivated to practice natural pest control technique in rice fields to avoid detrimental
effect of pesticide on fish culture. To establish right of original fishermen on this
common water body gradual empowerment is required which can be achieved by
strengthening the social bonding among the group members. If the mentioned
constraints can be possible to properly introduce, the CBFM in beel mail will
become a very successful story.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support for this research from
the World Fish (Community Based Fish Culture in Irrigation System and Seasonal
10

Floodplain Project (CP35) funded by CGIAR Chellenge Program Water & Food,
April 2005 -31 Dec 2010) and Malaysian Commonwealth Scholarship (MCS),
Ministry of Higher Education, Malaysia (Ref. KPT (BS) 035/11/002, 15.2.200631.5.2009).
References
Aguero M. Inland water fisheries of Bangladesh: management options and national
interventions. In: Aguero, M., Huq, S., Rahman, A.K.A., Ahmed, M. (Eds.).
Inland Fisheries Management in Bangladesh. Department of Fisheries,
Dhaka, Bangladesh; Bangladesh Centre for Advanced Studies, Dhaka,
Bangladesh, and International Centre for Living Aquatic Resources
Management, Manila, Philippines (1989): 149.
Alam M. F. & Thomson K. J. Current constraints and future possibilities for
Bangladesh fisheries. Food Policy.26(3) (2001): 297-313.
Ali M.Y. Fish, Water and People: Reflections on Inland Openwater Fisheries
Resources of Bangladesh. University Press, Dhaka (1997).
Ali M.L. & Fisher K. Potential, constraints and strategy for conservation and
management of inland open water fisheries in Bangladesh. Paper presented
at the National Workshop on Fisheries Resource Development and
Management. MOFL, ODA and FAO, Dhaka, Bangladesh (1995).
Berkes F. Property rights and costal fisheries, 51-62. In R.S. Pomeroy (ed.)
proceeding of the conference on Community management and common
property of costal fisheries in Asia and the Pacific: concepts, methods and
experience. ICLARM 45 (1994): 196.
Berkes F., Feeny D., McCay B.J. & Acheson J.M. The benefits of the commons.
Nature 340 (1998): 91–93.
Bernacsek G.M. Socio-economic constraints impeding implementation of the New
Fisheries Management Policy in Bangladesh. In: Proceedings of the IPFC
Symposium held in Conjunction with the 24th Session of IPFC on Socioeconomic Issues in Coastal Fisheries Management. FAO (1994): 248–258.
FAO. The economics of conservation agriculture. Rome, Italy: FAO, Land and water
development division, Food and Agriculture organization of the United
Nations (2001).
Hardin G. The tragedy of the commons. Science.162 (1968): 1243-1248.

11

Hasan M.R., Bala N. & Middendorp H.A.J. Secchi disc as a tool to determine
stocking density and predict fish yield in a culture-based fishery. 159–168 In:
H.A.J. Middendorp, P.M. Thompson, R.S. Pomeroy (Eds.) Proceedings of
the Conference on Sustainable Inland Fisheries Management in Bangladesh.
ICLARM, Vol. 58, Manila, Philippines (1999).
Hoque M. T. „Sustainable agriculture – a perspective on fish culture for the small
scale resource-poor farmers of Bangladesh‟. Journal of Sustainable
Agriculture 5(3) (1995): 97-113.
Hossain MI., Siwar C., Mokhtar MB., Dey MM. & Jaafar AH. Impact of Community
Based Fish Culture on Seasonal Floodplain Beel - A Comparative Study. J. Sci.
Res. 2 (2) (2010): 369-379.
Hossain M.M., Rahman S.A. & Thompson P.M., Building government–nongovernment organization-fisher partnerships for fisheries management in
Bangladesh. In: Proceedings of the Seventh Annual Conference on the
International Association for the Study of Common Property, Vancouver,
Canada. http://www.indiana.edu/iascp/Drafts/hossain.pdf., (4th May 2007)
(1998).
Hossain M. M., Kabir M. S., Thompson P. M., Islam M. N. & Kadir M. M.
Overview of the community based Fisheries management Project, p.9-18. In
H.A.J.Middendrop, P.M.Thompson and R.S. Pomeroy (Eds.) Proceeding of
the Conference on Sustainable inland fisheries management in Bangladesh,
ICLARM (1999): 58, 280.
Mazid M.A. & Hossain M. S. Development of fish resources in floodplains. FRI
Publication No. 12, Fisheries Research Institute, Mymensingh, Bangladesh
(1995): 29-31.
Monir Hossain M., Islam M.A., Ridgway S., & Matsuishi T. Management of inland
open water fisheries resources of Bangladesh: Issues and options. Fisheries
Research. l80 (1-3) (2006): 275-284.
Ostrom E. Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective
Action. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA (1990).
Pomeroy R.S. & Berkes F. Two to tango: the role of government in fisheries comanagement. Marine Policy. 21 (5) (1997): 465–480.
Sadeque S.Z. Capture fisheries and other common property resources in the
floodplains of Bangladesh. J. Sci. Stu.Dhaka. 55 (1992): 20-34.

12

Shankar B., Halls A. & Barr J. The Effects of Surface Water Abstraction for Rice
Irrigation on Floodplain Fish Production in Bangladesh‟, Int. J. Water. 3 (1)
(2005): 61-83.
Worldfish Center Increasing and Sustaining the Productivity of Fish and Rice in the
Flood-Prone Ecosystems in South and Southeast Asia. Final Report to the
International Fund for Agricultural Development, Worldfish Center, Pinag,
Malaysia (2002): 95.

13

