International Studies Quarterly (2018) 62, 383–395

Labor Migrants as Political Leverage: Migration Interdependence
and Coercion in the Mediterranean
G E R A S I M O S T S O U R A PA S
University of Birmingham

Introduction
“The number of people makes the wealth of states.”
Frederick the Great
“It’s an easy decision for Mexico,” wrote Donald Trump in
his March 2016 memo to the Washington Post. In it, Trump
detailed how he intended to force Mexico to finance a border wall between the United States and its southern neighbor. He would threaten to cut off its migrants’ remittances.
“Make a one-time payment of $5–$10 billion to ensure that
$24 billion [in remittances] continues to flow into their
country year after year … we have all the leverage … Mexico
is totally dependent on the United States as a release valve
for its own poverty” (Washington Post 2016).
Cross-border population mobility often generates both
tensions and opportunities for leverage in global politics.
The European Union (EU)’s muddled response to migrant
and refugee flows across the Mediterranean Sea has profoundly shaped politics in many of its member states. In June
2017, a number of Arab states heightened immigration controls and engaged in collective deportations of Qatari citizens in order to exert diplomatic pressure on the Gulf state.
Meanwhile, European citizens in Great Britain accuse the
Gerasimos Tsourapas is a lecturer in Middle East politics at the Department of
Political Science and International Studies, University of Birmingham. He works
on authoritarianism and the politics of migration, refugees, and diasporas in the
Middle East and North Africa.
Author’s note: I am indebted to a number of colleagues that have supported
this work during multiple iterations. I wish to thank the International Studies Quarterly editorial team as well as the three anonymous reviewers for their help in
improving the quality of this manuscript. I am also grateful to Maria Koinova
for her astute comments on multiple versions of this piece. The argumentation
originally developed during conversations with Fiona Adamson—I have benefitted tremendously from her support and insightful feedback. Many thanks to Jim
Hollifield, Ibrahim Awad, Tara Buss, May Darwich, Filippo Dionigi, Abel EscribàFolch, Thibaut Jaulin, Karrie Koesel, Matteo Legrenzi, Ed Stoddard, Michael D.
Tyburski, Adam Quinn, Kurt Weyland, Stefan Wolff, and Sean L. Yom. Ahmad
Barakat has provided valuable research assistance. Previous versions of this work
were presented at the APSA, ISA, ECPR, and MESA Annual Meetings, as well as
at workshops organized at the American University of Cairo, University of Exeter,
King’s College London, LSE, North Carolina State University, and SOAS, where
attendees provided valuable feedback.

British government of using them as bargaining chips in the
ongoing negotiations with Brussels over “Brexit.”
This article aims to expand our understanding of the interplay between migration and power politics by examining
how labor migration features in coercive interstate relations.
It addresses two main questions: How do states attempt to
leverage their position as destinations for labor migration to
influence sending states? Under which conditions do these
attempts succeed?
I introduce the term migration interdependence to describe
the reciprocal political economy effects produced by labor
migration between sending and host states. I argue that
there are two ways through which host states are able to
manipulate migration interdependence in order to coerce
a sending state into specific policy shifts. Firstly, a host state
may pursue a strategy of restriction by limiting the outflow of
migrant remittances into a sending state, adopting tighter
immigration controls for citizens of a sending state, or doing both. Secondly, a host state may pursue a strategy of displacement by forcibly expelling citizens of a sending state.
The effectiveness of restriction or displacement depends on
whether a sending state is vulnerable to migration interdependence. Vulnerable sending states are more likely to comply with host-state demands, particularly if a host state exercises a strategy of displacement rather than one of mere
restriction.
The article proceeds as follows: I review the relevant literature and present my theoretical model. I
then introduce two least-likely cases, selected for theorytesting purposes through covariation and within-case analysis. In the first case, Jordan sought to coerce the
Egyptian state into increasing the supply of natural gas
into the country in 2012. In the second case, Libya aimed,
in 2013, to coerce the Egyptian state into complying with
the extradition of ancien régime elites, who had relocated
their political and economic activities in Egypt. The two
host states attempted to leverage their positions against
the sending state through strategies of restriction and
displacement of their respective Egyptian migrant labor
communities.

Tsourapas, Gerasimos. (2018) Labor Migrants as Political Leverage: Migration Interdependence and Coercion in the Mediterranean. International Studies Quarterly, doi:
10.1093/isq/sqx088
© The Author (2018). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the International Studies Association. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original work is properly cited.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/isq/article-abstract/62/2/383/4986742 by guest on 28 September 2018

How do states attempt to use their position as destinations for labor migration to influence sending states, and under what
conditions do they succeed? I argue that economically driven cross-border mobility generates reciprocal political economy effects on sending and host states. That is, it produces migration interdependence. Host states may leverage their position against a
sending state by either deploying strategies of restriction—curbing remittances, strengthening immigration controls, or both—
or displacement—forcefully expelling citizens of the sending state. These strategies’ success depends on whether the sending
state is vulnerable to the political economy costs incurred by host states’ strategy, namely if it is unable to absorb them domestically and cannot procure the support of alternative host states. I also contend that displacement strategies involve higher
costs than restriction efforts and are therefore more likely to succeed. I demonstrate my claims through a least-likely, two-case
study design of Libyan and Jordanian coercive migration diplomacy against Egypt in the aftermath of the Arab Spring. I examine how two weaker Arab states leveraged their position against Egypt, a stronger state but one vulnerable to migration
interdependence, through the restriction and displacement of Egyptian migrants.

384

Labor Migrants as Political Leverage

Investigating Labor Migration as Interstate Leverage
International-relations theorists have only recently treated
the effects of labor migration on global politics as a separate field of inquiry. The realist and neorealist tradition,
in particular, traditionally approached labor migration as
a “low” rather than a “high” politics issue (Hollifield and
Wong 2014, 228), save for a few notable exceptions of scholars working primarily on immigration or security politics
(Zolberg 1989; Weiner and Russell 2001; see for comparison
Teitelbaum 2001). The international-relations scholarship
tends to also examine host states at the expense of sending
states—that is, “to focus on the consequences of immigration in wealthy, migrant-receiving societies, and to ignore
the causes and consequences of migration in origin countries” (Castles, De Haas, and Miller 2014, 26). This hinders
our ability to theorize the international politics of migration,
as it obscures the role of economically driven cross-border
population mobility in interstate relations.
A first line of work that ties migration to coercive interstate relations sees cross-border mobility in terms of existing
power imbalances between sending and host states. Early
scholars of dependency theory, as well as recent critics of
globalization, focus on migration’s contribution to the “development of underdevelopment” (Frank 1966). Rooted in
Marxist political economy, such research examines migration flows as part of broader patterns of uneven trade between “developed (migration receiving) and less-developed
(migration sending) countries” (Hollifield 2012, 366; see
for comparison Sassen 1988). Wallerstein and other worldsystems theorists identify that labor migration sustains “relations of domination” between these two groups of nations,
confirming the expectations of mainstream internationalrelations theory regarding stronger powers exerting pressure on weaker ones (Castles et al. 2014, 33). For instance,
Mexican migration into the United States features as a main
dimension in the power imbalances between the two states
(FitzGerald 2009, 55, 167–69). The presence of 15–20 million Bangladeshi immigrants across India is indicative of
the unequal distribution of economic power between the
two states (Sadiq 2008). Although such work affirms the
importance of labor migration in interstate relations, it approaches economically driven cross-border population mobility not as an instrument of foreign policy or coercion, but
as part and parcel of global power imbalances. How might
a host state leverage its position against a sending state for
specific policy goals?
Working broadly within the field of global power politics (Berenskoetter 2007; Goddard and Nexon 2016), three
separate research agendas allow us to identify potential
leverage mechanisms; firstly, work on economic remittances

long established the importance of such capital inflows
for sending states (Orrenius and Zavodny 2012; EscribàFolch, Meseguer, and Wright 2015; Mosley and Singer 2015,
293–97; Hollifield, Martin, and Orrenius 2014, 7). Economic remittances constitute a valuable source of foreign
exchange and produce multiplier effects on the aggregate economy (Kapur 2010). They enhance access to public services (Adida and Girod 2011) and decrease demand
for social spending (Doyle 2015). The importance of migrant remittances is frequently identified in the extensive
literature on state-diaspora relations (Délano and Gamlen
2014; Adamson 2017; Koinova 2014; Koinova and Tsourapas, forthcoming). An extensive political economy literature
also highlights how remittances may also constitute a form
of rent distribution, particularly in the Middle East, and suggests that it may contribute to the stability of sending states’
political regimes (Korany 1986; Richter and Steiner 2008;
Soliman 2011). Warnings regarding the risks of overreliance
on remittances, of Dutch disease effects, or of associated inflationary risks notwithstanding (Chami, Barajas, Cosimano,
Fullenkamp, Gapen, and Montiel 2008), sending states habitually place significant value upon the ability to attract economic remittances (Castles et al. 2014, 75–83).
Consequently, host states attempting to exercise leverage against sending states may target the latter’s reliance
on remittances, mainly via disrupting migrants’ ability to
send earnings home. The rationale behind such a strategy of restricting remittances is similar to states’ adoption
of negative economic sanctions (Lindsay 1986; Hufbauer,
Schott, and Elliott 1990), as both mechanisms aim to force
target states’ compliance on a range of issues via disrupting capital inflows. “Because economic sanctions can impose costs … without carrying the degree of risk attached
to military actions,” Martin (1993, 3) argues, “governments
use them to signal resolve and exert pressure for policy
changes. In a similar fashion, a host state may curtail migrants’ financial transfers as leverage. There is a wealth of
empirical examples of host states targeting the outflow of
economic remittances for political purposes. The United
States’ embargo against Cuba prohibited migrants from dispatching remittances, while Cubans had to use third countries to transfer funds back home (Vanderbush and Haney
2005). When Japanese-North Korean relations deteriorated
in March 1999 as Pyongyang prepared to test-fire a new longrange ballistic missile, Japan threatened to ban all migrant
remittances to North Korea, estimated at $600 million to $1
billion per year (Miyashita 2003, 163).
Beyond migrant remittances, cross-border mobility serves
a second political economy purpose for sending states. Political scientists identify that economically driven migration
allows for an outflow of domestic labor, constituting what
Turner described as a “safety valve” (1920), or the reduction
of labor surpluses and the easing of accompanying sociopolitical and economic pressures. Drawing on Hirschman’s
thesis on “voice” versus “exit,” research demonstrates that
sending states find it preferable to encourage the “exit”
of disenfranchised social actors rather than allow them to
“voice” their grievances (Hirschman 1970, 15–43; for comparison Dowding, John, Mergoupis, and Vugt 2000, 478–80;
Burgess 2012). Sending states often attempt to curb overpopulation or unemployment, in particular, by aiming to
“export” citizens abroad. Such policies are evident in India,
Bangladesh, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, as well as poorer Middle
East states, which traditionally promote labor migration to
the oil-producing Arab states (Weiner 1985, 445). The 1942–
1964 Bracero program allowed for the outflow of Mexican
labor into the United States (FitzGerald 2009, 48–50). In

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/isq/article-abstract/62/2/383/4986742 by guest on 28 September 2018

In neither case did restriction strategies produce the desired policy shift. But displacement led Egypt to comply
with both Jordanian and Libyan demands. Egypt arguably
yielded to Jordanian and Libyan pressures because it was, at
the time, vulnerable to migration interdependence. I find
little support for alternative explanations, and I also apply
the study’s framework on two attempts at coercion via displacement against Egypt by Libya and Iraq in the pre-2011
period. I demonstrate that, at the time, the two host states
failed to produce compliance because Egypt was not vulnerable to migration interdependence. Finally, I briefly examine how my argument might shed light on other instances
where host states attempt to coerce sending states and discuss avenues for future research on the politics of migration
interdependence.

G E R A S I M O S T S O U R A PA S

1
Similar to research on the effects of economic remittances on sending states,
a debate continues on the benefits of such outward mobility, with a number of
scholars arguing that it constitutes a form of “brain drain” for sending states. The
article is merely interested in identifying the perceived importance of emigration
for sending states.
2
At the same time, labor migration within the Middle East also arguably constitutes an element of cooperation—rather than coercion—between
resource-rich/labor-poor and resource-poor/labor-rich autocracies (for comparison, Erdmann, Bank, Hoffmann, and Richter 2013; von Soest 2015; Tansey 2016).
However, this is beyond the scope of the study’s research questions.

ing cross-border mobility) focuses on how the West, namely
the EU (Levitsky and Way 2011, 87–129) or the United
States (130–80), exercised pressure upon weaker post–Cold
War states. Some scholars examine “suasion” games that focus on the dilemmas facing a hegemonic power (indicatively, Martin 1992). When would weaker host states be able
to leverage their position against stronger sending states?
A small literature has theorized that weak states may coerce stronger states within conditions of military conflict
and counterinsurgency (Mack 1975; Arreguin-Toft 2005; for
comparison, Paul 1994), but issue-linkage in the field of
labor migration has been examined only with regard to
stronger states’ “migration diplomacy” strategies (Tsourapas
2017). Similarly, Greenhill (2002, 2010) does not incorporate weaker host states in her analysis and focuses primarily
on forced migration.
Secondly, work on economic coercion suggests that interstate economic linkages may produce political compliance,
but may also produce resistance or nationalism. Not unlike
the debated effectiveness of economic sanctions as a policy
of coercion, placing restrictions on migrant remittances or
strengthening immigration controls may have little effect on
sending states’ compliance, as the cases of Cuba or North
Korea demonstrate. As a result, relevant work, particularly
within security studies, is unclear in its conclusions. Brand,
for instance, mentions how “it may make sense to think of
… Jordanian expatriate labor in Kuwait” as a form of “economic statecraft,” but she does not carry this argument any
further (Brand 2013, 148). Oyen (2015) examines the interaction between US foreign policy and the deportation of
Chinese citizens during the Cold War, but does not specify
whether expulsion constitutes a host-state strategy or an outcome. Greenhill establishes that deportation produces compliance when employed by sending or transit states against
liberal democratic host states, but her findings on its effect against sending states are inconclusive (see coding in
2010, 310–11, 312–13, 321). The following section provides
a novel theoretical framework that explains the conditions
under which such strategies will likely succeed in producing
sending-state compliance.

Theorizing Migration Interdependence and Coercion:
Sending-State Vulnerability to Restriction and
Displacement Strategies
This section brings existing work on migration in conversation with the international-relations literature on economic
interdependence. It puts forth a novel approach to understanding host states’ use of coercion against sending states
and the conditions under which it is successful. I identify how economically driven cross-border mobility generates reciprocal political economy effects on sending and
host states, or migration interdependence. I argue that a
host state may leverage its position against the sending
state by either deploying strategies of restriction—curbing remittances, strengthening immigration controls, or both—
or displacement—forcefully expelling citizens of the sending
state. The success of these strategies depends on whether
the sending state is vulnerable to the political economy cost
incurred by the host state’s strategy, namely if it is unable to
absorb the incurred cost domestically and cannot procure
the support of alternative host states. However, I contend
that displacement is more likely than restriction to change
the behavior of the sending state, because of the higher costs
involved (see Table 1).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/isq/article-abstract/62/2/383/4986742 by guest on 28 September 2018

the second half of the twentieth century, Tunisia and Morocco began fostering emigration to Europe for similar political economy reasons (Brand 2006, 17), while Western
European countries, notably Germany, engaged in recruitment of labor from Turkey and other Mediterranean states
(Martin 1991).1
By extension, I expect host states aiming to leverage their
position against a sending state to also attempt to restrict
the outflow of its citizens abroad. An extensive literature
exists on various methods of immigration control; a host
state may decide to curb immigration flows from a specific
sending state through the tightening of border controls, an
increase in security and policing, the introduction of new
visa requirements or the strengthening of existing ones, the
criminalization of irregular migration, and so on (Andreas
and Snyder 2000). Following Turkey’s shooting down of a
Russian Su-24M military aircraft near the Turkish-Syrian border on November 24, 2015, for instance, President Putin responded by suspending visa-free travel for Turkish citizens
(Schenk 2016, 481–86). The strengthening of immigration
controls, when employed within a coercive intestate context,
is similar to a potential disruption of remittances outflows;
by restricting sending states’ access to its labor market, a host
state aims to elicit their compliance.
Finally, beyond a strategy of restriction—disrupting the
outflow of migrant remittances, strengthening immigration
controls, or both—a host state may adopt a second strategy, namely the expulsion of a sending state’s migrant population, either in part or in its entirety. This occurs either through the deportation of a sending state’s migrant
community or through the implementation of policies that
render a migrant group susceptible to deportation. Such
policies may involve novel provisions on required documentation or on immigrants’ family history (on the politics of deportation, see Ellermann 2009; De Genova and Peutz 2010;
Oyen 2015, 99–127). Security studies scholars approach
such policies of “demographic engineering” as extreme
measures (Weiner and Teitelbaum 2001, 55–56, 65–74), for
they are able to target both a state’s reliance on migrant
remittances and its ability to allow the outflow of domestic labor at the same time, effectively “capacity-swamping” it
(Greenhill 2010, 39). Russia’s 2008 law On the Legal Status
of Foreign Citizens includes the option to declare certain
foreigners “undesirable” (nezhelatel’nyi). Only in 2015, it was
estimated that it deported 117,493 foreigners, particularly
citizens of Central Asian and Western states (MVD Rossii—
Grazhdanskoe Sodeistvie). Similarly, foreign policy analysts
highlight how Saudi Arabia, Libya, and other Arab states do
not hesitate to deport certain states’ migrants, when bilateral relations deteriorate (Kapiszewski 2001; Thiollet 2011;
Tsourapas 2015a; 2016).2
Under what conditions would sending states comply with
host states’ demands? Two research agendas are relevant.
Firstly, work on linkage and leverage suggests that strong
states are particularly successful when exercising coercion
against weaker states. Levitsky and Way’s seminal analysis of
linkage and leverage mechanisms (albeit without examin-

385

386

Labor Migrants as Political Leverage
Table 1. Sending state compliance to host state coercive strategies
Sending state vulnerability interdependence

Type of host state strategy

Restriction
Displacement

3

While the article does not argue that the impact of a complex phenomenon
such as migration is limited to political economy, its analysis focuses on effects
produced by labor migration as a form of interstate trade. Similarly, transit states
may also generate migration interdependence, but this is not analyzed here.

Yes

Compliance unlikely
Compliance unlikely

Compliance somewhat likely
Compliance very likely

is created by interactions within a framework of policies”
(Keohane and Nye 2012, 12). The sensitivity of Western
states’ economies to increased oil prices in the 1970s was
“a function of the greater costs of foreign oil and the proportion of petroleum they imported” (12). Similarly, in this
article’s framework, the existence of migration interdependence constitutes the threshold for establishing a sending
state’s sensitivity to migration interdependence. The sensitivity of the Mexican state to Washington’s 1964 termination
of the Bracero Program was a function of the political economy costs incurred once the United States restricted further
immigration of Mexican contract laborers. Ghana’s sensitivity to Nigeria’s 1983 displacement of African labor immigrants was a function of the political economy costs incurred
once Nigeria displaced more than one million Ghanaian
citizens.
While sensitivity assumes that the policy framework remains unchanged, “the vulnerability dimension of interdependence rests on the relative availability and costliness of
the alternatives that various actors face,” and “can be measured only by the costliness of making effective adjustments
to a changed environment over a period of time” (13). “The
fact that the United States imports approximately 85 percent of its bauxite supply does not indicate American vulnerability to actions by bauxite exporters,” Keohane and Nye
argue, “until we know what it would cost (in time as well
as money) to obtain substitutes” (13). In the context of migration interdependence, therefore, one would expect that
sending states’ vulnerability is established by their inability
to make effective adjustments with regard to the political
economy costs incurred by the change in the policy framework through a host-state strategy of restriction or displacement. In particular, two conditions must be satisfied in order
for a sending state to become vulnerable to a host-state strategy: the sending state needs to be unable to both absorb the
incurred cost domestically and to procure the support of alternative host states.4
Empirical evidence attests as to why the two conditions’
coexistence is necessary for establishing sending states’ vulnerability interdependence. A state may not be able to find
alternative states willing to bear the cost of a host-state strategy of restriction or displacement, but that would not render it vulnerable if it is able to absorb the cost of such
a strategy domestically. For instance, European states’ increasingly restrictive labor immigration policies in recent
decades reduced Turkish immigration, but did not necessarily affect the vulnerability of the Turkish state; despite
being “the main source of non-EU migration in the EEC
between 1960 and 1990, Turkey has entered a migration
transition” (Castles et al. 2014, 179) recent research suggests. “As a consequence of relatively high political stability and rapid economic growth, Turkey has transformed
4
One could argue that a sending state’s ability to contain any political costs
incurred by a host-state strategy (strikes, sit-ins, deportees’ protests) is also important. However, I view such costs as spillover effects from a sending state’s inability
to absorb the political economy cost domestically or shift it to alternative host
states.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/isq/article-abstract/62/2/383/4986742 by guest on 28 September 2018

The previous examination of cross-border mobility and
interstate relations points to the need to conceptualize labor migration as form of trade between sovereign nations
that generates interdependence between sending and host
states (Hollifield 2012, 366; for a history of the concept,
see Cooper 1972; Baldwin 1980). Interdependence is approached here as “reciprocal effects among countries or
among actors in different countries” (Keohane and Nye
2012, 8). Similar to financial transactions or foreign trade,
I expect economically driven cross-border population mobility to engender political economy effects among states,
or migration interdependence. Drawing on the literature
on states’ labor emigration and immigration policies, I define migration interdependence in a minimalist fashion, as
the reciprocal political economy effects arising from crossborder flows of people between a sending and host state.3
According to Hirschman’s (1945, xvi) landmark study, the
international trade system is “vulnerable to the will of any
government so minded to use it in the pursuit of power.”
Rather than constitute a Millian force for international cooperation, “commerce can become an alternative to war …
by providing a method of coercion of its own in the relations between sovereign nations” (14–15). Hirschman also
lays out the two mechanisms through which a state may employ trade as an instrument of power against a target state
in conditions of interdependence, consisting “mainly of the
threat of severance and ultimately of actual interruption of
external economic relations with that country” (16).
While Hirschman does not discuss cross-border population mobility, I introduce his framework into migration interdependence. Building on existing work outlined in the
previous section, I argue that a host state may leverage its
position for coercive purposes against a sending state in two
ways: either by reducing a sending state’s migration interdependence through restriction, or by severing it completely
through displacement. Restriction refers to host-state policies of curbing migrant remittances, strengthening immigration flows, or both. It corresponds to Hirschman’s “threat
of severance,” (16) given that migration interdependence is
not severed; even at cases of extreme restriction, as in the
case of the American embargo against Cuba, for instance,
Cuban citizens were able to remain in the United States and
had devised ways to send remittances home via third countries. Displacement refers to host-state strategies of deportation and corresponds to Hirschman’s expectation of “actual
interruption of external economic relations” with the sending state (16).
When are these two mechanisms of coercive migration
diplomacy successful in producing sending-state compliance? I introduce two key terms from the literature on interdependence: sensitivity and vulnerability. For Keohane and
Nye, sensitivity “involves degrees of responsiveness within a
policy framework”; as a result, “sensitivity interdependence

No

G E R A S I M O S T S O U R A PA S

Methodology and Case Selection
I employ case-study methodology for the purposes of theorytesting through deduction, and I rely on covariation and
within-case analysis (Bennett and Checkel 2015). Egypt constitutes the largest supplier of migrant labor in the Arab
world (Tsourapas 2015a; 2016). It is also one of the major sending states worldwide; it ranks as the eighth largest
remittance-receiving state and received $18.32 billion in
2015 alone (International Monetary Fund 2016). Care has
been taken so as to select two host states with diverse characteristics. Jordan is an established monarchy whose size is
only 89,342 km2 (or 0.7 percent of the total Arab world territory). Jordan also does not share a physical border with
Egypt and is not an oil-exporting state. On the other hand,
Libya in 2013 had just emerged from the first phase of
a brutal civil war. It is one of the largest Arab states (at
1,759,540 km2 , constituting 11.4 percent of the total Arab
world territory), and shares a porous, 1,115-km border with
Egypt. Since 1962, Libya is a member of the Organization of
the Petroleum Exporting Countries.
The study focuses on Egyptian labor migration to Jordan
and Libya under Mohamed Morsi, who became President
in June 2012 under the Muslim Brotherhood–backed Freedom and Justice Party. In the first case, Jordan aimed to coerce the Egyptian state into increasing the supply of natural
gas into the country while, in the second case, Libya aimed
to coerce the Egyptian state into complying with the extradition of ancien régime elites, who had relocated their political and economic activities to Egypt. The two host states attempted to leverage their positions against the sending state
through strategies of restriction and displacement of their
respective Egyptian migrant labor communities. While the
strategy of restriction did not produce a sending-state policy
shift in either case, the strategy of displacement led to Egyptian compliance with both Jordanian and Libyan demands.
The study treats the two cases as least-likely ones, which
“can strengthen support for theories that fit even cases
where they should be weak” (George and Bennett 2005, 121;
for contrast Rohlfing 2012, 62; Eckstein 1975). According
to existing research, neither Jordan nor Libya should have
been successful in their attempts at coercion. For one, both
host states are considerably weaker than Egypt (Vandewalle
2012, 86; Brand 2013, 2, 5). Egyptian gross domestic product
(GDP) exceeded $286 billion in 2013; in contrast, Libyan
GDP amounted to $65.5 billion in the same year, a bit less
than twice the Jordanian GDP ($33.59 billion). There is also
no evidence that Egyptian compliance was forced through
the intervention of any stronger, third state (be it regional
or international). At the same time, in 2012, Jordan and
Libya were not major sources of economic remittances, nor
were they hosting a large number of Egyptians at the time
(see Figures 1 and 2 below; World Bank 2015a, 2015b).
One could argue that Egypt complied with Libyan demands
because of future oil rent rewards, but such an expectation would be years away, given the extent of the Libyan
state’s disintegration. At the same time, it would not explain
Egypt’s compliance with the demands of Jordan, which is
not an oil-exporting state. An argument that Egypt complied
with Jordanian demands because the issue of natural gas
provision was not crucial would also be inaccurate: Egypt was
plagued with energy problems and power outages throughout Morsi’s rule. In May 2013, amid scattered protests and
social media calls to avoid paying energy bills, Morsi admitted to the Associated Press that only 80 percent of Egypt’s electricity needs were being met, saying “we have a real energy
problem in Egypt” (Associated Press 2013).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/isq/article-abstract/62/2/383/4986742 by guest on 28 September 2018

from a net emigration into a net immigration country”
(Castles et al. 2014, 179). The strength of the Turkish
economy suggests that it was able to bear the costs of
European states’ restrictive policies domestically. Similarly,
a state’s weak domestic economy would not matter if it is
able to find alternative host states willing to bear the cost of
restriction or displacement. President Trump’s intentions to
employ restriction and displacement of Mexican labor does
not necessarily mean that the Mexican state will be vulnerable to such a strategy, even if it is unable to absorb the political economy cost of such strategies domestically. Canada’s
2016 decision to lift visa requirements for Mexican citizens
entering the country is expected to allow for a “surge of
Mexican immigrants” unable to reach, or not allowed work
in, the United States (Guardian 2016). The existence of an
alternative host state suggests that Mexico will not necessarily be vulnerable to potential American strategies of restriction or displacement.
Most frequently, sending states’ responses to host-state
strategies involve both the identification of alternative host
states and attempts to absorb (part of) the cost domestically;
for instance, in 1985, Colonel Gaddafi expelled an estimated
twenty thousand Tunisian workers from Libya (Vandewalle
2012, 144). Tunisia immediately launched emergency job
programs for displaced migrants. Ismail Khelil, the country’s planning minister, asserted that “it will take time,
but we will integrate them into the economy” (quoted in
New York Times 1985). At the same time, Tunisia diversified its emigration policy and encouraged formerly expatriate Tunisians to seek employment in Italy, which did
not require a visa for entry at the time (Natter 2015, 7).
Tunisia was not vulnerable to Libya’s strategy of displacement. Sending states become vulnerable only once both
conditions are met; when Yemen failed to denounce the
Iraqi invasion of Kuwait at the United Nations Security
Council (where it served as a nonpermanent member) in
September 1990, Saudi Arabia expelled approximately eight
hundred thousand Yemenis over the following two months.
Yemen, diplomatically isolated and burdened with a struggling economy, barely provided for these returnees, as authorities sought the help of the Red Crescent Society and
set up camps to house them (Okruhlik and Conge 1997,
560; Al-Rasheed 2010, 146). It was unable to relocate deported migrants elsewhere, as other Arab states followed
Saudi’s example and deported more Yemeni workers. Politically, the “monstrous” domestic upheaval that ensued
has been identified as a major cause of the Yemeni Civil
War (Dresch 2000, 186). This is not surprising as, arguably,
Yemen was vulnerable to Saudi Arabia’s displacement
strategy.
As per Keohane and Nye, while sensitivity is not politically
unimportant, “vulnerability interdependence includes the
strategic dimension that sensitivity interdependence omits”
(16). For the purposes of this study, vulnerability interdependence allows the theorization of the conditions under
which a sending state is likely to comply with host-state coercion. When a nonvulnerable sending state is faced with hoststate coercion, via restriction and/or via displacement, its
compliance is unlikely, as it is able to compensate for related
political economy costs. When a vulnerable sending state is
faced with host-state coercion via restriction, its compliance
is only somewhat likely, as the strategy is merely a “threat”
to sever migration interdependence, to borrow Hirschman’s
term. When a vulnerable sending state is faced with hoststate coercion via displacement, or an actual “severance” of
interdependence, it is very likely to comply given the high
political economy costs.

387

388

Labor Migrants as Political Leverage

A long discussion exists on the potential pitfalls of the
case-study method (Geddes 1990; Collier and Mahoney
1996), particularly if cases are selected on the dependent
variable. Yet a significant body of political science work highlights how “in the early stages of a research program, selection on the dependent variable can serve the heuristic
purpose of identifying the potential causal paths and variables leading to the dependent variable of interest” (George
and Bennett 2005, 23). Interestingly, both cases exhibit incase variance (cf. Blatter and Blume 2008), demonstrating
noncompliance to restriction and compliance to displacement. Covariation and within-case analysis are employed to
substantiate the study’s theoretical claims (Gerring 2016).
Within-case analysis is well-suited to the “systematic examination of diagnostic evidence selected and analyzed” (Collier
2011, 823), particularly in enabling qualitative tools to assess
the causal claims and mechanisms outlined in the previous
section (for comparison, Beach and Pedersen 2013).
A final note on data collection: fieldwork in authoritarian contexts presents unique challenges (Kapiszewski,
MacLean, and Read 2015, 218), particularly in light of the
fact that regional migration is traditionally considered a
security issue for Arab elites (Kapiszewski 2001; Tsourapas
2014). At the same time, research is plagued by a lack of detailed, publicly available statistical data on intra-Arab flows
(Fargues 2014), as well as by the fact that migration management is handled at the highest levels of the executive
(Feiler 2003). As Brand (2013, 8) wrote on seeking statistical data on the Jordanian political economy, “one works
under the assumption that such documents will probably
never be released, or may never have existed in the first
place.” Key elites that would be able to substantiate the
study’s findings are either unlikely to share any information,
such as Jordan’s King Abdullah II, or unavailable, such as deposed Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi, who is currently

facing a death sentence conviction. To overcome these issues, I rely upon a meticulous collection of the coverage
of regional labor migration issues in the 2012–2013 period across the three main Egyptian newspapers (al-Ahram,
al-Akhbar, al-Gomhuriya). In an attempt to fill in gaps and substantiate Egyptian reporting, I also draw on non-Egyptian
Arabic media sources, particularly Jordanian and Libyan
coverage of labor migration. Finally, for the purposes of triangulation, I employ semistructured expert and elite interviews conducted in Cairo (n = 31) between July 2013 and
June 2014 (for comparison Tansey 2007). This includes former Prime Minister Abdel Aziz Hegazy, current and former
ministers, and high-ranking Egyptian government officials.

Host-State Coercion Via Restriction and Displacement
Jordanian-Egyptian Relations and the Provision of Natural Gas5

According to a 2004 agreement between Cairo and Amman, Egypt is contractually obliged to supply natural gas
to Jordan via the Arab Gas Pipeline to the amount of
240 million cubic feet of gas per day until 2019 (al-Ahram,
June 3, 2013). Egypt found it impossible to continue the
supply of natural gas at these levels in the aftermath of the
2011 Arab Spring due to domestic energy shortages and frequent attacks against the pipeline itself, which is also supplying gas to Israel at reduced prices. Once in power in
June 2012, Morsi unilaterally decided to curb the export
of natural gas to Jordan, which saw its reliance on Egyptian
natural gas fall from 89 percent in 2009 to 17 percent by the
end of 2012. “As a consequence, the state-owned electricity
company, the National Electric Power Company (NEPCO),
made huge losses, in 2011 amounting to 5 percent of gross
5
For ease of reading, all dates in this section refer to 2012, unless otherwise
stated.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/isq/article-abstract/62/2/383/4986742 by guest on 28 September 2018

Figure 1. Bilateral remittances received by Egypt, 2013, in US$ millions (World Bank, 2015a).

G E R A S I M O S T S O U R A PA S

389

domestic product (GDP)” and was faced with a $3.5 billion
deficit (Henderson 2015, 3). It was estimated that “every
time the supply is halted as a result of the frequent interruptions caused by the bombing[s], it costs the Jordanian
treasury $1 million per day” (al-Monitor, April 2014). Indicatively, the supply of gas to Jordan was interrupted more than
fifteen times between February 2011 and November 2012
period alone (al-Ahram, November 21).
In the bilateral conflict over this issue, Jordan employed
its status as host state of Egyptian labor in its coercive migration diplomacy. Egyptian migrant labor in Jordan has a long
history spanning back decades, when thousands of Egyptian
workers travelled through Jordanian territory in order to
reach Saudi Arabia and other oil-producing countries in the
Gulf that had been recruiting Arab labor in the aftermath
of the 1973 Arab-Israeli War (Amin and Awni 1986). Over
the past few decades, Jordan also became a host state for
unskilled Egyptian migrant labor. This has been due both
to its fairly developed economy as well as to its position;
many Egyptians that were either unable to enter the Gulf
states, or did not wish to return to Egypt when their employment there was terminated, chose to pursue employment
in Jordan. A key characteristic of these migrant laborers is
that thousands of them lack legal documentation to validate
their employment status in Jordan. In 2012, it was reported
that only 167,000 possessed a legal working permit (Egypt
Daily News, December 19).
Jordan employed a strategy of restriction and, following Egyptian noncompliance, displacement in its efforts to
have Egypt shift its natural gas provisions back to the 2004
agreement’s stipulations. In early December, Jordanian media and government sources began hinting at the need to
restructure the domestic labor market. Jordanian Minister
of Labor Nidal Qatamin declared “the necessity of launching a campaign in Jordan to regulate the labor market,”

(al-Ahram, December 9). The announcement focused particularly on Egyptian workers that were employed in the
Kingdom without a permit. Did Jordan’s decision to regulate the domestic labor market by targeting illegal Egyptian
migrants constitute a strategy of coercion against Egypt? Or,
could it merely have been driven by other factors, such as
the deterioration of the post–Arab Spring Jordanian economy (for contrast Yom 2015)? Qatamin publicly stated that
the regulation campaign was driven by a “security,” not “political” rationale (Middle East News Agency, December 9). Yet,
two pieces of evidence strongly suggest that this was a clear
attempt at using migration as interstate coercion. First, targeted Egyptians had been pursuing employment within Jordan for years, if not decades, making the timing of Jordan’s
policy shift suspect. Second, numerous sources confirmed
that Jordan’s policy shift formed part of its broader strategy
on securing Egyptian natural gas. Al-Jazeera reported an early
December 2012 meeting that Abdullah held at the house of
former minister Rajaii al-Maashar. The piece, entitled “Jordan Swaps Egyptian Labor for Gas,” states the following:
According to the sources that spoke to Al-Jazeera.net,
the king revealed that his country is in possession
of some cards that it is using to send messages to
Cairo. Such cards include the presence of … Egyptian
workers in Jordan and the fact that Jordan is the
only passageway for the exported Egyptian vegetables
towards Iraq … One of the meeting participants
quoted the king as saying that the weak flow of
the Egyptian gas and it being cut off Jordan “destroyed
the Jordanian economy.” He also indicated that the
rise in debts over the past two years was mainly due to
the losses incurred by the power plant that had to use
heavy fuel instead of gas. (al-Jazeera, December 11)

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/isq/article-abstract/62/2/383/4986742 by guest on 28 September 2018

Figure 2. Egyptian migrant stock, 2013 (World Bank, 2015b).

390

Labor Migrants as Political Leverage

The officials in Amman are very upset with their counterparts in Cairo, and this is why they have sent a signal
to the Egyptians in order to express the dissatisfaction
of the Jordanian leadership. Amman is upset about a
number of issues, one of which being the fact that the
gas pipeline from Egypt to Jordan is no longer functioning normally. Other official sources told al-Hayat
that “thousands of Egyptian workers were arrested in
Jordan during the last two weeks due to irregularities
in their papers and sent back to their country.” (alHayat, December 12)
Deportations of Egyptian workers formally started on
December 8, when approximately two hundred migrants
lacking necessary documentation were expelled (al-Ahram,
December 9 and 11). By December 14, it was revealed that
Jordan had arrested hundreds of Egyptian workers, who
were found in violation of their residency permits and were
facing deportation. Following Abdullah, other Jordanian institutions underlined how the potential expulsion of Egyptian migrants was linked to Egypt’s policy on natural gas.
The Amman Center for Human Rights Studies (2012, 1) issued a telling declaration: “sadly the recent procedures of
deporting Egyptian workers came as a result of poor political relationship between the two countries. While we stress
the relationship with our neighbor Egypt,” the report continued, “it is unacceptable for the new Egyptian leadership
to stop the implementation of bilateral economic agreements and sacrifice [a] profound relationship.” Elites also
confirmed this state strategy: “official authorities in Amman
were leaking information about the presence of [a number
of] Egyptians working in Jordan without a license and in an
illegal way,” al-Quds al-Arabi reported. “The collective deportation of the latter would address a harsh message to the
Egyptian government, and the Jordanian government chose
the shorter path and arrested hundreds of Egyptian workers who were in violation of their residency conditions and
indeed deported them.” The newspaper’s report concluded
with a message from an unnamed, “prominent” Jordanian
politician who wished to send a message to Cairo: “We beg
of you. Our situation cannot tolerate having you tamper with
the gas issue any further” (al-Quds al-Arabi, December 13).
As per the study’s third claim, when faced with Jordan’s
strategy of displacement, Egypt complied with the host-state
demands. Morsi called Abdullah from London, where he
was on an official visit on December 9. This was the first
time the two leaders engaged in conversation since Morsi’s
electoral victory. The Egyptian president reportedly guaranteed an increase in the supply of Jordan with Egyptian gas
and agreed to create a joint bilateral committee on the issue, in order to appease Abdullah. Simultaneously, Morsi
also dispatched Egyptian Prime Minister Hisham Qandeel
to Amman, in an effort to solve this “silent crisis” (al-Quds

al-Arabi, December 13). Jordanian Prime Minister Abdullah
al-Ensour later reported to the media that Qandeel had reiterated Morsi’s natural gas assurances to Abdullah and confirmed that “Egypt will always keep its pledges and has no
intention to renege on any agreements” (al-Gomhuriya, January 19, 2013). According to al-Hayat,
[t]he diplomatic contacts launched at the highest
level between Jordan and Egypt succeeded in containing the crisis that had erupted between the two
sides. In this respect, Egypt pledged to continue supplying Jordan with gas and Amman promised to stop
deporting the thousands of Egyptian workers present
in the kingdom … Cairo promised to keep supplying Jordan with gas after the misunderstanding that
had erupted lately. The two states had signed agreements in this regard and President Morsi pledged to
respect them. Jordan for its part said that it would no
longer expulse the Egyptian workers whose papers are
not in order. Following these contacts and the agreement that was reached, thousands of Egyptian workers were released, and [1,900] people were even allowed to go back to Jordan after being deported to
Egypt. (al-Hayat, December 21)
The Jordanian Ministry of Labor announced the formal
halting of Egyptian workers’ deportation, and the Egyptian Minister of Migration was dispatched to Jordan to
resolve Egyptian migrants’ remaining administrative problems. A few days later, Morsi publicly thanked Abdullah for “his decision to stop these measures” (al-Ahram,
December 13). “Egypt and Jordan overcame a labor problem that could have strained bilateral relations,” the Middle
East News Agency wrote, “thanks to direct high-level contacts
that were crowned by a personal phone call Egyptian President Mohamed Morsy had with King Abdullah II on Monday
evening” (Middle East News Agency, December 13). A minor
glitch in negotiations appeared in late January 2013, when
Qandeel was visiting Jordan to sign a bilateral agreement
on the legalization of Egyptian migrant workers. As was reported across Egyptian media, host-state elites identified “a
delay of pumping Egyptian natural gas to Jordan,” which
presented a “new obstacle” in any bilateral migration agreement. Khaled Azhari, the Egyptian Minister of Manpower
and Immigration, went on record to state that his Ministry
will coordinate with the Egyptian Ministry of Petroleum “to
remove any obstacles facing Egyptian laborers in Jordan”
(quoted in al-Ahram, January 29, 2013).
Libyan-Egyptian Relations and the Extradition of Gaddafi-Era Elites6

Early the following year, Libya also successfully employed restriction and displacement strategies in its coercive migration diplomacy against Egypt. The ousting of the Gaddafi
regime in 2011 had created tremendous political turmoil in
Libya. Once the first phase of the civil war ended, the General National Congress emerged as the country’s legislative
authority and attempted to consolidate the transitional process in Libya. The Congress identified that, since 2011, a
number of ancien régime members of the Gaddafi years had
fled Libya seeking refuge in Egypt. Egypt in the immediate
outbreak of the Libyan civil war had become a safe haven
for elites affiliated with the Gaddafi regime, who continued their economic and political activities from Cairo. The
Congress believed that their extradition and trial in Libya
6
For ease of reading, all dates in this section refer to 2013, unless otherwise
stated.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/isq/article-abstract/62/2/383/4986742 by guest on 28 September 2018

Al-Quds al-Arabi confirmed the meeting, adding that Abdullah mentioned how “tens of thousands of Egyptians
working in the Gulf states go through [Jordanian town]
Aqaba in their movements,” which the Kingdom could further use this as a bargaining chip against Cairo (al-Quds
al-Arabi, December 12). Given Egyptian inaction, Jordan
adopted a strategy of displacement, as the government announced that any Egyptian workers found working illegally
within the Kingdom would be subject to deportation. At the
same time, the Ministry of Labor began targeting Egyptians
who possessed valid permits but had been working in professions not included in their permits (Middle East News Agency,
December 13). Al-Hayat quotes a number of sources that affirm how:

G E R A S I M O S T S O U R A PA S

purchase employment visas for Libya (al-Jumhuriya, March
18). Similar to the Jordanian case, Libya gradually intensified its displacement strategy; in late February, it formally
closed the border to Egyptian migrants while, by late March,
Libyan authorities were deporting more than four hundred
workers daily on a variety of charges, even accusing some
of being infected with hepatitis (Middle East News Agency,
March 29).
Similar to Jordan, Libya’s adaptation of displacement
coerced Egypt into compliance. In late March, Egyptian
authorities duly arrested the ex-Gaddafi Libyan officials,
including Ali Maria, the former ambassador to Egypt, and
Mohammed Ibrahim, the brother of senior Gaddafi-era official Ahmed Ibrahim. Ahmed Qaddaf Alddam himself was
also arrested (AFP, 2013). The latter “handed himself in to
the security forces after [ten] vehicles surrounded his house
in the Zamalek neighborhood of the Egyptian capital,” effectively nullifying the Egyptian courts’ decision of nonextradition (BBC News, 2013). Twenty-three other Libyan citizens were immediately arrested and duly extradited. AlAhram cited officials employed in the Egyptian Interpol, who
declared that these extraditions were conducted in return
for Egyptian migrant workers jailed in Libya being released
(al-Ahram, March 28). The timing of these arrests strengthens the claim that Egypt complied with Libyan demands because of the latter’s use of displacement; Prosecutor General
Tala’at Abdallah issued the extradition decision two days
after a Libyan delegation arrived in Egypt on March 19,
bearing an updated list of eighty-eight names of “Gaddafiera fugitives” (al-Ahram, March 22). They were returning a
visit to Libya by a delegation representing Egyptian prosecution, which had been dispatched to investigate the arrests
of Egyptian migrants and the death of Ezzat Attalah (Daily
News Egypt, March 25). According to al-Hayat, “the Egyptian
authorities wanted to send a positive message to their neighbors and that this was the main reason behind their decision
to act now.” The report continued: “it must be noted that
in the last few months, bilateral relations between the two
neighbors had greatly deteriorated” (al-Hayat, March 20).
Egyptian compliance with Libyan demands led to the
restoration of the status quo ante in terms of migration interdependence, as had occurred in Jordan a few months
earlier. The arrest of the Gaddafi-era elites in Cairo led
Libya to reopen the border between the two countries, after keeping it closed for more than two months (al-Ahram,
April 26 2016). Providing further proof of the connection
between Egyptian labor migration and the forced repatriation of Libyan elites, “the Libyan authorities also promised
to open their market to the Egyptian workers in case all the
figures taking refuge in Egypt are handed over [emphasis added]”
(al-Hayat, March 20). By June, the Egyptian Ministry of Manpower and Migration extolled the excellent bilateral relations between the two countries, going as far as to claim that
Libya was now ready to receive “millions of Egyptians” (alAhram, June 7). The Libyan Deputy Central Bank Governor
Ali Salem Hibri summed up the relationship between Libya
and Egypt: “there are times when your upstairs neighbor has
a leaking pipe and you need to help him fix it for your own
peace of mind” (Reuters, April 16).

Explaining Egyptian Compliance to Host-State Coercion
The previous section identified how two host states leveraged their position in order to induce sending-state compliance via two mechanisms, restriction and displacement.
Confirming the study’s first claim, both Jordan and Libya
employed the restriction and displacement of Egyptian

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/isq/article-abstract/62/2/383/4986742 by guest on 28 September 2018

was necessary for Libya’s post-Gaddafi political transition.
But Egyptian authorities resisted such extradition requests,
citing a number of legal obstacles. For instance, Egyptian
courts had forbidden the extradition of Gaddafi’s cousin,
Ahmed Qaddaf Alddam, because he claimed to have Egyptian citizenship. Similarly, other Libyan elites had already
filed applications for Egyptian asylum, making a potential
extradition to Libya legally difficult (see details in Reuters,
April 16).
In contrast to Jordan, Libya had been a preferred destination for Egyptian workers seeking employment opportunities abroad since the early 1970s (Tsourapas 2015b; Feiler
2003, 101). The proximity to Egypt, the porous border between the countries, and the ample wealth that flowed into
the resource-rich but labor-poor country, which contains the
largest oil reserves of any African state, allowed the country
to become a major destination of Egyptian migrant labor.
In the later years of Gaddafi’s rule, immigration controls
for Egyptians became particularly relaxed (Tsourapas 2017).
Yet, Libya in 2012 contained only a small fraction of its earlier migrant labor force, mostly unskilled and low-skilled
workers; in the post-2011 era, most Egyptians fled due to
the brutal Libyan civil war that, coupled with the NATO-led
military intervention, had contributed to the collapse of the
oil industry.
In the second half of 2012, Libya let it be known publicly that remaining Egyptian migrants would be employed
as a strategy against Egypt in case of noncompliance with the
extradition requests. “A high-level source in [Egypt’s] Ministry of Manpower and Migration has confirmed that Libya’s
threats to expel workers is not just a rumor,” reported the alZaman daily in August 2012. “[The source] confirmed that
there has been deafening silence on the part of officials,
as concerns this issue and its being wrapped up with the
critical and private political matter about the handover of
senior members of the Gaddafi regime” (al-Zaman, August
28, 2012). Egypt downplayed the matter, while Farouk el
Dessouky, head of the Union of Egyptians Abroad, asserted
that “there is no abuse against Egyptians in Libya because of
the crisis on the remnants of the Gaddafi regime” (al-Watan,
October 19, 2012).
In early 2013, Libya engaged in a strategy of restriction
seeking to shift Egypt’s extradition policy. The General National Congress initiated the implementation of tougher
measures against Egyptians working in the country and identified that many Egyptians lacked proper immigration or
health certificates, were holding expired residency permits,
or had gained entrance into Libya via fraudulent documents. At the same time, members of the Egyptian Christian Coptic community in Libya were harassed and arrested
on illegal emigration charges (Daily News Egypt, March 2).
In mid-March, an Egyptian Coptic Church in Benghazi was
set on fire for the second time in 2013, while 55 Egyptian
Copts were arrested on charges of proselytization and reportedly tortured. One of them, Ezzat Attallah, eventually
died while in custody in a Tripoli prison (see full coverage in Middle East News Agency, March 14). The Egyptian
government did not respond to the Libyan strategy of restriction, leading Libya to employ a strategy of displacement
from late February onward; Egyptians found without proper
documentation were declared subject to immediate deportation, as the so-called bilateral “visa crisis” escalated (alAhram, February 25). The assistant Egyptian foreign minister officially denied that Egyptians were facing any discrimination, although news broke that more than one hundred
Egyptians had been deported on March 18, all of whom had
reportedly paid 3,000 LE each (or $338, a sizeable sum) to

391

392

Labor Migrants as Political Leverage

Two historical examples of earlier attempts at exploiting Egyptian migration interdependence help shed light
on the importance of these two conditions in establishing
vulnerability. Gaddafi would deport thousands of Egyptian
workers out of Libya in the mid-1970s, whenever his relations with the Egyptian President Anwar Sadat deteriorated (Tsourapas 2017). When, in 1976, Gaddafi expelled
thousands of Egyptian migrants, Der Spiegel interviewed Sadat on his counterstrategy. “Well … we don’t take the situation so seriously,” Sadat responded, sketching out the
two conditions establishing migration interdependence vulnerability. “We are ready to absorb our workers; they can
find work here, or in other Arab countries” (quoted in Der
Spiegel, 1976). Indeed, Egypt at the time did not meet either of the two vulnerability conditions. For one, the close
relationship between Egypt and the Gulf states meant that
the latter were willing to absorb any political economy
costs by recruiting those displaced Egyptians (Feiler 2003,
98–116). “[Egypt had] zero worry,” recalled former Prime
Minister (1974–1975) Abd El Aziz Hegazi. “We relied on the
help of the Saudis when we dealt with … Qaddafi’s actions”
(personal interview, April 27, 2014). At the same time, elites’
ability to continue expanding the Egyptian economy’s public sector also allowed for the partial absorption of displaced
migrants’ costs domestically, as the economy profited from
the 1975 reopening of the Suez Canal, increased revenues
from tourism and oil exports, remittances from Egyptians
in the Gulf, as well as American and Arab financial aid. Despite the fact that Libya constituted the largest regional host
state for Egyptian migrants at the time, Egypt did not comply
with Gaddafi’s demands, for it was not vulnerable to Libyan
strategies.
In 1990, President Saddam Hussein ordered the displacement of Egyptians from Iraq (at the time hosting more
than 44 percent of all Egyptian regional migrants), partly
to compel Egypt to withdraw from Operation Desert Storm
(Farouk-Sluglett and Sluglett 2001, 288). “The Iraqis, they
were our brothers, but now after two weeks everything has
changed,” one returning migrant told the New York Times
in August 1990, reporting harrowing stories of rape and
theft. Egyptian deportees exiting Iraq recounted how they
“had to sleep at night in desert camps, and Iraqi soldiers,
they came in the night and searched our pockets” (New
York Times, August 22, 1990). Despite the forced return of
more than seven hundred thousand migrants (Feiler 2003,
245), Egypt did not shift its policy on Iraq. While Egypt
was not able to absorb these costs domestically (only a
year later, in 1991, Mubarak had to resort to the IMF and
initiate an arduous process of economic restructuring), it
was able to locate alternative host states willing to shoulder the cost. Saudi Arabia and Libya, with whom Egypt had
friendly relations (Vandewalle 2012, 179), absorbed the displaced migrants out of Iraq and minimized the socioeconomic cost to Egypt. In terms of Saudi Arabia, Feiler writes
the following:
Fortunately for Egypt, Saudi Arabia offered [Egypt]
various economic compensations for its cooperation
with the anti-Iraqi coalition, and by the end of April
1991, the number of Egyptian workers in Saudi
Arabia had reached 1.25 million—double their prewar number. (Feiler 2003, 244)
But Libya also came to the help of Egypt: “it is interesting to note that the moment relations between Egypt
and neighboring Libya improved … [more than fifty thousand] Egyptians moved into Libya seeking employment,”
Vatikiotis wrote in his authoritative history of modern Egypt.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/isq/article-abstract/62/2/383/4986742 by guest on 28 September 2018

migrant labor within their territory in order to induce Egyptian compliance on the issue of natural gas and the extradition of Libyan elites, respectively. Why would a more
powerful state yield to the demands of two weaker states?
Why was Egypt, a state that numbered more than three million labor migrants abroad in 2012, affected by the expulsion of a few thousand Egyptians? According to the study’s
second claim, a sending state is likely to comply with a
strategy of displacement when it demonstrates vulnerable
migration interdependence. Indeed, Egypt under Morsi
demonstrated migration interdependence vulnerability for
it satisfied the two conditions theorized above: firstly, it faced
a lack of alternative states able to shoulder the political
economy costs of Jordanian and Libyan strategies, and, secondly, its economy was not in a position to absorb these costs
domestically.
With regard to the first condition for establishing vulnerability, the ruling Muslim Brotherhood was viewed with
distrust, to say the least, by the vast majority of the
conservative Arab monarchies due to their fear of a “domino
effect” after the Egyptian and Tunisian revolutions and their
historically hostile views on the Muslim Brotherhood itself (Ryan 2014). While Egypt had received diverse forms
of aid from oil-producing Arab states, particularly Saudi
Arabia, under Sadat and Mubarak, its regional isolation under the Morsi presidency strongly suggested that the post2011 situation was completely different. As a result, it was
highly unlikely that displaced Egyptian workers from Libya
or Jordan would be redispatched to other oil-producing
Arab states that had supported Egypt economically before the rise of the Muslim Brotherhood. In fact, not
only were Arab oil-producing states unwilling to support
Morsi by absorbing any costs, but Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and
the United Arab Emirates—the three main host states in
2012—were themselves engaging in a strategy of restriction
against Egypt, by arresting Egyptian labor migrants with suspected ties to the Muslim Brotherhood (for more details,
see National 2013).
With regard to the second condition for establishing vulnerability, the deteriorating condition of the Egyptian economy implied that the state was unable to absorb the burden
of host states’ displacement strategies. In November 2012,
a few weeks before the Jordanian crisis, Morsi had turned
to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for a $4.8 billion
loan in order to help Egypt stay afloat. But Egypt’s inability
to meet the Fund’s loan requirements delayed the signing of
the agreement until after Morsi was ousted from power. As
Egypt’s foreign reserves plummeted, economic remittances
from Arab host states came to form a major part of the
national economy, while Egypt’s high unemployment rate,
growing from 9 percent to 12.7 percent in 2012, implied
that Egypt was increasingly reliant on continuing labor emigration as a socioeconomic “safety valve” and was unable
to absorb any displaced workers domestically. While she refused to disclose any details on the Jordanian and Libyan
cases, Nahed Ashry, Minister of Manpower and Migration,
stated that “Egyptians [working] in Arab sister-countries are
more important to the Egyptian state than ever before”
(personal interview, February 24, 2014). It bears noting
that Egyptian labor in both post-2011 Libya and Jordan has
been typically employed in the unskilled and semiskilled sectors, which made reintegration into the Egyptian economy
highly problematic. Retail, tourism, and the unskilled sector
were already overburdened in Egypt, which indicates that
the economic impact of displacement was amplified given
the spiking unemployment rates, the increased demand on
government services, and broader strains on infrastructure.

G E R A S I M O S T S O U R A PA S
Table 2. Geographical distribution of Egyptian regional migrants
1990 & 1993 (by percentage)
1990

1993

Iraq
Saudi Arabia
Kuwait
Jordan
United Arab Emirates
Libya
Yemen
Qatar
Oman
Sudan
Bahrain
Total

44.1
29.3
9.3
6.5
4.3
3.0
1.6
1.0
0.6
0.2
0.1
100

6.9
45.9
9.0
9.4
2.9
22.9
0.9
1.1
0.6
0.2
0.2
100

Source: Farrag (1995, 73)

“So long as Egyptian migrant labor found ready employment in these Arab countries … things went well“ (Vatikiotis
1991, 432–33). While Saudi Arabia and Libya do not release detailed migration statistics for security reasons, Farrag has estimated the geographical distribution of Egyptian regional migrants before and after Operation Desert
Storm (see Table 2). Her findings exemplify Egypt’s strategy of shifting the cost of host-state coercion to alternative
host states. Overall, the fact that the Egyptian economy was
not in a position to absorb the cost of Iraq’s strategy of displacement did not render Egypt vulnerable to it: given that
oil-producing Arab states were willing to shoulder this cost,
Egypt did not satisfy one of the two conditions establishing
migration interdependence vulnerability and was able to resist Iraqi coercion (for contrast, see footnote 3).
In sum, unlike earlier coercive attempts against Egypt under Sadat or Mubarak, the two cases examined in this study’s
empirical section occurred at a time when Egypt was both regionally isolated and economically weak. As such, the article
demonstrated how a sending state that is neither able to shift
the cost of host-state strategies to other states nor able to
absorb this cost domestically exhibits migration interdependence vulnerability and, thus, is likely to comply. Egyptian
noncompliance to Libya and Jordan would have likely been
an option in two counterfactual cases, as per the article’s
theoretical framework: firstly, had Morsi been able to shift
the cost to another regional state (as per Mubarak’s strategy
in 1990), and, secondly, if the Egyptian economy had been
able to absorb these costs domestically (as per part of Sadat’s
strategy in 1976).

Conclusion
This article developed a framework for understanding how
labor migration features in coercive interstate relations.
It analyzed the mechanisms through which host states attempt to leverage their position against sending states, as
well as the conditions under which such a strategy succeeds. I argued for viewing these dynamics through the
prism of migration interdependence: reciprocal political
economy effects created through cross-border population
mobility between sending and host states. A host state may
attempt to leverage its position via restriction, namely the
imposition of costs via curbing remittances, immigration,
or both. It may also attempt to do so via displacement,
namely the forced expulsion of a sending state’s migrant
group. The effectiveness of restriction or displacement depends on whether a sending state is vulnerable to migration
interdependence. Vulnerable sending states are more likely
to comply with host-state demands, particularly if a host state

exercises a strategy of displacement rather than one of mere
restriction. I detailed an unexplored aspect of migration
diplomacy by drawing on Middle East cases to highlight the
potential potency of labor migration as a weapon of weak
host states against stronger sending states.
Do my arguments travel beyond the two cases discussed
here? Some examples highlight frequent uses of restriction
and displacement by host states; in Afghanistan, authorities
have not hesitated to use both restriction and displacement
against Pakistani labor migrants entering the country since
mid-2016. Afghanistan recently adopted a law that requires
passports, rather than mere identity cards, and frequently
deported Pakistani labor migrants, in an effort to force
Pakistan to reverse its decision to unilaterally close the
Chaman border crossing (Times of India 2016); in response,
in March 2017, Pakistan’s prime minister decided to open
the crossing “as a gesture of goodwill” (BBC News 2017).
Elsewhere, bilateral disputes between Egypt and Sudan, including the contested border of the Halayeb Triangle, led
Khartoum to adopt a strategy of restriction in April 2017,
by barring entry to Egyptian men aged between sixteen and
fifty without visas (Atef 2017). In both cases, my framework
should help make sense of the nature of these strategies and
the mechanisms that account for their effects.
This article challenges long-held understandings of crossborder migration as necessarily conducive to interstate cooperation. In doing so, the article avoids reproducing the
conventional wisdom that stronger states induce weaker
ones into compliance; rather, it affirms Keohane and Nye’s
(2012) insight that, under certain conditions, weaker states
can successfully employ a nonmilitary coercive strategy
against more powerful states. In explaining the dynamics
of such processes, the article also intervenes in ongoing debates within the growing literature on migrant remittances
by putting them firmly into conversation with work on economic sanctions. Future work should test, and modify, my
framework via medium- and large-N studies of host-state
leverage strategies against sending states. We also need additional single-case or small-N studies to uncover the political importance of sending states’ sensitivity to migration
interdependence. Even if this study suggests that host-state
attempts at manipulating sensitivity interdependence are
unlikely to succeed, this does not mean that such efforts
are politically unimportant. Finally, we should conduct research on host-state leverage within a cooperative, rather
than coercive, migration diplomacy framework: What are
the mechanisms through which migration interdependence
might provide host states with “carrots” rather than “sticks”
in the management of bilateral relations? Under what conditions would preferential access to a host-state labor market, or the reduction of taxes imposed on migrant remittances, contribute to policy changes in sending states? The
mechanisms and dynamics of host-state use of labor migration against sending states constitute an important, underexplored field of inquiry in the study of world politics.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Council for British Research in the Levant [2017/18 Pilot Study Award] and by
a BA/Leverhulme Small Research Grant [grant number
SG163246].
References
ADAMSON, FIONA. “Sending States and the Making of Intra-Diasporic Politics:
Turkey and Its Diaspora(s).” International Migration Review (forthcoming).

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/isq/article-abstract/62/2/383/4986742 by guest on 28 September 2018

Country

393

394

Labor Migrants as Political Leverage
DER, SPIEGEL 1976. “Die Deutschen müssen Verantwortung tragen” [Germans
Must Take Responsibility]. Der Spiegel, Accessed November 21, 2017,
http://www.spiegel.de/spiegel/print/d-41279392.html.
DOWDING, KEITH, PETER JOHN, THANOS MERGOUPIS, AND MARK VUGT. 2000. “Exit,
Voice, and Loyalty: Analytic and Empirical Developments.” European
Journal of Political Research 37 (4): 469–95.
DOYLE, DAVID. 2015. “Remittances and Social Spending.” American Political
Science Review 109 (4): 785–802.
DRESCH, PAUL. 2000. A History of Modern Yemen. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
ECKSTEIN, HARRY. 1975. “Case Studies and Theory in Political Science.” In The
Handbook of Political Science, edited by Fred I. Greenstein and Nelson W.
Polsby. 79–138, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
ELLERMANN, ANTJE. 2009. States Against Migrants: Deportation in Germany and the
United States. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
ERDMANN, GERO, ANDRÉ BANK, BERT HOFFMANN, AND THOMAS RICHTER. 2013.
“International Cooperation of Authoritarian Regimes: Toward a Conceptual
Framework.” GIGA Working Paper Series, GIGA German Institute of
Global and Area Studies.
ESCRIBÀ-FOLCH, ABEL, COVADONGA MESEGUER, AND JOSEPH WRIGHT. 2015. “Remittances and Democratization.” International Studies Quarterly 59 (3): 571–
86.
FARGUES, PHILIPPE. 2014. “The Fuzzy Lines of International Migration: A Critical Assessment of Definitions and Estimates in the Arab Countries.”
Robert Schuman Centre for Advanced Studies Research Paper No. RSCAS 71.
FAROUK-SLUGLETT, MARION, AND PETER SLUGLETT. 2001. Iraq Since 1958: From
Revolution to Dictatorship. London: I.B. Tauris.
FARRAG, MYAR 1995. “Emigration Dynamics in Egypt,” in Emigration Dynamics
in Developing Countries, Volume IV: The Arab Region. edited by Appleyard
Reginald, 44–88, Aldershot: Ashgate.
FEILER, GIL. 2003. Economic Relations Between Egypt and the Gulf Oil States, 1967–
2000: Petro-Wealth and Patterns of Influence. Brighton: Sussex Academic
Press.
FITZGERALD, DAVID. 2009. A Nation of Emigrants: How Mexico Manages Its Migration. Berkeley: University of California Press.
FRANK, ANDRE GUNDER. 1966. “The Development of Underdevelopment.”
Monthly Review 18 (4): 17–31.
GEDDES, BARBARA. 1990. “How the Cases You Choose Affect the Answers You
Get: Selection Bias in Comparative Politics.” Political Analysis 2 (1):
131–50.
GEORGE, ALEXANDER L., AND ANDREW BENNETT. 2005. Case Studies and Theory
Development in the Social Sciences. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
GERRING, JOHN. 2016. Case Study Research: Principles and Practices, 2nd ed.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
GODDARD, STACIE E., AND DANIEL H. NEXON. 2016. “The Dynamics of Global
Power Politics: A Framework for Analysis.” Journal of Global Security Studies 1 (1): 4–18.
GREENHILL, KELLY M. 2002. “Engineered Migration and the Use of Refugees
as Political Weapons: A Case Study of the 1994 Cuban Balseros Crisis.”
International Migration 40 (4): 39–74.
———. 2010. Weapons of Mass Migration - Forced Displacement, Coercion, and
Foreign Policy. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Guardian. 2016. “Canada Prepares for Surge of Mexican Immigrants After
Visa Lift and Trump Win.” Guardian. Accessed November 21, 2017.
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/01/canada-mexicoimmigrants-visas-asylum-tourism
HENDERSON, SIMON. 2015. Jordan’s Energy Supply Options: The Prospect of Gas
Imports from Israel. Washington, DC: The German Marshall Fund of the
United States.
HIRSCHMAN, ALBERT O. 1945. National Power and the Structure of Foreign Trade.
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
———. 1970. Exit, Voice, and Loyalty: Responses to Decline in Firms, Organizations, and States. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
HOLLIFIELD, JAMES F. 2012. Migration and International Relations. In The
Oxford Handbook of The Politics of International Migration, edited by Marc
R. Rosenblum and Daniel J. Tichenor. 345–82, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
HOLLIFIELD, JAMES F., PHILIP MARTIN, AND PIA ORRENIUS, eds. 2014. Controlling Immigration: A Global Perspective, 3rd ed. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.
HOLLIFIELD, JAMES F., AND TOM K. WONG. 2014. “The Politics of International
Migration: How Can We ‘Bring the State Back In’?” In Migration Theory: Talking Across Disciplines, 3rd ed, edited by Caroline F. Brettell and
James F. Hollifield. 227–88, New York: Routledge.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/isq/article-abstract/62/2/383/4986742 by guest on 28 September 2018

ADIDA, CLAIRE L., AND DESHA M. GIROD. 2011. “Do Migrants Improve Their
Hometowns? Remittances and Access to Public Services in Mexico,
1995–2000.” Comparative Political Studies 44 (3): 3–27.
AFP 2013. “Egypt to Extradite Two Qaddafi-era Officials to Libya.” AFP.
Accessed November 21, 2017, http://english.alarabiya.net/en/
News/2013/03/24/Egypt-to-extradite-two-Qaddafi-era-officials-toLibya.html.
AL-RASHEED, MADAWI. 2010. A History of Saudi Arabia, 2nd ed. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
AMIN, GALAL A., AND ELIZABETH TAYLOR AWNI. 1986. Hijrat Al-àmālah Al-Misr.ı̄yah:
Dirāsah Naqdı̄yah Lil-Buhu.t̄h Wa-Al-Dirāsāt Al-Khāss.a.h Bi-Hijrat Al-àmālah
Al-Misr.ı̄yah Ilá Al-Khārij [Egyptian Labor Migration: A Critical Study of Research and Studies on the Migration of Egyptian Workers Abroad]. Ottawa,
CA: Markaz al-Buhu.t̄h lil-Tanmiyah al-Dawlı̄yah.
AMMAN CENTER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS STUDIES. 2012. “Amman Center Welcomes
the Decision to Stop Deportation of Egyptian Workers.” Accessed
November 21, 2017. http://www.achrs.org/english/index.php/
center-news-mainmenu-79/others-mainmenu-38/324-amman-centerwelcomes-the-decision-to-stop-deportation-of-egyptian-workers.html
ANDREAS, PETER, AND TIMOTHY SNYDER, eds. 2000. The Wall Around the West: State
Borders and Immigration Controls in North America and Europe. New York:
Rowman & Littlefield.
ARREGUIN-TOFT, IVAN. 2005. How the Weak Win Wars: A Theory of Asymmetric
Conflict. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
ASSOCIATED PRESS 2013. “Power Outages Add to Egypt’s Woes.” Associated Press. Accessed November 21, 2017, https://www.thenational.ae/
world/africa/power-outages-add-to-egypt-s-woes-1.305254.
ATEF, MAGED. 2017. “Egypt and Sudan’s Escalating Border Dispute.” Foreign
Affairs. Accessed November 21, 2017. https://www.foreignaffairs.com/
articles/egypt/2017-05-15/egypt-and-sudans-escalating-borderdispute
BALDWIN, DAVID A. 1980. “Interdependence and Power–A Conceptual Analysis.” International Organization 34 (4): 471–506.
BERENSKOETTER, FELIX. 2007. “Thinking About Power.” In Power in World
Politics, edited by Felix Berenksoetter and M. J. Willians. New York:
Routledge.
BBC NEWS 2013. “Gaddafi cousin Ahmed Gaddaf al-Dam arrested in Egypt.” BBC News. Accessed November 21, 2017,
http://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-21848712.
BBC NEWS. 2017. “Pakistan PM Orders Afghan Border Crossings to Reopen.” BBC News. Accessed November 21, 2017.
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-39328784
BEACH, DEREK, AND RASMUS BRUN PEDERSEN. 2013. Process-Tracing Methods: Foundations and Guidelines. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
BENNETT, ANDREW, AND JEFFREY T. CHECKEL, eds. 2015. Process Tracing–From
Metaphor to Analytic Tool. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
BLATTER, JOACHIM, AND TILL BLUME. 2008. “Co-Variation and Causal Process
Tracing Revisited: Clarifying New Directions for Causal Inference and
Generalization in Case Study Methodology.” Qualitative Methods 6 (1):
29–34.
BRAND, LAURIE A. 2006. Citizens Abroad: Emigration and the State in the Middle
East and North Africa. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2013. Jordan’s Inter-Arab Relations: The Political Economy of AllianceMaking. New York: Columbia University Press.
BURGESS, KATRINA. 2012. “Migrants, Remittances, and Politics: Loyalty and
Voice after Exit.” Fletcher Forum of World Affairs 36 (1): 43–56.
CASTLES, STEPHEN, HEIN DE HAAS, AND MARK J. MILLER 2014. The Age of Migration
- International Population Movements in the Modern World, 5th ed. New
York: The Guilford Press.
CHAMI, RALPH, ADOLFO BARAJAS, THOMAS COSIMANO, CONNEL FULLENKAMP,
MICHAEL GAPEN, AND PETER MONTIEL. 2008. Macroeconomic Consequences of
Remittances. International Monetary Fund Occassional Paper No. 259.
Washington, DC.
COLLIER, DAVID. 2011. “Understanding Process Tracing.” PS: Political Science
& Politics 44 (4): 823–30.
COLLIER, DAVID, AND JAMES MAHONEY. 1996. “Insights and Pitfalls: Selection Bias
in Qualitative Research.” World Politics 49 (2): 56–91.
COOPER, RICHARD N. 1972. “Economic Interdependence and Foreign Policy
in the Seventies.” World Politics 24 (2): 159–81.
DE GENOVA, NICHOLAS, AND NATHALIE PEUTZ, eds. 2010. The Deportation Regime:
Sovereignty, Space, and the Freedom of Movement. Raleigh, NC: Duke University Press.
DÉLANO, ALEXANDRA, AND ALAN GAMLEN. 2014. “Comparing and Theorising
State-Diaspora Relations.” Political Geography 41: 43–53.

G E R A S I M O S T S O U R A PA S

SADIQ, KAMAL. 2008. Paper Citizens: How Illegal Immigrants Acquire Citizenship in
Developing Countries. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
SASSEN, SASKIA. 1988. The Mobility of Labor and Capital: A Study in International
Investment and Labor Flow. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
SCHENK, CARESS. 2016. “Assessing Foreign Policy Commitment Through Migration Policy in Russia.” Demokratizatsiya: The Journal of Post-Soviet
Democratization 24 (4): 475–99.
VON SOEST, CHRISTIAN. 2015. “Democracy Prevention: The International Collaboration of Authoritarian Regimes.” European Journal of Political
Research 54 (4): 623–38.
SOLIMAN, SAMER. 2011. The Autumn of Dictatorship: Fiscal Crisis and Political
Change in Egypt under Mubarak. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
TANSEY, OISÍN. 2007. “Process Tracing and Elite Interviewing: A Case for NonProbability Sampling.” PS: Political Science & Politics 40 (4): 765–72.
———. 2016. International Politics of Authoritarian Rule. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
TEITELBAUM, MICHAEL S. 2001. “International Migration: Predicting the Unknowable.” In Demography and National Security, edited by Myron Weiner
and Sharon Stanton Russell. New York: Berghahn Books.
THIOLLET, HELENE. 2011. “Migration as Diplomacy: Labor Migrants, Refugees,
and Arab Regional Politics in the Oil-Rich Countries.” International Labor and Working-Class History 79 (1): 103–21.
Times of India. 2016. “Afghanistan Deports 250 Pakistanis Due to Border Tension.” Times of India. Accessed November 21, 2017. http://
timesofindia.indiatimes.com/world/south-asia/Afghanistan-deports250-Pakistanis-due-to-border-tension/articleshow/53896729.cms
TSOURAPAS, GERASIMOS. 2014. “Notes from the Field: Researching Emigration
in Post-2011 Egypt.” American Political Science Association Migration &
Citizenship Newsletter 2 (2): 58–62.
———. 2015a. “Why Do States Develop Multi-Tier Emigrant Policies? Evidence from Egypt.” Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies
41 (13): 2192–214.
———.
2015b.
“The
Politics
of
Egyptian
Migration
to
Libya.” Middle East Report. Accessed November 21, 2017.
http://www.merip.org/mero/mero031715
———. 2016. “Nasser’s Educators & Agitators across Al-Watan Al-‘Arabi: Tracing the Foreign Policy Importance of Egyptian Regional Migration,
1952–1967.” British Journal of Middle Eastern Studies 43 (3): 324–41.
———. 2017. “Migration Diplomacy in the Global South: Cooperation, Coercion & Issue-Linkage in Gaddafi’s Libya.” Third World Quarterly 38
(10): 2367–85.
TURNER, FREDERICK JACKSON. 1920. The Frontier in American History. New York:
1460 H. Holt and Company.
VANDERBUSH, WALT, AND PATRICK JUDE HANEY. 2005. The Cuban Embargo: The Domestic Politics of an American Foreign Policy. Pittsburgh, PA: University of
Pittsburgh Press.
VANDEWALLE, DIRK. 2012. A History of Modern Libya, 2nd ed. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
VATIKIOTIS, PANAYIOTIS J. 1991. The History of Modern Egypt: From Muhammad Ali
to Mubarak, 4th ed. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Washington Post. 2016. “Memo Explains how Donald Trump Plans to Pay
for Border Wall.” Washington Post. Accessed November 21, 2017.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/apps/g/page/politics/memoexplains-how-donald-trump-plans-to-pay-for-border-wall/2007/
WEINER, MYRON. 1985. “On International Migration and International
Relations.” Population and Development Review 11 (3): 441–55.
WEINER, MYRON, AND MICHAEL S. TEITELBAUM. 2001. Political Demography, Demographic Engineering. New York: Berghahn Books.
WEINER, MYRON, AND SHARON STANTON RUSSELL, eds. 2001. Demography and National Security. New York: Berghahn Books.
WORLD BANK. 2015a. “Migration and Remittances Data.” Bilateral Remittances
Matrix. Accessed November 21, 2017. http://www.worldbank.org/
en/topic/migrationremittancesdiasporaissues/brief/
migration-remittances-data
WORLD BANK. 2015b. “Migration and Remittances Data.” Bilateral Migration Matrix 2013. Accessed November 21, 2017. http://
www.worldbank.org/en/topic/migrationremittancesdiasporaissues/
brief/migration-remittances-data
YOM, SEAN L. 2015. “The New Landscape of Jordanian Politics: Social Opposition, Fiscal Crisis, and the Arab Spring.” British Journal of Middle Eastern
Studies 42 (3): 284–300.
ZOLBERG, ARISTIDE R. 1989. “The Next Waves: Migration Theory for a Changing World.” The International Migration Review 23 (3): 403–30.

Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/isq/article-abstract/62/2/383/4986742 by guest on 28 September 2018

HUFBAUER, GARY CLYDE, JEFFREY J. SCHOTT, AND KIMBERLY ANN ELLIOTT. 1990. Economic Sanctions Reconsidered: History and Current Policy. Washington, DC:
Peterson Institute.
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND. 2016. Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook.
Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
KAPISZEWSKI, ANDRZEJ. 2001. Nationals and Expatriates: Population and Labour
Dilemmas of the Gulf Cooperation Council States. Reading, NY: Ithaca Press.
KAPISZEWSKI, DIANA, LAUREN M. MACLEAN, AND BENJAMIN L. READ. 2015. Field Research in Political Science: Practices and Principles. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
KAPUR, DEVESH. 2010. Diaspora, Development, and Democracy: The Domestic Impact
of International Migration from India. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
KEOHANE, ROBERT OWEN, AND JOSEPH S. NYE. 2012. Power and Interdependence,
4th ed. London: Longman.
KORANY, BAHGAT. 1986. “Political Petrolism and Contemporary Arab Politics,
1967–1983.” Journal of Asian and African Studies 21 (1–2): 66–80.
KOINOVA, MARIA. 2014. “Sending States and Diaspora Positionality in International Relations.” Washington, DC: Paper presented at the 2014 Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association.
KOINOVA, MARIA, AND GERASIMOS TSOURAPAS. “How do Countries of Origin Engage with Migrants and Diasporas? Multiple Actors and Comparative
Perspectives.” International Political Science Review (forthcoming).
LEVITSKY, STEVEN R., AND LUCAN A. WAY. 2011. Competitive Authoritarianism: Hybrid Regimes After the Cold War. New York: Cambridge University Press.
LINDSAY, JAMES M. 1986. “Trade Sanctions as Policy Instruments: A ReExamination.” International Studies Quarterly 30 (2): 153–73.
MACK, ANDREW. 1975. “Why Big Nations Lose Small Wars: The Politics of
Asymmetric Conflict.” World Politics 27 (2): 175–200.
MARTIN, LISA L. 1992. “Interests, Power, and Multilateralism.” International
Organization 46 (4): 765–92.
———. 1993. Coercive Cooperation: Explaining Multilateral Economic Sanctions.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
MARTIN, PHILIP L. 1991. The Unfinished Story: Turkish Labor Migration to Western
Europe, with Special Reference to the Federal Republic of Germany. Geneva:
International Labour Organisation.
MIYASHITA, AKITOSHI. 2003. Limits to Power: Asymmetric Dependence and Japanese
Foreign Aid Policy. Oxford: Lexington Books.
MOSLEY, LAYNA, AND DAVID A. SINGER. 2015. “Migration, Labor, and the International Political Economy.” Annual Review of Political Science 18 (1):
283–301.
NATTER, KATHARINA. 2015. “Revolution and Political Transition in Tunisia: A
Migration Game Changer?” Migration Policy Institute. Accessed November 21, 2017. http://www.migrationpolicy.org/article/revolution-andpolitical-transition-tunisia-migration-game-changer
NATIONAL. 2013. “Morsi Faces Diplomatic Test Over UAE Arrests.” Accessed
November 21, 2017. http://www.thenational.ae/news/world/middleeast/morsi-faces-diplomatic-test-over-uae-arrests
New York Times. 1985. “For Tunisians in Libya, an Abrupt Homecoming.”
New York Times. Accessed November 21, 2017. http://www.nytimes.
com/1985/09/23/world/for-tunisians-in-libya-an-abrupthomecoming.html
OKRUHLIK, GWENN, AND PATRICK CONGE. 1997. “National Autonomy, Labor
Migration and Political Crisis: Yemen and Saudi Arabia.” Middle East
Journal 51 (4): 554–65.
ORRENIUS, PIA, AND MADELINE ZAVODNY. 2012. “Economic Effects of Migration: Receiving States.” In The Oxford Handbook of The Politics of International Migration, edited by Marc R. Rosenblum and Daniel J. Tichenor.
105–30, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
OYEN, MEREDITH. 2015. The Diplomacy of Migration: Transnational Lives and
the Making of U.S.-Chinese Relations in the Cold War. Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press.
PAUL, THAZHA VARKEY. 1994. Asymmetric Conflicts: War Initiation by Weaker Powers.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
RICHTER, THOMAS, AND CHRISTIAN STEINER. 2008. “Politics, Economics and
Tourism Development in Egypt: Insights into the Sectoral Transformations of a Neo-Patrimonial Rentier State.” Third World Quarterly 29 (5):
939–59.
ROHLFING, INGO. 2012. Case Studies and Causal Inference: An Integrative Framework. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
RYAN, CURTIS R. 2014. “Inter-Arab Relations and the Regional System.” In
The Arab Uprisings Explained: New Contentious Politics in the Middle East,
edited by Marc Lynch. 110–23, New York: Columbia University Press.

395

