"x"
"1" "The Posthumanist Child :  Pharmako n  and Collodi’s  Pinocchio"
"2" "LINDSAY BURTON"
"3" "The childlike elements of deconstruction—deconstruction’s suggestion of play—have heretofore been  largely  unremarked upon in scholarly discourse on Derrida. The power of the child in children’s literature scholarship has been similarly suppressed in the name of ‘aetonormativity,’ which norms adult power while subverting that of the child. In light of the posthumanist turn in critical thinking, which demands a dissolution of binaries in favor of heterogeneity, deconstruction  offers a novel   approach   to analysing  the child in children’s literature. Derrida’s deconstruction ,  utilised in tandem with Donna Haraway’s diffractive thinking and Karen Barad’s concept of material-discursive apparatuses ,  promises  a new, authentically posthumanist way of reading the figure of the child in works of fiction for children."
"4" "This article traces the edges of a literary figure I term the posthumanist child, arising from the application of a deconstructive reading of aetonormative literary structures. I posit that revealing the posthumanist child in a work of children’s literature—here, Carlo Collodi’s  The Adventures of Pinocchio— destabili s es  its internal didacticism and allows for a  ‘ rethinking ’   (Spyrou 433)  of childhood . I argue that  this rethinking  is particularly necessary in order to  align ideas about childhood with contemporary posthumanist and new materialist thinking about binaries and their dissolution, an alliance that has been avoided in recent children’s literature criticism.  Children’s literature abounds with  posthuman  figures—talking animals,  endearing  robots, sentient trees—and much has been said about the posthuman-ness of these figures and their particular location in texts for children  (e.g. Jaques; Flanagan,  Technology ; McCulloch; Tarr and White) . What  interests me, and what is at stake in the measurement of a  posthumanist  child, is an inherent contradiction between theories of posthumanism and of children’s literature that persists despite the clear presence of posthumans throughout the genre. My emphasis above indicates an alignment with Victoria Flanagan’s distinction between the posthuman and posthumanism:"
"5" "‘Posthumanism’ is the critical discourse that seeks to understand and dismantle the  privileged status of the humanist subject, whereas the ‘posthuman’ is the subject who  exists in a world where the boundaries that once defined humanity have been redrawn as  a result of technological impact or the recognition that the human is of multi-species  origin.  (“Rethinking” 35)"
"6" "As a discourse that intends to ‘dismantle the privileged status of the humanist subject’, posthumanism concerns itself with power binaries and their dissolution,  championing heterogeneity  instead of ‘reproduc[ing]…the sacred image of the Same’  (Haraway, “Promises” 67) . The power binary in question in children’s literature studies is the binary between the adult and the child, termed aetonormativity, an ‘adult normativity that governs the way children’s literature has been patterned from its emergence to the present day’  (Nikolajeva 8) . The discourse of aetonormativity extends to include:"
"7" "social conditions, in real as well as in fictive world (sic), [in which] adults are and will always be superior to children. Here, power hierarchy is non-negotiable, unlike other heterological situations (gender, class, sexual preference), and power is inevitably self-reproducing.  (203)"
"8" "Thus aetonormativity, one of the prevailing theories of children’s literature, posits an iron-clad power hierarchy between adult and child. Even later adjustments to aetonormativity  (Gubar; Beauvais)  that position the difference between adult and child as one of ‘degree, not of kind’  (Gubar 454)  insist that aetonormativity must be at least  somewhat  preserved to the extent that it ‘[justifies] an array of protective measures that cannot be dismissed as merely oppressive’ (454). Gubar’s comment is particularly telling, as it avoids negating aetonormativity’s oppressive action while redirecting the reader’s attention towards our own ‘dismissal’ of opposition to the theory. The adult-child power binary endures, a stasis sharply juxtaposed with other ‘heterological situations,’ which have undergone increasingly public and political destabilisation over the last century."
"9" "Why does aetonormativity resist the type of deconstruction that has been productively applied to other power binaries? More precisely, why do scholars of  children’s literature   seem not only to resist a meaningful critique of aetonormativity but moreover to dismiss one as impossible  (cf. Nodelman; Flynn) ? I suspect the answer has to do with Stephen Thomson’s description of the conceptual child’s ‘ particular risk of being  hypostatized’  (357) . Nikolajeva overtly hypostasises the child, as a component of the adult-child binary, in her definition of aetonormativity. More conservatively, Gubar takes the ‘risk’ of ‘talking about actual children’  (450) , unknowingly echoing Thomson by becoming ‘entangled in the idea that there are real children at stake’  (Thomson 355)  when we discuss the conceptual child. Thomson, conversely, suggests:"
"10" "that one needs to insist   upon the conceptuality of  ‘ child ’ , in an attempt to wrest the object   from its self-evidence and make it available for a sort of thinking   through   which, though it remains involved in issues that exercise the   practical, does not take the practical as its telos.   (356)"
"11" "Thomson here insists that the conceptual child be made available for a “thinking through,” but he stops short at defining what, in particular, needs to be thought through.  I posit that the conceptual  child, unhypostati s ed, has a central role to play in thinking through a posthumanist deconstruction of aetonormativity, thus becoming a posthumanist child. In this becoming, the posthumanist child shows us the generative possibilities for rethinking childhood that arise when we destabili s e aetonormativity."
"12" "The posthumanist child remains hidden under a veritable maelstrom of analytical demands. Firstly, we must decenter the human by interrogating and dismantling humanist power hierarchies; secondly, the power hierarchy between adults and children is non-negotiable and in fact fundamentally beneficial for both parties; thirdly, this non-negotiable power structure essentialises the material child while doing away with the conceptual one, which should, fourthly, remain available for ‘thinking through’. If we are able to pause and allow all of these tensions to balance at once, we can find the posthumanist child, itself an inherent contradiction-in-terms on several fundamental levels. I highlight this tension because my aim here is  not  to resolve it, but rather to use the energy within it to power the forward momentum of my examination. In this I follow Donna Haraway, who uses the optical metaphor of diffraction to describe her approach:"
"13" "Diffraction does not produce  ‘ the same ’  displaced, as reflection and refraction do. Diffraction is a mapping of interference, not of replication, reflection, or reproduction. A diffraction pattern does not map where differences appear, but rather maps where the effects of difference appear.   (“Promises” 70)"
"14" "Instead of merely observing the differences between the theories at play in order to resolve them, I intend to map the effects of these differences  in order  to reveal a figure called the posthumanist child, a figure that emerges out of the effects of difference, out of the type of diffraction caused by the force of deconstruction colliding against the rock of aetonormativity.  I do this using Carlo  Collodi’s  The Adventures of Pinocchio , a canonical children’s story whose titular protagonist ‘can easily be perceived through the prism of technological change and shifting conceptions of the human in modern times’  (Pizzi 13) , arguing that one of the shifting conceptions of the human implicated in the posthuman figure of Pinocchio is a shift in our conception of aetonormativity."
"15" "From  Pinocchio,  I suggest a way forward for reconsidering the child and childhood that avoids hypostati s ation while still attending to material conditions and to the binary-destabili s ing action of posthumanist thought ."
"16" "Derrida and the Pharmakon-Child: Deconstruction as play"
"17" "Ursula K. Le Guin recommends that ‘if you want to clear a room of Derrideans, mention Beatrix Potter without sneering’  (1) . On the contrary, I find that  Derrida’s historical unpopularity  in some circles  heralds a productive pairing  of his work  with children’s literature, a category of writing that has itself achieved scant academic  approval.  Indeed, I argue that there is much about Derrida’s  ‘ metaphysics of fragments ’   (Hassan 833) , that favors its usage in an accounting of a posthumanist child.  A diffractive reading of Nikolajeva’s original conception of aetonormative theory through Thomson’s useful essay confirms the sense that Derrida and childhood are closely and productively connected. Thomson performs an admirable round-up of the major appearances of the child in Derrida’s oeuvre, noting that:"
"18" "[In Derrida’s writing,]  'child' is not generally cited as a concept or given the status of a   theme, and it is rarely, if ever, flagged in the indices and headings of   commentaries. And where the child is discussed, it tends to figure in   the most anecdotal, empirical sense.   (338)"
"19" "In rectifying this oversight, Thomson does not draw an overt connexion between deconstruction and childhood, instead claiming that the concept of the ‘“ child ”  names and thematises in Derrida that which cannot   just be named and thematised ’ (338.). In contrast, I find in Derrida’s juxtaposition of ‘child’ with other names and themes a convincing relationship between the destabilising action of deconstruction and the figure of the child. The particular Derridean context involving the child that interests me and suggests a way forward for a deconstruction of aetonormativity is Derrida’s discussion of  pharmakon  in his retelling of Plato’s pharmacy in  Dissemination.  As Thomson describes:"
"20" "Derrida has no sooner   proclaimed himself the first to read Plato's pharmacy as a family scene,   one that is sheltered by the family, even as it makes itself apparent   through familial metaphor … than  (sic)  the child is cast out of its   shelter. …Such is the position of text following Plato: once issued from the   father, it is exposed in the world, without its own voice,  infans .   (346)"
"21" "For Derrida, writing itself is an orphaned child. This alone is enough to suggest the relevance of deconstruction to the analysis of children’s literature, since orphaning action is a prerequisite for the assertion of aetonormativity. In her description of aetonormativity, Nikolajeva sets out the exact contradiction in power that is ripe for a deconstructive consideration:"
"22" "Children in our society are oppressed and powerless. Yet, paradoxically enough, children are allowed, in fiction written by adults for the enlightenment and enjoyment of children, to become strong, brave, rich, powerful, and independent— on certain conditions and for a limited time . The most important condition is the physical dislocation and the removal, temporary or permanent, of parental protection   (Nikolajeva 10, emphasis original) ."
"23" "Nikolajeva uses Bakhtinian carnivalesque theory to describe the pattern of aetonormative assertion in children’s literature: the child moves from the aetonormative, real world into the carnivalesque world in which she has outsized (literally or figuratively) power, only to be forced to return to the aetonormative world by the end of the text, either through a removal of powers, growing up, or even through death. Yet when we take writing to be an orphaned child, ‘ wander [ing]  here and there, making its appearance and reciting its story …neither  affirmed as belonging, nor   quite disowned ’  (Thomson 346) , such a formulaic, strict—dare I say  adult— application of this theory seems itself aetonormative, collapsing the paradox of power within children’s literature instead of examining the effects of difference inherent in the adult-child power binary.  By contrast, a deconstructive reading allows children’s literature to escape out its bedroom window without the grown-ups noticing."
"24" "The moment  that holds significance for revealing the posthumanist child and allowing  a rethinking of childhood  appears in Derrida’s retelling of  Plato’s  p harmacy , the Egyptian story of Amon-Ra and Thoth as told by Plato in  Phaedrus . This recitation is not merely a recounting of a myth; it is also a discussion of speech and writing, of  logos  (speech; logic)   and  pharmakon  (cure; poison; writing)—and of parent and child. The focus for this tale and for much of this broader section of  Dissemination  is on the father, not the son, but the father figure would not hold Derrida’s attention without the counterpoint/focal point of the son to provide it with meaning—an initial hint towards the value of the child in Derrida’s logic. In his analysis of Plato’s  Phaedrus , he turns to more literal father- and child-figures to contextualise his meaning, identifying Amon-Ra as the father who rejects the gift of writing—a  pharmakon  for the inadequate memory of man—from his son Thoth, who like the pharmakon he creates ‘is  opposed to its other … but as that which at on c e supplements and supplants it ’  (93) . Where  Plato uses this  myth to justify the evils of writing, Derrida plays on the undecidability of the word  pharmakon , meaning variously “cure”, “medicine”, “poison”, “drug”, and “remedy”, to demonstrate that writing both  cures  the problems of memory even as it simultaneously  makes the problem worse , allowing humans to remember ever fewer things in favor of writing them down externally. I use the word ‘play’ to describe Derrida’s analytical action intentionally, as Thoth, play, and deconstruction are inextricably linked:"
"25" "Sly, slippery, and masked, an intriguer and a card, like Hermes,  [Thoth]  is neither king nor jack, but rather a sort of joker, a  fl oating signifier, a wild card, one who puts play into play.  … His propriety or property is impropriety or inappropriateness, the  floa ting   indetermination that allows for substitution and play. Play, of which he is also the inventor, as Plato himself reminds us.   (Derrida 93)"
"26" "Thoth is the inventor and embodiment of play, philosophical and otherwise, ‘ marked by …[an]  unstable ambivalence ’ (93) which is the fundamental nature of deconstructive thought."
"27" "Deconstruction, emblemised by  pharmakon,  is the childlike thumbing of the nose to the austere severity of the father,  logos . Unlike the temporary power granted to children in children’s literature under the aetonormative paradigm, the power of deconstruction to destabilise—or rather, the existence of instability in all writing, as explained via deconstruction and exemplified by  pharmakon —is inherent and enduring, instantly and forever beyond the reach of its creator at the moment of its creation."
"28" "Derrida views  pharmakon  as ‘extremely apt for the task of tying all the threads of this correspondence together’  (96) ; here I substitute the word child for  pharmakon  and find that the threads of my argument tie together neatly. Thoth is the child of Ra and the god of writing (itself also the child of speech), which is a  pharmakon ; in turn,  pharmakon  is   a concept that suggests  and allows for and  is  undecidability ,  which destabilises binaries. This chain of substitutions positions both the figure of the child and children’s literature as prime sites for deconstructive analysis, for taking a closer look at the constant undecidability of words and their meanings as they pertain to power binaries assumed to be present."
"29" "But what of the  posthumanist  child? The child-as-idea, at this stage in my argument, is inherently deconstructive. If we are not satisfied with the intrinsic posthumanism of deconstructive thought, I hasten to point out that  pharmakon  is not only a drug, a remedy, a poison, a cure, but also a  tekhne , an artifice, from whence we derive (our modern word) technology. We tend to think of posthumanism as a theory occurring post-atomic bomb, but human reliance on technology to move beyond ourselves is as old as writing; as D. S. Halacy Jr. points out, ‘ As I type this page I am a cybernetic organism, just as you are when you take pen in hand to sign a check ’  (13) . Traces of this posthuman-ness animate all conceptual, that is fictional, children written under the aetonormative paradigm: as creations, they become powerful. What remains to be uncovered is the characterisation of this power. Aetonormativity dictates that fictional children gain power through their separation, their orphanage, from parental, adult figures—technology that has escaped from adult control, reminiscent of the cyborg’s ‘ awful apocalyptic telos of the  “ West’s ”  escalating dominations of abstract individuation,  an ultimate self untied at last from all dependency ’  (Haraway, “Manifesto” 9) . A deconstructive view of the conceptual child must necessarily locate that child’s power elsewhere, out of the hands of the adults who create it. This misdirection regarding the source of the fictional child’s power is all the more salient when the child in question is itself a  posthuman  figure, as we shall see shortly in a consideration of Pinocchio, but it remains the defining characteristic of the posthumanist child."
"30" "Barad and the Apparatus of Children’s Literature"
"31" "Connecting the dots between posthumanism, the child,  pharmakon,  and deconstruction lays productive groundwork but does not in and of itself deconstruct aetonormativity. In order to put a true subversion of the aetonormative binary into practice, our understanding of power must change in material ways, and not just by flipping the binary so that the former ‘other’ is now normed and powerful. It is at this juncture that the novel ‘onto-epistemological’ framework of Karen Barad, what she terms ‘agential realism,’ comes into play.  Barad argues that the discoveries of quantum mechanics—namely, that light can act as both a wave and a particle, and that the atom is not uncuttable—should and must be scaled up in such a way as to impact our working ontological and epistemological theories, including our understanding of power relationships. Barad aligns herself with Derrida when she observes that ‘[t] he postulation of individually determinate entities with inherent properties …[i.e.]  the hallmark of atomistic metaphysics ’  (“Performativity” 812)  has had an outsize effect on modern social and scientific theories, which ‘ owe   much to the idea that the world is composed of individuals with separately   attributable properties ’  (“Performativity” 813) . She describes how the work of physicist Niels Bohr reframes ontological thinking away from traditional, atomic metaphysics:"
"32" "According to Bohr,  theoretical concepts  (e.g.,  ‘ position ’  and  ‘ momentum ’ ) are not ideational in character but rather are  specific physical arrangements … [A] ny measurement of  [theoretical  concepts]… cannot be attributed to some abstract independently existing  ‘ object ’  but rather is a property of the  phenomenon —the inseparability of  ‘ observed object ’  and  ‘ agencies of observation. ’   ( …)T herefore … the  primary epistemological unit is not independent objects with inherent boundaries and properties but rather  phenomena . On my agential realist elaboration, phenomena do not merely mark the epistemological inseparability of  ‘ observer ’  and  ‘ observed ’ ; rather,  phenomena are the ontological inseparability of agentially intra-acting  ‘ components . ’   (“Performativity” 814–15, emphasis original)"
"33" "Barad’s elaboration echoes Haraway’s critique of Western humanism; for both philosophers, the primary epistemological unit is not ‘ an ultimate self untied at last from all dependency, a man in space ’  (“Manifesto” 9)  but ‘ partial, contradictory, permanently unclosed constructions of personal and collective selves ’ (9). This is not necessarily a rejection of our everyday lived experiences as individuals, but rather an opportunity to rethink—or, if you will, think through—a fundamentally new paradigm of identity and agency."
"34" "I describe these basic tenets of Barad’s theory for clarification, but the direct application of agential realism to the material figures within a text like  Pinocchio  has, in my view, some limitation, given Barad’s preference for the material over the represented. Barad’s theory seeks to escape the linguistic maneuverings present in so much contemporary cultural theory and give some power back to matter, claiming that ‘ language has been granted too much power ’  (Barad, “Performativity” 801) .  Given her position,  it feels disingenuous to apply Barad’s theory to any particular children’s literature text as merely a representation of material conditions. Roberta Trites, while admitting that children’s literature itself  is  largely discursive, claims that materialist theory such as Barad’s still pertains to children’s literature inasmuch as children’s literature is  ‘ heavily invested in exposing children to innumerable aspects of materiality, such as human embodiment, toys and other physical objects, physical spaces and geographies, and the environment ’   (xviii) . I do not discount Trites’ s  observation, but I question how far an entrenched  power binary such as aetonormativity can be  subverted  with a poetic-esque reading of, for example, Pinocchio’s wooden body. As Jaques notes,  Pinocchio  enacts a  ‘ normalizing conclusion…[that]  is a return to the humanist ethics and scripted behaviors that Pinocchio-as-puppet so playfully queers ’   (219) . This normali s ing conclusion also reasserts aetonormativity as another iteration of humanist ethics.  This example is broadly generali s able to much contemporary children’s literature analysis; thus far, aetonormativity has shown a remarkable resistance to being read against."
"35" "By applying a deconstructive approach to  Pinocchio , I go beyond an analysis of representations of the material within the text and proceed towards an understanding of  children’s literature itself as  (an integral part of)  an apparatus of binary constitution.  Children’s literature, as a discourse, ‘ is not what is said; it is that which constrains and enables what can be said ’  (Barad,  Meeting  146)  about children and childhood. In having material copies of itself placed and used in the hands of readers, children’s literature takes on the qualities of an apparatus. Barad describes apparatuses as ‘ material-discursive practices—causal intra-actions through which matter is iteratively and di ff erentially articulated,   reconfiguring the material-discursive field of possibilities and impossibilities   in the ongoing dynamics of intra-activity that is agency ’  ( Meeting  170) . Reading children’s literature as an apparatus becomes the qualitative inverse of the hypostatisation of the fictional child that Thomson warns against. Such a reading does not materialise a real child out of a fictional one, but instead acknowledges that there is an agency, which is power, in the intra-activity of fictional and real children, of texts and readers, that reconfigures what counts as possible and impossible in the phenomenon that we commonly know by its discrete parts of ‘adult’ and ‘child’. A reading of  Pinocchio  or any other work of children’s literature that deconstructs the text’s overt aetonormative power structure contributes  to this apparatus, to the reconfiguration of what is possible for the child—the child, who through this type of reading, becomes truly posthumanist. In the following two sections, I perform that reading, first through an analysis of the precise nature of  Pinocchio ’s aetonormative elements and then through a breakdown of the elements that work against the text’s aetonormative structure."
"36" "Pinocchio, Aetonormatively"
"37" "‘ No, children, you are mistaken. ’"
"38" "Carlo Collodi’s  The Adventures of Pinocchio , ‘one of the few truly classic pieces of children’s literature’  (Heisig 23) , has been submitted to a myriad of academic readings, including Freudian  (West) , Marxist  (Panszczyk) , Jungian  (Heisig) , aesthetic  (Gannon) , postmodern  (Wunderlich) , and posthuman  (Jaques) . The story’s fable-esque instructive tone hardly seems to require close analysis; few readers could fail to miss the heavy didacticism of characters such as the Talking Cricket, who has represented the voice of maturity and responsibility via his Disney counterpart Jiminy for several Western generations. Yet an aetonormative reading will unveil the specific nature of the text’s treatment of the adult-child relationship and in doing so unveil the instability inherent in that aetonormativity. We must first shine light on the structure in order to see its cracks."
"39" "The Talking Cricket is one of a host of literary elements in  Pinocchio  that work to reinforce aetonormativity on Pinocchio’s character arc. Along with the Cricket, Old Joe , the Blue Fairy, a white Blackbird, a Parrot, and the Busy Bee villagers all reiterate the same message  to Pinocchio: ‘“ Woe betide those children who rebel against their parents and who take it into their heads to run away from home. They will never do well in this world, and sooner or later they will bitterly regret what they did.” ’   (Collodi 12) .  Pinocchio’s assertion of what he wants from his existence—‘“eating, drinking, sleeping, and enjoying myself from morn till night ” ’—leads to a repeated warning that ‘“those who take up that career generally all finish up in the workhouse or in prison ” ’   (Collodi 13) . Pinocchio suffers plenty for his flouting of adult norms, experiencing at various times starvation, loss of limb, attempted murder by hanging, jail time, and transfiguration into a donkey, released from his suffering each time only by the pity of adult figures. This privileging of the adult also asserts itself in its opposite—the invalidation of the child—through depictions of school children, who are characterised by teasing and bullying, and of childhood, represented allegorically by the ‘Land of Toys’:"
"40" "Its population was entirely made up of children. In the streets there was such rejoicing, such a din, such a screaming as to numb the brain. …In fact there was such a  pandemonium , such a chirruping, such a  devilish uproar , that if you didn’t stuff your ears with cotton wool, you’d go deaf.  (Collodi 127, emphasis mine)"
"41" "In the Land of Toys, what initially presents as the joy and happiness of childhood quickly devolves into sensory evil, disrupting both physical and cognitive processes. This infernal racket, created by a litany of games and laughter, stands for childhood itself, just as the village of the Busy Bees, where ‘everyone was working, everyone had something to do’  (86)  stands for responsible adulthood. Children, childhood, and childish things are all badly maligned."
"42" "The subjugation of the child and childhood in Pinocchio descends past the allegorical and into the material, both as it is depicted in the text and in reference to the presumed (material) child reader. Anna Panszczyk describes Pinocchio’s ‘liminal’ nature as ‘the articulation of an  uncanny bildungsroman…experienced through and in tangible material rather than human development’  (192) ; in an aetonormative reading, the text blurs the line between material and human-child in order not merely to create an uncanny effect but to underscore a pro-adult, anti-child power structure. Maestro Cherry, who first discovers the piece of wood that becomes Pinocchio by hearing ‘a little, tiny voice saying pleadingly “Don’t hit me too hard!”’ acts surprised at the idea that ‘this piece of wood…has learned to cry and complain like a child’  (Collodi 1–2) . This initial alignment of the material—that is, the usable and profitable—with the negative aspects of childhood cycles throughout Pinocchio’s narrative, from Old Joe’s initial desire to carve ‘a fine wooden puppet’ that will earn him ‘a crust and a glass of wine’  (Collodi 4)  to Pinocchio’s metamorphosis out of his wooden body by dint of hard work, described by Old Joe as a state that emerges ‘when naughty children become good’  (Collodi 169) . Panszczyk claims that Pinocchio ‘ only   became human when he … becomes a cog in the machinery of   labor and commodification ’  (200) , but a close reading reveals that the desires and needs of the immediate adult figures in the plot—Old Joe and the Blue Fairy—are the final test for Pinocchio’s transformation:"
"43" "“Well done, Pinocchio! On account of your kind heart, I forgive you all the pranks that you have played before now. Children who lovingly help their parents in their hardship and infirmity always deserve great praise and great affection, even if they cannot be cited as models of obedience and good behaviour. Be sensible in the future and you will be happy.”  (Collodi 167–68)"
"44" "The Blue Fairy’s final warning to Pinocchio to ‘be sensible’ is modest and not particularly work-oriented. Her comment defines the only proper and positive role a child can play as that which helps their parents. The ultimate transaction of  Pinocchio  is not one of material labor for material  goods, but emotional devotion on the part of the child in return for comfort on the part of the adult. The reward for completing this transaction is a shift in materiality that allows Pinocchio future access to the privileged state of adulthood."
"45" "The narratorial aetonormativity present in the text, while more subtle than the aetonormativity of Pinocchio’s character development, complements the latter through ‘typical Collodian repetition’  (Lucas 174)  of direct address to the story’s presumed child audience. Returning briefly to the moment of Cherry’s discovery of Pinocchio, we note that Cherry’s disbelief in Pinocchio’s existence (‘Could it be…? I can’t believe that’) encourages the presumed child reader to affirm the wood’s sentience, while simultaneously requiring her to affirm crying and complaining as defining characteristics of childhood. Indeed, from the narrative’s outset, child readers are treated to moments intended to invite participation in the narrative only to undercut the position they are assumed to provide. In the first iteration of this, the children are wildly ‘mistaken’ (1) in their assumptions:"
"46" "Once upon a time there was…"
"47" "“A king!” my little readers will say straight away. No, children, you are mistaken. Once upon a time there was a piece of wood.  (Collodi 1)"
"48" "Previous analyses  (Jaques; Panszczyk)  have focused on substitution of wood for king in this introduction to the tale, but the mistakenness of children both precedes this substitution and remains a heavily utilised narratorial technique. The narrator repeatedly instructs the child reader to imagine the result of various scenes, but after the failure of their imagination in the original call-and-response, they are no longer granted a response, a limitation that heightens the device’s imperative condescension. The relationship between the adult narrator and the assumed child reader requires the child first to be wrong, then to be silent, and finally to use their imagination  precisely in the direction that the narrator prefers: by picturing the scene that the narrator immediately describes for them. In  Pinocchio , all children are treated as puppets."
"49" "Pinocchio, Deconstructed"
"50" "‘ Unfortunately, in a puppet’s life, there are always  buts , which spoil everything. ’"
"51" "The concluding line to one of  Pinocchio’s  later chapters acts as a synecdochal moment of deconstruction of the text’s aetonormative intentions. Aetonormatively, the ‘buts’ stand for the contrast between the impulses of childhood and the rigidity of adulthood which spoil the outcome of Pinocchio’s enacted desires. This reading of ‘buts’ echoes Amon-Ra’s ‘but’ towards Thoth’s offering of the  pharmakon .  Yet the  ‘buts’ can be taken another way. If the ‘buts’ spoil  everything , then adulthood must be spoiled along with childhood by the contrasts that the former works so hard to resolve. If there are  always  ‘buts,’ then this spoilage is perpetual, regardless of adult direction or intercession. The powerful, eternal, agential attribute in this equation is not the adult control of  Pinocchio  and the narrative but the ‘buts’, the contrast, the undecidability, the  pharmakon , the posthumanist child."
"52" "The undecidable power of the posthumanist child disrupts the text’s aetonormative telos  most thoroughly  at moments when aetonormativity asserts itself  most strongly . Old Joe and the Blue Fairy repeatedly try to resolve the tension inherent in Pinocchio’s liminal body by redirecting it towards curative service to the parent—the positive, sanctioned side of  pharmakon.  But what ailment, precisely, are they trying to cure? As much as this is an ‘uncanny bildungsroman,’  (Panszczyk 192) , the ailment in question cannot belong to Pinocchio, for as we have already observed, Pinocchio’s true failing is his lack of service to the parent, not his  ignorance or lack of hard work; Pinocchio himself is the cure. The ailment must belong to the parents, to Old Joe and the Blue Fairy, and a close reading reveals that the ailment in question is no less than death itself. When Pinocchio embodies the poisonous side of  pharmakon  by shirking his service to the parent—a common state for him—Old Joe variously ends up kicked in the nose, thrown in prison, and aged beyond his years with care and worry, ending up in ‘poor health’  (Collodi 165)  and confined to a wheelchair. Similarly, the Blue Fairy dies repeatedly, only to be brought back in Pinocchio’s greatest moments of need. Panszczyk attributes these near-deaths, deaths, and resurrections to ‘divine intervention’  (204)  on behalf of ‘ the Christian idea of spirit or soul ’  (206) , but as Derrida reminds us, the presence of  pharmakon  stands for ‘the god of writing [who] must also be the god of death’  (91) . Writing, which is a  pharmakon , which is the posthumanist child, is a substitution of ‘the breathless sign for the living voice’  (Derrida 92) , which is a substitution of the wooden puppet for the living boy. Pinocchio thus cannot die, although he is burned, hanged, ill with fever, and drowned. Pinocchio’s presence as a wooden puppet in the text is itself the eternal promise of immortality, of rescue from death; his inanimate ‘thingness…prevents real death from occurring’  (Panszczyk 203) . Even when the presence of death itself, in the form of ‘four rabbits as black as ink, carrying on their shoulders a small coffin’  (Collodi 54)  persuades Pinocchio to take the bitter medicine that the Blue Fairy offers him, the medicine itself is only a stand-in for obedience and service to the adult, not a substance with physical curative effect; as the narrator describes immediately thereafter, ‘a few minutes later Pinocchio jumped out of bed thoroughly well again. For, you see, wooden puppets have the privilege of falling ill rarely and of getting better speedily’  (55–56) . It was not Pinocchio’s body that was at risk of dying, but his curative obedience to the adult."
"53" "Given the material power of his wooden body to guarantee the service of immortality to the adults, Pinocchio’s transformation into a human boy thoroughly subverts the aetonormative intentions of the text. Having tempted Pinocchio into complete obedience with promises of power inherent in adulthood, which can only be accessed with a human body, the Blue Fairy rewards him with an allowance of ‘forty gold florins’  (Collodi 168) . The remainder of Pinocchio’s changes, including his transformation into a human, are commonly attributed to the Blue Fairy, but the only sign that she is responsible for them is her forgiveness of Pinocchio for ‘all the pranks that [he has] played’  (Collodi 167) . Her forgiveness here is not unique; she has forgiven him several times prior to this moment, with no accompanying transformations. It is thus reasonable to attribute Pinocchio’s transformation, in which his materiality becomes externalised into ‘a lovely bedroom furnished and decorated with an elegant simplicity’ and ‘a fine set of new clothes, a new cap and a pair of leather boots,’ not to mention ‘Old Joe in good health, sprightly and good-humoured, just as he once had been’  (Collodi 168–69) , to Pinocchio’s own behavior, having been completely collapsed into one side of  pharmakon . With his transformation into a human boy, Pinocchio has been decided and is no longer the  pharmakon."
"54" "Immortality is lost, for himself and for the story’s adults, in a very concrete way, as the story comes to its ultimate conclusion within two pages of his transformation, and in the content of the text itself. The final illustration of the story is not of Pinocchio looking at himself in the mirror, ‘the handsome reflection of an intelligent and lively young boy’  (Collodi 168) . The text declines the opportunity to depict ‘the sacred image of the Same’  (Haraway, “Promises” 67) , instead depicting one of a human looking at the old, wooden Pinocchio:"
"55" "“There he is,” replied Joe, and pointed out a big puppet leaning on a chair, his head turned one way, his arms dangling loose, his legs crossed over and bent in the middle, so that it seemed a miracle that he was still standing  (Collodi 169–70) ."
"56" "Two things subvert the apparent aetonormativity of Pinocchio’s transformation in this final scene. The first is the illustration itself, which reverses and destabilises Michelangelo’s  Creation of Adam ; where the original painting has both Adam and God reaching to each other, balanced in power and desire, the illustration here shows a youth pointing to a puppet with ‘arms dangling loose’. If we take the illustration in light of the painting, which positions God on the right and Adam on the left,  then the aetonormative power structure rapidly disintegrates; although the human youth is on the right, in the position of God, finger outstretched, the power lies in the refusal of the puppet on the left, its hands behind its back, head turned aside, unwilling to engage. As Jaques observes, ‘ there is a strange sense that it is the  “ real boy ” , rather than the wooden toy, whose agency is subverted by unseen strings pulled offstage ’  (219) . The puppet’s role is still that of a “miracle”; the wooden form retains the that which the adults have been unable to control. The second point of subversion lies in a reading of the illustration through the text describing it. The story describes  Joe  as the figure pointing at the puppet, yet the illustration clearly shows a figure younger than an adult, with a rounded face and clothing typical of a child. Is it the human Pinocchio being depicted, or is it Joe, who in this final moment is no longer “Old”? The undecidability of the posthumanist child persists despite Pinocchio’s transformation, and the curative service of the child has served only to increase the presence of undecidable childhood, diffracting against the “miraculous” wooden puppet."
"57" "No Conclusion: An Unending Apparatus"
"58" "There can be no conclusion to the undecidability of the posthumanist child. Aetonormative readings of texts like  Pinocchio  may persist, but the posthumanist child, as  pharmakon , ‘authorize[s], even prescribe[s]’  (Derrida 127)  for us to play with aetonormativity, to tweak its nose and beat it at cards, to re-center children’s literature on the child itself. The posthumanist child remains an integral part of the apparatus of children’s literature, and ‘ apparatuses are themselves … part of the ongoing intra-activity of the   world ’  (Barad,  Meeting  146) . It is through this apparatus, and not through a misplaced reification, that the conceptual child ‘ remains involved in issues that exercise the   practical ’  (Thomson 356) . The key word in Barad’s definition is “ongoing”. Collodi tried to finish the story of Pinocchio by hanging him from an oak tree, but ‘the paper was besieged by children writing to ask for the story to be continued’  (Lucas 179) , and so the story was continued. The story of Pinocchio has continued to continue, and not because he becomes a real boy in the end, either. As Glauco Cambon observes,"
"59" "… what a d eli ght it had been to follow Pinocchio's vagaries … ! Life   certainly would have been  dull  for him and for the readers if he had been tame   from the start …   How exciting it is to see him get out of scrape   after scrape …  (54–55)"
"60" "In a summative (but not final) accounting of the posthumanist child, who in this instance is Pinocchio, he stands for  pharmakon , which stands for the entire apparatus of children’s literature, which adults continually try to reduce to its didactic cure and which survives because of its enticing, delighting, addictive, dangerous possibilities. Any attempted ending to the story of the posthumanist child—to any children’s literature story—that privileges an aetonormative account over one of ‘respectful engagement” with the agency of the child figure is “contingent, not fixed’  (Barad,  Meeting  90) —contingent on a sanitised and sanitising view of childhood.  After all, ‘ t here is no such thing as a harmless remedy. The pharmakon can never be simply beneficial ’  (Derrida 99) . Children inevitably predict and spring from the demise of adults. In other words, a purely aetonormative take on a work of children’s literature like  Pinocchio , done out of an instinct to hypostatise the child, will miss the point, will miss an opportunity to think through the complexities offered by the story, will miss the possibilities—which are realities—of the  pharmakon  in favor of generating impossibilities, which perpetually undermine themselves."
"61" "Works Cited"
"62" "Barad, Karen.  Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the Entanglement of Matter and Meaning . Duke University Press, 2007."
"63" "---. “Posthumanist Performativity: Toward an Understanding of How Matter Comes to Matter.”  Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society , vol. 28, no. 3, Mar. 2003, pp. 801–31."
"64" "Beauvais, Clémentine.  The Mighty Child: Time and Power in Children’s Literature . John Benjamins Publishing Company, 2015."
"65" "Cambon, Glauco. “Pinocchio and the Problem of Children’s Literature.”  Children’s Literature , vol. 2, no. 1, 1973, pp. 50–60.  Project MUSE , doi:10.1353/chl.0.0314."
"66" "Collodi, Carlo.  The Adventures of Pinocchio . Edited by Ann Lawson Lucas, Oxford World’s Classics, Oxford University Press, 2009."
"67" "Derrida, Jacques.  Dissemination . Athlone Press, 1981."
"68" "Flanagan, Victoria. “Posthumanism: Rethinking ‘the Human’ in Modern Children’s Literature.”  The Edinburgh Companion to Children’s Literature. , edited by Clémentine Beauvais and Maria Nikolajeva, Edinburgh University Press, 2018."
"69" "---.  Technology and Identity in Young Adult Fiction: The Posthuman Subject . Palgrave Macmillan, 2014."
"70" "Flynn, Richard. “What Are We Talking about When We Talk about Agency?”  Jeunesse: Young People, Texts, Cultures , vol. 8, no. 1, Aug. 2016.  jeunessejournal.ca , http://jeunessejournal.ca/index.php/yptc/article/view/322."
"71" "Gannon, Susan R. “Pinocchio: The First Hundred Years.”  Children’s Literature Association Quarterly , vol. 6, no. 4, 1981, pp. 1–7.  Project MUSE , doi:10.1353/chq.0.1333."
"72" "Gubar, Marah. “Risky Business: Talking about Children in Children’s Literature Criticism.”  Children’s Literature Association Quarterly , vol. 38, no. 4, Nov. 2013, pp. 450–57."
"73" "Halacy, Jr, D. S.  Cyborg: Evolution of the Superman . Harper & Row Publishers, 1965."
"74" "Haraway, Donna. “A Manifesto for Cyborgs: Science, Technology, and Socialist Feminism in the 1980s.”  The Haraway Reader , Routledge, 2004, pp. 7–45."
"75" "---. “The Promises of Monsters: A Regenerative Politics for Inappropriate/d Others.”  The Haraway Reader , Routledge, 2004, pp. 63–124."
"76" "Hassan, Ihab. “Prometheus as Performer: Toward a Posthumanist Culture?”  The Georgia Review , vol. 31, no. 4, 1977, pp. 830–50."
"77" "Heisig, James W. “Pinocchio: Archetype of the Motherless Child.”  Children’s Literature , vol. 3, no. 1, 1974, pp. 23–35.  Project MUSE , doi:10.1353/chl.0.0336."
"78" "Jaques, Zoe.  Children’s Literature and the Posthuman: Animal, Environment, Cyborg . Routledge, 2015."
"79" "Le Guin, Ursula K.  Buffalo Gals & Other Animal Presences . Penguin Books Ltd, 1990."
"80" "Lucas, Ann Lawson. “Explanatory Notes.”  The Adventures of Pinocchio , Oxford World’s Classics, Oxford University Press, 2009."
"81" "McCulloch, Fiona. “‘No Longer Just Human’: The Posthuman Child in Beth Revis’s Across the Universe Trilogy.”  Children’s Literature Association Quarterly , vol. 41, no. 1, Feb. 2016, pp. 74–92.  Project MUSE , doi:10.1353/chq.2016.0008."
"82" "Nikolajeva, Maria.  Power, Voice and Subjectivity in Literature for Young Readers . Routledge, 2009."
"83" "Nodelman, Perry. “The Hidden Child in ‘The Hidden Adult.’”  Jeunesse: Young People, Texts, Cultures , vol. 8, no. 1, Aug. 2016.  jeunessejournal.ca , http://jeunessejournal.ca/index.php/yptc/article/view/323."
"84" "Panszczyk, Anna. “The ‘Becoming’ of Pinocchio: The Liminal Nature of Collodi’s Boy-Toy.”  Children’s Literature , vol. 44, no. 1, June 2016, pp. 192–218.  Project MUSE , doi:10.1353/chl.2016.0020."
"85" "Pizzi, Katia.  Pinocchio, Puppets, and Modernity: The Mechanical Body . Routledge, 2011."
"86" "Spyrou, Spyros. “Time to Decenter Childhood?”  Childhood , vol. 24, no. 4, Nov. 2017, pp. 433–37.  SAGE Journals , doi:10.1177/0907568217725936."
"87" "Tarr, Anita, and Donna R. White, editors.  Posthumanism in Young Adult Fiction: Finding Humanity in a Posthuman World . University Press of Mississippi, 2018."
"88" "Thomson, Stephen. “Derrida and the Child: Ethics, Pathos, Property, Risk.”  Oxford Literary Review , vol. 25, no. 1, 2003, pp. 337–59.  Crossref , doi:10.3366/olr.2003.020."
"89" "Trites, Roberta Seelinger.  Twenty-First-Century Feminisms in Children’s and Adolescent Literature . University Press of Mississippi, 2018."
"90" "West, Mark I. “From the Pleasure Principle to the Reality Principle: Pinocchio’s Psychological Journey.”  Children’s Literature Association Quarterly , vol. 1986, no. 1, 1986, pp. 112–15.  Project MUSE , doi:10.1353/chq.1986.0001."
"91" "Wunderlich, Richard.  Pinocchio Goes Postmodern: Perils of a Puppet in the United States . New York, 2002."
