The Consequences of Incarceration
for Mortality in the United States
Sebastian Daza
Center for Demography and Ecology
University of Wisconsin-Madison
sdaza@ssc.wisc.edu
Alberto Palloni
Center for Demography and Health of Aging
University of Wisconsin-Madison
palloni@ssc.wisc.edu
Jerrett Jones
Center for Demography and Ecology
University of Wisconsin-Madison
jbjones@ssc.wisc.edu
September 20, 2019

Keywords: Incarceration, Mortality, United States, United Kingdom, Health
Inequality, PSID, NLSY, Decomposition

∗

The University of Wisconsin-Madison researchers are supported by core grants to the Center for Demography and
Ecology, University of Wisconsin (R24 HD047873) and to the Center for Demography of Health and Aging, University
of Wisconsin (P30 AG017266), and a small grant for research using PSID Data through the National Institute on Aging
(P01AG029409).

Abstract
Previous research suggests that incarceration has negative implications for individuals’ well-being,
health, and mortality. Most of these studies, however, do not follow former prisoners over an extended period of time and into older adult ages when the risk of health deterioration and mortality
is the greatest. This paper contributes to this literature by employing for the first time the Panel
Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) to estimate the long run association between individual incarceration and mortality over nearly 40 years, and supplementing those analyses with the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79). We then use these estimates to investigate the implications of the US incarceration regime and the post-1980 incarceration boom for the US health
and mortality disadvantage relative to industrialized peer countries (the United Kingdom).

1

Introduction

The growth in the incarcerated population is a widely acknowledged fact of contemporary American life that has been increasingly studied by social scientists (National Research Council, 2014).
Research shows that incarceration is negatively associated with a host of outcomes for individuals
themselves as well as their kin and close relationships, including employment and wages (Pager,
2003; Western, 2002), union stability (Massoglia & Warner, 2011; Turney, 2015), and children’s
health, behavior and development (Foster & Hagan, 2014; Wildeman, 2009). Furthermore, an
emerging line of research considers the consequences of incarceration for individual’s health and
well-being. Recent studies find that those with an incarceration history report higher chronic health
problems (Schnittker & John, 2007), lower self-reported health (Massoglia, 2008a), higher obesity
(Houle & Martin, 2011), more infectious diseases, stress-related illness (Massoglia, 2008b), and
psychological disorders (Massoglia & Pridemore, 2015).
Despite increasing interest in understanding the impact of incarceration on health, few studies
investigate its long-term consequences for individuals’ mortality risks, mostly due to data limitations (Massoglia & Pridemore, 2015). This is an important shortcoming in the current body of
research. First, the health and mortality impacts of incarceration on the US population are quite
different if its health-related effects are experienced in the short instead of the long run. This is
because short-term effects are likely to involve a much younger sub-population than long-term effects. Furthermore, from a public health stand perspective the distinction is crucial as the nature of
preventative measures and associated health costs are entirely different in each case.
Previous research on the relationship between incarceration and health primarily relies on a
handful of data-sets including the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 and 1997 (NLSY), the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent
Health (Add Health) (Massoglia & Pridemore, 2015), or administrative data (Evelyn J Patterson,
2010; Evelyn J. Patterson, 2013; Binswanger et al., 2007). While these studies make significant
advances, they are limited in that they do not follow individuals over long swaths of time and thus
cannot estimate effects that unfold during the older adult phase of an individual’s life course when

1

the risk of health deterioration and mortality is the greatest.
Importantly, extant individual level analyses of the association between incarceration and health
rarely, if ever, examine the population level implications of their estimates. This is especially unfortunate for a number of reasons. To begin with it is impossible to assess accurately the ultimate
health consequences of shifts in federal policies regulating incarceration. This is not trivial since
it affects a particularly vulnerable subpopulation. Second, ignoring the population level consequences of ill-health and excess mortality brought about by incarceration rules out any study of the
role it may play on contributing to at least well-known but underexplained phenomenon. One is the
persistent US Black-White health and mortality disparities. The other is the perplexing US health
and mortality disadvantage relative to peer countries. What is the role of the recent expansion of
the criminal justice system in the expanding (contracting) Black-White disparities? How much
of the recent increase in the adult health and mortality gap between the US and West European
countries can be due to shifts federal incarceration policies? Although data limitations prevent us
from addressing the first question, we are able to investigate the second one.
Thus, this paper makes two key contributions to this area of research. First, we estimate the
long-term association between incarceration and adult mortality using two data sets: the Panel
Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) (main analysis) and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth
1979 (NLSY79) (sensitivity analysis). To our knowledge, no previous studies uses the PSID to
explore the relationship of interest over such an extensive period (including the time interval before
the incarceration boom). NLSY79, in turn, has been used previously (for instance, Massoglia, Pare,
Schnittker, and Gagnon 2014), but only considering premature deaths. We expand those analyses
using the new NLSY79 data available to explore longer periods after incarceration.
Our second contribution is to shed light on the macro-level impact of US mass incarceration on
adult mortality. We use empirical estimates of excess mortality among formerly incarcerated adult
populations to compute low-bounds for the magnitude of the contribution of US incarceration to
the US adult mortality disadvantage relative to peer countries (the United Kingdom). Although
tentative, these estimates highlight the significance of US incarceration policies and practices for

2

adult US mortality levels, trends, and patterns, thus expanding previous research based on aggregate data (Christopher Wildeman, 2016). The analysis demonstrates that the investigation of excess mortality among those incarcerated has much larger implications than those associated with
the population affected.

2

Incarceration and Heath: Causal pathways

A number of mechanisms can explain the association between incarceration and long-term adult
health and mortality. Figure 1 summarizes those most notable pathways discussed in the literature.
The pathways in the figure are represented by lines connecting personal and contextual factors
both to mortality and incarceration.
First, the experience of imprisonment may increase the risk of contracting physical or mental
illness. This, in interaction with post-imprisonment exposures, could increase accumulated adult
mortality risks. Second, even in the absence of after-effects of exposures while imprisoned, released individuals may face disadvantageous residential, labor, and familial conditions that are
detrimental to their physical and mental well-being. An important factor that may worsen conditions is the powerful social stigma of past incarceration. Third, for some individuals at least,
prison offers safety features they cannot enjoy outside of it. Thus, routine access to medical care
may reduce some health risks both during and after life in prison. More frequent contact with
health facilities and medical personnel may increase knowledge and vigilance leading to reduced
exposures long after individuals are released from prison.
These three mechanisms (exposure to risks while incarcerated, increase of disadvantage after
release, and protection from external risks due to imprisonment) involve a direct causal impact of
imprisonment on long term adult health status and mortality. The first mechanism is not mediated
but could be modified by post-prison release environments. The second explanation is mediated by
stigma and factors directly related to it that are the result of life in prison whereas the third mechanism depends on specific characteristics of the prison environment which individuals experience

3

while incarcerated and outside prison.
Fourth, individual’ traits that attenuate (enhance) the risk of imprisonment may also attenuate
(enhance) the risk of adult ill-health thus producing an association between imprisonment experiences and long term mortality that is not due to a direct causal effect. Thus, for example, individual
propensity to violence associated with antecedent mental illness could translate both in behaviors
that lead to prison and to personal injury after release. Conversely, individuals who enter prison
may be, on average, healthier than those of similar characteristics who do not and could experience
lower ill-health and mortality risks after release by virtue of these antecedent traits.
Finally, there is strong empirical evidence suggesting that prisoners share characteristics (e.g.,
social disadvantage, family instability) that are related to both criminal activities and involvement
in the criminal justice system’s and individual health and mortality. In this case the observed
association between imprisonment, on one hand, and ill-health and mortality on the other, would
be spurious.
In this paper we are interested in assessing the total magnitude of effects (first, second and
third pathways with solid lines in Figure 1) and seek to estimate these with rich longitudinal panel
data. We acknowledge, however, that the relations portrayed in Figure 1 are complicated and in the
absence of randomized controlled trials it is very difficult to rule out contamination of estimates
attributable to selection or spuriousness. As a result, empirical estimates of the magnitude of the
effect in this, as in other population-based studies, must be interpreted with caution.1

2.1

Direct effects during incarceration

Previous research suggests that prison populations have characteristics that increase exposure to
various health risks and mortality during the prison term served. Prisoners are often held in overcrowded and unsanitary conditions that are conducive to the spread of communicable diseases.
This may account for the fact that incarcerated populations experience higher rates of infectious
1 In

the remainder of the text we use the terms “effect” or “impact” of condition X on mortality as shorthand to
mean the estimated regression coefficient of condition X on mortality. We do this to avoid terminological cluttering,
not to equivocate. We invoke causal language only when we think it is legitimate to do so.

4

diseases (National Research Council, 2014). According to the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2011, prevalence of syphilis, gonorrhea, and chlamydia are higher among inmates in
correctional facilities than in the general population. These are all conditions that, in the absence
of timely screening and adherence to treatment, may impair the health of individuals years after
they leave the prison.
Similarly, prison environments expose individuals to both chronic and acute stress and promote
unhealthy behaviors, trigger mental health problems and physical injury. This could explain drug
abuse, depression, chronic anxiety, poor self-rated health, and plummeting life satisfaction. Additionally, extreme exposures, such as solitary confinement, increase the risk of fatal self-harm (e.g.,
hanging and ingesting poison).
As is the case of communicable diseases, unhealthy behaviors and ill-mental health may influence individuals not only during their prison term but could have strong lagged effects spread
over an individual’s post prison adult life. The impact of communicable diseases, mental illness
and unhealthy behaviors during life in prison and its post-release effects may become worse or
better depending on the prison setting and, importantly, on whether or not it hosts routine access
to prevention and treatment programs.

2.2

Effects after incarceration

Increases in health risk during incarceration may have a long reach and influence exposures,
choices and behaviors after release. Individuals who experience incarceration spend on average
far more time out of prison than in it: their exposure out of prison is nearly six times as long as
their exposure as prison inmates (Christopher Wildeman & Wang, 2017). Although short positive
shocks (i.e., health care access, protective environment) might have long-term and cumulative consequences for health, former inmates face challenges that may outweigh transient benefits associated with imprisonment. They are often released without medications or follow-up appointments,
and are less likely to have a primary care physician. They have no or only precarious housing,
employment, family support, and experience discrimination when applying for jobs and housing.

5

Consistent with these challenges, empirical evidence shows a deleterious impact of past incarceration experiences on health. Binswanger et al., 2007, for example, finds that after adjusting for
age, sex, and ethnicity, the mortality rate for recently released inmates is 3.5 times higher than the
rate for the general population during an interval of 2 to 5 years since release. Similarly, Rosen,
Schoenbach, and Wohl, 2008, after adjusting North Carolina male administrative data for age, race
(white/black) and educational attainment, conclude that ex-prisoners experienced more deaths than
expected among other residents: standardized mortality ratios (SMR) for white and black former
prisoners were 2.08 and 1.03, respectively (see also Spaulding et al. 2011).
Evelyn J. Patterson, 2013, in turn, after following a cohort of parolees (1989-1993) for about
10 years, finds that an additional year in prison increases the odds of dying by 16% (about 2-year
decline in adult life expectancy), and that the risk was highest early after release and decreases
over time. Finally, Massoglia et al., 2014 report a significant association between incarceration
and premature mortality for women, but not for men in the NLSY79.

2.3

Selection Effects

Some empirical research shows salubrious effects of life in prison and, in particular, reduced mortality and physical morbidity among inmates, especially black male prisoners, during incarceration.
According to Mumola, 2007, mortality rates for state prisoners were about 20% lower than the resident population from 2001-2004. Evelyn J Patterson, 2010 further bolsters these findings using
data from the BJS and the Census Bureau from 1985-1998 showing that mortality rates declines
while in prison, especially for African-American males.
One explanation of this pattern is the healthy prisoner hypothesis which argues that individuals
who engage in criminal behavior are, on average, in better health than the general population. This
conjecture is based on the healthy worker hypothesis according to which productive and active
individuals (those more likely to enter the workforce) have a lower risk of mortality and morbidity
in comparison with those unemployed. Research by Baćak and Wildeman, 2015, however, shows
that there is little support for the healthy prisoner hypothesis, and suggest that the association

6

between incarceration and health is attributable to factors emerging during and after imprisonment.
Another explanation of lower mortality among those in prison is that imprisonment offers a
protective environment and spending time in prison may decrease the risk of death by violence
or accidents, reduce access to illicit drugs and alcohol, and improve health-care access. These
mechanisms, however, may hold mostly for black male prisoners but less so for other groups.
For instance, there might be heterogeneous effects due to both the variability in the quality of
medical care across prisons and differences in imprisonment experiences. (Christopher Wildeman
& Wang, 2017). Finally, it is also possible that inmates with particularly poor health and close to
death are systematically released (i.e., compassionate release), resulting in changes in composition
of prisoners by health status. Figure 1 represents compassionate release by connecting frailty and
release.
Although the discussion above refers to effects of imprisonment on health and mortality during imprisonment, it is possible that some of the factors on which these effects depend enhance
(depress) health and mortality after release and are thus part of a different pathway.

2.4

Long-term mortality effects of incarceration and its implications

Due to data limitations, previous studies of incarceration and post-release mortality have focused
mainly on short-term effects of incarceration on mortality (Massoglia & Pridemore, 2015). The
first goal and contribution of this paper is to use two rich panel datasets to estimate the total
association between individual incarceration experiences and long-term adult mortality (e.g., the
association produced by pathways with solid lines in Figure 1) and manifested after incarceration
experiences. Our conjecture is that because of exposure during life in prison and/or due to negative
post-imprisonment familial, residential, economic, and emotional challenges with strong influence
of health and well-being, mortality rates will be consistently higher among former inmates when
compared to rates for individuals with no imprisonment experiences despite any protective effect
incarceration might have. We are not arguing, though, that the effect of incarceration is higher
later after release from prison, but that both immediate effects (closer to the release) and long-term

7

consequences of imprisonment (later after the release) might have significant detrimental impacts
in population health, and that a proper way to estimate cumulative effects of incarceration on
mortality requires examining long-term associations and extensive longitudinal data.2
The second goal and contribution of the paper is to generate preliminary estimates of the influence of excess mortality among formerly incarcerated adults on the US mortality disadvantage
relative to peer countries in Western Europe (the United Kingdom). We conjecture that, owing to
the relative size of the population of interest in the US and the expected excess mortality, postprison mortality patterns will have non-trivial impacts of roughly the same order of magnitude as
that of other candidate mechanisms.

3

Data and Measures

Our main analysis employs the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). The PSID is one of the
most widely used population surveys and one of its strengths is the longevity of the sample design.
The PSID follows a nationally representative sample of 15,000 individuals living in 5,000 families
in the United States, beginning in 1968 with annual follow-up interviews through 1997 and biannual thereafter. Moreover, we use the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79)
to undertake sensitivity analysis and verify whether or results from examination of NLSY are
similar to those obtained from PSID. For more details see the section Sensitivity Analysis below.

3.1

Mortality

Our dependent variable is mortality (year of death) and is retrieved from information from the
National Death Index (NDI) and PSID non-response records. Between 1968 and 2013, 6863 respondents died during the observation period (9% of respondents with at least one valid record).
2 We

explored whether or not the association between incarceration and mortality changes after the release of
inmates (not shown). Our results are consistent with the literature and previous research (i.e., the risk of mortality
is highest early after release and decreases over time). However, because our sample is too small to sustain robust
inferences, we did not estimate the magnitude of the differences between long and short term effects. This issue
should be explored in future research.

8

Records for individuals whose deaths took place between 1979 and 2013 were matched to the NDI
to obtain precise dates at death (see the PSID Death File documentation for details). For deaths
that took place before 1979, we use the PSID year of death (Death File 2015). When the PSID
provides a range for the year of death, we impute an exact date as the middle point of the interval
(e.g., 1980-1986 = 1983). In total, 76% of deaths in our analysis were matched to the NDI.3

3.2

Incarceration indicators

Our key independent variable is incarceration and is measured using two indicators from PSID
sources (for more details see the Online Appendix). First, we use non-response information on
whether a member of a household was incarcerated at the time of the interview. According to this
variable, 627 individuals were in prison at any wave. The major disadvantage of this indicator
is that it misses short spells of imprisonment and, therefore, could generate downward biases in
estimates of the association between incarceration and mortality. Figure 2 shows weighted and
unweighted proportions of respondents in prison by year using the non-response incarceration
variable. As seen in the figure, the trend of observed imprisonment is consistent with significant
increases in the number of people behind bars since 1972 in the United States. The magnitude of
the incarceration rate from PSID, however, is somewhat lower than figures reported by the Bureau
of Justice Statistics (National Research Council, 2014). This suggests that, as conjectured before,
the PSID non-response incarceration records under report imprisonment.4
Our second indicator of incarceration uses a set of questions about involvement with the criminal justice system. One of them, asked respondents in 1995 whether they had been in jail or prison.
According to this variable, 1995 incarceration, 838 individuals were in prison before 1996.
Finally, we use a combination of these two indicators. Since mortality and imprisonment are
rare events, combining both measures maximizes the statistical power of our estimates. To do
so we create a time-varying incarceration variable for year t that attains a value 1 if there was
3 The
4 The

distribution of the age of death is shown in Figure S1 of the Online Appendix.
distribution of the age of first imprisonment is shown in Figure S1 of the Online Appendix.

9

information on respondent’s imprisonment by year t, and 0 otherwise. For 1995 incarceration, we
use information about the year of the last release to define an imprisonment event (every period
after release was coded as 1). We then combine both variables and, to avoid survival selection
bias, we exclude those who died before 1996. According to the combined indicator, 1285 persons
(1.7% of respondents) were ever in jail/prison at any time during the observation period. Although
both incarceration measures may be affected by measurement error, most errors will be due to
under-reporting caused by either short spells of incarceration or desirability bias.

3.3

Control variables

To minimize contamination by selection and confounding, all models adjust for individual and
household characteristics. A major concern, however, is to avoid adjusting for variables measured
after the event of interest (i.e., incarceration). We adjust for covariates such as age, gender, race,
education attainment, household income, and self-reported health. We prioritize relevant and wellmeasured variables that cover most of the observation period per respondent. Age is included as a
fixed covariate and its value is set at the beginning of the observation (time = 0). Respondents’ race
and ethnicity was available only for the head of households and their spouses. For the remaining
population we imputed race using the head of household’s race. Educational attainment, originally
measured in years of education, was recoded into four categories (less than high school, high
school, some college, and college). Household income was adjusted for inflation (2013) and then
log transformed. Finally, self-rated health, a time-varying covariate measured since 1986, was
recorded using a 5-point scale (excellent, very good, good, fair, and poor) and applied to heads of
households and their spouses. For the remaining household members we only know if whether they
were in poor health or not (binary variable). To establish comparability, we recode the variable and
the last two categories of the 5-point scale (fair and poor) are used to create a poor health single
binary variable.

10

3.4

Analytic Dataset

We arrange the PSID dataset in a person-year format, so that records represent observations from
time 0 (when respondents started at the PSID) to time t, the last time a respondent was interviewed.
Because since 1997 PSID interviews were conducted bi-annually, we expand those intervals to
create an annual dataset. We define an observation as valid when respondents were present in a
Family Unit (FU), in an institution, or died during that year. That is, we include both sample and
non-sample respondents according to PSID’s terms. Sample respondents are those who belong to
the original 1968 family for the core PSID sample or the original 1997 family for the Immigrant
sample. Non-sample members are those respondents added later who were not related by blood or
adoption to any PSID sample member.
The dataset for analysis (excluding deaths before 1995) includes 48,340 respondents (48.7%
males). The average age at the start of PSID was 28 years (median = 23), while the average
exposure (or observation window) was 13 years (median = 7), with a minimum of 1 and maximum
of 46 years. 56% of the sample is white, 34% African-American. A total of 2719 deaths were
registered (after removing records with missing data) and 73 respondents were in prison and died
during the observation period. Among these the average number of years between the last spell
of incarceration recorded and the year of death was 14 (median = 12). Those deaths occurred on
average at age 47 (median = 49), and 22% occurred during the first 5 years after release at the
average age of 38. Because our indicator of release from prison is based on non-response records
in the PSID, it is subject to error and should not be taken as a precise measure of date of release.
To ensure an internally consistent analytic dataset devoid of coding errors, we employ a simple
multistate simulation model with arbitrary parameters and verify that simulated outcomes obtained
from the analytic dataset and the arbitrary parameters reproduce the input parameters (see the
Online Appendix). The analytic data set described above has shortcomings. First, the number of
respondents who were both in prison and died is small, preventing us from identifying precisely
differences by gender, race, cause of death, age, and cohort. As a consequence throughout our
analyses we focus on the gross association between imprisonment experiences and mortality and

11

do not engage in the exercise of establishing fine tuned contrasts between gender, races or ages.
Second, given the sample size, our estimates might be upwardly biased due to Type M error,
namely, conditional on statistical significance, the noisier the estimate is, the higher the chance
of overestimating the magnitude of the effect (Gelman & Carlin, 2014). One way to address this
issue is to use additional data and prior information to evaluate the plausibility of our estimates. We
briefly discuss this point in the final section of the paper and assess the magnitude of our estimates
relative to those found in previous literature.

4

Models and estimation strategy

We use both parametric (Gompertz) and semi-parametric (Cox) survival models to estimate the
association between incarceration and mortality. Parametric models allow us to validate the data
setup and to verify consistency of the adult mortality pattern we find in the data (constant and slope
of the Gompertz model) with US national data. Semi-parametric models, were used to test sensitivity of estimates to alternative specifications. They also enable us to produce estimates of the
association between incarceration and mortality using different sampling weights, handling alternative missing data strategies, modeling unobserved heterogeneity specifications, and employing
marginal structural models (MSM). The semi-parametric models yield bounds and ranges rather
than point estimates and thus lead to more conservative inferences (see the Online Appendix for
more details).
We first estimate a baseline model that adjusts only for demographic characteristics such as
age, gender, and race/ethnicity. We then add two time-dependent covariates: the centered log of
household income and education attainment by time t. Finally, we add poor health to adjust for
any potential confounding between health, incarceration and mortality. Given the time-dependent
nature of our key independent variable (incarceration) and confounders (e.g., income, education,
and poor health), we estimate marginal structural models (MSM) by using stabilized inverse probability weights (van der Wal & Geskus, 2011). Once these estimates are in place we proceed with

12

diagnostic tests of the parametric model and estimation of non-parametric models (see the Online
Appendix for more details).

5

Results

We begin by estimating Gompertz models using the PSID data and comparing the slope of those
models with the estimates obtained using the US vital statistics and census population. This exercise provides a good benchmark to judge the accuracy of the data and suitability of the model.
Table 1 displays Gompertz models using different controls and no sampling weights. The Gompertz model includes a parameterized baseline hazard that depends on two parameters, a constant,
α and a slope (or shape) γ. The parameter γ is a measure of the rate of increase of mortality rates at
older age whereas the constant is a measure of levels of mortality at approximately age 18 when all
covariates are set to 0. Covariates influence the magnitude of the constant only and we constrain
the slope to be invariant across subpopulations.5
The value of γ for the male 2010 US life table is .095 (Arias, Heron, & Xu, 2017). Our baseline
models in Table 1 lead to an estimate of γ in the neighborhood of 0.13, within the expected human
range but somewhat higher than the one in the US life table. Comparisons of the values of the
(exponentiated) estimate of the Gompertz constant with the US mortality rate at around age 20 are
less meaningful since our estimates are based on very few events in the vicinity of ages 18-25.
Moreover, because it is a measure of mortality levels in the left out groups (all covariates set to
zero) it is not an average measure of mortality and, therefore, is not directly comparable with the
US life table. In contrast, the estimate of the slope reflects experiences during a stage of the life
cycle when mortality increases rapidly, and the number of events on which the estimate is based is
larger than the points of support available for the estimate of Gompertz’s constant.
The effects of imprisonment in Table 1 ranges between 0.74 and 0.97 in the models with de5 The

variability of the slope in humans is restricted to a somewhat narrow range (.05-.14) (Kirkwood, 2015). We
expect our estimates to be within that range. We opt for not letting the Gompertz slope be a function of covariates
(some of them identical to those that modify the constant) because this leads to intractable identification problems,
even in very large samples.

13

mographic adjustments, that is, hazard rates for former prisoners are between 2.10 and 2.64 times
higher than hazard rates for those who have not been in prison by time t (after adjusting for other
covariates), with standard errors considerably smaller than the size of coefficients. These differences in mortality rates translate into differences in life expectancy at age 45 of (approximately) 4
to 5 years or roughly 14 percent of the value of US male life expectancy at age 50.

5.1

Sensitivity Analysis

We assess the sensitivity of estimates obtained by varying model specification, using different
strategies for panel attrition and missingness, and using a different dataset.

5.1.1

Model Specification and Panel Attrition

To help assessment of the effects of panel attrition we estimate additional Cox models and Marginal
Structural Models with various specifications. First, Tables 2 and 3 shows results of Cox models
using both unweighted and weighted samples and four model specifications. We define two set of
models: (1) adjusting only for sociodemographic covariates only, and (2) adjusting for sociodemographic covariates and health. Within these two sets, we estimate models with and without
marginal structural effects (MSM). Coefficients in Tables 2 and 3 are about the same order of
magnitude than what we observe in Table 1 (hazard ratios from 1.88 to 2.69), and they behave as
expected. Income and education coefficients are consistently negative, and poor health (measured
since 1986) is, not surprisingly, highly associated with mortality. Figure 3 shows cumulative mortality by incarceration status (probability that an individual died by time x) at age 18 and 30 using
the model M1 in Table 2. An individual who started out as a PSID member at age 18 (time or year
= 0) and is incarcerated, will experience an probability of dying after 40 years of about 0.37, while
someone who was not incarcerated will experience an accumulated probability of dying of about
0.20.
Second, the marginal structural models use two scaled weights - one correcting for attrition
(drop out) and the other for exposure (incarceration). The estimates from the MSM yield slightly

14

smaller hazard ratios associated with imprisonment (from 1.88 to 2.01). Models with sampling
weights (Table 3) leads to higher hazard ratios: former prisoners experience mortality rates between 2.41 and 2.69 times higher than those for the population that has not been in prison by time
t. Standard errors from weighted models are, as expected, higher, and regression estimates are
more uncertain. While unweighted models have coefficients about 4.3 times larger than standard
errors, weighted models show a slightly lower ratio (3.5).

5.1.2

Missingness

Multiple imputation do not change imprisonment estimates. Point estimates of hazard ratios in
Tables S1 and S2 in the Online Appendix range from 1.86 to 2.36. Standard errors, though, are
much higher, specially when using sampling weights: The average ratio between coefficients and
standard errors is 3.49 without weights and 2.75 with weights. Thus, the existence of missing data
augments the uncertainty of our estimates even though it does not appear to alter their mean values.

5.1.3

NLSY 79

We estimate parameters using complete NLSY79 cohort through 2014 (584 deaths) thus including
a 34 year follow-up period. We employ marginal structural models (MSM) to adjust for timevarying confounders while avoiding over-controlling for them (Hernán & Robins, 2006). We follow the same analytic approach used when analyzing the PSID data but are able to include a much
richer set of covariates.
Simple hazard imprisonment coefficients are close to zero (or negative) and with large uncertainty bounds (see Tables S3 and S4 in the Online Appendix). The covariates are properly signed:
males have a higher risk of mortality; income, education, working status, and married are associated with lower risks; and, finally, poor (self-reported) health is a strong predictor of mortality.
The marginal structural models, on the other hand, show positive and more accurate coefficients
for incarceration (hazard ratios ranging from 1.73 to 1.77). Thus, results from the NLSY and PSID
are consistent despite the fact that these data sets include completely different cohorts and cover

15

periods of time that are only partially overlapping. This strengthens our confidence on estimates
from the PSID data.

6

Implications of excess mortality due to incarceration

It is a relatively simple exercise to translate the estimates of excess mortality disclosed in the previous section into a more transparent metric such as the life expectancy at age 40. As mentioned
earlier, we estimate that incarceration’s adult mortality excess translates into a loss of between 4
and 5 years of life expectancy at age 40. Although this is an improvement over the more opaque
metric of relative risks used before, it still does not render the full significance of the estimates.
To do so one needs to investigate further their broader implications. That some of these implications are quite significant is demonstrated by results of previous research whose objective is
to assess the impact of individuals’ incarceration on their own well-being, health and mortality
and that of related individuals (close kin, spouses and children, neighbors). A small body of that
research is dedicated to evaluate the impact of aggregate levels of incarceration on US national
levels of health and mortality (Christopher Wildeman, 2016). In this section we contribute to this
literature by examining the implications of US incarceration experiences for recent adult US mortality. In particular, we explore the possibility that past US incarceration policies and practices
may have contributed significantly to the persistent adult mortality disadvantage of the US relative
to peer countries. To do so we transform the estimates obtained from our models into (expected)
excess adult mortality in the US population attributable to past incarceration experiences. These
transformations amount to computing counterfactual differences, e.g., differences between current
mortality levels in the US total male population (or some other of its subpopulations) and what we
would observe if incarceration had no mortality effects or if the rates of incarceration were zero.

16

6.1

Background: the NRC reports

A number of recent reports show that the US does not rank well among peer countries in terms of
adult health and mortality. In particular, health status indicators and mortality rates among young
adult males and females (20-44 years old) and older adults (45-69) (but not the very old) rank close
to the bottom of the distributions (National Research Council, 2014). Could it be that part of the
observed disparities are accounted for by differential incarceration experiences and excess mortality risks? To what extent is the US health and mortality disadvantage among young and older
adults accounted for disparities in the composition of populations by incarceration experiences? In
light of both differences in rates of incarceration in the US vis-a-vis other countries (Christopher
Wildeman, 2016) and of qualitative and quantitative evidence showing that imprisonment experiences increase health risks and mortality, these are not far-fetched questions. Furthermore, over
the last forty years the US penal system has experienced a large expansion (National Research
Council, 2014) and this, jointly with excess health and mortality risks of the population that experiences imprisonment, is consistent with a gradual trend of increased US deterioration relative to
peer countries. We ask the following question: how much of the gap in mortality between the US
and peer countries can be attributable to differential imprisonment experiences?

6.2

Estimation

To approximately assess the contribution of the association between incarceration and mortality
to the poor US health and mortality ranking, we decompose the difference of mortality between
the US and the UK and estimate what fraction of that difference could be attributed to differences
in rates of incarceration in both countries. This provides a first approximation to the question
of how much differential incarceration regimes contribute to the US adult mortality disadvantage
relative to peer countries. We implement a very simple procedure and compute the fraction of
the difference of mortality rates in two age ranges between the US and the UK. The procedure
rests on two simplifications. First, a more systematic tests of the conjecture should be based on
comparisons with multiple populations. However, the requisite data for the exercise are available

17

only for the UK. Further, together with Canada, the UK is one of the two peer countries that most
resembles the US on a number of dimensions and because its population most resemble the US
population in terms of demographic profiles, ethnic diversity, culture, and language.6
Second, we employ only two age groups: 20-45 and 20-70. The choice of the wider older
age group is justified on the grounds that the mortality effects of imprisonment we estimate include the population older than 45 and it is this older population that could experience the brunt
of excess mortality risks. The choice of the younger age group serves the purpose of constraining
the computations to a sub-population more likely to be vulnerable in the future as their imprisonment experiences are surely more recent and the consequences have not yet fully unfolded. These
estimates are preliminary and should be interpreted with caution.
The mortality gap between the US and a peer country is given by:

D(x) = MU(x) − mu(x)
where MU(x) is the mortality rate at age x in the US, and mu(x) the mortality rate in the peer country.
The rates are defined as:

MU(x) = MUo(x) × (P(x) × (E − 1) + 1) = MUo(x) × H(x)
mu(x) = muo(x) × (p(x) × (E − 1) + 1) = muo(x) × h(x)
where MUo(x) and muo(x) is the mortality rate at age x among those who have not been in prison in
the US and peer country, respectively; P(x) and p(x) is the fraction of the population not currently
in prison but that has been in prison in the past in the US and the peer country respectively and,
finally, E is the relative risk of mortality of those who had been in prison. We assume throughout
6 There

are many and very strong reasons to use UK and not France or Russia as a benchmark. First, in key
studies of the US adult health and mortality disadvantage, the UK is used as the preferred benchmark (Banks, Marmot,
Oldfield, & Smith, 2006) because of similarity of culture and language and contrasts of medical health care system.
Ideally, we would have liked to produce a full comparison with all countries included in the NRC report, but that is
left for future work. In terms of the criminal justice system, comparisons between the US and UK are not rare, either.
Garland, 2002, for instance, claims that there are strong similarities in the recent criminal policies and practices and
this alone makes the comparison interesting.

18

that the mortality excess of people who have been imprisoned is the same in the US and peer
country. The expression for the gap can be rewritten as follows:

D(x) = A(x) + B(x)
where

A(x) =

H(x) + h(x)
× (MUo(x) − muo(x) )
2

B(x) =

MUo(x) + muo(x)
× (H(x) − h(x) )
2

A(x) is the contribution of differences in mortality in the population that have not experienced
prison. The second term, B( x), is the contribution to the total difference of the population who
have been in prison. The fraction of the difference attributable to imprisonment is
due to other factors is

A(x)
Dx .

B(x)
Dx

and the one

These quantities were computed assuming that the incarceration rate

J(x) and j(x) are invariant with age, P(x) = r × J(x) and p(x) = r × j(x) .
Table 4 displays estimates for both age groups using alternative estimates of the effects of
prison on mortality from Cox models. We use incarceration rates (per 100,000) for the US and
UK 2011-2012 (National Research Council, 2014, p. 36), and mortality rates (per 1,000) for
the different age groups in 2011 (Wilmoth & Shkolnikov, 2008). Since we lack information for
the UK we assumed that p(x) = r × j(x) . Estimates for P(x) in the US are around 2% (2.05%
according to Bonczar 2003, and 2.09% to Shannon et al. 2017, and 1.86% to Uggen, Manza, and
Thompson 2006). Throughout we use the highest estimates. According to Table 4, the contribution
of differential composition by imprisonment to the mortality gap in the age group 20-70,

B(x)
Dx ,

ranges between 4% to 10% depending on which estimate of mortality effects we choose. In the
narrower age groups, the results are more muted and the range for the proportionate contribution
of imprisonment is between 3% and 6%.
Two caveats are in order. First, the National Research Council Reports, where comparisons
between the US and peer countries mortality are discussed, use a more fine-tuned aggregation of

19

mortality rates by age than we do here. Ideally, our counterfactuals should be computed at the
same level of aggregation as in the report. Unfortunately this is not possible in our case because
the sparsity of events across the life course in PSID only enables us to estimate a single level of
mortality with a fixed age pattern. This weakness is, however, inconsequential because the US age
pattern of excess mortality is quite regular, at least between ages 20 and 69. It follows that the use
of an even more simplified approach, with a single age group, instead of two as we do here, would
have produced robust estimates.
Second, in an attempt to include a broader range of estimates of excess mortality among formerly incarcerated individuals, we gathered information from several sources and build a set of
estimates from which we sample to compute counterfactuals. However, the range of these estimates turned out to be a subset of the range we used above and, therefore, could not possibly lead
to different inferences.7
Caveats aside, we hasten to emphasize that the main take-away message from this exercise
should not be about precise magnitudes of target parameters but rather about order of magnitudes.
The counterfactual estimates derived before rest on a number of somewhat fragile assumptions
that although plausible must be ascertained with more accuracy than we are able to do here. Although they do not translate into massive contributions to the US-peer-country (UK) disadvantage,
the estimates of effects we compute are non-trivial and of roughly the same order of magnitude
as contributions attributable to other factors routinely considered relevant for adult mortality disparities, such as race and education (Olshansky et al., 2012; Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2017). Finally, note that these estimates rely on the highly conservative assumption
that excess mortality risks due to past imprisonment is the same in the UK and the US. This could
misrepresent the possibly more benign social and economic environments for post-prison life of
UK’s young adults and produce underestimates of the contribution of US incarcerations to its own
mortality disadvantage.
7 Had the range of values been broader, we would have proceeded differently via Bayesian computations and
imposing a prior distribution on estimates. This exercise is left for future research.

20

7

Conclusion and Discussion

This paper uses the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) to estimate the long-term association
between imprisonment and mortality in the US over a period of nearly 40 years. Our estimates
point to a moderate association between incarceration and mortality, with relative risks ranging
between 1.7 to 2.7. These mortality excesses translate into losses of life expectancy at age 45 of
about 4-5 years or 13 percent of current US life expectancy at age 45. Moreover, the sensitivity
analysis employing the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979 (NLSY79) shows associations
in the same direction and of the same order of magnitude than those in PSID.
Only a handful of studies have examined incarceration and mortality with a long-term followup. Our estimates using the PSID and NLSY79, however, are in line with research showing a
significant association between imprisonment and mortality. The magnitude of effects reported
in previous studies ranges ratios between 1.32 and 2.56 (Massoglia & Pridemore, 2015), a range
values consistent with our estimates. This suggests our coefficients are not exaggerating the association between incarceration and mortality due to small sample size and Type M error, but it
might also mean that they suffer from the same biases as those in other studies. Further research
will be need to clarify this sample size limitation.
Although we estimate the association between imprisonment and mortality in the US over a
period of nearly 40 years, we are not able to identify the precise magnitude of differences between
early and later effects due to sample size limitations. It is likely that most of them operate both
in the short-term – inducing effects that are visible immediately after prison release (Evelyn J.
Patterson, 2013) – and also in the long-term, unfolding over long stretches of time and spread over
wide segment of an individual’s adult life. Their identification is possible only through extended
longitudinal studies with larger samples than those available to us.
In an attempt to uncover the substantive significance of our estimates, we investigated their implications for an important problem in social demography, namely, the US mortality disadvantage
relative to peer countries. Thus, we estimate that the fraction of the mortality gap between the
US and a single peer country (UK) that can be attributed to differential imprisonment experiences

21

ranges from 3% to 10%. These contributions are not large and cannot reflect massive influences
but they are not trivial either and are of comparable order of magnitude than those attributed to
better known factors such as education, health care, and race (Olshansky et al., 2012; Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, 2017).
Our analyses and model specifications are limited by the PSID and NLSY79 design, including
timing and frequency of some key questions, attrition, and missing data. We made an effort to provide a range of estimates using different strategies and model specifications to explicitly disclose
levels of uncertainty and of model dependency. Our models might also be seriously affected by
selection: the paths linking personal and contextual characteristics to both incarceration and mortality in Figure 1. As a consequence, the counterfactual computations associated with the fraction
of mortality gaps between the US and peer countries attributable to incarceration, are tentative and
preliminary. Despite these limitations, our estimates of the contribution of incarceration to adult
mortality gaps is useful because it provides a sense of the magnitude of the potential macro-level
consequences of mass incarceration in the US. This can be readily extended to the study of other
problems involving mortality gaps between sub-populations (e.g., Black-White mortality disparities).
Our paper represents a first step in a more comprehensive assessment of repercussions of the
recent US expansion of the criminal justice system. Future research in this area should focus on
two fronts. First, to obtain more precise and nuanced estimates of excess adult health and mortality
due to incarceration experiences, including assessments by gender, race, and detailed age groups.
Second, to investigate the implications of such estimates for some of the most startling features of
modern US mortality patterns, such as recent time trends of disparities between adult White and
African American male mortality.

22

References
Arias, E., Heron, M., & Xu, J. (2017). United states life tables, 2013. National Vital Statistics
Report, 66(3), 1–64.
Baćak, V. & Wildeman, C. [Christopher]. (2015). An empirical assessment of the “healthy prisoner
hypothesis”. Social Science & Medicine, 138, 187–191. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2015.05.
039
Banks, J., Marmot, M., Oldfield, Z., & Smith, J. P. (2006). Disease and disadvantage in the United
States and in England. JAMA, 295(17), 2037–2045. doi:10.1001/jama.295.17.2037
Binswanger, I. A., Stern, M. F., Deyo, R. A., Heagerty, P. J., Cheadle, A., Elmore, J. G., & Koepsell,
T. D. (2007). Release from prison - a high risk of death for former inmates. New England
Journal of Medicine, 356(2), 157–165. doi:10.1056/NEJMsa064115
Bonczar, T. P. (2003). Prevalence of imprisonment in the us population, 1974-2001. U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs. Retrieved from http://www.cbsnews.com/htdocs/
pdf/prisontime.pdf
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2011). STDs in persons entering corrections facilities.
Department of Health and Human Services.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2017). Health, United States, 2017: With special
features on racial and ethnic health disparities. Department of Health and Human Services.
Foster, H. & Hagan, J. (2014). Supportive ties in the lives of incarcerated women: Gender, race/ethnicity,
and children’s human rights. J. Gender Race & Just. 17, 257. Retrieved from http://heinonline.
org.ezproxy.library.wisc.edu/hol-cgi-bin/get%5C pdf.cgi?handle=hein.journals/jgrj17%
5C&section=16
Garland, D. (2002). The Culture of Control: Crime and Social Order in Contemporary Society (1
edition). Chicago: University Of Chicago Press.
Gelman, A. & Carlin, J. (2014). Beyond power calculations assessing type s (sign) and type m
(magnitude) errors. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 9(6), 641–651. Retrieved from
http://pps.sagepub.com/content/9/6/641.short

23

Hernán, M. A. & Robins, J. M. (2006). Estimating causal effects from epidemiological data. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health (1979-), 60(7), 578–586.
Houle, J. N. & Martin, M. A. (2011). Does intergenerational mobility shape psychological distress?
sorokin revisited. Research in Social Stratification and Mobility, 29(2), 193–203. doi:10 .
1016/j.rssm.2010.11.001
Kirkwood, T. B. L. (2015). Deciphering death: A commentary on gompertz (1825) ‘on the nature of
the function expressive of the law of human mortality, and on a new mode of determining the
value of life contingencies’. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences, 370(1666). doi:10.1098/rstb.2014.0379
Massoglia, M. (2008a). Incarceration as exposure: The prison, infectious disease, and other stressrelated illnesses. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 49(1), 56–71. doi:10.1177/002214650804900105
Massoglia, M. (2008b). Incarceration, health, and racial disparities in health. Law & Society Review, 42(2), 275–306. doi:10.1111/j.1540-5893.2008.00342.x
Massoglia, M., Pare, P.-P., Schnittker, J., & Gagnon, A. (2014). The relationship between incarceration and premature adult mortality: Gender specific evidence. Social Science Research, 46,
142–154.
Massoglia, M. & Pridemore, W. A. (2015). Incarceration and health. Annual Review of Sociology,
41(1), 291–310. doi:10.1146/annurev-soc-073014-112326
Massoglia, M. & Warner, C. (2011). The consequences of incarceration. Criminology & Public
Policy, 10(3), 851–863. doi:10.1111/j.1745-9133.2011.00754.x
Mumola, C. J. (2007). Medical causes of death in state prisons, 2001-2004. US Department of
Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics. Retrieved from https : / /
www.ncjrs.gov/App/AbstractDB/AbstractDBDetails.aspx?id=237953
National Research Council. (2014). The growth of incarceration in the united states: Exploring
causes and consequences (J. Travis, B. Western, & S. Redburn, Eds.). Washington, DC: The
National Academies Press. Retrieved from https://www.nap.edu/catalog/18613/the-growthof-incarceration-in-the-united-states-exploring-causes

24

Olshansky, S. J., Antonucci, T., Berkman, L., Binstock, R. H., Boersch-Supan, A., Cacioppo, J. T.,
. . . Goldman, D. P., et al. (2012). Differences in life expectancy due to race and educational
differences are widening, and many may not catch up. Health Affairs, 31(8), 1803–1813.
Pager, D. (2003). The mark of a criminal record. American Journal of Sociology, 108(5), 937–975.
Patterson, E. J. [Evelyn J]. (2010). Incarcerating death: Mortality in u.s. state correctional facilities,
1985-1998. Demography, 47(3), 587–607. Retrieved from http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.
gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=3000056%5C&tool=pmcentrez%5C&rendertype=abstract
Patterson, E. J. [Evelyn J.]. (2013). The Dose–response of Time Served in Prison on Mortality:
New York State, 1989–2003. American Journal of Public Health, 103(3), 523–528.
Rosen, D. L., Schoenbach, V. J., & Wohl, D. A. (2008). All-cause and cause-specific mortality
among men released from state prison, 1980-2005. American Journal of Public Health,
98(12), 2278–2284. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2007.121855
Schnittker, J. & John, A. (2007). Enduring stigma: The long-term effects of incarceration on health.
Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 48(2), 115–130. doi:10.1177/002214650704800202
Shannon, S. K. S., Uggen, C., Schnittker, J., Thompson, M., Wakefield, S., & Massoglia, M.
(2017). The growth, scope, and spatial distribution of people with felony records in the united
states, 1948 to 2010. Working Paper.
Spaulding, A. C., Seals, R. M., McCallum, V. A., Perez, S. D., Brzozowski, A. K., & Steenland, N. K. (2011). Prisoner survival inside and outside of the institution: Implications for
health-care planning. American Journal of Epidemiology, 173(5), 479–487. doi:10.1093/aje/
kwq422
Turney, K. (2015). Hopelessly devoted? relationship quality during and after incarceration. Journal
of Marriage and Family, 77(2), 480–495. Retrieved from http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com.
ezproxy.library.wisc.edu/doi/10.1111/jomf.12174/full
Uggen, C., Manza, J., & Thompson, M. (2006). Citizenship, democracy, and the civic reintegration
of criminal offenders. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science,
605(1), 281–310.

25

van der Wal, W. M. & Geskus, R. B. (2011). Ipw: An R package for inverse probability weighting.
Journal of Statistical Software, 43(13), 1–23.
Western, B. (2002). The impact of incarceration on wage mobility and inequality. American Sociological Review, 67(4), 526–546. doi:10.2307/3088944
Wildeman, C. (2009). Parental imprisonment, the prison boom, and the concentration of childhood
disadvantage. Demography, 46(2), 265–280.
Wildeman, C. [Christopher]. (2016). Incarceration and population health in wealthy democracies.
Criminology, 54(2), 360–382.
Wildeman, C. [Christopher] & Wang, E. A. (2017). Mass incarceration, public health, and widening inequality in the usa. The Lancet, 389(10077), 1464–1474. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(17)
30259-3
Wilmoth, J. R. & Shkolnikov, V. (2008). Human mortality database. University of California,
Berkeley (US), and Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research (Germany).

26

8

Tables
Table 1: Gompertz Models on the effect of Imprisonment on Mortality,
Unweighted, PSID 1968-2013
Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Prison

1.10
(0.12)

0.97
(0.12)

0.74
(0.12)

Age

0.08
(0.00)

0.08
(0.00)

0.08
(0.00)

Male

0.38
(0.04)

0.42
(0.04)

0.50
(0.04)

Black

0.56
(0.04)

0.37
(0.04)

Other race + unknown

0.18
(0.11)

0.13
(0.11)

Race (ref. White)

−0.13
(0.01)

Log income, centered
Education (ref. < HS)
High school

−0.02
(0.05)

Some college

−0.27
(0.07)

College

−0.64
(0.07)

Constant
Slope
AIC
Deaths
Person-years

−9.65
(0.08)

−9.96
(0.08)

−9.68
(0.09)

0.13
(0.00)

0.13
(0.00)

0.13
(0.00)

8667
2719
621810

8497
2719
621810

Standard errors in parenthesis.

27

8239
2719
621810

Table 2: Cox Survival Models on the effect of Imprisonment on Mortality,
Unweighted, PSID 1968-2013

M1
Prison
Age
Male

M1 MSM

M2

M2 MSM

0.69
(0.13)
0.08
(0.00)
0.49
(0.04)

0.63
(0.15)
0.08
(0.00)
0.44
(0.04)

0.74
(0.13)
0.07
(0.00)
0.50
(0.04)

0.70
(0.16)
0.08
(0.00)
0.43
(0.04)

0.36
(0.04)
0.07
(0.11)
−0.14
(0.01)

0.53
(0.04)
0.18
(0.11)

0.24
(0.04)
−0.08
(0.11)
−0.12
(0.01)

0.52
(0.04)
0.06
(0.12)

Race ( .ref. White)
Black
Other race + Unknown
Log Income, centered
Education (ref. < HS)
High school
Some college
College

−0.03
(0.05)
−0.27
(0.07)
−0.63
(0.07)

0.12
(0.05)
−0.05
(0.07)
−0.35
(0.07)
1.00
(0.04)

Poor health
Deaths
Person-years

2719
621810

2719
621810

Robust standard errors in parenthesis.

28

2564
595659

2564
595659

Table 3: Cox Survival Models on the effect of Imprisonment on Mortality,
Weighted, PSID 1968-2013

M1
Prison
Age
Male

M1 MSM

M2

M2 MSM

0.99
(0.18)
0.09
(0.00)
0.49
(0.05)

0.88
(0.24)
0.09
(0.00)
0.43
(0.05)

0.91
(0.18)
0.08
(0.00)
0.50
(0.05)

0.92
(0.25)
0.09
(0.00)
0.42
(0.05)

0.34
(0.07)
0.02
(0.14)
−0.14
(0.01)

0.47
(0.07)
0.12
(0.13)

0.23
(0.08)
−0.08
(0.13)
−0.12
(0.01)

0.49
(0.07)
0.03
(0.15)

Race (ref. White)
Black
Other race + Unknown
Log Income, centered
Education (ref. < HS)
High school
Some college
College

0.01
(0.07)
−0.26
(0.09)
−0.58
(0.09)

0.14
(0.06)
−0.03
(0.09)
−0.30
(0.10)
1.14
(0.05)

Poor health
Deaths
Person-years

2719
621810

2719
621810

Robust standard errors in parenthesis.

29

2564
595659

2564
595659

Table 4: Imprisonment Contribution to Mortality Gap, U.S. and U.K. (England & Wales)
Age group

β prison

Hazard Ratio

P(x)

A(x)

B(x)

20-45
20-45
20-45
20-45
20-45
20-45
20-45

0.55
0.63
0.69
0.74
0.82
0.88
0.99

1.73
1.88
1.99
2.10
2.27
2.41
2.69

0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02

0.97
0.97
0.97
0.96
0.96
0.95
0.94

0.03
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.06

20-70
20-70
20-70
20-70
20-70
20-70
20-70

0.55
0.63
0.69
0.74
0.82
0.88
0.99

1.73
1.88
1.99
2.10
2.27
2.41
2.69

0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02

0.96
0.95
0.94
0.94
0.93
0.92
0.90

0.04
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.10

Note: J(x) = 707, j(x) = 148, MU(20−45) = 4.35, mu(20−45) = 2.69, MU(20−70)
= 35.6; mu(20−70) = 27.7. Incarceration rates per 100,000; Mortality rates per
1,000.

30

9

Figures
Figure 1: Individual Pathways between Incarceration and Mortality

31

Figure 2: Proportion Respondents in Prison, PSID 1968-2013
Unweighted

Weighted

0.005

Proportion

0.004

0.003

0.002

0.001

0.000
1970

1980

1990

Year

32

2000

2010

Figure 3: Cumulative Incidence Mortality (M1, Table 2)
(a) At age 18

(b) At age 30
Strata

All

1.00

Cumulative event

Cumulative event

1.00

0.75
Prison

0.50

0.25

Prison

0.75

0.50

0.25

No prison

No prison

0.00

0.00
0

10

20

30

40

50

0

Years

10

20

30

40

Years

Note: Predicted probabilities for male, black, less than high school, and average income.

33

50

Online Appendix
The code to reproduce the analysis of The Consequences of Incarceration for Mortality in the
United States is available in https://github.com/sdaza/mortality-incarceration-paper. Some of the
data we use are restricted, and was obtained under special contractual arrangements to protect the
anonymity of respondents. These data are not available from the authors. Those interested in
obtaining PSID restricted data should contact PSIDHelp@isr.umich.edu.

1

Incarceration Measures

The incarceration indicators available in the PSID include non-response information on whether
a member of a household was incarcerated at the time of the interview, and a set of questions on
involvement with the criminal justice system. One of those questions asked in 1995 if respondents
have been in jail or prison. Unfortunately, we cannot distinguish between prison and jail in our data.
We acknowledge that prison and jail are different spaces in terms of the resources and treatment of
inmates, which might have an impact on their health and mortality. However, given the limitations
of our data, we use incarceration and imprisonment interchangeable.
In the case of the non-response incarceration, if a respondent in the PSID was not the only
member of their family unit (FU), his incarceration status usually came from other family unit
members (e.g., wife, kids). Incarcerated respondents did not get interviewed. However, they are
flagged as institutionalized and followed in the next wave. Their family may still be interviewed,
provided she had a family unit larger than one in the previous wave. Thus, if a respondent is the
only FU member and goes to jail, there will not be an interview at all, but his extended family
would be usually contacted to learn his status. If that person lives with his spouse and children,
and he goes to jail, there will be an interview in which his spouse will likely be the respondent
and the incarcerated respondent will be coded as in an institution for that wave. In the case of
the incarceration indicator in 1995, an imprisonment question was asked only to respondents who
were 13-49 years old and attended school sometime.

1

Although both indicators provide useful information on respondents’ incarceration experiences, they have some shortcomings. In the case of non-response incarceration, we only have
information when the household to which the respondent belongs was interviewed. We do not
know what happened before respondents started participating in the study. Similarly, we do not
know their incarceration status during periods when individuals were not interviewed. The 1995
incarceration variable, in contrast, is retrospective, providing information from respondents’ criminal justice contacts before 1996. However, that question was posed to panel members who survived until 1995 and could contaminate estimates with survivor biases. We finally combined both
sources of information and adjust for survival bias.
A general concern when studying incarceration effects using survey data is that a substantial
segment of the US population has been rendered invisible in many official statistics, specially
incarcerated people who are very often omitted from sampling frames (Pettit, 2012). We are well
aware of the potential problems posed by of missing individuals of interest for the question we pose
at the outset. However, although PSID does not consider incarcerated people in the first wave, it
does takes into account both retrospective and prospective incarceration events. Surely, this is not
an ideal set up but, provided there are enough young respondents who are followed over time (the
PSID follows new family members and the NLSY79 includes a very young sample, 12-16 year-old
respondents), the estimates we obtain should be close to those we would have obtained had the first
wave included those incarcerated at the time.
Figure S1 show the PSID distributions of the age of death, first imprisonment using the data
available, and the difference between the age of death and first imprisonment.

2

Simulation Check

To check our data setup, we implement a simple multi-state model simulation with three transition
rates (incarceration, dying without experiencing incarceration, and dying after incarceration) and
three states (being born, being in prison, and dying, see Figure S2).

2

We use age-specific mortality rates from the US life-table, the US age population distribution,
and a constant imprisonment rate of 0.007 for ages 18-45, otherwise the incarceration rate is set to
0. In our model, being in prison increases age-specific mortality rates by 1.90. Individuals enter
to the observation window at different ages as in the PSID, and right censoring is defined using a
uniform distribution, censoring = uniform(ageenter , 120). Then, we generate 1000 samples using
10,000 individuals. The average start age across simulations is 37.1.
Finally, we run 1,000 Cox models adjusting by a time-varying prison variable (coded as 1
after the incarceration transition occurs) and age (non-variant covariate). The estimated mean of
mortality hazard ratios from 1,000 simulations is 1.879, pretty close to 1.90, so we conclude that
our data setup is correct. The simulation results are available at https://github.com/sdaza/mortalityincarceration-paper/blob/master/simulation/simulation.ipynb.

3

Model Specifications

3.1

Time-varying covariates and attrition

By using Marginal Structural Models (MSM), we address two problematic situations pointed out
by Hernán and Robins, 2006 when employing time-varying covariates: (1) There exists a timedependent covariate that is both a risk factor for mortality and also predicts subsequent exposure
(e.g., income); (2) Past exposure history (incarceration) might predicts risk factors (e.g., income or
health). For instance, past income is a time-dependent confounder for the effect of incarceration on
survival, because it is a risk factor for mortality and a predictor of the onset of incarceration. Additionally, prior incarceration is an independent predictor of subsequent income. Standard methods
(i.e., Cox regression) that estimate mortality rates at a given time (age) using a summary measure of income or health up to that time (age) may produce biased estimates of the association of
incarceration whether or not one adjusts for past income in the analysis.
Following van der Wal and Geskus, 2011, we compute stabilized inverse probability weights
to correct the biases related to time-varying covariates. We also adjust these weights using the

3

association between incarceration and attrition as a way to confront informative censoring. The
specification of our models are available in our online repository. The marginal structural models
adjust both for the incarceration indicator and baseline covariates (i.e., time-invariant covariates)
as we include them in the numerator to stabilize weights.

3.2

Goodness of fit

We explore different specifications and examine goodness of fit. We test the proportional hazard
assumption of Cox models using Schoenfeld residuals (i.e., observed minus expected values of the
covariates at each failure time). When we find indications of departures from proportionality, we
introduce an interaction term between the covariate and the log of time. In general, that interactions
are noisy and do not change the average results of the effect of imprisonment. Thus, we decide to
present the simplest models in the paper.
We also estimate models adjusting for unmeasured frailty by introducing a random proportionality factor that modifies the hazard function of a respondent (Mills, 2011; Broström, 2012).
Specifically, we estimate a shared frailty model with a gamma distribution fit (with a mean of 1
and variance θ ) based on the long-term family identifier available and individual identifier in the
PSID. We do not observe substantial differences in the estimates.

3.3

Sampling Weights

We estimate models with and without sampling weights. Our analytic sample includes respondents
who are not PSID sample members, according to the PSID terminology. Those respondents have
an unknown probability of selection. We assign sample weights to non-sample respondents using
the following procedure: After defining our analytic sample, we consider only the first longitudinal
sample weight available for individual i at time t0 (i.e., the sample weight at the start of the period
of observation for individual i). If the individual i did not have a sample weight, we pooled the
weights from the members of his family unit u at time t0 , and compute the average. We estimate
models without and with sample to assess how sensitive they are to this procedure.

4

3.4

Missing data

We implement two strategies to deal with missing data. First, we impute time-varying covariates
(e.g., education, income, health) using the Last Observation Carried Forward (LSCF) procedure.
This strategy is not problematic regarding stable and monotonic variables such education, but can
be questionable with respect to variables such health and income where more change over time is
expected. When health is poor, we should not expect much change, specially if the time between
missing periods is short. Income, on the other hand, will change due to aging and structural
economic factors. In addition to LSCF, we also impute backwards only when the first incarceration
episode (according to the PSID) occurred after the first record of the covariate of interest. We
remove respondents that do not comply with this rule. For the rest of time-invariable variables,
we exclude observations with missing data and without sampling weights. Regarding our key
independent variable (incarceration), we impute unobserved periods with zeros (i.e., no event).
If imprisonment indeed increases mortality, our incarceration variable and imputation procedure
would underestimate the association, particularly if it is unlikely that ex-inmates have lower risk
of dying after their release.
Our second strategy is multiple imputation. We implement multilevel models to impute missing
values using both time-invariant and time-variant covariates. For example, to impute income we
specify a model such as:

income j =α + yeari + malei + racei + agei +
edu j + prison j + prison95 j + health j + dropout j + died j +
δi + ε j
Where j represents each observation in a long-format dataset, and i individuals. δi represents the
random effect at the individual level. We examine the distribution of the imputed variables by age
and year to check they were reasonable. Then, we pool estimates from 100 imputations. Results
are displayed in Tables S1 and S2.

5

3.5

NLSY 79

To validate our data setup and extent the analysis by Massoglia, Pare, Schnittker, and Gagnon,
2014 using NLSY79, we estimate the association between imprisonment and mortality using the
complete NLSY sample (584 deaths in total) and implement marginal structural models (MSM) to
adjust by time-varying confounders.
We estimate Cox-models using sampling weights and adjusting for age (set of dummies), gender, race, income, education, work status, marriage, poor health, delinquency at the baseline, and
parent’s education. The number of respondents who here incarcerated and died during the observation period of the NLSY was 81, and 17 of them were women. The average number of years
between the last spell and the year of death was 8.4 (median = 7), about 40% lower than the PSID.
As expected, deaths occurred on average at younger ages (41, median = 43), and 42% of them
occurred within the first 5 years after release at an average age of 37. This is different from the
PSID, where a much smaller proportion of deaths (22%) occurred within the first 5 years.
Tables S3 and S4 display Cox models using both unweighted and weighted NLSY samples
and four model specifications: adjusting or not by poor health and estimation or not of MSMs.
Unweighted imprisonment coefficients are close to zero with large uncertainty bounds for the size
of the effects. Weighted point estimates, on the other hand, are negative and also uncertain. The
other covariates are properly signed: males have a higher risk of mortality; income, education,
working status, and married are associated with lower risks; and, finally, poor (self-reported) health
is a strong predictor of mortality. Our marginal structural models, in contrast, show positive and
more consistent coefficients for imprisonment, with hazard ratios ranging from 1.73 to 1.77. In
summary, we are able to reproduce key results from PSID when using marginal structural models
and dealing with time-covariate adjustments (Hernán & Robins, 2006).

6

References
Broström, G. (2012). Event history analysis with R. CRC Press.
Hernán, M. A. & Robins, J. M. (2006). Estimating causal effects from epidemiological data. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health (1979-), 60(7), 578–586.
Massoglia, M., Pare, P.-P., Schnittker, J., & Gagnon, A. (2014). The relationship between incarceration and premature adult mortality: Gender specific evidence. Social Science Research, 46,
142–154.
Mills, M. (2011). Introducing survival and event history analysis. Sage Publications.
Pettit, B. (2012). Invisible Men: Mass Incarceration and the Myth of Black Progress (First Edition).
New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
van der Wal, W. M. & Geskus, R. B. (2011). Ipw: An R package for inverse probability weighting.
Journal of Statistical Software, 43(13), 1–23.

7

Figures and Tables
Figure S1: PSID Distribution Age of Death an Imprisonment
(a) Distribution Age of Death

(b) Distribution Age First Imprisonment
0.06

0.020

0.015

Density

0.04

0.010

0.02
0.005

0.000
30

60

90

0.00

120

20

Age of death

40

60

Age First Imprisonment (based on the data)

(c) Difference Age of Death and Imprisonment

0.03

Density

Density

4

0.02

0.01

0.00
0

10

20

Difference in years

8

30

40

Figure S2: Simulated State Transitions

9

Table S1: Cox Survival Models on the effect of Imprisonment on Mortality,
100 Imputations, Unweighted, PSID 1968-2013

M1
Prison
Age
Male

M1 MSM

M2

M2 MSM

0.71
(0.16)
0.08
(0.00)
0.44
(0.04)

0.63
(0.26)
0.08
(0.00)
0.42
(0.04)

0.71
(0.15)
0.07
(0.00)
0.45
(0.04)

0.62
(0.26)
0.08
(0.00)
0.42
(0.04)

0.37
(0.05)
0.06
(0.10)
−0.04
(0.02)

0.48
(0.05)
0.14
(0.11)

0.33
(0.05)
0.03
(0.10)
−0.02
(0.02)

0.48
(0.05)
0.14
(0.11)

Race (ref. White)
Black
Other race + Unknown
Log Income, centered
Education (ref. < HS)
High school
Some college
College

−0.08
(0.05)
−0.34
(0.07)
−0.73
(0.07)

−0.03
(0.05)
−0.26
(0.07)
−0.63
(0.07)
0.53
(0.07)

Poor health
Person-years
Deaths

633519
2803

633519
2803

Robust standard errors in parenthesis.

10

633519
2803

633519
2803

Table S2: Cox Survival Models on the effect of Imprisonment on Mortality,
100 Imputations, Weighted, PSID 1968-2013

M1
Prison
Age
Male

M1 MSM

M2

M2 MSM

0.86
(0.26)
0.09
(0.00)
0.46
(0.05)

0.82
(0.41)
0.09
(0.00)
0.42
(0.05)

0.85
(0.23)
0.08
(0.00)
0.46
(0.05)

0.82
(0.41)
0.09
(0.00)
0.42
(0.05)

0.31
(0.10)
−0.05
(0.13)
−0.05
(0.02)

0.40
(0.11)
0.03
(0.13)

0.26
(0.10)
−0.07
(0.12)
−0.03
(0.02)

0.40
(0.11)
0.03
(0.13)

Race (ref. White)
Black
Other race + Unknown
Log Income, centered
Education (ref. < HS)
High school
Some college
College

−0.04
(0.07)
−0.31
(0.09)
−0.68
(0.09)

0.01
(0.07)
−0.20
(0.09)
−0.55
(0.10)
0.74
(0.07)

Poor health
Person-years
Deaths

633519
2803

633519
2803

Robust standard errors in parenthesis.

11

633519
2803

633519
2803

Table S3: Cox Survival Models on the effect of Imprisonment on Mortality,
Unweighted, NLSY79 1980-2014

M1
Prison
Male

M1 MSM

M2

M2 MSM

0.00
(0.16)
0.54
(0.09)

0.57
(0.17)
0.50
(0.09)

0.03
(0.16)
0.54
(0.09)

0.57
(0.17)
0.50
(0.09)

0.01
(0.10)
−0.22
(0.13)
−0.02
(0.02)

0.43
(0.10)
0.01
(0.12)

0.03
(0.10)
−0.19
(0.13)
−0.03
(0.02)

0.44
(0.10)
0.01
(0.12)

Race (ref. Non-Hispanics/Blacks)
Black
Hispanic
Log Income, centered
Education (ref. < HS)
High school
Some college
College
Working
Married

−0.16
(0.11)
−0.38
(0.15)
−0.43
(0.18)
−1.06
(0.10)
−0.87
(0.10)

−0.15
(0.11)
−0.35
(0.15)
−0.37
(0.18)
−0.74
(0.11)
−0.81
(0.10)
0.90
(0.11)

Poor health
Deaths
Person-years

584
297282

584
297282

584
297282

Robust standard errors in parenthesis. Age, Delinquency at 1980 and Parent’s education coefficient omitted.

12

584
297282

Table S4: Cox Survival Models on the effect of Imprisonment on Mortality,
Weighted, NLSY79 1980-2014

M1
Prison
Male

M1 MSM

M2

M2 MSM

−0.27
(0.20)
0.54
(0.11)

0.55
(0.19)
0.49
(0.11)

−0.25
(0.20)
0.55
(0.11)

0.55
(0.19)
0.49
(0.11)

−0.12
(0.10)
−0.34
(0.13)
−0.02
(0.02)

0.40
(0.09)
−0.05
(0.13)

−0.09
(0.10)
−0.29
(0.13)
−0.02
(0.02)

0.40
(0.09)
−0.04
(0.13)

Race (ref. Non-Hispanics/Blacks)
Black
Hispanic
Log Income, centered
Education (ref. < HS)
High school
Some college
College
Working
Married

−0.04
(0.14)
−0.22
(0.18)
−0.36
(0.21)
−1.14
(0.14)
−1.07
(0.14)

−0.04
(0.14)
−0.19
(0.18)
−0.29
(0.21)
−0.76
(0.14)
−1.00
(0.14)
0.97
(0.14)

Poor health
Deaths
Person-years

584
297282

584
297282

584
297282

Robust standard errors in parenthesis. Age, Delinquency at 1980 and Parent’s education coefficient omitted.

13

584
297282

