Arab World English Journal ( September 2019)
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/th.244

Theses ID 244

Pp. 1- 155

The Expression of Indefiniteness in English and Arabic: A Contrastive Study
Inam Ismael Taher
Department of English, College of Basic Education
University of Diyala, Iraq

Author: Inam Ismael Taher
Thesis Title: The Expression of Indefiniteness in English and Arabic: A Contrastive Study
Subject/major: Linguistics / Grammar
Institution: Department of English, University of Baghdad
Degree: MA in Linguistics
Year of award: 2005
Supervisor: Prof. Kadhim Haidar Al - Jawadi, Ph.D.
KeyWords: articles, definiteness, contrastive study, indefiniteness, nouns, pragmatics,
semantics, syntax
Abstract
Indefiniteness is a semantic feature expressed by grammatical devices to be used linguistically depending
on pragmatic factors. So, the present study deals with indefiniteness syntactically, semantically and
pragmatically. These levels are related to each other and it is not easy to draw lines between them. The
study aims at (1)Pointing out how the concept of indefiniteness is expressed grammatically in English
and Arabic, and show the role of articles in expressing the concept.(2)Showing the syntactic, semantic
and pragmatic uses of the indefinite expression in English and Arabic.(3)Identifying the similarity and
difference between the two languages at the syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic levels which may help to
get a common core that contributes to the belief in the existence of language universals. The procedures
followed in this study include an introduction about the concept of indefiniteness, and a brief survey of
indefiniteness in thirty-one languages to show how this concept is expressed in them. Then, indefiniteness
in English and Arabic is dealt with at the syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic levels. This is followed by a
contrastive analysis to point out the similarities and differences between the two languages.
The study has come to the conclusion that, in English, the indefinite feature exists in the noun, not in the
article, and the article has a syntactic function rather than a semantic one. The study shows also that,
semantically, indefiniteness in English and Arabic is almost the same, and its function is internal to the
language system. Syntactically and pragmatically, indefiniteness in Arabic is more powerful and active
than it is in English. Syntactically, the indefinite item is obligatory in certain positions to perform
different functions. Pragmatically, the indefinite item acquires additional meaning from the context in
which it occurs.
Cite as: Taher, I. I. (2005). The Expression of Indefiniteness in English and Arabic: A Contrastive Study.
Department of English, University of Baghdad (Master Thesis). Retrieved from Arab World English Journal
(ID Number: 244. September 2019,1-155 . DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/th.244

Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

UNIVERSITY OF BAGHDAD

THE EXPRESSION OF INDEFINITENESS
IN
ENGLISH AND ARABIC:
A CONTRASTIVE STUDY

A THESIS
SUBMITTED TO THE COUNCIL OF THE
COLLEGE OF ARTS
UNIVERSITY OF BAGHDAD
IN PARTIAL FULFILMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS
FOR THE DEGREE OF
MASTER OF ARTS
IN ENGLISH LANGUAGE AND LINGUISTICS

BY
INAM ISMAEL TAHER
SUPERVISED BY
PROF. KADHIM HAIDAR AL - JAWADI, Ph.D.

JULY 2005 A.D.

JUMAADA AL-AAKHIRA 1426 A.H.

‫‪‬‬
‫أَفَهَىْ يَدَّبَّسُوا انْقَىْلَ أَوْ جَاءَهُىْ يَا نَىْ يَأْتِ آبَاءَهُىُ انْأَوَّنِنيَ‬

‫أَوْ نَىْ يَعْسِفُىا زَسُىنَهُىْ فَهُىْ نَهُ يُنْكِسُوٌَ‬
‫أَوْ يَقُىنُىٌَ بِهِ جِنَّةٌ بَمْ جَاءَهُىْ بِانْحَقِّ وَأَكْثَسُهُىْ نِهْحَقِّ كَازِهُىٌَ‬
‫وَنَىِ اتَّبَعَ انْحَقُّ أَهْىَاءَهُىْ نَفَسَدَتِ انسًََّاوَاتُ وَانْأَزْضُ وَيٍَْ فِيهٍَِّ‬
‫بَمْ أَتَيْنَاهُىْ بِرِكْسِهِىْ فَهُىْ عٍَْ ذِكْسِهِىْ يُعْسِضُىٌَ‬

‫‪‬‬
‫‪‬‬

‫سورة املؤمنون ( ‪17– 86‬‬

‫(‬

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
First of all I offer my praise and thanks to Almighty Allah,
Who has granted me success throughout my M.A. study and enabled
me to complete my present thesis.
Then I would like to express my deep gratitude and
appreciation, which go beyond words, to my supervisor Prof. Dr.
Kadhim Haidar al- Jawadi for suggesting the topic of this thesis, and
for his fatherly attention, sincere help and encouragement throughout
the preparation and writing of this thesis.
I am also greatly indebted to Prof. Dr. Abdullatif Al- Jumaily,
Head of the Department of English ,College of Arts , University of
Baghdad , for his scholarly guidance and sincere help , which he has
always been ready to offer when needed .
Words of thanks are also due to my dear brothers Aziz and
Tahir, Mr. Abdur-Razzaq Hasan, Mr. Ahmad Khalaf, and Mr.
Kareem Ja‘far for providing me with valuable books on which this
thesis depended heavily.
I am also grateful to the staff Members of the Library of the
Department of English, Mrs. Widad Salman (Um Ali) and Miss
Ma‘aani, for all their real efforts and friendly help. The staff
members of the Central Library of the University of Baghdad, the
Library of the College of Arts, the Central Library of alMustansiriyya University, and the Central Library in Ba‘quba have
also offered me real help and facilitated things for me; to them I
offer my sincere thanks.
Finally my love and gratitude are due to my family for their
patience, help, and encouragement.
ii

CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
………………………………… ii
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS……………………………………..vii
ABSTRACT………………………………………………………viii
CHAPTER
ONE:

INTRODUCTION ………………………………… 1
1.1 The Problem ..………………………………… 1
1.2 The Aims of the Study ..……………………... 2
1.3 The Hypothesis ..……………………………… 3
1.4 The Procedures ..……………………………… 3
1.5 The Value of the Study ..……………………… 4
1.6 The Limits of the Study..….…………………… 4

TWO:

THE CONCEPT OF INDEFINITENESS………….. 5
2.1 Introduction ..……………………………….. 5
2.2 Definitions of Indefiniteness ..………………… 8
2.3 Indefiniteness v. Definiteness..………………...10
2.4 The Need for Articles……………………. ….. 14
2.5 Indefiniteness as the Unmarked Feature..…….. 18
2.6 Sentence Structure..………………………… 20

THREE: INDEFINITENESS IN ENGLISH………………… 22
3.1 Indefiniteness at the Syntactic Level ..……… 22
3.1.1 The Classification of Nouns .………….. 23
3.1.2 Articles ..……………………………… 30
iii

3.1.3 The Syntactic Positions of the
Indefinite Noun phrase….………………32
3.2 Indefiniteness at the Semantic Level….………..35
3.2.1 The Uses of the Indefinite Noun...…..… 35
3.2.2 The Indefinite Article a/an and the
Numeral One ....………………………. 44
.3.2.3 Indefiniteness and Ambiguity....………...46
3.2.4 The Semantic Contrast between .
Indefiniteness and Definiteness….……...48
3.2.5 The Indefinite Noun in English
Proverbs...…………………………….. 54
3.3 Indefiniteness at the Pragmatic Level.......… …..55
3.3.1 The Pragmatic Contrast between
Indefiniteness and Definiteness…...……..56
3.3.2 The Co-operative Principle......…………..58
3.3.3 The Pragmatic Sets of Indefiniteness ........60
FOUR: INDEFINITENESS IN ARABIC …………………...63
4.1 Indefiniteness at the Syntactic Level….………..63
4.1.1 The Syntactic Definitions of the
Indefinite ‫لنكرة(اسن‬
‫)ا‬....………………….67
4.1.2 The Classification of Nouns.....……… ..68
4.1.2.1 The Indefiniteness of ‫علن‬
‫سن ال‬
‫ال‬
Proper Noun ...………………. ..70
4.1.3 Articles ..……………………………... 74
4.1.3.1 ‫تنوين‬
‫ال‬Nunation ...………………..74
4.1.3.2 The Definite Article ‫‘ أل‬the’ ...…..81
4.1.4 The Syntactic Positions of the
Indefinite‫…………………………اسن‬.…82
iv

4.2 Indefiniteness at the Semantic Level....…. .. … 91
4.2.1 The Uses of the Indefinite ‫اسم‬..…..…….. .91
4.2.2 Indefiniteness and Singularity..…..……..94
4.2.3 Indefiniteness and ‫العموم‬
Generalization……..…………………….96
4.2.4 Indefiniteness and Ambiguity.….………..97
4.2.5 The Semantic contrast between
Indefiniteness and Definiteness...………..98
4.2.6 The indefinite ‫ اسم‬in Proverbs and
Proverbial Sayings …..………………….. 100
4.3 Indefiniteness at the Pragmatic Level..……….101
4.3.1 The Pragmatic Meanings of the
Indefinite ‫…اسم‬.……………………… 104
FIVE:

CONTRASTIVE ANALYSIS….…………………..107
5.1 Indefiniteness at the Syntactic Level .….……..107
5.1.1 The Classification of Noun /‫ اسم‬.....……..108
5.1.2 Articles......……………………………...108
5.1.3 The Syntactic Positions of the
Indefinite Noun/‫…………………… اسم‬111
5.2 Indefiniteness at the Semantic Level.......……..113
5.2.1 The Uses of the Indefinite Noun /‫…اسم‬...113
5.2.2 The indefinite noun/ ‫ اسم‬and the Numeral
one ‫ واحد‬/ ‫ …………………………واحدة‬114
5.2.3 Indefiniteness and Ambiguity....……….114
5.2.4 The Semantic Contrast between
Indefiniteness and Definiteness...……...115
5.3 Indefiniteness at the Pragmatic Level ….…….123

v

SIX:

CONCLUSIONS, RECOMMENDATIONS, AND
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER STUDY…..…. .125
6.1 Conclusions .…..……………………………....125
6.2 Recommendations.…...…… ………………….127
6.3 Suggestions for Further study........……………128

APPENDIX………………………………………………………129
BIBLIOGRAPHY..………………………………………………144
ABSTRACT IN ARABIC

vi

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
Adj

Adjective

Det

Determiner

LV

Linking Verb

N

Noun

2OED

The Oxford English Dictionary 2nd edition 1989

TrV

Transitive Verb

UW

Uninflected Word

Webster III

Webster’s Third New International Dictionary of
the English Language

vii

ABSTRACT
Indefiniteness is a linguistic concept that exists in English and
Arabic. It indicates that the referent(s) is common and not
distinguishable from any member or part of the kind, so it is not
uniquely identified by the addressee.
The distinction between indefiniteness and definiteness is
essentially related to the addressee’s knowledge. The referent(s)
referred to by the indefinite item is unknown to the addressee but it
can be known or unknown to the speaker/writer. When the referent
is known to the speaker/writer, the specific indefinite item is used;
when it is unknown, the generic indefinite is used.
Thus, indefiniteness is a semantic feature expressed by
grammatical devices to be used linguistically depending on
pragmatic factors. So, the present study deals with indefiniteness
syntactically, semantically and pragmatically. These levels are
related to each other and it is not easy to draw lines between them.
Indefiniteness in English grammar books is treated mainly as a
syntactic category independently of the semantic and pragmatic
factors, which are highly involved in expressing the concept. The
concentration in grammar is on the articles, not the concept itself.
In Arabic, there is no such concentration, because Arabic,
unlike English, has no indefinite article. Indefiniteness is expressed
by the original form of the word, i.e. the absence of the definite
article, and the indefinite marker nunation, which is a controversial
marker. The present study considers nunation an indefinite marker
with different functions.
viii

The procedures followed in this study include an introduction
about the concept of indefiniteness, and a brief survey of
indefiniteness in thirty-one languages to show how this concept is
expressed in them. Then, indefiniteness in English and Arabic is
dealt with at the syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic levels. This is
followed by a contrastive analysis to point out the similarities and
differences between the two languages.
The study has come to the conclusion that, in English, the
indefinite feature exists in the noun, not in the article, and the article
has a syntactic function rather than a semantic one. The study shows
also that, semantically, indefiniteness in English and Arabic is
almost the same, and its function is internal to the language system.
Syntactically and pragmatically, indefiniteness in Arabic is more
powerful and active than it is in English. Syntactically, the indefinite
item is obligatory in certain positions to perform different functions.
Pragmatically, the indefinite item acquires additional meaning from
the context in which it occurs.

ix

TO
My Family
with My
Love and Gratitude

CHAPTER ONE
INTRODUCTION
1.1 The Problem
Indefiniteness is a linguistic term used in grammar, semantics,
and pragmatics. It refers to an entity or class of entities which is not
capable of specific and unique identification. It indicates that the
referent of an expression is not presumed to be uniquely identifiable
by the addressee because of a lack of shared knowledge or situation
or because there is no previous mention of the referent.
English and Arabic grammarians agree that indefiniteness is
the unmarked term in the system of language because it is
considered the basis and the origin of all things. Definiteness, on the
other hand, is considered secondary to indefiniteness.
In English, indefiniteness is expressed grammatically by the
use of the indefinite article a/an with the singular count nouns, and
zero article or the unstressed some with the plural and non-count
nouns. In Arabic, it is expressed by the absence of the definite article

‫التعريف‬
‫‘ أ ل‬the’ and the indefinite marker nunation ‫نفيي‬
‫الت‬
, which
is used with count, non-count, and proper nouns, with certain
exceptions, to perform different functions.
Languages are different in their rules and structures; so they
are different in how they organize their thematic structure. There is a
1

2

tendency in most languages, including English and Arabic, to place
the given information, which is definite, at the beginning of the
sentence, and the new information, which is indefinite, at the end.
Certain devices are used in both languages to keep the sentence
grammatical

and

acceptable

such

as:

existential

there,

transformation, extrapolation, etc.
The indefinite and definite terms have generic and specific
uses and the selection of the proper term depends on syntactic,
semantic, and pragmatic considerations. English and Arabic
grammarians try to find syntactic rules for the use of the indefinite
term irrespective of the semantic and pragmatic factors. In the
present study, indefiniteness will be treated at the syntactic,
semantic, and pragmatic levels.
Indefiniteness is not a specific notion, and the distinction
between indefiniteness and definiteness is not easy to understand.
The many linguistic and extralinguistic contextual variables, which
operate, should be taken into consideration. The distinction can be
captured in pragmatic terms.
There is no one -to –one relation between English and Arabic;
so areas where the two languages differ are expected to constitute
problems to the non- native speaker concerning indefiniteness.

1.2 The Aims of the Study
The study aims to:
1. Point out how the concept of indefiniteness is expressed
grammatically in English and Arabic, and show the role of
articles in expressing the concept.

3

2. Show the syntactic, semantic and pragmatic uses of the
indefinite expression in English and Arabic.
3. Identify the similarity and difference between the two
languages at the syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic levels
which may help to get a common core that contributes to the
belief in the existence of language universals.

1.3 The Hypotheses
In order to give a comprehensive view about indefiniteness in
English and Arabic, it will be treated at the syntactic, semantic, and
pragmatic levels. Accordingly, the following hypotheses will be
considered:
1. The indefinite feature exists in the noun itself not in the article
so the article in English is considered a grammatical device not
a semantic one.
2. Indefiniteness in Arabic is more active and powerful
syntactically and pragmatically than it is in English.

1.4

The Procedures
1. Giving an idea about the concept of indefiniteness and how it
is expressed in different languages.
2. Showing indefiniteness in English at the syntactic, semantic,
and pragmatic levels.
3. Showing indefiniteness in Arabic at the syntactic, semantic
and pragmatic levels.

4

4. Carrying out a contrastive analysis to show the similarity and
difference

between

the

two

languages

concerning

indefiniteness.
5. Drawing conclusions from the results of the study.

1.5 The Value of the Study
The contrastive analysis that will be done in this study may be
useful for the belief of some linguists in the existence of language
universals. This study may be useful also for pedagogical purposes.
The findings and results of the study may help us predict difficulties
that non- native speakers encounter concerning indefiniteness.

1.6 The Limits of the Study
The study will be limited to Standard English and Standard
Arabic.

CHAPTER TWO
THE CONCEPT OF INDEFINITENESS
This chapter presents an introduction about how indefiniteness
is expressed in different languages. It contains also the definitions of
the concept, indefiniteness v. definiteness, the need for articles,
indefiniteness as the unmarked feature and sentence structure as far
as indefiniteness is concerned.

2.1 Introduction
Concepts such as negation, question, indefiniteness and
definiteness etc. are expressed linguistically by grammatical devices,
that is to say these concepts are transferred from theory to practice
through grammatical devices.
The concern of the present study is the concept of
indefiniteness. To see how this concept is expressed in different
languages, which may help us to comprehend the concept, a brief
survey of thirty-one languages from different families is made.1 It is
found that some languages have article system and others do not,
and those that do are different from each other in their article system.

1

The web site WIKIPEDIA provides a wide range of information about languages, including grammar
and semantics, (http:/en.wikipedia.org/wiki). Webster’s Third Dictionary (1976) also provides the
grammar of seven languages which are: English, French, German, Italian, Spanish, Russian, and
Japanese.

5

6

Some languages have indefinite and definite articles. Others
have only a definite article, and the absence of this article indicates
indefiniteness. The difference is also in the position of the article and
whether it is a separate word or an affix.
Languages which have no article system employ other devices
to express indefiniteness and definiteness such as word order,
intonation, demonstratives, numeral one, the form of words and the
context.
It is to be mentioned here that the survey includes in addition
to natural languages two different languages: an artificial language
called The Master Language, and American Sign Language (ASL).
According to the survey, the examined languages are classified
as follows:
I. Languages which have an article system:
(a) Languages which have both indefinite and definite articles are:
English, French, German, Swedish, Danish, Romanian, Dutch,
Italian, Spanish, and The Master Language.
(b) Languages which have one article (the definite article) are:
Arabic, Greek, Galician, Bulgarian, Soddo, Welsh, and
Mekheal .
II. Languages which have no article system are:
Latin, Japanese, Chinese, Turkish, Czech, Finnish, Russian,
Hindi, Slovene, Rotuman, Tamil, Acatec, Garifuna, and
American Sign Language (ASL).
These Languages are different in expressing the concept of
indefiniteness and definiteness (see the Appendix).

7

Out of the survey, the following points come out, which need
special attention:
1. The choice of the proper noun phrase, whether indefinite or
definite, depends on linguistic, situational, and cultural context in
addition to the man’s knowledge of the world, i.e.the
environment in which the noun phrase occurs determines the
choice of the noun phrase.
1. The indefinite and definite articles in most languages, which have
an article system, have the function of the numeral one and the
demonstrative that respectively. In some languages which have
no article system the numeral one and the demonstrative that
function as indefinite and definite articles respectively. This point
emphasizes the historical origin of the indefinite and definite
articles in English. The former is derived from the numeral
one,and the latter from the demonstrative that (Strang1970: 272 ;
Halliday & Hassan 1976/1987 :70).
2. None of the examined languages has only an indefinite article.
This point may emphasize the fact that nouns are inherently
indefinite, and that indefiniteness is the unmarked feature in the
system of language.
3. The gender of the noun affects the form of the article in some
languages i.e. the article agrees with the gender of the noun in
some languages that have grammatical gender.
4. In some languages, the indefinite and definite determiners can be
used together in the same noun phrase. In others, two definite
determiners can be used in the same noun phrase.

8

5. The physical linguistic manifestation that exists in the surface
structure of a language cannot be considered a ground to make
comparison between languages because there is no one –to –one
relation between them. So, the further one abstracts from the
physical aspect of language towards its conceptual content, the
nearer one gets to a common core of linguistic universal ( Leech
1974/1978 : 232).
2.2 Definitions of Indefiniteness
Indefiniteness as a general term is always associated with
vagueness and considered as a synonym to it (2OED s.v.
indefiniteness ; Webster’s III s.v. indefiniteness). In fact, the
indefinite noun may be considered as non-specific rather than vague
because there is a distinction between vagueness and lack of
specificity ( Alston 1964:84-85).
In grammar books and linguistics, there is no precise and
comprehensive definition for indefiniteness. The concentration is on
the article rather than the concept itself. However, Crystal (1997 s.v.
Indefinite(ness)) defines it as “a term used in Grammar and
Semantics to refer to an entity (or class of entities) which is not
capable of specific identification.”Definiteness, on the other hand, is
used “to refer to a specific identifiable entity (or class of
entities)”(ibid. s.v. definite (ness)). It seems that these definitions are
inadequate, partly because they do not give a semantic explanation
for the concept, and partly because they ignore the pragmatic factors
which are highly involved in expressing the concept.

9

Arabic grammarians define the indefinite ‫اسم‬in different ways.
Here are some of them. ‫ هم ( ابنالسراج‬316 ‫[ ت‬1973:1/175]) defines it
as follows :

‫كم اسم م ان ممنز ام ها زرم و إمراسم ّو ام سمنا و إمرا من ا م اوم‬

‫ تعرف به ماحداًبعم ه اذا ذكر‬i.e ‘The ‫ اس‬is said to be ‫‘ وإمرا‬indefinite’, if
it applies to more than one entity. It is called ‫‘ وإممرا‬indefinite’,
because when the indefinite ‫اسم‬is mentioned the addressee cannot
identify with it a specific entity.’
‫بن يعمش‬
‫ ه ( ا‬643 ‫ ت‬: 5/85) defines ‫‘ ال إرا‬the indefinite ‫ ’اس‬from
a semantic and pragmatic point of view ; he says :
‫س يت مل غمره‬
‫هم عرمف لمه م‬
‫رجل ملم بسلان‬
‫اوم زم طلمب غلم‬

‫ مال ارا بل اعرزة خص ماحداً ن الج‬- ‫ال إراب اع ى ال ا إ ر‬
‫اذقمديمركر ال امت إل م‬. ‫مذل تعلقب اعرزة ال اخ طَب من الات إل‬
‫فمه زم ار‬
‫يعرزه ال اخ طًب زم إ ن إ راً كقم ل القلم ل امنيخ ط‬
ً
‫فست ن مقد يعرزمه ال امت إل اي ًم وو ق لم‬
‫م ه يعرف الر م ال‬
.‫شتريه ام داراكترير م ي إ ن قصده الىش ءبعم ه‬
‫ا‬

Paraphrase in English (without the examples):
The indefinite ‫ اسم‬means that the referent is unknown to the
addressee, but it can be known or unknown to the speaker. The
definite ‫ اسم‬, on the other hand, is related to one specific entity
which is known to the addressee and the speaker/writer
.

‫ھ( ألوصم ر‬761 ‫[ ت‬1977:1/292]) defines it as follows : ‫ال إمرا م‬
ً ‫مضع خص‬

‫مال اعرزة‬

‫ مضعشلع ًوو ر‬i.e.‘ The indefinite ‫ اس‬applies

to common things and the definite applies to specific things.’
‫و‬

‫ ھ (الجر‬816 ‫ھ[ ت‬1405: 316‫س‬185 ] ) says

‫ال إرا م مضمع ل م‬

‫تمه عرزمة شم ء خمر‬
‫تلمع عرز‬
‫تسم‬
‫ذكمر شم ء‬
‫… التعريف ف را ن‬
i.e. ‘The indefinite

‫بعم ه كر‬

‫ اسممم‬refers to a non-specific thing as a

man…definiteness is mentioning a thing the knowledge of which
requires prior knowledge of something else.’

10

From the above definitions, one concludes that the indefinite
noun / ‫اسم‬refers to a common entity which is not understood by the
addressee to be the only thing, group, or quantity of the kind in
existence in general, or in the relevant situation in particular. The
definite, on the other hand, means that the referent is uniquely
identified by the addressee.
The identifiability criterion is not controlled by certain rules.
The referent is said to be identifiable if it is visible in the situation,
mentioned previously, recoverable from the context, or based on
general knowledge of the speaker/writer and the addressee. In brief,
it exists uniquely in the shared knowledge.

2.3 Indefiniteness v. Definiteness
The contrast between indefiniteness and definiteness is not a
binary taxonomy; the relation between them is rather one of
hyponomy (Leech 1974/1978:167-168).2 Thus, the formula ‘a man’
(- definite) and ‘the man’ (+ definite), which is used by some
grammarians, is incompatible. This can be seen from the relation of
entailment in the following example:
2.1 I saw the queen today.
entails
2.2

I saw a queen today
(ibid.)

So, the queen is a queen, and, according to the componential
2 Leech (ibid.102) defines the term hyponymy as “the inclusion of one meaning in another” and
incompatibility as “the exclusion of one meaning from another.”

11

analysis, the queen includes the features of a queen plus the definite
feature. The phrase a queen, in another respect, includes the queen in
the sense that the general term includes the meaning of the specific
one (ibid. 101).
According to meaning inclusion, it can be said that the definite
term has the features of the general term which in turn has the
features of the more general one and so on. Thus, the indefiniteness
of a noun is a matter of degree, the larger the set is, the more
indefinite its member will be. For example, the queen is a queen and
she is a woman, a human being, a creature, and a living being. It can
be seen that a creature, for example, is more indefinite than a queen.
From this ground it can be said that the feature of
indefiniteness and definiteness belongs to the theory of reference
(ibid.). The indefinite noun refers to a common and non-unique
entity and the definite noun refers to a unique entity in the relevant
situation.
Since nouns in general refer to common objects in the world,
they are inherently indefinite. Then, when an object becomes
uniquely identified in the mind of the speaker/writer and the
addressee, or when it is given a name, it becomes definite.
Compare the following entries of the words god, man, and sun
in the Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary (2000):
god 1 (God) [sing.]… the being or spirit that is worshipped and is believed
to have created the universe… 2 [c]…a being or spirit who is believed to
have power over a particular part of nature …
man [c] an adult human being …

12

sun (the sun, the Sun) [sing.] the star that shines in the sky
during the day and gives the earth heat and light
.

It can be seen that god

(1)

and sun are introduced by the definite

noun phrases the being and the star respectively .The former
indicates the uniqueness of God , and the latter refers to the unique
entity that shines on this earth . The words god

(2)

and man are

introduced by the indefinite noun phrases a being and an adult
respectively because they are common nouns. They can be classified

into indefinite and definite according to the context.
The ‫اسم‬/noun can be classified into indefinite and definite in
the sentence not in isolation ( ‫ھ آل مد‬631 ‫[ ت‬1914:1/35]) because
the feature of indefiniteness and definiteness belongs to the theory of
reference, and the distinction between them is essentially related to
the knowledge of the speaker/writer and the addressee. Thus, the
proper nouns and personal pronouns are considered definite because
they refer to definite persons or things which are supposed to be
known to the speaker/writer and the addressee and they are unique in
the relevant situation.
Accordingly, the noun can be classified into indefinite and
definite syntactically and semantically. These levels are related to
each other and they cannot operate independently of context and
general knowledge .The speaker/writer generates a linguistic
utterance by matching the conceptual meaning with the right
syntactic structure of his language. The addressee, on the other hand,
understands the utterance by matching the syntactic structure with
the conceptual meaning (Leech 1974/1978:13). The article has no

13

conceptual meaning; so it has no semantic function, it does not add
meaning , but it is an indicator after the noun has already been made
indefinite or definite by the speaker/writer through the context. Yet,
some grammarians consider, for example, a lion and the lion
indefinite and definite respectively because the former is preceded
by the indefinite article and the latter by the definite article. They
pass their judgement independently of context and give the
impression that the article carries the feature of indefiniteness or
definiteness not the noun.
Consider the following examples:
2.3

I saw a lion and an elephant in the zoo yesterday and the
lion tried to attack me.
2.4 The lion is a dangerous animal.
The indefinite noun phrase a lion in (3) is grammatically indefinite
but it refers to a specific lion in the mind of the speaker but it is
unknown to the addressee. When the object becomes contextually
definite to the addressee, and when it becomes the only thing in the
relevant situation that is talked about, the definite noun is used .The
definite noun phrase the lion in (4)is grammatically definite but it
does not refer to a specific lion in the mind of the speaker/writer and
the addressee . The indefinite noun phrase can be indefinite in form
and reference as in:
2.5 A lion is a dangerous animal.

14

The indefinite noun a lion refers to any arbitrary lion for the
speaker/writer and the addressee. It seems that the terms indefinite
and definite are not always proper ones for classifying these nouns.

2.4

The Need for Articles
Consider the following example:

2.6 *I meet man and woman yesterday and man tried to help
me.
This sentence can be understood without articles depending on the
lexical meaning of the words and the pragmatic factors. Sentences
analogous to this sentence can be normal and grammatical in some
languages that have no article system.
Since English has an article system to mark the indefiniteness
and definiteness of nouns and form part of the structural meaning of
the sentence ( Fries 1977:56), the articles are used as follows :
2.7 I met a man and a woman yesterday and the man tried to
help me .
It is obvious that a man and the man refer to the same entity and the
man is a man. Now, when it becomes definite, a man requires an
extra article which is the definite article the. As a result, a conflict
will ensue between the two articles, the indefinite and the definite, as
it is explained below:

15

2.8. I met a man and a woman yesterday and the (a) man
tried to help me.
In such a case, the original article used with the noun is dropped i.e.
the indefinite article

‫بممن م‬
‫ھ ا‬392 ‫[ ت‬1956:3/62] ; Jespersen

1949/1954:VII:468):
2.7

I met a man and a woman yesterday and the man

tried to help me .
Quirk et al. (1985/1987:255) say that the articles have no
lexical meaning nor function independently of the noun they
precede. They are used solely to give grammatical status to the
following noun which needs this status. Yet, the articles are
considered separate words. Hall (1960:98-99) thinks that they are
considered separate words because English grammars use writing
not language as their point of departure. He suggests that the articles
should be counted as bound forms like prefixes and suffixes . For
example, the indefinite article a/an and the suffix –s in the following
nouns have the same grammatical role:
a book , books
The indefinite article a is used with the singular count noun to
individualize the object book , so it indicates singularity , whereas
the suffix –s is used to indicate plurality . The historical origin of the
indefinite article in English may support this view ( Strang
1970/1974 :272). Thus, the indefinite article is used with the singular
count noun to perform an obligatory syntactic function. It is used to

16

pick out one of a potentially infinite number of the object in
question. Compare:
2.9 *I bought book.
2.10 I bought a book .
2.11 I bought the book .
The noun book in (9) has only a lexical meaning. It does not refer to
anything, whereas a book in (10) refers to the object as an
individual, and it is indefinite because it is the first mention of the
referent. When the object becomes definite to the addressee the
definite the book is used as in (11).
This grammatical classification into indefinite and definite is
categoric. It does not apply only to nouns that accept determiners,
but it includes the whole class of nouns . The types of noun that do
not always take a determiner can also be classified into indefinite
and definite. John for example is definite, whereas kindness is
indefinite (Blomfield 1933/1963:204). It is obvious that the
indefiniteness of kindness and the definiteness of John are not
expressed formally, i.e. they are expressed without articles. So, they
are similar in terms of article use. Some grammarians try to
distinguish between these nouns by giving different labels
concerning the article. Quirk et al. (1985/1987:246) and Palmer &
Blandford (1969:56-62n)3almost share the same view in this respect.

3

Palmer & Blandford say that there are two articles in English, indefinite and definite .When the
indefinite article is used with plural and non-count nouns , it is alogistic, i.e. not represented by any
word . It is equivalent to zero article .

17

They distinguish between zero article and no article. Quirk et al.
introduce the following:
2.12 I like music .
2.13 I think the music is too loud in here .
2.14 I like Sid.
The noun music in the first example has zero article because it
means music in general, whereas Sid in the last example has no
article because it is a proper noun.
Dik (1978/1979:61-62) has another view which is more
general because it includes languages which have an article system
and languages which do not. He says that terms can be indefinitised
or definitised by means of the indefinite or definite operator
respectively .The operator exists in the underlying structure of the
term , and it is expressed in different ways depending on the type of
the noun and the structure of the language in question. Thus,
indefiniteness and definiteness can be expressed with or without
articles. In English, for example, the operator in some nouns is
expressed by a marker, whereas in others, such as proper nouns ,the
operator is present in the underlying structure of the noun. In
languages which have no article system, the operator is expressed by
other ways. In Latin and Finnish, for example, the operator is
expressed by the constituent order differences. Consider the
following example from Finnish (Ihalainen1980: 59):

18

2.15 a Kirja on pöydälä.
b The book is on the table.
2.16 a Pöydälä on kirja.
b There is a book on the table .
It can be noticed that articles are not a prerequisite for
expressing indefiniteness. It can be expressed in one way or another
It is a matter of fact that the speaker of any language which has no
article system never misses the article because its use has not
become conventional with him (Pyles 1964/1971: 10).
Bloomfield (1933/1963:203) believes that the use of
determiners with nouns is a habit; he says :
This habit of using certain noun expressions always with a
determiner is peculiar to some languages, such as the modern
Germanic and Romance. Many languages have not this habit; in
Latin, for instance, domus ‘house’ requires no attribute and is
used indifferently where we say the house or a house.

As a conclusion it can be said that articles are only needed for
structural and grammatical purposes not semantic ones .The noun
itself carries the feature of indefiniteness or definiteness in the deep
structure, and the article is introduced in the intermediate syntactic
structure (Postal 1966; cited in Master 1987: 167).

2.5 Indefiniteness as the Unmarked Feature
The originality of indefiniteness may be considered as a reason
for being the unmarked term in the system of language. The other
reason is that it is more general and common than definiteness.

19

‫ھ(السمم ط‬911 ‫( ب [ ت‬:71])says that indefiniteness is the origin
of things because it is the first to arise in the mind. Harris
(1751/1968:251; cited in Brown & Yule 1983/1987: 170) refers to
the primary perception of the indefinite article and the secondary
perception of the definite one. It is better to use the indefinite noun
instead of the indefinite article in this statement because the feature
of indefiniteness exists in the noun not in the article.
Quirk et al. (1972:128) say that the indefinite term is
considered the unmarked term in the system because “it is natural to
consider indefiniteness as being basic to definiteness.”
Leech (1974/1978:168,190) explains the unmarkedness of the
indefinite term according to the normal rules of componential
analysis. He suggests that the definite feature is marked by a single
symbol and the absence of this symbol marks indefiniteness. In
English, for example, the definite feature is marked grammatically
by the definite article the in a noun phrase and it is also present in
the meaning of the proper nouns and the personal pronouns. The
absence of the definite feature marks indefiniteness, which is marked
grammatically by a/an or zero article in the noun phrase .The noun
phrases a butcher and the woman, for example, according to Leech’s
theory have the following features:
[+Human]
a butcher

[+Adult]
[+Male]

20

[+Definite]
the woman

[+Human]
[+Adult]
[-Male]

2.6 Sentence Structure
It is important to show the structure of the sentence as far as
indefiniteness is concerned. The structure of the sentence can be
divided semantically and grammatically. Semantically, it is divided
into theme and rheme,or what is called in other schools of linguistics
topic and comment .The theme represents what is talked about, and
the rheme what is said about the theme .
The

distinction

given/new

is

used

sometimes

for

topic/comment and theme/rheme distinction. The theme contains
given or shared information and it can be identified with the subject
in the unmarked pattern .The rheme , on the other hand, gives extra
meaning and new information which adds most to the advancing
communication process(Crystal 1997/1998, s.v. theme and rheme).
The difference between theme / rheme and given/new is that the
former is defined linguistically, whereas the latter is established
contextually (Quirk et al. (1985/1987: 1362]).In terms of indefinite
and definite , the theme should be definite and the rheme indefinite .
In logic, propositions, which are normally explained in terms
of predication, may be true or false (‫يعممش‬
‫ھابمن‬643 ‫ ت‬:1/ 87) and
(Palmer1981:198).Each proposition is analysed in terms of predicate
and arguments. Leech (1974/1978: 167]) believes that the feature of
indefiniteness and definiteness belongs to the theory of reference

21

rather than to the theory of truth and falsehood. He considers the
terms predicate and argument logico-semantic units and the
predicate in this sense has nothing to do with the predicate of
traditional grammar.
Indefiniteness on the semantic level belongs to arguments not
to predicates or predications as a whole. When the noun phrase
expresses a whole predication, the use of the definite article becomes
vacuous because there is no concept of definiteness to be expressed.
So, the following examples are in free variation (ibid. :128,190):
2.17 Robbery of old people is a heinous crime.
2.18 The robbery of old people is a heinous crime .
The structure of the sentence is divided grammatically into
subject and predicate .The subject should be definite and known to
the addressee. The predicate, on the other hand, should be indefinite
and unknown to the addressee, and should contain new information.

CHAPTER THREE
INDEFINITENESS IN ENGLISH
This chapter deals with indefiniteness in English at the
syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic levels.

3.1 Indefiniteness at the Syntactic Level
The parts of speech in English are classified traditionally into
noun, pronoun, adjective, verb, preposition, conjunction, adverb, and
interjection (Palmer 1984/1985: 55).
Indefiniteness is a characteristic of nouns. All nouns in the
context are either indefinite or definite in meaning, but they are
different in expressing the concept grammatically. Proper nouns, for
example, are self- determining, i.e.they do not need a separate word
to express their definiteness. Common nouns, on the other hand,
need a separate word with a determinative function to express the
concept; i.e. they need a determiner (Quirk et al. 1985/1987: 64).
There

are

three

kinds

of

determiners

in

English:

predeterminers, central determiners, and postdeterminers. The
concern of this study is central determiners. They include the articles
(a/an, the), demonstratives (this, that, etc.), quantifiers (some, any,
every, each, etc.) and wh-determiners (what )ever( ), who )ever( ,
etc.)

22

23

Indefiniteness is expressed by the indefinite article (a/an) with
the singular count noun, and the zero article or the unstressed some
with the plural and non-count-nouns. Indefiniteness with added
meaning of amount can be expressed by indefinite determiners like
some, most, any, etc. (Leech & Svartvic 1994/1996: 45-51).
Definiteness is mainly expressed by the definite article the. It
can be expressed by other determiners like the demonstratives (that,
this, etc.) and the possessives (my, his, etc.).

3.1.1 The Classification of Nouns
Nouns are divided for syntactic and semantic reasons into
proper and common nouns. A proper noun refers to a unique entity
which cannot be further specified. Yet, it behaves as a common noun
when there is more than one entity referred to by the same proper
noun as in :
3.1 The Dr. Brown I know comes from Australia.
3.2 The flower arrangement was done by a Miss Phillips in
Park Road .
(Quirk et al. 1985/1987: 290)

A common noun, on the other hand, refers to a general object.
It is of two types, count and non-count nouns. Count nouns have
singular and plural forms, whereas non-count nouns have one form
and refer to continuous entities which have no natural bounds. They
are either concrete such as milk, sand, and water, or abstract such as
kindness, strength and information. The term mass noun is used

24

sometimes for non-count noun in general and sometimes for
concrete noun only.
In fact, common nouns are not inherently count and non-count,
but they are used countably and non-countably (Jacobs 1995:107). It
can be seen that some count nouns can be used uncountably and
non-count nouns can be used countably in one way or another.
3.3 You have got some egg on your shirt .
3.4 She needs a piece of paper .
3.5

Two more coffee, please (=cups of coffee)

Furthermore, there is a number of nouns that can be both count and
non-count nouns as in the following examples :
3.6 We went for a walk in the woods.
3.7 There are a lot of houses made of wood.
Determiners are used with count and non-count nouns
differently. The indefinite article a/an is used with the singular count
noun, as in :
3.8 She has a book.
3.9 A child needs plenty of love.
It is used with plural count nouns in certain exceptions (Quirk
et al.1985/1987:758n. (b)), as in:
a happy three months and a good many friends.

25

Jespersen (1949/1954: 431) considers the use of a many “an
archaism or provincialism”, as in:
3.10 They have not shed a many tears. (Tennyson)
The structure many a is used with singular count noun to indicate
plurality (Quirk et al 1985/1987: 263), as in:
Many a good student
which means :
Many good students
The indefinite article can be used with the non-count nouns
when the noun is premodified or postmodified (ibid.:287). Consider
the following examples:
3.11 She played the oboe with (a) charming sensitivity.
3.12 She played the oboe with a sensitivity that delighted the
critics.
The acceptability of the indefinite article depends on the
amount of modification (ibid.). The modified noun sometimes refers
to a quality of a person or a thing, and the modification is either
expressed or implied (ibid. 252 n.), as in:
3.13 She has a good education.
3.14 She has an education (a good education).

26

The stressed some is used with the singular count noun to
denote an unspecified or unkown person or thing, as in:
3.15 Some old philosopher once said that you should
know something of everything and everything of
something.
(Jespersen 1933/1976:180)

It can be strengthened with or other to emphasize the indefinite or
unknown feature of the referent.
3.16 Some one (or other) must have touched my paper
since I went out .
(ibid.)

Strongly stressed some occurs with certain singular noun,
especially temporal nouns (Quirk et al. 1985/1987:257 n.(a), 384), as:
3.17 Some day, I’ll tell you a great secret .[one day]
Christophersen (1939; cited in Jespersen 1949/1954:VII:609)
distinguishes between a and some; he says :
Some competes with a in certain of its uses. It is neither
individualizing nor generic; we cannot say, “once upon a time
there was some king who had some daughter,” or “some cat has
nine lives.” some emphasizes the total indefiniteness of the notion.

27

Compare the following examples:
3.18 I have read it in a book .
3.19 I have read it in some book .
In (18) the speaker may still remember which book he has read,
whereas in (19) the speaker probably cannot remember the title of
the book (ibid.).
The unstressed some and zero article are used with plural
count nouns and non-count nouns to express indefiniteness, as in:
3.20 I want some rolls / bread , please .
3.21 I’ve always preferred coffee to tea.
The unstressed some and zero article are exchangeable in
certain contexts and not in others (Quirk et al.1985/1987 : 274-275).
Consider the following examples:
3.22 Would you like (some) coffee or (some) tea ?
3.23 I’ve been writing (some) letters this morning.
3.24 We have just received (some)news from Moscow.
3.25 They have become vegetarians.
3.26 * They have become some vegetarians.
It can be noticed that zero article has a categorical meaning, so
it is used in the generic sense, whereas some has a quantitative
meaning, so it is used in the specific sense. The choice between them

28

is a matter of focus (ibid.).
Swan (1995/2003:61) has almost the same view. He says that
some is used when the speaker/writer is thinking about limited but
indefinite numbers or quantities, whereas no article, which he uses
instead of zero article, is used when the speaker/writer is thinking
about unlimited numbers or quantities, or not thinking about them at
all.
It is to be mentioned that although that the unstressed some is
sometimes considered a plural article, it keeps its quantifying
function. It refers to a specifiable but indefinite number or quantity
(Quirk et al. 1985/1987: 275). It is proper to consider it an indefinite
article instead of a plural article since it is used with count and noncount nouns.
The definite article the is used with count and non-count
nouns. It occurs with both of them in the specific use, as in:
3.27 Where do you want me to put the chair/ the chairs /
the furniture?
and only with the singular noun in the generic one as in:
3.28 Mary plays the harp very well.
The definite article can be used with nationality nouns as in:
the English, and with an adjective referring to a group of people as
in: the blind. It cannot be used with the plural and non-count nouns
for generic reference (ibid.:283 ; Swan1995/2003:62-63).

29

Consider the following examples:
3.29 * The wolves are carnivorous.
3.30

Wolves are carnivorous.

3.31 *The hydrogen is lighter than the oxygen.
3.32 Hydrogen is lighter than the oxygen.
(Quirk et al :283)

Swan thinks that the definite article the does not mean all, so it
cannot be used to talk about things in general. Hawkins (1978)
disagrees with this view. He considers such sentences as (29) and
(30) grammatical and he distinguishes between them (see 3.2.4).
The last point to be mentioned is that count nouns can occur
without a determiner in two cases (Quirk et al. 1985/1987: 255n.(a)):
1. In parallel structure, as in:
3.33 Man or boy, I don't like him.
2. In the vocatives, as in:
3.34 Look here, man!
It is to be mentioned that man is used generically without the
article when it means ‘the human race’ rather than ‘a male human
being’, and in this sense, its synonym is mankind (ibid.282n.)
3.35 This book is an attempt to trace the history of man.

30

3.1.2 Articles
English grammarians from Harris (1751/1968) to Crystal
(1997/1998) concentrate on the indefinite and definite articles as
prototypes of indefiniteness and definiteness respectively. It is said
previously that these articles, unlike other determiners, have no
function independently of the noun that follows them. They have no
lexical meaning by themselves but they acquire their meaning from
the following noun and the context in which the noun occurs.
Yet, grammarians give different labels to the articles. Fries
(1952/1977:182) describes the indefinite article as general, and the
definite as specific. Palmer & Blandford (1969:58) say that the
indefinite article is either a specific and introductory article used to
single out the idea expressed by the noun and make the addressee
expect further information about it, or absolute article with the
purely indefinite sense of any. Halliday & Hasan (1976/1987: 70)
say that the indefinite article is a non-specific determiner, whereas
the definite is a specific one. The proper name for a/an is the
individualizing article because it is mainly used to individualize the
object in question, whether it is specific or non-specific
Hartmann & Stork (1973 s.v. article) define the word article
as ‘an adjunct to a noun to modify or limit its meaning’. So, it is
considered by traditional grammarians as an adjective because it
adds meaning to the following noun and limits its application. It is
treated today as a determiner (Palmer1984/1985: 59). The indefinite
article a/an or its equivalents in other languages is considered an
individualizing adjective and it is said to be indefinite because it is
applied to nouns “taken in their more general and confused

31

signification”(2OED s.v. indefinite).
Structuralists, owing to their concentration on form rather than
meaning, consider the articles as noun-determiners and they are
grouped under function words (Fries 1952/1977: 88). They believe
that the structural meaning of a sentence is understood by the use of
formal devices like articles. For example, Fries’s sentence ship sails
today is ambiguous because it lacks a noun determiner to decide
whether ship and sails are nouns or verbs (ibid.:146). It is to be
noted that the ambiguity of this sentence does not only arise because
of the absence of the articles, but also because it is cited in isolation
independently of context and prosodic features like intonation.
Transformational
grammatical

and

grammarians

conceptual

distinguish

structures.

between

Chomsky

the

(1965)

distinguishes between the surface structure, what is actually uttered,
and the deep structure, what is present in the mind. He puts the
determiner (article) in the deep structure and gives it the indefinite
and definite features. Postal (1966; cited in Master 1987:167) is not
satisfied with this vague transference of features from the noun to
the article. He infers that the noun itself carries the feature in the
deep structure and the article is introduced as a segment in the
intermediate syntactic structure.
The interest of English grammar books is to show the
grammatical indefiniteness, by using the articles, separately from the
meaning of words and the context. This separation leads to the
incompatibility of the rules of grammar with the meaning and use of
words and leads consequently to ungrammatical structures (Hawkins
1978: 237-38). Compare the following structures:

32

a pretty girl
the pretty girl

* a prettiest girl
the prettiest girl

These noun phrases have the same syntactic structure (Det + Adj+
N).Yet, for a semantic reason, a prettiest girl is ungrammatical. This
ungrammaticality arises because of the semantic incompatibility
between indefiniteness and the superlative. Thus, the choice of the
article depends on the other elements in the noun phrase in addition
to the whole context.
Indefiniteness in English is associated with the indefinite
article a/an, which is used with the singular count noun. Some
grammarians try to show the grammatical indefiniteness of plural
and non-count nouns. Palmer & Blandford (1969: 57) believe that
when the indefinite article is used with plural and non-count nouns,
it is alogistic, i.e. not represented by any word, which is equivalent
to the zero article. Quirk et al.(1985/1987:65.n) say that “the
apparent absence of an article signals the presence of the zero
article.” Crystal(1997/1998 s.v. zero) says that zero article refers to
the absence of an indefinite or definite article before a noun .

3.1.3 The Syntactic Position of the Indefinite Noun Phrase
The structure of the sentence is divided grammatically into
subject and predicate. The subject is supposed to be known and
definite to the addressee, and the predicate unknown and indefinite
because it gives new information about the subject. This statement
emphasizes the fact that the verb is an indefinite element (see 4.1.4).

33

Stageberg (1971: 169-90) gives nine basic patterns for the
English sentence. The following ones are chosen to explain the
syntactic positions of the indefinite and definite nouns:
1.

N1 be N1

3.36 My brother is a teacher.
2.

N1 LV N1

3.37 My brother became a teacher.
3.

N be UW

3.38 The doctor is here.
4.

N1 TrV N2

3.39 The girl bought a dress.
5.

N1 TrV N2 N3

3.40 The woman bought her daughter a dress.
The noun phrase that occupies the subject position in these
patterns is either specific or generic. The specific subject is almost
always definite, but when the reference is indefinite in certain
situations, the indefinite noun is used:
3.41

While we were sitting in the class, a boy opened
the door.

34

However, when the subject is indefinite, there are certain
grammatical devices used to make the sentence more acceptable.
One of these devices is existential there which is used to avoid
starting the sentence with new information and prevent any kind of
awkwardness sensed in the sentence (Quirk et al. 1985/1987:1402)
Consider the following examples:
3.42 A car is blocking my way.
3.43 There is a car blocking my way.
The other device is to combine the subject with discontinuous
postmodification of the noun phrase (ibid.):
3.44 A bird is in that tree.
3.45 A bird is in that tree which I have never seen around
here before.
The indefinite and definite generic noun may occupy the
subject position but the indefinite generic is more flexible in taking
other syntactic positions as well (Master 1987:184):
3.46 The best way to learn a language is to live among
its speakers.
(Quirk et al. 1985/1987: 281)

Gramley & Pätzold (1992:162) say that the singular indefinite
generic noun may occur only in subject position. In fact, the

35

indefinite and definite generic noun may occupy other syntactic
positions depending on the verb selected and the context (see 3.2.1).
In the first and second patterns, when the complement of the
copular and linking verbs has a classifying function, the second noun
should be indefinite (Zandvoort 1962/1963:125; Quirk et al.
1985/1987: 273; Jacobs 1995: 109).
The object of the transitive verb should be indefinite when it is
not uniquely identified in the situation and in its first mention.

3.2 Indefiniteness at the Semantic Level
To show the semantic contrast between indefiniteness and
definiteness, it is better to shed light on the uses of the indefinite and
definite nouns, the indefinite article and numeral one, and
indefiniteness and ambiguity.

3.2.1 The Uses of the Indefinite Noun
Jespersen (1949/1954), Zandvoort (1962/1963), Frank (1972),
Hawkins (1978), Quirk et al.(1985/1987), Jacobs(1995), and Leech
& Svartvick (1994/1996) distinguish two main uses of the indefinite
noun: specific and generic:
1. The specific use:
It includes count and non-count nouns. The singular indefinite
noun may refer to a definite member of a class which is unknown to
the addressee. It is used to introduce entities into the discourse; so
Jespersen refers to this use as introductory. It is the first mention of
the noun phrase, as in:

36

3.47 I bought a book yesterday.
The indefinite noun a book refers to a certain book from many others
existing in the situation, which are infinite in number; so it is not
uniquely identified by the addressee. It is considered in this sense a
referring expression because it refers to a particular book in the
speaker's mind, which is definitely one book. So, the singular
indefinite noun indicates singularity and specificity at the same time.
Sometimes, the context or the intention of the speaker concentrates
on one of these meanings more than the other. So, when the
concentration is on the singularity, the indefinite article can be
replaced by one as in:
3.48 I bought a (one) book and two magazines.
It is to be mentioned that Quirk et al. (1985/1987:265) give the
following example as a specific use of the indefinite noun:
3.49 A lion and two tigers are sleeping in the cage.
It seems that this example indicates singularity more than specificity
because it is followed by two tigers, and the concentration of the
speaker/writer is on the number of the animals.
The indefinite noun in a sentence can be understood either
specific or generic depending on the context as in:
3.50 I bought a newspaper yesterday (a specific one).
3.51 I bought a newspaper yesterday (not a magazine).

37

The plural indefinite noun refers to a specific number of
something which is unknown to the addressee and the non-count
indefinite to a specific a mount of something, as in :
3.52 She bought (some) books.
3.53 She bought (some) milk.
2. The generic use:
The indefinite noun in this use cannot be considered a
referring expression because there is no particular thing in the mind
of the speaker and the addressee. The indefinite noun is used to
mean any member or anything of the class. This use can be subdivided into three uses applied in three cases:
(a) The general use of the indefinite noun:
It includes the count and non-count nouns. The singular
indefinite noun may refer to any arbitrary member of a class as a
representative of the whole class. So, it has an inclusive meaning in
a superficially exclusive use. The plural and non-count indefinite
nouns refer to things in general. Some examples are shown below:
3.54 A tiger has no mane.
5.55 Tigers have no mane.
3.56 Milk is nutritious.
3.57 Education is important for everyone.
Jespersen (1949/1954:VII:424) proposes

the term all-

representative use for this use and he keeps the term generic for the

38

definite noun, whereas Jacobs (1995:110) ignores the generic use of
the definite noun and employs the indefinite generic to refer to a
class of entities.
This use is proper in the context of definition which includes
classification, properties, comparisons and other means used to
define an object. So, it almost always occurs in the subject position,
and when it occurs in other position , the properties of the object can
be understood from the context, as :
3.58 A lion is very strong.
( Frank 1972 :1:154)

3.59 He had the strong teeth of a rodent.
(Jespersen1949/1954:VII:424)

This use is also proper in the context of generalization. It
occurs in this sense in different positions in the sentence:
3.60 She likes reading books.
3.61 Tea is my favourite drink.
The indefinite noun used in transferred or metaphorical sense
can be included in this use. Consider the following examples:
3.62 Old Mr.smith is a fox.
3.63 He married a lemon.
(Bloomfield 1933/1963:149)

The indefinite nouns a fox and a lemon are not used to mean a real
fox or real lemon. The indefinite noun used in these examples

39

indicates the description, behaviour or the qualities of the real object.
These sentences can be understood as:
3.64 Old Mr. Smith is sly as a fox.
3.65 He married a beautiful girl, like a lemon.
Thus, the sentence:
3.62 Old Mr. Smith is a fox.
apparently belongs to the following generic use, the classifying use,
but virtually belongs to the general use of the indefinite noun.
(b ) The classifying use of the indefinite noun:
It provides a classification for the subject or the object. It is
associated with the complement function in a sentence, especially in
a copular relation (Quirk et al.1985/1987:273):
3.66 Denver is an interesting city.
3.67 He found Denver an interesting city.
Jespersen adds the appositives to this use, as in:
3.68 Hamlet, a play of Shakespeare, is very interesting.
(c) The non-specific use of the indefinite noun:
The indefinite noun can be used to mean any member, kind,
aspect, or quantity of something. It is mainly used in negative,

40

interrogative, imperative, and conditional sentences. Some examples
are shown below:
3.69 She does not have a book.
3.70 Does she like reading books?
3.71 Give me juice, please.
3.72 If you say a word. I'll punish you.
The speaker in all these examples has no specific thing in mind, he
means anything that fits the description. Jespersen (1949/1954: VII:
423) refers to this use indirectly by saying that the indefinite noun
may refer to a member of a class which indicate the typical qualities
of the person or thing in question. He gives the following example:
2.73 She had never yet been inside a theatre.
As a conclusion, it can be said that the specific and generic
uses of the indefinite noun are different in two main points:
1. The specific indefinite noun is considered a referring expression,
whereas the generic one is non-referring expression.
2. The plural of the specific indefinite noun can be preceded by
some, whereas the plural of the generic one cannot.
It is proper to touch upon the main uses of the definite noun
because they will be needed in the present study:
1. The specific use of the definite noun: it includes the count and
non-count nouns, and it can be sub-divided into the following uses:

41

(a) The anaphoric use, which is established by the previous mention
of the noun, as in:
3.74 She bought a book yesterday. The book was lost.
(b) The cataphoric use which is established by a kind of
modification such as an of- phrase or a relative clause.
3.75 The book of my friend was lost.
3.76

Mary lost the book she bought yesterday .

(c) The conventional use in which the definite noun may refer to
anything shared by the community (institutions, devices, etc)
as : the radio, the train, etc.
(d) The unique use in which the definite noun may refer to what is
understood to be unique in the world or in the situation, as :
the sun, the Queen, the Dean, etc..
2. The generic use of the definite noun: it includes only count nouns,
singular and plural. The generic non-count noun is expressed by zero
article instead of the. The singular definite noun refers to the class as
a whole not as individual, whereas the plural refers to all the
members of the class, as in:
3.77 The tiger has no mane.
3.78 The tigers have no mane.
3.79 Water is necessary for life.

42

Restrictions on using the indefinite and definite nouns:
The indefinite and definite nouns can be exchangeable in some
contexts, as in:
3.80 A tiger is a wild animal.
3.81 The tiger is a wild animal.
3.82 Tigers are wild animals.
3.83 The tigers are wild animals.
These sentences express essentially the same meaning, tigers in
general. Yet, the slight difference between the uses of the indefinite
and definite nouns makes them unexchangeable in other contexts.
Consider the following examples:
3.84 The tiger is in danger of becoming extinct.
3.85 *A tiger is in danger of becoming extinct.
3.86 Tigers are in danger of becoming extinct.
The second example (85) is ungrammatical because the
property of extinction is applied to the class itself not to individuals
(Hawkins 1978:216 ; Quirk etal:1985/1987 : 281 ; Leech & svartvik:
1994/1996 : 53).
The verb also has a role in restricting the use of the indefinite
and definite nouns. Chafe (1968; cited in Master1987:170) believes
that certain verbs are inherently generic and the verb determines the
genericity of its subject and object. He gives certain restrictions on
the selected generic noun. If the verb involves a change in the

43

condition of the object referred to, the generic definite cannot be
used .The following examples illustrate the generic object:
3.87 *A gopher digs the tunnel.
3.88 A gopher digs a tunnel.
3.89 A gopher digs tunnels .
If the verb affects all members of the class at the same time and
cannot act on any member individually, the generic indefinite cannot
be used:
3.90 Roger is studying the elephant.
3.91 *Roger is studying an elephant.
3.92 *Roger is studying elephants.
Concerning the generic subject, consider the following examples:
3.93 *An automobile has changed our way of life.
3.94 The automobile has changed our way of life.
3.95 Automobiles have changed our way of life.
3.96 A student should work hard.
3.97 Students should work hard.
3.98 *The student should work hard.

(ibid.:166)

The ungrammaticality of, for example,(98) arises because the
act of working and studying is related to individuals not to the class
as a whole. It can be noticed that the verb with the generic noun in
subject position should be in the present.

44

It is to be mentioned that the verb does not only affect the
generic noun but also the specific one. Consider the following
examples:
3.99 *He scribbled on a living room wall.
3.100 He scribbled on the living room wall.
The concentration is on the act of scribbling, not on a specific wall;
so the indefinite noun should not be used (see 3.2.4).

3.2.2. The Indefinite Article a/an and the Numeral One
The relation between the indefinite article a/an and the
numeral one emphasizes the fact that the indefinite article derives
historically from one. Thus, the indefinite article a/an means one and
it is used with count nouns to indicate a single object, and one is
used only to show a contrast with two or more (Praninskas 1975:
8,72). Accordingly, the singular indefinite noun, whether specific or
generic, refers to one entity; so it definitely indicates singularity .In
the specific use, the indefinite article can be replaced by one (Quirk
et al.1985/1987 :274), as in the following example:
3.101 The Wrights have two daughters and a son. (cf. 3.2.1.
ex. 49).
In the generic use, the indefinite article cannot be replaced by
one because the singular generic indefinite noun refers to any
arbitrary member of the class as repersentative of the whole class
(ibid.), as in:

45

3.102 A tiger is a wild animal.
3.103 *One tiger is a wild animal.
One as a pronoun has a generic use, and can be replaced by the
indefinite you in informal use as in:
3.104 One never knows what may happen.
3.105 You never know what may happen.
The indefinite article cannot occur with one, they are mutually
exclusive,1 whereas the definite article may occur. Consider the
following structures:
*a one book I like best.
the one (only) book I like best.
(ibid.:262)

Yet, a one may occur when one is a noun or in a casual speech or in
non-standard usage in the sense of an amusing person (ibid. 387).
The following examples illustrate these uses respectively:
3.106 I could not remember whether the number is a four or
a one.
3.107 I had lots of pens and now I haven't got a one!
3.108 You are a one.

1

similarly, the definite article and the demonstratives are mutually exclusive as in :
*the that boy
This point emphasizes the historical origin of the indefinite and definite articles.

46

The indefinite article a/an used as a numeral or a quantifying
element can be seen in its occurrence in such expressions: a million,
a dozen, in a word, etc.
The indefinite article a/an can be considered an unstressed
one, equivalent to the stressed one (ibid.: 254n.) as in the following
structures : a pound or two and one or two pounds
However, when the indefinite article a/an has the function of
the numeral one, it is not completely article (Jespersen1949/
1954:408). Though, one can be used as an indefinite determiner in
some expressions as one day , one morning, etc. as in:
3.109 One day she will change her mind.
and as an indefinite pronoun as in:
3.110 How does one deals with this problem.
It is to be mentioned that the adjective single can be used to
add an intensifying force to the indefinite noun (Qurik et
al.1985/1987: 274) as in:
3.111 They did not stop talking for a (single)
moment.

3.2.3. Indefiniteness and Ambiguity
It is well known that an ambiguity arises when two
interpretations are plausible. Consider the following:

47

3.112 I am looking for the pencil.
3.113 I am looking for a pencil.
The unambiguity of (112) lies in that the hearer knows the object
referred to and it is supposed to be mentioned previously or it may
exist in the shared knowledge. So, he has a kind of control on the
situation, whereas in (113), the hearer lacks this knowledge. So, he
understands the indefinite noun phrase either as specific or nonspecific. In the specific reading, a pencil means that the speaker has
a specific pencil in mind, whereas in the non-specific reading, it
means that anything fitting the description will meet the speaker's
need. In both readings, the referent is unknown to the addressee.
It is to be mentioned that this ambiguity arises mainly in
opaque contexts in which the meaning of a sentence cannot be
understood and determined clearly unless the whole context is
known. There are certain verbs used in such contexts as look for and
want (Palmer 1981:195 ; Brown & yule 1983/1987:209).
It may be useful to point out that the non-specific reading does
not always mean any member of the class and it does not matter
which one. It may refer to any member of a certain group in the
class. Consider the following example:
3.114 I want a student to answer this question.
In the non-specific reading of this sentence, the indefinite noun, a
student, does not necessarily refer to any student, but to any clever
student. Jespersen (1949/1954:420) mentions the difference between

48

the indefinite article a/an and any by stating the following questions
and answers:
3.115 Can a boy do that? No, but a man can.
3.116 Can any boy do that? No, but some boys can.

3.2.4. The Semantic Contrast between Indefiniteness
and

Definiteness
Russell (1905; cited in Hawkins 1978 ; Abbott 2004) tries to

find the semantic difference between the indefinite and definite
nouns. His analysis is based on logic and mathematics and applies
only to singular count nouns. He thinks that the indefinite noun
refers to a non-unique entity in the situation. There is more than one
entity in the situation and the indefinite noun phrase refers to one of
them:
3.117 A student arrived.
The definite noun phrase, on the other hand, refers to a unique entity
in the situation, as in:
3.118 The student arrived.
Accordingly, the indefinite noun phrase does not occur with
some postdeterminers and adjectives whose meaning is associated
with uniqueness such as: same, only, sole, and the superlatives.
(Hawkins 1978:247-248 ; Quirk et al1985/1987:270):

49

3.119 Ada and I have the same hobby.
3.120 * Ada and I have a same hobby.
( ibid.)

Quirk et al.(1985/1987) consider the use of the definite article with
these words ‘the logical use’ of the definite article.
Hawkins (1978) criticizes Russell’s theory for being
incomplete because it applies only to singular count nouns. So, he
introduces his alternative theory ‘the Location Theory’ which is
more comprehensive because it includes plural and mass nouns in
addition to the singular count noun.
The crucial concepts in his theory are exclusiveness and
inclusiveness. He argues that the indefinite noun phrase refers
exclusively to not-all objects, whereas the definite refers inclusively
to all objects in the situation. This theory applies to the specific and
generic uses of the nouns.
Concerning the specific nouns, consider the following
examples:
3.121 A member of parliament has just died.
3.122 Pass me a cup of tea, please.
3.123 Pass me the bucket, please.
3.124 Bring the wickets in after the game.
3.125 Move the sand from my gateway.
The indefinite noun in (121) and (122) refers to one member and
excludes the others. The definite noun in (123),(124), and (125)
refers to all objects and quantities in the relevant situation.

50

Concerning the generic nouns, consider the following :
3.126 A lion is a noble beast.
3.127 Lions are noble beasts.
3.128 The lion is a noble beast.
3.129 The lions are noble beasts.
The singular indefinite noun a lion refers to any member of the class
as a representative of the whole class, and the plural indefinite noun
lions refers to any member of the class whether it exists or not yet in
existence. The singular definite noun the lion, on the other hand,
refers to the class as a whole not as individuals, and the plural
definite noun the lions refers to all the members of the class which
are actually in existence.
So, according to Hawkins's theory, one can infer that the
distinction between a lion / lions on one hand, and the lion/the lions
on the other, is a distinction between any and every respectively. The
indefinite nouns a lion and lions refer to any member in the class , A
or B or C. The definite nouns the lion and the lions, on the other
hand, refer to every member, A and B and C. It can be noticed that
the generic indefinite noun has inclusive and general meaning
theoretically not practically. It involves an indefinite reference to
any arbitrary member or quantity of something.
This theory can be better explained with the parts of the body
as in the following examples cited by Hawkins (1978):

51

3.130 Fred lost a leg in the war.
3.131 Fred lost some fingers in the war.
3.132 *Fred lost a head in the war.
It can be seen that the indefinite noun cannot be used unless
the body has more than one of the body parts mentioned. If there are
more than two parts, some is used. Yet, the possessive pronoun can
be used instead of the indefinite article (Hawkins 1978:180 ; (Quirk
et al.1985/1987: 273):
3.133 Fred lost his leg in the war.
3.134 Fred lost his fingers in the war.
3.135 Fred lost his head in the war.
It is to be mentioned that according to this theory, indefinites
with have and be do not presuppose exclusiveness. These verbs
define the membership of the relevant objects within a pragmatic set:
3.136 My house has a roof.
3.137 There is a roof on my house.
3.138 My house has some windows.
3.139 There are some windows in my house.
It seems that Hawkins’s theory does not apply to all situations.
Sometimes, even when the referent of the noun phrase is more than
one, the definite noun is more suitable. Recall:

52

3.99 *He scribbled on a living-room wall.
3.100 He scribbled on the living-room wall.
The referent of the noun in (99) is more than one, so the
indefinite noun is supposed to be used. Yet, the definite is used
because it does not matter for the hearer which wall was scribbled
on. The use of the indefinite noun in this example “gives the
impression of being unnaturally precise” (Dubois 1980:233; cited in
Abbott 2001:11), whereas the use of the indefinite noun in the
following example is normal:
3.140 We have to paint a living-room wall.
Abbott (ibid.) thinks that the use of the definite noun instead of
the indefinite in (140) is not so good because it gives the impression
that there is only one wall in the living room. She fails to point out
that the use of the definite noun in such a case is acceptable if the
hearer knows previously that one of the walls needs painting;
otherwise it is not acceptable:
3.141 We have to paint the living –room wall.
Bloomfiled (1933/1963:203) indirectly refers to what Hawkins
later on states explicitly. He states that one of the features that subdivides the determiners into indefinite and definite is that “a definite
determiner can be preceded by the numerative all (as in all the
water) but an indefinite determiner (as some in some water) cannot.”

53

What can be said about Hawkins's theory is that:
1. He does not mention proper and abstract nouns in his theory, and
he concentrates on count nouns more than non-count ones.
2. He attributes the concept of exclusiveness and inclusiveness to the
indefinite and definite articles respectively. Being so, he ignores
languages, which have no articles but definitely have the concept of
indefiniteness and definiteness.
3. It seems that this theory is not very plausible with the inclusiveness
of the singular count noun. Compare:
3.142 Pass me the buckets , please.
3.143 Pass me the bucket , please.
According to Hawkins’s theory, the plural definite noun
phrase the buckets in (142) refers to all the buckets in the
situation; the singular definite the bucket in (143) also refers
to all the buckets, but, as Hawkins justifies implausibly, it just
happens that the total number of buckets is only one. This
remark also applies to Bloomfield’s statement, though he
does not give examples for the count nouns, singular and
plural.
4. There is no mention of the zero article which is used with
plural and non-count nouns.
It seems that Russell’s and Hawkins’s theories complete each
other since the former applies to singular count noun and the latter is
more plausible with plural and non-count nouns.

54

3.2.5 The Indefinite Noun in English Proverbs
It is well known that proverbs are concerned with the general
meaning rather than the specific one. They are used for pragmatic
purposes in different situations. The proverb can help, for example,
to express one’s feeling or opinions, justify something, excuse
someone, and so on.
The indefinite and definite nouns can be used in English
generically; so both of them can be used in proverbs. The singular
indefinite is used when the properties of the referent are related to
individuals, whereas the singular definite is used when the properties
are related to the class as a whole .The plural and non-count nouns
are used to convey general meaning. Gramley & Pätzold (1992:7677) give the following well-known proverbs:
1. A friend in need is a friend indeed.
2. People who live in glass houses should not throw stones.
3. Absence makes the heart fonder.
4. Clothes do not make the man.
Jespersen (1949/1954:VII: 439) says that the generic mass
(non-count) words are frequently used in proverbs because they
convey general meaning, as in:
5. Haste makes waste, and waste makes want , and want
makes strife between the good man and his wife.
6.

Mirth and motion prolong life.

55

The indefinite article in some proverbs can be replaced by one
as in the following proverbs:
7.
8.

A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.
A stitch in time saves nine.
( Best 1963/1983: 63)

Zandvoort (1962/1963:126) says that the indefinite article can
be used to mean the same, as in the following proverb:
9.

Birds of a feather flock together.
Some proverbs contain irregular syntax as in:

10.

Like father, like son.

3.3 Indefiniteness at the Pragmatic Level.
The contrast between indefiniteness and definiteness can be
based on pragmatic principles ( Dik 1978/1979: 61).
The main environment in which the indefinite noun is required
is the first mention of the reference, i.e. when the reference is not
mentioned before and supposed to be unfamiliar to the addressee as :
3.144 Bob lost a gold watch yesterday.
(Quirk et al. 1985/1987: 272)

When the indefinite noun is repeated in the same context, it

56

refers to another object, i.e. there is no coreference between the two
indefinites. When the reference becomes contextually known, the
indefinite noun is replaced by a definite one and they refer to the
same thing. Compare:
3.145

Bob lost a gold watch yesterday, and Bill was wearing
a gold watch this morning.

3.146

Bob lost a gold watch yesterday, and Bill was
wearing the gold watch this morning.

Quirk et al. use the term direct anaphoric reference for the use
of the definite noun in (146). They describe the occurrence of
indefinite and definite nouns in this way as having a complementary
role (ibid.:267). It is to be mentioned here that the use of the definite
noun in (146) is not obligatory. It can be replaced by it or this gold
watch.
However, the context determines how the indefinite noun is
understood. For example, the two indefinite nouns in the following
example most probably refer to the same object:
3.147 Bob lost a gold watch in a taxi, and Bill found a gold
watch in the taxi.

3.3.1 The Pragmatic Contrast between Indefiniteness and
Definiteness
The difference between the indefinite and definite nouns in
some contexts is mainly pragmatic. Quirk et al. (ibid.:272) give the

57

following examples:
3.148 The house on the corner is for sale.
3.149 A house on the corner is for sale.
They think that the speaker/writer in (148) presupposes that
the referent is identifiable to the addressee because there is only one
such a house. In (149), there is no such presupposition. The
prepositional phrase on the corner in (148) refers to a definite
corner, whereas in (149) it is used to modify the noun a house, and it
does not refer to any particular corner. Yet, the use of the indefinite
noun in such a case is not very satisfactory because the corner
permits only one house. The indefiniteness of the referent can be
better expressed in this way:
3.150

A corner-house is for sale.

The pragmatic contrast between the indefinite and definite nouns can
be brought out by the following:
3.151 The door of the house was broken.
3.152 A door of the house was broken.
The speaker/writer and the adressee in (151) know that the house
normally has one door; so the use of the definite noun is normal. In
(152), the use of the indefinite noun will be odd unless the house has
more than one door. In such a case, the speaker/writer should

58

presuppose that the addressee knows this fact in order to avoid such
a question:
3.153 How many doors does the house have?
which is not preferred according to Grice's co- operative principle.

3.3.2 The Co-operative Principle:
The participants in any conversation should co-operate with
each other in order to make the conversation proceed properly and
successfully. So, the speaker should avoid ambiguity and whquestion which may arise because he may misjudge the knowledge
of the hearer.
Grice (1975) sets out the co-operative principle with four
maxims, which should be obeyed. Yule (1985/1988:110) states this
co-operative principle in the following way:
Make your conversational contribution such as is required, at the
stage at which it occurs, by the accepted purpose or direction of the
talk exchange in which you are engaged.

The four maxims are quantity, quality, relation and manner.
Grice’s co-operative principle can be better explained by the
following directive utterances:
3.154 Please hand me a glass.
3.155 Please hand me the glass.
(Abbott 2001:5)

59

For (154), any entity fitting the description of glass will enable the
addressee to carry out the directive, whereas for (155), the speaker
cannot be co-operative unless he knows previously that the
addressee can figure out which glass the speaker means.
Furthermore, the speaker must assume that there is only one glass in
the relevant context.
It is to be mention that the ambiguity of the indefinite noun in
certain context, whether specific or non-specific, can be treated in
pragmatic terms (3.2.3). The referent of the specific indefinite noun
is known to the speaker/writer but unknown to the addressee,
whereas the referent of the non-specific indefinite is unknown to the
speaker/writer and the addressee. The ambiguity of a sentence can be
removed by the speaker/writer depending on Grice’s co- operative
principle. Recall:
3.113 I am looking for a pencil.
The speaker/writer can disambiguate (113) if he completes his
speech in one of these ways:
3.156 I am looking for a certain pencil. (specific)
3.157 I am looking for a pencil. Please, who can find it?
(specific)
3.158 I am looking for a pencil. Please, who can give me
one? (non-specific)

60

3.3.3 The Pragmatic Sets of the Indefinite Noun
Discourse analysts point out that the purpose of the indefinite
noun is to introduce entities to the discourse and to indicate that the
object(s) referred to does not exist in the speaker-hearer shared
knowledge. Consider the following example:
3.159 I bought a book.
The indefinite noun a book is used to introduce an entity to the
discourse and it means to the addressee just one member, any
arbitrary member of a potentially infinite number of such objects.
Hawkins (1978: 173) disagrees with this view. He proposes
that the referent of an indefinite expression can be located in the
speaker-hearer shared knowledge .He proposes pragmatic sets which
are defined on the basis of the speaker –hearer shared knowledge
and the situation of the utterance. These pragmatic sets are:
1. The larger situation set:
It is common knowledge that people of the same village,
country, or nation can speak about objects existing in their area. So,
when the speaker speaks about the president of his country, he says
the president not a president because there is only one president in
the country. When there is more than one member, the indefinite is
used:
3.160 A member of parliament has just died.

61

2. The immediate situation set:
The referent may exist in the immediate situation in which the
conversation is taking place. The referent is not necessarily invisible
to the speaker and hearer. Consider:
3.161 Pass me a bucket.
3.162 Pass me some buckets.
3.163 I need a student to help me.
3. The association set:
The mention of certain noun expressions sometimes conjures
up a set of associations for the hearer, for instance:
3.164 Fred bought a book from Heffer's.
3.165 He then went and spoke to the author about it.
Although the author in (165) is mentioned for the first time, the
definite form is used. It is associated with a book because every
book has an author(s). Consider the following examples:
3.166 Fred bought a book from Heffer's.
3.167 He was dismayed to find that a page was torn.
3.168 He then went and spoke to an author about it.
Hawkins (ibid.:176) says that a page is associated with that book,
but an author cannot be the author of that book .He neglects books
which have more than one author.

62

Prince (1981;cited in brown & Yule 1983/1987: 183) calls this
associative use as inferrable because the speaker assumes that the
hearer can infer from the discourse which has already been
mentioned.
Quirk et al.(1985/1987:267) refer to this use and call it indirect
anaphoric reference of the definite article:
3.169 John bought a bicycle, but when he rode it, one of the
wheels came off.
which is equivalent to
3.170 John bought a bicycle, but when he rode it, a wheel
came off.
It seems that Hawkins concentrates on concrete nouns, and he
ignores abstract nouns like idea, help, courage, etc. He needs
another set for them, which he may call imagination or mental set.

CHAPTER FOUR
INDEFINITENESS IN ARABIC
This chapter deals with indefiniteness at the syntactic,
semantic and pragmatic levels.

4.1 Indefiniteness at the Syntactic Level
Arabic grammarians agree that the indefinite form is the
( ‫هي‬180 ‫[ ت‬1316:1/ 6-7]) expresses this
original state of things. ‫سيبويه‬
‫نكية ول مييهي عل هي‬
‫ال‬i.e. ‘The indefinite is
idea by saying ‫ابمعي به ية ي‬
first and then it becomes definite.’ ‫بيي‬
‫السي‬
(‫ي‬
‫ ه‬911 ‫ ) د ([ ت‬: 1/ 55])
expresses a similar view when he says :
‫نيييا‬
‫يي األ‬
‫يي األل م‬
‫يي ل ه‬
‫أل األجن‬

‫اليجييد اي‬
‫ليح لي‬
‫ظي ةت إ‬
‫إذان‬

‫يي‬
‫ييل الت هةه‬
‫ييةلو‬
‫تنكب‬
‫ ال‬i.e. ‘Indefiniteness

precedes definiteness because the genera exist first and then the
species.’ Thus, it can be said that indefiniteness is expressed by the
original form of the ‫اسيي‬
. There is no need to express it grammatically
by using an indefinite article .Yet, there is a marker accompanying
‫ا‬, which is called nunation ‫نيي ه‬
‫الت‬.Tritton (1943/1970:
the indefinite ‫سي‬
24) believes that what is here called nunation is in fact an indefinite
article /n/ and it occurs at the end of the noun. This marker will be
discussed in detail with the definite article in the section on articles.
Definiteness, on the other hand, is expressed by many ways.
The first one is by adding

‫ ‘و الت هةه‬the’ as a prefix to ‫لنك ة‬
‫سي ا‬
‫‘ال‬the

63

64

indefinite ‫اسيي‬
’ as in ‫الكتي‬
. The other way is by using ‫ضي ة‬
‫‘ إل‬the
construct state’, which means relating or ascribing the indefinite ‫اسيي‬
to a definite ‫اسيي‬
or a pronoun as in ‫اي الكتي‬
‫ هي‬and ‫ هامي‬. Consider the
difference in the following examples:
ْ ‫(لَ َ الَّ ِذي ِه‬
ْ َ‫ك ِ ِلَ ْو َلوَ ْ هَةْبَ َّ إِل‬
4.1 )‫ك‬
َ ُ‫ك يَ ةْ ة‬
َ ‫ب‬
َ ‫كتَ ِ وَنَ آبِب‬
ِ ‫ن َ هُ ِع ْل ٌم ِع َ ا ْل‬
)40 ‫ع اآله‬:‫(النمل‬

4.2

ُ َ‫بن‬
َ ِ‫فَح ِ ََّّلل‬
ْ َ ‫بنِ َل‬
ْ َ ً‫ش ِمب ا‬
‫ي‬
‫سالًلُلْ َا‬
‫( َلهَقُي ُ الَّ ِذه َ َا‬
ْ‫ك‬
َ ْ‫فَ ةُلالَسْتَ ُع ة‬
ْ ‫َل َع ْ ِه‬
) 34: ‫(الة ه‬
)‫ب‬
ِ ‫كتَا‬
ِ ‫ن َ هُ ِع ْل ُم ا ْل‬

The indefinite ‫اسيي‬
may be added to another indefinite ‫اسيي‬
as in

‫اامي‬

‫لق‬. In this case ‫نص ري‬
‫ي ( أل‬
‫ ه‬761 ‫[ ت‬1959:253]) says that the addition
gives the first indefinite ‫صييب‬
‫‘ 'بخ‬specialization’ , not

‫ب ههةي‬

‘definiteness’ .
definite is by using
The other way to make the indefinite ‫اسيي‬
‫‘المن دى‬the vocative’ in the nominative case as in:
4.3

)‫ي‬
َ ‫َ ةْ داً َل‬
َ ‫سالع ً َهاَح إِ ْ َةا ِهب‬

ِ‫(لُ ْانَ يَانَا ُر ُاين‬

)69:‫(األنوب ء‬

This kind of indefinite ‫سي‬
‫ ا‬is called ‫صييد‬
‫ك المق‬
‫لن ة‬
‫‘ ا‬the intended
indefinite’ because there is a specific individual or thing directly
addressed. ‫صييد‬
‫بية المق‬
‫نكي ة ي‬
‫‘ال‬the unintended indefinite’ ,on the other
hand,is expressed by using the vocative in the accusative case, as in :
4.4

‫يا غاف لا ه ذ اة هللا‬

4.5

‫يا رج لا عذ ب ي‬

65

The definites also include, in addition to the three ones
mentioned above, ‫ضيم رة‬
‫‘ ال‬the pronouns’, ‫يي‬
‫‘ ال َها‬proper noun’, ‫وسيم ء‬
‫‘ إلش ر‬demonstratives’ and ‫صيل‬
‫‘ ألسمء المي‬the relative pronouns’.
There are certain points that should be taken into consideration
concerning the indefinite and definite ( ‫يي ا المعاكين‬
‫ ه‬651 ‫[ ت‬1964
:52];
1.

‫بيي‬
‫ ه الس‬911 ‫)د([ ت‬:1/52]; ‫لس‬1961:1/146 ):
Certain items classed ‫اسيي‬
are considered indefinite by form,

but

definite by meaning, as the word ‫ ول‬in the following

examples:
‫ذلك ه ع ً أو َل‬

4.6
2.

‫ا‬

Other items, however, are considered definite by form, but

indefinite by meaning, like ‫ أس ااة‬which means a lion. This kind
‫اسي‬is called
of ‫يي‬

‫السين‬
‫‘ اهيي‬generic proper noun’. The generic

definite ‫اسيي‬
is also put in this group because it is definite by form
but it does not refer to a specific thing, as in:
َ‫سانل‬
ْ ‫فِ ُع‬
)‫س ٍة‬
َ ‫(إِ َّ اإلن‬

4.7

)2:‫(ال هص ة‬

‫ني‬
‫(لغالهب‬1966:1/155) gives the following example to show the
explicit definiteness and implicit indefiniteness of the generic
definite ‫سي‬
‫ا‬:
‫اللئيم هسُّن‬
‫للق و ُّع ة هاح‬

4.8
ُ ‫م َّمت‬،‫ةمضبت‬
‫ ال ه هنبن‬: ‫لات‬

66

He states that ‫يبي‬
‫الائ‬is definite by form but indefinite by meaning ;
‫ الا‬is
so the following sentence ‫ هسُّون‬, can be considered ‫ لي‬if ‫ئيبي‬
treated as definite , and ‫يف‬
‫ ص‬if it is treated as indefinite because
there is a rule in Arabic that says : ‫ف ت ل هي‬
‫صي‬
‫لنكيةات‬
‫لسميل هي ا‬
‫ا‬
‫‘ال مه ر ولييا‬Clauses occurring after the indefinite are adjectival,
and after the definite are advervials of manner.’
3.

Still others are considered indefinite by some people and

definite by others like: ‫ لال وع‬and ‫ هو طن‬.
4.

And others remain indefinite even when they are used in a

construct state like : ‫ يبة‬and ‫عثل‬:
4.9

َّ ‫( َل‬
ْ َ‫هللاُ ا ْل َغنِ ُّ َلو‬
ْ َ‫يلَّيْ ا ه‬
‫ي‬
‫ي ا ْل‬
ْ ‫ستَ ْو ِ ْ لَيْع ً َغ‬
ْ ‫ي َر ُا‬
ُ ُ‫نت‬
َ َ‫فُقَ َةا ُء َلإِ ْبَت‬
ُ َ‫ي ال ه‬
ُ َ‫كينُيا أَ ْةثَال‬
)‫ك ْم‬
َّ ُ‫م‬
)38 ‫ ع اآله‬: ‫( عحم‬

4.10

َّ َ ‫س ْو َح‬
َّ ‫ي ُر‬
ْ ُ‫هللاِ َه َّم ه‬
) َ ‫ش ِة ُاي‬
ُ ِ‫هللا‬
ْ ‫ي إِلَ ٌ َغ‬
ْ ُ‫(وَ ْملَ م‬
)43:‫(الطير‬

4.11

ْ َ‫فِ َ ا ْلوَحْ ُةلَ ْو َلوَ ْب‬
َ ِ‫(لُلْ لَيْ َا َ ا ْلوَحْ ُة ِع َ اداًل‬
َ‫ت َر ِّ لَن‬
‫ن‬
َ َ‫ف‬
ِ ‫كاِ َم‬
ْ ‫ئنَ بِ ِم‬
ْ ‫ت َر ِّ َللَيْ ِج‬
ُ ‫َااِ َم‬
)ً‫ثلِ ِه َع َ دا‬
)109: ‫(الكم‬

These items are called ‫ي م‬
‫تييايةي اإل م‬
‫‘نكيةات ع‬indefinites that are
deeply rooted in vagueness’ ( ‫ لس‬1961:1/ 305 n.1).

67

4.1.1 The Syntactic Definitions of the Indefinite ‫النكرة)اسم‬
(
The indefinite ‫اسيي‬
is given a number of syntactic definitions in
Arabic grammars. For example, ‫ ه ) ا علك‬672‫[ ت‬1930:12]) says:
‫نك ة ٌل ُل أل عؤ مةا‬
‫ع عيل َع ع ل ذ ا ةا‬
ٌ ‫ول لال‬
Explaining this statement, ‫قبل‬
‫ ه ( ا ه‬769 ‫[ ت‬1956:1/76]) says ‫نكية‬
‫ال‬
) ‫يل (و‬
‫ي هقو‬
‫يع ع‬
‫يع عيل‬
‫ي ول هق‬
‫ي الت ه ةه‬
‫ف ة ةب‬
‫يؤم‬
‫يل (و ) لب‬
‫ي هقو‬
‫‘ ع‬The indefinite is
what accepts ‫ ‘ و‬the’ and by which it changes into definite . For
example, ‫يل‬
‫ رجي‬is indefinite and ‫يل‬
‫الةجي‬is definite, whereas ‫وهي ل‬
and‫ الهو ل‬are both definite and ‫ و‬attached to ‫ هو ل‬does not affect the
‫اسيي‬
. If the ‫اسيي‬
does not permit ‫ و‬it may have the meaning of a word
which permits it. For example, ‫ ذل هاي‬has the meaning of ‫ص لب هاي‬.
‫نص ري‬
‫ ه (أل‬761 ‫[ ت‬1953:131) thinks that ‫قول دعي‬
‫الع النكة ا ب‬
‫ي‬
‫‘ (ُرف ) هابم‬The indefinite noun is identified by accepting ) َّ ‫ ( ر‬in
front of it.’ For example:
ٍ ‫ُ ُر َّ رجل ٍ هلي‬

4.12

Accordingly, ‫ص ي ري‬
‫ ألن‬infers that ‫عيي‬and ‫ي‬
‫ عي‬may occur as
indefinite ‫وسم ء‬in some contexts. He gives the following examples:
‫نضست يبظ لاو‬
‫ُ ُر َّ ةن ا‬

4.13

‫نح ل عيب ًلي هطع‬
‫ل بم‬
‫نفي ل ع األعة‬
‫ربمابكةه ال‬

4.14
‫ل ةةج احلالهق‬

68

‫بيسي‬
‫ي ( ا لوطا‬
‫ ه‬521 ‫[ ت‬1980: 343,345,357]) says that ‫ عي‬, ‫ي‬
‫ ع‬, and ‫وي‬
may be used as indefinite ‫وسم ء‬on condition that they are modified:
4.15

‫عةرتبمنعحس إلبك‬

4.16

‫سب لك‬
‫عةرتبما عه‬

4.17

‫سب لك‬
‫عةرتبأي عه‬

4.1.2 The Classification of Nouns
The parts of speech in Arabic are classified traditionally into
‫سي‬
‫ال‬, ‫الف هل‬
, and

‫الحة‬. ‫سي‬
‫ ال‬is not easy to determine ; so ‫سبويه‬
) ‫ ه‬180

‫[ ت‬1316:1/2) determines ‫الف هل‬
and

‫الحية‬, and leaves ‫السيي‬
to include

all words which are neither ‫ ةهل‬nor ‫ لة‬.
Nevertheless, it can be said that ‫الس يي‬
includes

‫الس ين‬
‫اس يي‬1

‘generic or common noun’, ‫ ‘الهاي‬proper noun’, ‫لصف‬
‫‘ا‬adjective’ , ‫اسي‬
‫ييي‬
‫ييييالمفه ي‬
‫ييل اس‬
‫‘ الفه ي ل‬participles’

, ‫ييمبة‬
‫ضي‬
‫‘ال‬pronoun’, ‫ي ر‬
‫يي‬
‫يياإلشي‬
‫اس ي‬

‘demonstrative’, ‫‘ال الميصي‬relative
‫سي‬
pronoun’, and ‫‘ الظة‬adverb’,
in addition to other certain ‫ اسم ء‬like : ‫يبة‬, ‫عثل‬, ‫اب‬, ‫وهي‬, ‫عي‬, ‫عي‬, and ‫ذل‬
which cannot be placed with the previous groups.
‫السي ن‬
‫‘ اسي‬the generic noun’ is either ‫اسييهيب‬
‘concrete noun’ as
‫‘رجيل‬man’ ,or ‫نيح‬
‫اسيي عه‬
‘abstract noun’ as ‫‘هايي‬knowledge’. The same
may apply to adjectives and participles, for example, ‫راايب‬, riding, is
‫اسي هب‬, a concrete noun , and ‫عفميم‬
, understood , ‫اسي عهنح‬, an abstract
noun (‫ ه آلع ي‬631 ‫[ ت‬1914:1/73] ; Wright 1896/1955:1:107) .

Concerning ‫ ‘ اسم اجلنس‬the generic noun’, ‫ هـ( الزخمشري‬538 ‫ (ب)] ت‬: 5[ ) says : [ ‫ينقسم [ اسم اجلنس‬
‫اىل اسم عني و اسم معىن وكالمها ينقسم اىل اسم غري صفة واسم هو صفة فاالسم غري الصفة حنو رجل وفرس وعلم وجهل والصفة حنو راكب وجالس ومفهوم‬
‫ ومضمر‬. Some grammarians do not distinguish between ‫ اسم اجلنس‬and ‫ حسن) النكرة‬1961: 1:142 n).
1

69

‫ايي‬
‫‘اله‬proper noun’ , is definite but it is either transferred from
, , or from adjective like ‫يبي‬
‫ ; رل‬or it may be
indefinite noun like ‫وسي‬
derived from indefinite noun like ‫ ه مة‬, or it is a borrowed noun (nonnative Arabic) like ‫ ه ا السةاج( إ ةاهبي‬316 ‫[ ت‬1973: 1/176-177]).
‫السيي‬
is also either count or non-count . Count ‫اسيي‬
can be ‫فيةد‬
‫ع‬
‘singular’ as ‫ عهاي‬, ‫عثنح‬
‘dual’ as

‫ عهام‬, or ‫‘ جمع‬plural’. The plural of

‫سي‬
‫ ا‬include ‫الميذالسيلي‬
‫اة‬
‫جميع‬
‘the regular masculine plural’ as ‫عهاميي‬,
‫المؤ السيلي‬
‫‘جميع نيا‬the regular feminine plural’ as ‫ي ت‬
‫ عهام‬, and ‫جميع‬
‫كسبة‬
‫‘الت‬the irregular (broken) plural’ as
‫سي‬
‫ ال‬is classified according to

‫ رج‬.

‫تصةه‬
‫‘ال‬declension’ into ‫ع هة‬

‘declinable’ and ‫‘ عوني‬indeclinable’ (Wright 1896/1955: 1:234; ‫لسي‬
1961:1/18-22). The declinable

‫يي‬
‫اسي‬is either

‫صي ية‬
‫‘عهيية عن‬fully

declinable’ (with nunation) as ‫رجيل‬and ‫عحمي‬, or ‫نص ية‬
‫بية ع‬
‫عهية ي‬
‘partly declinable’ (without nunation and without the regular ending
‫نيي عي ا‬
‫ال مم‬
of the genitive case ) like ‫صيحةاء‬,which is called ‫لص ية‬
‘diptotes’ . The indeclinable, on the other hand, has either a rigidly
fixed termination like

‫بيي‬
‫ ا‬and

‫ع ي‬,or

a non- rigidly fixed

termination i.e. a termination that can be changed but only under
‫ س‬when it is not applied to the known
certain conditions like ِ ‫يبويه‬
person, but to any person carries

the same name and unknown to

the addressee .
The indefiniteness of the singular, the regular feminine plural,
the irregular (broken) plural, and the non-count common declinable
‫اسيي‬
is expressed by the origin of such ‫اسيي‬
i.e. the absence of the
ٌ ‫يام‬
definite article, and it is emphasized by nunation, like ‫ رج ٌل‬,‫ت‬
‫عس‬,
ٌ ‫ رجي‬and ‫ي ٌء‬
‫ع‬. The indefiniteness of the regular masculine plural and
the dual is expressed by the absence of the definite article, like

70

‫عسييامي‬and

‫يام‬
‫عسي‬
. Similarly, The indefiniteness of the common

diptotes is expressed by the absence of the definite article without
‫ص‬. The indefiniteness of proper nouns will be
nunation like ‫يح ةا ُء‬
discussed separately. The indefiniteness of the indeclinable ‫اسيي‬
is
expressed by nunation like ٍُ ‫سبويه‬/ َُ ‫ سبويه‬and ٍ ‫ص‬/ ْ ‫ص‬.

4.1.2.1 The Indefiniteness of ‫لعلم‬
‫‘السم ا‬Proper Noun’
‫ايي‬
‫ السي اله‬, The proper noun, is one of the definites . It is a name
of a person, a city, a river, etc. which is applicable to only one
‫ ه (الس‬911 ‫ ( د ([ ت‬:1/73]) says that ‫لليهنكية‬
individual of a kind. ‫بي ي‬
ً‫ ‘ ال هاييبحقبقي ً البقي ه ةا‬The proper noun can be indefinite either
practically

or as an assumption’, and he gives the following

examples respectively:
4.18

‫روهت زيدا ع المه ه‬

4.19

‫بيم‬
‫يش ه ال‬
َ ‫القر‬

Then, it is deprived of its definiteness and behaves as an
indefinite ‫سي‬
‫ا‬. It can be dual as ‫ ز ه ا‬, and plural as ‫ ز ه ل‬. It accepts
the definite article ‫و الت هة ه‬, as in:
‫هذاالزيد اشة ع ذلكالزيد‬

4.20

and the proper noun can be used in a construct phrase, as in :
‫هالزيد ناهيم النق رالزيدكم‬

4.21
‫أبض عض الشةةتب هم‬

71

Also it may occur after َّ ‫ ُر‬and

‫ ال الن ةبلاسن‬which are used

‫ا‬, as in:
only with indefinite ‫سي‬
4.22
ًُ

‫ُر َّزيد ا ً ال س ع زه‬
‫لض لالأبا حسنلم‬

4.23

The proper noun ‫ وي لسي‬is used in (23) as a generic noun . It
is used instead of the indefinite noun ‫ رجل‬. Its use gives the situation
more effectiveness and shows how the problem is difficult. This
impression comes from the fact that the use of ‫ايي‬
‫‘السيي اله‬the proper
noun’, that refers to a man well- known for his wide knowledge in
this respect, is better than using a man in general. The use of the
proper noun in such a case does not mean that the person in
question, ‫ويلسيي‬, is indefinite or not considerable; on the other
contrary, it shows his greatness. So, some grammarians interpret this
sentence as:
4.24

‫لس لم‬

‫لض لالقاضيوالفاصل عثل ا‬

4.25

‫لضب لالةثلأبي حسنلم‬

4.26

‫قضب‬
‫الاةثال عليلمذه ال‬

) ‫ ه سبويه‬180 ‫ ه [ ت‬1316 : 1/354] ; ‫ههبش‬

‫ ھ ا‬643 ‫ ت‬:2/104; ‫قبل‬
‫ا ه‬

‫ ه‬769 ‫[ ت‬1956:1/335] ; ‫بي ي‬
‫ ه الس‬911 ‫) ] ت‬

(

1985:3/82]).

It is to be mentioned that the proper noun is either declinable
as ‫ عحمي‬and ‫المي‬or indeclinable as ِ ‫يبويه‬
‫ س‬. The declinable is either
fully declinable as ‫ عح م‬or diptote as ‫الم‬.

72

All these types of proper noun can be indefinite and accept
nunation in one way or another. The indefiniteness of the fully
declinable proper noun can be understood through the context
( ‫بي ي‬
‫ ه الس‬911 ‫ ) د( [ ت‬:1/73] ; ‫الس عةار‬2000 : 1/ 81) :
4.27

‫م ت‬

‫ع ع زيد امه‬

The indefiniteness of the diptote is expressed by nunation, as:
4.28

‫ل ات احمدا‬

The indefiniteness of the indeclinable proper noun is similarly
expressed by nunation, as in:
4.29

‫سيبويه ا ً آعة‬
‫ل ةوتلسبويه ِ ل‬

The indefiniteness of the proper noun can be accounted for by
the following:
1. The proper noun, especially the name of a person, can be repeated
many times; so this repetition gives it a sense of indefiniteness.
2. Proper nouns refer to persons, cities, etc. which are originally
common nouns; for example, ‫ عح م‬is a man , ‫ غي اد‬is a city , ‫دجاي‬
is a river and so on . Thus, the proper noun implies indefiniteness
and the name is just a distinctive marker to make ‫السيي‬
definite,
like ‫‘ و الت هةهي‬the definite article’. The difference between them
is that the origin of ‫ السي‬is observable with the definite article and
not observable with the proper noun.

73

‫يي‬
‫ي ( ايي نجي‬
‫ هي‬392 ‫ ] ت‬1956: 3/ 240] accounts for the
indefiniteness of the proper noun by saying that the proper noun
. Its definiteness is implicit,
is, by form , like the indefinite ‫اسيي‬
whereas the definiteness of the definite ‫اسيي‬
that is defined by the
article or the construct state is explicit.
3. Proper nouns are either transferred from common indefinite ‫اسيي‬
like, ‫وسي‬
or from ، ‫صيف‬adjective, like ،‫بيل‬
‫ نو‬or it is derived from
indefinite ‫سي‬
‫ا‬, like‫ ُه م ة‬. The proper noun has no meaning related to
the referent and it does not describe the person or thing which
carries the name. It happens that someone’s name is

‫ صي د‬but

in fact he is a liar . Thus, the name has nothing to do with the fact
and personality of the referent. Yet, it happens that the meaning
of the name fits the description of the person or thing it denotes.
In such cases, the definite article can be attached to the proper
noun to draw attention to the meaning of the noun, as in: ‫الحي ر‬
,and ‫ السي عةار ( الحسي‬2000:1/ 84). Compare, for example, ‫الفيةات‬
with ‫دجاي‬. The definite article is attached to the former but not to
the latter because the former has a sense of description, which is
‫بيي )المء ال هذ‬
‫ ه الس‬911 ‫)ج ([ ت‬:2/157]) :
ْ َ‫سق‬
ْ َ‫( َلو‬
)‫ي َع ًءفُ َرات ا‬
ْ ‫بنَ ُا‬

4.30
)27 ‫ ع اآله‬:‫(ال مة الت‬

This phenomenon is called in Arabic ‫صيل‬
‫‘ لم األ‬hinting at
the original meaning’. It is to be mentioned that changing the
name of someone does not make a change in language, whereas

74

changing the genus or class of someone makes a change in
language ( ‫بي ي‬
‫ ه الس‬911 ‫([ ت‬

)

:3/ 81 ]).

4. There is a kind of proper nouns called ‫السي ن‬
‫ايي‬
‫‘ ه‬the generic proper
noun’, like ‫وسي ع‬
, ‫ي‬
‫ مُ هل‬and ‫ي‬
‫ ُذؤال‬.These nouns are definite by form
but indefinite by meaning. Each one of these nouns is applicable to
every individual of a whole kind ( ‫ ه ألنص ري‬761 ‫[ ت‬1959:97] ) . It
is to be mentioned that these nouns do not accept the definite article
and the construct state.

4.1.3 Articles
The indefinite marker in Arabic, as considered by some Arabic
grammarians, is ‫نيي ه‬
‫‘ الت‬nunation’ ,and the definite article is

‫و‬

‫‘الت هة ه‬the’ .

4.1.3.1 ‫‘التنوين‬Nunation’
Nunation is traditionally defined as ً ‫ي‬
‫فظ‬
‫ني زار س ان باحق اآلع ةل‬
‫بياب‬
‫لغبة‬،‫‘ ال عط‬A superfluous /n/ that is attached to the end of the ‫سي‬
‫ا‬
pronounced , not written , and for no emphasis .’
‫ ‘الت‬nunation’ , is ‫بيبي‬
‫لتم‬
‫ ‘ ا‬meemation’ ,which
The origin of ‫نيي ه‬
exists in other semitic languages like Akkadian ; for example the
ٌ
origin of ‫بت‬
is ‫ةجستةاسة( بتي‬

1982: 27).

It is found that in the ancient Akkadian ‫بيبي‬
‫لتم‬
‫ ا‬has also a sense
of definiteness (ibid.: 118). The occurrence of ‫لتميبي‬
‫ اب‬with the
indefinite and definite items is found in Hamurabi’s texts ; so
‫(السي عةار‬1968:192-194 ) concludes that nunation and the definite
article do not occur together because they indicate the same thing ,
and also for phonological reasons .

75

In Aramaic languages, when the definite article becomes weak
and old, another article is invented. The old one becomes part of the
word and it is considered as an indefinite article. It is not omitted
when the new article is added; for example, the noun ’u hmōrō has
two articles. ‫تةاسية‬
‫( ةجس‬1982 : 119 ) infers that nunation perhaps is
a definite article then it becomes an indefinite one.
Accordingly, the indefinite and definite articles are changeable
and exchangeable. There is no strict formal marker that distinguishes
between indefinite and definite forms in these semitic languages.
Arab grammarians, traditional and modern, have two views
about nunation:
The first one says that nunation is a marker of fully declinable
‫اسيي‬
whether indefinite or definite. ‫ي (سيبويه‬
‫ ه‬180 ‫[ ت‬1316:1/7]) says
that

‫ييتثقاي‬
‫يهسي‬
‫بةا ي هالعييلم ي‬
‫يبمي ل‬
‫اهي‬

‫يي‬
‫ييي لاألعي‬
‫ني‬
‫يي ه‬
‫لالعكي‬
‫ييي هالع يي‬
‫ني‬
‫الت‬

and the easier in
i.e.‘Nunation is a marker of the fully declinable ‫اسيي‬
articulation; avoidance of nunation indicates that they find it difficult
in articulation.’ ‫ ه (السةج ن‬471 ‫) ([ ت‬1982:1/73 - 76]) and ‫بي ي‬
‫السي‬
( ‫ھ‬911 ‫([ ت‬

)

: 3/239]) distinguish a number of types of nunation

amounting to ten types, but the following are the concern of this
study :
‫نييه ال‬
‫ب‬: this kind of nunation shows that ‫ألسيي‬is fully
1. ‫تمكيب‬
declinable like ‫رجي ٌل‬and ٌ ‫ي‬
‫عحم‬. It includes indefinite and definite
‫اسيم ء‬
, and when nunation is mentioned without specifying it , this
nunation, ‫بنيه التمكب‬, is meant.
2. ‫نكبة‬
‫‘بنيه الت‬nunation of indefiniteness’: this kind of nunation
is used to distinguish between indefinite and definite indeclinable
‫اسم ء‬, as in :

76

‫لةوت لسبويه ِلسيبوي ٍه آ عة‬

4.31

The first ِ ‫يبويه‬
‫ س‬refers to the well-known Arabic grammarian and the
second one refers to another one called ‫سيبويه‬
, but he is unknown to
the addressee.

‫ ‘اسمء األةه‬the nominal verbs’ , like ْ ‫ص‬
َ , ْ ‫ َع‬, and ِ ‫إه‬

are also included in this type ; for example , the word ِ ‫ إه‬means ‫ه ت‬
‫الحي ها‬, speak on this subject , whereas ٍ ‫ي‬
‫ إه‬means ً ‫ي هث‬
‫يتل‬
‫ ه‬, speak on
any subject ( ‫يالسةجي ن‬
‫ ه‬471 ‫)] ت‬

)

1982:1/ 73 -74[ ;‫ظيير‬
‫ھ اي عن‬711

‫ت‬:17 / 366 s.v.ِ ‫( إه‬. It is to be mentioned that ‫صيةهي‬
‫الو‬consider these
words

‫اسيمء وةهي‬
, because they are neither

‫ وةهي‬nor ‫وسيم ء‬
. They

accept nunation which is a marker of ‫اسيي‬and they also indicate
, on the
action and time which are the characteristics of ‫ةهيل‬. ‫الكيةبيي‬
other hand , consider these words

‫ وةهي‬because they indicate action

and time and they have nothing to do with indefiniteness and
definiteness ) ‫ المخملع‬1964 : 202).
3. ‫ ‘بني ه المق ا‬nunation of correspondence’ : this nunation is
found in the feminine regular plural which corresponds to the ‫الني‬
/n/ in the masculine regular plural. This nunation does not seem
reasonable. Consider the following words :
‫ي‬
ٌ ‫عسا‬

َ ‫عسامي‬

ٌ ‫عسام‬
‫ت‬

ُ ‫ي المسام‬
ُ ‫المسا‬

َ ‫المسامي‬

ُ ‫المسام‬
‫ت‬

ٌ ‫عسام‬
ُ ‫ه عسام‬

‫ي‬
ُ ‫ه عسا‬

َ ‫ه عسامي‬

ُ ‫ه عسام‬
‫ت‬

ٌ ‫يام‬
It is obvious that the nunation in ‫ت‬
‫عس‬corresponds to the
nunation in ‫ي‬
‫ي‬
‫عس‬and ٌ ‫يام‬
‫ي‬
‫ عس‬rather than to
ٌ ‫يا‬

‫يي‬
‫ نالي‬in

‫عسييامي‬
. The

indefiniteness of the dual and the masculine regular plural is

77

expressed grammatically by the absence of the definite article not by
‫الني‬. This ‫ني‬exists in the indefinite and definite ‫سي‬
‫ ا‬and also in the
vocative; so it cannot be considered the marker corresponding to
nunation, as considered by some grammarians. ‫(نييرالي ه‬2003:234 ),
for example , says that the indefinite marker ‫النيي‬and the definite
marker

‫ و‬can be used together as in

‫ي المهامي‬
‫دع ل‬. It is to be

mentioned that there are some Arabic tribes that use nunation with
the dual as in: ٌ ‫ج ء رجال‬. This dialect is called ‫ (الهسةةب‬ibid. :139 ).
‫السةج ي ن‬
( ‫ ه ي‬471 ‫([ ت‬

(

1982 :1/183]) tries to find an

explanation for the use of the ‫ النيي‬with the indefinite and definite
dual and masculine regular plural . He believes that ‫ النيي‬in these
‫الحةاي ل الت‬
forms has two cases : in the first one it corresponds to ‫نيي ه‬
in the indefinite singular, as in :

In the second case,

That is why

‫رج ٌل‬

‫جال‬

‫ي‬
ٌ ‫عسا‬

‫عسامي‬

‫ الني‬corresponds to ‫الحة ا‬, as in :
‫ه رج ُل‬

‫ه رجال‬

‫ي‬
ُ ‫ه عسا‬

‫ه عسامي‬

‫ال ةج ُل‬

‫ال ةجال‬

‫ي‬
ُ ‫المسا‬

‫المسامي‬

‫السةج ي ن‬does not mention the nunation of

correspondence. It is better to include the nunation of the feminine

78

regular plural within the first type of nunation with the indefinite
singular, the irregular plural and the non-count ‫اسم ء‬.
4. ‫صية‬
‫ي ال‬
‫نيي ع‬
‫نييه ال مم‬
‫‘ ب‬nunation of diptote’: It is used to
distinguish between indefinite and definite diptote , as in:
4.32

ُ ‫ل‬
‫ات احم َد‬

4.33

ُ ‫ل‬
‫ات احمدا‬

The first َ ‫ي‬
‫ الم‬refers to a definite person who is known to the
speaker and addressee, whereas the second, ً‫ي ا‬
‫ الم‬, refers to someone
called

‫ الم‬, who is unknown to the addressee .

5. ‫‘بنيه المن دى‬nunation of the vocative’ :it is used to
distinguish between the indefinite and definite ‫اسيي‬in the vocative
case , as in :
4.34

)‫ي‬
َ ‫َ ةْ داً َل‬
َ ‫سالع ً َهاَح إِ ْ َةا ِهب‬

ِ‫(لُ ْانَ هَ نَا ُر ُاين‬

) 69:‫(االنوب ء‬

4.35

‫ه غاف لَ ًُ ه ذ ا ة هللا‬

The second view is that nunation is a marker of indefiniteness.
‫جن‬

‫ ه (ا‬392 ‫] ت‬1954 : 69]) states that

‫لالالم ب‬
‫تنكبة‬
‫هاحال‬

‫التني ه ه‬

‫هي‬
‫ايح الت هة‬
‫‘ ه‬Nunation indicates indefiniteness and the definite article
‫ الم‬/l/ indicates definiteness.’ Tritton (1943/1970:24) and ‫يطفح‬
‫صي‬
‫ع‬
(1959 :165) agree with this view. It seems that this statement is not
very precise. It says that the definite article indicates definiteness
which means that the absence of this article indicates indefiniteness,
‫رجي‬. Accordingly, nunation does not indicate
as in ‫ الةجيل‬and ‫يل‬

79

indefiniteness, but it occurs in this case to emphasize indefiniteness.
Furthermore, nunation occurs with other nouns as a device to
perform different functions (see 4.1.2). Thus, nunation and the
definite article do not occur together because the indefinite noun
becomes definite by the definite article; so there is no need to
emphasize the indefinite noun.
‫ي (اي جني‬
‫ ه‬392 ‫[ ت‬1956:3/240) accounts for the nunation in
proper nouns by considering them indefinite ‫ ;اسيم ء‬so when the
proper noun refers to a specific person who is directly addressed as
in the vocative , then nunation is not used , like : ُ ‫ ه عحم‬.
This statement is in contrast with two cases:
1. The proper noun (‫ عحم ٌ ) ص‬in :
4.36

‫ةحم ٌد رسي ُ هللا‬

refers to a specific person and no one can be confused about him.
Yet, nunation is found in this noun.
2. The proper noun َ ‫ زه‬in:
4.37

‫م ت‬

‫ال زي َد امه‬

is used indefinitely and generically. Yet, nunation is not found in
this noun.
Concerning the first case, nunation in ٌ ‫ي‬
‫ عحم‬refers to the
indefinite origin of the ‫اسيي‬
. Nunation here does not reduce the
importance and the greatness of the prophet Muhammad, but it

80

shows the origin of the proper noun. This can be supported by the
following Quranic ayya (verse):
4.38
) 144

ْ َ‫سو ٌللَ ْ عَ ا‬
َ‫س ُل وَةَإ ِ ْ َع ت‬
ُ ُّ‫ت ِع ْ لَ ْواِ ِ ال ة‬
ُ ‫( َل َع ُة َح َّم ٌد إِ َّال َر‬
ْ ‫وَلْ لُتِ َل ا‬
ُ ِ َ‫ي َهاَحوَ ْهق‬
‫ ع اآله‬: ‫(آ هم ةا‬
)‫كي‬
ْ ُ‫نقَاَ ْوت‬

Concerning the second case, َ ‫ ال زهي‬, nunation is not used
because َ ‫ي‬
‫ ال زه‬is considered as one phonological unit .Similarly, the
‫اسيي‬in the vocative is used also without nunation except in certain
cases

in

which

nunation

is

used

for

necessity

(see

examples(34)and(35) above) ( ‫السي عةار‬1968 : 188 - 189 (. In general,
nunation is omitted to make the articulation easy and effortless.
Joodi (1978: 181) and Johani (1984 :233) consider nunation an
indefinite article and they suggest a zero article to account for the
absence of nunation in diptotes.
‫ي ( ألستةا ذي‬
‫ ه‬686 ‫ ت‬: 2/129 ) stands between these two views;
he says that ً ‫ي ةع ه‬
‫ي‬
‫فبي التمكيب لالتنكب‬
‫ي ة هايي ه‬
‫ي‬
‫يل اسيي عيتمك يب‬
‫ي‬
‫ييه ةي ا‬
‫ي‬
‫ التن‬.
i.e.‘Nunation in declinable ‫اسيم ء‬except the proper nouns shows that
a noun is fully declinable and also indicates indefiniteness.’
As a conclusion, it can be said that nunation is an indefinite
marker, but it has different functions: in the common declinable ‫اسي‬it
emphasizes indefiniteness because the ‫اسيي‬
is originally indefinite. In
the proper noun which is declinable, nunation is used to hint at the
origin of the ‫اسي‬. In the indeclinable ‫اسم ء‬, diptotes and the ‫اسيي‬
used
in the vocative , nunation has a semantic function , because it
indicates indefiniteness and distinguishes between indefinite and
definite ‫ اسم ء‬.

81

4.1.3.2 The Definite Article ‫‘ أل‬the’
The definite article in Arabic is

‫ي‬
‫هي‬
‫‘ و الت هة‬the’. Some

grammarians say that it is ‫) (الم الت هةهي‬. ‫ي ( اي ههيبش‬
‫ ه‬634 ‫ ت‬:1/24)
calls it ‫‘ لة الت هة ه‬a particle’ for two reasons :
1. to include the view of ‫سيبويه‬
, who considers the letter or the
sound ( ( alone as the definite article ,and of ‫يل‬
‫الخاي‬,
‫ ب‬who
considers ‫ و‬as ‫‘ لية لالي‬a particle’ combined of two letters
like ‫ هل‬and ‫ ل‬.
2. to include the practice in ancient Arabic of replacing ‫الم الت هةهي‬
by ‫المبي‬as in the saying of prophet Muhammad:
‫سفة‬
‫ع ام ة امصب م ة ام‬

4.39

‫لب‬

) [ 114:1959] ‫ ه‬761 ‫ ت‬، ‫(األنص ري‬

and in :
‫هابك امرو ي لهابن ام ةه‬

4.40
)[96 /3:1965] ‫ ه‬656 ‫ ت‬، ‫و الح ه‬

‫(ا‬

The definite article ‫ و الت هةهي‬in Arabic has three main uses
( ‫ ه النص ري‬761 ‫[ ت‬1959:112- 113) :
1. ‫اله م‬, as in :
4.41

َّ
ْ ‫ير ِه َا ِم‬
َ‫ش‬
‫ك ٍ ةِب مَ ِعصْوَ ٌح‬
َّ ‫(هللاُنُي ُر ال‬
ِ ‫س َم َلا‬
ِ ُ‫ض َعثَ ُلن‬
ِ ْ‫ت َل ْاألَر‬
ْ ‫ي هُيلَ ُ ِع‬
ُّ ‫اح ةِ ُز َج َج ٍ ا‬
ٌّ ‫اج ُ َاأَنَّمَ َايْ َابٌ ُد ِّر‬
ْ ‫ا ْل ِم‬
ُ َ‫صب‬
َ ‫لز َج‬
َ ‫س َة ٍ ُعوَ َر َا ٍ َز ْهتُينَ ٍ ال‬
َ
َ ‫ش ةْلِبَّ ٍ َلال‬
)ٍ َّ‫ي ةِْب‬
َ ‫ش‬
)35 ‫ ع اآله‬:‫ا(لنير‬

2. ‫الس ن‬
, the generic use , as in :

82

َ ‫( َل َج َه ْانَ ِع َ ا ْل َما ِء ُا َّل‬
) ٍّ ‫ش ْ ٍء َل‬

4.42

) 30 ‫ ع اآله‬:‫) االنوب ء‬

3. ‫ ألستغةا‬, as in :
َّ ُ ‫(هُ ِةه‬
ْ ‫فِّ َ َه‬
ُ‫ن‬
)ً ‫ف‬
‫ض ِهب‬
‫هللاُوَ ْ هُ َخ‬
َ ِ‫ي َل ُعا‬
ْ‫ك‬
َ ‫ق اإلنسان‬

4.43

) 28 :‫نس ء‬
‫(ال‬

‫ي (آلعي ي‬
‫ ه‬631 ‫[ ت‬1914:1/301]) says that when the definite
article is used generically , it does not show the genus of the object
because it is already known without it . It is used to convey a sense
of generalization .

4.1.4 The Syntactic Position of the Indefinite ‫اسم‬
The structure of the sentence in Arabic is divided
grammatically into a subject and a predicate. The subject is called
‫بي‬
‫المسين ال‬
or ‫بي‬
‫محكييم ها‬
‫ ال‬and the predicate is ‫المسين‬
or ‫الحكيي‬
.There are
two types of sentences in Arabic : ‫بي‬
‫سما الفها‬
‫‘الي‬the verbal sentence’
and ‫‘ال ما االسمب‬the nominal sentence’.
The verbal sentence is composed of ‫الفهيل‬
‘the verb’ and ‫الفهيل‬
‘the subject’ (the doer of the action). The nominal sentence, on the
‫ ‘ ت‬the subject’ and ‫ويية‬
‫‘ الخ‬the
other hand, is composed of ‫الموي و‬
predicate’.
In Arabic, indefiniteness is associated with the predicate. In
the verbal sentence, the verb is considered the predicate and it
precedes the subject. So, Arabic grammarians agree that the verb is
‫‘نك ة‬indefinite’, and it is impossible to be definite (‫ههبش‬
1/24]; ‫ لسي‬1974:1/323 ;

‫بيي‬
‫يالسي‬
‫ ه‬911 ‫)[ ت‬

)

‫ ه ا‬643 ‫ت‬:
1985:1:199]).

83

Though, there are some examples in Arabic in which ‫ و‬is attached
to the verb. In such cases, this prefix has the form of the definite
article

‫هيي‬
‫ا الت هة‬, ‘the’ , but the different meaning of a relative

pronoun, as ‫‘الذي‬who, that, which’ ( ‫ي ري‬
‫نص‬
‫ي أل‬
‫ ه‬761 ‫[ ت‬1977:1/312];
‫يالسةجي ن‬
‫ ه‬471 ‫)[ ت‬

)1982

:1/72]). This use of ‫ ا‬is irregular and

abnormal (ibid.) . ‫السةجن‬gives the following :
ً ‫هقي الخن لا غض ال ُهسي ِن يق‬

4.44

‫ع‬
ُ ‫إلحنر صيت الحم ر اليُج ّد‬
4.45

‫لهستخ ة ُج الب ة ي َ ع ن ةقر‬
‫ع‬
ُ ‫ص‬
ّ ‫لع جُح ةه لشبخ اليتق‬

‫نص ري‬
‫ أل‬says that ) ‫ )و‬in this sense is used out of necessity:
‫كيعت‬
‫ضى ل‬
ّ ‫ع ونت لحكي التُر‬

4.46

and it is also used with ‫سي الفهيل‬
‫ ا‬and ‫اسيي المفهيي‬
‘the participles’ as in
: ‫لضي ر‬
‫ ا‬and ‫ضي ةل‬
‫الم‬. It can be said that these two forms of

‫و‬,

‫الت هةه‬and ‫والميصيل‬, can be considered hymonymous .
The subject of the verbal sentence may be indefinite or definite
since the verb begins the sentence and the action is determined in the
mind of the speaker first ( ‫قبل‬
‫ ه ا ه‬769 ‫[ ت‬1956 :1/ 92]), as in :
)‫ان‬
ِّ ‫( َل َد َع َل َع َه ُ ال‬
ِ َ‫سسْ َفَتَي‬

4.47

)36 ‫ ع اآله‬: ‫(هيس‬

4.48

) ‫ي وج هي * إال إاب‬
‫سس الملئك اام‬
‫(ة‬
( 31-30:‫لحس ة‬
‫( ا‬

‫‪84‬‬

‫‪The object of the verb may be definite or indefinite as in :‬‬
‫بُ‬
‫بُ‬
‫سوالا َ‬
‫ش ِه اً َهاَ ْ‬
‫س ْانَ إِلَ ْ‬
‫س ْانَ إِلَح ةِ ةْ هَيْ َ‬
‫ي َر ُ‬
‫كْ‬
‫كْ‬
‫ي َا َم وَرْ َ‬
‫(إِنَّ وَرْ َ‬
‫سو َل ةَأَع َْذنَ هُوَ ْعذاً َلِبالً)‬
‫صح ةِ ةْ هَيْ ُ ال َّر ُ‬
‫َر ُ‬
‫سوالا* ةَ َه َ‬

‫‪4.49‬‬

‫)ال ممعل‪)16 -15‬‬

‫اسم ء ‪There are certain positions in Arabic that are occupied by‬‬
‫‪should be indefinite. The‬اسيم ء ‪in the accusative case, and these‬‬
‫‪important ones will be mentioned hereunder with examples:‬‬
‫‪ ‘adverbs of manner’ as in :‬الح ‪1.‬‬
‫ض َة َرح ا)‬
‫( َلالبَ ْم ِ‬
‫ش ةِ ْاألَرْ ِ‬

‫‪4.50‬‬
‫( االس ةاء‪ :‬ع اآله ‪) 37‬‬

‫لتمبب م ‪2.‬‬
‫‪ ‘Specificative’, as in:‬ا‬
‫(لَ َ َر ِّ إِنِّ َل هَ َ ا ْل َه ْ‬
‫ي ِعنِّ َلا ْ‬
‫يب ا )‬
‫شتَ َه َل ال ة َّْو لُ َ‬
‫شْ‬
‫ظُ‬

‫‪4.51‬‬

‫(عةهي‪ :‬ع اآله ‪)4‬‬

‫ع َلبِ ْ‬
‫( إِ َّ هَ َذاوَ ِع لَ ُبِ ْ‬
‫ع َج ا)‬
‫س ٌ‬
‫س هُي َ نَ ْ‬

‫‪4.52‬‬

‫ف‬
‫(ص‪ :‬ع اآله ‪)23‬‬

‫المفهي المطاق ‪3.‬‬
‫‪‘the absolute object’ ,as in :‬‬
‫(إِنَّ َم هُ ِةه ُ َّ‬
‫ب َه ْ‬
‫نُ‬
‫ي ال ِّةجْ َ وَ ْه َل ا ْلوَ ْ‬
‫يتَ ْط ِهيرا)‬
‫ت َلهُطَ مِّ َة ُا ْ‬
‫هللاُلِب ُْذ ِه َ‬
‫ب ِ‬
‫كُ‬

‫‪4.53‬‬

‫(األل ما ‪ :‬ع اآله ‪)33‬‬

‫كفَ ْ‬
‫تح ا ُعوِبن ً)‬
‫(إِنَّ ةَتَحْنَ لَ َ‬

‫‪4.54‬‬
‫فت ‪)1 :‬‬
‫(ال‬

85

4. ‫مفهي ألجا‬
‫ال‬, as in:
ْ ‫(إِ ْ ُا‬
) ِ‫ضب‬
ْ ُ‫ي َع َةجْت‬
ْ ُ‫نت‬
َ ْ‫سوِباِ َلاْتِ َغ َء َع ة‬
َ ِ‫ي ِج َهادا ة‬

4.55

)1 ‫ ع اآله‬: ‫تحن‬
‫(المم‬

The indefinite also occurs after ‫ ال النبة لاسن‬, as in:
4.56

) َ‫ي َب ةِب م‬
َّ ‫( َلوَ َّ ال‬
ْ ‫س َه َآبِبَ ٌ ال َر‬
)7 ‫ ع اآله‬:‫(الحج‬

It also occurs after ‫‘ ال‬every, each’, ‫‘ وي‬any’, and ‫‘ اي‬how many’, as
in :
ْ َ‫( ُالُّ ن‬
)‫ت‬
ِ ْ‫س َذارِقَ ُ ا ْل َمي‬
ٍ ‫ف‬

4.57

)35 ‫ ع اآله‬:‫(االنوب ء‬

4.58

َ ‫صو َر ٍة َع‬
)‫ك‬
ِّ َ‫(ةِ و‬
َ َ‫ش َء َر َّاو‬
ُ ‫ي‬
) 8 :‫فط ر‬
‫(االن‬

‫بلةوت‬
ٍ ‫اي كتا‬

4.59

In the nominal sentence, the subject precedes the predicate and
should be definite and known to the addressee. The predicate, on the
other hand, should be indefinite and unknown to the addressee
( ‫هي سيبويه‬180 ‫ي [ ت‬
‫ ه‬1316:1/22]). Thus starting a message with an
is not allowed in Arabic. However, there are certain
indefinite ‫اسيي‬
justifications for which the subject may be indefinite.2 These
2

There are different views about starting the nominal sentence in Arabic with an indefinite ‫ اسم‬/ ‫نكرة‬.

‫ ه السيوطي‬911 ‫( [ ) ت‬

) : 1985 :3/107]( mentions some of these views.

86

justifications as stated by Arabic grammarians come to forty ones.
‫صي ري‬
‫ي (الن‬
‫ ه‬761 ‫[ ت‬1957:182-183 ]) and ‫بي ي‬
‫ي (السي‬
‫ ه‬911 ‫([ ت‬

)

1985:3/95]) state the main and common justifications as follows :
1. When the indefinite is modified explicitly or implicitly, as in the
following:
4.60

ْ ‫ب ٌة ِع ْ ُع‬
ُ َ‫سو‬
ْ ‫ب ٌد ُة ْؤ ِةنٌ َع‬
)‫ي‬
ْ‫ع‬
ٍ ‫ش ِة‬
ْ‫ك‬
َ ‫ك َللَيْ وَ ْه‬
َ َ‫) َلل‬
)221 ‫ ع اآله‬: ‫(الوقة‬

4.61

‫رهي‬

‫السم ةنوان‬
‫ُرجيل ج ءن‬

4.62

Sentence (61) means : ‫السم ةنوان ةنه رهي‬, and (62) means ‫رج ٌلصايي ٌر‬
‫ ج ءن‬.
2. When the indefinite is active, i.e. it is derived from a verb as:
‫قائ ٌم الم ه ا‬

4.63
4.64.

‫مهةل ص ل‬

‫اة ٌر‬

3. In the case of ‫‘الهطي‬co-ordination’, provided that either ‫المهطيي‬
or

‫بيي‬
‫يي ها‬
‫طي‬
‫ ال مه‬satisfies the grammatical conditions of the

permissible indefinite subject as in :
4.65

ْ َ‫ص َلَ ٍ ه‬
ْ ‫ع ُروفٌ َو َة‬
ْ ‫يفِ َرةٌ َع‬
‫ى‬
ً ‫توَ ُه مَ وَذ‬
ْ ‫(قَ ْو ٌل َة‬
َ ْ ‫ب ٌة ِع‬
َّ ‫َل‬
َ ُ‫هللا‬
)‫ي‬
ٌ ‫ينِ ٌّ َلاِب‬
)263: ‫(الوقة‬

َّ ‫ص َلُيا‬
َ َ‫هللاَل‬
ْ ‫ك َ َع‬
4.66 )‫ي‬
ْ ‫(طَا َع ٌ َوقَ ْو ٌل َة‬
ْ ُ‫ب ةاًلَ م‬
َ ْ‫ع ُروفٌ ةَإ ِ َذا َه َم َم ْاألَ ْع ُة ةَاَي‬
)21: ‫(عحم‬

87

4. When the predicate is a preposition or an adverbial phrase as
follows :
4.67

َّ ِ ‫( َل َع َا َ لِ َةسُي ٍ وَ ْ هَأْبِ َ ِآهَ ٍ إِ َّال ِإ ِ ْذ‬
ُ ِ‫هللاِل‬
)‫َاب‬
ٌ ‫كت‬
ِ ‫ك ِّل أَ َج ٍل‬
)38 ‫ ع اآله‬: ‫(الة ه‬

َ َ‫ي َع ه‬
)‫ينَا َة ِزي ٌد‬
ْ ‫ش ُءل َ ةِب مَ َولَ َد‬
ْ ُ‫(لَ م‬

4.68

)35 : ‫(ف‬

5. If the indefinite ‫اسيي‬
is used non- specifically either by itself like
‫وسيمالشيةي‬
‫‘ ء‬conditional ‫وسيم ء‬
’, or it is preceded by negation or
interrogation as follows :
4.69

ْ ‫(فَ َمنْ َا َ ِع‬
ُ‫ن‬
) ‫فَ ٍة ةَ ِه َّ ٌ ِع ْ وَهَّ ٍموُعَ َة‬
‫س‬
ْ‫ك‬
َ ‫ي َع ِةهض ًوَلْ َهاَح‬

)184 ‫ ع اآله‬: ‫(الوقة‬

4.70

َّ ‫(وَال إِ َّ وَلْلِبَ َء‬
ْ َ‫هللاِ ال َخ ْوفٌ َها‬
) َ ‫ي هَحْ َمنُي‬
ْ ُ‫ي َلال ه‬
ْ ‫ب ِم‬
) 62 : ‫(هين‬

4.71

َّ ‫ِ ُ(وَإِلَ هٌ َع َع‬
) َ ‫هللاِلَاِبالً َعبَ َذ َّا ةُل‬
) 62 ‫ ع اآله‬:‫(النمل‬

6. If it is used generically and as a matter of fact, as in :
4.72

‫تمرةٌ عب ٌة ع جةاد‬

4.73

‫حدي ٌد عب ٌة ع نح ل‬

7. When it has a meaning of a verb , which denotes , for example ,
invocations , as in the following example :
) َ ‫سب‬
َ )
ِ َ‫س ل ٌم َهاَح إِ ْ ه‬

4.74
)130:‫(الص ة ت‬

88

8. When the information conveyed in the message is unusual and
strange, as follows :
‫شجرةٌسس ت‬

4.75

Some grammarians consider this sentence nominal since it begins
with ‫اس يي‬
; others consider it verbal since it contains ‫يل‬
‫‘ ةهي‬verb’
regardless of its position .
9. When the indefinite ‫سي‬
‫ ا‬occurs after ‫إذا الفسرب‬
, as :
‫عةجت ة ذا رج ٌل ل و‬

4.76

‫السم‬, a manner
10. When it occurs in the initial position of ‫اي الحلبي‬
clause , as :
‫سةهن ونج ٌمل وض ء ةمذ ا‬

4.77

‫عحبك وعفحضيءه ال ش ر‬
Arabic grammarians divide the structure of the nominal
sentence according to indefiniteness and definiteness into three
patterns ) ‫ ه السةجن‬471 ‫( [ ت‬

)

1982:305-309]) :

1. The subject is definite and the predicate is indefinite. This pattern
is the unmarked one because it follows the requirements of the
meaningful sentence , as in :
4.78

ٌ ‫زه ٌ عنطا‬
‫ق‬

89

2. Both of them, the subject and the predicate, are definite. In this
pattern, there is no information to convey. However, it is used in
certain cases. Consider the following examples:
4.79

‫هللا رن ل عحم نوبن‬

4.80

‫ها وع‬

Concerning (79), every Muslim knows this fact , but it is said as a
kind of worship . It may also be said to the non- Muslim who does
not know this fact, or to the child to teach him . Concerning (80), it
is said if the hearer knows that I have a brother, and he knows
‫ ه‬, so I inform him that ‫اي‬
‫ ه‬is my brother . In this
someone called ‫اي‬
case the whole sentence is considered new information.
A kind of confusion may arise concerning whether the subject
and the predicate in this pattern form a complete sentence or just a
nominal structure. So, to remove any possibility of the predicate
being considered as an adjective or apposition, a pronoun called ‫ضمبة‬
‫صيل‬
‫‘الف‬a pronoun of separation’ is normally inserted between the
subject and the predicate )‫ شية‬1975 : 205 n.173) . This pronoun is
used either to indicate the beginning of the predicate or to emphasize
the subject ( Ziadeh & Winder 1957:48 ) . Consider the following
examples:
4.81

‫ها ٌ هيوع‬

4.82

‫ت هَيْ َعئِ ٍذ ةَقَ ْ َر ِل ْمتَ ُ َل َذلِك‬
َّ ‫َق ال‬
َّ ‫ي ال‬
ِ َ‫سبِّئ‬
ِ َ‫سبِّئ‬
ُ ‫( َللِ ِم‬
ِ ‫ت َل َع ْب‬
)‫ي‬
‫ي ا ْل‬
ُ ‫فَيْ ُز ا ْل َه ِظب‬
َ ُ‫ه‬
) 9 :‫( ي ة ة‬

90

The intonation also helps to know whether the subject and the
predicate in this pattern form a complete sentence or a part of a
sentence.
3. Both the subject and the predicate are indefinite. This pattern will
be meaningless unless one of them is modified, as in :
4.83

‫ي‬
ٌ ‫رج ٌل ع لوبا اذا هل‬

4.84

‫يوببٌ ع رج ع داري‬

‫ ه ) ا السةاج‬316 ‫ [ ت‬1973 :1/ 72)] adds the following possibility:
4. The subject is indefinite and the predicate is definite. This pattern
is used especially for poetic necessity as a poetic licence, as in the
following example :
4.85

‫ا أ ال ة ع بت رول‬
‫هكي عماجم هس ٌل ل ع ء‬

To conclude, the indefiniteness and definiteness of the subject
and the predicate are determined by the context. Any structure that
gives a new piece of information and benefit to the addressee is
possible regardless of the indefiniteness and definiteness of its
elements.‫ ا علك‬summarizes this matter by saying :
‫ال ه يز االت ا لنكة‬
ُ‫ع ليب‬
‫ ا ِهن زه ٍنَ ِم ة‬، ‫ف‬

91

4.2 Indefiniteness at the Semantic Level
It is said previously that Arabic grammarians define ‫نكي ة‬
‫ال‬, the
indefinite ‫اسيي‬
, semantically ( see 2.2). Some of these definitions refer
indirectly to the uses of the indefinite ‫اسيي‬
, which will be mentioned
in detail in this section.

4.2.1 The Uses of the Indefinite ‫اسم‬
There are two main uses for the indefinite ‫سي‬
‫ ا‬depending on the
knowledge of the speaker/writer and the addressee: specific and
generic:
1.The specific use:
The referent of the specific indefinite ‫يي‬
‫اسي‬is known to the
speaker and unknown to the addressee. Some grammarians
concentrate on the singular indefinite ‫اسيي‬
in this use. In fact, this use
. The indefinite singular
includes countable and non- countable ‫وسيم ء‬
‫سي‬
‫ ا‬refers to one definite member of a class, as in:
ْ َ‫(لَلُيا إِ ْ ه‬
)‫س َة َ أَ ٌخلَ ُ ِع ْ لَوْل‬
َ ْ َ‫س ِة ْ ةَق‬

4.86

)77 ‫ ع اآله‬: ‫(هيس‬

4.87

ْ ‫( َللَقَ ْ ِج‬
) َ ‫ى َل َرلْ َم ًلِقَيْ ٍم ه ُْؤ ِعنُي‬
ً ُ‫ي ه‬
ْ ُ‫ئنَ ه‬
ٍ ‫كتَا‬
ِ ِ‫يب‬
ٍ ‫ب ةَص َّْانَ هُ َهاَح ِه ْا‬
)52: ‫(أل ه ةا‬

The indefinite dual refers to two members of a class or a group, as in
4.88

َّ ‫ي‬
ْ َ‫(لَ َ َر ُج ل ِن ِع َ الَّ ِذه َ هَ َخ ةُي َ و‬
) ‫هللاُ َهاَب ِم َم‬
َ ‫ن َه‬
) 23 : ‫(الم ر‬

‫‪92‬‬

‫‪The indefinite plural refers to some members of a class or a group,‬‬
‫‪ [1914 : 1/ 302]) :‬ت ‪ 631‬ه آلع ي( ‪and not all of them‬‬
‫سرِاِب َ )‬
‫يبِ ِ آيَاتٌ لِا َّ‬
‫(لَقَ ْ َا َ ةِ هُي ُ‬
‫س َ َلإِ ْع َ‬

‫‪4.89‬‬
‫(هيس ‪) 7 :‬‬

‫ال ُد ةَتَ هَ َه ْ نَ ْ‬
‫س َوةٌ ةِ ا ْل َم ِهنَ ِ ا ْع َةوَ ُ‬
‫س ِ)‬
‫( َللَ َ نِ ْ‬
‫ف ِ‬
‫ت ا ْل َه ِمه ِمبُ َة ِ‬

‫‪4.90‬‬

‫(هيس ‪)30:‬‬

‫ي)‬
‫سب َم هُ ْ‬
‫) َل َهاَى األ ْه َةا ِ ِر َجا ٌل هَ ْه ِةةُي َ ُافالً ِ ِ‬

‫‪4.91‬‬

‫(األ ه ةا ‪ :‬ع اآله ‪)46‬‬

‫اسيي ‪This indefinite‬‬
‫‪ or‬عهي لد ‪can be followed by certain words like‬‬
‫‪, as in :‬عهايع ت‬
‫( َل َ‬
‫عدُو َد ٍة )‬
‫ش َةلْ هُِثَ َم ٍ َ ْخ ٍ َد َرا ِه َم َة ْ‬

‫‪4.92‬‬
‫(هيس ‪ :‬ع اآله ‪)20‬‬

‫علُو َةاتٌ )‬
‫(ا ْل َحجُّ أَ ْ‬
‫ش ُه ٌر َة ْ‬

‫‪4.93‬‬
‫)الوقة ‪ :‬ع اآله ‪)197‬‬

‫اسيي ‪The indefinite non - countable‬‬
‫‪refers to a certain quantity, a part ,‬‬
‫‪or a kind of something, as in :‬‬
‫ص ُة َخ ْمرا‬
‫( َل َد َع َل َع َه ُ ال ِّ‬
‫سسْ َ ةَتَبَ ِ لَ َ وَ َل ُ هُ َم إِنِّ وَ َرانِ وَ ْه ِ‬
‫ب ُة ِع ْ‬
‫بزابَأْ ُا ُل الطَّ ْ‬
‫ن ُ)‬
‫س ُخ ْ‬
‫َللَ َ ْاآل َع ُة إِنِّ وَ َرانِ وَلْ ِم ُل ةَيْ َ َر ْو ِ‬

‫‪4.94‬‬

‫(هيس ‪:‬ع اآله ‪) 36‬‬

‫يي ‪The indefinite abstract‬‬
‫‪refers to a certain aspect or kind of‬اسي‬
‫‪something, as in:‬‬

93

4.95

َّ ‫ي‬
)ٌ‫ي ِغشَا َوة‬
ْ ‫ص ِر ِه‬
ْ ‫س ْم ِه ِم‬
ْ ‫هللاُ َهاَحلُاُي ِ ِم‬
َ ْ َ‫ي َل َهاَحو‬
َ ‫ي َل َهاَح‬
َ َ‫( َعت‬

)7 ‫ ع اآله‬: ‫(الوقة‬

4.96

ْ ‫(لَ َ الَّ ِذي ِه‬
ْ َ‫ك ِ ِلَ ْو َلوَ ْ هَةْبَ َّ إِل‬
‫ك‬
َ ‫ب‬
َ ‫كتَ ِ وَنَ آبِب‬
ِ ‫ن َ هُ ِع ْل ٌم ِع َ ا ْل‬
)‫ك‬
َ ُ‫يَ ةْ ة‬
)40 ‫ ع اآله‬:‫(النمل‬

In general, the indefinite ‫اسيي‬
refers to some or part of the class
in question ) ‫الستةا ذي‬

‫ ه‬686 ‫ ت‬:2/129 ).

2.The generic use:
The referent of the generic indefinite ‫اسيي‬
is unknown to the
speaker and the addressee. This use applies in three cases:
(a) The generic use:it shows the very identity and nature of a certain
class or genus as in:
‫رج ٌل عب ٌة ع اةرأة‬

4.97
and recall :

‫حدي ٌد عب ٌة ع نحاس‬

4.73

This use can be called identity-generic use to distinguish it from the
other generic ones.
(b) The classifying use: it classifies the subject or the object. So, it
occurs in the predicate, as in :
ْ ُ َ‫(لَ َ ه‬
) ‫ش َةى هَ َذا ُغ ل ٌم‬

4.98

)19 ‫ ع اآله‬: ‫)هيس‬

ُ ْ‫ض ةَ ل‬
َْ ‫ي‬
)‫ب َ النَّ ِل ِ ْل َحق‬
َ َ‫( هَ َدا ُل ُد إِنَّ َج َه ْان‬
ْ‫ك‬
ِ ْ‫ك َخلِيفَ ا ةِ ْاألَر‬
4.99
‫ف‬
)26 ‫ ع اآله‬:‫(ص‬

ْ ‫ش ٌر ِع‬
ُ ُ ‫ثا‬
) َّ َ‫ي هُي َلح إِل‬
َ َ‫(لُلْ إِنَّ َم وَنَ ب‬
ْ‫ك‬

4.100
)6 ‫اآله‬

‫ ع‬:‫(ةصات‬

94

(c) The non-specific use: it refers to any member of a class or a
quantity or a kind of something that carries the qualities of the
thing in question, as in :
َّ َّ ِ‫(إ‬
) ‫يوَ ْب َْذ َحُيابَقَ َرةا‬
ْ ‫هللاَ هَأْ ُع ُة ُا‬

4.101
)67 ‫ ع اآله‬: ‫(الوقة‬

4.102

ْ ‫سحْ ٌة ُع‬
)ٌّ‫ستَ ِم ة‬
ِ ‫( َلإِ ْ هَ َةلْ ا آيَ ا هُ ْه ِةضُيا َلهَقُيلُيا‬
)2 :‫(القم ة‬

‫ي (السةجن‬
‫ ه‬471 ‫) و )[ ت‬:103]) distinguishes between the specific
and generic use of the indefinite ‫يي‬
‫اسي‬by the structure of the
interrogative sentence. Compare:
4.103

‫و ج ءك رج ٌل‬

4.104

‫و رج ٌل ج ءك‬

In (103), the question is about the coming of a specific person,
whereas in (104), the question is about the genus of the comer, (cf.
‫ ه ا المعاكن‬651 ‫[ ت‬1964: 51]) .

4.2.2 Indefiniteness and Singularity
The indefinite singular ‫سي‬
‫ ا‬used in the specific and generic uses
definitely refers to one thing, but this sense does not always have the
priority. The context determines the indication of the ‫سي‬
‫ا‬.
‫ي (ال مراشي‬
‫ ه‬794 ‫ [ ت‬1391:4/42] ) and

‫ ( السي عةار‬2000:1/39)

give the following examples respectively referring to the sense of
singularity of the indefinite ‫سي‬
‫ ا‬:

95

َ‫سح إِ َّ ا ْل َم ََل‬
ْ َ‫صح ا ْل َم ِهنَ ِ ه‬
َ ‫س َهح لَ َ هَ ُعي‬
َ ‫( َل َج َء َر ُج ٌل ِع ْ وَ ْل‬
ْ َ‫ك لِب‬
) ‫ص ِحب‬
َ َ‫ك ةَ ْع ةُجْ إِنِّ ل‬
َ ‫قتُاُي‬
َ ِ َ ‫هَأْبَ ِم ةُل‬
ِ َّ‫ك ِع َ الن‬

4.105
)20 :

‫(القص‬

ْ َ‫) َل َج َء ِع ْ ولصح ا ْل َم ِهنَ ِ َر ُج ٌل ه‬
‫س َهح لَ َ هَ لَيْ ِمابَّوِ هُيا‬
)20: ‫ف‬
‫(ه‬
) ‫ساِب‬
َ ْ‫ا ْل ُم ة‬

4.106

It seems that these examples are not appropriate to convey the sense
of singularity. In (105) and (106), the indefinite ‫اسيي‬
, ‫‘رجي ٌل‬a man’
means one man , but it is not important whether the man who came
is alone or not . The most important thing in the first situation is that
the news of the conspiracy reaches Moses by someone, whereas in
the second, the most important thing is that the message of the
prophet Muhammad (PBUH) reached the remotest part of the city.
in these examples supports this
The position of the indefinite ‫اسيي‬
point. However, the following examples can be used to express
singularity:
4.107

ْ ِ‫يلَلُيالَو‬
ْ ِ‫يلَو‬
ْ ‫(لَ َ لَرِ ٌل ِع‬
)‫ْض هَيْ ٍم‬
ْ ُ‫ثت‬
ْ ‫ي َا‬
ْ ُ‫ن م‬
َ ‫ثنَ يَ ْو ة اوَلْ َ ه‬

)19 ‫ ع اآله‬: ‫)الكم‬

َ ‫سان ا َل‬
ْ َ‫فَت‬
ْ َ‫بن‬
ْ ‫ينَسْ َهلْ لَ ُ َه‬
)ِ ‫ب‬
‫ش‬
ْ َ‫(وَل‬
َ ِ‫ب ِ * َلل‬

4.108

)9-8: ‫(الوا‬

In (107) and (108) , the indefinite ‫سي‬
‫ ا‬implies the numeral ‫ لال‬/ ‫لالي‬
‘one’ which can be expressed explicitly in a certain context to
emphasize the singularity of the indefinite ‫سي‬
‫ا‬, as in :
4.109

ٌ َّ‫ات َل َجن‬
ٌ ‫س ِل َر‬
ٌ ْ‫ت ِع ْ وَ ْهنَ ٍ َلزَر‬
ٌ َ‫ضلِط‬
َ َ‫ع ُعت‬
ِ ْ‫( َلةِ ْاألَر‬
ْ‫ص‬
ْ‫ص‬
َ ‫يا ٌ َل‬
ْ ُ ‫يا ٍ ه‬
ْ‫ي‬
)‫سقَحبِ َما ٍء َوا ِح ٍد‬
ِ ‫ب ُة‬
ِ ‫َلنَ ِخب ٌل‬
َ‫ن‬
َ‫ن‬
)4 ‫ ع اآله‬: ‫(الة ه‬

96

4.110

ْ ِ‫ع َلب‬
ْ ِ‫(إِ َّ هَ َذاوَ ِع لَ ُب‬
)ٌ‫اح َدة‬
ٌ ‫س‬
ْ َ‫س ً َللِ َ ن‬
َ ‫س هُي َ نَ ْه‬
ِ ‫ع َج ٌ َو‬
‫( ف‬
)23 ‫ ع اآله‬:‫ص‬

It is to be mentioned that ‫لالي‬/ ‫‘لالي‬one’ and the indefinite
marker ‫‘ التني ه‬nunation’ are not mutually exclusive.3

4.2.3 Indefiniteness and ‫‘العموم‬Generalization’
When the indefinite ‫اسيي‬
is used in the contexts of negation,
conditional, and imperative it conveys a sense of generalization, as :
َّ َّ ِ‫)إ‬
)‫يوَ ْب َْذ َحُيابَقَ َرةا‬
ْ ‫هللاَ هَأْ ُع ُة ُا‬

4.111

) 67 ‫ ع اآله‬: ‫)(الوقة‬

4.112

ْ َ‫ي ه‬
ْ َ‫هللاَ ال ه‬
َّ َّ ِ‫(إ‬
ْ َ‫ك َّ النَّ َلو‬
) َ ‫ظاِ ُمي‬
‫ن‬
َ ‫ي النَّ َل‬
ْ‫ش‬
ْ ُ‫س م‬
َ ُ‫ف‬
ِ َ‫يئ ا َلل‬
ُ ِ ‫ظا‬
)44: ‫(هين‬

4.1 13

‫صبوُيا‬
ٌ ‫س‬
ْ ‫(هَ وَهُّ مَ الَّ ِذه َ آ َعنُيا إِ ْ َج َء ُا‬
ِ ُ‫ق ِنَوَأ ٍةَتَوَب َّنُياوَ ْب‬
ِ ‫يفَا‬
) َ ‫ينَ ِد ِعب‬
ْ ُ‫س مَلَ ٍ ةَتُصْوِحُيا َهاَح َع ةَ َه ْات‬
َ ِ ً ‫لَيْع‬
)6 :‫لحس ةات‬
‫(ا‬

It can be noticed that the indefinite ‫اسيم ء‬in these examples do
not imply inclusive generalization, but they refer to any one , or any
part of the object(s)in question . Sometimes, the indefinite ‫اسيي‬
used
in the sense of generalization has an inclusive meaning, as in:
4.114

ْ َ‫ي اً َل َعبَ ْ ِرين‬
ْ َ‫( َل َعبَ ْ ِرين‬
ْ َ‫س َع َذاب‬
َ ُ‫سب‬
‫ي‬
ِّ َ ‫ف ٌ ِأ‬
ٌ ‫ف‬
ِ ‫ك‬
َّ َّ ِ‫يت إ‬
ُ ‫ضبَ ُم‬
)ٌ‫ي َعوِب ة‬
ٌ ‫هللاَ َهاِب‬
ٍ ْ‫وَر‬
)34 ‫ ع اآله‬: ‫(لقم‬

3

Similarly, the definite article ‫أل التعريف‬and the demonstratives (,‫ هذا‬etc.) are not mutually exclusive.

97

ْ َ‫تن‬
ْ ‫ت َلوَ َّع َة‬
ْ ‫س َع لَ َّ َع‬
ْ ‫ت* َهاِ َم‬
ْ ‫( َلإِ َذا ا ْلقُوُي ُر ُ ْهثِ َة‬
)‫ت‬
ٌ ‫ف‬

4.115

)5-4:‫فط ر‬
‫(االن‬

َّ ‫ق‬
)ً ‫هللاَ هَسْ َهلْ لَ ُ َع ْخ َةج‬
ِ َّ‫ِ ُ( َل َةنْ هَت‬

4.116

)2 ‫ ع اآله‬: ‫(ال ال‬

The indefinite ‫اسيي‬
after

‫لاسين‬
‫بي‬
‫ ال الن ة‬and ْ ‫ي‬
‫ ِع‬also expresses

inclusive generalization , as in :
ْ َ‫ك و‬
)‫ي‬
ُ ‫)لَلُيا‬
َ َّ‫ك ال ِع ْل َملَنَ إِ َّال َع َهاَّ ْمتَنَ إِن‬
َ َ‫س ْو َحن‬
ِ ‫ي ا ْل َح‬
ُ ‫كب‬
ُ ‫نتَ ا ْل َهاِب‬

4.117

)32: ‫)الوقة‬

ْ ‫ي إِ َّال َانُيا َه‬
) َ ‫ضب‬
ْ ‫ت َر ِّ ِم‬
ْ ‫) َل َعبَأْبِب ِم‬
ِ ‫ن مَ ُع ْه ِة‬
ِ َ‫ي ِع ْ آيَ ٍ ِع ْ آه‬

4.118

)4:‫(األنه م‬

4.2.4 Indefiniteness and Ambiguity
The indefinite ‫اسيي‬
in Arabic can be understood as specific or
generic (non-specific) depending on the intention of the speaker and
the context.
Consider the following example:
4.119

ً ‫يلي ً اجنوب‬
َ ‫اره ُ ا ْ اب ها‬

This sentence either means that the speaker has a specific language
in mind, or he has no specific language.
It is to be mentioned that this ambiguity arises with certain
‫‘ا ةه‬verbs’, like ‫ اره‬, ‫ ا حا‬and ‫ الت ج‬.

98

4.2.5 The Semantic Contrast between Indefiniteness and
Definiteness
Consider the following Quranic aayas (verses):
4.120

َّ َ ‫فُيا إِ َّال ِ َح ْو ٍل ِع‬
ْ َ ‫ض ِة‬
ْ َ‫ت َها‬
‫هللاِ َل َل ْو ٍل‬
ُ (
ِ‫ي ال ِّذلَّ ُوَ ْه َ َع مُق‬
ُ ‫ب ِم‬
َّ َ ‫ب ِع‬
ُ َ‫كن‬
ْ َ ‫ض ِة‬
َ‫س‬
ْ ‫ي ا ْل َم‬
ْ َ‫ت َها‬
ُ ‫هللاِ َل‬
ٍ ‫ض‬
َ ‫ِع َ النَّ ِل َل َ ُءلا ِ َغ‬
ُ ‫ب ِم‬
َّ ‫ت‬
ْ َ‫هللاِ َله‬
ْ َ‫ي َانُيا ه‬
ْ َ‫قتُاُي َ ْاأل‬
ْ ‫نوِبَ َء ِ َغ‬
‫ب ِة‬
‫ك‬
َ ِ‫َذل‬
ْ ُ‫ك ِأَنَّم‬
ِ َ‫فُ ةُل َ ِآه‬
) َ ‫صيْ ا َل َانُيا هَ ْهتَ ُل‬
َ ِ‫َحق َذل‬
َ ‫ك ِ َم َه‬
)112: ‫هم ةا‬

4.121

‫(آ‬

َّ َ ‫ب ِع‬
ْ َ ‫ض ِة‬
َ‫س‬
ْ ‫ي ال ِّذلَّ ُ َلا ْل َم‬
ْ َ‫ت َها‬
ُ ‫َل‬
ٍ ‫ض‬
َ ‫كنَ ُ َل َ ُءلا ِ َغ‬
ِ‫هللا‬
ُ ‫ب ِم‬
َّ ‫ت‬
ْ َ‫هللاِ َله‬
ْ َ‫ي َانُيا ه‬
ْ ‫قتُاُي َ النَّوِبِّب َ ِ َغ‬
‫ب ِة‬
‫ك‬
َ ِ‫َذل‬
ْ ُ‫ك ِأَنَّم‬
ِ َ‫فُ ةُل َ آه‬
) َ ‫صيْ ا َل َانُيا هَ ْهتَ ُل‬
ِّ ‫ا ْل َح‬
َ ِ‫ق َذل‬
َ ‫ك ِ َم َه‬

)61 ‫ ع اآله‬: ‫(الوقة‬

The indefinite ‫اسيي‬
‫ ‘ حاق‬right’ in (120) indicates that there is
‫الحاق ا‬, ‘the
no right at all to kill and hurt the prophets. The definite ‫سي‬
right’ in (121) refers to one definite ‫يق‬
‫‘ ل‬right’ which is the right to
kill the prophets. So, the indefinite is general and unknown, whereas
the definite is specific and known ( ‫ الس عةار‬1988: 170).
It can also be understood that the indefinite and definite ‫اسيم ء‬
,
‫يق‬
‫ ل‬and ‫يق‬
‫الح‬are used generically . Arabic grammarians distinguish
between the generic indefinite and generic definite.
‫ )الغالهبني‬1966 : 1/ 155 ) and ‫ (ا لسي عةار‬2000: 1/ 116 - 118 )
think that the difference between them is a different between ‫يق‬
‫المطا‬
‘the absolute’ and ‫بي‬
‫‘المق‬the restricted’ . The generic indefinite refers
to the absolute fact without restriction, whereas the generic definite
refers to the identity of the thing as it exists in the mind. The

99

difference between them is also that the generic indefinite is
indefinite by form and meaning, whereas the generic definite is
definite by form but indefinite by meaning.
At any rate, whether the definite ‫سي‬
‫الحاق ا‬in (121) is specific or
generic it is restricted and it is in harmony with the whole aaya, for
example , with the word ‫بيب‬
‫النو‬. The indefinite ‫ حاقاسيي‬in (120) is
general and it fits in with the whole ayya and with the word ‫بي ء‬
‫ ألنو‬.
The choice of these words in these ayyas is intended to show that the
mischief and hideousness of the non-believers are more in (120).
The indefinite and definite ‫وسم ء‬are used in the Glorious Qur’an
to convey different provisions. For example, the words ‫صيب‬
‫ ل‬and
‫اليصب‬occur in the Glorious Qur’an in different situations . Consider
the following Quranic aayas ( verses) :
4.122

ْ ‫اذ َا ِة ِع‬
َّ ِ‫يل‬
َّ ‫ي‬
ِّ ‫ث ُل َل‬
ْ ُ‫ظ ْاأل‬
ُ ‫صب‬
َّ ‫ب ِ ةَإ ِ ْ ُا‬
ْ َ‫نثَب‬
ْ ‫هللاُ ةِ وَلْ ال ِد ُا‬
ِ ‫(هُي‬
ُ‫ك‬
ْ ‫ك َلإِ ْ َان‬
ْ َ‫س ًء ةَيْ َ ْامنَت‬
َ ‫ب ِ ةَاَ مُ َّ مُاُثَ َعبَ َة‬
َ‫َت َلا ِل َ ً ةَاَ م‬
َ ِ‫ن‬
ْ ‫ك ِّل َلا ِل ِع‬
ُ ِ‫ي ْه ِل‬
ُّ ‫ن مُ َم ال‬
َ ‫ك إِ ْ َا‬
َ ‫س ُ لُ ِع َّمبَ َة‬
َ َ َ‫النِّصْ ُ َل ِأل‬
ُ َ‫ي ه‬
َ ‫ياهُ ةَ َِلُ ِّع ِ الثُّاُ ُا ةَإ ِ ْ َا‬
ْ َ‫لَ ُ َللَ ٌ ةَإ ِ ْ ل‬
َ َ َ‫ك ْ لَ ُ َللَ ٌ َل َل ِرمَ ُو‬

ُّ ‫ي ٌ ةَ َِلُ ِّع ِ ال‬
ِ ‫صيَّ ٍ هُي‬
ِ ‫س ُ لُ ِع ْ َ ْه ِ َو‬
َ ‫لَ ُ إِ ْع‬
ٍ ‫ص ِ مَ وَلْ َد ْه‬
ْ َ‫ين‬
ُ َ‫يوَ ْل َة ُ ل‬
َ ‫ض ً ِع‬
ْ‫ك‬
ْ ُ‫ي البَ ْ رُل َ وَهُّ م‬
ْ ‫ي َلوَ ْنَ ُؤ ُا‬
ْ ‫آ َ ُؤ ُا‬
َ ‫ف ه ً ةَ ِةه‬
َّ َّ ِ‫هللاِ إ‬
َّ
)ً ‫كبم‬
ِ ‫هللاَ َا َ َهاِبم ً َل‬
)11:‫نس ء‬
‫ا(ل‬

4.123

ُ َّ‫صي‬
ُ‫ب‬
ُ ْ‫ي ا ْل َمي‬
ْ ‫ك َع‬
ْ َ‫ب َها‬
َ ‫ت إِ ْبَ َة‬
ْ‫ك‬
َ ‫ي إِ َذا َل‬
َ ِ‫( ُات‬
ِ ‫ب ةاً ا ْل َو‬
ُ ‫ض َةوَ َل َ ُا‬
) َ ‫ف ً َهاَح ا ْل ُمتَّقِب‬
‫يالِ َ ْه ِ َل ْاألَ ْل َةِب َ ِ ْل َم ْه ةُل ِ َلق‬
َ ‫لِ ْا‬
)180: ‫(الوقة‬

100

In (122), the indefinite ‫وصية اسم‬, refers to something optional.
The definite ‫ الوصية اسم‬in (123) refers to an obligatory state which is
required of Muslims at a certain time. The interference of the
pragmatic element with the semantic one is obvious.

4.2.6 The Indefinite ‫اسم‬in Proverbs and Proverbial Sayings
The indefinite and definite items can be used in Arabic
generically; so both of them are used in proverbs and proverbial
sayings. The indefinite item can begin the sentence if , for example,
it has a modifier of some sort , or specialization , as in :
1.
2.

.‫حش ٌر مع الناس عيد‬
‫عنسلطان جائر‬
‫حق ٍ د‬
ِ ُ ‫كلم‬

The indefinite item can be used in non-subject position, as in:
3.

‫كت المرء على إهان‬
‫اليس‬

4.

‫فعى‬
‫اظل من أ‬

and it may imply the numeral ‫‘ واحد‬one’, as in ,
5.

‫ألف صدق وال عدو‬

6.

‫الدهر يومانيوملك ويومعليكفاذا كان‬
‫صبر‬
‫لكفالتبطر وإذا كان عليكفا‬

The indefinite item is used in the context of negation to convey a
sense of generalization, as in:

101

7.

‫ية الخالق‬
‫ال طا ع لمخلوقفيمعص‬

8.

‫كريم منلئةم‬
‫بر منفاجر وعاقل من جاهل و‬: ‫الينتصف الثة من الثة‬

and it may be used after ‫ رب‬, as in :
‫سلبتنعمة‬
‫فرب كلم‬

9.

4.3 Indefiniteness at the Pragmatic Level
The indefinite ‫اسم‬is used when the referent is mentioned for
the first time; otherwise, for example, when the referent is
mentioned previously or unique or well-known to the speaker and
the hearer or it has a general sense, then the definite ‫اسم‬is used, as in
the following example:
4.124

ْ َ‫( َولَقَ ْد َخل‬
‫قنَا اإلنسان ِم ْنسُاللَ ٍة ِم ْن ِطةن *ثُ َج َع ْلنَاهُنُ ْطفَ فِي‬
ْ ُّ‫قنَا الن‬
ْ َ‫غ فَ َخل‬
ْ َ‫فَ ةَ َعلَقَ فَ َخل‬
ْ َ‫كي ٍن*ثُ َخل‬
َ‫ض‬
‫قنَا‬
‫ط‬
ْ ‫قنَا ا ْل َعلَقَ ةَ ُم‬
ِ ‫قَ َرار َم‬

ْ َ‫سوْنَا ا ْل ِعظَا َملَحْ ما ًثُ أ‬
َ َ‫ا ْل ُمضْ َغ ةَ ِعظَاماف‬
َ ‫ن‬
‫شأْنَاهُ َخ ْلقا ً آ َخ َر‬
َ ‫ك‬
)‫ين‬
َ ِ‫س ُن ا ْل َخالِق‬
َ ‫فَتَبَا َر‬
َ ْ‫ك َّللاُ أَح‬
) 14- 12 :‫(المؤمنون‬

Arabic grammarians recognize four cases for the repetition of
the ‫اسم‬in the context according to its indefiniteness and definiteness
) ‫زركشمي‬
‫ هم ال‬794 ‫ هم [ ت‬1391 : 4/93] ; ‫ همالسميويي‬911 ‫) أ)[ ت‬:
1/563]):
1.

When the first and second ‫اسمماء‬are indefinite , they have

different referents , as in :
4.125
)54 :‫(الروم‬

ُ َ‫(َّللاُ ال ِذي َخلَق‬
‫عفقُوةًثُ َج َع َل‬
ْ‫ض‬
َ ‫ض ْعفثُ َج َع َل ِم ْنبَ ْع ِد‬
َ ‫ك ْ ِم ْن‬
َ َ‫ق َماي‬
ُ ُ‫يبَ ةًيَ ْخل‬
َ ‫عفا َو‬
ْ‫ش‬
)ُ‫شا ُء َو هُ َو ا ْل َعلِي ُ ا ْلقَ ِدير‬
ْ‫ض‬
َ ‫ِم ْنبَ ْع ِدقُو ٍة‬

102

2.

When the first and second ‫وسيم ء‬
are definite , they have one

referent , as in :
4.126

ْ َ‫ين أ‬
‫ي ِر‬
َ ‫ص َراطَ الَّ ِذ‬
ْ ‫ي ِه ْم َغ‬
ْ َ‫ع ْمتَ َعل‬
ْ ‫ص َراطَ ا ْل ُم‬
ِّ ‫(ا ْه ِنَ ال‬
َ‫ن‬
ِ *‫ستَقِي َم‬
ْ ‫ا ْل َم‬
)‫ين‬
َ ِّ‫ضال‬
ْ َ‫ب َعل‬
َّ ‫ي ِه ْم َوال ال‬
ُ ‫ي‬
ِ ‫ضو‬
) 7-6 : ‫الفبح‬
(

These two cases can be seen in the following example :
)‫سرا‬
ْ ُ‫س ِري‬
ْ ‫ع‬
ْ ُ‫س ِري‬
ْ ‫ع‬
ُ ‫سرا* إِ َّ َع َع ا ْل‬
ُ ‫(ةَإ ِ َّ َع َع ا ْل‬

4.127

) 6- 5 :‫(الشةح‬

The indefinite, ‫ هسةا‬, has two referents, whereas the definite, ‫ الهسية‬,
has one referent. This view is supported by the saying of the prophet
Muhammad “ ‫هغاب هس ةٌهس ةه‬
‫ي الطوةس ( ”ل‬
‫ ه‬548 ‫ ت‬:10/ 509). In some
َ
Quranic commentaries, it is said that the repetition of the whole
sentence in such cases is for the sake of emphasis.
3.

When the first ‫ اسي‬is indefinite and the second is definite ,

they have the same referent , as in :
4.128

ُ‫ب‬
ُ‫ب‬
َ ً‫ي َرسُيال‬
ْ َ‫ش ِه اً َها‬
ْ َ‫س ْانَ إِل‬
َ ْ‫س ْانَ إِلَح ِة ةْ هَي‬
ْ‫ك‬
ْ‫ك‬
َ ْ‫ي َا َم وَر‬
َ ْ‫(إِنَّ وَر‬
)ً‫سو َل ةَأَع َْذنَ هُوَ ْعذاً َلِبال‬
ُ ‫صح ةِ ةْ هَيْ ُ ال َّر‬
ُ ‫َر‬
َ ‫سوالا* ةَ َه‬
) 16 -15 :‫(ال ممعل‬

4. When the first ‫اسيي‬
is definite and the second is indefinite ,they
either have one referent as in :

103

‫ي‬
ْ ُ‫ض َةْنَ لِانَّ ِل ةِ هَ َذا ا ْلقُ ْرآ ِن ِع ْ ُا ِّل َعثَ ٍللَ َهاَّ م‬
َ ْ َ‫( َللَق‬
َ ‫هَتَ َذ َّا ةُل َ * قُ ْرآن ا َع َربِيّ ا‬
ْ‫ي‬
) َ ‫ي هَتَّقُي‬
ْ ُ‫جلَ َهاَّم‬
َ ‫ب َة ِذي ِه‬
ٍ ‫ي‬

4.129

) 28 - 27 :‫(المع ة‬

or they have different referents, as in :
4.130

ْ ُ‫سا َع ُ ه‬
‫ي ا ْل ُمسْ ِة ُعي َ َع لَوِثُيا‬
َّ ‫َلهَيْ َمبَقُي ُم ال‬
ِ ‫ق‬
ُ‫س‬
ُ َ‫ك َانُيا ه ُْؤة‬
َ
ْ‫ي‬
) َ ‫كي‬
َ ِ‫سا َع ٍ َا َذل‬
َ ‫ب َة‬
)55 :‫(الةلم‬

It seems that these rules sometimes apply to the form of the
word not to its meaning. For example, the words

‫السي ه‬
and ‫سي ه‬
in

(130) have different meanings, so they definitely have different
referents .
The inadequacy of these rules can be supported by the
following example:
4.131

‫ك‬
َ َ ‫ض الً ةَ مَ َ ى* َل َل َج‬
َ َ ‫كيَتِيم ا ةَآ َلى * َل َل َج‬
َ ْ‫س‬
ْ َ‫(وَل‬
َ ‫ك‬
ِ َ‫ي ه‬
ْ َ‫ينَح* ةَأ َ َّع ا ْليَتِي َم ةَالب‬
ْ َ ‫َهرِالً ةَأ‬
) ْ‫ق مَ ة‬
)9 - 6 :‫(الضحح‬

This example, according to these rules, belongs to the third case, i.e.
the indefinite and definite items

‫ي‬
‫تبم‬
‫ ه‬and ‫تيبي‬
‫الب‬respectively have the

‫الب‬is definite by form ,but it
same referent. In fact the definite item ‫تيبي‬
has an indefinite referent because it is used in a generic sense.
It can be concluded that the syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic
factors should be taken into consideration to form such rules.

104

4.3.1 The Pragmatic Meanings of the Indefinite ‫اسم‬
Arabic grammarians state that the indefinite ‫اسيي‬
is used to
express certain meanings like ‘ ‫ظ يبي‬
‫لته‬
‫‘ ا‬greatness and elevation’,
‫يية‬
‫يي‬
‫تحقي‬
‫‘ال ب‬humility

and

degradation’, ‫ييل‬
‫يي‬
‫تقاي‬
‫‘الب‬decreasing

and

scarcity’, ‫بية‬
‫لتكث‬
‫‘ا‬increasing and abundance’, etc. In fact, the indefinite
‫اسيي‬
has its lexical meaning and the above meanings are given to the
indefinite ‫اسيي‬
by context ( ‫ ي لي‬1950 : 128) . Consider the following
aayas (verses):
4.132

ْ َ‫ص النَّ ِل َهاَح َحيَا ٍة َل ِع َ الَّ ِذه َ و‬
‫ي ُّد‬
ْ ُ‫س َنَّم‬
َ ‫يوَلْ َة‬
َ َ‫ش َة ُايا ه‬
ِ َ‫) َللَت‬
) ٍ َ‫سن‬
ْ ُ‫وَ َل ُ ه‬
َ َ ‫يلَيْ هُ َه َّم ُةوَ ْل‬
)96 ‫ ع اآله‬: ‫(الوقة‬

4.133

ُ َّ‫ص َحيَاةٌ هَ وُللِ ْاألَ ْلوَ ِلَ َها‬
ُ َ‫) َلل‬
) َ ‫يبَتَّقُي‬
ْ‫ك‬
ْ‫ك‬
َ ِ‫ي ةِ ا ْلق‬
ِ ‫ص‬
)179: ‫(الوقة‬

In (132) and (133) the indefinite ‫بي‬
‫ ل‬has the same meaning , and it is
used instead of the definite

‫بي‬
‫ الح‬to refer to the absolute life

‫لبي‬,

but the context gives them different meanings. In (132), the context
in which

‫بي‬
‫ ل‬occurred gives it a sense of humility ,whereas the

context of (133) gives it a sense of greatness (ibid.) .
‫ي (السةجين‬
‫ ه‬471 ‫ )و)[ ت‬: 198 - 199 ]) thinks that the indefinite
is used in these aayas(verses) because it refers to additional life, not
one’s already possessed life .4 ‫هي ( االمعاكين‬651 ‫[ ت‬1964:52] ) and
‫ھ(المر اش‬793 ‫ ھ[ ت‬1391 : 4 / 91 ]) reiterate the view of ‫السةج ن‬.

4

Concerning (133) , ‫ اجلرجاين‬says : ‫”و السبب يف ذلك [حسن التنكري] ان املعىن على االزدياد من احلباة ال احلياة من‬
‫ اصلها وذلك ال حيرص عليه اال احلي فاما العادم للحياة فال يصح منه احلرص على احلياة وال على غريها‬,concerning (134), he

says :
‫ان السبب يف حسن التنكري وان مل حيسن التعريف ان ليس املعىن على احلياة نفسها ولكن على انه ملا كان االنسان‬
‫اذا علم انه اذا قتل قُتل ارتدع بذلك عن القتل فسلم صاحبه صارت حياة هذا املهموم بقتله يف مستانف الوقت مستفادة بالقصاص‬

105

It is important to infer that these levels, the syntactic, semantic,
and pragmatic are integral to each other. The following examples
show this integration:
4.134

ٌ ‫بطَ ِ نَ ْم‬
ْ َ‫( َلإِ َّع ه‬
َّ ‫ك ِع َ ال‬
َ ‫ن َم‬
ْ َ‫غ ة‬
ْ‫ش‬
)‫ع َعلِي ٌم‬
َ َّ‫ين‬
ٌ ‫س ِمي‬
َ ُ َّ‫ستَ ِه ْذ ِ ََّّللِ إِن‬
) 200 : ‫(أل ه ةا‬

4.135

ٌ ‫بطَ ِ نَ ْم‬
ْ َ‫) َلإِ َّع ه‬
َّ ‫ك ِع َ ال‬
َ ‫ن َم‬
ْ َ‫غ ة‬
ْ‫ش‬
‫ع‬
َ َّ‫ين‬
ُ ‫س ِمي‬
َّ ‫ي ال‬
َ ُ‫ستَ ِه ْذ ِ ََّّللِ إِنَّ ُ ه‬
)‫علِي ُم‬
َ ‫ا ْل‬
) 36:‫(ةصات‬

‫ع ها‬
ٌ ‫يمب‬
‫ س‬in (134)
At the syntactic level, the two indefinites ‫ي‬
ٌ ‫يب‬
‫ا‬.
form the predicate, which is the normal position of the indefinite ‫سي‬
The two definites ‫ي‬
‫ع ال ها‬
‫ الس‬in(135), on the other hand, form the
ُ ‫يمب‬
ُ ‫يب‬
predicate but a pronoun of separation, which is ‫هيي‬
, is used to remove
any possibility of the predicate being an adjective or an apposition .
ٌ ‫ سمب‬mean that Allah
At the semantic level, the indefinites ‫ي‬
ٌ ‫ع هاب‬
hears and knows but these qualities are not unique to Him. The
definites ‫ي‬
ُ ‫السمب‬, on the other hand , mean that Allah alone has
ُ ‫ع ال هاب‬
these qualities , and these ‫ اسم ء‬are two of His Names.
At the pragmatic level, the choice of the ‫سي‬
‫ ا‬whether indefinite or
definite depends on the context. Concerning the first aaya , it can be
noticed, by reading the ayyas preceding the one in question , that
there is a description of the gods which neither hear nor see nor do
anything. So, Allah describes Himself by being ‫ي‬
ٌ ‫سمب‬. In the
ٌ ‫ع هاب‬
second aaya, it can be noticed from the context that the nonMuslims say that the knowledge of Allah is little. So, Allah
describes Himself as ‫ي‬
ُ ‫ السمب‬to prove that these qualities are
ُ ‫ع ال هاب‬

106

exclusive to Him and all that they know amounts nothing when
compared with the knowledge of Allah . The pronoun of separation
‫ هي‬is used to emphasize this meaning ( ‫الس عةار‬1988:175 ) .

CHAPTER FIVE
CONTRASTIVE ANALYSIS
The contrastive analysis intended here will be conducted at the
syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic levels.

5.1

Indefiniteness at the Syntactic Level
English and Arabic are different in their structures and their

grammatical systems. This difference leads them consequently to be
different in their expression of certain concepts.
The parts of speech in English are the noun, pronoun, verb,
adverb, adjective, preposition, conjunction and interjection. The
, and
parts of speech in Arabic are ‫أسم‬, ‫فعم‬

‫حمف‬.The class of ‫اسم‬in

Arabic includes the counterparts of English common and proper
nouns, adjectives, participles, and some adverbs.
Indefiniteness in both languages is a characteristic of noun and
‫اس‬. It is expressed in English by using the indefinite article a/an with
the singular count noun and zero article or unstressed some with
plural and non-count noun. In Arabic it is expressed by the absence
of the definite article

‫يم‬
‫‘ال التعف‬the’ and the definite suffixal marker

‫‘التنوين‬nunation’.
In Arabic, the indefinite ‫ اس‬is given some syntactic definitions
(4.1.1), perhaps because there is no indefinite article in Arabic,
whereas in English there is no such definitions.

107

108

5.1.1 The Classification of Noun and ‫اسم‬
The classification of noun and

‫اسم‬in English and Arabic is

similar in some aspects and different in others. Nouns in English are
of two types: common and proper nouns. The common noun is either
count or non- count. The count noun can be either singular or plural.
In Arabic, ‫اسم‬includes the counterparts of English common and
proper noun, adjective, participle and some adverbs. These (except
proper nouns) are either count or non- count. The count can be
singular, dual or plural. The plural is of three types: regular
masculine plural, regular feminine plural, and irregular plural. In
both languages the noun and ‫ اس‬is either concrete or abstract.
In Arabic, being an inflected language, ‫ اسمم‬is classified
according to declension. In English, there is no such classification.
5.1.2 Articles
In English and Arabic, articles have no meaning by
themselves. They acquire their meanings from the word they occur
with and the context. The choice of the article in both languages
depends on syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic factors.
In English, there are two articles. The indefinite article a/an,
and the definite article the. Plural and non-count nouns in the generic
use take no article, and in such a case, they are said to take zero
article (3.1.1).
article

In Arabic, there is one article, which is the definite

‫يم‬
‫أل التعف‬. The absence of this article indicates indefiniteness

with the indefinite marker nunation ‫التنمموين‬, which has different
functions (4.1.3.1).

109

A question may be asked that: is the absence of the definite
article in Arabic referred to by zero article? The answer is that zero
article is appropriate with common nouns which have article
contrast (Quirk et al. 1985/1987:246). In Arabic, when the ‫اسمم‬
implies one, some, or any then it can be said that it carries zero
article, in contrast with the definite article

‫يم‬
‫أل التعف‬. When the

generic ‫اسم‬
refers to the absolute fact of the referent, it does not carry
zero article.
Nunation is not an indefinite article;1 otherwise, Arab learners
of English would not have produced a sentence like:
5.1 *He is teacher.
instead of :
5.2

He is a teacher.

It is the interference of Arabic, which lacks the indefinite
article, that is behind the production of such a sentence.
Since Arabic is an inflected language, the presence of nunation
with the indefinite ‫اسم‬is important. It is found with almost all types
of ‫اسم‬in Arabic. The absence of the definite article and the presence
of nunation in Arabic may correspond to the indefinite article a/an,
zero article and some in English. The differences between the
indefinite article a/an in English and the indefinite marker nunation
in Arabic are the following:

1

See the different views about nunation in (4.1.3.1)..

110

1. The indefinite article in English is used to make the singular
count noun grammatically indefinite, whereas in Arabic, ‫اسم‬is
originally indefinite and the definite marker nunation is used to
perform different functions (4.1.3.1).
2. The indefinite article in English is used to express the
indefiniteness of the singular count noun. The indefiniteness of
plural and non-count nouns is expressed by zero article or the
unstressed some .The indefinite marker in Arabic is used with all
kinds of nouns, with certain exceptions. It is to be mentioned in
this respect that the concentration in English grammar books is
on the indefinite article and consequently on the singular count
noun. The indefiniteness of plural and non-count nouns is almost
neglected. In Arabic, though the indefinite marker is used with
the count (singular and plural) and non-count

‫اسممم‬
, the

concentration is also on the singular indefinite ‫اس‬.
3. The indefinite article in English is not used with the proper noun
except when the proper noun behaves as a common noun. In
Arabic, the indefinite marker is used with ‫‘السم العمم‬the proper
noun’ freely.
4. The indefinite article in English is a separate word, whereas the
indefinite marker in Arabic is a suffix.
5. The indefinite article in English has the meaning of one and they
are mutually exclusive, whereas the indefinite marker in Arabic,
when it is used with the singular count ‫اسم‬, does not have such a
meaning and it is not mutually exclusive with ‫ واحد‬and ‫‘ واحدة‬one’.

111

The definite articles in English and Arabic share almost the
same grammatical functions. They are also similar in their position,
but in English it is a separate word and in Arabic it is a prefix.
5.1.3 The syntactic Position of the Indefinite Noun and ‫اسم‬
The sentence is divided structurally into subject and predicate.
In English, the subject precedes the predicate and it should be
definite because it carries given information. Yet, the subject can be
indefinite in certain contexts, although in others it seems awkward.
To avoid any kind of awkwardness sensed in the sentence, certain
grammatical devices are used. One of these devices is existential
there and the other is the postmodification of the subject (3.1.3).
In Arabic, the sentence is of two types: verbal and nominal. In
the verbal sentence, the predicate precedes the subject, and the
subject can be definite or indefinite. In the nominal sentence the
subject precedes the predicate and the subject should be definite. It is
not allowed in Arabic to begin the nominal sentence with an
indefinite element unless there is a justification (4.1.4). If the subject
is indefinite and the predicate is a prepositional phrase, the word
order of the sentence is changed to avoid starting the sentence with
an indefinite ‫اسم‬. Yet, in modern Arabic texts there is a construction
reproducing English existential there, viz. ‫ هن لم‬/

‫( هنم‬Aziz 1998:

136). This is an aspect of loan grammar in Arabic which has come
about as a result of borrowing done by translators from English. The
following is an example:

112

ٌ‫يقة رجل‬
‫في الحد‬

5.3

‫يقة‬
‫في الحد‬
ٌ‫هناك ٌرجل‬

5.4

The English sentence corresponds to the Arabic nominal
sentence. The main difference between them is that in patterns of
English sentence where the predicate is an adjective, a noun, or an
uninflected word, a copula is required between the subject and the
predicate which is either verb to be or another linking verb. In
Arabic, however, there is no verb copula. What exists in Arabic in
such sentence patterns is another kind of copula as in the following
examples:
5.5 a. Ahmad is a teacher.
b. ‫اح د‬

‫معم‬

‫اح ُد معم‬

c.

5.6 a. Ahmad is the teacher.
b.

‫اح د‬

‫ال عم‬

c.

‫ا ح د ال عم‬

d.

ُ ‫اح ُد هو ال عم‬

In (5a), it seems that the indefiniteness of the predicate ‫معمم‬
functions as a kind of copula in Arabic. In (6d), ‫ضم الص لم ه همو‬
‫‘رف‬the
pronoun of separation’ performs this function ( 1975‫بشمف‬
:205n.173).
However, the copula is not for emphasis, whereas

‫ضمم الص ل م‬
‫رف‬

performs rhetorical functions including emphasis ( ‫السمم مفا ي‬
2000:1/47- 56 ).

113

The insertion of the pronouns ‫همي‬/ ‫ همو‬as a copula in Arabic
seems to have started with the movement of translation from Greek
during the Abbasid Era. ‫ ال عبد هللا‬states in the book entitled ‫حشمرة ممال‬
‫بمد هللا‬
‫ع‬, or ‫( حشمرةععمدي الر م ا‬1129 ‫ ) هم‬quoting ‫بي‬
‫صم اا‬
‫ هم ا(ل‬950 ‫ )ت‬that
such use is an arrangement within the Arabic language to fill the gap
of the Greek verb befound necessary in translation from
Greek. ‫ العبد هللا‬says(p.38):
‫لروننرمة المل العفبرم ة ولمد القمو ا‬
‫صةل نقمت من المغمة ا‬
‫صمس‬
‫ص اابي إ حك ة ال‬
‫كف ال‬
‫وذ‬
‫دوا فمي المغم ةاابطمة‬
‫لن ق لة ولكنل يجم‬
‫الفابطة ال منرةفي المغة العفبرة هياألفع ل ا‬
‫مف‬
‫لروننرةفستع اوالمفابطة الغر‬
‫في ا‬
ٌ‫تي ن‬
‫ص اسي و ٌاس‬
‫في ال‬
ٌ ‫غرف زمنرةعقو مق ٌاست‬
.‫لصظة هوٌوهي ونحو ه مع كون ه ف األص أس ال أدوات‬
‫ال منرة‬

The object in both languages can be indefinite or definite
depending on the context.
In Arabic, certain position is occupied by an indefinite noun as
‫الحم ل‬, ‫لتررمم‬
‫ا‬, ‫صعممول أللممم‬, ‫ال‬
etc. which are expressed in English in
different ways.

5.2 Indefiniteness at the Semantic Level
5.2.1 The Uses of the Indefinite Noun and ‫اسم‬
English noun and Arabic ‫ اس‬share the same uses in the
indefinite, the generic and specific use, with some differences. In
English, the indefinite singular, plural, and non-count noun are used
in generic and specific use. The singular indefinite noun is used
generically more than others and it is flexible in taking different
syntactic positions in the sentence.

114

In Arabic, the count and non-count

‫أسم‬are used in a generic

and specific sense. They are not frequently used in the subject
position in an affirmative nominal sentence. In negative,
interrogative and conditional sentences the indefinite ‫ اسم‬is used
frequently in a generic sense.
The generic definite ‫اسم‬is used in the subject position in the
affirmative nominal sentence instead of the indefinite noun as in:
5.7

ٌ ٌ ٌ ٌ ٌ ٌ ٌ ٌ ٌ ٌ ٌ ٌ ٌ ٌ ٌ ٌ ٌ ٌ ٌ ٌ ٌ ٌ ٌ ٌ ‫وخرف لمرس ٍفي ال م كتاب‬

5.8

ٍ ‫ف لمرس‬
ُ ‫الكتابٌ خر‬

The difference between the generic indefinite and generic
definite is explained in (4.2.6).

5.2.2 The Indefinite Noun /‫اسم‬and the Numeral One‫ واحد‬/ ‫واحدة‬
In English and Arabic the singular indefinite noun / ‫اسمم‬
,
whether specific or generic, implies numeral one. The singularity of
the indefinite noun / ‫ اسم‬is sometimes emphasized by numeral one in
English and ‫ واحد‬/‫ واحدة‬in Arabic.
In English the indefinite article and one are mutually exclusive
(3.2.2), whereas in Arabic the indefinite marker, when it is used with
the singular indefinite , and ٌ ‫ واحد‬/ ‫ واحدة‬are not (4.2.2).

5.23 Indefiniteness and Ambiguity
In English and Arabic the indefinite noun/ ‫ اس‬may be
understood as specific or non- specific with certain verbs like want
‫يفيد‬and look for ‫يبحث عن‬.

115

5.2.4 The Semantic Contrast between Indefiniteness and
Definiteness
The generic use of the indefinite and definite noun in English :
The all- representative singular indefinite noun refers to any
member of the class as representative of the whole class. The plural
indefinite noun refers to any member of the class as individuals and
as a whole class, and it refers to things which exist or are not yet in
existence. The non-specific generic refers to any member, no matter
which.
The singular definite noun refers to the class itself as a whole.
The plural definite noun refers to the class as a whole and as
individuals and it refers only to things which exist. The generic noncount noun is expressed by zero article.
The generic use of the indefinite and definite ٌ‫ اسم‬in Arabic:
The identity generic indefinite ‫ اسم‬refers to the absolute fact
of the class or genus . It does not refer to individuals but to the fact
of the genus or the class. The counts and non-counts are used in this
sense (4.2.1).
The non- specific generic is used mainly in interrogative,
conditional, and imperative sentences. It is also used with certain
,and it has the
verbs in affirmative sentences as ٌ ‫ يريد‬and ‫يبح د ٌندن‬
meaning of any member(s) not specific one(s).
The generic singular definite refers to the fact of the class or
genus as represented in the mind by its typical member or specimen.
It also refers to the class as individuals. The counts and non- counts
are used in this sense.

116

The specific use of the indefinite and definite noun /‫سدم‬
‫ ا‬in
English and Arabic:
The specific indefinite noun / ‫اسم‬in English and Arabic
refers to a particular thing(s) or quantity which is specific and
definite in the spearker’s mind. The specific definite noun / ‫اسم‬in
English and Arabic refers to a particular thing(s) or quantity
which is specific and definite in the speaker’s and hearer’s minds.
Hawkins’s theory of inclusiveness and exclusiveness
applies to English and Arabic. The definite refers to all objects in
the situation, whereas the indefinite refers to one, some, or any
member/quantity of the object.
In spite of the semantic contrast between the indefinite and
definite noun/ ‫اسم‬, translators do not convey the same meaning
achieved by using the indefinite and the definite in the original
text. This point can be proved by the following aayas (verses) of
the Glorious Qura’n containing indefinite and definite items
examined in a number of translations respectively. The translators
depended on here are: Pickthal(1930/1959), Ali(1934/1996),
Arberry(1955/1980), and Dawood (1956/1978) :
ْ َ‫ه َوي‬
ْ َ‫قتُمُو َ ْاأل‬
ٌ‫ف َحق‬
ِ ‫نبِرَ َبِ َغ ْر‬
112‫ من اآلية‬: ‫هآل ع فا‬

ْ َ‫ه َوي‬
ٌ‫ف ا ٌ ْل َحق‬
َ ِّ‫قتُمُو َ الن َّبِر‬
ِ ‫رنبِ َغ ْر‬
61 ‫ من اآلية‬:‫هالبقفة‬

‘…and slew the Prophets wrongfully…’
‘…and slew the Prophets wrongfully…’
(Pickthall:71, 38)

117

‘…and slew The Prophets in defiance of right;’
‘…And slaying His Messengers Without just cause.’
( Ali:91,12)

‘…and slew the Prophets without right;’
‘…and slain the Prophets unrightfully;’
(Arberry 1:88,36)

‘…and slew His Prophets unjustly…’
‘…and slew His Prophets unjustly…’
(Dawood : 417,338)

It seems that there is no distinction between the indefinite and
definite items in these translations and the translators give a general
idea about the aayas .The distinction between ‫ حق‬and ‫الحمق‬is worthy
of consideration and it is mentioned in (4.2.4).
The use of the indefinite ‫صمس‬
‫ ن‬and the definite ‫نصس‬
‫لم‬
‫ ا‬in the
Glorious Qur’an is not arbitrary, and they invoke a number of
contextual meanings. It has already been mentioned (4.3.1) that there
, such as
are a number of pragmatic meanings of the indefinite ‫اسم‬
‫تعظمر‬
‫ ا‘ل‬greatness and elevation’, ‫رمف‬
‫تحق‬
‫‘ ال‬humility and degradation’
‫تقمرممم‬
‫‘ ال‬decreasing and scarcity’, and ‫ممف‬
‫لتكثرم‬
‫‘ ا‬increasing and
abundance’. These meanings cannot always be found in the
pragmatic use of the indefinite soul in English. Therefore translators
cannot aspire to achieve success in their renderings. However, the
inclusion of every, any, and each in some of the translations of a
number of aayas reflect their understanding of the general or total

118

reference to all souls addressed or deserving what is said in the
aayas. Consider the following translation specimens:
ْ ُ‫فَ ْلرَوْ َ الع‬
ْ َ‫ظمَ ُ ن‬
ْ‫ك‬
ُ ‫ش ْرئ ً َوالعُجْ َ وْ َ إِ َّال َم‬
َ ٌ‫فس‬
‫ه‬
َ ‫نتُ ْ عَ ْع َمُو‬
54: ‫هيّ س‬

‘This day no soul is wronged in aught; nor are
ye requited aught save what ye used to do’
(Pickthall 317)

‘Then ,on that Day,
Not a soul will be
Wronged in the least ,
And ye shall but
Be repaid the meeds
Of your past Deeds.’
(Ali 684-85)

‘So today no soul shall be wronged anything, and
you shall not be
recompensed, except according to what you
have been doing.’
(Arberry II :147)

‘ On that day no soul shall suffer the least injustice you
shall be rewarded according only to your deeds’
(Dawood 176)

119

َّ ‫نم ِو‬
ْ َ‫هأَ ْ عَقُو َلن‬
ْ‫ك‬
ْ ‫متفِمي َل‬
ُ ْ ِ‫هللاِ َوإ‬
ُ ‫ن‬
ُ ْ ‫ف‬
‫من‬
َّ َ‫فعَل َعمَمل َممف‬
َ ِ َ‫متل‬
َ ‫فسٌيَم َحسْم‬
‫ين‬
َ ‫ف‬
ِ ‫السَّم ِخ‬
56:‫هال مف‬

‘Lest any soul should say : Alas, my grief
that I was unmindful of Allah ,
and I was indeed among the
scoffers !’
( Pickthall 333)

‘Lest the soul should (then)
Say : Ah!woe is me!’ –
In that I neglected
(My Duty ) towards Allah ,
And was but among those
Who mocked’
(Ali 726)

‘Lest any soul should say , Alas for me,
in that I neglected my duty to God,
and was a scoffer,’
(Arberry II : 171)

‘lest any man should say:
‘Alas I have disobeyed Allah
and scoffed at His revelations .’
(Dawood 283)

120

َّ َّ ِ‫هللاَ إ‬
َّ ‫تلِ َغ ٍد َواعَّقُوا‬
َّ ‫ين آ َمنُوا اع َّقُوا‬
ْ َ‫نظُفْ ٌن‬
ْ ‫فسٌ َم قَ َّد َم‬
ْ َ‫هللاَ َو ْلت‬
َ ‫هيَ أَيُّ هَ الَّ ِذ‬
َ‫هللا‬
‫َخبِرف‬
َ ‫بِ َ عَ ْع َمُو‬
18:‫هالحشف‬

‘O ye who believe ! observe your duty to Allah. And let every
soul look to that which sendeth on before for the morrow. And
observe your duty to Allah! Lo! Allah is informed of what ye
do.’

( Pickthall 394)

‘O ye who believe !
Fear Allah,
And let every soul look
To what (provision) he has
Sent forth for the morrow.
Yea,fear Allah:
For Allah is well-acquainted
With (all)that ye do’

(Ali 887)

‘O believers , fear God. Let every soul
consider what it has forwarded for the
morrow. And fear God; God is aware of
the things you do’.
(Arberry II : 269)

‘Believers, have fear of Allah .Let every soul look to what it
offers for the morrow. Fear Allah , for He is cognizant of all
your actions.’
(Dawood 270)

121

ْ َ‫تن‬
ْ ‫ف‬
ْ ‫فسٌ َم قَ َّد َم‬
ْ َ ِ‫ت * َعم‬
ْ ‫ف‬
‫ت‬
َ ‫ت َوأَ َّخ‬
َ ِ‫ه َوإِ َذا ا ْلقُبُو ُابُ ْعث‬
5-4:‫صط ا‬
‫هاالن‬

‘And [when] the sepulchres are overturned,
A soul will know what it hath sent before (it)
and what left behind’
( Pickthal :432)

‘And when the Graves
Are turned upside down_
(Then ) shall each soul know
What it hath sent forward
And (what it hath) kept back.’
(Ali 985)

‘when the tombs are overthrown ,
Then a soul shall know its works, the former and the latter.’
(Arberry II :328)

‘when the graves are hurled ;each soul shall know
what it has done and what it has failed to do.’
(Dawood 16)

َ‫س َّوا ه‬
َ ‫َ َح هَ * ونفسٌ َو َم‬

‫ض َو َم‬
ِ ْ‫ه َو ْاألَ ا‬

)7: 6‫(الشمس‬

‘And [by] the earth and Him who spread it
And [by] a soul and Him who perfected it’

(Pickthall 441)

122

By the Earth
And its (wide) expanse;
By the Soul,
And the proportion and order
Given to it;
(Ali 1008)

‘and by the earth and That which extended it !
By the soul , and That which shaped it’
( Arberry II : 340)

‘by the earth and Him that spread it ; by
the soul and Him that moulded it’
(Dawood 30)

Concerning the previous aayas, it is important to mention that
the all-representative generic in English does not correspond to the
identity generic in Arabic. The word ‫صمس‬
‫‘ ن‬soul’ in, for example, the
ْ َ‫ ون‬refers to something great and indescribable ; so,
ayya َ‫سم َّوا ه‬
َ ‫فسٌ َو َمم‬
the generic indefinite is used to refer to this great thing as an
absolute concept not as an individual in order to show the greatness

of Allah. The context of the Swearing of Allah gives the word ‫صمس‬
‫ن‬
more greatness, which is considered by the interpreters the main
reason behind using the indefinite word.2 The word ‫صمس‬
‫ ن‬in the ayya

‫ ه ( الزخمشري‬538‫ ه أ ] ت‬: 4 / 758 ) says: ‫فيدينصس‬
‫س] فر وله أحد ه أ‬
" ‫فيسو اةالش‬
[ ‫لنصس‬
‫عنكرف ا‬
‫لطفيقةال ذكواة في‬
‫ف لمتكثرف عمل ا‬
‫فيد نصس وينك‬
‫لنصوس والثني أ ي ك‬
‫صس آد كأن ق ل وواحدة من ا‬
‫لنص وس وهين‬
‫خ صة من ا‬
ْ َ‫تن‬
ْ َ ِ‫قول َعم‬
ٌ ".ٌ ‫فس‬
2

123

ْ َ‫تن‬
ْ ‫ف‬
ْ ‫فسٌ َم قَم َّد َم‬
ْ َ ِ‫ َعم‬refers to the soul as an individual and it has a
‫ت‬
َ ‫ت َوأَ َّخم‬
sense of inclusive generalization (4.2.3).
It can be noticed that the generic indefinite ‫اسمم‬in Arabic
assumes a special significance, whereas in English the indefinite
noun does not have that significance.
The definite noun / ‫ اس‬in English and Arabic is almost similar.
In both languages, the definite noun/ ‫ اس‬is either generic or specific.

5.3 Indefiniteness at the Pragmatic Level
In English and Arabic, the distinction between indefiniteness
and definiteness depends heavily on pragmatic factors. The choice of
the word whether indefinite or definite depends on the context, the
information shared by the participants, common knowledge,
familiarity and unfamiliarity, and the participant’s knowledge of the
world.
In Arabic, the context determines the choice of the ‫اسم‬, whether
indefinite or definite, and adds meanings to the indefinite ‫(اسم‬4.3.1).
In English, the context determines the choice of the noun, but it does
not add meanings to the indefinite noun.
In English and Arabic, the main environment in which the
indefinite noun/ ‫اسم‬is required is the first mention of the referent.
Then, when the object is determined in the mind of the addressee,
the definite noun/ ‫ اس‬is used.

124

The Pragmatic Sets of the Indefinite Noun /‫اسم‬
The main purpose of the specific indefinite noun/ ‫ اسم‬is to
introduce an entity to the discourse. This entity either exists in the
shared knowledge or not.
The pragmatic sets given by Hawkins, which are defined on
the basis of shared knowledge and the situation, exist in English and
Arabic. In both languages, the indefinite noun / ‫اسم‬may refer to an
object that can exist in one of these sets (3.3.3):
1- the larger situation set
2- the immediate situation set
3- the association set
It is important to say that the choice of the indefinite or
definite is relative to the world in which the speaker/writer and
addressee live

CHAPTER SIX
CONCLUSIONS, RECOMMENDATIONS,
AND SUGGESTIONS FOR
FURTHER STUDY
6.1 Conclusions
The study has arrived at the following conclusions:
A. At the syntactic level, the study has revealed the following
points:
1. The articles in English are used to perform an obligatory
syntactic function, and they have nothing to do with meaning.
Accordingly, the first hypothesis, which is that the indefinite
feature exists in the noun not in the article, is validated.
2. Arabic grammarians are interested in finding justifications for
using the indefinite ‫ اسمم‬in the subject position. These
justifications are not very satisfactory. The indefinite ‫اسم‬can
be used in subject position if it is accompanied by specifying
features that render it definite.
3. The use of the indefinite ‫ اس‬in Arabic is obligatory in certain
positions in the sentence, and it is used to perform different
functions, such as ‫الحال‬, ‫لتمييز‬
‫ا‬, and ‫المفعولألجل ه‬, which do not
exist in English in forms corresponding to their forms in
Arabic. This point partially validates the second hypothesis,
125

126

which is that the indefinite expression in Arabic is more active and
powerful from the syntactic point of view than it is in English .
4. The indefinite article a/an and zero article in English, and the
indefinite marker, nunation, in Arabic share some grammatical
functions.
B. At the semantic level , the study has revealed the following points
which apply to English and Arabic:
1. The notion of reference overlaps with the conceptual meaning
of the indefinite noun / ‫اسم‬. The indefinite noun / ‫اسم‬has a
conceptual meaning which exists in all objects referred to by
the noun / ‫اسم‬. The context determines whether the referent is
specific or generic.
2. The function of the indefiniteness is internal to the language
system in English and Arabic.
3. This study will hopefully contribute to the belief in the
existence of language universals.
C. At the pragmatic level, the study has revealed the following
points:
1. The context determines the choice of the noun/ ‫اس‬, indefinite or
definite, in English and Arabic.
2. In Arabic, the context gives additional meanings to the
indefinite ‫اسم‬which also contributes to the validation of the
second hypothesis.

127

6.2 Recommendations
Depending on the findings arrived at in this study, the
following recommendations are considered useful for pedagogical
purposes and also for researchers:
1. Indefiniteness is a concept that can be expressed with or
without articles. Teachers should not concentrate on the
syntactic aspect of indefiniteness, which is expressed by the
articles. They have to consider the semantic and pragmatic
aspects of the concept as well.
2. The difference in using the articles in English and Arabic
should be taken into consideration in the pedagogical process.
So, this study is considered helpful to the learners so that they
overcome some of their problems in using the articles.
3. Since indefiniteness is the unmarked term in the system of
language, the indefinite article in English, for its obligatory
occurrence with the singular count noun, can be considered a
bound form not a free form. This is suggested by Hall (1960:
98-99).

128

6.3 Suggestions for Further Study
1. The feature of definiteness is not treated in detail in this study,
but it has been touched upon when needed. A similar
contrastive

study

can

be

conducted

about

expressing

definiteness.
2. A similar contrastive study can be done with other languages to
investigate the concept of indefiniteness in these languages.

129

APPENDIX
І. Languages which have an article system:
A. Languages which have both indefinite and definite articles are:
1. English: Indo-European, Germanic
The indefinite article is a/an for the singular noun, and zero
article or unstressed some for the plural and non- count nouns .
The definite article is the for count and non- count nouns.
a book ,

an apple

(some) books

(some) water

the book(s)

the water

2. French: Indo-European , Romance language
The indefinite article is un for the singular masculine , une for
the singular feminine , and des for the indefinite plural .
un livre

a book

une pomme

an apple

des livres

books

des pommes

apples

The indefinite article also refers to just one member of a class:

130

Il ya un étudiant dans la salle.
There is one student in the class.
The definite article in French is le for the singular masculine, la
for the singular feminine , l’ before a vowel sound and les for
plural :
le livre

the book

la banque

the bank

l’ amor

the love

les livres

the books

The definite articles in French were formed from the Latin
demonstrative ille. Furthermore, the articles in French can
indicate different meanings:
la puce

the flea

le puce

the thumb

3. German: Indo-European, Germanic language
The indefinite articles in German are ein/eines/einem/einen for
the singular masculine, eine/einer/einer/eine for the singular
feminine, and ein/eines/einem/ein for the neuter . The choice of
the article depends on the case of the noun: nominative,
genitive, dative, and accusative. The following nouns are in the
nominative case:

131

ein Mann

a man

eine Frau

a woman

ein Kind

a child

The indefinite plural is used without article:
ein Sohn

a son

Söhne

sons

The definite article is der/ des /dem/ den for the singular
masculine ; die/der/der/die for the singular feminine ; and
das/des/dem/das/ for the neuter.The definite plural for all
genders is die/der/den/die . The choice of the article depends
also on the case of the noun. The following nouns are in the
nominative case:
der Mann

the man

die Frau

the woman

das Kind

the child

die Männer

the child

die Frauer

the women

die kinder

the children

4. Swedish: Indo-European, Germanic language
The article structures in the Scandinavian languages are
similar. The indefinite article is a separate word preceding the
noun, whereas the definite article is the same indefinite article

132

attached to the end of the noun as a suffix. The noun in
Swedish is either common or neuter. The indefinite article is
en with the common noun,and ett with the neuter. The definite
article is -en with the common noun and -ett with the neuter :
en banan

a banana

bananen

the banana

ett bord

a table

bordett

the table

The article in this language may indicate different meanings
depending on the article and the noun:
en plan

a plan

ett plan

a plane

5. Danish: Indo-European,Germanic language
The indefinite article is en with the common noun and et with
neuter noun. The definite article is -en with the common noun
and -et with neuter noun attached at the end of the noun as a
sffix:
en bil

a car

bilen

the car

et hus

a house

huset

the house

133

6. Romanian: Indo-European, Romance language
It is the only Romance language that has the definite article as
a suffix not as a separate word in front of the noun .The
indefinite article in Romanian has different forms .It can be
explained as follows:
O

with singular,feminine,nominative
with singular,masculine,and neuter,

Un
nominative
Niste

with plural , nominative

Unei

with singular,feminine ,dative

Unui

wth singular,masculine,neuter,dative

Unor

with plural,dative

The definite article in Romanian is -a for the feminine and -ul
for the masculine :
Cartea

the book

Drumul

the road

7. Dutch: Indo-Europen , west Germanic language
The indefinite article is een, and the definite article is de or het
:
een book

a book

de book

the man

het kind

the child

134

8. Italian: Indo – European, Italic language, Romance
The indefinite articles are un /uno for singular masculine, una
/un’ for singular feminine, dei/ degli for plural masculine and
delle for plural feminine. The definite articles are il / lo / l’/I
/gli for masculine and la / l’/ le for feminine .
9. Spanish: Indo- European , Italic language, Romance
The indefinite article is un for singular masculine, una for
singular feminine ,unos for plural masculine, and unas for
feminine plural. The definite is el for singular masculine, la
for feminine singular, los for plural masculine and las for
plural feminine.
10.The Master Language (Magistri Linguio):
This is an artificial language .It is an attempt at the
international auxiliary language (IAL) based on modified
Latin vocabulary with English word order instead of the Latin
declensional system. This language was published privately in
1907 by Stephen Chase Houghton, and it is reproduced today
with the comments of Paul Bartlett, who is interested in the
past IAL project.
The indefinite article in this language is un , and the definite
article is il .Bartlett suggests that there is no need to use
articles at all to express indefiniteness and definiteness .He
thinks that marking for indefiniteness is almost never

135

necessary , and if it is needed to express definiteness
,demonstratives such as isti(s) or ili(s) can be used to mark it .
B. Languages with one article:
1. Arabic : Semitic language
The definite article is

‫يف‬
‫ أل التعر‬which is equivalent to the, and

the absence of this article indicates indefiniteness.
‫ه‬
‫ك ِم أ‬
َ‫ش‬
َ ‫ور ِه‬
‫كا ٍةفِي هَا ِم أ‬
‫صبَا ٌح‬
‫(َّللاُنُو ُر ال ه‬
ِ ‫س َما َوا‬
ِ ُ‫ض َمثَ ُلن‬
ِ ‫ت َو أاْلَ أر‬
َ ‫ك أو‬
َ ‫كأَنه هَا‬
َ ُ‫اج ة‬
ُّ ‫صبَاحُفِي ُز َجا َج ٍة ا‬
‫ييُوقَ ُد ِم أن‬
ٌّ ‫كبٌ ُد ِّر‬
ْ ‫ا ْل ِم‬
َ ‫لز َج‬
َ ‫ش َج َر ٍة ُمبَا َر‬
َ ‫يتُونَ ٍة ال‬
َ
‫ك ٍة َزأ‬
)‫ش أرقِيه ٍة َوال غ أَربِيه ٍة‬
ُ)

35‫ ُ نُاآلية‬:‫(النور‬

2.Greek: Indo-European
In Greek, the definite article is variable in form. It has about
thirty different forms, and all these forms have the meaning of
the. The absence of the definite article indicate indefiniteness
.It is to be mentioned here that the translation from Greek to
English is not easy because there is no indefinite article in
Greek. So, the mechanism to express indefiniteness is
different. The absence of the definite article indicates that the
noun is indefinite. This may cause a problem in translation
especially when it affects doctrinal understanding.

3. Galician: Indo- European, Italic ,Romance language
It has the definite article as :
as patacas

the potatoes

136

When the definite article is preceded by en it patterns like bare
noun phrase (indefinite) even though a definite aticle is
present.
Està comendo as patacas
He/She is eating the potatoes
Està comendo nas patacas
Està comendo patacas
She is eating potatoes
4. Bulgarian: Indo European, Slavic language
The definite article is ek, and the absence of this article
indicates indefiniteness:
човек

man, a man

човекът

the man

добър човек

a good man

добрият човек

the good man

5.Soddo: Afro –Asiatic, Semitic, spoken in Ethiopia
Indefiniteness can be expressed by using the word k'una, which
means one. The definite article is expressed by the suffix -i,
goš

a boy

goš-i

the boy

ätit

sister

ätiti

the sister

137

6. Welsh: Indo-European, Celtic
Welsh has no indefinite article. The definite article, which
precedes the words it modifies and whose usage differs little
with that of English, has the forms y, yr, and 'r.
7. Mekhael:
It is an extinct language once spoken throughout northern
Arakhel. There are two forms of the definite article,
independent and affixed. The absence of the definite article
indicates indefiniteness.
Prel aîl sepízos!
Bring [imper] I[dat] fish[ac,sg]!
Get me a fish! (any fish)

Prel aîl esepízos!
Bring [imper] I[dat] fish[ac,sg,masc,def]!
Get me the fish! (a specific fish)
II. Languages with no articles
1.Latin: Indo-European language
Indefiniteness, if necessary ,can be expressed by unus and
una,

which means one ,and definiteness by the

demonstratives ille and illa .

138

2.Japanese
Indefiniteness can be expressed by the numeral one and
definiteness by the demonstratives:
ko-no

this

a no

that

so-no

that

There are certain markers used with the object, subject ,and
topic:
O

object marker

ga

subject marker

wa

topic marker

There is a parallelism between ga and wa in Japanese and a
and the in English in some contexts.
3. Chinese:
Indefiniteness and definiteness are expressed by the word
order which is also interacts with topicality and the
distribution of the new and old information in the sentence.
Zhou-zi shang you shu
There is a book (books) on the table
Shu zai zhuo-zi shang

139

The book is on the table
4. Turkish: Altaic ( disputed) , Turkic
Indefiniteness is expressed by the numeral one / bir and
definiteness, if necessary, by the demonstratives:
ev

house, the house

bir ev

a house, one house

The numeral one/ bir has a dual function: it indicates
singularity and introduces a new individual to the discourse .
5.Czech:
Indefiniteness and definiteness are expressed by the discourse
context, intonation, word order, and lexical quantifiers. There
are four quantifiers used in this language :
Nejaky, jakys, eden, and jakykoliv
6. Finnish: Finno-Ugrian language
Finnish uses certain devices to express indefiniteness and
definiteness. These devices are: pronouns, stress and
intonation, ,and word order, as in the following example:
Henryllä on kirja
Henry has a book

140

Kirja on Henryllä
Henry has the book
7. Russian:Slavic language
Indefiniteness is expressed by word order:
Na stole lezhit karta
On table lies map
There is a map lying on the table
Karta lezhit na stole
Map lies on table
The map is lying on the tale
8. Hindi: Indo- Iranian
On the language level nouns in Hindi are indefinite .In
context,

the zeo article can signal both indefiniteness and

definiteness. The numeral one also expresses indefiniteness.
9. Slovene or Slovenian: Slavic language
barka

a baga
the barga

The numeral one / ena is used to express indefiniteness in
certain cases.
ena barka

a barge
One barge

141

Definiteness can be expressed by that ,as :
tista barka

that (exact )barge

10. Rotuman: Western Fijian
All content words in Rotuman have two forms: complete and
incomplete. The complete form is used to express definiteness
and the incomplete is used to express indefiniteness, as:
epa

the mats
eap

some mats

11. Tamil : spoken in southern India
Indefiniteness is expressed by numeral one , whereas
compound nouns are used as deictic pronouns (demonstratives
)which are used to indicate close objects .
12. Acatec: a Mayan language
Indefiniteness is expressed by numeral one / jun which cannot
be considered as indefinite article. Definiteness, on the other
hand is expressed by a classifier .The most frequently
classifiers in this language are : ix, naj,te’, ixim, no’, etc.The
classifier can combine with the numeral one :
jun no’ s ajin s-mis naj
a white cat of his.

142

13 .Garifuna:
Indefiniteness is expressed by the use of the marker aba,
which can also mean the numeral one .It is used mainly before
nominal presenting entities introduced in a discourse for the
first time. Definiteness is expressed by many ways .One of
these ways is by using one of the third person pronoun forms
after the noun. The generic use of the noun is expressed
without using articles.
14. American Sign Language ASL
ASL grammar has its own rules. It uses spatial locations,
motion, and context. For example, If a signer signs a noun and
then points to a certain spot, he (she) can refer back to that
noun by pointing again to the same spot. Indefiniteness in
ASL is expressed in different ways. The English sentence, for
example, I am a teacher could be signed : TEACHER ME or
ME TEACHER while nodding the head .
It is discovered recently that there is an indefinite particle in
ASL (Colin et al. 2003). It is similar to the question sign
WHAT, but they are different in terms of articulation,
function, and distribution. The indefinite particle occurs in
question constructions, and in sentences that involves some
kind of indefiniteness. It appears in environment in which
(wh) phrases are disallowed. In negative context the indefinite
particle can play a role like any in English.

143

The indefinite particle may occur at the end of a sentence or with a
determiner or a pronoun. In the first case, it indicates uncertainty of
the proposition as a whole, whereas in the second, it indicates
uncertainty of the noun phrase only. When this particle occurs with
the indefinite determiner or pronoun, it may appear in different
positions and sometimes in more than one position.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abbott, Barbara. (2001). “Definiteness and Identification in English”
Pragmatics in 2000: Selected papers from the 7 th
international pragmatics conference, Vol.2. Antwerp:
International pragmatics Association,1-15.Retrieved February
14,2004,from http://msu. edu./~ abbott .
________. (2004). “Definiteness and Indefiniteness”. In Laurence R.
Horn &Gregory Ward (Eds.), Handbook of pragmatics (122149). Oxford: Blackwell. Retrieved May 19,2004,from
http://msu.edu./~ abbott.
Abboud, Peter F. & Ernest N. McCarns (Eds.).(1987). Elementry
Modern Standard Arabic Pronunciation and Writing .Part
1.Cambridge:Cambridge University Press.
Ali,Abduallah Yousif Ali, trans.(1934/1996). An English
Interpretation of The Holy Qura’n. India : Bilal Books.
Alston, William p. (1964). Philosophy of Language. Englewood
Cliffs,N.J.: Prentice Hall.
Alyéshmerni, Mansoor & Paul Taubr.(1979).Working with Aspects
of Language. Chicago : Harcourt, Brace and Word, inc.
Arberry, A. J., trans. (1955 /1980).The Koran Interpreted .London :
George Allen & Unwin.
Aziz, Yowell Y. (1998). Topics in Translation. Benghazi:
Garyounis University.
Best , Wilfred D. (1963/1983).The Students’ Companion .London:
Collins Sons & Company.

144

145

Bloomfield, Leonard .(1933/1963) . Language. New York: Holt,
Rinehart and Winston.
Brown, Gillian & George Yule. (1983/1987 ) .Discourse Analysis.
Cambridge: Cambridge university Press.
Chafe,W.(1968). English Noun Inflection and Related Matters
from a Generative Semantic Point of View (POLA Report 26). Berkely:University of California.
Chomsky,N. (1965). Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Christophersen, Paul.(1939).The Articles.: A Study of their Theory
and Use in English. Copenhagen: Munksgaard.
Colins, Frances, Paul Hagstorm, and Carol Neidle. (2003). “A
Particle of Indefiniteness in American Sign Language”
Linguistic Discovery. 2.1 . Retrieved May 19, 2004, from
http:// journals. Dartmouth.edu/webobjibin/
Crystal, David.(1997/1998). A Dictionary of Linguistic and
Phonetics. Oxford: Blackwell.
Dawood, N.J., trans.(1978). The Koran. Harmondsworth: Penguin
Books.
Dik Simo C. (1978/1979). Functional Grammar. Amsterdam:
North Holland Publishing Company.
Du Bois , J. W. (1980). “Beyond Definiteness : the Trace of Identity
in Discourse”. In W. Chafe (Ed.) , The Pear Stories :
Cognitive, Cultural, and Linguistic Aspects of Narrative
Production (203-274).Noorwood, NJ: Ablex.
Frank, Marcella. (1972). Modern English .Part 1 , Parts of Speech.
Englewood Cliffs.N.J. : Prentice –Hall .

146

Fries,C.C. (1952). The Structure of English . London : Longmans .
Gramley,Stephan & Kurt_Mich Pätzold .(1992). A Survey of
Modern English . London : Routledge.
Hall, Robert A., Jr. (1960). Linguistics and your Language.New
York : Anchor Books. Revised edition of Leave Your
Language Alone ! by the Linguistic Press in 1950.
Halliday, M. A. K. & Ruqaiya Hasan.(1976/1987).Cohesin in
English . London : Longman.
Harris, J. (1751/1968). Hermes: or A Philosophical Inquiry
concerning Language and Universal Grammar. Menston:
Scolar Press.
Hartmann, R. R. K. & F.C. Stork . (1973). Dictionary of Language
and Linguistics. London: Applied Science Publishers.
Hawkins, John A.(1978). Definiteness and Indefiniteness: A study
in Reference and Grammaticality Prediction. London: Croom
Helm.
Haywood, J. A. & H. M. Nahmad . (1965). A New Arabic Grammar
of the Written Language. London : The Camelot Press.
Henning, Jeffrey.(2000). “Magistri Linguio : A Latin – Based IAL”.
Retrieved April 8,2005, from http://langmaker.com/featured
magistrilinguio.htm.
Hurford, James R. & Brendan Heasley.(1983/1996).Semantics: a
Coursebook .Cambridge: Cambridge university Press.
Ihalainen, Ossi. (1980). “Some Remarks on Word Order and
Definiteness in Finnish and English” . Papers and Studies in
Contrastive Linguistics ,11: 59-67.
Jacobs, Roderick A. (1995). English Syntax. Oxford : Oxford
University Press .

147

Jespersen, Otto .(1933/1976). Essentials of English Grammar.
London: George Allen &Unwin.
________. (1949/1954). A Modern Grammar on Historical
Principles. Vol. VII. London: George Allen & Unwin .
al-Johani, Maneh Hammad .(1984) . English and Arabic Articles :A
Contrastive Analysis in Definiteness and Indefiniteness
.Diss. Indiana University .(1982 ).Michigan: University
Microfilms.
Joodi,Abdul Majeed Hameed .(1978) . “A Contrastive Analysis of
the Article System in Standard English and Modern Arabic.”
Master’s Thesis, University of Baghdad .
Leech, Geoffery.(1974/1978 ).Semantics .Harmondsworth : Penguin
Books.
Leech, Geoffery & Jan Svartivk .(1994 /1996 ). A communicative
Grammar of English . London : Longman.
Master, Peter.(1987). “Generic The in Scientific American.” English
for specific Purposes . 6.3: 165-185.
Murphy, Raymond. (1994/1999). English Grammar in Use
Cambridge: Cambridge university Press.
The Oxford English Dictionary .(1989), 2nd ed. .Oxford :Clarendon
Press.
Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary .(2000).Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Palmer, Harold E. & F. G. Blandford .(1969) . A Grammar of
Spoken English. Cambridge : W. Heffer & Sons LTD.
Palmer, F.R. (1981) . Semantics . Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press .
________. (1984/1985).Grammar.Harmondsworth:Penguin books.

148

Peñalosa, Fernando . (1987). “Major Syntactic Structures of Acatec”
International Journal of American Linguistics . 53.3 :281311.
Pickthal, M. trans. (1953/1959). The Meaning of the Glorious
Koran London: George & Unwin.
Postal, P. M. (1966). “On So-called ‘ Pronouns’ in English”. 19 th
Monograph on Language and Linguistics (201-224).
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Institute of
Languages and Linguistics.
Praninskas, Jean.(1975) . Rapid Review of English Grammar. New
Jersey: Printice-Hall.
Prince, E. F. ( 1981) .“ Toward a Taxonomy of Given-New
Information” in P. Cole (Ed.) Radical Pragmatics. New York:
Academic Press.
Pyles, Thomas & John Alego. (1964/1971). The Origins and
Developments of English Language. New York : Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich.
Quirk, R., S. Greenbaum, G. Leech , and J. Svartvic .(1972). A
Grammar of Contemporary English . London : Longman.
________. (1985/1987). A Comprehensive Grammar of the English
Language. London: Longman.
Russell, Bertrand .(1905). “On Denoting”, Mind 14 : 479-493.
Snape, Neal. (2002). “Variability in the Use of the English Article
System by Japanese Learners of English.” Retrieved July
14,2004 , from http:// geocities.com /.
Stageberg, Norman C. (1971). An Introductory English Grammar.
New York: Holt , Rinehart andWinston.
Strang, Barbara M. H. (1970/1974). A History of English. Harper &
Row Publishers.

149

Swan, Michael. (1995/2003). Practical English Usage. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Tritton,A.S. (1943/1970). Arabic. London: Teach Yourself Books.
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary of the English
Language.(1976).Vol.Ш.Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britaunica,
Inc.
Wikipedia contributors. (2001). Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia.
Retrieved 27 February 2005 from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
grammatical article.
Wright, W.(1896/1955). A Grammar of the Arabic Language
Vol.1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Yule, George.(1985/1988). The Study of Language. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Zandvoort, R. W. (1962/1963). A Handbook of English Grammar.
London: Longmans.
Ziadeh, Farhat J., & R. Bayly Winder .(1957). An Introduction to
Modern Arabic. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

‫‪150‬‬

‫بية‬
‫المصادر العر‬
‫لقرآن الكريم‬
‫ا‬
‫ييبالحييين ‪ 656 ،‬ھ ‪.) 1965 (.‬شرح نهر‬
‫بد الحميدبن أ‬
‫ابنأبيالحديد‪،‬عز الدين ع‬
‫براهيم ‪ .‬مصر‪ :‬دار إحياء الكتب‪.‬‬
‫فضل إ‬
‫بو ال‬
‫تحقيق محمد أ‬
‫ثالث ‪.‬‬
‫ال الغة‪.‬الجزء ال‬
‫بيراهيم‬
‫تحقيق إ‬
‫تحعثمان‪ 392 ،‬هـ ‪.) 1954(.‬ال ُمنصفالجزء األول ‪.‬‬
‫بوأ الف‬
‫ابن جني‪،‬‬
‫بي‪.‬‬
‫بي الحل‬
‫صطفى البا‬
‫بعة م‬
‫صطفى وعبد هللا ا مين الجزء األول‪ .‬مصر‪:‬مط‬
‫م‬
‫لنجار ‪.‬مصر‪ :‬دار‬
‫تحقيق محمد علي ا‬
‫ثالث ‪.‬‬
‫صائص‪.‬الجزءال‬
‫________‪ . )1956(.‬الخ‬
‫تب العربية ‪.‬‬
‫الك‬
‫تبيرافر‬
‫يـ‪. )1964(.‬ال‬
‫يريم ‪ 651 ،‬ه‬
‫بي الك‬
‫ين عد‬
‫الواحيدب‬
‫بيد‬
‫ابنالزملكاني‪ ،‬كمال الدين ع‬
‫يية‬
‫ييوخ و د‪ .‬ديج‬
‫يد مطل‬
‫يق ‪.‬داحمي‬
‫يي‬
‫تحق‬
‫علرر ا البيررا ال ُمعلرر إ علرر اقع آررا الررح ‪.‬‬
‫عة العاني ‪.‬‬
‫ثي بغداد ‪:‬مطب‬
‫الحدي ‪.‬‬
‫يزء‬
‫النورو الج‬
‫‪.‬‬
‫بن اليراج النحوي ‪ 316 ،‬هـ ‪.)1965(.‬الموجز فر‬
‫بو بكر‬
‫ابناليراج‪،‬أ‬
‫بيدران‬
‫يي رو ‪:‬م يية أ‪.‬‬
‫ينيالمدامرجيي‪.‬ب‬
‫يويمي وب‬
‫يطفىالي‬
‫يق مص‬
‫تحقي‬
‫الثاني ‪.‬‬
‫للطباعة و النير ‪.‬‬
‫يي ‪.‬‬
‫الفتي‬
‫يي ل‬
‫يق د‪.‬بدعيالحي ن‬
‫تحقي‬
‫يزءاألول ‪ .‬ي‬
‫الجي‬
‫روفررالنوررو ‪.‬‬
‫ف‬
‫ألصر‬
‫________‪.)1973(.‬‬
‫طبعة النعمان ‪.‬‬
‫الجف األشرف ‪ :‬م‬
‫يزء‬
‫الجي‬
‫يررة ار الرر ‪.‬‬
‫يـ‪.)1956( .‬شررحفلة‬
‫يد هللا ‪769 ،‬هي‬
‫يدينبعي‬
‫ياءل اي‬
‫باي‬
‫يل ‪،‬‬
‫عقي‬
‫ين ي‬
‫بي‬
‫ا‬
‫ألول ‪ .‬مصر‪ :‬مطبعة محمدعلي ‪.‬‬
‫ابن مالك ‪ ،‬جمالالدين محمدبنعبد هللابن محمد ‪ 672 ،‬هـ ‪)1930(.‬ف‪.‬لةيةلب الر‬
‫دار الكتب المصرية‪.‬‬
‫القاهرة‬
‫لصحف ‪: .‬‬
‫ف النوو و ا‬
‫تحقيق محمد كامل بركا ‪.‬‬
‫تسهيلالةوائدو تكميل الم اصد ‪.‬‬
‫________‪. )1967( .‬‬
‫بيللطب اعة ‪.‬‬
‫تاخ العر‬
‫القا هرة ‪ :‬درا الك‬

‫‪151‬‬

‫بي‬
‫تيو‪،‬ى ‪643‬هيـ ‪( .‬‬
‫قيي‪ ،‬الم‬
‫ينمكيرياأل‪،‬ري‬
‫اليدينمحميدب‬
‫ضيل جميال‬
‫الف‬
‫ابن منظور ‪،‬آبي‬
‫لعحب الجزء اليابع ‪.‬بيرو ‪:‬دار صادر‪.‬‬
‫تاريخ ) ‪ .‬لسا ا ‪.‬‬
‫يزء‬
‫ريل‪.‬الج‬
‫ابنيعيش ‪ ،‬مو‪،‬قالدينابنعلي‪ ،‬المتو‪،‬ى ‪643‬ھ ‪(.‬ب تاريخ )‪ .‬شحالتةص‬
‫ألول والخامس‪ .‬مصر ‪:‬الطباعة المنيرية ‪.‬‬
‫ياريخ ) ‪.‬شررح‬
‫يـب(يتي‬
‫يو‪،‬ى ‪686‬هي‬
‫المي‬
‫ين‪ ،‬ت‬
‫بيالحيي‬
‫ين‬
‫يد‬
‫يدينمحمي‬
‫ييل اي‬
‫أل يتراب ا ي ‪ ،‬ر ي‬
‫رو ‪ :‬دار الكتب العامة ‪.‬‬
‫لكافيةف النوو‪ .‬الجزء الثاني ‪.‬بي‬
‫ا‬
‫حكرا فراصروف‬
‫يـ ‪ )1914(.‬اإل‬
‫تيو‪،‬ى ‪ 631‬ه‬
‫ليي ‪،‬الم‬
‫ين ع‬
‫بييالحي‬
‫آلمدي ‪ ،‬يفالدين آ‬
‫ألحكا ‪ .‬الجزءاألول ‪ .‬مصر ‪ :‬مطبعة المعارف ‪.‬‬
‫هيا‪ ،‬المتو‪،‬ى ‪ 761‬هـ‪.)1953( .‬شح شذور ال ذهب ‪،‬ي معر‪،‬ة ك ي‬
‫نصاري ‪،‬ابن ي‬
‫أل‬
‫طبعة اليعادة‪.‬‬
‫عبد الحميد ‪ .‬مصر‪ :‬م‬
‫تحقيق محمد محي الدين‬
‫الع رخ ‪.‬‬
‫يد‬
‫يدينبعي‬
‫ييل اي‬
‫يدمحي‬
‫يقمحمي‬
‫تحقي‬
‫الصررد ا‪ .‬ي‬
‫نرردا اوررل‬
‫رحال‬
‫________‪.)1959( .‬شررح رعر‬
‫طبعة اليعادة ‪.‬‬
‫الحميد ‪ .‬مصر ‪ :‬م‬
‫العحاية‪ .‬الجزءاألول ‪ .‬درا ة‬
‫بدرية ف علااللغة‬
‫________‪ .)1977(.‬شح اللموة ال‬
‫طبعة الجامعة ‪.‬‬
‫تحقيق د ‪ .‬هادين ار‪.‬بغداد ‪ :‬م‬
‫و‬
‫________‪ .)1980( .‬اوضح المسال ال االةية اا ال الجزء األول‪ .‬لبنان ‪ :‬دار‬
‫دوة الجديدة ‪.‬‬
‫الن‬
‫بدوي ‪،‬احمد ‪. )1950( .‬‬

‫الغةال ح‬

‫مصرالفجالة ‪.‬‬
‫‪: .‬‬

‫يي‪ ،‬الجامعية‬
‫العحاية ‪ :‬مح ا يرا القاهيا‬
‫لتعور النوويللغة‬
‫برجيترا ر ‪،‬ج ‪ . )1982(.‬ا‬
‫ييواخ ‪.‬‬
‫تي‬
‫ييد ال‬
‫بي‬
‫ييان ع‬
‫ضي‬
‫يق د‪ .‬رم‬
‫تعلي‬
‫ييحيح و ي‬
‫صي‬
‫يراج وت‬
‫يينة ‪ .1929‬ا ي‬
‫ية ي‬
‫يير‬
‫صي‬
‫الم‬
‫بة الخانجي ‪.‬‬
‫القاهرة‪ :‬مكت‬
‫بة اليباخ ‪.‬‬
‫بير ‪ ،‬دكتور كمال محمد ‪ . )1975( ،‬دورالكلمةف اللغة ‪ .‬مصر ‪ :‬مكت‬
‫بطليو ي ‪،‬ابي محمدعبد هللابن محمد ‪،‬المتو‪،‬ى ‪ 521‬هـ ‪. )1980( .‬الولل ف اصال‬
‫ال‬
‫دار الرش ييد‬
‫يداد ‪:‬‬
‫بغي‬
‫يعودي ‪.‬‬
‫يريم ي‬
‫بيالكي‬
‫يعيديدع‬
‫يق ي‬
‫يي‬
‫تحق‬
‫لخلررل رر ترراب الآمررل ‪.‬‬
‫ا‬
‫للنير‪.‬‬
‫يداد‬
‫بغي‬
‫للغيوررة ‪.‬‬
‫يب ‪ .)1982(.‬صررعةا جررواد وجهررودو ا‬
‫المطي‬
‫يد ل‬
‫بي‬
‫يد ع‬
‫يورمحمي‬
‫دكي‬
‫ياء ‪،‬ت‬
‫بكي‬
‫ال‬
‫ش للنير ‪.‬‬
‫‪:‬دار الريد‬

‫‪152‬‬

‫صيحيح و‬
‫ئرل األع آرا ‪.‬ت‬
‫بي تياريخ) ‪ .‬ال‬
‫يـ ‪ (.‬أ)(‬
‫الجرجاني ‪،‬عبدالقا هر ‪،‬المتو‪،‬ى ‪ 471‬ه‬
‫طبعة العربية ‪.‬‬
‫طفى المراغي ‪ .‬مصر ‪ :‬الم‬
‫تعليق احمد مص‬
‫شرح و‬
‫يق‪ .‬دكي ا م‬
‫تحقي‬
‫لمجليد األول ‪.‬‬
‫_______ _‪(.‬خ)(‪ .)1982‬مال تصد ف شرح األيارا ‪.‬‬
‫ش للنير ‪.‬‬
‫بحر المرجان ‪.‬بغداد ‪:‬دار الريد‬
‫يررة‬
‫للغو‬
‫يعررة و اليور ا ا‬
‫لحف‬
‫راليب ا‬
‫ين ‪،‬بعي ا ‪. )1961(.‬النوور الرواف ررإ راعري ااألرر‬
‫حيي‬
‫الث القا هرة ‪ :‬دار المعارف ‪.‬‬
‫المتآدد ‪.‬الجزءاالول والث ‪.‬‬
‫الزركيي ‪،‬بدر الدين محمدبنعبد هللا‪ ،‬المتو‪،‬ى ‪ 749‬هـ ‪ 1391 ( .‬هـ) ‪.‬البحهرا فر‬
‫علو ال ح ‪.‬الجزء الرابع ‪.‬بيرو ‪:‬دار المعر‪،‬ة‪.‬‬
‫‪.‬‬
‫تيياريخ) ‪.‬‬
‫ي‬
‫بي‬
‫يـ ‪ ( .‬أ)(‬
‫يو‪،‬ى ‪538‬هي‬
‫المي‬
‫ير‪ ،‬ت‬
‫بيين عمي‬
‫يود‬
‫يا جييار هللامحمي‬
‫ي‬
‫يرياألمي‬
‫مخيي‬
‫الز‬
‫يزء‬
‫يرل‪.‬الج‬
‫التلو‬
‫يرلفروجروو‬
‫التنزيل و عيو األراو‬
‫الكشاف ع حائق غوا ض‬
‫تاخ العربي ‪.‬‬
‫الرابع ‪.‬بيرو ‪ :‬درا الك‬
‫_______ _‪(.‬خ)(ب تاريخ)‪ .‬المةصلف النوو‪.‬‬
‫رركل‬
‫شر‬
‫ررثال‬
‫ير‬
‫رر ررر ح‬
‫رر الكر الالعحار‬
‫سر‬
‫طفى ‪ . )1977( .‬ار ا‬
‫صيي‬
‫ييل مي‬
‫ييور ‪،‬ا ي‬
‫تي‬
‫ييا‪،‬ي ‪ ،‬دك‬
‫اليي‬
‫بة الخانجي ‪.‬‬
‫والوظيةة ‪.‬القا هرة ‪ :‬مكت‬
‫تور ابراهيم ‪. )1968( .‬النووالعحا ‪:‬ن د واناء ‪.‬بغداد ‪:‬دار الصادق ‪.‬‬
‫اليامرائي ‪ ،‬دك‬
‫التعبيحال ح ن‪ .‬بغداد ‪:‬بيت الحكمة ‪.‬‬
‫اليامرائي ‪ ،‬دكتور ‪ ،‬ا ل صالح‪.(1988) .‬‬
‫‪.‬عم ‪ :‬دار الفكرللطب اعة‪.‬‬
‫________‪ )2000( .‬عان النوو‪ .‬الجزءاألول و الثالث ان‬
‫تراب ‪.‬‬
‫يـ) ‪.‬الك‬
‫تيو‪،‬ى ‪180‬هيـ ‪ 1316( .‬ه‬
‫بير‪ ،‬الم‬
‫ين ‪،‬ن‬
‫ثميانب‬
‫ين ع‬
‫بييرعميروب‬
‫يبويه ‪،‬ابي‬
‫مصر‪ :‬المطبعة األميريةبوالق‪.‬‬
‫ررح ‪.‬‬
‫ررو الر‬
‫رر علر‬
‫ررا فر‬
‫ييـ‪(.‬أ)(بتيياريخ)‪ .‬األتر‬
‫ييو‪،‬ى‪911‬هي‬
‫تي‬
‫ييدين‪ ،‬الم‬
‫لي‬
‫يي ل ا‬
‫يييو‪،‬ي ‪ ،‬جي‬
‫اليي‬
‫بي‪.‬‬
‫بي الحل‬
‫صطفى البا‬
‫بعة م‬
‫القا هرة‪:‬مط‬
‫يد‬
‫يق د‪.‬بعي‬
‫تحقي‬
‫يث‪ .‬ي‬
‫ثاي‬
‫الجيزء االول و الل‬
‫رائح ‪.‬‬
‫النئر‬
‫رباو و‬
‫شر‬
‫________ ‪ ( .‬خ) (‪ . )1985‬أل‬
‫العال الم مك ّري ‪ .‬الكويت‪ :‬م ية الر الةللطباعة و النير ‪.‬‬
‫قيياهرة‪:‬‬
‫ياني‪ .‬ال‬
‫يزءثالي‬
‫الجي‬
‫المزهرف ر علررواللغررة‪.‬‬
‫ياريخ ) ‪ .‬رح‬
‫يـ)ب(يتي‬
‫__‪ ( .‬جي‬
‫______‬
‫بي ‪.‬‬
‫بي الحل‬
‫صطفى البا‬
‫بعة م‬
‫مط‬

‫‪153‬‬

‫يزءاألول و‬
‫الجي‬
‫ياريخ) ‪ .‬همررإال هوارإرف ر شررح جمررإ الآوا ررإ ‪.‬‬
‫________‪(.‬د)ب(يتي‬
‫الثاني ‪.‬بيرو ‪ :‬دار المعر‪،‬ةللطباعة و النير ‪.‬‬
‫بررا فرر‬
‫ياريخ ) ‪ .‬آمررإالي‬
‫يـب(يتي‬
‫‪548‬ي‬
‫يو‪،‬ى ه‬
‫المي‬
‫ين‪ ،‬ت‬
‫بيالحيي‬
‫ين‬
‫يل‬
‫ضي‬
‫ب اييالف‬
‫يي ‪،‬‬
‫بر ي‬
‫الط‬
‫لتراث العربي ‪.‬‬
‫ةسيحال ح ‪ .‬الجزء العاشر ‪.‬بيرو ‪ :‬دار احياء ا‬
‫ت‬
‫ية‬
‫يي‬
‫ي اللغو‬
‫يوء الدرايا‬
‫يي ي‬
‫ية‪،‬ي‬
‫يي‬
‫ية العرب‬
‫لي‬
‫نعمي رحييم ‪" .)1986 (.‬الجم‬
‫يور ية‬
‫دكي‬
‫يزاوي ‪،‬ت‬
‫العي‬
‫الحديثة" ‪ .‬دراراتف اللغة‪ /‬تاب المورد‪.‬العدد ‪. 1‬بغداد ‪.‬‬
‫يي رو ‪:‬‬
‫يزءاألول ‪.‬ب‬
‫العحايرة ‪.‬الج‬
‫صطفى ‪ . )1966 (.‬جا إ الدروس‬
‫الغييني ‪،‬الييخ م‬
‫ت العصرية ‪.‬‬
‫بة‬
‫المك‬
‫القالي ‪،‬ابوعلي ا ماعيلبنالقا م ‪،‬المتو‪،‬ى ‪ 356‬هـ‪ .) 1626( .‬أل ال ‪ .‬الجزءاألول‪.‬‬
‫القاهدار الكتب المصرية ‪.‬‬
‫رة‪:‬‬
‫اليب الرح‬
‫الفتاح‪ . )1983( .‬المعان ف ضوء ار‬
‫الشين ‪ ،‬دكتورعبد‬
‫ألموية ‪.‬‬

‫بية‬
‫صير‪ :‬المكت‬
‫‪.‬م‬

‫يزء‬
‫الجي‬
‫بي تياريخ)‪ .‬الم تارب ‪.‬‬
‫يـ (‬
‫تيو‪،‬ى ‪ 285‬ه‬
‫ييد‪ ،‬الم‬
‫ينيز‬
‫بي ا محميدب‬
‫يي الع‬
‫بيرد ‪،‬اب‬
‫الم‬
‫الرابع ‪.‬تحقيق محمد عبد الخالق ُعضيمة ‪ .‬القا هرة ‪ :‬المكتبة الكبرى‪.‬‬
‫وجيي ‪.‬بيرو ‪ :‬المكتبة‬
‫المخزومي ‪ ،‬دكتور مادي ‪. )1964 (.‬ف النوو العحا ‪ :‬ن دو ت‬
‫العصرية ‪.‬‬
‫صطفى ‪ ،‬ابراهيم ‪ .) 1959( .‬احياء النوو ‪ .‬مصر ‪ :‬مطبعة لجنة التأليف ‪.‬‬
‫م‬
‫نور الدين ‪،‬عصاي‪ . )2003( .‬واضحات ف ف ياللغة‪ .‬لبنان ‪ :‬درا الكتبالعلمية ‪.‬‬
‫حاشية تعديلالميزا ‪،.‬بع ‪،‬يدار الخ ‪،‬ة ‪.‬‬
‫الم عبد هللا ‪ 1129 ( .‬هـ )‪.‬‬

‫المستخلص‬
‫التٌك ٘زهف ِْم لغْٕف ٖ الًكل٘ش ٗة ّالعزب ٘ة‬

‫ُّْ ٗع ٌ ٖ إىالش ٖءالوذ كْرشائع فٖ‬

‫تعلاكف اٖ‬
‫جٌسَ ّالٗتو٘شب أّصاا سائاتيو ٘اشٍ بايبم ٘اة ج ٌساَ ‪ .‬إىالتٌك ٘از ّالتعز ٗاف ه‬
‫فا َ الوخا َ‬
‫فة الوخا َ‬
‫طا‬
‫طا و ّى الواتكلن إ ا اى الشا ٖء الواذك ْر ال ٗعز‬
‫الحم ٘مةبوعز‬

‫ّلكايلا‬

‫كلن أّال ٗعزفَ ‪.‬‬
‫ٗعزفَ الوت‬
‫التٌك ٘ز‬

‫لتعب ٘ز بٌِابْساائ‬
‫ُْ خاص ٘ة (ظاُزت)والل ٘ةٗتن ا‬

‫ب ْا ه ي ا ّل ٘ةيخص الس ٘اق ّ الوتكلن ّ الوخا َ‬
‫ط‬

‫بتوااوبلأ‬
‫ًحْ ٗاة اال‬

‫ّل ِاذافااى ُاذ ٍ ال راساةيت ٌاا ّن الت ٌك ٘از‬

‫هيال ٌاح ٘ة ا لٌحْ ٗة ّال الل ٘ة ّالت اّل ٘ة ّ ُ ذٍال ٌْاح ٖ(الوساتْ ٗ ا ) هتزاب ةاة ّهت اخلاة‬
‫ف ٘واب ٌِ٘ا ّالٗستغ ٌٖ أ ح ُابي ا‪ٙ‬خز ‪.‬‬
‫اى كت ال ٌح ْ اإل ًكل٘ش ٕيز ّ‬
‫فس َ‬
‫ف ِ ْم ً‬
‫كش بلٔ أوات الت ٌك ٘زاكثز هي التزك٘ش بلٔ الو‬
‫ّ ُ ٖبذلكَيعُ ُّ الت ٌك ٘ز ظاا ُزت ًح ْ ٗاةفماظبع ٘ا ا باي الع ْا ها ال الل ٘اة ّ الت ا ّل ٘اة التا ٖل ِاا‬
‫لتعب٘زبي التٌك ٘ز ‪.‬‬
‫شأى كب ٘ز فٖ ا‬
‫أهاف ٖاللغة العزب ٘ةفالتعب ٘ز بي الت ٌك ٘ز ٗك ْىبشك االسن األصا هرازوا هاي أوات‬
‫التعز ٗف ‪ ،‬هعالت ٌْ ٗي ‪ّ .‬الت ٌْ ٗي هْضاع خا با ٘يال ٌحاْ ٗ ٘يالعاز ن ّلك اي ٍُاذ ال راساة‬
‫يعُّ ٍ ب هةي ٌك ٘ز اا‬

‫فةيعتو بلٔ ً ْع االسن الو ٌَّ ْى ‪.‬‬
‫ّظائف هختل‬

‫ّل اشت ولت خةْا العو ف ٖ ُذا البحث بلٔ هم هة باي هفِاْم التٌك ٘ا زّباز‬
‫لتعب ٘از ب ٌ اَفا ٖذٍُا اللغ اا ‪.‬‬
‫تلفةلب ٘اى ك٘ف ٘اة ا‬
‫هْجشبيالتٌك ٘زف ٖ إح ٓ ّثث ٘يلغة هخ‬
‫اي ال ٌا اْاحٖ‬
‫تااي األًكل٘ش ٗا اة ّ العزب ٘ااة ها‬
‫ّبالرا ات ُا ٍاذال راسااة هْضااْع التٌك ٘اازف اٖا اللغ‬
‫ا لٌحْ ٗة ّال الل ٘ة ّالت اّل ٘ ة َ ّيبع ُاذايحل ٘ا هماارىلب ٘ااى ا ّجا َ التشااب َ ّ االخات‬
‫صالت ال راساة إلأ إى هع ٌأ التٌك ٘از‬
‫لتعب ٘زبي التٌك ٘از ‪ ّ .‬يْ‬
‫اللغت ٘يف ٖ ا‬
‫إلًكل٘ش ٗةف ٖ ها ٗسؤ‪( noun‬‬

‫با ٘ي‬

‫هْجاْوفاٖ اللغاة‬

‫ف اللغة‬
‫ُّْالوماب المز ٗ لسنف ٖ العزب ة ) أها األوات ٖ‬

‫ضا الأ‬
‫فتِا ًحْ ٗةفمظ ّاليح و هع ٌٔالت ٌك٘ز‪ّ .‬ليْصلت ال راسة أ ٗ‬
‫إلًكل٘ش ٗةفاى ّظ ٘‬
‫اى الت ٌك ٘زف ٖ اللغة اإل ًكل٘ش ٗة ّالعزب ٘ة هتشاب َيمزٗباا هاي ال ٌاح ٘اة ال الل ٘اة أ هاا هاي ال ٌاح ٘اة‬
‫ال ٌح ْ ٗااة ّ الت ا ّل ٘اااةفااااى الت ٌك ٘ااازفااا ٖ العزب ٘اااةلاا َ و ّرفّعاااان ّ هاااّثز اكثاااز هواااا ُااا ْفااا ٖ‬
‫إلًكل٘ش ٗة‪.‬‬

‫هعت بغداد‬
‫جا‬

‫التعبري عن التنكري‬
‫في‬
‫العربيت‬
‫سيت و‬
‫اإلنكلي‬
‫لغخي‬
‫ال‬
‫دراست هقارنت‬
‫التهقدهت‬
‫رس‬
‫اب في جاهعتبغداد‬
‫يت اآلد‬
‫إلً هجلس كل‬
‫خير‬
‫هخطلباثنيلشهادة الواجس‬
‫جسءا هن‬
‫للغت‬
‫نكليسيتوعلن ا‬
‫للغتاإل‬
‫في ا‬
‫حقد ه جب ها‬
‫إنعام إسماعيل ط اهر‬
‫بإشراف‬
‫دكتور كاظم حيدر الجوادي‬
‫ستاذ ال‬
‫األ‬

‫جوا ي اآلخرة ‪ 6241‬هـ‬

‫حوىز ‪ 4002‬م‬

