Hierarchy without Hegemony: Locating Boys in an Inclusive Masculinity Setting
Mark McCormack, Ph.D.
markmccormackphd@gmail.com

Please cite as:
McCormack, M. (2011). Hierarchy without hegemony: Locating boys in an inclusive school setting. Sociological Perspectives, 54(1), 83-101.

Abstract
In this article, I detail how 16-18 year old boys ascribe to the tenets of inclusive masculinity in a UK secondary school that I call ‘Standard High.’ Drawing on five months of participant observation, and 12 in-depth interviews, I show that the boys’ masculinities are predicated in opposition to the orthodox values of homophobia, misogyny and aggressiveness. Accordingly, the practices of subordination and marginalization described in hegemonic masculinity theory are not used to regulate masculine behaviors or obtain dominance in this setting. At Standard High, boys ascribing to different masculine archetypes can each maintain high social status. Nonetheless, a social hierarchy still exists. Here, boys are stratified in accordance to a popularity ranking, which is determined by the possession of a matrix of variables, namely: charisma, authenticity, emotional support, and social fluidity. 



Introduction
Previous research has shown that school-aged boys are hierarchically stratified according to a hegemonic mode of masculine dominance (Mac an Ghaill 1994; Stoudt 2006). Here, boys are compelled to conform to orthodox gender norms by exhibiting homophobic, misogynistic and aggressive attitudes and behaviors (Nayak and Kehily 1996; Plummer 1999). These masculine behaviors are found throughout educational institutions (Epstein 1997; Salisbury and Jackson 1996), not least because schools are complicit in the re/production of these dominant gender norms (Plummer 1999). However, Anderson (2009) argues that a decrease in cultural homophobia results in radically different gendered behaviors of young men. According to Anderson’s inclusive masculinity theory, diminishing cultural homophobia can result in multiple masculinities being esteemed in one setting. 
In this article, I detail how 16-18 year old boys maintain the tenets of inclusive masculinity in a UK sixth form1 that I call ‘Standard High.’ Drawing on five months of participant observation, and 12 in-depth interviews, I show that the boys’ masculinities are predicated in opposition to homophobia, misogyny and aggressiveness. Therefore, contrasting with what the literature traditionally shows (Mac an Ghaill 1994; Morris 2008; Robinson 2005), practices of subordination and marginalization are not used to regulate masculine behaviors or obtain dominance in this setting (cf. Connell 1995). At Standard High, boys ascribing to different masculine archetypes (e.g. jocks, emos, geeks) can all maintain high social status. 
Nonetheless, a social hierarchy still exists. Rather than being ranked by masculine capital, however, boys are instead stratified by ‘popularity.’ I show that this ranking of boys is determined by the possession of a constellation of variables, namely: charisma, authenticity, emotional support, and social fluidity. It was not, however, possible to explicate how these inclusive views developed—it seems that the boys held these attitudes before reaching Standard High. Accordingly, in this ethnography, I show the ways in which popularity is maintained, examining the social matrix of a setting where inclusive masculinities are predominant. 

Theorizing Masculinities
The most prolific theory for masculinities studies has been Connell’s (1987, 1995) hegemonic masculinity theory. From a social constructionist perspective, hegemonic masculinity theory articulates the social processes by which a masculine hierarchy is created and legitimized. Connell (1995) describes two key mechanisms that produce this hegemony: domination conceptualizes the material acts that subordinate specific groups of boys and men, while marginalization represents the discursive challenging of the legitimacy of particular masculinities. She argues that these processes combine to produce just one culturally esteemed form of masculinity.
These mechanisms are of fundamental importance to Connell’s theorizing. In the second edition of Masculinities, Connell (2005) continues to stress the centrality of these social processes in her theory of gendered relations. Furthermore, Connell and Messerschmidt (2005: 844) maintain that, “to sustain a given pattern of hegemony requires the policing of men.” Indeed, they argue that “the concept of hegemonic masculinity presumes the subordination of nonhegemonic masculinities” (846). It can therefore be reasonably concluded that hegemonic masculinity will not adequately describe a setting where these social processes are absent. 
However, hegemonic masculinity theory has been a successful heuristic tool precisely because the majority of studies show boys are stratified in this way (cf. Connell and Messerschmidt 2005). These processes of oppression are used by boys and men to maintain or improve their position within male hierarchies. And with heteromasculinity traditionally privileged, boys are forced to distance themselves from homosexuality and femininity (Connell 1987; Pronger 1990). Accordingly, homophobia, violence and misogyny have regularly been shown to be integral aspects of the dominant mode of masculinity (cf. Mac an Ghaill 1994; Pharr 1997). 
Homophobia has been particularly significant in regulating masculine boundaries (cf. Kimmel 1994; Plummer 2001). Anderson (2008a) argues that this is because it is impossible to prove heterosexuality in a homophobic culture. He maintains that homophobia questions heteromasculinity and can therefore marginalize any male. Accordingly, boys employ homophobic discourse to distance themselves from anything perceived as feminine or gay (Nayak and Kehily 1996; Phoenix, Frosh and Pattman 2003). Pascoe (2007) theorizes this by discussing a ‘fag discourse,’ where homophobic epithets are continually hurled between boys and men as they jockey for masculine position. This discursive policing of orthodox sexual and gender norms promotes one’s own heteromasculine capital, too (Anderson 2005a; Epstein 1997). The power of homophobia in the regulation of masculinity means that boys and men learn to reject all behaviors coded as homosexual (Kimmel 1994). 
	Bullying is seen as inevitable for boys who transgress heteromasculine codes within this model, particularly for boys who rank poorly in the masculine hierarchy (Martino and Pallotta-Chiarolli 2003). Alongside reaffirming the masculine hierarchy, bullying also serves to bring ‘deviant’ boys back in line with the norms in a particular setting (Steinberg, Epstein and Johnson 1997). This limits the range of permissible behaviors available to boys. Indeed, the rules of masculinity are so restrictive that Mac an Ghaill (1994:56) describes them as limiting boys’ legitimate interests to “three F’s:” football, fighting and fucking. 
	However, these gendered behaviors are not fixed, and hegemonic masculinity theory is only one lens through which the social construction of masculine hierarchies may be understood. Scholars have warned that an over-reliance on Connell’s theory leads to selective accounts of masculinity and diminished lines of academic inquiry (Rowe 1998; Sparkes 1992). Indeed, Moller (2007) argues that academics see patterns of hegemonic masculinity even when the social dynamics are in fact far more complex. Yet by stereotyping men in this regard, it is possible that we fall back onto hegemonic masculinity theory as a default way of understanding men’s behaviors. This is problematic because broader cultural changes may impact on the stratifications of boys and men in ways that this theory cannot not address.
In recent years, a rapid rise in gay visibility has coincided with a sharp decrease in cultural homophobia (Altmeyer 2001; Loftus 2001; Ohlander, Batalova and Treas 2005; Weeks 2007). Anderson (2009) examines how these changing levels of homophobia directly impact on the social hierarchy of masculinities, and presents inclusive masculinity theory to argue that the gendered behaviors of boys and men will be radically different in settings where cultural homophobia has diminished. 	
Anderson (2009) develops his theory with the concept, homohysteria. This is defined as the cultural fear of being homosexualized, and Anderson suggests two key factors that affect a culture’s level of homohysteria: The awareness that anyone can be gay, and the level of cultural homophobia. For Anderson (2009:8), these factors impact on “the need for men to publicly align their social identities with heterosexuality in order to avoid homosexual suspicion.” He argues that in the period since the emergence of masculinities studies, Western cultures have been highly homohysteric. In this zeitgeist, hegemonic masculinity theory captures the social dynamics of male peer group cultures. However, Anderson (2009) argues that this is not the case when levels of homohysteria decrease.
Anderson theorizes that when homophobia no longer acts as a policing mechanism to the dominant form of masculinity, the esteemed attributes of boys and men will no longer rely on control and domination. Accordingly, masculinity is not the primary way of ranking boys and men in such contexts. Here, multiple forms of masculinity can be equally esteemed, and the subordination of particular forms of masculinity will not be a requirement of any given stratification. 
There is a growing body of work supporting the emergence of more inclusive forms of masculinity (Anderson and McGuire forthcoming; Author forthcoming; Kehler 2007; Markula and Pringle 2005; Swain 2006a). Furthermore, Anderson (2008a; 2008b; 2008c) shows that tactility and emotional intimacy are esteemed attributes of men in settings with low levels of homophobia. From these ethnographies, it seems that the diminution of marginalization and domination allows men the opportunity to discuss their feelings and provide each other with social and emotional support. Unlike the “boy code” identified by Pollack (1998), men in these studies can express emotions and discuss their own feelings and fears. 
The decrease in cultural homophobia is not uniform, of course, and there exists large variance in levels of homophobia across institutions and between countries (cf. Anderson 2005b; Weeks 2007). However, while a substantial amount of research examines the intersection of homophobia and masculinity (cf. Anderson 2009; Author forthcoming; Kimmel 1994), there is notably little scholarship on the social hierarchies of heterosexual boys and men in settings where overt homophobia is absent. For example, while Jackson (2006) partially examines popularity rankings of male students, she focuses on how popularity is interlinked with (homophobic) orthodox masculinity. 
The focus on ‘laddish’ behaviors prevents the multiplicity of masculinities that exist in school settings from being fully recognized (cf. Francis 1999; Jackson 2006). As Lyng (2009:463) argues, this means that empirical studies of secondary schools do not “grasp the variety of student groups and the relations between them.” To overcome this issue, it is necessary to investigate the social processes by which boys are stratified when homophobia is absent. Accordingly, I theorize the social processes of the ranking of boys in a school setting where I empirically demonstrate that inclusive masculinities are predominant. 

Methods
Participants 
Data for this research comes from a five month ethnographic study of a sixth form in the southwest of England. Data collection occurred between March and July 2008. The participants are the 16-18 year old boys attending the sixth form, ‘Standard High.’ The student population at Standard High comes from Standard town, which is situated seven miles from a major British city. There are 200 pupils in total, evenly split between boys and girls.
The sixth form was strategically selected because of its demographic similarity to the population of the UK. Accordingly, these students reflect the race and class profile of the country as a whole. Students come from working to upper-middle class families; ninety percent of the students are white, and the remaining ten percent comprise a variety of other ethnic and racial groups. Furthermore, the scholastic achievement rankings of the school rest at the median of the UK’s formalized testing results. It is important to note that students can leave school at 16 in the UK, so all participants have opted to stay in full time education. This may mean that some of the more disruptive students have already left the setting (Kehily and Pattman 2006).

Procedures
A triangulated approach was adopted, with participant observation, in-depth interviews and passive observation of lessons providing three perspectives of the students’ attitudes and behaviors (Bogdan and Biklen 2003). Multiple classes were observed, and I socialized with the students across the school site. However, the most illuminating data was collected in the students’ common room.
	The common room is reserved for use by the 16-18 year old students, only. It has computers, a vending machine, and a stereo system. It is open all day, so students use it on their breaks, or when they have a free period. The majority of students spend at least some of their day in the common room, and boys of all social groupings use it. It is also an unsupervised area, with the only adults being part-time employees who sell snacks and drinks; I rarely saw teachers or administrators in the common room. I spent a large proportion of time with students in this setting, as it provided the opportunity to observe boys of various sub-groupings away from institutional regulation. Indeed, perhaps because of this freedom from teacher regulation, the common room turned out to be the richest source of observational data. 
	While over 500 hours of participant observation provides insight into behavioral patterns, interviews provide data about participants’ attitudes (Brewer 2002). In addition to numerous casual conversations, I conducted 12 semi-structured, in-depth interviews; strategically selecting self-identified heterosexual boys from various sub-cultures. Interviewees’ race and class mirror that of the school population. Interviews were conducted at the end of the participant observation, so that rapport had developed between us. Interviewees were selected from one grade level, meaning that 12 out of 50 boys from this age bracket (16-17) were interviewed.
	Much of the interview schedule was created from the thematic coding of the participant observations. This included issues of: bullying and harassment; friendship groups; attitudes toward homosexuality and homophobia; as well as perceptions of masculinity and popularity among peers. The interviews, averaging fifty minutes, were recorded, transcribed and coded using a constant-comparative method of emerging themes (Goetz and LeCompte 1981). A portion of coding was cross-checked by another researcher, who also spent time in the school to validate my interpretations of participant observations (LeCompte and Goetz 1982). The data presented is chosen because of its representativeness of the data as a whole, unless presented as an anomalous result.
The nature of qualitative research prevents grand claims of generalizability being made across geographic location, types of institution and other categories of analysis. However, this does not mean that the substantive theoretical findings will not be replicable elsewhere. As Willis and Trondman (2002) argue, the strength of ethnographic research is in its ability to move from qualitative descriptions to conceptual analysis that informs existing theory. Accordingly, I discuss how my findings impact on contemporary understandings of popularity among male students in educational settings. 

Social Distance and Researcher Effect
Given the critiques of the subjective nature of qualitative and ethnographic research, the relationship between researcher and participants is of increased significance in ethnography (Davies 1999). In school-based ethnographies, there are two main approaches to negotiating the relationship between participants and researcher. In one, ethnographers retain an adult, expert role (cf. Pascoe 2007). In the other, researchers actively place themselves into the students’ world (cf. Ferguson 2000). I refer to these two ethnographic forms as formal and informal, with the names characterizing the interactions and relationships that the researcher maintains with participants. 
The predominant style of ethnography in school settings has traditionally been that of the formal model (cf. Mac an Ghaill 1994; Swain 2006; Thorne 1993). Here, ethnographers maintain social distance from their participants, as they seek to preserve a professional and knowledgeable self-image. For example, Pascoe (2007) documents the strategies she uses to define herself as “an outsider, albeit a privileged one, an expert, someone who knew more about the boys than they knew themselves” (p. 180). While formal ethnographies minimize the likelihood of going native, this ethnographic style has serious implications with regards to the richness of data collected. Emerson, Fretz and Shaw (1995) suggest that the distance from participants in formal ethnographies can, although not necessarily does, lead to the researcher being detached from their research setting. As LeCompte and Goetz (1982:46) argue, “Detachment can destroy rapport and cause participants to infer indifference or even hostility on the part of the researcher.” 
	In contrast to the formal ethnography, the informal approach requires social distance between researcher and participant to be minimized (Adler and Adler 1987; Anderson 2009; Hoffman 2007). Perhaps the best example of informal ethnography in the educational literature is Ferguson’s (2000) study of the intersection of race, gender and schooling. Here, Ferguson aligned herself with her participants, actively situating herself in their world. She maintained allegiance with the students, keeping distance from the teachers and administrative staff. This minimized social distance with her participants, decreased researcher power, and enabled Ferguson to collect data otherwise unobtainable in school settings. Proponents of this style of ethnography maintain that decreased social distance between researcher and participants leads to richer data and increased validity (Anderson 2008b; Hoffman 2007; Johnson 2002). 
It is because of the richness of data collected from informal ethnographies that I adopt this form of data collection. To facilitate this, I sought to minimize social markers of difference between myself and my participants. I adopted the male students’ colloquialisms, and talked about the same television shows they enjoyed. This was made easier by my similar age, ethnicity and class status. Accordingly, I was familiar with many of the cultural references that many of the students used. For example, I already shopped in the same clothes shops as many participants (such as River Island and Topman). I also watched some of the television shows they enjoyed (such as Skins and Family Guy), and I listened to similar radio stations (such as ‘Kiss’ and ‘BBC Radio 1’). These similarities enabled me to join in the informal discussions that pervade daily life. 
However, I did not try to present myself as a student. As Wax (1971:49) comments, such attempts can look “silly, phony, and mendacious.”  Wax further argues that participants can view assurances that the researcher is one of them as “rude, presumptuous, insulting, or threatening.” Accordingly, I presented myself as sympathetic to students’ views, eager to get to know them better, and appreciative of their engagement with me. To support this, I also distanced myself from the administration while in the presence of students. This meant that I did not reprimand students who engaged in minor rule-breaking behaviors: I did not comment on the copying of homework or when students left campus. One time I participated in a game of volleyball in the common room. This complicity was agreed with the administration before data collection commenced. Overall, while I recognize the complexities of engaging with teenagers, I believe I was successful in maintaining good relationships with a broad range of students.
It is important to note that this was not covert research. When meeting new students, either in lessons or the common room, I would introduce myself by saying I was a university student “writing a book on what it means to be a guy in school today.” I said that I wanted to hear their opinions and views, and to get to know them as well. Throughout the period of data collection, I openly responded to questions about my research. The extent of participants’ knowledge of my research (beyond my introduction) was dependent on how much they asked. To the best of my knowledge, all students I engaged with knew of my position as a researcher.

Reflexivity
While I worked to decrease social distance, it is necessary to recognize the impact of the researcher on the research process (Davies 1999; Wax 1971). The relationship between the researcher and participants can have complex and unexpected effects. The strength of reflexivity, as Willis (1978:197) argues, is in the ability of the researcher to “analyze the intersection of his own social paradigms with those of the people he wishes to understand.” While a thorough methodological account of my position in the field has been produced elsewhere (Author forthcoming), I detail here some of the steps I took to examine the effect of my presence on the statements and behavior of participants.
	As Mauthner and Doucet (2003) suggest, I allocated specific times and places each day to reflect on the collection of data. Here, I examined the ways in which my personal influences impacted on my analysis of data, and my emotional experiences in the field. I also investigated the extent to which participants acted differently when I was present (Wax 1971). I examined the extent to which participants may have acted differently in my presence in two ways. First, I spoke to two key participants about my findings, strategically presenting some false findings to see if the students were willing to challenge my interpretation. Both students disagreed with these findings, validating my belief that other students did not act markedly differently around me. Secondly, I spoke to members of staff who spent time with students but maintain little authority over them; the caretaker, cleaner and those who staff the common room food shop. These adults all commented that they noticed no difference in how students acted in my presence or absence.  

Ethical Issues
Ethical guidelines have been followed to ensure that no harm comes to the participants in this research. Permission for interviews was obtained from the Head Teacher (ie. the Principal), the student, and a parent/guardian of each student interviewed. Participants were also told that they were under no obligation to talk with me, and that they could inform myself or a member of staff if they did not want me to interact with them. To ensure the anonymity of participants, all names have been changed and any identifying characteristics of participants removed. The openly gay student (who could potentially be identified by other participants) gave permission for his interview data to be used in publications resulting from the research. 

An Inclusive Masculinity Setting
The total absence of overt homophobia is the most striking finding at Standard High. Throughout the five months of data collection, including over 500 hours of participant observation, I never heard the term ‘gay’ used in derogatory ways. Additionally, phrases such as ‘that’s so gay’ are not used by these students. Instead, the word ‘gay’ is only used in its literal sense when referring to homosexuality. Homophobic pejoratives have fallen out of usage altogether. To verify that the absence of homophobic discourse was not due to my presence, I spoke to the canteen staff that work in the common room, but who maintain little authority over students. They confirmed that students do not use homophobic discourse. 
	Tom provides more data supporting an absence of homophobia at Standard High. As the only openly gay student in the sixth form, he insists that he does not hear homophobic discourse, and does not feel subordinated by his peers. “I like it here,” he says. “The other guys are cool with it…Nobody is bothered.” While Tom is shy (he has just two close friends at Standard High), he insists that this is because he spends most of his time in the library. “It’s not because I’m gay,” he says. “I’m a quiet guy. That’s just who I am.”
Furthermore, the boys at Standard High stand firmly and publicly against homophobia. When the issue of homophobia is raised in interviews, all participants position themselves against it. They maintain this is true of their fellow students, too. For example, Matt, a sporty and popular boy, suggests that if someone was homophobic, he would be policed by his peers. Justin adds, “They wouldn’t get away with homophobia. We’d tell them it’s not on.” Sam, a quieter student, agrees, “You might find homophobia before [sixth form], but not here. It’s just not acceptable anymore.” Thus, it seems that rather than homophobia being an integral part of masculinity the way Kimmel (1994) describes, boys at Standard High instead stigmatize homophobic behaviors. 
Other tenets of orthodox masculinity hold less significance at Standard High, too. Boys rarely employ misogynistic language or engage in behaviors that sexually degrade women (cf. Epstein and Johnson 1998; Robinson 2005). The (hetero)sexualized discussions of sex tend to focus on the boys’ own potency, rather than girls’ traditionally stigmatized behaviors. While discussion of one’s heterosexual potency is also found in traditional forms of masculinity (cf. Mac an Ghaill 1994), these discussions are notable in that they are not used to marginalize or dominate other students. While this may have socio-negative effects in relation to misogyny, it is further evidence that students do not marginalize or bully each other. 
Male students also do not appear to express misogynistic attitudes, and girls who have sex with several boys are not stigmatized for having done so. For example, one free period, Matt, Liam and Ant (three of the most outgoing boys) walk into the common room and overhear a group of girls discussing oral sex. The boys walk to the other side of the common room, where they continue their conversation. They do not label the girls as sluts or whores, as previous research suggests they might (Lees 1993). This example is typical of the way boys at Standard High do not publicly invoke misogyny. While I did not have access to the boys’ private sexual talk (where sexual objectification of women is more likely to occur), girls at Standard High appear to have greater freedom from sexualized harassment than other research suggests (Lees 1993; Robinson 2005). 
The male students at Standard High also do not exhibit the aggressiveness traditionally associated with school-aged boys (cf. Stoudt 2006). For example, no fight occurred between sixth form students in the five months I collected participant observations. Indeed, participants say that there have been no physical altercations between students in the sixth form throughout the academic year. They attribute this to the view that fighting is no longer part of ‘being a man’. Sam says “It just wouldn’t be cool. Fighting sucks.” Jack agrees, “Guys are now more laid back—they depend on their wit, rather than strength.” 
Finally, a requisite characteristic for boys at Standard High is that they are inclusive of other boys. There are countless examples of this, but particularly noteworthy is the active inclusion of Tom, the openly gay student. Jack recalls a sixth form trip where he saw Tom sitting alone on the bus. Knowing Tom’s shyness, Jack felt sorry for him. He gathered a few friends, and together they sat around Tom for the rest of their journey. Jack explains, “I mean he was there on his own. You can’t just let him sit there.”
 The boys also play sports together, regardless of athletic ability. For example, Dan is not particularly popular at Standard High, and he walks with a limp. Nonetheless, when passing a group of sporty boys playing tennis, they ask him to join their game. Where this invitation would once perhaps have been designed to humiliate him, these boys are sincere in their offer. They welcome him to the court and, after rallying back and forth for several shots, Rhys offers Dan advice on improving his serve. After, Rhys says, “If we were playing another school and it was competitive, you want your best team. But if it’s just for fun, then anyone can play. Why not?” So whereas boys once avoided association with marginalized or less popular students, this is not the case at Standard High. Instead, these inclusive acts have been normalized, with friendliness both expected and esteemed.

A Popularity Ranking at Standard High
Boys are no longer stratified according to an aggressive and domineering form of masculine dominance at Standard High, yet a hierarchy of boys is still evident. Put simply, certain boys are more popular than others. This popularity, however, is not maintained through peer diminution, domination or risk-taking behaviors (cf. Jackson 2006). Instead, many boys ascribing to a wide range of masculine archetypes can maintain popularity. These boys come from both privileged backgrounds and areas of socio-economic disadvantage; they include students of various ethnicities, and boys of various athletic abilities. Dominant discourse is based on white, middle-class norms, yet these do not stratify boys within the school. Instead, a boy’s popularity is dependent on the extent to which he maintains other characteristics. In this hierarchy, I identify four main categories of behavior that increase one’s popularity at Standard High: charisma, authenticity, emotional support and social fluidity. 
	It should be recognized that popularity is a concept that is both complicated and nebulous. At one level, popularity is self-evident to the extent that it is visible as a set of relations between peers (Adler and Adler 1998). However, popularity is also firmly entrenched in discourses of race, class, gender and sexuality. Despite the complexities behind this deceptively simple term, popularity remains a useful and enduring concept. Indeed, Francis, Skelton and Read (2010:3) comment that “for all its fragility and inherent contradiction, the concept bears great resonance and recognition in schools.” The participants in this research discuss popularity themselves, and it effectively describes the social dynamics of Standard High.

Charisma 
A boy’s popularity at Standard High is primarily maintained by entertaining his peers through high-octane, energetic behaviors. Accordingly, charisma denotes the extroverted and ‘fun-loving’ acts that increase popularity. For example, the primary entertainment in the common room one week was based on the use of a skateboard. Different boys would use it to perform tricks, each trying to outperform the others. The success of the trick, however, was less important than the energy and exuberance with which it was executed. The most popular performances were the funniest and most physical, not necessarily the most skilled. Thus, boys displaying most charisma received the most praise.
	Charisma has always been important in boys’ behaviors (cf. Kehily and Nayak 1997), but here it is without the violent or aggressive acts usually associated with teenage boys (cf. Salisbury and Jackson 1996). For example, one day, Matt, Joe and Ben enter the common room where loud music is playing. Hearing it, they jump on two empty tables in the middle of the common room, and start dancing and singing along. After a crowd has gathered, Joe lies on his back, cradling his legs in his arms. Matt and Ben spin him around for several seconds, and the other students chant Joe’s name. Dizzy, Joe jumps off the table, and stumbles. The other students cheer, and Matt stops him from bumping into a wall. This example is typical of esteemed masculine behaviors at Standard High. The students are energetic, but fundamentally unaggressive.
Charisma is also important when the boys play sport. For example, a group of students often play an informal game of cricket during their lunch break. The players always want a good bowler because this ensures that everyone gets a chance at batting. However, even though Matt has the most skill, the favorite bowler is Jack. This is because while Matt ensures a fast (though not too fast) turn-over of batters, Jack provides more entertainment when bowling. Where Matt concentrates on his bowling, Jack uses his charisma to entertain the other players in various ways. He imitates famous cricketers, moves in funny ways, and banters with other players. Jack is esteemed for his extroverted behaviors when playing cricket, and is always a central player in these informal games. 
The centrality of charisma in rankings of popularity is also supported by interviews. Alex, a quiet student who plays in a rock band, highlights the importance of charisma to popularity. “The bigger the character you are, the higher up you are.” He adds, “Take Joe, he’s really out there. But he’s popular because he’s a big character.” Sam agrees, “I would be more popular if I was loud and outgoing, but that’s not really me.” Rhys suggests that this is because extroverted behaviors raise the spirits of all students. “Say it’s a wet and rainy day and everyone’s down,” he says, “You can always rely on someone doing something, just to make everyone laugh again, and feel a bit better.”
	
Authenticity
The most popular boys at Standard High are also seen by other students as being genuine and open. This characteristic is conceptualized by the variable authenticity. Indeed, the presentation of a ‘truthful’ and ‘honest’ self is a valued attribute for boys at Standard High. For example, Jack argues that authenticity is highly important. “It is ultimately about comfortability with yourself,” he says, “And a lot of guys are a lot less secure than they portray.” 
	One way authenticity is displayed is through clothing. The most esteemed clothing style is that of a group of sporty students who dress to display their physique (cf. Filiault and Drummond 2009). They wear tight t-shirts, and low-hanging trousers, revealing their underwear—stylish fashion accessories with designer labels on show. Although this dominant clothing style exists at Standard High, several popular boys differ from this norm. For example, Jack wears garish clothes even though style is highly valued. Yet his difference is championed, and his popularity high. This is partly attributable to his charisma, but also due to his self-confident, individualistic fashion choices. Similarly, Ant wears clothes symbolic of lower class groups, while Nick wears sports clothes. These clothing choices correspond with the students’ self-image, and they therefore display authenticity through their difference—helping them maintain their popularity. 
However, while authenticity cements the popularity of the more charismatic boys, it is also important for those who lack charisma because it provides these boys with an opportunity to increase their popularity. For example, while talking about differences between students, Rhys comments, “Take Sam, he’s a bit different. But I got to know him, and he’s really cool. I like his individuality.” 
The importance of authenticity is also demonstrated by boys who do not engage in the charismatic behaviors of the most popular students. In other words, boys who follow their own interests are respected for doing so. Ant says, “Some guys don’t dance on tables and stuff, but that’s them. They want to get on with their work, and I respect them for that.” Ant’s statement is supported by participant observations. Standard High has silent workrooms where students can choose to study when they do not have lessons. Students have to cross the common room to reach these workrooms, and many low ranking students, including Tom, spend their free time there. Yet I did not observe students being heckled or bullied for going to these rooms; rather, their work ethic is praised. Justin says, “I wouldn’t do it. I mean I don’t think it’s fun. But good for them if they want to get good grades.”
The importance of authenticity to popularity rankings is further evidenced by discussions of boys deemed lacking in it. For example, Jack suggests that Ben does not maintain authenticity. Jack says, “I know he’s insecure, but he comes across as false.” When asked about Ben, Steve agrees, saying, “It’s annoying. He talks about football loads, but I know he’s not really into it. I don’t know why he pretends.” Matt concurs, “Yeah, he tries too hard. He’s a good guy, but he puts too much effort in.” Accordingly, Ben’s lack of authenticity limits his popularity. 

Emotional Support
The giving of emotional support between boys is an ordinary interaction at Standard High. Here, boys regularly offer each other reassurance and advice. Indeed, boys at Standard High maintain that support is a crucial part of friendship. In interviews, several boys say that their friends provide emotional comfort and practical help. Discussing his friends, Rhys says, “I could have a serious chat with any of them, but at the same time still have a laugh.” Matt agrees, “I love my friends, and I could rely on them if I needed to.” Boys speak of their close friendships openly, without the threat of being feminized for this (cf. Kehler 2007). 
	Boys also support each other in times of stress. For example, Steve has been learning to drive for several months. Before taking his test, a group of friends publicly offer him support. Oli says, “I know you’ll pass first time, you’re really good,” and Jack says, “Good luck, man, I’ll be thinking of you.” As Steve prepares to leave, Ant embraces him for several seconds, and says, “I know you can do it.” 
Boys also provide assurance to each other in public events, such as assemblies and music performances. Even though ritualized events like these have traditionally been scenes for the re/establishment of masculine hierarchies (cf. Pascoe 2007), this is not the case at Standard High. An example of this comes through the election of “student officers.” Each candidate gives a 3 minute speech in assembly, and each is applauded as they step up to the platform to argue for their election. Simon, who is somewhat socially awkward and not particularly popular, speaks hesitantly, making several mistakes. Nonetheless, he is equally applauded by his peers. Later in the common room, Simon walks past a group of the most popular students. Matt calls out, “Well done, Simon. It was good,” and Rhys adds, “Yeah, it’s not easy to do.” There was no heckling, and the boys praised Simon’s willingness to take part. 
Demonstrating the importance of emotional support, if it is judged by peers that a boy has not offered the right level of support, he is reprimanded for his behavior. For example, Dave is discussing with his friends the opportunity he has been given by an art teacher to help paint a mural in the common room. Dave says, “I think I will. I mean, I want to leave my mark on the school.” As Justin and Kai are suggesting this is a good opportunity, Joe joins the conversation by commenting, “You can paint it with my dick!” However, no-one laughs at this, and there is a short silence until Kai comments, “Joe, don’t be harsh, it sounds cool.” Joe looks perturbed by this, and quickly replies, “Oh sorry man. You’ve got to go for it. I mean, you love that kind of stuff.” Here, Joe was regulated for the cavalier and somewhat aggressive manner in which he contributed to the discussion. His failed attempt at humor resulted in him demonstrating his support of Dave so as not to lose social standing. 

Social Fluidity
Research shows that boys’ friendship groups are traditionally fragmented into heavily insulated social cliques (cf. Stoudt 2006). In contrast to this, boys at Standard High valorize the ability to socialize with a range of students. Complementing both inclusivity and support, social fluidity denotes the ease with which students can move between social groups, and how well they can befriend a broad range of peers. 
The privileging of social fluidity means that there are no real cliques at Standard High—just groups of friends. That is, while friendship groups exist, they lack the exclusivity, competitiveness and rivalry that characterizes many social cliques (Adler and Adler 1995). Furthermore, while these distinct friendship groups exist, there is often overlap between them. Nick says, “I’m friends with the sporty lot, yeah, but also other guys. I spend time with each, and that’s important to me.” Sam has a similar view of social groupings, “I’m friends with lots of guys. In fact, you’ll see me hang out with different guys each week.” 
Many boys value this sociability. For example, in the last week of the summer term, approximately two thirds of the students organize a five day holiday together to the same seaside resort. About ten students carefully planned the trip, ensuring that the whole group stayed near each other. Matt, one of the main organizers, says, “It’s important we go as a group, so we can all celebrate the end of the year together.” 
	However, social fluidity is about more than having a large number or broad range of friends (cf. Francis, Skelton and Read 2010), it also involves being able to socialize with boys who are not part of one’s own friendship group. For example, Rhys presents himself as able to spend time with anyone: “I love spending time with my friends in the common room. But if my friends aren’t there, I can talk to guys I don’t really know. Just make conversation with them.” 
Students with less popularity agree. Alex, who perceives himself as being on the periphery of several groups, says:
“When you enter the common room and your friends aren’t there, you can just talk to other people. I’d be more popular if I did that more, but I find chatting to people I don’t know difficult.” 
Indeed, social fluidity blurs somewhat with charisma. This is because charismatic boys are better socially equipped to talk to people beyond their friendship group. Of significance, however, is that popular boys who do not socialize beyond their immediate social network do not rank as highly as boys that maintain a broad range of friends. Notably, the most popular boys desire to mix with all students, and participant observations show the most popular boys are also happy for less popular students to join their friends. 

Being Unpopular? A Hierarchy without Hegemony
The stratification of masculinities traditionally found in schools has been shown to be maintained by marginalizing students and stigmatizing particular boys as unmasculine (cf. Mac an Ghaill 1994; Stoudt 2006). This is not the case with the popularity stratification found at Standard High. This ranking is not used by students to stigmatize their peers—it is not a negative ranking system. That is, while some boys at Standard High may maintain little popularity, they are not labeled unpopular and socially ostracized by their peers. When asked if anyone is unpopular, Ant says, “No, we all get along pretty well. I might not like everyone, but there’s nobody I hate.” Jack concurs, saying “There are a few guys I can think of who don’t have many friends, but I wouldn’t say they were unpopular, no.” 
The boys recognize, however, that certain behaviors are unacceptable at Standard High. Rhys says, “It wouldn’t be okay if someone was rude all the time, or upset people.” Sam adds, “Well, if you bullied someone, that would be bad.” Nick sums up the boys views, by saying, “Basically you’d be unpopular if you were really mean to someone.” Participant observation supports these statements, too. I did not come across a single student who was ostracized or labeled unpopular in my five months at the school. Indeed, the one time I witnessed a boy harassing another student (for sitting in his seat), other boys confronted the aggressor—who later apologized for his behavior. It seems that breaking the tenets of inclusive masculinity is the only way to be unpopular at Standard High. 
Also, students who are not particularly popular appear happy with their position in the popularity ranking. For example, Sam recognizes he would be more popular if he was more extroverted, but comments, “That’s not really me. I’m happy with my friends, and I don’t want to be more popular.” However, the less popular students do not desire to be like the esteemed forms. Alex says, “There are plenty of guys more popular than me, but that’s because I’m not a joker. And it suits me fine.” Similarly, Kai comments, “Look at Matt, he’s really cool. But I like my friends and my group. I don’t want to change.” Accordingly, this is a social hierarchy without hegemony, and that requires new conceptual tools to understand its maintenance.

Discussion
Research on school cultures shows that many boys’ gendered behaviors are structured into a restrictive heteromasculine ethos that is heavily policed by homophobic discourse. In such a setting, heterosexual boys must conform to restrictive gender norms if they desire to maintain masculine status. However, this paper finds that boys at Standard High position themselves against homophobia, do not publicly engage in misogyny, and do not exhibit aggressive or violent behaviors. Offering fresh insight into the gendered behaviors of boys in school settings, it supports Anderson’s inclusive masculinity theory by showing that the set of acceptable masculine behaviors is greatly expanded in settings where homophobia is absent. When boys cease to be homophobic, misogynistic and aggressive, multiple forms of masculinity can prosper, and masculine capital no longer serves as the main stratification of boys.
Inclusive masculinity theory does not, however, explain how boys are ranked in an inclusive setting. This paper contributes to the literature by conceptualizing a popularity ranking of boys, consisting of four variables: charisma, authenticity, emotional support, and social fluidity. It highlights that while toxic practices of masculinity have been shown to exist in many settings (Connell and Messerscmidt 2005), boys also engage in socio-positive acts that do not harm others. 
An important conceptual finding of this research is that boys who provide emotional support are esteemed for doing so at Standard High. This stands in contrast with much existing literature. For example, Brannon (1976) highlighted how men must be a “sturdy oak,” while Pollack shows that a code exists to severely restrict the emotional freedoms of boys. Nayak and Kehily (1996:224) also suggest that “talking about personal and emotional subjects can be problematic as it fractures the hard face of conventional masculinity.” Yet the emotional support demonstrated in this study highlights how the understanding of boys as emotionally illiterate is based in work that is over a decade old, and questions the extent to which seminal work from a more homophobic era speaks to contemporary youth. 
The social fluidity of male students is also an important and somewhat counter-intuitive finding. Research on masculinities and student friendship groups demonstrates the ways in which friendship groups are consolidated by the exclusion of ostracized students (Poteat, Espelage and Green 2007; Stoudt 2006), yet this paper suggests that this is not the case in settings of low homophobia. Here, the ability to socialize across friendship groups is an attribute that raises one’s popularity. Accordingly, it is necessary to contextualize processes of exclusion as dependent on existing within highly homohysteric cultures. 
This paper has not examined the genesis of the inclusive attitudes that exist at Standard High. This is because despite rigorous analysis, I have been unable to discern any substantial institutional influences unique to Standard High that should affect rates of homophobia and the construction of masculinities. For example, there is no openly gay teacher; no gay student with high social capital; and no institutional pro-gay initiatives. To comprehensively explain the origin of these behaviors would be the topic of another paper, but I suggest that reasons for it may be found at a cultural rather than institutional level (cf. Anderson 2009; Author forthcoming; Weeks 2007). 
The inclusive masculinities on display at Standard High may also be partly attributable to the dynamics of sixth form education. Students at Standard High are no longer compelled to be in full-time education, and thus some of the more disruptive students may have decided against joining the sixth form. Furthermore, Kehily and Pattman (2006) argue that sixth form students appropriate middle class norms—distancing themselves from homophobia would be one way of doing this (cf. Anderson 2009; Weeks 2007). However, this factor can only be a partial explanation, because previous research has documented high levels of homophobia in sixth form settings (Epstein, O’Flynn and Telford 2003; Salisbury and Jackson 1996).
	While this research locates boys on a social hierarchy in an inclusive masculinity setting, it is only exploratory in certain other respects. For example, while it is apparent that boys at Standard High reject many misogynistic behaviors, the effect girls have on the construction of masculinity is undertheorized. Further research investigating the role women play in the construction of masculinity would be illuminating. It is also interesting to note that there is only one openly gay student out of 200 students in the sixth form (although there are more openly gay children lower down the school). Given that it is reasonable to expect an increase in openly gay students in settings with little or no homophobia, further inquiry as to why there are not more openly gay students is required. 
Nonetheless, I present in this research an alternative view of the construction of masculinities and the stratification of boys in a UK high school. I explicate the mechanisms of a gendered popularity hierarchy and examine the social matrix of an inclusive masculinity setting. By doing this, I show that not all schools are homophobic, misogynistic and violent spaces, and that we therefore need a new theoretical lens for viewing male behavior in schools. 



Footnote:
1. Sixth form refers to the final two years of schooling in the UK, with students aged 16-18.
References
Adler, Patricia and Peter Adler. 1995. “Dynamics of inclusion and exclusion in preadolescent cliques.” Social Psychology Quarterly 58(3):145-62.
Adler, Patricia and Peter Adler. 1998. Peer preadolescent culture and identity. New Jersey, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Altmeyer, Bob. 2001. “Changes in attitudes toward homosexuality.” Journal of Homosexuality 42:63–75.
Anderson, Eric. 2005a. In the game: Gay athletes and the cult of masculinity. New York, NY: State University of New York Press.
-----. 2005b. “Orthodox and inclusive masculinity: Competing masculinities among heterosexual men in a feminized terrain.” Sociological Perspectives 48(3):337-55.
-----. 2008a. “‘Being masculine is not about who you sleep with...’: Heterosexual athletes contesting masculinity and the one-time rule of homosexuality.” Sex Roles 58(1-2):104-15.
-----. 2008b. “Inclusive masculinity in a fraternal setting.” Men and Masculinities 10(5):604-20.
-----. 2008c. “‘I used to think women were weak’: Orthodox masculinity, gender segregation and sport.” Sociological Forum 23(2):257-80.
-----. 2009. Inclusive masculinity. London: Routledge. 
Anderson, Eric and Rhydian McGuire. Forthcoming. “Inclusive masculinity theory and the politics of men’s rugby.” Journal of Gender Studies. 
Author forthcoming.
Bogdan, Robert C. and. Sari K.Biklen. 2003. Qualitative research for education. Fourth edition. New York, NY: Allyn and Bacon.
Brewer, John D. 2002. Ethnography. Buckingham: Open University Press. 
Connell, Raewyn. 1987. Gender and power. Cambridge: Polity.
-----. 1995. Masculinities. Cambridge: Polity. 
-----. 2005 Masculinities. Second edition. Cambridge: Polity.
Connell, Raewyn and James Messerschmidt. “Hegemonic masculinity: Rethinking the concept.” Gender & Society 19(6):829-45.
Epstein, Debbie. 1997. “Boyz' own stories: Masculinities and sexualities in schools.” Gender and Education 9(1):105-15.
Epstein, Debbie and Richard Johnson. 1998. Schooling sexualities. Buckingham: Open University.
Ferguson, Ann. 2000. Bad boys: Public schools in the making of black masculinity. Michigan, IL: The University of Michigan Press.
Filiault, Shaun and Murray Drummond. 2009. “All the right labels: Gay male athletes and their perceptions of clothing.” Culture, Society and Masculinities 1(2):177-96.
Francis, Becky. 1999. “Lads, lasses, and (new) labor.” British Journal of Sociology of Education 20(3):355-71.
Francis, Becky, Christine Skelton, and Barbara Read. 2010. “The simultaneous production of educational achievement and popularity.” British Educational Research Journal iFirst:1-24. 
Goetz, Judith and Margaret LeCompte. 1981. “Ethnographic research and the problem of data reduction.” Anthropology and Education Quarterly 12(1):51-70.
Hoffman, Eric. 2007. “Open-ended interviews, power, and emotional labor.” Journal of Contemporary Ethnography 26(3):318-46. 
Jackson, Carolyn. 2006. Lads and ladettes in school. Buckingham: Open University Press. 
Johnson, Jospeh. 2002. In-depth interviewing. In Handbook of interview research, edited by J.F. Gubrium and J.A. Holstein. London: Sage.
Kehily, Mary Jane. 2002. Sexuality, gender and schooling. London: Routledge/Falmer.
Kehily, Mary Jane and Anoop Nayak. 1997. “Lads and laughter: Humor and the production of heterosexual hierarchies.” Gender and Education 9(1):69-88.
Kehily, Mary Jane and Rob Pattman. 2006. “Middle-class struggle?” British Journal of Sociology of Education 27(1):37-52.
Kehler, Michael. 2007. “Hallway fears and high school friendships: The complications of young men (re)negotiating heterosexualized identities.” Discourse: Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education 28(2):259-77.
Kimmel, Michael. 1994. “Masculinity as homophobia: Fear, shame, and silence in the construction of gender identity.” In Theorising masculinities, edited by Harry Brod and M. Kaufman. London: Sage.
LeCompte, Margaret and Judith Goetz. 1982. “Problems of reliability and validity in ethnographic research.” Review of Educational Research, 52(1):31-60.
Lees, Sue. 1993. Sugar and spice: Sexuality and adolescent girls. London: Penguin.
Loftus, Jenni. 2001. “America’s liberalization in attitudes toward homosexuality, 1973-1998.” American Sociological Review 66(5):762-82.
Lyng, Selma Therese. 2009. “Is there more to “antischoolishness” than masculinity? On multiple student styles, gender, and educational self-exclusion in secondary school.” Men and Masculinities 11(4):462-87.
Mac an Ghaill, Mairtin. 1994. The making of men. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Markula, Pirrko and Richard Pringle. 2005. “No pain is sane after all: A Foucauldian analysis of masculinities and men’s experiences in rugby.” Sociology of Sport Journal 22(4):472-89.
Martino, Wayne and Maria Pallotta-Chiarolli. 2003. So what's a boy: Addressing issues of masculinity and schooling. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Mauthner, Natasha and Andrea Doucet. 2003. “Reflexive accounts and accounts of reflexivity in qualitative data analysis.” Sociology 37(3):413-31. 
Moller, Michael. 2007. “Exploiting patterns: A critique of hegemonic masculinity.” Journal of Gender Studies 16(3):263-76. 
Morris, Edward.W. 2008. “‘Rednecks,’ ‘rutters,’ and ‘rithmetic’: Social class, masculinity, and schooling in a rural context.” Gender & Society 22(6):728-51.
Nayak, Anoop and Mary Jane Kehily. 1996. “Playing it straight: Masculinities, homophobia and schooling.” Journal of Gender Studies 5(2):211-29.
Ohlander, Julianne, Jeanne Batalova, and Judy Treas. 2005. “Explaining educational influences on attitudes toward homosexuality.” Social Science Research 38(4):781-99.
Pascoe, C.J., 2007. Dude, you're a fag. London: University of California Press.
Pharr, Suzanne. 1997. Homophobia: A weapon of sexism. Berkeley, CA: Chardon Press.
Phoenix, Ann, Stephen Frosh and Rob Pattman. 2003. “Producing contradictory masculine subject positions: Narratives of threat, homophobia and bullying in 11-14 year old boys.” Journal of Social Issues 59(1):179-95.
Plummer, David. 1999. One of the boys: Masculinity, homophobia and modern manhood. New York, NY: Harrington Park Press.
Plummer, David. 2001. Policing manhood: New theories about the social significance of homophobia. In Sexual Positions: An Australian View, edited by C. Wood. Melbourne: Hill of Content/Collins.
Poteat, V. Paul, Dorothy Espelage and Harold Green. 2007. “The socialization of dominance: Peer group contextual effects on homophobic and dominance attitudes.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 92(6):1040-50.
Pronger, Brian. 1990. The arena of masculinity: Sports, homosexuality, and the meaning of sex. New York, NY: St. Martin's Press.
Robinson, Kerry H. 2005. “Reinforcing hegemonic masculinities through sexual harassment: Issues of identity, power and popularity in secondary schools.” Gender and Education, 17(1):19-37.
Rowe, David. 1998. “Play up: Rethinking power and resistance.” Journal of Sport and Social Issues 22(2):241-51.
Salisbury, John and David Jackson. 1996. Challenging macho values: Practical ways of working with adolescent boys. London: Falmer Press.
Sparkes, Andrew. 1992. “The paradigms debate: An extended review and celebration of difference.” In Research in physical education and sport: Exploring alternative visions, edited by A. Sparkes. London: Falmer.
Steinberg, Deborah, Debbie Epstein and Richard Johnson. 1997. Border patrols. London: Cassell.
Stoudt, Brett G. 2006. “‘You’re either in or you’re out’: School violence, peer discipline, and the (re)production of hegemonic masculinity.” Men and Masculinities 8(3):273-87. 
Swain, Jon. 2006a. “Reflections on patterns of masculinity in school settings.” Men and Masculinities 8(3): 331-49.
Swain, Jon. 2006b. “An ethnographic approach to researching children in junior school.” International Journal of Social Research Methodology 9(3):199-213.
Thorne, Barrie. 1993. Gender play: Girls and boys in school. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
Wax, Rosalie. 1971. Doing fieldwork: Warnings and advice. London: University of Chicago Press. 
Weeks, Jeffrey. 2007. The world we have one. London: Routledge.
Wetherell, Margaret and Nigel Edley. 1999. “Negotiating hegemonic masculinity: Imaginary positions and psycho-discursive practices.” Feminism & Psychology 9(3):335–56.
Willis, Paul. 1978. Profane culture. London: Routledge. 
Willis, Paul and Mats Trondman. 2002. “Manifesto for ethnography.” Cultural studies: Critical Methodologies 2(3):394-402.

