Who Feels It? Income Inequality, Relative
Deprivation, and Financial Satisfaction in U.S.
States, 1973–2012
Orestes P. Hastings

∗

pat.hastings@colostate.edu
Colorado State University
Department of Sociology
January 2019

Forthcoming in Research in Social Stratification and Mobility
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rssm.2019.01.004

∗

This paper has benefited from the helpful advice and comments of David Brady, Claude Fischer, Neil Fligstein, David Harding, Mike Hout, Hilary Hoynes, Lane Kenworthy, Vida Maralani,
Christopher Muller, Daniel Schneider, Tim Smeeding, and the Berkeley Mathematical, Analytical,
and Experimental Sociology working group. Previous versions were presented at the 2015 ISA RC28,
2016 SASE, and 2016 ASA conferences.

Who Feels It? Income Inequality, Relative Deprivation, and
Financial Satisfaction in U.S. States, 1973–2012
Abstract
Many accounts posit that as income inequality rises, individuals will be less
satisfied with their own financial situation as they feel increasingly deprived
relative to others—driving these individuals to spend more as they engage in
positional competition and increasing their anxieties as position in the income
distribution becomes ever more important. I examine if and for whom income
inequality reduces financial satisfaction by analyzing the 1973–2012 General Social Surveys linked to state-level administrative data based on tax returns, the
Census, and the American Community Survey. I find that higher state-level
income inequality decreases financial satisfaction overall, and I further find that
this effect is especially pronounced for those in the middle of the income distribution. Counterfactual simulations suggest rising income inequality explains a
substantial portion of a four-decade decline in financial satisfaction.

Keywords: Income inequality; Relative deprivation; Financial satisfaction; Contextual effect

1

1

Introduction

Income inequality in the United States has risen sharply over the past forty years. In 1973,
the top 10% of earners made one-third of the national income, but by 2012 their income share
was over one-half (Piketty and Saez 2003 [2015]). Over the same time period, the national
Gini index in the United States rose from .47 to .64 (Frank 2014).1 Scholars, pundits, and
public figures alike have raised alarm about this trend, suggesting high or rising income
inequality leads to a variety of negative outcomes, but the empirical evidence has been far
from definitive (Neckerman and Torche 2007; Van de Werfhorst and Salverda 2012; Moss
et al. 2013; Atkinson and Bourguignon 2015; Kenworthy 2016).2
Many of the mechanisms proposed to explain why inequality could or should matter
utilize the concept of relative deprivation (Merton and Rossi 1950; Davis 1959; Runciman
1966). That is, in modern, developed economies inequality does not deprive people of
seemingly life-sustaining necessaries (e.g., food, shelter, basic health care), but rather—
because it makes them less well-off relative to others above them—inequality restructures
people’s evaluations of their own financial well-being. More negative evaluations could then
affect decisions about work, leisure, rest, debt, housing, policy preferences, family, and more.
Early scholarship defined relative deprivation as an objective measure of where one stood
relative to others in terms of income (Yitzhaki 1979; Adjaye-Gbewonyo and Kawachi 2012).
Yet the theories of why inequality matters depend not just on objective position, but on the
extent to which one feels deprived. Income inequality may matter when it widens the gap
between one’s economic position and where one feels they “ought” to be based on what they
see in others.
To see if income inequality affects these feelings, this paper examines the empirical
relationship between state-level income inequality and financial satisfaction. The paper
proceeds as follows: First, I elaborate on theories of relative deprivation and their link to
financial satisfaction. Then, I explain why these may be affected by income inequality. I
describe how the expected effects of income inequality may depend on one’s position on the
income distribution, but show that there are competing theories about which part of the
distribution should be most affected by income inequality. Based on these theories, I develop
a set of competing hypotheses that I test by analyzing the effect of the state-level Gini index
on financial satisfaction using the 1973–2012 General Social Surveys linked to state-level data
based on IRS tax returns, the decennial Census, and the American Community Survey.
Using models that account for time-invariant differences between states and that include
a wide range of individual- and state-level controls, I find evidence that income inequality
reduces financial satisfaction. Furthermore, I find that this effect of income inequality is
most pronounced for those in the middle of the income distribution. I assess the robustness
of these results to multiple measures of income inequality, various modeling approaches, and
different contextual and individual covariates. Finally, I use a counterfactual simulation to
1

Specifically, this is a pre-tax and transfer measure of inequality calculated from the Adjusted
Gross Income (AGI) reported in IRS’s Statistic of Income based on federal tax returns (Frank 2014).
Alternative calculations from the CPS and Census Bureau show a similar rise, though the values
differ because of how that income data is collected. The advantages and limitations of this data are
discussed in both the Data and Methods and the Discussion and Conclusion sections of the paper.
2
They may be talking about economic inequality, more generally. While different forms of economic inequality (e.g., income, wealth, or consumption inequality) are distinct from one another, in
the U.S. context income inequality has been a driving factor of other types of economic inequality
(Piketty 2014; Saez and Zucman 2016; Keister and Lee 2017).

2
show that income inequality likely explains a substantial portion of a four-decade decline in
financial satisfaction.
This paper contributes to the sociological study of income inequality by focusing on
feelings of relative deprivation and financial satisfaction—factors scholars have suggested
should be a key mediator between income inequality and critical social problems, but that
have rarely been examined directly. It makes an empirical contribution through a rigorous
analysis of the effects across the income distribution of over four decades of growing income
inequality in U.S. states.

2

Relative Deprivation and Financial Satisfaction

Scholars have studied financial satisfaction—that is, an individual’s subjective evaluation of
their financial situation—as both a “sub-construct” or domain of subjective well-being and
life satisfaction (e.g., Van Praag et al. 2003; DePianto 2011; Diener and Biswas-Diener 2002)
and as an important component of perceived economic standing (e.g., Kalleberg and Marsden
2012; Joo and Grable 2004). Unsurprisingly, there is a robust association across a number
of contexts between the income of an individual or household and their level of financial
satisfaction (e.g., DePianto 2011; Diener and Oishi 2000; Easterlin 2006). Additional work
has shown financial satisfaction to be a mediator between income and overall or “global” life
satisfaction (see review by Diener and Biswas-Diener 2002).
Yet research also suggests that the ability to derive satisfaction from income is highly
context dependent—not only does it matter what one makes, but also how that stands in
relation to others. One of the most concise accounts of this is articulated in the Easterlin
Paradox, which notes that although individuals with more income report being happier, an
increase in average income over time for a country does not translate into greater happiness
overall for that country (Easterlin 1973). At present, some scholars debate whether average
income really lacks any explanatory power on happiness (see Stevenson and Wolfers 2008;
2013, and responses by Easterlin et al. 2010). Some suggest that absolute income may
indeed have some positive effects, but that in the U.S. the efforts to obtain that income—
namely, working more hours and increasing the number of dual-earning households—have
had counteracting negative effects (Fischer 2008; Schnittker 2008). Still, there remains ample
evidence that relative income is an important determinant of financial—and ultimately—
overall satisfaction.
In fact, social comparisons of income and other material goods have been foundational to
the social sciences. In The Theory of the Leisure Class, Veblen ([1899] 1963) described how
social status is demonstrated and reified through visible forms of consumption that others
can see and compare themselves against. Duesenberry’s (1949) relative income hypothesis
stated that people’s consumption and savings behaviors depend heavily on income in relation
to others. And Marx (1847 [1972]) illustrated the idea when writing that, “A house may
be large or small; as long as the neighboring houses are likewise small, it satisfies all social
requirement for a residence. But let there arise next to the little house a palace, and the
little house shrinks to a hut.” (p. 33)
These early ideas were formalized in the theory of “relative deprivation” which assumes
that the comparisons individuals make with others who are more advantaged can cause
them to feel deprived (Merton and Rossi 1950; Davis 1959; Runciman 1966). Rather than
lacking in absolute terms such as being without adequate shelter, clothing, or food—factors
that are more relevant to conceptions of poverty (Iceland 2012)—relative deprivation focuses

3
on lacking the goods or resources that one desires or feels necessary to fully participate in
society (Runciman 1966; Adjaye-Gbewonyo and Kawachi 2012).
Building on this understanding, financial satisfaction is clearly related to this theoretical
conception of relative deprivation. In Falling Behind, Frank (2007) emphasizes that such
comparisons that would lower financial satisfaction need not be made out of envy. Rather,
it is “fundamentally about the link between context and evaluation” (p. xx ). Wants and felt
needs are shaped by one’s context—the greater the standards, the more income necessary to
be satisfied, and the easier it becomes to be dissatisfied with the income one actually has. In
particular, the standards are mostly to increase for those things that can become sources of
evaluation are aptly described as “positional goods” (Hirsch 1977). Yet the resulting potential
drawbacks from this competition are two-fold: not only does it require increasingly more
income to acquire them, but, in turn households may also be prompted to reduce their
consumption of so-called “non-positional goods” such as vacations, leisure time, and sleep.

3

The Effect of Income Inequality

Does rising inequality increase these feelings of relative deprivation and decrease financial
satisfaction? As income inequality grows, so does the distance between those at different
parts of the income distribution, potentially resulting in greater contrasts and more opportunities for negative comparisons. This could happen in two ways. First, as noted above, as
inequality increases, so too may inequality in the consumption of positional goods (Frank
2007). There is ongoing scholarly debate on the extent to which overall consumption inequality (spending in all areas) has (or has not) mirrored rising income inequality. Recent studies
from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) have reached mixed conclusions: some studies arguing consumption inequality has risen substantially (Aguiar and Bils 2015; Attanasio
et al. 2015) while others claiming the increase has been minimal (Krueger and Perri 2006;
Meyer and Sullivan 2017) Complicating the matter is that the CEX has likely experienced
greater measurement error in recent years (Meyer et al. 2015) and, more generally, consumption data measures spending within categories, rather than the quality or quantity of the
items purchased (see also Fisher et al. 2013; Attanasio and Pistaferri 2016). However, studies
examining specific positional goods such as neigborhoods (Frank 2007; Fligstein et al. 2017;
Goldstein and Hastings 2018), cars (Bricker et al. 2014), and luxury goods (Walasek and
Brown 2015; 2016) find that the focus on them seems to increase when and where income
inequality is greater. Second, people may to some extent compare incomes directly. While
Americans have limited knowledge about what others make, some salaries and wages are
public (e.g., many public sector and unionized workplaces, see Rosenfeld 2017) and others
can be approximated through hearsay, personal experience, and the news (McCall 2013).
Even though people have limited understandings of the income distribution (Hauser and
Norton 2017), even imperfect information may credibly inform people’s perceptions of their
position relative to others.
Yet, most previously attempts to operationalize “relative deprivation” define it as a
function of one’s position in the income distribution, regardless of one’s perception of that
position. This is exemplified in Yitzhaki’s (1979) definition of relative deprivation as the
average of the income differences between a person and everyone else in the population who
has a higher income than them. Yitzhaki’s measure and variants of it remain the standard
(see Adjaye-Gbewonyo and Kawachi 2012), but these metrics mechanically link relative
deprivation and income inequality. For any population, the average level of Yitzhaki’s

4
relative deprivation is the mean income multiplied by the Gini index, meaning that—net of
mean income—any society with more income inequality will have more relative deprivation
(Evans et al. 2004). But while rising inequality means people are objectively more deprived
relative to others, existing work has not demonstrated to what extent people may or may
not feel that deprivation and be less financially satisfied as a result.
Scholars have described two explanations of how income inequality could reduce financial
satisfaction. One view focuses on how relative deprivation drives others to overspend to “keep
up with the Joneses” or to be dissatisfied when they do not keep up. For example, Frank
(2007) argues inequality arises when the growth of top incomes sets off a chain of local
comparisons that cascade all the way down to low income earners. He describes this as
the increasing “cost of adequate” which leads to dissatisfaction, stress, and other adverse
outcomes.
Another view focuses on how relative deprivation may result in anxiety over one’s place
in the social hierarchy of status and prestige. As inequality increases, one’s position becomes
ever more crucial. Scholars have argued that this leads to status anxiety and increases levels
of stress, which then results in a number of negative consequences that are psychological,
physical, and social. Among the leading proponents of this position are Wilkinson and Pickett, who popularized this argument in The Spirit Level (2010). They use both cross-national
and between-state comparisons to argue that the additional status anxiety generated by income inequality can explain associations between income inequality and loss of community
life; poor mental and physical health; higher drug use, obesity, mortality, teen births, and
crime; and lower educational performance (see also Wilkinson and Pickett 2009).
But Wilkinson and Pickett do not measure feelings of relative deprivation or financial
satisfaction. Rather, they argue that the evidence supports their argument because the
outcomes associated with income inequality have a “status gradient.” That is, health and
social problems that are typically more common lower down the income distribution are
also more common in unequal contexts, while problems without a status gradient are less
associated with inequality. From this they infer that income inequality has effects through
the relative differences between individuals. While “status” is presented broadly, implicit in
these arguments is an increasing concern with one’s income and where it stands in relation
together.
Both arguments suggest that rising income inequality should be a cause of less financial satisfaction (to be clear, neither articulation requires that people know the level of
inequality—only that they experience it and navigate life through it), something this paper
tests empirically. Although no study does this directly, two studies use similar arguments to
test related outcomes. One study examined the effect of income inequality on status anxiety
in a cross-sectional study of European countries (Layte and Whelan 2014). Respondents
were asked the extent to which they agreed with the statement “Some people look down
on me because of my job situation or income.” On average, individuals in more unequal
countries were more likely to agree. In contrast, scholars in another study of European
countries analyzed questions about status seeking and found that people reported being less
concerned about status seeking in more unequal contexts (Paskov et al. 2017). They suggest
as inequality rises, people may “give up” on their efforts to keep up. Comparable studies in
the U.S. context do not yet exist.
The above discussion suggests there may be, on average, a negative effect of income
inequality on financial satisfaction, leading to the following ceteris paribus hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1: Income inequality is associated with lower financial satisfaction.

5

4

Heterogenous Effects

Many studies—both theoretically and empirically—have focused on the overall (i.e., populationaverage) effect of income inequality. Practically speaking, some of this is because much of the
work on the effects of income inequality has been conducted using outcomes at the aggregate
level, rather than at the individual level. Although sometimes adequate data exist only at
the aggregate level, an ecological fallacy can occur when inferring individual-level processes
from aggregate data (Evans et al. 2004). Moreoever, aggregate data can, at best, only establish population-level effects. This makes it impossible to distinguish how income inequality
may affect people differently who are at different places on the income distribution.
As noted above, prior scholarship has clearly established that income itself is positively
associated with financial satisfaction. There are also compelling arguments that the effect
of inequality on financial satisfaction should vary across the income distribution, but the
existing theories—all of which suggested an average decline in financial satisfaction—yield
conflicting expectations about how this effect would (or would not) vary across the income
distribution.

4.1

Effects smallest at top; largest at bottom

Relative deprivation theory emphasizes the negative comparisons that people make with
those who are more advantaged. The further down one is on the income distribution, the
more opportunities one has to make negative comparisons. Conversely, the higher up one is,
the fewer negative comparisons there are to make. By definition, greater income inequality
means a stretching of the income distribution, and thus, the relative deprivation of everyone
not at the top increases.
We know there is an association between relative income and financial satisfaction, so
we expect that, ceteris paribus, the effect of inequality should be smallest at the top of the
income distribution and largest at the bottom of the income distribution. Layte and Whelan
(2014) similarly proposed that the negative effect of individual income rank on status anxiety
would be exacerbated (i.e., positively moderated) by increasing income inequality, but they
did not find support for this hypothesis. However, financial dissatisfaction resulting from
feelings of relative deprivation is a different concept than status anxiety. For example, while
it is plausible that feelings of relative deprivation may induce status anxiety, feeling deprived
may also lead to overspending and/or financial dissatisfaction even among those who do not
feel negatively judged because of their income (or lack thereof).
Hypothesis 2a: The association between income inequality and financial satisfaction is the least negative for those at the top of the income distribution and
increases for those lower on the income distribution (i.e., there is a steeper
income gradient between individual income and financial satisfaction when inequality is higher).
Relative deprivation theory typically assumes individuals mostly ignore those who are
less advantaged than them. But an extension of this is “Relative Gratification Theory”
which proposes that comparisons with those who earn less will make individuals feel better
(Davis 1959; Evans et al. 2004). If people compare themselves to others both above and
below them, then not only would we expect a steeper gradient between income and financial
satisfaction, but we may find a positive effect of income inequality for those near the top of
the income distribution.

6
Hypothesis 2b: The association of income inequality and financial satisfaction
is positive for those near the top of the income distribution.

4.2

Effects largest in the middle

In contrast, because income inequality in the U.S. has been primarily driven by the growth
of top incomes (Piketty and Saez 2003 [2015]), those in the middle may be more sensitive
to these gains, while those at the bottom (correctly) may not perceive those in the middle pulling away so much. This makes sense if what occurs is not comparisons to those
throughout the entire income distribution, but local comparisons to those just above. This
is precisely Frank’s (2007) account: for the middle class, the losses from the “positional arms
race” have been made worse by rising inequality, and through a chain of local comparisons,
they spend more while diverting resources away from non-positional goods, causing large
welfare losses.3
A variant of this explanation has a more cultural emphasis. Those near the middle
may experience the greatest gap between their aspirations and economic reality. Studies
suggest that the standards are increasing for the so-called “middle class” lifestyle in the
U.S.—which often includes owning a (larger) house and (nicer) car and having a good job,
some modest savings, and enough money to pay for one’s children’s college education(s)—
are increasing, meaning those in the middle more often do not have the means to pay for
these them (Schor 1998; Dwyer 2009). Rising income inequality is likely a driver behind
these elevated standards (Frank 2007; Walasek and Brown 2015; Fligstein et al. 2017). As
a result, those in the middle may be the most discontent as they fail to achieve these goals
or take on considerable debt to meet these aspirations (Fligstein and Goldstein 2015). In
contrast, higher earning households may be able to meet more of these “middle-class” goals,
while those at the bottom may recognize that these things are out of reach.
Hypothesis 3: The association of income inequality and financial satisfaction is
most negative in the middle.
It is possible, of course, that the association between income inequality and financial
satisfaction is similar across the income distribution. If inequality increases status anxiety
by making everyone feel insecure about their position (regardless of whether they are high or
low), then these effects should be felt everywhere. This would be consistent with the findings
mentioned above that although income inequality increased self-reported status anxiety, this
was not moderated by income (Layte and Whelan 2014), but there would also be no variation
if there was no substantive effect of income inequality on financial satisfaction.

5

Data and Methods

5.1

General Social Survey

The individual-level data come from the nationally-representative General Social Survey
(GSS) which has been conducted annually or biannually since 1972 with response rates
greater than 70% (Smith et al. 2013). Unlike other long-running nationally-representative
3

Hence Frank’s (2007) book’s unsubtle subtitle: How Rising Inequality Harms the Middle Class.

7
surveys, the GSS asks a large number of questions about attitudes, including financial satisfaction. I obtained the restricted-access GSS geographic identification file that contains
state identifiers for every survey year beginning with 1973 and matched each respondent to
a variety of state-level measures described below.4

5.1.1

Outcomes

Financial satisfaction is measured with the question “So far as you and your family are
concerned, would you say that you are pretty well satisfied with your present financial
situation, more or less satisfied, or not satisfied at all?” (codebook item: satfin). In the
main analysis I present this as a continuous variable, but I also found substantively identical
results when using ordered logistic regression and multinomial logistic regression.
Figure 1 shows how this variable has changed over time. There has been an overall decline
of about .15 on the 3 point scale (abut 0.2 standard deviations). Looking at the change in
each response category, it is evident that this is driven by a decline in the proportion of
respondents who report being “satisfied” (from 32% to 26%) and an increase in “not at all
satisfied” (from 24% to 29%), while the proportion who are “more or less satisfied” has
remained about the same (about 45%).
Figure 1: Lowess Plots of Financial Satisfaction from 1973 to 2012 for each Response
Category and the Overall Mean (Source: General Social Survey)
.45
.4
2.05
.35
.3
2
.25
1.95

.2
1970

1980

1990
year

mean(financial satisfaction)

4

% in response category

mean(financial satisfaction)

2.1

2000

2010
not at all
more or less
satisfied

Data from the GSS, Census, and ACS are available from the respective websites of
each. The inequality data based on IRS tax returns are available at http://www.shsu.edu/
eco_mwf/inequality.html. However, the GSS state-level identifiers can only be obtained
through special contractual arrangements with NORC: http://gss.norc.org/documents/other/
ObtainingGSSSensitiveDataFiles.pdf

8
5.1.2

Individual-level Independent Variables

Income was measured by asking respondents to place their household’s income into an income
bin. The bins have changed over time, but the GSS provides a harmonized “best estimate”
by assigning each respondent the midpoint of their income bin, except for the open-ended
top income bin where incomes were assigned using a Pareto curve (Ligon [1989] 1994; Hout
2004). I divide the respondents into income quintiles by year. I found similar results when
using 7 and 10 groups rather than 5, and when dividing the total sample into quintiles,
instead of for each year. I also found similar results by dividing each household’s income by
their state-year median and then separating this state-year adjusted income into quintiles
by year, and I also found similar results in models that controlled for income alongside the
income bins.
To control for characteristics that might bias the relationship between income inequality
and the dependent variables, I include measures for the respondent’s sex, age, age squared,
race/ethnicity (non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, other non-Hispanic, and Hispanic),
years of education (using highest degree earned made no change to the main findings),
marital status (married, widowed, divorced, separated, or never married), number of children
in the household, number of adults in the household, work status (full-time, part-time,
temporarily not working, unemployed, retired, in school, keeping house, other), political
party affiliation (Republican, Democrat, independent/other), religious service attendance
(from 0 = never attend to 8 = attend more than once a week), and type of area of residence
(urban, suburban, or rural). The GSS did not measure Hispanic or Latino ethnicity until
2000, so for observations before that year I use country of ancestral origin. This correlates
extremely well with self-identified Hispanic from 2000 onward (the tetrachoric correlation
is .99) and has been used in previous research on race and ethnicity (Hout and Goldstein
1994).

5.2
5.2.1

Area Level Data
Income Inequality

While the outcomes are at the individual level, inequality itself is a population-level characteristic. This paper argues that financial satisfaction may be shaped by area-level inequality,
but it is not readily apparent what the appropriate unit of aggregation is to measure income
inequality. I focus on U.S. states for both theoretical and pragmatic reasons. First, although some studies measure inequality at the local level, scholars have argued that relative
deprivation should operate at a larger level such as the state (Wilkinson and Pickett 2009).
This may seem counterintuitive if one expects the effects to result directly from face-to-face
encounters with others, but the processes described above also depend heavily on the extent
of the separation between those on different parts of the income distribution which may not
be captured when looking at the inequality of smaller areas.
Second, states have been used extensively in prior studies of income inequality effects
and evidence suggests there are net state-level income inequality associations for some of
the outcomes that could result via financial dissatisfaction. Third, policy interventions are
frequently applied at the state level, so understanding whether psychosocial effects appear
at the same level may be especially useful for those interested in the potential policy implications of these analyses.
Fourth, unlike for sub-state areas, excellent annual state-level income inequality data

9
are available (described below). Fifth, unlike counties, MSAs, and other sub-state areas,
states have maintained consistent boundaries over time. Finally, sixth, the GSS geo-coded
data only has location identifiers below the state beginning in 1993, making it impossible
to examine the effect of inequality during the first 20 years of the survey for smaller levels.
Excluding these respondents would dramatically reduce the sample and omit about half the
income inequality growth between 1973–2012.
My income inequality measure is the state-level Gini index. The Gini is the average
distance between all pairs of proportional income in the population, ranging from 0 (if
everyone had the same income) to 1 (if one household had all the income). The Gini
assesses inequality across the entire income distribution and is the most common inequality
measure in previous research.
The Gini is calculated and made available by Frank (2014) from data published in the
IRS’s Statistics of Income. Alternative state-level data sources of income inequality come
from the Current Population Survey (CPS) and the Census Bureau (decennial Census until 2000 and American Community Survey (ACS) afterwards) (Stone et al. 2016), but the
IRS-based data provides a number of advantages including being based all returns rather
than a smaller sample, being available annually, relying on reports where respondents are
penalized for income reporting errors (Akhand and Liu 2002; Hümbelin and Farys 2016),
and being subject to less top-coding (Richard et al. 2009). IRS-based data does risk censoring households whose income is below the threshold for mandatory tax filing, but these
households may still file taxes to benefit from tax credits or receive a tax refund.5
5

See Hastings (2018) for additional discussion of differences between the data sources. All of these
data series are based on pre-tax and transfer income. Although post-tax and transfer income would
be ideal since it better measures disposable income, no such data series exists at the state level. In
cross-national work, using pre-tax and transfer income is especially problematic (Ferreira et al. 2015;
Guillaud et al. 2017), but this is much less the case in state-level work for two reasons. First, there is
much less variation between states in their taxes and transfers as compared to nations. Second, the
models employ state fixed effects, so it is only change over time that matters (i.e., average difference
between high tax-and-transfer states and low tax-and-transfer states are netted out).

10

state gini index
.55
.6

.65

Figure 2: 90th, 50th, and 10th Percentiles of the State Gini Index of Income Inequality,
1973–2012 (Data source: Frank 2014)

12
20

09
20

06
20

03
20

00
20

97
19

94
19

91
19

88
19

85
19

82
19

79
19

76
19

19

73

.45

.5

90th percentile
median
10th percentile

year

Some recent research has focused on top income shares (Frank 2014; Piketty and Saez
2003 [2015]), but the hypotheses tested here would seem to be sensitive to changes in income
inequality across the entire distribution, so I focus on a measure that is similarly sensitive to
these changes. Figure 2 shows the Gini index across states during the analysis period. Two
trends are notable. First, consistent with other accounts of income inequality, inequality
grew considerably over the period of study. In fact, the Gini of the least equal state in 1973
(.50 in the District of Columbia) was lower than in the most equal state in 2012 (.55 in West
Virginia). Second, the gap between the 10th and 90th percentiles is nearly twice as large in
2012 as 1973, meaning that inequality grew substantially more in some states than others.

5.2.2

Other Area Level Data

I control for state-level median household income (logged) which is often used as a measure
of standard of living and is less sensitive than mean income to measurement errors of high
income. I control for changing racial composition with the percent black in each stateyear. Deaton and Lubotsky (2003) argue that race is a confounder of income inequality
effects, showing in one analysis that the inclusion of the proportion black explains away a
relationship between state-level income inequality and mortality. This study has since been
challenged in several respects (e.g., Ash and Robinson 2009), but Pickett and Wilkinson
(2015) also question whether such explanations are even theoretically appropriate, suggesting
that “ethnic differences attract more attention and seem more important not only when
they become markers of social status differences but also when greater inequality makes
social status differentiation more powerful, increasing the importance of ‘downward’ social

11
prejudices whether by class or ethnicity.” (p. 7). Thus, controlling for race presents a more
conservative estimate. Hispanic or Latino ethnicity was not consistently recorded in the
census until 1980 and is not included, but I control for the percent foreign born in each
state-year. Finally, I control for state population density (logged) to account for population
shifts and growth. These measures come from the decennial Census for 1970-2000 (except
that households reported the previous year’s income, so median income is measured for 1969,
1979, 1989, and 1999) and the annual ACS for 2005-2012. I linearly interpolated between
data points to create annual measures, except for percent black, for which model-based
annual estimates are provided by the Census Bureau. Descriptives of all individual- and
state-level measures are presented in the Appendix.

5.3

Analytical Strategy

The analytic approach is to conduct an individual-level analysis of financial satisfaction.
Though much prior work on the effects of income inequality has been conducted at the
aggregate level, this research is vulnerable to an ecological fallacy. Moreover, aggregate-level
analysis can only establish population-level effects, making it impossible to distinguish how
income inequality may affect people differently across the income distribution, something
this paper also examines.
I estimate a linear regression model with state fixed effects and time-varying controls.
Many studies of income inequality employ cross-sectional comparisons across countries or
states at a single point in time, but this design risks confounding the effects of income
inequality with unobserved characteristics of areas that shape both income inequality and
the outcomes being studied. Panel data can exploit within-area temporal variation in income
inequality and net out unobserved time-invariant characteristics, as I do with the inclusion
of state fixed effects. In all, I analyze 51,699 observations in 1,063 state-years.
Formally, consider observation i in state s collected in year t. The regression equation
(with bolded terms indicating vectors) is,
Satisf actionist = β0 + β1 Ginist + β2 Incomeist
+ [β3 (Ginist × Incomeist )]
+ β4 Controls + µs + ist
where Satisf actionist is the respondent’s reported financial satisfaction, Ginist is the statelevel inequality measure, Incomeist is a vector of the five indicator variables for each
income quintile, Controls is a vector of the individual and state-level controls, µs specifies
a full set of state indicators (i.e., fixed effects), and ist is the idiosyncratic error. I place the
interaction of the Gini index and the income quintiles in brackets to show that I estimate this
model both with and without these terms. Without these terms, β1 represents the overall
effect of the Gini on financial satisfaction. By including the interaction terms, I can assess
how the effects vary across the income distribution. In all models I employ the sampling
weights provided by the GSS and adjust the standard errors for clustering within states.6
6

This clustering accounts for individuals appearing more than once because of the panel structure
of the GSS beginning in 2006. I cluster at the highest level (states). The clustered variance estimator accommodates an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix within each cluster, so it is robust to
the presence of lower levels of clustering (Cameron and Miller 2011). This approach treats individuals that move between states as independent observations, but excluding repeat observations from

12
I do not include year fixed effects in the main models, as adding them nets out the
average level of inequality for each year and forces the estimate to be based on changes in
income inequality within states net of the overall growth of income inequality across states.
Inequality grew in all states, as shown in Figure 2. As a result, this approach may be overly
conservative, netting out much of the variation in income inequality that we are interested
in understanding. However, I present models with year fixed effects as a robustness check
(Appendix Table A4) and show these produce results with a similar magnitude and direction
but have much larger standard errors.
Many studies of income inequality prefer to specify a multilevel model (i.e., mixed or
hierarchical linear models) to understand the effects of inequality. In the multilevel approach,
β1 is estimated from variation both between and within states and years and “borrows
strength” across groups (i.e., state-years) when they are small (Gelman and Hill 2007). As
a result, this model is more efficient (i.e., yields smaller standard errors) but requires the
untestable “random effects” assumption—in this case that any unobserved characteristics
of the states that influence the outcomes are not correlated with any of the individual- or
state-level measures that are included with the model. These models also account in their
standard errors for the clustering of observations within shared contexts without needing
post-hoc clustering adjustments that are done in the fixed effects regression models (RabeHesketh and Skrondal 2012). Despite the differences, I find substantively the same results
with the random effects approach as compared to the fixed effects approach above (Appendix
Table A5)
Because the outcomes measure the attitude of the respondent at the moment of completing the survey, I use income inequality for the same year. It is possible that respondents
take some time to “update” their mental understanding of how they compare to those around
them, so for robustness I also consider the models with a lagged Gini.
I consider several other robustness specifications. I reestimate the models using alternative sets of control variables (no controls, individual controls only, state controls only).
I consider the effect of outliers by removing the most and least unequal state observed in
each year. And I reestimate the preferred models without survey weights. The results of the
robustness checks are discussed in a section following the results from the preferred model.
After estimating the effect of inequality, I then examine the overall time trend in financial
satisfaction and I present a counterfactual simulation of how financial satisfaction might have
changed over time had inequality not risen. As noted in Figure 1, financial satisfaction has
declined over time. How much of this can be attributed to changes in inequality? We
know inequality rose over the same time period, as shown in Figure 2, but, of course, many
things changed in the U.S. besides inequality, which is precisely the motivation for doing
the multivariate analysis in the first place.
The appropriate counterfactual is not “no change” in financial satisfaction over time,
but rather the estimation of how financial satisfaction would have changed had inequality
remained constant. To estimate this, I take the coefficients from the final model and make
two predictions for each observation. First, I predict each respondent’s financial satisfaction
using all of the observed values for all individual- and state-level variables (this is the traditional ŷ of a regression model). Second, I predict each respondent’s financial satisfaction
using the observed values except replacing the state Gini with its mean level in 1973. I
movers does not alter the main results. As would be expected, removing clustering entirely generated smaller standard errors and smaller p-values for the coefficients of interest. Results available
upon request.

13
compare these results visually using locally weighted regression (lowess) plots (bandwidth
= .8) employing the sampling weights provided by the GSS, both for the full sample and
by income quintile, in order to evaluate income inequality’s long-term effect on financial
satisfaction.

6
6.1

Results
Main Effect

Table 1 presents the main results for the effect of income inequality on financial satisfaction
(full results with all coefficients are in Appendix Table A3). The baseline income group is
the middle income quintile, which includes the median earner. Model 1 shows the main
effect of inequality (Hypothesis 1) while Model 2 adds interactions between inequality and
the respondent’s income quintile, in order to see how the effect varies across the income
distribution (Hypotheses 2a, 2b, and 3).
Table 1: Coefficients from Models of Financial Satisfaction
(1)

(2)

State Gini

−0.30∗

(0.13)

−0.54∗∗

(0.20)

Q1 (bottom)
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5 (top)

−0.30∗∗∗
−0.16∗∗∗
ref .
0.16∗∗∗
0.41∗∗∗

(0.014)
(0.0091)

−0.30∗∗∗
−0.16∗∗∗
ref .
0.16∗∗∗
0.41∗∗∗

(0.014)
(0.0091)

0.38∗
0.0032
ref .
0.27
0.55∗

(0.17)
(0.13)

Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5

(0.012)
(0.016)

(bottom) × Gini
× Gini
× Gini
× Gini
(top) × Gini

State poverty rate
State median income (logged)
Individual Controls
State Time-varying Controls
State Fixed Effects
Observations

−0.011∗∗∗ (0.0031)
0.14
(0.092)

(0.011)
(0.015)

(0.21)
(0.25)

−0.011∗∗∗ (0.0031)
0.14
(0.092)

Y es
Y es
Y es

Y es
Y es
Y es

51699

51699

Standard errors in parentheses
∗
p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01, ∗∗∗ p < .001
Notes: The middle income quintile (Q3) is the baseline category. Each model
uses sampling weights and the standard errors are adjusted for clustering
within states. Full models with all coefficients are in the Appendix.

The overall effect of income inequality is negative and significant. In Model 1, a 0.1 increase in the Gini (about 1.5 standard deviations) is associated with a 0.03 (≈ 0.04 standard

14
deviation) decrease in financial satisfaction. To help understand these effects, I also report
the coefficients for the state poverty rate and the logged state median income. Poverty also
has a significant negative effect. For example, in model 1 a 0.1 increase in the Gini has
about the same negative effect on financial satisfaction as a (-0.30*0.1/-0.011 =) 2.7 percentage point increase in the state poverty rate. State median income has a non-significant
effect on financial satisfaction, which is consistent with the notion that relative—rather than
absolute—income is what is more important for financial satisfaction. Taking the point estimates at face value, in Model 1 a 0.1 increase in the Gini has approximately the same effect
size as a 20% decrease in state median income.7
These back-of-the-envelope coefficient comparisons should probably be interpreted cautiously, as changes to the poverty rate or median income are likely to change inequality as
well, but they provide some evidence that these effects of inequality are indeed quite meaningful. Yet another way of sizing these effects is to consider the substantive implications
from an over time perspective. Further below I also consider what portion of the overall
change over time in the outcome could be explained by rising income inequality based on
these models.
These models also show that the coefficients for the income groups are negative for
quintiles below the middle quintile and positive for quintiles greater than the middle quintile.
This is not surprising since this captures the effects of absolute income and the dimension
of financial satisfaction that is about income rank, whereas the Gini captures the effect of
a greater distance between ranks. Next, I consider how the Gini may have different effects
depending on one’s rank.

6.2

Heterogenous Effects by Income

Model 2 of Table 1 shows how the effect of income inequality varies across the income
distribution. Here, the coefficient for the Gini represents the effect of income inequality for
the middle income quintile. It is still negative, and it is greater in magnitude than in Model
1 (β = -.54, p <.01). The coefficients for the interaction term between the Gini and the
2nd and 4th income quintiles are not significant, but interaction coefficients for the highest
and lowest income groups are both positive and significant. From this model, it appears the
effect of income inequality is least negative for those at the top and bottom of the income
distribution and is most negative for those in the middle (especially the second and third
income quintiles).
To visualize these results, Figure 3 shows the predicted values of financial satisfaction
for each income group in contexts of high and low income inequality while setting all of the
remaining covariates to their mean values. The high inequality line shows the prediction
when income inequality is at the level of the 90th percentile in the sample (Gini = .64), while
the low inequality line shows the prediction for inequality at the level of the 10th percentile
(Gini = .47). Another way to think of these levels is that the “low inequality” value is about
the median level of state inequality in 1973, while the “high inequality” value is about the
7

State median income is logged, so the percent change will have the same effect on the outcome,
regardless of the baseline income. Finding the comparable percent change to the effect of a 0.1
increase in the Gini requires solving
βlog(median
for x.

income)

∗ log(1 + x) = 0.1 ∗ βgini

15
median level of state inequality in 2012.

2.2
2

low inequality
(Gini of 10th percentile = .47)

high inequality
(Gini of 90th percentile = .64)

1.6

1.8

financial satisfaction

2.4

Figure 3: Predicted Values of Financial Satisfaction by Income Group in Contexts of High
and Low Income Inequality (from Model 2 of Table 1). Error bars show 95% confidence
intervals.

Q1 (bottom)

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q5 (top)

income quintile

Figure 3 clearly illustrates that income inequality is negatively associated with financial
satisfaction because the low inequality line is above the high inequality line. The gap is
largest for the second and third income quintiles, and smallest at the top and bottom of the
income distribution. For some perspective, the gap between high and low income inequality
for the middle income quintile is slightly more than half the effect of moving from the middle
quintile to one quintile above or below. Even if this is (debatably) not a large effect, it is
important to note that changes in income inequality affect the entire population, whereas
income changes for a single household affect only that household.
These findings show that there is substantial variation across the income distribution on
the effect of inequality. The findings are in line with the argument that those in the middle
should be most affected (Hypothesis 3). They do not support the expectation that those in
the bottom are most affected (rejecting Hypothesis 2a).
Hypothesis 2b further predicted that the effect of income inequality would be positive
for the top income group. Returning to Model 2 of Table 1, the sum of coefficients for the
Gini and the top income quintile × Gini interaction term is only barely positive (-0.543 +
0.549 = 0.006) and a Wald test of the sum of these two coefficients shows there is not a
statistically significant difference from zero (p = .98). This does not support Hypotheses
2b. One possibility is that the top income quintile is too large a group, but in an additional
model I found no positive effect for the top 10% (available upon request). The data do not

16
permit me to examine those at the extreme high end of the income distribution because the
incomes of more than 5% of GSS respondents are top-coded each year.

6.3

Robustness Models

I also examined several alternative models and assessed the sensitivity of the results to a
number of robustness tests. First, I estimated multilevel models with random incepts, both
as a three-level model with random intercepts at the state, state-year, and individual level,
and as a two-level model with crossed non-nested random intercepts at the state and the
year level (Appendix Table A5). These models produce results with similar coefficients and
smaller standard errors (“more” statistical significance) than the main models. This is not
surprising because the random effects model is a more efficient estimator and uses variation
both within and between groups.
Turning to the other extreme, I analyzed models that added year fixed effects to the main
models (Appendix Table A4). In these models with two-way fixed effects, the magnitude
and direction the coefficients are nearly the same as in the main results, but the standard
errors of the estimates increase substantially and the results are not statistically significant
at the conventional p<.05 level.8 Recall, however, that year controls net out much of
the increase in inequality within states over the time period being examined. Although
it is possible that some other trending characteristics are driving the main results, these
unidentified characteristics would have to operate independently of the existing time-varying
state-level controls (median income, population density, percent black, percent foreign born,
and poverty rate).
I also considered models that treat the three-value measure of financial satisfaction as
categorical; using both ordered logistic and multinomial logistic regression produces substantively identical results. The results were also robust to models using the income quintiles
based on the ratio of household income to state-year median income, models controlling for
household income alongside income quintile, models reestimated without survey weights,
models that removed observations from the most and least unequal state in each year, and
models with a one-year lagged Gini index.

6.4

Counterfactual Simulation of Change Over Time

The analysis presented so far assesses the effect of income inequality by using the state-level
variation in inequality over time. Given, as shown in Figure 2, that state-level inequality
rose over the period of analysis, what implications did that have for financial satisfaction?
I examine this by comparing the observed trend in financial satisfaction to a counterfactual
trend—based on the estimated model—of how financial satisfaction might have changed had
income inequality not risen.
Figure 4 presents these results. First, the dotted green line shows the true level over time
for financial satisfaction—the same as in Figure 1. Next, the short-dashed red lines show
the outcome’s level for each year based on the predicted values obtained by calculating the
predicted values for all of the observations in the sample, using the observed values for all of
the covariates. If the model is reasonable, this should be close to the observed values, which
it is. Finally, the long-dashed blue line shows the counterfactual simulation that predicts
8

Models with a year linear term and with year linear and quadratic terms produced substantively
similar results.

17
what financial satisfaction would have been in every year had income inequality remained
constant since 1973, but everything had changed as it actually did. The figure demonstrates
that had state-level inequality remained constant, the overall decline would have been about
half of what it actually was. For example, the predicted gap between the counterfactual and
predicted lines for 2012 is about .06 (about .08 standard deviations).

financial satisfaction
2
2.05

2.1

Figure 4: Counterfactual Simulation of Change Over Time in Financial Satisfaction

1.95

Observed
Predicted with Observed Inequalty
Predicted if Inequality Remained at 1973 Level
1970

1980

1990
year

2000

2010

Note: Lines are lowess plots of data points aggregated by year.

Figure 5 presents the same results by income group. To avoid over-cluttering the figure,
the true observed values are not shown, but the predicted line based on the actual inequality
and the counterfactual line based on constant inequality are presented. From looking at the
predicted values (red short dashes) it is clear that between 1972 and 2012 it was those in
the bottom income quintile that experienced the greatest overall decline in their financial
satisfaction (from 1.80 to 1.65). However, the largest gap attributable to income inequality
is for those near the middle of the income distribution. The gap in 2012 between the
predicted and counterfactual line for the middle quintile is 0.1—almost double that of the
overall effect from Figure 4. For the top quintile, there is no predicted change in financial
satisfaction for the observed or counterfactual models over time, as seen by the nearly-flat,
completely-overlapping lines at the top of the figure.

18

2.4

Figure 5: Counterfactual Simulation of Change Over Time in Financial Satisfaction by
Income Quintile

financial satisfaction
2
2.2

Predicted
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5

1.6

1.8

Counterfactual
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5

1970

1980

1990
year

2000

2010

Note: Lines are lowess plots of data points aggregated by year and income group. Note for Q5 the
predicted and counterfactual lines completely overlap.

7

Discussion and Conclusion

This paper examined the effect of rising state-level income inequality on financial satisfaction.
Although the overall effect is negative, I find the middle to be the most negatively effected.
This is consistent with the account that the middle class may be the most affected by
income inequality. In the escalating “positional arms race,” it is these households who likely
experience a greater gap between their aspirations (the “American dream”) and the economic
reality they face (Schor 1998; Frank 2007; Dwyer 2009; Fligstein and Goldstein 2015).
I employed a counterfactual simulation to predict what the consequences of rising inequality have been for financial satisfaction between 1973 and 2012. Overall, the simulation
suggests financial satisfaction would have declined only about half as much as it did. When
breaking it down by income quintiles, I show that although those at the bottom experienced
the largest decline in financial satisfaction, it is those in the middle whose decline is most
attributable to rising income inequality.
Whether these effect sizes and over time declines are “large” depends on how much one
thinks financial satisfaction is associated with other outcomes of interest. But small values
can be substantively (as well as statistically) significant, especially when they apply to an
entire population. If financial satisfaction (or the lack thereof) is a factor in the decisions
people and families make about aspects of life ranging from work and leisure to indebtedness
and voting preferences to marriage and fertility, then rising income inequality may be an

19
important part of the story to focus on.
This paper embraces causal language throughout, referring to the “effects” of income
inequality. Of course the analyses can only show associations between measures. As such,
reverse causality cannot be entirely dismissed. It is possible that states where people are
less satisfied with their finances are more likely to become unequal (though this would likely
be a long-term process). But, I find the more straightforward direction of causality—income
inequality causing the outcomes—far more plausible. A more likely problem is confounders.
There are many differences between states and the people in them besides their Gini indices,
and these differences could be driving some of the results (although this reasoning applied
to popular cross-national work on inequality is even more concerning). This paper tries to
deal with confounders by including a large number of additional covariates at the individual
and state level, including state fixed effects.
Another possibility is that inequality works through a more dynamic causal relationship. For example, it is possible that past levels of income inequality, even net of the current
level, also effect financial satisfaction. In such cases, the presence of state fixed effects could
actually bias the results (Imai and Kim 2017).9 Relatedly, it may be that the changes in
inequality levels, rather than the absolute levels themselves, may drive inequality’s effects
on financial satisfaction. Once a particular level of income inequality becomes normalized (whether high or low), it may have much less effect than when it is rapidly changing
(Hirschman and Rothschild 1973; Schröder 2016; Esping-Andersen and Nedoluzhko 2017).
Future research might take this into account by, for example, exploring the effects of a %
change in income inequality from some previous point in time.
Still other limitations revolve around the data. As noted in the Data and Methods
section, income inequality in this analysis is measured with pre-tax and transfer income, yet
disposable income is a better measure of what is available to spend on the positional goods
that people may wish to acquire. While currently no state-level data series of post-tax and
transfer income is available, developing this could be a fruitful avenue for future research
(and would be useful when examining the effect of income inequality on a wide array of
outcomes).
It is also possible that the association between income inequality and financial satisfaction is real but the explanation—feeling deprived relative to others—is not. For example
many have argued for neo-material explanations (e.g., differences in healthcare or employment opportunities) to explain the associations found between income inequality and various
problems in society (e.g. Deaton 2003; Lynch et al. 2000). Similarly, neo-material factors
could affect financial satisfaction itself. Income inequality may drive up the cost of living,
rather than just the living standards (there some evidence in the housing market, see Dong
2017). Future research could focus on directly accounting for the prices of goods to separate
living standards from living costs when assessing the effects of income inequality. Likewise,
as inequality increases, the rich might obtain more political power and try to limit public
spending on things that benefit everyone and direct more of the spending towards what
benefits themselves (e.g., Bartels 2008), leaving everyone else less satisfied. (However, others argue that higher inequality might mean that, because the rich are richer and they pay
high taxes and give to philanthropic causes, they pay for “public goods” such as medical
facilities, educational resources, and amenities that actually improve the lives of everyone
9
My results are robust to omitting state fixed effects (and, in fact, the statistically significant
coefficients have larger effect sizes), but this reintroduces the unobserved time-invariant confounders
being controlled for. See (Imai and Kim 2017) for one approach to deal with this.

20
[e.g., Boustan et al. 2013]).
But the results of this paper actually provide good evidence for a relative deprivation
explanation. If rising income inequality is linked to lower financial satisfaction because it
reduces public goods or makes things more expensive, then everyone (except perhaps the
highest earners) would be affected. However, we find that those in the middle of the income
distribution are most affected. This is far more consistent with the argument that relative
position—rather than absolute income or resources—is driving the findings.
Despite the limitations, this paper makes a significant contribution to our understanding of the effects of income inequality. Existing literature has frequently implied that psychosocial factors such as feelings of relative deprivation are important mediators for income
inequality’s effects on various social problems, but some critics have questioned this explanation, instead arguing for the supremacy of neo-material explanations (e.g. Deaton 2003;
Lynch et al. 2000). Still others question whether there is really a relationship at all (e.g.,
Winship 2013).
Furthermore, classical sociological accounts of status have consistently noted that income
(and economic standing, more generally) is only one dimension of social status. Weber (1946)
described how “social honor” was typically expressed by members of “status groups” through
what they consumed and their style of life. In The Civilizing Process, Elias ([1939] 1994)
showed how forms of manner, dress, and politeness evolved so that nobles could distinguish
themselves in an ongoing status competition within the kings’ courts. As capitalism took
hold, a new class of bourgeoisie with similar economic resources but non-noble birth began
to emulate these behaviors, further escalating the creation of new ways to behave. Similarly
Bourdieu (1984), in his study of lifestyles in Distinction, used survey data to map out a social
field of France wherein status depended on at least two dimensions of resources: cultural
capital and economic capital. In more recent work, Chan and Goldthorpe (2007) presented
a significant difference between class and social status in British social life, and Goldthorpe
(2010) pointed out—in a direct critique of Wilkinson and Pickett (2010)—that Japan has
relatively low income inequality but a strong status hierarchy.
All this might suggest that income inequality would have little to no influence on individuals in normal life. Yet these results show that income inequality does make people feel
more deprived and less satisfied with their financial situation. This in turn likely shapes their
behaviors and attitudes, from everyday routines to major life decisions. To my knowledge,
this is the first study to directly examine the link between income inequality and financial
satisfaction, and it is an important step towards effectively evaluating and addressing the
broader consequences of income inequality.

21

References
Adjaye-Gbewonyo, Kafui and Ichiro Kawachi. 2012. “Use of the Yitzhaki Index As a Test
of Relative Deprivation for Health Outcomes: A Review of Recent Literature.” Social
Science & Medicine 75(1):129–37.
Aguiar, Mark and Mark Bils. 2015. “Has Consumption Inequality Mirrored Income Inequality?” American Economic Review 105(9):2725–2756.
Akhand, Hafiz and Haoming Liu. 2002. “Income Inequality in the United States: What the
Individual Tax Files Say.” Applied Economics Letters 9(4):255–259.
Ash, Michael and Dean Robinson. 2009. “Inequality, Race, and Mortality in U.S. Cities:
A Political and Econometric Review of Deaton and Lubotsky (56:6, 1139-1153, 2003).”
Social Science & Medicine 68(11):1909–1913.
Atkinson, Anthony B. and François Bourguignon (eds.). 2015. Handbook of Income Distribution, volume 2. Elsevier.
Attanasio, Orazio P., Erik Hurst, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2015. “The Evolution of Income, Consumption, and Leisure Inequality in the US, 1980–2010.” In Improving the Measurement
of Consumer Expenditures, edited by Christopher D. Carroll, Thomas F. Crossley, and
John Sabelhaus, chapter 4. University of Chicago Press.
Attanasio, Orazio P. and Luigi Pistaferri. 2016. “Consumption Inequality.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 30(2):3–28.
Bartels, Larry M. 2008. Unequal Democracy: The Political Economy of the New Gilded Age.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1984. Distinction. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Boustan, Leah, Fernando Ferreira, Hernan Winkler, and Eric Zolt. 2013. “The Effect of
Rising Income Inequality on Taxation and Public Expenditures: Evidence from US Municipalities and School Districts, 1970-2000.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95:1291–
1302.
Bricker, Jesse, Rodney Ramcharan, and Jacob Krimmel. 2014. “Signaling Status: The
Impact of Relative Income on Household Consumption and Financial Decisions.” Finance
and Economics Discussion Series 2014-76. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System (U.S.) .
Cameron, Colin and Douglas Miller. 2011. “Robust Inference with Clustered Data.” In
Handbook of Empirical Economics and Finance, edited by A. Ullah and D. E. Giles., pp.
1–28. CRC Press.
Chan, Tak Wing and John H. Goldthorpe. 2007. “Class and Status: The Conceptual Distinction and its Empirical Relevance.” American Sociological Review 72:512–532.
Davis, James. 1959. “A Formal Interpretation of the Theory of Relative Deprivation.” Sociometry 22(4):280–296.

22
Deaton, Angus. 2003. “Health, Inequality, and Economic Development.” Journal of Economic Literature 41(1):113–158.
Deaton, Angus and Darren Lubotsky. 2003. “Mortality, Inequality and Race in American
Cities and States.” Social Science & Medicine 56:1139–1153.
DePianto, David E. 2011. “Financial Satisfaction and Perceived Income Through a Demographic Lens: Do Different Race/Gender Pairs Reap Different Returns to Income?” Social
Science Research 40(3):773–783.
Diener, Ed and Robert Biswas-Diener. 2002. “Will Money Increase Subjective Well-Being? A
Literature Review and Guide to Needed Research.” Social Indicators Research 57:119–69.
Diener, Ed and S. Oishi. 2000. “Money and Happiness: Income and Subjective Well-Being
Across Nations.” In Subjective Well-Being Across Cultures, edited by E. Diener and E. M.
Suh. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dong, Hongwei. 2017. “The impact of income inequality on rental affordability: An empirical
study in large American metropolitan areas.” Urban Studies pp. 1–17.
Duesenberry, James. 1949. Income, Savings, and the Theory of Consumer Behavior . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Dwyer, Rachel E. 2009. “The McMansionization of America? Income Stratification and the
Standard of Living in Housing, 1960–2000.” Research in Social Stratification and Mobility
27:285–300.
Easterlin, Richard. 2006. “Life Cycle Happiness and Its Sources: Intersections of Psychology,
Economics and Demography.” Journal of Economic Psychology 27(4):463–482.
Easterlin, Richard, L. Angelescu-McVey, M. Switek, O. Sawangfa, and J. S. Zweig. 2010.
“The Happiness-Income Paradox Revisited.” Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences
107(52):22463–22468.
Easterlin, Richard A. 1973. “Does Money Buy Happiness?” The Public Interest 30:3–10.
Elias, Norbert. [1939] 1994. The Civilizing Process. Oxford: Blackwell Press.
Esping-Andersen, Gøsta and Lesia Nedoluzhko. 2017. “Inequality equilibria and individual
well-being.” Social Science Research 62:24–28.
Evans, William, Michael Hout, and Susan Mayer. 2004. “Assessing the Effect of Economic
Inequality.” In Social Inequality, edited by Kathryn Neckerman, pp. 933–968. Russell
Sage Foundation.
Ferreira, Francisco H. G., Nora Lustig, and Daniel Teles. 2015. “Appraising Cross-National
Income Inequality Databases: An Introduction.” The Journal of Economic Inequality 13
(4):497–526.
Fischer, Claude S. 2008. “What Wealth-Happiness Paradox? A Short Note on the American
Case.” Journal of Happiness Studies 9(2):219–226.

23
Fisher, Jonathan D., David S. Johnson, and Timothy M. Smeeding. 2013. “Measuring
the Trends in Inequality of Individuals and Families: Income and Consumption.” The
American Economic Review 103(3):184–188.
Fligstein, Neil and Adam Goldstein. 2015. “The Emergence of a Finance Culture in American
Households, 1989-2007.” Socio-Economic Review 13(3):575–601.
Fligstein, Neil, Orestes P. Hastings, and Adam Goldstein. 2017. “Keeping up with the
Joneses: How Households Fared in the Era of High Income Inequality and the Housing
Price Bubble, 1999-2007.” Socius: Sociological Research for a Dynamic World 3:1–15.
Frank, Mark. 2014. “A New State-Level Panel of Annual Inequality Measures over the Period
1916-2005.” Journal of Business Strategies 31(1):241–263.
Frank, Robert. 2007. Falling Behind: How Rising Inequality Harms the Middle Class. University of California Press.
Gelman, Andrew and Jennifer Hill. 2007. Data Analysis Using Regression and Multilevel/hierarchical Models. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Goldstein, Adam and Orestes P. Hastings. 2018. “Buying In: Positional Competition,
Schools, and Housing Consumption.” Working paper.
Goldthorpe, John H. 2010. “Analysing Social Inequality: A Critique of Two Recent Contributions from Economics and Epidemiology.” European Sociological Review 26(6):731–744.
Guillaud, Elvire, Matthew Olckers, and Michaël Zemmour. 2017. “Four levers of redistribution: The impact of tax and transfer systems on inequality reduction.” LIS Working
Paper Series No. 695.
Hastings, Orestes P. 2018. “Less Equal, Less Trusting? Reexamining Longitudinal and
Cross-sectional Effects of Income Inequality on Trust in U.S. States, 1973-2012.” Social
Science Research 74:77–95.
Hauser, Oliver P and Michael I Norton. 2017. “(Mis)perceptions of inequality.” Current
Opinion in Psychology 18:21–25.
Hirsch, Fred. 1977. The Social Limits to Growth. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Hirschman, Albert O. and Michael Rothschild. 1973. “The Changing Tolerance for Income
Inequality in the Course of Economic Development.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
87:544–566.
Hout, Michael. 2004. “Getting the Most out of the GSS Income Measures.” GSS Methodological Report 101.
Hout, Michael and Joshua Goldstein. 1994. “How 4.5 Million Irish Immigrants Came to
Be 41 Million Irish Americans: Demographic, Social, and Subjective Components of the
Ethnic Composition of the White Population of the United States.” American Sociological
Review 59:64–82.

24
Hümbelin, Oliver and Rudolf Farys. 2016. “The Suitability of Tax Data to Study Trends
in Inequality—A Theoretical and Empirical Review with Tax Data from Switzerland.”
Research in Social Stratification and Mobility 44:136–150.
Iceland, John. 2012. Poverty in America: A Handbook . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Imai, Kosuke and In Song Kim. 2017. “When Should We Use Fixed Effects Regression
Models for Causal Inference with Longitudinal Data?” Working Paper online at http:
//web.mit.edu/insong/www/pdf/FEmatch.pdf.
Joo, So-Hyun and John E. Grable. 2004. “An Exploratory Framework of the Determinants
of Financial Satisfaction.” Journal of Family and Economic Issues 25:25–50.
Kalleberg, Arne and Peter V. Marsden. 2012. “Labor Force Insecurity and U.S. Work Attitudes, 1970s-2006.” In Social Trends in American Life, edited by Peter V. Marsden, pp.
315–337. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Keister, Lisa A. and Hang Young Lee. 2017. “The Double One Percent: Identifying an Elite
and a Super-Elite using the Joint Distribution of Income and Net Worth.” Research in
Social Stratification and Mobility 50:1–12.
Kenworthy, Lane. 2016.
thegoodsociety.

The Good Society.

Online at http://lanekenworthy.net/

Krueger, Dirk and Fabrizio Perri. 2006. “Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption
Inequality? Evidence and Theory.” Review of Economic Studies 73(1):163–193.
Layte, Richard and Christopher Whelan. 2014. “Who Feels Inferior? A Test of the Status
Anxiety Hypothesis of Social Inequalities in Health.” European Sociological Review 30
(4):525–535.
Ligon, Ethan. [1989] 1994. “The Development and Use of a Consistent Income Measure for
the General Social Survey.” GSS Methodological Report 64.
Lynch, John, George Davey Smith, George Kaplan, and James House. 2000. “Income Inequality and Mortality: Importance to Health of Individual Income, Psychosocial Environment, or Material Conditions.” BMJ 320:1200–1204.
Marx, Karl. 1847 [1972]. “Wage Labor and Capital.” In The Marx-Engels Reader , edited by
Robert Tucker. W. W. Norton & Company.
McCall, Leslie. 2013. The Undeserving Rich: American Beliefs About Inequality, Opportunity, and Redistribution. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Merton, Robert and Alice Rossi. 1950. “Contributions to the Theory of Reference Group Behavior.” In Continuities in Social Research, edited by Robert Merton and Paul Lazarsfeld,
pp. 40–115. New York: Free Press.
Meyer, Bruce D., Wallace K. C. Mok, and James X. Sullivan. 2015. “Household Surveys in
Crisis.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 29(4):199–226.

25
Meyer, Bruce D. and James X. Sullivan. 2017. “Consumption and Income Inequality in the
U.S. Since the 1960s.” NBER Working Paper No. 23655 .
Moss, David, Anant Thaker, and Howard Rudnick. 2013. “Inequality and Decision Making:
Imagining a New Line of Inquiry.” Harvard Business School Working Paper 13-099.
Neckerman, Kathryn and Florencia Torche. 2007. “Inequality: Causes and Consequences.”
Annual Review of Sociology 33:335–357.
Paskov, Marii, Klarita Gërxhani, and G. Van de Werfhorst Herman. 2017. “Giving up on
the Joneses? the Relationship Between Income Inequality and Status-Seeking.” European
Sociological Review 33(1):112–123.
Pickett, Kate and Richard G. Wilkinson. 2015. “Income Inequality and Health: A Causal
Review.” Social Science & Medicine 128:316–326.
Piketty, Thomas. 2014. Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Boston, MA: Harvard University Press.
Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez. 2003 [2015]. “Income Inequality in the United States,
1913-1998.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(1):1–39.
Rabe-Hesketh, Sophia and Anders Skrondal. 2012. Multilevel and Longitudinal Modeling
Using Stata (3rd Edition). College Station, TX: Stata Press.
Richard, Burkhauser, Shuaizhang Feng, Stephen Jenkins, and Jeff Larrimore. 2009. “Recent
Trends in Top Incomes Shares in the USA: Reconciling Estimates from March CPS and
IRS Tax Return Data.” NBER Working Paper 15320.
Rosenfeld, Jake. 2017. “Don’t Ask or Tell: Pay Secrecy Policies in U.S. Workplaces.” Social
Science Research 65:1–16.
Runciman, Walter G. 1966. Relative Deprivation and Social Justice. London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul.
Saez, Emmanuel and Gabriel Zucman. 2016. “Wealth Inequality in the United States Since
1913: Evidence from Capitalized Income Tax Data.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 131
(2):519–578.
Schnittker, Jason. 2008. “Diagnosing Our National Disease: Trends in Income and Happiness, 1973 to 2004.” Social Psychology Quarterly 71(3):257–280.
Schor, Juliet. 1998. The Overspent American. New York: Basic Books.
Schröder, Martin. 2016. “Article Navigation How Income Inequality Influences Life Satisfaction: Hybrid Effects Evidence from the German SOEP.” European Sociological Review
32(2):307–320.
Smith, Tom, Peter Marsden, Michael Hout, and Jibum Kim. 2013. General Social Surveys,
1972-2012 . Chicago: National Opinion Research Center [producer]; Storrs, CT: The
Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, University of Connecticut [distributor].

26
Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers. 2008. “Economic Growth and Happiness: Reassessing
the Easterlin Paradox.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1-87.
Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers. 2013. “Subjective Well-Being and Income: Is There
Any Evidence of Satiation?” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 103
(3):598–604.
Stone, Chad, Danilo Trisi, Arloc Sherman, and Emily Horton. 2016. “A Guide to Statistics
on Historical Trends in Income Inequality.” Technical report, Center on Budget and Policy
Priorities.
Van de Werfhorst, Herman G. and Wiemer Salverda. 2012. “Consequences of economic
inequality: Introduction to a special issue.” Research in Social Stratification and Mobility
30:377–387.
Van Praag, B. M. S., P. Frijters, and A. Ferrer i Carbonell:. 2003. “The Anatomy of WellBeing.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 51:29–49.
Veblen, Thorstein. [1899] 1963. A Theory of the Leisure Class: An Economic Study of
Institutions. New York: New American Library.
Walasek, Lukasz and Gordon D. A. Brown. 2015. “Income Inequality and Status Seeking
Searching for Positional Goods in Unequal US States.” Psychological Science 26(4):527–
533.
Walasek, Lukasz and Gordon D. A. Brown. 2016. “Income Inequality, Income, and Internet
Searches for Status Goods: A Cross-National Study of the Association Between Inequality
and Well-Being.” Social Indicators Research 129:1001–1014.
Weber, Max. 1946. From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology. Edited by Hans Gerth and C.
Wright Mills. New York: Oxford University Press.
Wilkinson, Richard and Kate Pickett. 2009. “Income Inequality and Social Dysfunction.”
Annual Review of Sociology 35:493–511.
Wilkinson, Richard and Kate Pickett. 2010. The Spirit Level: Why Equality Is Better for
Everyone. New York: Bloomsbury Press.
Winship, Scott. 2013. “Overstating the Costs of Inequality.” National Affairs 15:33–49.
Yitzhaki, Shlomo. 1979. “Relative Deprivation and the Gini Coefficient.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 93(2):321–324.

27

Appendix
Table A1: Descriptives

Financial satisfaction
State gini
Income quintile 1 (bottom)
Income quintile 2
Income quintile 3
Income quintile 4
Income quintile 5 (top)
Female
Age (years)
(Age x Age)/100
Non-Hispanic white
Non-Hispanic black
Non-Hispanic other
Hispanic
Married
Widowed
Divorced
Separated
Never married
Number of adults
Number of children
Religious service attendance
Years of education
Working fulltime
Working parttime
Temporality not working
Unemployed
Retired
Student
Keeping house
Other work status
Democrat
Republican
Other party; No party
Urban
Suburban
Rural
State median income (logged)
State percent foreign born
State population density (logged)
State percent black
State poverty rate

mean

sd

min

max

2.02
0.56
0.19
0.20
0.19
0.21
0.20
0.53
44.14
22.26
0.77
0.13
0.03
0.08
0.61
0.06
0.10
0.03
0.21
2.23
1.96
3.80
12.93
0.52
0.11
0.02
0.04
0.11
0.04
0.15
0.02
0.49
0.35
0.16
0.60
0.27
0.13
10.87
0.09
4.98
0.13
13.48

0.74
0.06

1
0.43
0
0
0
0
0
0
18
3.24
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
10.4
0.0070
0.017
0.0023
2.90

3
0.71
1
1
1
1
1
1
89
79.2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
8
8
8
20
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
11.3
0.27
9.28
0.71
27.2

16.67
16.26

0.92
1.79
2.71
3.08

0.14
0.07
0.99
0.08
3.35

Note: N = 51699. Individual measures are weighted to account
for sampling. State Gini index variable is reported before mean
centering. State median income is adjusted to 2012 dollars using
the CPI-U-RS. Sources: General Social Survey: 1973-2012. Census:
1970, 1980, 1990, 2000. American Community Survey: 2006-2012.
IRS Statistics of Income: 1973-2012.

28
Table A2: Correlation Table of State Level Variables

1.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

State
State
State
State
State
State

2.

Gini
1.00
median income (logged)
0.17 1.00
percent foreign born
0.56 0.46
population density (logged) 0.07 0.36
percent black
0.11 -0.25
poverty rate
0.18 -0.70

3.

4.

1.00
0.42 1.00
-0.07 0.35
0.03 -0.18

5.

6.

1.00
0.38 1.00

Census: 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000. American Community Survey: 2006-2012. IRS Statistics of Income:
1973-2012.

29
Table A3: Full Regression Coefficients from Main Models of Financial Satisfaction
(1)

(2)

State Gini

−0.30∗

(0.13)

−0.54∗∗

(0.20)

Q1 (bottom)
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5 (top)

−0.30∗∗∗
−0.16∗∗∗
ref .
0.16∗∗∗
0.41∗∗∗

(0.014)
(0.0091)

−0.30∗∗∗
−0.16∗∗∗
ref .
0.16∗∗∗
0.41∗∗∗

(0.014)
(0.0091)

0.38∗
0.0032
ref .
0.27
0.55∗

(0.17)
(0.13)

Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5

(0.012)
(0.016)

(bottom) × Gini
× Gini
× Gini
× Gini
(top) × Gini

Female
Age (years)
(Age x Age)/10
Non-Hispanic white
Non-Hispanic black
Non-Hispanic other
Hispanic
Married
Widowed
Divorced
Separated
Never Married
Number of adults
Number of children
Religious service attendance
Years of education
Urban
Suburban
Rural
Full time
Part time
Temp not wrk
Unemployed
Retired
In school
Keeping house
Other work status
Democrat
Republican
Other party; no party
State median income (logged)
State percent foreign born
State population density (logged)
State percent black
State poverty rate
State Fixed Effects
Observations

0.0095
−0.019∗∗∗
0.028∗∗∗
ref .
−0.12∗∗∗
0.085∗∗
0.013
ref .
−0.064∗∗∗
−0.11∗∗∗
−0.11∗∗∗
0.066∗∗∗
−0.034∗∗∗
−0.019∗∗∗
0.020∗∗∗
0.0027
ref .
−0.024∗
0.036∗∗
ref .
−0.009
−0.0097
−0.31∗∗∗
0.090∗∗∗
0.058∗
0.043∗∗∗
−0.10∗∗∗
ref .
0.063∗∗∗
−0.0043
0.14
0.11
−0.16
−0.25
−0.011∗∗∗
Y es
51699

(0.0097)
(0.0013)
(0.0015)
(0.013)
(0.025)
(0.015)
(0.013)
(0.0095)
(0.024)
(0.011)
(0.0047)
(0.0024)
(0.0024)
(0.0015)
(0.012)
(0.013)
(0.010)
(0.025)
(0.025)
(0.021)
(0.023)
(0.0088)
(0.028)
(0.0087)
(0.012)
(0.092)
(0.36)
(0.083)
(0.39)
(0.0031)

0.0093
−0.019∗∗∗
0.028∗∗∗
ref .
−0.12∗∗∗
0.084∗∗
0.015
ref .
−0.062∗∗∗
−0.11∗∗∗
−0.11∗∗∗
0.068∗∗∗
−0.033∗∗∗
−0.018∗∗∗
0.020∗∗∗
0.0026
ref .
−0.024∗
0.035∗∗
ref .
−0.0095
−0.0097
−0.32∗∗∗
0.089∗∗∗
0.058∗
0.043∗∗∗
−0.11∗∗∗
ref .
0.063∗∗∗
−0.0035
0.14
0.035
−0.15
−0.23
−0.011∗∗∗
Y es

(0.011)
(0.015)

(0.21)
(0.25)
(0.0096)
(0.0013)
(0.0015)
(0.013)
(0.025)
(0.016)
(0.013)
(0.0091)
(0.024)
(0.011)
(0.0046)
(0.0024)
(0.0024)
(0.0015)
(0.012)
(0.013)
(0.010)
(0.025)
(0.026)
(0.021)
(0.023)
(0.0088)
(0.028)
(0.0087)
(0.012)
(0.092)
(0.35)
(0.083)
(0.39)
(0.0031)

51699

Standard errors in parentheses
∗
p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01, ∗∗∗ p < .001
Note: The middle income quintile (Q3) is the baseline category. Each
model uses sampling weights and the standard errors are adjusted for
clustering within states.

30
Table A4: Regression Coefficients from Models of Financial Satisfaction with Year Fixed
Effects
(1)

(2)

State Gini

−0.34

(0.27)

−0.58

(0.33)

Q1 (bottom)
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5 (top)

−0.30∗∗∗
−0.16∗∗∗
ref .
0.16∗∗∗
0.42∗∗∗

(0.014)
(0.0091)

−0.30∗∗∗
−0.16∗∗∗
ref .
0.16∗∗∗
0.42∗∗∗

(0.014)
(0.0091)

0.38∗
−0.0087
ref .
0.28
0.52∗

(0.17)
(0.13)

Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5

(0.012)
(0.015)

(bottom) × Gini
× Gini
× Gini
× Gini
(top) × Gini

Female
Age (years)
(Age x Age)/10
Non-Hispanic white
Non-Hispanic black
Non-Hispanic other
Hispanic
Married
Widowed
Divorced
Separated
Never Married
Number of adults
Number of children
Religious service attendance
Years of education
Urban
Suburban
Rural
Full time
Part time
Temp not working
Unemployed
Retired
In school
Keeping house
Other work status
Democrat
Republican
Other party; no party
State median income (logged)
State percent foreign born
State population density (logged)
State percent black
State poverty rate
State Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
Observations

0.0097
−0.020∗∗∗
0.028∗∗∗
ref .
−0.12∗∗∗
0.084∗∗
0.014
ref .
−0.063∗∗∗
−0.11∗∗∗
−0.11∗∗∗
0.067∗∗∗
−0.034∗∗∗
−0.019∗∗∗
0.020∗∗∗
0.0027
ref .
−0.025∗
0.036∗∗
ref .
−0.0076
−0.0097
−0.31∗∗∗
0.090∗∗∗
0.058∗
0.045∗∗∗
−0.10∗∗∗
ref .
0.062∗∗∗
−0.0046
−0.00017
−0.057
−0.086
0.048
−0.0049
Y es
Y es
51699

(0.0093)
(0.0013)
(0.0015)
(0.013)
(0.025)
(0.014)
(0.012)
(0.0092)
(0.024)
(0.011)
(0.0046)
(0.0023)
(0.0024)
(0.0015)
(0.011)
(0.013)
(0.010)
(0.025)
(0.024)
(0.021)
(0.023)
(0.0089)
(0.027)
(0.0089)
(0.012)
(0.082)
(0.30)
(0.081)
(0.38)
(0.0033)

0.0095
−0.020∗∗∗
0.028∗∗∗
ref .
−0.12∗∗∗
0.083∗∗
0.017
ref .
−0.062∗∗∗
−0.11∗∗∗
−0.11∗∗∗
0.069∗∗∗
−0.033∗∗∗
−0.018∗∗∗
0.020∗∗∗
0.0027
ref .
−0.025∗
0.035∗∗
ref .
−0.008
−0.0097
−0.31∗∗∗
0.089∗∗∗
0.058∗
0.044∗∗∗
−0.10∗∗∗
ref .
0.062∗∗∗
−0.0039
−0.0013
−0.13
−0.075
0.057
−0.005
Y es
Y es

(0.011)
(0.014)

(0.21)
(0.25)
(0.0093)
(0.0013)
(0.0015)
(0.013)
(0.025)
(0.015)
(0.012)
(0.0088)
(0.024)
(0.011)
(0.0046)
(0.0023)
(0.0024)
(0.0015)
(0.011)
(0.013)
(0.010)
(0.025)
(0.025)
(0.021)
(0.023)
(0.0089)
(0.027)
(0.0089)
(0.012)
(0.082)
(0.30)
(0.080)
(0.38)
(0.0033)

51699

Standard errors in parentheses
∗
p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01, ∗∗∗ p < .001
Note: The middle income quintile (Q3) is the baseline category. Each
model uses sampling weights and the standard errors are adjusted for
clustering within states.

31
Table A5: Regression Coefficients from Multilevel Models of Financial Satisfaction
(1)
Financial satisfaction

(2)
Financial satisfaction

State Gini

−0.42∗∗∗

(0.12)

−0.59∗∗∗

(0.16)

Q1 (bottom)
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5 (top)

−0.32∗∗∗
−0.17∗∗∗
ref .
0.17∗∗∗
0.40∗∗∗

(0.010)
(0.0095)

−0.32∗∗∗
−0.17∗∗∗
ref .
0.17∗∗∗
0.40∗∗∗

(0.010)
(0.0095)

0.25
−0.033
ref .
0.26
0.37∗

(0.15)
(0.15)

Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5

(0.0097)
(0.011)

(bottom) × Gini
× Gini
× Gini
× Gini
(top) × Gini

Female
Age (years)
(Age x Age)/10
Non-Hispanic white
Non-Hispanic black
Non-Hispanic other
Hispanic
Married
Widowed
Divorced
Separated
Never Married
Number of adults
Number of children
Religious service attendance
Years of education
Urban
Suburban
Rural
Full time
Part time
Temp not wrk
Unemployed
Retired
In school
Keeping house
Other work status
Democrat
Republican
Other party; no party
State median income (logged)
State percent foreign born
State population density (logged)
State percent black
State poverty rate
Constant
var(State)
var(State-year)
var(Individual)
var(Residual)
Observations

0.0017
(0.0069)
−0.017∗∗∗ (0.0012)
0.026∗∗∗ (0.0012)
ref .
−0.12∗∗∗ (0.010)
0.049∗
(0.020)
0.0064
(0.013)
ref .
−0.020
(0.013)
−0.095∗∗∗ (0.010)
−0.12∗∗∗ (0.017)
0.063∗∗∗ (0.0099)
−0.030∗∗∗ (0.0043)
−0.020∗∗∗ (0.0021)
0.019∗∗∗ (0.0012)
0.0026∗ (0.0012)
ref .
−0.027∗∗∗ (0.0076)
0.035∗∗∗ (0.0100)
ref .
−0.012
(0.010)
−0.0052
(0.020)
−0.32∗∗∗ (0.016)
0.067∗∗∗ (0.013)
0.046∗
(0.019)
0.039∗∗∗ (0.010)
−0.13∗∗∗ (0.022)
ref .
0.062∗∗∗ (0.0071)
−0.0028
(0.0088)
−0.045
(0.057)
−0.15
(0.14)
−0.020∗∗ (0.0068)
0.25∗∗
(0.078)
−0.0050∗ (0.0020)
2.81∗∗∗ (0.63)
0.0013∗∗∗ (0.00043)
0.00089∗∗∗(0.00033)
0.18∗∗∗ (0.0049)
0.27∗∗∗ (0.0045)
51699

(0.0097)
(0.011)

(0.15)
(0.16)

0.0016
(0.0069)
−0.017∗∗∗ (0.0012)
0.026∗∗∗ (0.0012)
ref .
−0.12∗∗∗ (0.010)
0.049∗
(0.020)
0.008
(0.013)
ref .
−0.019
(0.013)
−0.094∗∗∗ (0.010)
−0.12∗∗∗ (0.017)
0.065∗∗∗ (0.0099)
−0.029∗∗∗ (0.0043)
−0.019∗∗∗ (0.0021)
0.019∗∗∗ (0.0012)
0.0026∗ (0.0012)
ref .
−0.027∗∗∗ (0.0076)
0.035∗∗∗ (0.0100)
ref .
−0.012
(0.010)
−0.0054
(0.020)
−0.32∗∗∗ (0.016)
0.067∗∗∗ (0.013)
0.046∗
(0.019)
0.039∗∗∗ (0.010)
−0.13∗∗∗ (0.022)
ref .
0.062∗∗∗ (0.0071)
−0.0023
(0.0088)
−0.045
(0.057)
−0.16
(0.14)
−0.020∗∗ (0.0067)
0.25∗∗
(0.078)
−0.0051∗ (0.0020)
2.82∗∗∗ (0.63)
0.0013∗∗∗ (0.00043)
0.00088∗∗∗(0.00033)
0.18∗∗∗ (0.0049)
0.27∗∗∗ (0.0045)
51699

Standard errors in parentheses
∗
p < .05, ∗∗ p < .01, ∗∗∗ p < .001
Note: The middle income quintile (Q3) is the baseline category.

