The Promise and Pitfalls of Conflict Prediction:
Evidence from Colombia and Indonesia
Samuel Bazzi

Robert A. Blair

Christopher Blattman

Boston University

Brown University

University of Chicago

Oeindrila Dube

Matthew Gudgeon

Richard Peck

University of Chicago

U.S. Military Academy

Northwestern University

∗

Abstract

How feasible is violence early-warning prediction? Columbia and Indonesia
have unusually fine-grained data. We assemble two decades of local violent events
alongside hundreds of annual risk factors. We attempt to predict violence one
year ahead with a range of machine learning techniques. Our models reliably
identify persistent, high-violence hot spots. Violence is not simply autoregressive,
as detailed histories of disaggregated violence perform best, but socioeconomic
data substitute well for these histories. Even with unusually rich data, however,
our models poorly predict new outbreaks or escalations of violence. These “best
case” scenarios with annual data fall short of workable early-warning systems.

∗

Bazzi:

sbazzi@bu.edu;

blattman@uchicago.edu;

Blair:
Dube:

robert blair@brown.edu;
dube@uchicago.edu;

Blattman:
Gudgeon:

matthew.gudgeon@westpoint.edu; Peck: richardpeck2021@u.northwestern.edu. For comments, we thank Austin Wright and seminar participants at ESOC, MWIEDC, ISF, NBER
Economics of National Security, and NEUDC. Miguel Morales-Mosquera and Sebastian
Hernandez provided excellent research assistance.

1

Introduction

Advances in data and computing techniques have kindled hopes that civil society, police,
or peacekeepers will be able to predict costly violence ahead of time. Such early warning
systems could be used to target scarce security personnel and resources, and prevent violence
from occurring or escalating.
Until recently, prediction focused on large-scale, country-level events, including coups,
civil wars, and terror attacks.1 These macro-level efforts have informed policy, the science
of prediction, and our understanding of violence. But such high-level predictions are not
easy to act on. Scholars such as Cederman and Weidmann (2017) argue that country-level
conflict predictions are unlikely to improve much in the future: there is simply too much
complexity and randomness, they argue, to develop reliable forecasts over such wide time
and space.
Subnational predictions could prove more fruitful. The past decade has seen the study
of conflict push down to the micro-level causes, processes, and consequences of violence, and
we can avail ourselves of these data to investigate prediction. Policy options to prevent an
ethnic riot or local unrest are likely better than policy options to prevent a civil war. The
feasibility of these early warning systems is unknown, however. Now is a good moment to
take stock of what existing methods and the richest available micro data can deliver.
This paper takes advantage of high-quality, extensive annualized data in two countries,
Colombia and Indonesia. Both countries have been ravaged by violence for decades—a

1

The Political Instability Task Force’s prediction efforts are likely the most well known
(Goldstone et al., 2010). For other examples of cross-national prediction studies, see Beck
et al. (2000); Blair and Sambanis (2020); Brandt et al. (2011); Celiku and Kraay (2017);
Gleditsch and Ward (2013); Gurr and Lichbach (1986); Harff (2003); Hegre et al. (2013,
2016); Perry (2013); Ward et al. (2013). For an early exception see Schrodt (2006) who
studies violence in the Balkans.
1

situation that typically does not bode well for data availability. But both countries are also
wealthy enough (and have strong enough states and research communities) to produce some
of the highest-quality, local-level panel data in the developing world. This includes a trove
of information on annual socioeconomic conditions and other characteristics, plus more than
a decade of subdistrict- or municipal-level data on annual local violence.
We chose these two cases because they are among the current “best case” scenarios in
terms of data availability on both violence and potential predictors of violence, in annual
panel form. Such annual data are, to date, the most common kind of data available across
countries (especially for predictor variables). If conflict prediction proves fruitful in these two
instances, they could be models for other prediction efforts. If not, then we must ask where
or with what other forms of data we can expect early warning systems to bear fruit (if any).
Finally, both countries have suffered recurring episodes of local violence during transitions
to national peace. Anticipating and preventing these episodes is of both substantive and
practical importance.
We identified, collected, and merged dozens of subnational datasets in each country. This
gives us an unusually rich array of hundreds of covariates per locality, including covariates
that the empirical and theoretical literatures commonly associate with conflict onset and
escalation (Blattman and Miguel, 2010). Each country also has high quality violence data
from which we obtain our outcomes. Using data from 1998–2014 in Indonesia, we study
conflict related to interethnic and religious tensions, as well as electoral, governance, and
resource disputes, among others. In Colombia, our data span more than a quarter century,
1988–2014. We predict clashes between state, guerrilla, and paramilitary forces during a
period of protracted civil conflict. These granular violence data also allow us to leverage
detailed violence histories, adding to an already rich set of predictors.
We then use several machine learning methods to generate predictions of local violent
incidents at the annual level. In our main year-ahead predictions, we train the algorithms
on four to thirteen years of data, and forecast local conflict during the following year. We

2

generate and assess predictions for whether there will be any violence next year as well
as whether there will be a large number of events or an escalation. We further examine
predictive power across space as well as time.
Our results illustrate both the promise and pitfalls of annual local violence forecasting. An
ensemble of machine learning models effectively identifies locations at risk of having a violent
incident. We are particularly effective at identifying “hot spots” with high concentrations
of violence, defined as five or more incidents in a single year. Indeed, our ensemble model,
which combines the best new methods, performs better than previous subnational attempts
(Blair et al., 2017; Colaresi et al., 2016; Weidmann and Ward, 2010; Witmer et al., 2017).2
We view these results as especially important given that such local hot spots can pose a
serious risk of regional or national escalation, and some of these locations will not be known
to policymakers, especially in large, diverse countries.
Local violence is not merely autoregressive: a model consisting of the lagged dependent
variable alone performs consistently poorly. Nonetheless, more nuanced histories of violence
tend to be very strong predictors of violence. In other words, to predict future violence, it
is not enough to know where violence occurred in the past. But detailed and disaggregated
histories of violence—including the severity of particular incidents (e.g., number of deaths,
property damage) and the identity of the actors involved—perform very well.
Even without such detailed and disaggregated histories, however, our covariates also
predict hot spots well. This suggests that much of the information contained in these violence
2

Our improved performance has multiple explanations. We exploit a much longer panel and
a much wider variety of data sources than Blair et al. (2017). We also test a more diverse set
of prediction algorithms, and ensemble routines have been shown to surpass the performance
of any given model (Montgomery et al., 2012). Additionally, our event-based data rely on
local media and are more comprehensive and less prone to misreporting than the widelyused ACLED data. Finally, we draw on a much wider set of subnational predictors that go
beyond lagged violence and country-level predictors.
3

histories is representative of observable characteristics of the units in our two samples. The
most predictive risk factors tend to be slow-moving or time-invariant. In Colombia, for
example, one of the most reliable predictors is terrain ruggedness. In Indonesia, robust
predictors include remoteness as well as sectoral shares of the local economy. Time-invariant
predictors alone do just as well detailed violence histories.
Surprisingly, predictive accuracy improves little when we add time-varying factors, including economic output, government finance, communication infrastructure, natural disasters,
elections, and fluctuations in rainfall, temperature, commodity prices, drug production, and
U.S. military activity. This stands in contrast to a large causal literature on conflict, where
an array of findings associate economic and political shocks with intensified violence (Bazzi
and Blattman, 2014; Berman and Couttenier, 2013; Blattman and Miguel, 2010; Burke et
al., 2015; Dube and Vargas, 2013; Miguel et al., 2004).3
Our algorithms’ strong performance is mainly driven by forecasts of where, but not when,
violence is likely to occur. Our models perform poorly when predicting annual deviations
from average levels of violence over the study period. Even nuanced histories of violence, a
rich set of covariates, and the most widely studied economic and political shocks do not help
us identify what hot spots are likely to get hotter in the coming year.
In contrast, our models perform well when we forecast conflict across space. We use training data from all years in one set of locations to predict conflict in another set of locations.
In these cross-location predictions, time-varying shocks typically improve performance. The
models leverage the longest time series currently available at the local level. This leads us to
believe that a lack of common support in the training and testing periods may explain some
of the limited predictive performance of time-varying shocks when we attempt to forecast
3

We find similar associations of commodity price and weather shocks with conflict in Colombia and Indonesia using our datasets (see Appendix C.4). While these shocks may cause
conflict and help us forecast conflict hotspots, they add little to our ability to forecast
conflict over time.
4

conflict over time. Thus, early warning performance should improve over time, but this (by
definition) means that better one-year-ahead predictions may be a long way off.
We see these patterns consistently across two different country cases, with very different
forms of violence. Taken together, our results are both encouraging and disappointing.
On the one hand, we are able to predict hot spots for local violence remarkably well, and
much more accurately than previous exercises of this sort or simpler benchmark models.
Anticipating where violence is most likely to occur is potentially highly valuable to resourceconstrained governments in conflict-affected states.
On the other hand, early warning systems would ideally be able to predict not just the
location but also the timing of new outbreaks of violence. Our inability to do so, with some
of the richest and most systematic subnational annual panel data in the developing world,
is important but disheartening news for conflict forecasters.
One interpretation of our results is that local conflict prediction is less fruitful than
hoped, at least with the data most commonly at hand: human-coded violence data drawn
from newspapers and observer reports, annual aggregates of violence counts, and annual predictor variables. This pessimistic conclusion would resonate with warnings that big data and
machine learning may not deliver the precision that policymakers long for (Jasny and Stone,
2017, p. 469).4 It also aligns with a view that conflict breaks out for largely idiosyncratic
reasons, as reflected in the warning by Gartzke (1999) that “war is in the error term”.
Another interpretation is that early warning systems are feasible, but require longer,
more high-frequency data, or additional or different risk factors. Longer training samples
could give algorithms more variation to train on, and in principle this could help them to
identify more complex relationships with time-varying predictors. If true, this implies that
there will be large gains to collecting longer conflict time series, for example, by delving into
4

Of course, conflict may be more difficult to predict than other policy-relevant outcomes.
For example, Guha and Ng (2019) strike a more hopeful note in the context of predicting
retail sales in a high-frequency, subnational panel.
5

past historical archives. That said, our longest training samples are already decades long,
and longer time series can introduce their own challenges, like potential structural breaks
in the violence-generating process. There could also be gains from using higher-frequency
data, or more data on new risk factors—data from mobile phones, social media, local price
fluctuations, and so forth.
A case in point is work by Mueller and Rauh (2017), which successfully uses topics
analyses from newspapers to forecast conflict within countries. Likewise, Berger et al. (2014)
use cell phone call patterns to predict temporal variation in conflict. These data innovations,
and our increasing ability to collect newer and wider forms of big data, may enhance our
capacity to forecast conflict over time.
Our paper offers several results that future work should leverage to explore the promise
of machine learning methods for modeling and predicting conflict. Overall, conflict can be
forecasted well across space, but not over time with annualized panel data. While violence
is not simply autoregressive, detailed conflict histories can substitute for a broader array of
covariates, which are potentially more expensive to collect. But if such detailed histories of
violence are unavailable (as is the case in most countries), a more limited set of common or
easy-to-measure covariates can also predict hot spots remarkably well, at least in our two
cases. Cross-sectional hot spot prediction systems are probably feasible in a wide range of
countries, even if temporal early warnings system may not be.

2
2.1

Settings
Indonesia

Following the 1998 collapse of Suharto’s authoritarian regime, Indonesia experienced largescale collective violence.5 Separatist movements in Aceh, East Timor (as it parted from

5

For detailed accounts see Barron et al. (2014, 2016); Tadjoeddin (2014).
6

Indonesia), and Papua resulted in over 10,000 deaths. At the same time, religious and
ethnic conflict reached new highs.
Collective violence abated by 2003, and the separatist conflict in Aceh ended in 2005.
Post-2004, there were far fewer fatalities, and the composition of violence shifted as electoral
and resource-related violence rose. The violence also had different consequences: after 2004
it was more likely to lead to injuries and property damage than deaths. Deadly conflict
nevertheless remained prevalent across the archipelago, primarily concentrated in regions
with histories of large-scale violence.
Scholars debate the drivers of today’s conflict in Indonesia, highlighting fixed factors like
ethnicity and religion, as well as local resources like forests, minerals, and plantation crops.
Regional variation in violence has been linked to political and economic shocks associated
with decentralization and electoral reforms (Bazzi and Gudgeon, forthcoming; Pierskalla
and Sacks, 2017), with economic inequality (Indra et al., 2019), and with natural disasters,
weather shocks, and commodity price fluctuations (Barron et al., 2009; Wright and Signoret,
2016). While the literature has identified a variety of proximate causes, it is not clear which
of these factors are the best predictors of violence.

2.2

Colombia

Colombia’s long-running civil war has resulted in 220,000 deaths and 25,000 disappearances,
and the forced displacement of over five million civilians (Historical Memory Group, 2013).
During our primary analysis period, 1988–2005, the conflict mainly involved left-wing guerrilla groups, the government military, and right-wing paramilitary groups. The insurgency
was launched by communist guerrillas in the 1960s. Paramilitaries arose in the 1980s when
landowners organized in response to extortion and violence perpetrated by the guerrillas.
Paramilitaries and the government colluded extensively, though their relationship varied
over time and space.
Low violence levels prevailed through the 1980s, but escalated in the 1990s when paramil7

itaries expanded and centralized authority. Intensity remained high until the paramilitaries
demobilized, a process that began in 2003 and continued until 2006, when the main paramilitary organization officially disbanded. The conflict subsided further as the death of a number
of guerrilla leaders weakened their respective groups. It drew to an official end in 2016, when
the largest guerrilla group signed a peace deal with the government, though residual violence
(including killings of civil society leaders) continues.
Scholars have linked regional variation in conflict in Colombia to a host of political and
economic factors, including shocks to drug production (Angrist and Kugler, 2008), fluctuations in commodity prices (Dube and Vargas, 2013), revenue decentralization (Chacon,
2014), collusion between paramilitaries and politicians (Acemoglu et al., 2013), American
military aid (Dube and Naidu, 2015), and military incentives in the targeting of civilians
(Acemoglu et al., 2016). As in Indonesia, it is unknown whether these causal factors are also
good predictors of violence.

3

Data

An important contribution of this study is the two datasets we assembled. In each country,
we collected and stitched together dozens of local-level data sets, most of which had not
been consolidated before. The result is a uniquely rich trove of data that can be used for
purposes of prediction.

3.1

Indonesia

Our units of analysis are Indonesia’s third-tier administrative divisions, known as subdistricts or kecamatan. The country had 7,094 subdistricts in 514 districts in 2014. These
subdistricts had a median population of around 22,000.6 While districts are the key au6

To deal with Indonesia’s pervasive administrative unit proliferation, we harmonize all observations to boundaries in 2000.
8

tonomous administrative units, responsible for providing major public goods, subdistricts
are also important sites of political organization. They are also the most granular level at
which violence can be systematically tracked over time.

Subdistrict-Level Violence Data. Our main measures of violence come from the Indonesian National Violence Monitoring System (known by its Indonesian acronym, SNPK).
Coverage begins in 1998 for nine conflict-prone provinces and increases to 15 provinces plus
parts of 3 provinces in greater Jakarta beginning in 2005. The data is not formally representative of Indonesia, but by 2005 it spans all major island groups and covers a majority of
the population.
The SNPK is built from local media reports of violence. SNPK researchers collected all
available print archives of 120 local newspapers, recording over 2 million images. Coders then
used a standardized template to code each incident based on the underlying trigger, beginning
with broad groupings: domestic violence, violent crime, violence during law enforcement,
and conflict. Within conflict, the coders further sorted into identity, elections/appointments,
governance, resource violence, popular justice, separatist, and other (could not be classified).
Appendix Table C.1 defines each of these.
SNPK offers uniquely rich data on violence at the micro level. In 2014, the architects
of SNPK wrote “as far as we know, the [SNPK] is the largest dataset of violence created
for any single country” (Barron et al., 2014). Barron et al. provide additional detail on the
multi-year process involved in creating this data set, including the source selection process
and various quality control measures (Barron et al., 2014, 2016).7
We also draw on additional measures of violence from a triennial administrative census
of villages known by its acronym, Podes. Podes asks local government officials about a host

7

The data and supporting documentation can be accessed here: https://microdata.
worldbank.org/index.php/catalog/2626.
9

of village characteristics, including recent violent events.8

Outcome Measurement. Our main outcome is an indicator for any “social conflict.”
This groups all of the various forms of violence, except domestic violence and crime, into one
category. It guards against miscoding of conflict triggers. Predictive performance is similar
when retaining domestic violence and crime.
In addition to indicators of any social conflict, which occur in around half of the subdistricts each year, we also predict an indicator for at least five social conflict incidents
in a given year—a “hot spot”. This is meant to capture higher intensity episodes. These
episodes occur in around 10% of subdistricts each year. We predict indicators rather than
counts in order to simplify the interpretation of performance: the models either correctly
predict the incident or they do not. We predict counts in Appendix A.2; this exercise does
not meaningfully change our conclusions.
Of course, levels of violence tend to be persistent, and we are often interested in predicting
the onset and escalation of violence after a period of peace. There is no natural definition of
“onset” here, as in the civil war literature, since there are no discontinuities in subnational
event-level data.9 Instead, we construct an indicator for a standard deviation increase in
violence since the previous year, and seek to predict this escalation. A standard deviation
increase is around 4.7 acts of violence in a year, and we observe an increase of this size in
3.3% of subdistrict–years.10

8

To the extent that local leaders face strategic incentives to misreport violence, Podes measures may be more biased than those from external media reporting (for discussion, see
Barron et al., 2014).

9

In Appendix A.5, we consider prediction of future violent events in places that are not
currently experiencing violence.

10

In Appendix A.6, we consider alternative magnitudes and time horizons of escalations.
We generally find the measure of a one standard deviation increase in incidents to be
10

Covariates. In addition to detailed violence histories from SNPK and Podes, we assemble a set of 482 subdistrict-level predictors from multiple data sources.11 In order to assess
how predictive performance differs across related covariate sets, we group covariates into the
following predictor groups: (a) Population, (b) Religion, (c) Ethnicity, (d) Demographics
(e.g., fraction male, fraction young), (e) Education (e.g., mean years of schooling, school
presence), (f) Health (e.g., doctor and facility presence, rates of self-reported health problems), (g) Geography (e.g., soil quality, ruggedness), (h) Remoteness (e.g., distance to the
capital, road presence, transportation terminals), (i) Sector Shares (e.g., population share in
industry or agriculture), (j) Agricultural Features (e.g., irrigation access, share of households
with agricultural land), (k) Public Goods (e.g., safe water, garbage disposal, electricity and
gas sources), (l) Output (e.g., night light intensity, district Gross Domestic Product), (m)
Distributional Measures (e.g., inequality and poverty), (n) Communication (e.g., access to
telephones, cell signal), (o) Government Revenues and Expenditures, (p) Electoral Outcomes
(e.g., vote share polarization), (q) Natural Disasters, (r) Weather Histories and Shocks, and
(s) Commodity Shocks (e.g., food, cash crop, and mineral price shocks).
We use time-varying covariates whenever possible. Some, like geographic features, are
time-invariant by nature. Others, like ethnic and religious shares from the 2000 Population
Census, were only observed once at the beginning of the study period, and so are timeinvariant in our panel. Covariates derived from Podes are time-varying but only observed
triennially. Other variables, like education and health infrastructure, are slow moving by
nature. The violence data, night lights, economic shocks, as well as district-level revenues,
GDP and unemployment, and poverty and inequality, among others, vary annually. Our
models also include two lags of all violence predictors as well as several lags of our other
most predictable, but the differences when predicting other definitions of escalation are
not substantial.
11

Unless specified otherwise in Appendix C.1, these measures are available at the subdistrict
level or finer, and are aggregated to their subdistrict boundaries in 2000.
11

time-varying predictors subject to availability.12 We assess how predictive performance varies
when using only time-invariant or time-varying covariates.
Details on sources and variable construction can be found in Appendix C.1. Summary
statistics for each covariate, organized by predictor group, can be found in Appendix C.3.

3.2

Colombia

Our unit of analysis for Colombia is the municipality, or municipio. The country had 1,023
municipalities in our study period, averaging 37,000 residents—about two-thirds larger than
the average Indonesian subdistrict. These are the main administrative units in the country,
and municipalities play a key role in the allocation and contestation of public resources.

Municipality-Level Violence Data. The Conflict Analysis Resource Center (CERAC)
provides data on armed confrontations from 1988 to 2005. We also extend beyond 2005 by
using an additional source of conflict data collected by Universidad del Rosario through 2014
(see Appendix A.8).
The CERAC dataset contains over 21,000 events from the Colombian civil war, drawn
from periodicals published by two Colombian NGOs, the Center for Research and Popular
Education/Peace Program (CINEP) and Justicia y Paz. These periodicals, in turn, are
based on two underlying sources: reports of political violence and human rights abuses that
appear in 25 printed media outlets with local and national coverage, and a broad network of
priests from the Catholic church with representation in almost every Colombian municipality,
who report conflict episodes to CINEP. The priests are seen as neutral actors, often serving
as negotiators between the two sides. Thus, their accounts are viewed as both credible and
indispensable for attaining a comprehensive picture of conflict events in rural areas. Reliance
on a large number of media sources as well as the priests leads to the inclusion of every part
12

For the Podes variables, we use the two most recent measures of each conflict variable.
Appendix C.1 details the number of lags included for each time-varying predictor.
12

of the Colombian territory: violence events are reported in over 950 of 1,000 Colombian
municipalities over this 18-year period.
All events in the CERAC data are hand-coded and checked extensively to ensure accuracy,
with the precise coding procedures documented in Restrepo et al. (2004). For example, all
large events associated with double-digit casualties and a random sample of smaller events
are cross-checked against the archives of the leading Colombian newspaper El Tiempo, to
ensure that the data have been entered accurately, without double counting. The events are
also cross-checked against databases from the National Police, Human Rights Watch, and
Amnesty International.
CERAC also screens out events unrelated to the civil war (e.g., incidents of domestic
violence or crime). The dataset instead hones in on war-related actions carried out by politically motivated armed groups. Events are coded as either (a) bilateral clashes between sides,
or (b) unilateral attacks by any one side against another. The data separately categorize
violence by the military, various paramilitary organizations, and several guerrilla groups (the
largest being the FARC). Clashes occur between all three kinds of actors, though government
versus paramilitary clashes are rare, as are clashes between guerrillas or between paramilitaries. The CERAC dataset typically does not include kidnapping of individuals under event
categories, since kidnapping is commonly used by criminal groups, and tends to be underreported, which makes it difficult to measure comprehensively with accuracy (Restrepo et
al., 2004). The exception is when kidnapping results directly from war-related actions, for
example alongside other actions by an armed group that result in the classification of the
event as an attack.
We only use CERAC data after 1992 for the training sample since a consistent set of
covariates is unavailable before then. We further examine the possibility of prediction in
a longer panel by combining the CERAC series through 2005 with the Universidad del
Rosario dataset from 2006 to 2014. We present this in the appendix rather than the main
analysis in part because there are some coding differences between the two datasets, which

13

do not make them perfectly comparable. For example, the Universidad del Rosario dataset
includes additional political events, like the kidnapping of political actors, under the attack
classification. In addition, it categorizes attacks and clashes differently for complex events
involving the military. Nevertheless, predictive performance with the combined series is
similar to the baseline using only CERAC (see Appendix A.8).

Outcome Measurement. We construct indicators of any attack or clash, analogous to the
indicators for Indonesia. This grouping combines attacks initiated by the government with
attacks initiated by other armed actors. Results are similar when we remove governmentinitiated violence.
In Colombia, our indicator of any conflict occurs in about one-third of municipalities
each year. “Hot spots” with five or more incidents occur about 8% of the time. A standard
deviation change is 3.4 events, and we observe such a change in 4.4% of municipality-years.

Covariates. As in Indonesia, we assemble a broad set of predictors from multiple sources:
over 310 in all. First, we include detailed violence histories capturing incident types, actors, and outcomes. Beyond these violence histories, we incorporate the following predictor
groups of related covariates: (a) Population, (b) Geography (e.g., terrain ruggedness), (c)
Remoteness (e.g., road presence), (d) Distributional Measures (e.g., poverty and inequality), (e) Historical Traits (e.g., colonial population and infrastructure, following Acemoglu
et al., 2015), (f) Demilitarized Zone Proximity, (g) Municipality Revenues and Expenditure,
(h) Electoral Outcomes, (i) U.S. Military Presence and Spending (Dube and Naidu, 2015),
(j) Drug Production and Drug Price Shocks, (k) Weather Histories and Shocks, and (l)
Commodity Production and Price Shocks (as in Dube and Vargas, 2013).
As in Indonesia, we strive to use time-varying data when available. Electoral outcomes,
municipality revenues and spending, drug production, U.S. military involvement, and commodity and weather shocks all vary annually. Our models include two lags of all violence
predictors as well as lags of other time-varying predictors subject to availability. Summary
14

statistics for each covariate, organized by predictor group, can be found in Appendix C.3,
while details on sources and variable construction can be found in Appendix C.2.

3.3

Comments on Data Quality

It is worth discussing why we selected Colombia and Indonesia, and why scholars regard
their data as unusually high quality, especially the violence data. First, as we have already
mentioned, it is rare to have such a large number of covariates systematically available in
so many subnational units for such a long period. We know of few close comparisons in
countries with histories of violence.
Second, both countries offer state-of-the-art subnational violence data. The SNPK, for
example, was an explicit attempt to address shortcomings of earlier violence data sets within
Indonesia (Barron et al., 2014). Both sources are meticulously documented and subject to
various quality control measures (Restrepo et al., 2004; Barron et al., 2016). Each has been
effectively deployed in the academic literature (see, e.g., Bazzi and Gudgeon, forthcoming;
Dube and Vargas, 2013).
Third, the data draw on a large number of high-quality, local-language newspapers. This
is rare, as most news-coded datasets draw mainly from international news services. In many
low-income countries, the number and quality of local newspapers is extremely poor, and
there is little news coverage in conflicted places. Hence, many events are simply never
reported.
In fact, both countries’ conflict data offer significantly more comprehensive coverage
than other popular event-based data. The widely-used Uppsala Conflict Data Program
(UCDP) Georeferenced Event Data (GED) (Sundberg and Melander, 2013), which relies on
international media, misses over 99% of events in the SNPK and 61% of events in CERAC,
many of which involve substantial casualties. We detail these comparisons with UCDP-GED
in Appendix C.1.3 for Indonesia and Appendix C.2.3 for Colombia. Another popular source,
the Armed Conflict Location & Event Data Project (ACLED) data, is available for a more
15

limited range of years, beginning only in 2015 for Indonesia and 2019 for Colombia.
Nevertheless, we do not wish to overstate the quality of the data. The main violence
datasets undoubtedly omit or misclassify some events, or get the timing or location wrong,
thus impeding accurate prediction. Coding procedures also change over time. In Colombia,
for instance, the local sources and coding methods for the 2005–2014 data differ slightly
from the original 1988–2005 data, which is why we only include the later period in the
Appendix. Our results are not particularly sensitive to the way in which we create a longer
series by tying them together, but the issue is indicative of the challenges one can expect
from quarter-century long conflicts and data collection.
Another issue is that the data are typically aggregated to the level of a year, or to
a subdistrict or municipality. This introduces sources of measurement error in timing or
location that could, in principle, reduce predictive power. It is possible that we need to
reinvent the way that conflict scholars collect and code data in order to facilitate early
warning. But that would be a huge undertaking. This illustrates the purpose of this paper: to
evaluate how prediction works when applied to unusually rich existing data, before radically
changing data approaches to data collection. We are careful to limit our conclusions to the
specific kind of data that is currently available and one-year-ahead prediction exercises.

4

Prediction Methods

4.1

Training and Testing

For each year t we forecast violence in year t + 1. While the events are coded with specific
dates, we aggregate to the annual level because few predictors are measured at sub-annual
frequency, and because disaggregation would exacerbate a class imbalance problem (i.e., the
fact that there are far more non-events than events). Our procedure is as follows:
1. For each model, we take predictors measured from t0 to t − 1 as our training set, and
violence measures up to and including period t are the training outcomes. That is,
16

violence in period t is matched to predictors in period t − 1, period t − 1 violence is
matched to period t − 2 predictors, etc., and we have t − 1 observations per location.
2. We use 5-fold cross validation to choose optimal tuning parameters specific to each machine learning algorithm (see Section 4.2). We choose tuning parameters to maximize
out-of-sample area under the receiver operating characteristic, or ROC, curve (AUC),
a metric detailed in Section 4.3. 5-fold cross validation simulates out-of-sample prediction. First, the data is randomly partitioned into 5 equal-sized subsamples. A model
is then fit to four subsamples and used to predict violence in the fifth. This is repeated for each of the five subsamples, so that there is an “out-of-sample” prediction
of each observation. We replicate this exercise for each tuning parameter value in the
parameter search space. The best performing parameter, in terms of AUC, is chosen.
3. We repeat step 2 ten times with different random partitions, in order to generate 10
“optimal” tuning parameters, and then we take the average over these 10 trials.13
4. Using the selected tuning parameter values, we fit the model to the entire training set.
5. With this fitted model, we use the predictors measured in year t and the estimated
parameters to forecast violence in year t + 1.
We generate out-of-sample predictions starting in 2008 (and ending in 2014) for Indonesia
and in 1998 for Colombia (ending in 2005). We use all data up to the test year to generate
out-of-sample forecasts. So, to predict violence in year t + 1, we train each model on data
through year t; to predict violence in t + 2, we train each model on data through t + 1; etc.
13

In Appendix B.2, we assess the extent to which multiple cross-validation rounds add stability to the hyper-parameter choice. We conclude that, for the most part, one single
cross-validation exercise is sufficient to choose a good hyper-parameter value. Nevertheless, this step is parallelizable and not costly in terms of computing time, so we use 10
cross-validation runs throughout the paper in order to be conservative.
17

For Indonesia, this procedure generates seven predictions per algorithm. The first is trained
on four years of data to forecast conflict in 2008, and the last is trained on ten years of data
to forecast conflict in 2014. For Colombia, we generate eight predictions per algorithm. The
first is trained on six years of data to forecast conflict in 1998, and the last is trained on
thirteen years of data to forecast conflict in 2005.

4.2

Machine Learning Algorithms

We apply several machine learning methods. Since each has its own strengths and drawbacks
discussed below, we also take a weighted average of the four using an Ensemble Bayesian
Model Average (Beger et al., 2016). Starting with the prior that each algorithm is equally
appropriate, we use cross-validation to update our weights based on the accuracy of each
model (Montgomery et al., 2012). Bayesian model averaging is especially important for
our auxiliary analyses in which we explore different subsets of predictors and alternative
prediction tasks. Since some procedures may be more or less suited to particular tasks, the
model average considers the full potential of the algorithms as a whole.
1. LASSO (Tibshirani, 1994) is a logistic regression model that penalizes large coefficients
and forces all but the most important to zero. This algorithm is the simplest of the
four that we test, and arguably the least susceptible to overfitting. It is less suited
to identifying complex relationships between covariates and outcomes. It is also most
familiar to social scientists.
2. Random Forests comprise many independent decision trees. Each tree is a sequence
of rules that splits the sample into subsets, called leaves, based on variable cutoffs. The
prediction for each leaf is the mean outcome for the observations on that leaf, and trees
are fit so as to minimize mean squared error. Each tree is constructed by sampling a
random subset of the training data and a random subset of the predictors. Each of
these trees generates a prediction, and the overall prediction of the Random Forest is

18

the average of the predictions from each tree. Random forests are very flexible, being
able to model complicated interactions between variables. Random forests are also
relatively straightforward in terms of tuning parameter selection, and have been used
(albeit sparingly) in the conflict forecasting literature (Blair et al., 2017; Blair and
Sambanis, 2020; Muchlinski et al., 2016).
3. Gradient Boosted Machines are a variant of Random Forests. Trees are fit neither
randomly nor independently. Instead, each tree is fit sequentially to the full dataset,
but observations are weighted by the error rates of previous trees in the forest, such
that later trees are fit with a larger weight on observations that previous trees found
difficult to predict. In this way, each new tree slightly improves the model (Freund
and Schapire, 1999). Gradient boosted machines can improve upon random forests by
fitting trees in a more targeted manner, but they also require more decisions about
tuning parameters and are more susceptible to overfitting.
4. Neural Networks consist of systems of “nodes,” which are each functions of predictors. The functions input a linear combination of predictors and output a value
between zero and one. The outputs of these nodes are then further combined to produce a single output, with an organization evoking the structure of the human brain
(Hastie et al., 2001). The optimization problem is to choose appropriate weights in
each linear combination.14 Neural networks are widely applied in industry and are best
suited for the most complex classification tasks such as image and speech recognition.

14

Because there is a separate set of weights for each node, the number of free parameters
can grow very quickly. Since we do not have many observations relative to our predictor
dimensionality, we must first cut down the number of predictors by taking principal components of the covariates. We use 30 principal components in Indonesia and 20 in Colombia.
Predictive performance is not sensitive to these particular choices. In Appendix B.3 we
explore alternative neural network architectures.
19

However, neural networks require relatively large datasets, carefully chosen network
architecture, and computing resources to achieve high performance.
Appendix B reports further details about hyper-parameter choices and the mechanics of
each algorithm.
While there is an enormous variety of additional algorithms we might have tested, we
focus on these four because they are well established in the machine learning literature,
because they have been used (albeit infrequently) for purposes of forecasting in economics
and political science, and because they reflect much of the variation across the most prominent categories of machine learning models: selection and shrinkage techniques (LASSO),
ensemble and tree-based techniques (Random Forests and Gradient Boosted Machines), and
nonlinear adaptive weighting techniques (Neural Networks). Our goal is not to be exhaustive,
but rather to evaluate the predictive power of well-established models applied to uniquely
rich within-country data on conflict and its correlates.

4.3

Performance Metrics

To evaluate our models, we focus on the area under the ROC curve, known as the “area under
the curve” or AUC. Other performance metrics such as the mean squared error, area under
the precision-recall curve, and maximal accuracy and sensitivity are reported in Appendix
A.1. ROC curves plot the tradeoff between true and false positives for a given model.
The AUC captures the probability that a randomly chosen pair of observations is correctly
ordered in terms of predicted risk of violence. A model that performs no better than chance
would have an AUC of 0.5; a perfect model would have an AUC of 1.
An advantage of the AUC is that it does not require specifying a probability threshold
above which we predict violence will occur. Selecting a specific threshold requires making a
tradeoff between accuracy, sensitivity (the proportion of incidents correctly predicted), and
specificity (the proportion of non-incidents correctly predicted). The threshold one chooses
depends on one’s relative tolerance for false positives and false negatives.
20

For example, a policymaker with ample resources might choose a low threshold, increasing
sensitivity at the cost of specificity and accuracy, while a policymaker with scarce resources
might choose a high threshold, increasing specificity at the cost of sensitivity and accuracy.
We are more interested in overall performance than in performance at any given threshold,
and so opt to focus on the AUC. But we recognize that the AUC has some limitations as
well, especially in the presence of class-imbalanced data, and report alternative performance
metrics in the appendix.15

5

Results

5.1

Next Year’s Violence is Predictable

Table 1 shows that all of the machine learning methods we test have strong predictive
performance. For the ensemble average (EBMA), the AUC is above 0.82 for predicting ≥1
event, above 0.91 for ≥5 events, and above 0.80 for escalations of ≥1 standard deviation. In
general, AUCs of 0.8 and above are considered very good, and AUCs of 0.9 and above are
considered excellent.
To fix ideas, given a random pair of Indonesian subdistricts in which one location experiences 5 or more incidents and the other does not, there is a 0.941 probability that the more
violent subdistrict would have a higher predicted probability of violence. The lower AUC for
escalations implies that changes are inherently more difficult to predict, and that increasing

15

Appendix A.1 reports the MSE, the precision-recall-AUC, as well as accuracy, sensitivity,
and specificity at two different thresholds, one that maximizes accuracy and one that
maximizes sensitivity while keeping accuracy above 50%. Our results are qualitatively
similar when we compare models using these alternative performance metrics rather than
the AUC. Appendix section A.1 also reports alternative models that are trained to minimize
MSE. Again, the results are qualitatively similar.
21

the number of true positives comes at the cost of more false positives.
These models exceed the performance of other recent subnational conflict forecasting
exercises. By way of comparison, Blair et al. (2017) report a maximum out-of-sample AUC
of 0.74 in a sample of 250 Liberian towns over three years, Weidmann and Ward (2010)
achieve a maximum out-of-sample AUC of 0.78 in Bosnia 1992–95, and Witmer et al. (2017)
find a maximum in-sample AUC of 0.85 across sub-Saharan Africa using 1 degree gridded
monthly data, 1980–2012.16 Gains in the range of 0.05 or 0.10 represent 10–20% of the
difference between the worst and best possible prediction.
The models perform similarly well in Indonesia and Colombia, and performance is similar
across algorithms. LASSO performs roughly as well as the more sophisticated algorithms,
which is notable given its relative simplicity. The tree-based models also perform well, with
gradient boosted machines edging out random forests in all instances. The neural networks
are generally the worst performers. They may be ill-suited for this prediction task, which
uses a relatively modest amount of data. They are also the most difficult to tune among our
candidate algorithms. Finally, the ensemble (EBMA) is generally the best performer, giving
us confidence in focusing on the ensemble as an indicator of the overall potential of these
methods. That said, the gains from model averaging are not large relative to the individual
top performers.
[TABLE 1 HERE]

5.1.1

Machine Learning Outperforms Simpler Benchmarks

Table 2 compares our machine learning approaches to simpler benchmarks. Column 1 reproduces the results from our main EBMA specification in column 5 of Table 1. Column 2
reports the performance of an OLS model using all predictor variables. Using our expansive

16

In-sample performance refers to models that are trained and tested on the same data. Outof-sample refers to models that are trained on one subset of data and tested on another.
22

dataset of conflict predictors, OLS alone does a good job of predicting conflict. However, our
ensemble machine learning model outperforms simple OLS. The gains are moderate in the
case of predicting any incident and more significant for the rarer outcomes. Linear regression
models appear to over-fit the data: the generated predictions underperform those of the less
flexible LASSO models in column 1 of Table 1. Moreover, the linear regression is not able
to model interactions between variables, which may explain the outperformance of Random
Forests and Gradient Boosted Machines.
Columns 3-5 consider alternative benchmarks that use fewer predictors. Column 3 reports
the performance of a simple autoregressive model (AR1) in which positive cases in period
t are predicted to remain positive cases in t + 1. Our prediction models outperform this
simple AR1 model as well. Unsurprisingly, the lagged predictand model is particularly poor
at predicting rapid increases in the number of conflicts in both Indonesia and Colombia.
Our models include enough time-invariant covariates, however, that in principle the machine learning performance could simply approximate fixed effects. Therefore, column 4
examines a simple OLS fixed effects model. In each year, we regress all previous years’
outcomes on fixed effects for each location. Then we take that fixed effect as our prediction
for the following year. We see that in all cases, prediction using our full set of covariates
outperforms the fixed effects model. The improvements for any violent event are moderate,
ranging from 0.025–0.05, which is roughly 5–10% of the difference between a random prediction and perfection. Improvements are larger when predicting hot spots and escalations.
The fact that the relative outperformance of our baseline model is greatest in Indonesia and
in cases where the dependent variable is rarer is intuitive from the perspective of estimator
variance.17 These fixed effects are noisily estimated, and our prediction algorithms are better
able to estimate the relationship between fixed factors and conflict.
17

The fixed effects model is required to estimate 1,023 parameters in Colombia and 2,009
parameters in Indonesia. As the variation in the dependent variable decreases, which
happens as it becomes rarer, this estimation becomes increasingly difficult.
23

The specification in column 5 attempts to remedy this imprecision by estimating fewer
fixed effects at a higher level of aggregation—the department in Colombia and the district in
Indonesia.18 In this case, performance for the rarest event, a 1 standard deviation increase
in violence, improves, but still falls well short of our benchmark model.
Together, these results show that the full models perform better than several simpler
alternatives. While performance varies across countries and outcomes, it is clear that there
are gains to machine learning approaches.
[TABLE 2 HERE]

5.2

We Predict Time-Invariant Risk Over Space Rather than Time

In this section, we clarify the nature and sources of predictability, and conclude that our
predictions mainly capture time-invariant risks of violence. Table 3 reports results. For
purposes of comparison, column 1 reproduces the baseline EBMA results from column 5 of
Table 1.

5.2.1

Violence Histories Alone are a Good Predictor of Future Conflict

First we examine the predictive power of violence histories alone. Importantly, these histories
are not simply lagged dependent variables. Instead, they comprise the number and severity
of incidents (number of deaths, destruction of property, etc.) and the actors involved, and,
in Indonesia, distinguish between each of the ten different violence categories.19
Columns 2 and 3 of Table 3 consider models that use all available information about past
violence. Column 3 adds measures of population and population density to reflect the fact

18

There are 33 departments in our Colombia sample and 168 districts in our Indonesia sample.
Therefore, the number of parameters drops considerably, as does the imprecision in their
estimation.

19

See Appendix C.3 for the full list of past violence predictors in each country.
24

that more populous places mechanically have more people who can engage in conflict with
one another.
We find that prediction models using violence histories alone perform almost as well as
our full model in column 1, suggesting that additional covariates yield, at most, modest
improvements beyond these rich conflict histories. The addition of population in column
3 leads to little improvement. The model with violence histories also vastly outperforms a
simple lagged dependent variable alone (column 3 of Table 2). Thus, performance is not
simply driven by the autoregressive properties of conflict, but by the rich set of conflict
measurements provided by our data sources. Appendix A.4 provides further evidence on the
predictive returns to more detailed violence data.

5.2.2

Time-Invariant Predictors are Most Effective in Our Models

If detailed, past violence predicts future violence, do we need other predictors at all? We
develop a number of tests for parsing the sources of predictability. Column 4 of Table
3 shows results for a model that only uses predictors that do not directly measure past
violence. These include the hundreds of socioeconomic and demographic measures discussed
above. Performance is comparable to the full model in column 1 and the violence-only model
in column 2. This suggests that these socioeconomic and demographic variables contain more
or less the same information as the detailed histories of violence, but add little value over
them.
Of course, our models contain hundreds of variables, and it is possible that some contribute much less than others. In particular, our models include a number of predictors that
change slowly or not at all. Some, such as topographical traits or colonial history, do not
vary by definition. Others, such as ethnic and religious traits in Indonesia, do not vary over
our sample because they are measured only once. Variables that do not change over our
sample cannot, by their nature, predict the timing of violent conflict on their own. If remote
areas are at risk for conflict in one year, then they continue to be at risk in the following

25

years, because they continue to be remote.
To examine the relative performance of time-varying and time-invariant predictors, we
compare models composed entirely of one or the other. Column 5 uses only time-invariant
traits to predict violence, and performance roughly matches or outperforms the model in
column 4. Column 6 uses only time-varying predictors and performance diminishes.20 Thus,
most of our model’s performance can be achieved by successfully predicting time-invariant
(or at least highly persistent) violence risk.
[TABLE 3 HERE]
In Figure 1, we go one step further and examine the predictive performance of clusters of
related predictors. We start with a baseline model that uses only population (level, growth
rate, and density) to generate predictions. We then add subgroups of predictors to that
baseline model and estimate the change in predictive performance. This approach estimates
the predictive power of sets of predictors beyond their association with population.
Figure 1 plots the change in model performance from adding each subgroup. Each outof-sample year is indicated with a small dot, to give a sense of the range of performance
changes. The first out-of-sample year is marked with a triangle, and the last is marked
with a square. While the first out-of-sample year generally has worse performance because
the training sample is smallest, it is difficult to see a clear improvement in performance
over successive out-of-sample predictions. The final year of data is not necessarily the best
performing. In the discussion below, we focus on the average change—reflected by the larger
open circle.
Consistent with the results above, time-invariant and slow-moving predictors appear to
20

This is true even for the ≥ 1 SD increase outcome. While such increases naturally have a
temporal element to them, it appears that our performance comes from leveraging which
places are most at risk of experiencing escalations as opposed to when these escalations
occur.
26

add the most to predictive performance.21 This is generally the case even when looking at
conflict escalation. The time-invariant predictors that add the most to predictive performance are also notably similar across countries and outcomes. Measures of remoteness, like
distance from major cities and road access, and geographic traits like terrain ruggedness,
are generally the best predictors. Time-invariant measures of economic structure such as
sectoral shares, agricultural features, or mineral presence are also important predictors.
In contrast, the covariates with the most year-to-year variation seldom improve predictive
power, even when predicting escalations. This is particularly evident for natural disasters,
commodity price shocks, drug price shocks, and weather shocks. In some instances, adding
these predictors seems to decrease performance. However, the direction in which they affect
performance varies, and the range of performance contributions over out-of-sample years
is large, which limits our ability to definitively conclude how these predictors affect model
performance.22
21

We classify variables as “slow-moving” in Indonesia if they vary triennially, originating
from the Podes survey. These predictors measure characteristics that tend to vary more
between locations than over time within location (see the summary statistics in Appendix
C.3, which show the within over between variance). Indeed, a prior draft used a purely timeinvariant version of these predictor groups from just the 1999 Podes, and their predictive
performance was extremely similar (Bazzi et al., 2019).

22

The inconclusive performance of these variables in our year-ahead prediction models stands
in contrast to causal studies of conflict, where variables such as commodity prices and
weather shocks have robust significant effects on conflict intensity and sometimes conflict
onset. See, for example, Miguel et al. (2004), Bazzi and Blattman (2014), Berman and
Couttenier (2013), Berman et al. (forthcoming), Burke et al. (2015) and Dube and Vargas (2013). This underscores the observation that the relationship between causation and
prediction is complex (Shmueli, 2010), and that the objective of prediction differs fundamentally from the objective of parameter estimation (Mullainathan and Spiess, 2017).
27

Some of the time-varying variables do improve performance. Output and communication
variables also seem to generally help in Indonesia. However, it is worth noting that even for
these time-varying measures, it could still be the case that the majority of their variation
is cross-sectional. Indeed, the within over between variance for many of the variables in
these predictor groups is below 1, indicating that much of the variation lies in the crosssection rather than within-location, over-time.23 Electoral data generally appears to improve
performance in both countries, though the effect varies for Colombia. Note, moreover, that
there is not a clear increase in the marginal contribution of these predictors over time. The
first out-of-sample year is seldom the worst in terms of the marginal contribution of these
time-varying predictors. Likewise, the final year, which uses the largest training set, is seldom
the best. Overall, we conclude that time-invariant predictors contribute more consistently
to our model’s performance in predicting conflict over time.
[FIGURE 1 HERE]
5.2.3

Our Models Predict Violence across Locations

So far, several pieces of evidence point to the difficulty of predicting the specific timing of
violence: the relatively poor performance of time-varying predictors; the interchangeability
of histories of violence and time-invariant predictors; and our finding that histories of violence
predict spikes in violence roughly as well as levels of violence.
In Appendix A.3, we further show that our models perform especially poorly when predicting within-location, over-time variation in violence. In this exercise, we attempt to predict
deviations in the number of violent incidents in each location from its historical mean. Performance is very poor. These results further underscore the difficulty of predicting within-unit
changes in violence, given the available data.
23

In Appendix A.7, we consider alternative groupings of time-varying predictors that shed
light on this distinction between the spatial and temporal variation in time-varying predictors.
28

Next, we take the opposite approach, forecasting conflict exclusively across locations.
To do this, we randomly split subdistricts in Indonesia and municipalities in Colombia into
two, equal-sized groups. We pool observations over time, and train our algorithms using all
location–years of data in one group of locations, generating predictions for a second group
of location–years. Table 4 reports these results. Strikingly, Column 1 shows that overall
performance when forecasting across locations is similar to performance when predicting
ahead in time.
[TABLE 4 HERE]
When forecasting across locations, some differences emerge in the performance of individual predictor groups. Figure 2 examines which groups of predictors (along with population)
best predict out-of-sample violence across locations. Time-invariant predictors remain important. However, time-varying predictors including weather, natural disasters and commodity
prices no longer reduce predictive power, and in some cases, improve it substantially.
One notable difference between the across-location and year-ahead predictions is that the
training set uses all years of available data in the across-location approach. The algorithms
therefore observe the entire relevant distribution of weather, disasters and commodity price
fluctuations over the duration of the period. These variables may behave very differently
year to year. When we predict violence one year ahead, if the training period includes such
shocks while the testing period does not, the lack of common support across these periods
may inhibit the predictive power of these variables. Thus, the short time series of the training
and testing samples, and the difficulty of generating off-support predictions, may explain why
time-varying covariates like weather shocks perform worse in our predictions over time.
[FIGURE 2 HERE]

29

6

Discussion

Using an unusually long and wide array of annual data, we show that local violence in
Indonesia and Colombia appears to be predictable with relatively high levels of accuracy.
But that predictability is largely a function of time-invariant, location-specific risk. This is
important in and of itself, since hot spots for violence may pose an especially severe risk of
further escalation. Machine learning approaches can help to identify these hot spots that
would have remained more obscure with simpler forecasting methods. However, the residual
variation—year-to-year changes in violence—remains difficult to forecast.
There are several possible explanations for this latter result. For one, it is possible that the
time-varying dimensions of violence are simply idiosyncratic and therefore hard to predict.
In many cases, conflict is not only inefficient but is an out-of-equilibrium behavior (Fearon,
1995). These deviations from normal, peaceful social competition could be inherently difficult
to forecast. Violence may also be hard to predict because it responds endogenously to the
strategic calculations of armed actors. For instance, we may observe peace in a particular
region precisely because government security forces crudely predicted a high conflict risk
there, and allocated resources accordingly. Likewise, a terrorist may decide to attack an
area because that is where the attack was least expected.
A variety of measurement problems may also limit model performance. Human-coded
violence data, or data from news reports, is state-of-the-art in that it is often the best or
only source of information available, but it is nonetheless prone to misclassification or errors
of omission. The timing of violence could be a function of factors that are inherently hardto-observe and measure, such as social grievances or the deterioration of communal trust.
Both issues will bedevil prediction exercises of all kinds.
We might also lack a sufficiently long time series to be able to capture time-varying
conflict risk, though several signs suggest otherwise. The limited predictive power of shocks
in our over-time predictions may reflect a lack of common support in the training and testing
samples. If so, then performance could improve with more years of data. Yet, our results hold
30

even when the training sample is at its longest, and as the training sample gets longer one
might be more concerned about the possibility of structural breaks in the violence-generating
process. If models need more than a quarter century of rich conflict and risk factor data to
yield better predictions, then the practical prospects for early warning are surely limited.
High-frequency data on local conditions and leading indicators of violence are other
potential avenues for improvement. For now, few developing country contexts offer such
data. But possibilities in the near future include data from social media, mobile phone
meta-data, real-time incident data, and media monitoring. We view these as promising
avenues for future research seeking to forecast where violence changes over time.

31

References
Acemoglu, Daron, Carlos Garcia-Jimeno, and James A. Robinson, “State capacity
and economic development: A network approach,” American Economic Review, 2015.
, James A. Robinson, and Rafael J. Santos, “The Monopoly of Violence: Evidence
from Colombia,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2013, 11 (S1), 5–44.
https://economics.mit.edu/files/10402.
, Leopoldo Fergusson, James A. Robinson, Dario Romero, and Juan F. Vargas, “The Perils of High-Powered Incentives: Evidence from Colombia’s False Positives,” Working Paper 22617, National Bureau of Economic Research September 2016.
http://dx.doi.org/10.3386/w22617.
Alesina, Alberto and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, “Segregation and the Quality of Government in a Cross Section of Countries,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (5),
1872–1911.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Adriana D. Kugler, “Rural Windfall or a New Resource
Curse?

Coca, Income, and Civil Conflict in Colombia,” The Review of Economics

and Statistics, May 2008, 90 (2), 191–215. https://ideas.repec.org/a/tpr/restat/
v90y2008i2p191-215.html.
Barron, Patrick, Kai Kaiser, and Menno Pradhan, “Understanding variations in local
conflict: Evidence and implications from Indonesia,” World Development, 2009, 37 (3),
698–713. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2008.08.007.
, Sana Jaffrey, and Ashutosh Varshney, “How Large Conflicts Subside: Evidence From Indonesia,” Indonesia Social Development Paper, 2014, (18).

https://

asiafoundation.org/resources/pdfs/HowLargeConflictsSubside.pdf.
,

, and

, “When Large Conflicts Subside: The Ebbs and Flows of Violence in Post-

Suharto Indonesia,” Journal of East Asian Studies, 2016, 16 (2), 191–217. https://doi.

32

org/10.1017/jea.2016.6.
Bazzi, Samuel and Christopher Blattman, “Economic shocks and conflict: Evidence
from commodity prices,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2014, 6 (4), 1–38.
dx.doi.org/10.1257/mac.6.4.1.
and Matthew Gudgeon, “The Political Boundaries of Ethnic Divisions,” American
Economic Journal: Applied Economics, forthcoming.
, Robert Blair, Christopher Blattman, Oeindrila Dube, Matthew Gudgeon,
and Richard M. Peck, “The Promise and Pitfalls of Conflict Prediction: Evidence from
Colombia and Indonesia,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.
Beck, Nathaniel, Gary King, and Langche Zeng, “Improving Quantitative Studies
of International Conflict: A Conjecture,” The American Political Science Review, March
2000, 94 (1), 21–35. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2586378.
Beger, Andreas, Cassy L. Dorff, and Michael D. Ward, “Irregular leadership changes
in 2014: Forecasts using ensemble, split-population duration models,” International Journal of Forecasting, January 2016, 32 (1), 98–111. dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijforecast.
2015.01.009.
Berger, Daniel, Shankar Kalyanaraman, and Sera Linardi, “Violence and Cell Phone
Communication: Behavior and Prediction in Cote D’Ivoire,” Unpublished Manuscript,
2014. https://ssrn.com/abstract=2526336.
Berman, Nicolas and Mathieu Couttenier, “External shocks, internal shots: the
geography of civil conflicts,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2013, (0). https:
//doi.org/10.1162/REST_a_00521.
,

, Dominic Rohner, and Mathias Thoenig, “This Mine is Mine! How Minerals

Fuel Conflicts in Africa,” American Economic Review, forthcoming. dx.doi.org/10.
1257/aer.20150774.
Blair, Robert A. and Nicholas Sambanis, “Forecasting Civil Wars: Theory and Struc33

ture in an Age of “Big Data” and Machine Learning,” Journal of Conflict Resolution,
2020.
, Christopher Blattman, and Alexandra Hartman, “Predicting local violence: Evidence from a panel survey in Liberia,” Journal of Peace Research, March 2017, 54 (2),
298–312. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0022343316684009.
Blattman, Christopher and Edward Miguel, “Civil war,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2010, pp. 3–57. dx.doi.org/10.1257/jel.48.1.3.
Brandt, Patrick T., John R. Freeman, and Philip A. Schrodt, “Real Time, Time
Series Forecasting of Inter- and Intra-State Political Conflict,” Conflict Management and
Peace Science, 2011, 28 (1), 41–64. https://doi.org/10.1177/0738894210388125.
Burke, Marshall, Solomon Hsiang, and Edward Miguel, “Climate and Conflict,” Annual Review Economics, 2015, 7, 577–617.

https://doi.org/10.1146/

annurev-economics-080614-115430.
Cederman, Lars-Erik and Nils B. Weidmann, “Predicting armed conflict: Time to
adjust our expectations?,” Science, 2017, 355 (6324), 474–476. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1126/science.aal4483.
Celiku, Bledi and Aart Kraay, “Predicting conflict,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 8075, 2017. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/26847.
Chacon, Mario, “In the Line of Fire: Political Violence and Decentralization in Colombia,”
Working Paper, 2014. https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.23866677.
Colaresi, Michael, Håvard Hegre, and Jonas Nordkvelle, “Early ViEWS: A prototype
disaggregated, open-source Violence Early-Warning System,” Presented to the American
Political Science Association annual convention, Philadelphia, 2016. http://www.pcr.
uu.se/digitalAssets/653/c_653796-l_1-k_earlyviewsapsa2016.pdf.
Dube, Oeindrila and Juan F. Vargas, “Commodity price shocks and civil conflict:
Evidence from Colombia,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2013, 80 (4), 1384–1421.
34

https://doi.org/10.1093/restud/rdt009.
and Suresh Naidu, “Bases, Bullets, and Ballots: The Effect of US Military Aid on
Political Conflict in Colombia,” The Journal of Politics, 2015, 77 (1), 249–267. https:
//www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/679021.
Fearon, James D., “Rationalist explanations for war,” International organization, 1995,
49 (3), 379–414. https://www.jstor.org/stable/2706903.
Fischer, Gunther, Freddy Nachtergaele, Sylvia Prieler, Harrij van Velthuizen,
Luc Verelst, and David Wiberg, “Global Agro-ecological Zones Assessment for Agriculture (GAEZ 2008),” Technical Report, GAEZ 2008. http://www.fao.org/nr/gaez/
publications/en/.
Freund, Yoav and Robert E. Schapire, “A Short Introduction to Boosting,” in “In Proceedings of the Sixteenth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence” Morgan
Kaufmann 1999, pp. 1401–1406. https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1624417.
Gartzke, Erik, “War is in the Error Term,” International Organization, 1999, 53 (3), 567–
587. https://doi.org/10.1162/002081899550995.
Gleditsch, Kristian Skrede and Michael D. Ward, “Forecasting is difficult, especially
about the future: Using contentious issues to forecast interstate disputes,” Journal of
Peace Research, 2013, 50 (1), 17–31. https://doi.org/10.1177/0022343312449033.
Goldstone, Jack A., Robert H. Bates, David L. Epstein, Ted Robert Gurr,
Michael B. Lustik, Monty G Marshall, Jay Ulfelder, and Mark Woodward, “A
Global Model for Forecasting Political Instability,” American Journal of Political Science,
January 2010, 54 (1), 190–208. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-5907.2009.00426.x.
Guha, Rishab. and Serena. Ng, “A Machine Learning Analysis of Seasonal and Cyclical
Sales in Weekly Scanner Data,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research
2019.
Gurr, Ted Robert and Mark Lichbach, “Forecasting Internal Conflict,” Comparative
35

Political Studies, 1986, 19 (1), 3–38. https://doi.org/10.1177/0010414086019001001.
Harff, Barbara, “No Lessons Learned from the Holocaust? Assessing Risks of Genocide
and Political Mass Murder Since 1955,” American Political Science Review, 2003, 97 (1),
57–73. https://www.jstor.org/stable/3118221.
Hastie, Trevor, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman, The Elements of Statistical Learning Springer Series in Statistics, New York, NY, USA: Springer New York Inc.,
2001.
Hegre, Håvard, Joakim Karlsen, Håvard Mokleiv Nygård, Håvard Strand, and
Henrik Urdal, “Predicting Armed Conflict, 2010–2050,” International Studies Quarterly,
2013, 57 (2), 250–270. https://doi.org/10.1111/isqu.12007.
Hegre, Håvard, Halvard Buhaug, Katherine V Calvin, Jonas Nordkvelle,
Stephanie T Waldhoff, and Elisabeth Gilmore, “Forecasting civil conflict along the
shared socioeconomic pathways,” Environmental Research Letters, 2016, 11 (5), 054002.
dx.doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/11/5/054002.
Henderson, J. Vernon, Adam Storeygard, and David N. Weil, “Measuring Economic
Growth from Outer Space,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (2), 994–1028. dx.
doi.org/10.1257/aer.102.2.994.
Historical

Memory

Group,

”Enough Already!” Colombia:

Memories of War

and Dignity, The National Center for Historical Memory, 2013.

http://www.

centrodememoriahistorica.gov.co/micrositios/informeGeneral/descargas.html.
Hsiang, Solomon M, Marshall Burke, and Edward Miguel, “Quantifying the influence of climate on human conflict,” Science, 2013, 341 (6151), 1235367.
Indra, Suahasil Nazara, Djoni Hartono, and Sudarno Sumarto, “Roles of Income
Polarization, Income Inequality and Ethnic Fractionalization in Social Conflicts: An Empirical Study of Indonesian Provinces, 2002–2012,” Asian Economic Journal, 2019, 33 (2),
165–190.
36

Jasny, Barbara R. and Richard Stone, “Prediction and its Limits,” Science, 2017, 355
(6324), 468–469. dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.355.6324.468.
Martinez-Bravo, Monica, Priya Mukherjee, and Andreas Stegmann, “The nondemocratic roots of elite capture: Evidence from Soeharto mayors in Indonesia,” Econometrica, 2017, 85 (6), 1991–2010.
McGuirk, Eoin and Marshall Burke, “The Economic Origins of Conflict in Africa,”
Working Paper 23056, National Bureau of Economic Research January 2017.
Miguel, Edward, Shanker Satyanath, and Ernest Sergenti, “Economic shocks and
civil conflict: An instrumental variables approach,” Journal of Political Economy, 2004,
112 (4), 725–753. https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/10.1086/421174.
Montgomery, Jacob, Florian Hollenbach, and Michael Ward, “Improving Predictions using Ensemble Bayesian Model Averaging,” Political Analysis, 2012, 20, 271–291.
https://doi.org/10.1093/pan/mps002.
Muchlinski, David, David Siroky, Jingrui He, and Matthew Kocher, “Comparing
Random Forest with Logistic Regression for Predicting Class-Imbalanced Civil War Onset
Data,” Political Analysis, 2016, 24 (1), 87–103.
Mueller, Hannes and Christopher Rauh, “Reading Between the Lines: Prediction
of Political Violence Using Newspaper Text,” American Political Science Review, 2017,
pp. 1–18. dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0003055417000570.
Mullainathan, Sendhil and Jann Spiess, “Machine Learning: An Applied Econometric
Approach,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, May 2017, 31 (2), 87–106. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1257/jep.31.2.87.
Perry, Chris, “Machine learning and conflict prediction: a use case,” Stability: International Journal of Security and Development, 2013, 2 (3), 56. http://doi.org/10.5334/
sta.cr.
Pierskalla, Jan H. and Audrey Sacks, “Unpacking the Effect of Decentralized Gov37

ernance on Routine Violence: Lessons from Indonesia,” World Development, 2017, 90,
213–228. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2016.09.008.
Restrepo, Jorge, Michael Spagat, and Juan Vargas, “The Dynamics of the Columbian
Civil Conflict: A New Dataset,” Homo Oeconomicus, 2004, 21, 396–429. https://ssrn.
com/abstract=480247.
Sappington, J. Mark, Kathleen M. Longshore, and Daniel B. Thompson, “Quantifying Landscape Ruggedness for Animal Habitat Analysis: A Case Study Using Bighorn
Sheep in the Mojave Desert,” The Journal of Wildlife Management, 2007, 71 (5), 1419–
1426. http://dx.doi.org/10.2193/2005-723.
Schrodt, Philip A., “Forecasting Conflict in the Balkans using Hidden Markov Models,” in
Robert Trappl, ed., Programming for Peace: Advances in Group Decision and Negotiation,
Vol. 2, Springer, 2006, pp. 161–184. dx.doi.org/10.1214/10-STS330.
Shmueli, Galit, “To explain or to predict?,” Statist. Sci., 08 2010, 25 (3), 289–310. dx.
doi.org/10.1214/10-STS330.
Srivastava, Nitish, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan
Salakhutdinov, “Dropout: A Simple Way to Prevent Neural Networks from Overfitting,”
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2014, 15 (56), 1929–1958.
Sundberg, R. and E. Melander, “Introducing the UCDP georeferenced event dataset,”
Journal of Peace Research, 2013, 50 (4), 523–532.
Tadjoeddin, Zulfan, Explaining collective violence in contemporary Indonesia: from conflict to cooperation, Springer, 2014.
Tibshirani, Robert, “Regression Shrinkage and Selection Via the Lasso,” Journal of the
Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 1994, 58, 267–288. https://www.jstor.org/stable/
2346178.
Ward, Michael, Nils Metternich, Cassy Dorff, Max Gallop, Florian Hollenbach,
Anna Schultz, and Simon Weschle, “Learning from the Past and Stepping into the
38

Future: Toward a New Generation of Conflict Prediction,” International Studies Review,
2013, 15 (4), 473–490. https://doi.org/10.1111/misr.12072.
Weidmann, Nils and Michael Ward, “Predicting Conflict in Space and Time,”
Journal of Conflict Resolution, 2010, 54 (6), 883–901.

https://doi.org/10.1177/

0022002710371669.
Witmer, Frank D.W., Andrew M Linke, John O’Loughlin, Andrew Gettelman,
and Arlene Laing, “Subnational violent conflict forecasts for sub-Saharan Africa, 2015–
65, using climate-sensitive models,” Journal of Peace Research, 2017, 54 (2), 175–192.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0022343316682064.
Wright, Austin L. and Patrick Signoret, “Climate Shocks, Price Dynamics, and Human
Conflict,” Working paper, 2016. https://www.austinlwright.com/climate-shocks/.

39

Table 1: Out-of-Sample (One Year Ahead) Performance of Prediction
Models, Area Under the Curve (AUC)

LASSO
(1)

Random Adaptive Neural
Forest Boosting Network
(2)
(3)
(4)

Indonesia (social conflict,
0.818
0.823
0.935
0.942
0.817
0.852

EBMA
(5)

2008-2014)
0.792
0.823
0.910
0.941
0.825
0.860

Any violent event
≥ 5 violent events
≥ 1 s.d. increase in events

0.819
0.940
0.866

Any violent event
≥ 5 violent events
≥ 1 s.d. increase in events

Colombia (attacks and clashes, 1998-2005)
0.845
0.847
0.849
0.825
0.850
0.914
0.911
0.910
0.886
0.915
0.802
0.787
0.796
0.741
0.801

Notes: Each model is trained on all available data preceding the out-of-sample prediction
year. Training data starts with 1991 data used to predict 1992 violence in Colombia
and 2003 data for 2004 violence in Indonesia. Out-of-sample prediction begins in 1998
in Colombia and 2008 in Indonesia. The AUC is the area under the ROC curve, a
measure of the trade-off between the true positive rate and false positive rate at different
thresholds. We report average performance over the out-of-sample years.

40

Table 2: Out-of-Sample Performance Versus Benchmarks

Baseline
EBMA
(1)

Any violent event
≥ 5 violent events
≥ 1 s.d. increase in events

Any violent event
≥ 5 violent events
≥ 1 s.d. increase in events

0.823
0.941
0.860

0.850
0.915
0.801

OLS
(2)

Lagged
Predictand
(3)

Location
FE Only
(4)

Indonesia (social conflict, 2008-2014)
0.790
0.687
0.774
0.911
0.808
0.880
0.759
0.527
0.694
Colombia (attacks and clashes,
0.821
0.743
0.858
0.748
0.744
0.521

1998-2005)
0.828
0.849
0.683

Department/
District
FE
Only
(5)

0.752
0.871
0.776

0.721
0.742
0.712

Notes: Each model is trained on all data available preceding the out-of-sample prediction
year. Training data starts with 1991 data used to predict 1992 violence in Colombia and
2003 data for 2004 violence in Indonesia. Out-of-sample prediction begins in 1998 in
Colombia and 2008 in Indonesia. The AUC is the area under the ROC curve, a measure
of the trade-off between the true positive rate and false positive rate as we vary the
discrimination threshold. We report average performance over the out-of-sample years
above. Lagged predictand includes only a single lag of the violence indicator of interest.
Fixed effects models are estimated by OLS.

41

Table 3: Out-of-Sample (One Year Ahead) Performance of the Ensemble
(EBMA) Method, Varying Predictor Sets

Full
Predictors
(1)

All Past
Violence
Measures
(2)

All Past
Violence
& Population
(3)

Full Excl.
Past
Violence
(4)

TimeTimeInvariant
Varying
Predictors Predictors
(5)
(6)

Any violent event
≥ 5 violent events
≥ 1 s.d. increase in events

0.823
0.941
0.860

Indonesia (social conflict, 2008-2014)
0.805
0.815
0.810
0.817
0.939
0.942
0.922
0.931
0.845
0.856
0.847
0.856

0.789
0.902
0.815

Any violent event
≥ 5 violent events
≥ 1 s.d. increase in events

0.850
0.915
0.801

Colombia (attacks and clashes, 1998-2005)
0.812
0.838
0.828
0.832
0.905
0.912
0.878
0.880
0.765
0.788
0.780
0.781

0.763
0.808
0.748

Notes: Each model is trained on all available data preceding the out-of-sample prediction
year. Training data starts with 1991 data used to predict 1992 violence in Colombia
and 2003 data for 2004 violence in Indonesia. Out-of-sample prediction begins in 1998
in Colombia and 2008 in Indonesia. The AUC is the area under the ROC curve, a
measure of the trade-off between the true positive rate and false positive rate at different
thresholds. We report average performance over the out-of-sample years above. Past
violence measures include breakdowns of events by actors and outcomes such as deaths
and damages. Population includes population growth rates and density.

42

Figure 1: AUC Improvements from Individual Predictor Groups
(a) Any violent event (Indonesia)

(b) Any violent event (Colombia)
Time−Invariant

Time−Invariant
Distance to Mines
Remoteness
Agricultural Features
Sector Share
Geography
Religion
Ethnicity
Weather History
Commodity Volatility
Slow−Moving
Education
Demographics
Public Goods
Health Care
Time varying (Annual)
Electoral
Output
Communication
Distributional Measures
Government Finance
Natural Disasters
Weather Shocks
Commodity Shocks

Geography
Weather History
Commodity Production
Historical Traits
Remoteness
Distributional Measures
DMZ Proximity
Drug Production
Time varying (Annual)
Electoral
Government Finance
Commodity Shocks
US Military Involvement
Drug Production Shocks
Weather Shocks

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

−0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

(c) ≥ 5 violent events (Indonesia)

(d) ≥ 5 violent events (Colombia)
Time−Invariant

Time−Invariant
Remoteness
Distance to Mines
Sector Share
Agricultural Features
Religion
Geography
Ethnicity
Weather History
Commodity Volatility
Slow−Moving
Education
Public Goods
Demographics
Health Care
Time varying (Annual)
Output
Government Finance
Communication
Electoral
Distributional Measures
Natural Disasters
Weather Shocks
Commodity Shocks

Geography
Remoteness
Historical Traits
Weather History
Distributional Measures
Commodity Production
DMZ Proximity
Drug Production
Time varying (Annual)
Electoral
Government Finance
US Military Involvement
Drug Production Shocks
Commodity Shocks
Weather Shocks

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

−0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

(e) ≥ 1 S.D. increase in violent events (Indone-(f) ≥ 1 S.D. increase in violent events (Colomsia)
bia)
Time−Invariant
Time−Invariant
Remoteness
Sector Share
Ethnicity
Agricultural Features
Religion
Distance to Mines
Weather History
Geography
Commodity Volatility
Slow−Moving
Education
Demographics
Public Goods
Health Care
Time varying (Annual)
Output
Distributional Measures
Electoral
Government Finance
Communication
Natural Disasters
Weather Shocks
Commodity Shocks

Geography
Commodity Production
Weather History
Distributional Measures
Remoteness
DMZ Proximity
Historical Traits
Drug Production
Time varying (Annual)
Electoral
Government Finance
US Military Involvement
Drug Production Shocks
Commodity Shocks
Weather Shocks

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

Notes: Dots represent performance in individual years. A triangle (square) denotes the
first (last) year of the sample. The hollow circle is average performance across the years.
Appendix C.3 lists the variables in each predictor group.
43

Table 4: Predicting Across Locations

Full
Predictors
(1)

Any violent event
≥ 5 violent events
≥ 1 s.d. increase in events

Any violent event
≥ 5 violent events
≥ 1 s.d. increase in events

All Past
Violence
Measures
(2)

All Past
Violence Full Excl.
&
Past
Population Violence
(3)
(4)

0.827
0.941
0.864

Indonesia
0.807
0.817
0.935
0.938
0.844
0.850

0.810
0.915
0.855

0.840
0.931
0.834

Colombia
0.795
0.823
0.919
0.926
0.786
0.812

0.798
0.862
0.796

Notes: AUCs for a random test set of locations over time. Algorithms are trained using
data from training locations over the entire time span of the datasets. Training data
starts with 1991 data used to predict 1992 violence in Colombia and 2003 data for 2004
violence in Indonesia. The AUC is the area under the ROC curve, a measure of the tradeoff between the true positive rate and false positive rate as we vary the discrimination
threshold.

44

Figure 2: AUC Improvements from Individual Predictor Groups, CrossSectional Prediction
(a) Any violent event (Indonesia)

(b) Any violent event (Colombia)
Time−Invariant

Time−Invariant
Distance to Mines
Remoteness
Sector Share
Agricultural Features
Ethnicity
Religion
Weather History
Geography
Commodity Volatility
Slow−Moving
Education
Health Care
Demographics
Public Goods
Time varying (Annual)
Output
Communication
Distributional Measures
Electoral
Government Finance
Natural Disasters
Commodity Shocks
Weather Shocks

Weather History
Commodity Production
DMZ Proximity
Geography
Distributional Measures
Historical Traits
Drug Production
Remoteness
Time varying (Annual)
Weather Shocks
Government Finance
Commodity Shocks
US Military Involvement
Drug Production Shocks
Electoral

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

−0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

(c) ≥ 5 violent events (Indonesia)

(d) ≥ 5 violent events (Colombia)
Time−Invariant

Time−Invariant
Remoteness
Distance to Mines
Sector Share
Agricultural Features
Religion
Ethnicity
Weather History
Geography
Commodity Volatility
Slow−Moving
Education
Health Care
Public Goods
Demographics
Time varying (Annual)
Output
Distributional Measures
Communication
Electoral
Government Finance
Commodity Shocks
Natural Disasters
Weather Shocks

Commodity Production
Weather History
Distributional Measures
DMZ Proximity
Remoteness
Drug Production
Historical Traits
Geography
Time varying (Annual)
Government Finance
Drug Production Shocks
US Military Involvement
Weather Shocks
Electoral
Commodity Shocks

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

−0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

(e) ≥ 1 S.D. increase (Indonesia)

(f) ≥ 1 S.D. increase (Colombia)
Time−Invariant

Time−Invariant
Agricultural Features
Remoteness
Distance to Mines
Sector Share
Religion
Ethnicity
Weather History
Commodity Volatility
Geography
Slow−Moving
Education
Health Care
Public Goods
Demographics
Time varying (Annual)
Distributional Measures
Output
Electoral
Communication
Government Finance
Commodity Shocks
Weather Shocks
Natural Disasters

Weather History
Commodity Production
Distributional Measures
Remoteness
Geography
DMZ Proximity
Drug Production
Historical Traits
Time varying (Annual)
US Military Involvement
Drug Production Shocks
Commodity Shocks
Weather Shocks
Government Finance
Electoral

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

−0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

−0.05

0.00

0.05

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

Notes: Performance (AUC) in the single test sample is reported.
45

0.10

Appendix for Online Publication

A Additional Results

1

A.1 Other Measures of Model Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

A.2 Predicting Event Counts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

A.3 Predicting Within-Location Risk

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

A.4 Returns to More Detailed Violence Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

A.5 Predicting New Violence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

A.6 Alternative Definitions of Escalation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

18

A.7 Alternative Predictor Groupings

21

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

A.8 Alternative Colombia Conflict Data

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24

A.8.1 Comparison of U. Rosario and CERAC Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . .

24

A.8.2 Prediction Performance in U. Rosario Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

27

B Methodological Details

30

B.1 Hyper-parameter Choices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

30

B.2 Alternative Cross-Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

32

B.3 Alternative Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

35

C Data Appendix

37

C.1 Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

37

C.1.1 Administrative Levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

37

C.1.2 Violence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

37

C.1.3 Comparison to Other Violence Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

40

C.1.4 Covariates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

41

C.2 Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

49

C.2.1 Administrative Levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

49

46

C.2.2 Violence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

49

C.2.3 Comparison to Other Violence Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

50

C.2.4 Covariates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

51

C.3 Predictor Groupings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

56

C.3.1 Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

56

C.3.2 Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

71

C.4 Correlating Commodity Price and Weather Shocks to Conflict . . . . . . . .

80

A
A.1

Additional Results
Other Measures of Model Performance

In the paper, we measure performance with the AUC. However, practitioners may be interested in
other performance statistics. Here we consider choosing various discrimination thresholds, each of
which essentially picks a point on the ROC curve. In Table A.1, we report a number of alternative
performance statistics. Each of our three main predictands are reported in separate panels (a), (b),
and (c). Note that we do not change the performance metric used to choose hyper-parameters. We
merely report alternative performance metrics for the same models that are developed in the main
results to maximize AUC.
Maximal Accuracy. In the top portion of each panel, we report performance when we set a
discrimination threshold to maximize accuracy. We choose this discrimination threshold in our
cross-validation routine. We report accuracy (the proportion of all cases correctly predicted),
sensitivity (the proportion of incidents correctly predicted), and specificity (the proportion of nonincidents correctly predicted).1
Maximal Sensitivity. In the next section of each panel, we choose a different discrimination
threshold to maximize sensitivity. Of course, if we predicted violence everywhere, we would achieve
a sensitivity of 1, but that would not be a useful prediction. Instead, we choose to maximize
sensitivity subject to the constraint that we keep accuracy above 0.5 in the cross-validation process.
We observe that, if needed, these models could identify all of the places that experience violence,
but this coverage comes at a high cost in terms of accuracy and specificity (false positives).2

1

Observe that as the outcome becomes rarer, accuracy generally increases while sensitivity
plummets. This is mechanical: when an outcome is rare, it is easy to predict that it never
happens (an uninformative prediction) and achieve high accuracy.

2

A practitioner might have preferences between these two extremes and consequently choose
a point on the ROC that differs from these two. This is precisely why we use the AUC as
our benchmark.
1

Mean Squared Error. We report the mean squared error (MSE). Generally, the MSE is closely
correlated with the AUC, but the correspondence is not exact.3 Using the MSE does not meaningfully change the results of this paper.
Area Under the Precision-Recall Curve. Finally, we report the area under the PrecisionRecall Curve or the PR-AUC. This metric measures the trade-off between precision (share of true
positives in the sample of positive predictions) and recall (the true positive rate). In contexts
such as ours in which data is imbalanced and violence is relatively rare, high PR-AUC’s can be
difficult to achieve. If there are many non-events, then misclassifying a small share as positive can
have large, deleterious effects on precision. Indeed, we see for the rarest events (the > 1 standard
deviation spikes) that the PR-AUC is quite low. However, we also see that holding the predictand
fixed, comparisons of model performance based on the area under the Precision-Recall curve are
largely consistent with the comparisons based on the area under the ROC curve.

3

This is because the AUC penalizes errors in relative rankings of different locations, while
the MSE penalizes errors of prediction according to the magnitude of the difference between
actual outcomes and predicted probabilities. While these two types of errors are related,
they are distinct. However, the differences often tend to be small. Assessing model performance according to MSE only changes comparisons for borderline cases, which we do not
put much emphasis on.
2

Table A.1: Out-of-Sample Performance of Prediction Models
Indonesia (social conflict)

Colombia (attacks and clashes)

Random AdaptiveNeural
Random AdaptiveNeural
LASSO Forest Boosting Network EBMA LASSO Forest Boosting Network EBMA
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)

(a) Any violent event
EBMA Weight

0.251

0.249

0.253

0.246

0.252

0.248

0.253

0.247

0.780
0.612
0.885

0.748
0.543
0.867

Threshold maximizes accuracy
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity

0.733
0.745
0.719

0.734
0.720
0.750

0.742
0.719
0.770

0.698
0.686
0.714

0.737
0.739
0.735

0.770
0.553
0.907

0.779
0.629
0.873

0.775
0.582
0.894

Threshold maximizes sensitivity, while accuracy above 50%
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity

0.546
0.999
0.009

0.544
1.000
0.003

0.547
0.999
0.010

0.542
1.000
0.000

0.548
1.000
0.013

0.576
0.955
0.341

0.529
0.977
0.253

0.532
0.977
0.256

0.544
0.941
0.297

0.545
0.971
0.280

MSE (Brier Score)
P-R AUC
AUC
Dep. Var. Mean

0.174
0.856
0.819
0.542

0.174
0.856
0.818

0.172
0.860
0.823

0.193
0.826
0.792

0.173
0.860
0.823

0.157
0.795
0.845
0.383

0.154
0.796
0.847

0.151
0.796
0.849

0.175
0.770
0.825

0.153
0.800
0.850

0.251

0.250

0.922
0.399
0.981

0.915
0.315
0.982

(b) ≥ 5 violent events
EBMA Weight

0.250

0.249

0.252

0.250

0.250

0.249

Threshold maximizes accuracy
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity

0.919
0.535
0.974

0.929
0.593
0.978

0.930
0.601
0.978

0.908
0.565
0.957

0.928
0.607
0.975

0.920
0.342
0.984

0.923
0.374
0.984

0.924
0.387
0.984

Threshold maximizes sensitivity, while accuracy above 50%
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity

0.544
0.959
0.483

0.321
0.993
0.223

0.465
0.991
0.388

0.470
0.969
0.396

0.395
0.994
0.307

0.521
0.970
0.470

0.509
0.982
0.457

0.507
0.970
0.455

0.284
0.989
0.205

0.492
0.982
0.437

MSE (Brier Score)
P-R AUC
AUC
Dep. Var. Mean

0.062
0.765
0.940
0.127

0.055
0.773
0.935

0.054
0.784
0.942

0.073
0.664
0.910

0.055
0.782
0.941

0.059
0.625
0.914
0.099

0.058
0.612
0.911

0.058
0.604
0.910

0.066
0.543
0.886

0.057
0.621
0.915

0.250

0.250

0.947
0.014
0.998

0.948
0.000
1.000

(c) ≥ 1 s.d. increase in events
EBMA Weight

0.250

0.250

0.250

0.250

0.250

0.250

Threshold maximizes accuracy
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity

0.964
0.008
0.999

0.964
0.004
0.999

0.964
0.018
0.999

0.964
0.000
1.000

0.964
0.016
0.999

0.947
0.012
0.998

0.948
0.005
0.999

0.948
0.011
0.999

Threshold maximizes sensitivity, while accuracy above 50%
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity

0.451
0.956
0.432

0.196
0.977
0.167

0.404
0.961
0.384

0.441
0.902
0.423

0.276
0.987
0.250

0.536
0.895
0.515

0.412
0.943
0.383

0.498
0.905
0.475

0.295
0.914
0.259

0.461
0.929
0.434

MSE (Brier Score)
P-R AUC
AUC
Dep. Var. Mean

0.031
0.214
0.866
0.035

0.034
0.170
0.817

0.032
0.207
0.852

0.037
0.170
0.825

0.031
0.217
0.860

0.047
0.198
0.802
0.052

0.047
0.166
0.787

0.047
0.181
0.796

0.050
0.146
0.741

0.046
0.200
0.801

Notes: Each model is trained on all data available preceding the out-of-sample prediction year. Accuracy
is the proportion of subdistricts correctly predicted. Sensitivity is the proportion of subdistricts that
actually experience violence for which we predicted violence. Specificity is the proportion of subdistricts
that do not actually experience violence, where we accurately predict non-violence. The AUC is the
area under the ROC curve, a measure of the trade-off between the true positive rate and false positive
rate as we vary the discrimination threshold.

3

We can also train the models to maximize different performance metrics. Table A.2 reports
performance for a set of models where hyper-parameters are chosen to minimize mean squared
error rather than to maximize AUC. We see that performance is very similar, as these two accuracy
measures are closely related.

4

Table A.2: Out-of-Sample Performance of Prediction Models
Indonesia (social conflict)

Colombia (attacks and clashes)

Random AdaptiveNeural
Random AdaptiveNeural
LASSO Forest Boosting Network EBMA LASSO Forest Boosting Network EBMA
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)

(a) Any violent event
EBMA Weight

0.251

0.249

0.253

0.246

0.252

0.248

0.252

0.247

0.779
0.611
0.884

0.748
0.543
0.867

Threshold maximizes accuracy
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity

0.732
0.741
0.722

0.734
0.720
0.750

0.742
0.716
0.773

0.698
0.686
0.714

0.738
0.735
0.743

0.769
0.554
0.904

0.779
0.629
0.873

0.776
0.587
0.892

Threshold maximizes sensitivity, while accuracy above 50%
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity

0.546
0.999
0.010

0.544
1.000
0.003

0.547
0.999
0.011

0.542
1.000
0.000

0.548
0.999
0.013

0.577
0.954
0.344

0.529
0.977
0.253

0.534
0.977
0.258

0.544
0.941
0.297

0.545
0.972
0.281

MSE (Brier Score)
P-R AUC
AUC
Dep. Var. Mean

0.174
0.856
0.819
0.542

0.174
0.856
0.818

0.172
0.859
0.823

0.193
0.826
0.792

0.173
0.860
0.823

0.158
0.795
0.845
0.383

0.154
0.796
0.847

0.151
0.796
0.849

0.175
0.770
0.825

0.153
0.800
0.850

0.250

0.249

0.922
0.375
0.983

0.919
0.312
0.987

(b) ≥ 5 violent events
EBMA Weight

0.250

0.249

0.251

0.250

0.251

0.250

Threshold maximizes accuracy
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity

0.920
0.524
0.978

0.929
0.593
0.978

0.929
0.598
0.978

0.909
0.526
0.964

0.929
0.597
0.977

0.920
0.352
0.983

0.923
0.374
0.984

0.923
0.371
0.984

Threshold maximizes sensitivity, while accuracy above 50%
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity

0.554
0.950
0.495

0.321
0.993
0.223

0.460
0.990
0.383

0.400
0.987
0.313

0.387
0.995
0.297

0.526
0.970
0.476

0.509
0.982
0.457

0.529
0.973
0.480

0.170
0.991
0.078

0.462
0.984
0.403

MSE (Brier Score)
P-R AUC
AUC
Dep. Var. Mean

0.062
0.768
0.940
0.127

0.055
0.773
0.935

0.054
0.785
0.942

0.069
0.677
0.912

0.055
0.785
0.942

0.059
0.625
0.914
0.099

0.058
0.612
0.911

0.058
0.607
0.911

0.063
0.572
0.892

0.057
0.625
0.917

0.250

0.250

0.948
0.019
0.998

0.948
0.000
1.000

(c) ≥ 1 s.d. increase in events
EBMA Weight

0.250

0.250

0.250

0.250

0.250

0.250

Threshold maximizes accuracy
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity

0.964
0.012
0.999

0.964
0.004
0.999

0.964
0.014
0.999

0.964
0.000
1.000

0.964
0.010
0.999

0.948
0.008
0.999

0.948
0.005
0.999

0.949
0.011
1.000

Threshold maximizes sensitivity, while accuracy above 50%
Accuracy
Sensitivity
Specificity

0.456
0.961
0.438

0.196
0.977
0.167

0.544
0.915
0.530

0.340
0.889
0.319

0.276
0.978
0.250

0.524
0.899
0.502

0.412
0.943
0.383

0.515
0.894
0.494

0.267
0.944
0.228

0.451
0.940
0.423

MSE (Brier Score)
P-R AUC
AUC
Dep. Var. Mean

0.031
0.215
0.862
0.035

0.034
0.170
0.817

0.031
0.206
0.849

0.035
0.134
0.780

0.031
0.205
0.847

0.046
0.205
0.802
0.052

0.047
0.166
0.787

0.047
0.171
0.789

0.050
0.148
0.743

0.046
0.192
0.798

Notes: Each model is trained on all data available preceding the out-of-sample prediction year. Hyperparameters are chosen to minimize MSE. Accuracy is the proportion of subdistricts correctly predicted.
Sensitivity is the proportion of subdistricts that actually experience violence for which we predicted
violence. Specificity is the proportion of subdistricts that do not actually experience violence, where we
accurately predict non-violence. The AUC is the area under the ROC curve, a measure of the trade-off
between the true positive rate and false positive rate
5 as we vary the discrimination threshold.

A.2

Predicting Event Counts

We chose to predict indicators instead of counts in our main analyses for several reasons: they are
easy to interpret, performance statistics are also easy to interpret, and they are the most common
type of outcome predicted by the conflict literature to date. In this section, however, we examine
the predictability of event counts.4
Table A.3 reports performance of the ensemble for a number of predictor sets similar to those
that we consider in the paper. We report two statistics—the mean squared error and a deviancebased R2 . The deviance-based R2 is similar to a typical R2 but is adapted to count data.5
Column 1 reports overall performance of the full model. Our predictions explain a decent
share of the variation in counts in both countries. Column 2 shows that, as in our prediction
of indicators, violence histories perform just as well as the full set of predictors. Column 3 adds
population measures to column 2 and shows a small increase in performance.
Column 4 considers all of the predictors that do not directly measure violence. These predictors

4

Predicting event counts requires some changes to the algorithms. In the cases of Lasso
and Gradient Boosted Machines, we change the loss function to a Poisson loss function to
accommodate the count data. In theory, we could do the same for Random Forests and
Neural Networks, but it is technically more challenging since the existing R packages do
not accommodate count data. Instead, we use a Gaussian loss function. This presents a
problem for the Neural Network algorithm, as its output is linear and therefore cannot take
values below zero. While this occurs for some location-years, it is not that common, and we
deal with this by left censoring the predictions at zero. For Random Forests, this is not an
issue because the algorithm can only make predictions in the convex hull of the predictand
values in the training set. We aggregate these predictions using an ensemble model, in this
case with weights based on a Poisson distribution for the model likelihood.

5

While the typical R2 measures the share of variance that for which the fitted values account,
2
Rdev
measures the share of deviance that the fitted values explain. Specifically, this measure
2
is Rdev
=1−

Residual Deviance
.
Null Deviance

6

perform significantly worse than the full model. This drop in performance is worse than when we
are predicting indicators. Columns 5 and 6 further clarify the reason for this. Of the non-violence
predictors, the time-varying ones perform more poorly—so much so that their inclusion actually
reduces performance relative to time-invariant predictors alone.
This result is in line with what we see in the paper. In the case of predicting indicators, we
saw that some of the time-varying predictors actually decreased performance. In this case we see
much larger decreases, but that is because the outcome is unbounded and so is the size of possible
errors. Therefore, when extrapolating the effect of commodity price shocks, for example, imprecise
estimation can lead to large differences between actual and predicted violence in a few cases. And
these large errors play an outsized role in contributing to our performance statistics.
Finally, figure A.1 reports a breakdown of specific predictor groups and shows similar patterns
to those we see for the prediction of indicators. The deleterious effect of the commodity price
movements is particularly severe, where out of sample predictions yield large errors.

Figure A.1: MSE Improvements, Predicting Counts
(a) Indonesia

(b) Colombia
Time−Invariant

Time−Invariant
Distance to Mines
Sector Share
Remoteness
Religion
Ethnicity
Agricultural Features
Geography
Weather History
Commodity Volatility
Slow−Moving
Education
Demographics
Public Goods
Health Care
Time varying (Annual)
Government Finance
Communication
Electoral
Output
Distributional Measures
Natural Disasters
Weather Shocks
Commodity Shocks

Geography
Remoteness
Weather History
Distributional Measures
Historical Traits
Commodity Production
DMZ Proximity
Drug Production
Time varying (Annual)
Electoral
Government Finance
Weather Shocks
Drug Production Shocks
US Military Involvement
Commodity Shocks

−200

−50

−15

−5

−2

0

2

5

15

−5

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

−4

−3

−2

−1

0

1

2

3

4

5

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

Notes: Performance in individual years appear as small dots. The first (last) year of the
sample is colored gray in order to show the change in performance over time, or lack
thereof. The large hollow circle is the average of performance across the years. Note
that results for Indonesia are displayed on a symmetric log scale for readability.

7

Table A.3: Out-of-sample (one year ahead) performance of the ensemble
(EBMA) method, varying predictor sets
Predicting the count of violent events
All Past
Violence
& Population
(3)

Full
Predictors
(1)

All Past
Violence
Measures
(2)

11.009
0.469

6.958
0.666

(a) Indonesia
6.612
21.615
0.674
0.231

8.219
0.659

27.693
-0.011

6.356
0.519

(b) Colombia
6.372
8.065
0.538
0.396

7.437
0.484

10.153
0.253

MSE
2
Rdev

MSE
2
Rdev

7.258
0.457

Full Excl.
Past
Violence
(4)

TimeTimeInvariant
Varying
Predictors Predictors
(5)
(6)

Notes: Each model is trained on all data available preceding the out-of-sample prediction
year. Training data starts with 1991 data used to predict 1992 violence in Colombia and
2003 data for 2004 violence in Indonesia. Out-of-sample prediction begins in 1998 in
Colombia and 2008 in Indonesia. We report average performance over the out-of-sample
years above.

8

A.3

Predicting Within-Location Risk

We construct a new outcome measure that isolates within-location, over-time variation in violence.
Specifically, we measure the deviation of the number of incidents in period t from the average
number of incidents per year from the start of the panel to period t − 1. By taking deviations
from the historical mean, we remove the average difference in violence across locations, leaving
purely within-location variation. Given the continuous outcome, we evaluate performance using
the out-of-sample mean squared error (MSE) instead of the AUC.
The results, reported in Table A.4, suggest that our models struggle to predict within-location
variation in violence in both Indonesia and Colombia.6 The first row reports the variance of the
dependent variable in each context. In both Colombia and Indonesia, the MSE is only slightly
lower than the variance of the dependent variable in the test set, indicating we are able to predict
very little of this within-location variation. In both cases, the out-of-sample R2 close to zero.

6

These differences arise from the difficulty of predicting within-unit deviations and not
changes in the performance metric or the shift to counts. Appendix A.1 shows that our
baseline performance is similar using the MSE instead of the AUC, while Appendix A.2
shows that our benchmark model is able to predict a large share of the variation in incident
counts.
9

Table A.4: Predicting Demeaned Number of Violent Events

Var(Dependent Variable)
EBMA mean square error (MSE)
R2

Indonesia
(1)
8.682
8.513
0.020

Colombia
(2)
7.541
7.428
0.015

Notes: Each model is trained on all available data preceding the out-of-sample prediction
year. Training data starts with 1991 data used to predict 1992 violence in Colombia and
2003 data for 2004 violence in Indonesia. Out-of-sample prediction begins in 1998 in
Colombia and 2008 in Indonesia. We report average mean squared error over the outof-sample years above.

10

A.4

Returns to More Detailed Violence Measurement

Our benchmarking exercise found that a model using detailed violence histories performs almost
as well as one that includes additional social, economic, and political covariates. This leads us to
ask what is the payoff to using richer and more detailed violence data. More granular, accurate, or
disaggregated data could improve predictions. For example, a history of small-scale ethnic cleansing
could conceivably presage larger scale violence, whereas other kinds of inter-group hostilities might
not. If a violence measures conflates these two kinds of violence then its predictive performance
will falter. Yet, collecting and coding richer data is costly for policymakers and researchers. Hence,
it is useful to explore the returns in terms of predictive performance.
With Indonesia, which has fairly granular violence data, we can conduct this ‘experiment’ by
using more versus less granular violence data, and observe changes in performance. We report
results in Table A.5. Column 1 reports the full model with all predictors for comparison. Column 2
reports performance for the lagged dependent variables alone. Column 3 reports performance using
measurements of prior aggregate conflict from SNPK, including total number of incidents, total
deaths, total injuries, and total property damage. Column 4 further breaks down these incident
measures by violence category (e.g., identity violence, resource conflict). And finally, Column 5
includes the lagged total number of killings and indicators for mass unrest reported in Podes and
the Disaster Information Management System (DIMS).
The AUCs increase with each successive column. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the largest increase
comes from the move from columns 2 to 3. The AUCs increase more when disaggregating the
subdistrict-level violence categories than when adding additional measures of the same broad
episodes of violence as reported in Podes. This highlights the potential predictive value of having
detailed information on the nature of prior conflict in terms of the key outcomes of contestation.

11

Table A.5: Out-of-Sample (One Year Ahead) Performance of the Ensemble (EBMA) Method, Varying Data Granularity

Full
Predictors
(1)

Only
Lagged
Indicator
(2)

Add
Intensity
(3)

All
Lagged
Disaggregate Violence
Violence
Data
(4)
(5)

Indonesia, 2008-2014
Any violent event
≥ 5 violent events
≥ 1 s.d. increase in events
Predictor set:
Lag of dependent variable
Total incidents, deaths, injuries
Disaggregate by violence type
Total village-level killings reported
Podes and DIMS
Economic and social characteristics

0.823
0.941
0.860

0.687
0.808
0.527

0.785
0.934
0.833

0.804
0.937
0.846

0.805
0.939
0.845

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: Each model is trained on all data available preceding the out-of-sample prediction
year. Training data starts in 2002 in Indonesia. Out-of-sample prediction begins in 2008
in Indonesia. The AUC is the area under the ROC curve, a measure of the trade-off
between the true positive rate and false positive rate as we vary the discrimination
threshold. We report average performance over the out-of-sample years above.

12

A.5

Predicting New Violence

In this section, we restrict our attention to locations that are not experiencing violence in the
current year, and assess the models’ ability to predict violence in the following year. These seem
like the cases of violence that would be most important for policymakers to predict. Since our data
are events, rather than extended episodes of violence, there is not a natural definition of “onset”.
We therefore assess predictive performance for previously peaceful locations in two ways.
First, we use our main model forecasts and evaluate prediction performance in the set of
location-years that are not currently experiencing conflict. Table A.6 reports performance in these
locations without violence. Performance declines significantly, but predictability remains high and
correspondingly useful from a policy perspective. Figure A.2 reproduces Figure 1 and shows similar qualitative results. Note that the variability of performance increases across years, since these
events are rarer in locations that did not previously experience conflict.
Second, we train new models using only location–years with no current violence. We then
evaluate the models using location–years without violence, i.e., the same inclusion criteria for
the training sample and the same testing sample as in the first exercise. In Table A.7, we see
that, overall, performance declines relative to the prior exercise, which suggests that the models
developed with this limited training sample perform worse than our main models. This highlights
a bias variance tradeoff: the model that learns from instances with and without violence has access
to more training data and consequently lower variance. Figure A.3 again shows similar qualitative
results with respect to predictor contributions.
Together, these results point to the difficulty of predicting outbreaks of violence in previously
peaceful locations. This is consistent with our findings from other exercises showing the difficulty
of forecasting the timing of new conflict events within location.

13

Table A.6: Performance of Main Prediction Models in Locations without
Current Violence, AUC

LASSO
(1)

Random Adaptive Neural
Forest Boosting Network
(2)
(3)
(4)

Indonesia (social conflict,
0.715
0.718
0.816
0.816
0.750
0.789

EBMA
(5)

2008-2014)
0.684
0.721
0.800
0.842
0.772
0.823

Any violent event
≥ 5 violent events
≥ 1 s.d. increase in events

0.716
0.845
0.809

Any violent event
≥ 5 violent events
≥ 1 s.d. increase in events

Colombia (attacks and clashes, 1998-2005)
0.741
0.744
0.752
0.707
0.753
0.795
0.782
0.770
0.713
0.788
0.791
0.778
0.791
0.703
0.803

Notes: Each model is trained on all available data preceding the out-of-sample prediction
year. Training data starts with 1991 data used to predict 1992 violence in Colombia and
2003 data for 2004 violence in Indonesia. Out-of-sample prediction begins in 1998 in
Colombia and 2008 in Indonesia. Performance is calculated only in location-years that
have not experienced violence in the past year. The AUC is the area under the ROC
curve, a measure of the trade-off between the true positive rate and false positive rate
at different thresholds. We report average performance over the out-of-sample years.

14

Table A.7: Performance of Prediction Models Trained on Sample without Current Violence, AUC

LASSO
(1)

Random Adaptive Neural
Forest Boosting Network
(2)
(3)
(4)

Indonesia (social conflict,
0.714
0.712
0.753
0.775
0.753
0.775

EBMA
(5)

2008-2014)
0.680
0.719
0.778
0.789
0.778
0.789

Any violent event
≥ 5 violent events
≥ 1 s.d. increase in events

0.711
0.500
0.500

Any violent event
≥ 5 violent events
≥ 1 s.d. increase in events

Colombia (attacks and clashes, 1998-2005)
0.743
0.750
0.751
0.708
0.754
0.714
0.734
0.796
0.691
0.789
0.783
0.734
0.785
0.728
0.786

Notes: Each model is trained on data preceding the out-of-sample prediction year. Training data starts with 1991 data used to predict 1992 violence in Colombia and 2003 data
for 2004 violence in Indonesia. Data are restricted to location-years that are not currently experiencing violence. Out-of-sample prediction begins in 1998 in Colombia and
2008 in Indonesia. The AUC is the area under the ROC curve, a measure of the trade-off
between the true positive rate and false positive rate at different thresholds. We report
average performance over the out-of-sample years.

15

Figure A.2: AUC Improvements from Individual Predictor Groups, New
Conflicts
(a) Any violent event (Indonesia)

(b) Any violent event (Colombia)
Time−Invariant

Time−Invariant
Distance to Mines
Agricultural Features
Remoteness
Sector Share
Geography
Religion
Ethnicity
Weather History
Commodity Volatility
Slow−Moving
Education
Demographics
Health Care
Public Goods
Time varying (Annual)
Output
Electoral
Distributional Measures
Communication
Natural Disasters
Government Finance
Weather Shocks
Commodity Shocks

Geography
Weather History
Commodity Production
Historical Traits
DMZ Proximity
Remoteness
Distributional Measures
Drug Production
Time varying (Annual)
Government Finance
Commodity Shocks
Electoral
US Military Involvement
Drug Production Shocks
Weather Shocks

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

−0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

(c) ≥ 5 violent events (Indonesia)

(d) ≥ 5 violent events (Colombia)
Time−Invariant

Time−Invariant
Sector Share
Geography
Agricultural Features
Ethnicity
Distance to Mines
Remoteness
Religion
Commodity Volatility
Weather History
Slow−Moving
Education
Public Goods
Health Care
Demographics
Time varying (Annual)
Communication
Output
Electoral
Distributional Measures
Natural Disasters
Government Finance
Weather Shocks
Commodity Shocks

Remoteness
Commodity Production
Geography
Weather History
Distributional Measures
DMZ Proximity
Historical Traits
Drug Production
Time varying (Annual)
Electoral
US Military Involvement
Government Finance
Commodity Shocks
Drug Production Shocks
Weather Shocks

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

−0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

(e) ≥ 1 S.D. increase in violent events (Indone-(f) ≥ 1 S.D. increase in violent events (Colomsia)
bia)
Time−Invariant
Time−Invariant
Sector Share
Remoteness
Agricultural Features
Ethnicity
Religion
Geography
Commodity Volatility
Distance to Mines
Weather History
Slow−Moving
Education
Public Goods
Health Care
Demographics
Time varying (Annual)
Output
Communication
Distributional Measures
Electoral
Government Finance
Natural Disasters
Weather Shocks
Commodity Shocks

Geography
Commodity Production
Remoteness
Distributional Measures
Weather History
DMZ Proximity
Historical Traits
Drug Production
Time varying (Annual)
Electoral
Commodity Shocks
US Military Involvement
Drug Production Shocks
Weather Shocks
Government Finance

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

−0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

Notes: Dots represent performance in individual years. A triangle (square) denotes the
first (last) year of the sample. The hollow circle is average performance across the years.
Appendix C.3 lists the variables in each predictor group.
16

Figure A.3: AUC Improvements from Individual Predictor Groups,
Trained with New Conflicts
(a) Any violent event (Indonesia)

(b) Any violent event (Colombia)
Time−Invariant

Time−Invariant
Distance to Mines
Agricultural Features
Sector Share
Remoteness
Ethnicity
Weather History
Religion
Geography
Commodity Volatility
Slow−Moving
Education
Demographics
Health Care
Public Goods
Time varying (Annual)
Output
Electoral
Distributional Measures
Communication
Government Finance
Natural Disasters
Weather Shocks
Commodity Shocks

Geography
Weather History
Commodity Production
Historical Traits
DMZ Proximity
Distributional Measures
Remoteness
Drug Production
Time varying (Annual)
Government Finance
US Military Involvement
Electoral
Drug Production Shocks
Commodity Shocks
Weather Shocks

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

−0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

(c) ≥ 5 violent events (Indonesia)

(d) ≥ 5 violent events (Colombia)
Time−Invariant

Time−Invariant
Sector Share
Agricultural Features
Remoteness
Religion
Commodity Volatility
Ethnicity
Weather History
Distance to Mines
Geography
Slow−Moving
Education
Demographics
Health Care
Public Goods
Time varying (Annual)
Output
Electoral
Natural Disasters
Government Finance
Communication
Distributional Measures
Weather Shocks
Commodity Shocks

Commodity Production
Weather History
Remoteness
Geography
Drug Production
Distributional Measures
DMZ Proximity
Historical Traits
Time varying (Annual)
Electoral
Commodity Shocks
Government Finance
US Military Involvement
Drug Production Shocks
Weather Shocks

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

−0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

(e) ≥ 1 S.D. increase in violent events (Indone-(f) ≥ 1 S.D. increase in violent events (Colomsia)
bia)
Time−Invariant
Time−Invariant
Sector Share
Agricultural Features
Remoteness
Religion
Commodity Volatility
Ethnicity
Weather History
Distance to Mines
Geography
Slow−Moving
Education
Demographics
Health Care
Public Goods
Time varying (Annual)
Output
Electoral
Natural Disasters
Government Finance
Communication
Distributional Measures
Weather Shocks
Commodity Shocks

Commodity Production
Geography
Weather History
Remoteness
Distributional Measures
Drug Production
DMZ Proximity
Historical Traits
Time varying (Annual)
Electoral
US Military Involvement
Weather Shocks
Drug Production Shocks
Government Finance
Commodity Shocks

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

−0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

Notes: Dots represent performance in individual years. A triangle (square) denotes the
first (last) year of the sample. The hollow circle is average performance across the years.
Appendix C.3 lists the variables in each predictor group.
17

A.6

Alternative Definitions of Escalation

Our decision to predict 1 standard deviation (s.d.) increases in the number of violent events is
somewhat arbitrary. Here we consider alternative definitions of our escalation variable. First,
we consider a 0.5 s.d. increase in the following year. Then, we consider a 0.5 s.d. and a 1 s.d.
increase in the following two years. The longer horizon is meant to take into account that some
run-ups in violence can occur over longer horizons. We stop at a two-year horizon, because as we
measure conflict further into the future, we lose observations for both training and testing, since (i)
observations require more data to calculate the given outcome (i.e., we cannot use the last year of
data alone); (ii) for a true out-of-sample test, we must skip years that overlap between the training
and testing sample (i.e., we cannot use the first year of test data); and (iii) outcomes become
increasingly correlated, e.g., the two-year increase in violence from 2008 to 2010 is correlated with
the two-year increase from 2009 to 2011.
Table A.8 reports the performance of models predicting these alternative escalation outcomes.
Note that that each of these events is a subset of our baseline, so they are more likely to occur.
That is, if a location experiences a greater 1 s.d. increase in violence over one year, that location
also experiences a greater than 0.5 standard deviation over the next two years. In Indonesia, the
rate of 0.5 s.d. escalations over one and two years is is 0.04 and 0.08 respectively, and the rate of 1
s.d. increases over two years is 0.08. In Colombia, the rate of 0.5 s.d. escalations over one and two
years is 0.12 and 0.19 respectively, and the rate of 1 s.d. increases over two years is 0.12. Recall
that the rates of our main escalation indicators (a one standard deviation increase over one year)
are 0.03 in Indonesia and 0.04 in Colombia.
We see that we are able to predict smaller escalations and longer term escalations with a
reasonable degree of accuracy. Performance is somewhat better when we move to a two-year
horizon for an increase of 1 standard deviation, possibly due to an increase in the frequency of
the outcome. Smaller one-year escalations also appear to be harder to predict over one and two
year horizons. This may be because less extreme spikes in violence happen for more idiosyncratic
reasons, and the outcome measure is noisier. Figure A.4 reports a version of Figure 1 where we
see that the added value of the predictor groups is relatively unchanged when we predict different
measures of escalation.

18

Table A.8: Out-of-Sample Performance of Prediction Models for Alternative Measures of Escalation, AUC

LASSO
(1)

Random Adaptive Neural
Forest Boosting Network
(2)
(3)
(4)

EBMA
(5)

≥
≥
≥
≥

1 s.d. increase in events
0.5 s.d. increase in events
1 s.d. increase in events over 2 years
0.5 s.d. increase in events over 2 years

0.866
0.786
0.854
0.784

0.817
0.768
0.840
0.763

Indonesia
0.852
0.785
0.852
0.778

0.825
0.718
0.821
0.712

0.860
0.789
0.862
0.785

≥
≥
≥
≥

1 s.d. increase in events
0.5 s.d. increase in events
1 s.d. increase in events over 2 years
0.5 s.d. increase in events over 2 years

0.802
0.761
0.800
0.743

0.787
0.750
0.785
0.739

Colombia
0.796
0.760
0.800
0.758

0.741
0.708
0.769
0.693

0.801
0.762
0.813
0.759

Notes: Prediction models are the same as in Table 1. The sample for the prediction
evaluation is restricted to locations without any conflict in the previous year. Each model
is trained on all available data preceding the out-of-sample prediction year. Training data
starts in 1992 in Colombia and 2004 in Indonesia. Out-of-sample prediction begins in
1998 in Colombia and 2008 in Indonesia. The AUC is the area under the ROC curve, a
measure of the trade-off between the true positive rate and false positive rate at different
thresholds. We report average performance over the out-of-sample years.

19

Figure A.4: AUC Improvements from Individual Predictor Groups, Alternative Escalations
(a) ≥ .5 S.D. increase in violent events (In-(b)≥ .5 S.D. increase in violent events (Colomdonesia)
bia)
Time−Invariant
Time−Invariant
Remoteness
Sector Share
Agricultural Features
Distance to Mines
Ethnicity
Religion
Weather History
Geography
Commodity Volatility
Slow−Moving
Education
Demographics
Public Goods
Health Care
Time varying (Annual)
Output
Distributional Measures
Electoral
Government Finance
Communication
Natural Disasters
Weather Shocks
Commodity Shocks

Geography
Weather History
Commodity Production
Historical Traits
Remoteness
Distributional Measures
DMZ Proximity
Drug Production
Time varying (Annual)
US Military Involvement
Government Finance
Electoral
Commodity Shocks
Drug Production Shocks
Weather Shocks

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

−0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

(c) ≥ 1 S.D. increase in next 2 years (Indone-(d) ≥ 1 S.D. increase in next 2 years (Colomsia)
bia)
Time−Invariant
Time−Invariant
Remoteness
Sector Share
Agricultural Features
Ethnicity
Religion
Distance to Mines
Weather History
Geography
Commodity Volatility
Slow−Moving
Education
Public Goods
Demographics
Health Care
Time varying (Annual)
Output
Distributional Measures
Government Finance
Electoral
Communication
Natural Disasters
Commodity Shocks
Weather Shocks

Geography
Weather History
Remoteness
Distributional Measures
Commodity Production
Historical Traits
DMZ Proximity
Drug Production
Time varying (Annual)
Electoral
US Military Involvement
Government Finance
Drug Production Shocks
Commodity Shocks
Weather Shocks

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

−0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

(e) ≥ .5 S.D. increase in next 2 years (Indone-(f) ≥ .5 S.D. increase in next 2 years (Colomsia)
bia)
Time−Invariant
Time−Invariant
Remoteness
Sector Share
Agricultural Features
Distance to Mines
Ethnicity
Religion
Weather History
Geography
Commodity Volatility
Slow−Moving
Education
Demographics
Public Goods
Health Care
Time varying (Annual)
Output
Distributional Measures
Electoral
Government Finance
Communication
Natural Disasters
Weather Shocks
Commodity Shocks

Geography
Weather History
Commodity Production
Historical Traits
Remoteness
Distributional Measures
DMZ Proximity
Drug Production
Time varying (Annual)
Commodity Shocks
Government Finance
Electoral
Drug Production Shocks
US Military Involvement
Weather Shocks

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

Notes: Dots represent performance in individual years. A triangle (square) denotes the
first (last) year of the sample. The hollow circle is average performance across the years.
Appendix C.3 lists the variables in each predictor group.
20

A.7

Alternative Predictor Groupings

In this section, we consider alternative groupings of our shock predictors. In our main analysis, we
find that annual, time-varying predictors generally do not improve our ability to forecast year-ahead
violence. Here we consider whether alternative groupings of these shocks affects this conclusion.
Taking as an example a coffee shock, causal studies of conflict have typically focused on the
interaction between coffee cultivation (the weight) in some pre-determined time period and timevarying coffee prices (the price), while accounting for the direct effects of both prices and weight. In
our main analysis, our ‘shock’ predictor groups include the interaction term and the time-varying
price, while the time-invariant production measure or weight instead enters as part of a separate
predictor group (see Appendix C.3).
Since our machine learning methods can leverage various interactions between variables, it is
possible that reorganizing our shock groupings could change our conclusions about their predictability. To explore this, in Figure A.5, we consider an alternative grouping of the variables. Component
variables in “shocks” include a time-invariant weight that varies across locations, a time-varying
price that varies over time (either the international price of a commodity or U.S. military spending
in the case of the military aid shock in Colombia), and their interaction. For each such “shock” we
separately look at the contributions of predictor groups consisting of various components. First,
we construct groups consisting only of time invariant weights or only of the annual, time-varying
prices. Then, we look at the time-varying prices along with the interaction term (without incorporating the weight component). Finally, we look at the contribution of all three components – the
weight, international prices and their interaction.
In Colombia and Indonesia, the commodity variables tell a similar story. On their own, the
time-invariant, commodity production measures (the weights) are often predictive of violence and
offer substantial improvement over the baseline, population-based model (as we saw in Figure 1 with
commodity production predictors in Columbia and distance to mines and agricultural predictors in
Indonesia). Unsurprisingly, annual international prices alone do not help to predict one-year-ahead
violence across various locations. Adding in the interaction term along with prices (without also
including the production weight) also does not improve performance. In contrast, adding in the full
group of predictors—weights, prices, and interactions—does have a positive effect on performance.

21

However, the results above suggest that much of the predictive power from incorporating all three
components stems from the time-invariant production weights. We conclude that the takeaways
from our baseline approach in Figure 1 remain largely insensitive to alternative permutations of
predictor groups. For the year-ahead predictions, the time-invariant component of these shocks
contribute more to improvements in predictive performance.

22

76

Figure A.5: AUC Improvements from Individual Predictor Groups
(a) Any violent event (Indonesia)

(b) Any violent event (Colombia)

Time−Invariant
Distance to Mines
Remoteness
Agricultural Features
Sector Share
Geography
Religion
Ethnicity
Weather History
Commodity Volatility
Slow−Moving
Education
Demographics
Public Goods
Health Care
Time varying (Annual)
Electoral
Output
Communication
Distributional Measures
Government Finance
Natural Disasters
Weather Shocks
Shock Breakdown
Commodity Price Weights
Comm Prices
Commodity Shocks
Comm Prices, Wts, and Ints

Time−Invariant
Geography
Weather History
Historical Traits
Remoteness
Distributional Measures
DMZ Proximity
Time varying (Annual)
Electoral
Government Finance
Weather Shocks
Shock Breakdown
Commodity Production (Wts)
Comm. Prices
Comm. Prices and Ints
Comm Prices, Wts, and Ints
Base Presence
US Mil. Spending (No Int)
US Mil. Spend and Ints
US Mil. Spend, Wts, and Ints
Drug Production Wts
Drug Prices
Drug Prices and Ints
Drug Prices, Wts and Ints

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

−0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

(c) ≥ 5 violent events (Indonesia)

(d) ≥ 5 violent events (Colombia)

Time−Invariant
Remoteness
Distance to Mines
Sector Share
Agricultural Features
Religion
Geography
Ethnicity
Weather History
Commodity Volatility
Slow−Moving
Education
Public Goods
Demographics
Health Care
Time varying (Annual)
Output
Government Finance
Communication
Electoral
Distributional Measures
Natural Disasters
Weather Shocks
Shock Breakdown
Commodity Price Weights
Comm Prices
Commodity Shocks
Comm Prices, Wts, and Ints

Time−Invariant
Geography
Remoteness
Historical Traits
Weather History
Distributional Measures
DMZ Proximity
Time varying (Annual)
Electoral
Government Finance
Weather Shocks
Shock Breakdown
Commodity Production (Wts)
Comm. Prices
Comm. Prices and Ints
Comm Prices, Wts, and Ints
Base Presence
US Mil. Spending (No Int)
US Mil. Spend and Ints
US Mil. Spend, Wts, and Ints
Drug Production Wts
Drug Prices
Drug Prices and Ints
Drug Prices, Wts and Ints

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

−0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

(e) ≥ 1 S.D. increase in violent events (Indone-(f) ≥ 1 S.D. increase in violent events (Colomsia)
bia)
Time−Invariant
Remoteness
Sector Share
Ethnicity
Agricultural Features
Religion
Distance to Mines
Weather History
Geography
Commodity Volatility
Slow−Moving
Education
Demographics
Public Goods
Health Care
Time varying (Annual)
Output
Distributional Measures
Electoral
Government Finance
Communication
Natural Disasters
Weather Shocks
Shock Breakdown
Commodity Price Weights
Comm Prices
Commodity Shocks
Comm Prices, Wts, and Ints

Time−Invariant
Geography
Weather History
Distributional Measures
Remoteness
DMZ Proximity
Historical Traits
Time varying (Annual)
Electoral
Government Finance
Weather Shocks
Shock Breakdown
Commodity Production (Wts)
Comm. Prices
Comm. Prices and Ints
Comm Prices, Wts, and Ints
Base Presence
US Mil. Spending (No Int)
US Mil. Spend and Ints
US Mil. Spend, Wts, and Ints
Drug Production Wts
Drug Prices
Drug Prices and Ints
Drug Prices, Wts and Ints

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

−0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

Notes: Dots represent performance in individual years. A triangle (square) denotes the
first (last) year of the sample. The hollow circle is average performance across the years.
Appendix C.3 lists the variables in each predictor group.
23

A.8

Alternative Colombia Conflict Data

An alternative dataset on violence in Colombia from U. Rosario has become available in recent
years, covering violent events from 1995 to 2014. In theory, the effort is meant to measure the same
types of conflicts as the CERAC dataset. However, due to some classification differences, and the
inclusion of some additional categories of violence detailed in the Appendix A.8.1, we do not view
the data as a direct extension but rather as an alternative dataset. Nevertheless, as a robustness
check, we have extended our predictor dataset and our violence dataset, using U.Rosario from 2006
to 2014.

A.8.1

Comparison of U. Rosario and CERAC Datasets

In general, the U. Rosario dataset follows similar protocols for including violent events as the
CERAC dataset. However, the two datasets are not perfectly aligned due to at least two coding
differences. The U. Rosario dataset appears to include an additional set of political events, which
are defined as events targeted toward political actors. Thus, it includes a set of events as attacks
that encompass executions, disappearances, personal attacks and kidnapping of political individuals. The CERAC dataset, in contrast, typically did not include events like kidnappings, unless it
coincided with other war-related actions that led to the classification of an event as an attack. In
addition, the two datasets treat the coding of clashes and attacks differently in the case of complex
events that involve a sequence of events involving both attack and clash elements. In particular,
when the government military is involved, if there is an event in which the government takes a
unilateral action, and this is followed by an exchange of fire with the armed groups, this would be
coded as a government attack followed by a clash under CERAC. However, the U. Rosario dataset
would instead categorize the event as a clash.
To examine and account for possible discrepancies on the inclusion of events, we construct
two series for the number of incidents in the U. Rosario dataset: one that accounts for political
events (extension 1) and another that excludes them (extension 2). Figure A.6 shows that both U.
Rosario series follow similar trends as CERAC, rising and peaking at 2002, and falling thereafter.
When including political events (extension 1), the number of U. Rosario events exceeds the number
of CERAC events, consistent with the more liberal inclusion criteria of events targeting political

24

actors. When political events are removed (extension 2), the CERAC data slightly exceeds the U.
Rosario events, consistent with the more liberal coding of complex events under CERAC. Figure
A.7 demonstrates similar patterns for our three municipality-level outcome measures: any violent
events, ≥ 5 violent events, ≥ 1 s.d. increase in violent events. Overall, the trend similarities in the
two data sources suggest that the two data sources provide a similar account of conflict dynamics
in Colombia over this period.

Figure A.6: Comparing CERAC and U. Rosario Datasets
Number of Violent Events by Year
(a) including political violence (ext. 1)

2500
2000
1500
1000
0

0

500

1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

(b) excluding political violence (ext. 2)

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

1995

25

2000

2005

2010

2015

Figure A.7: Comparing CERAC and U. Rosario Datasets
Share of municipalities reporting at least one violent event
(a) including political violence (ext. 1)

0.0

0.0

0.1

0.1

0.2

0.2

0.3

0.3

0.4

0.4

0.5

0.5

(b) excluding political violence (ext. 2)

1995

2000

2005

2010

1995

2000

2005

2010

Share of municipalities reporting five or more violent events

0.00

0.00

0.05

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.10

0.20

0.15

(d) excluding political violence (ext. 2)

0.25

(c) including political violence (ext. 1)

1995

2000

2005

2010

1995

2000

2005

2010

Share of municipalities with ≥ 1 s.d. increase in violent events
(f) excluding political events (ext. 2)
0.15
0.00

0.00

0.05

0.05

0.10

0.10

0.15

0.20

(e) including political violence (ext. 1)

1995

2000

2005

2010

1995

26

2000

2005

2010

A.8.2

Prediction Performance in U. Rosario Data

Using the now extended data, we construct the same indicators that we use in our main analysis—
indicators of any event, more than 5 events, and a 1 standard deviation increase in violent events.
We extend our main dataset by using the U. Rosario measures from 2006 onward. We do this for
two different sets of events—event counts including political violence and event counts excluding
political violence—and generate predictions all the way out to 2014. As in the original analysis
with CERAC, we begin training in 1992 and testing in 1998. However, because we are interested
in the potential for a longer panel to generate better models, we use all available data for training
the model, regardless of the break in the violence series. For example, for our 2008 prediction, the
models are trained using all observation-years from 1992 to 2007, including, e.g., municipality–years
from 1997 in which violence is measured by CERAC and municipality-years from 2006 in which
violence is measured by U. Rosario.
Table A.9 reports average performance statistics. We see that patterns are similar to those
for our main violence prediction measure and sample as reported in Table 1. It appears that
performance does improve when we extend the series, in particular for the series that excludes
political events. The longer data series may decrease model variance, generating better out-ofsample predictions as time goes on. It is also possible that as violence became rarer, it became
more concentrated in the locations where we would predict the most risk. Indeed, many of the
important predictors for the shorter CERAC series remain important with the extended series
combining CERAC and U. Rosario (see Figure A.8). Overall, prediction with this extended series
delivers broadly similar findings as our main predictions in the paper with a single, shorter data
series.

27

Table A.9: Extending the Colombia Analysis to 2014 by Combining U.
Rosario and CERAC Data

Random Adaptive Neural
Forest Boosting Network
(2)
(3)
(4)

LASSO
(1)

EBMA
(5)

Any violent event
≥ 5 violent events
≥ 1 s.d. increase in events

0.863
0.925
0.827

U. Rosario Incl. Political Violence
0.862
0.867
0.847
0.867
0.918
0.922
0.905
0.924
0.831
0.839
0.772
0.839

Any violent event
≥ 5 violent events
≥ 1 s.d. increase in events

0.872
0.932
0.828

U. Rosario Excl. Political Violence
0.871
0.875
0.857
0.877
0.924
0.929
0.909
0.932
0.825
0.842
0.793
0.840

Notes: Each model is trained on all available data preceding the out-of-sample prediction
year. Training data starts in 1992 in Colombia. Out-of-sample prediction begins in
1998. The AUC is the area under the ROC curve, a measure of the trade-off between
the true positive rate and false positive rate at different thresholds. We report average
performance over the out-of-sample years.

28

Figure A.8: AUC Improvements from Individual Predictor Groups,
Colombia Extensions
Any Violent Event
(a) including political violence
(b) excluding political violence
Time−Invariant

Time−Invariant

Geography

Geography

Historical Traits

Historical Traits

Weather History

Weather History

Distributional Measures

Remoteness

Commodity Production

Distributional Measures

Remoteness

Commodity Production

DMZ Proximity

DMZ Proximity

Drug Production

Drug Production

Time varying (Annual)

Time varying (Annual)

Electoral

Electoral

Government Finance

Government Finance

Drug Production Shocks

Weather Shocks

US Military Involvement

Drug Production Shocks

Weather Shocks

US Military Involvement

Commodity Shocks

Commodity Shocks

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

−0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

≥ 5 Violent Events
(c) including political violence
(d) excluding political violence
Time−Invariant

Time−Invariant

Geography

Geography

Historical Traits

Historical Traits

Remoteness

Remoteness

Weather History

Distributional Measures

Distributional Measures

Weather History

Commodity Production

Commodity Production

DMZ Proximity

DMZ Proximity

Drug Production

Drug Production

Time varying (Annual)

Time varying (Annual)

Electoral

Electoral

US Military Involvement

Government Finance

Government Finance

US Military Involvement

Drug Production Shocks

Drug Production Shocks

Weather Shocks

Weather Shocks

Commodity Shocks

Commodity Shocks

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

−0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

≥ 1 s.d. Increase in Violent Events
(e) including political violence
(f) excluding political violence
Time−Invariant

Time−Invariant

Geography

Geography

Weather History

Historical Traits

Historical Traits

Remoteness

Distributional Measures

Weather History

Remoteness

Distributional Measures

DMZ Proximity

Commodity Production

Commodity Production

Drug Production

Drug Production

DMZ Proximity

Time varying (Annual)

Time varying (Annual)

Electoral

Electoral

US Military Involvement

US Military Involvement

Drug Production Shocks

Weather Shocks

Government Finance

Drug Production Shocks

Weather Shocks

Government Finance

Commodity Shocks

Commodity Shocks

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

0.10

−0.10

−0.05

0.00

0.05

0.10

Performance improvement over population (AUC)

Notes: Colombia Extension 1 includes political events in the URosario dataset. Extension 2 ignores these political events. Dots represent performance in individual years. A
triangle (square) denotes the first (last) year of the sample. The hollow circle is average
performance across the years. Appendix C.3 lists the variables in each predictor group.
29

B

Methodological Details

B.1

Hyper-parameter Choices

Each of the machine learning methods that we use involves a number of hyper-parameter choices.
In general, the hyper-parameters govern the degree of flexibility afforded to each algorithm. The
optimal choice of these parameters balances the models’ ability to uncover complex relationships
against the risk that the algorithm over-fits to noise in the data. We choose these parameters using
a mixture of rules-of-thumb and 5-fold cross validation. In this section, we detail these choices.
LASSO. We implement a logistic LASSO where predictors are standardized to have a mean of
zero and unit variance before they are fed into the fitting algorithm. LASSO and ridge regression
are two closely-related penalized regression techniques. While LASSO penalizes the sum of the
absolute value of the regression coefficients, ridge regression penalizes the sum of squares. We
follow best practices as in Blair et al. (2017) and use a weighted average of the two penalties, where
the weight for the LASSO penalty is α = 0.95 and the weight on the ridge penalty is 1 − α.
For each country in each year of estimation, we find the optimal penalty parameter λ by
searching over a grid of candidate values and testing the penalties using 5-fold cross validation.
The grid includes 140 values from 1 down to 1.8 × 10−8 . The grid was chosen to make sure that
optimally chosen values would be interior. We repeat this process 10 times, and take the average
optimal value.
Random Forests. These are collections of many trees which are fit to random subsets of the data
and then are averaged together. The underlying logic is that the individual trees may be overfit to
their respective dataset, but since each tree is fit using a different set of predictors, the overfitting
averages out over the entire forest. We choose mean-squared error as the loss function for the
random forest. Beyond the choice of the loss function, there are three important hyper-parameters
to choose.
First, we must specify a rule governing how large trees can be. We could specify the minimum
number of observations per terminal node or the maximum number of terminal nodes. In general,
larger trees allow for more complexity but also increase the risk of overfitting (though this risk is

30

mitigated by averaging over the entire forest). We limit our trees to 60 terminal nodes, as it is
within the range suggested by Hastie et al. (2001), and we find little improvement in performance
past this number.
Second, we choose the number of trees in the forest. Since each tree is independent, additional
trees simply reduce variance of estimates and do not add to bias. As a result, more trees are always
better. At the same time, performance gains from additional trees generally diminish quickly,
while the computing time costs of fitting individual trees does not. In experimentation using crossvalidation, we observed little increase in performance as the number of trees exceeds 100. Therefore,
we choose to fit 100 trees in each forest.
Finally, we must choose the number of covariates to be considered at each branch in the trees.
We follow the rule-of-thumb of using one-third of the potential covariates at each split (Hastie et
al., 2001).
Gradient Boosted Machines. These are comprised of decision trees that are fit sequentially to
the residual variation in the predictand that was not predicted by previous trees. Unlike random
forests which leverage many overfit trees, gradient boosted machines are meant to learn slowly,
with each tree explaining a small amount of additional variation. Therefore, the key parameter is
the shrinkage parameter which limits the extent to which each tree can contribute to the machine’s
overall prediction. Best practice sets these shrinkage parameters as low as possible. We choose a
shrinkage parameter λ = 0.1.
As for random forests, GBM requires the implementer to specify the complexity of trees and
the number of trees in the ensemble. We specify the number of terminal nodes as 8 in each tree,
a standard parameter value for these models (Hastie et al., 2001). The number of trees to include
in the model is the key hyper-parameter that drives the overfitting versus complexity trade-off. If
there are too few trees, the predictions will be a very simple function of the predictors, whereas
if there are too many trees, the later trees will be fit to noise generated by idiosyncrasies of the
training sample. To manage this tradeoff, we choose the number of trees by 5-fold cross validation
over a grid of candidate sizes. We choose candidate values between 5 and 150. Though trial and
error, we found that the optimal values are within this range. We average the results of 10 such
trials to get an optimal number of trees in each year.

31

Neural Networks. These are built from weighted combinations of features, and an activation
function through which these combinations are passed. We use a single hidden layer neural network,
and the network is trained via back-propagation. Our neural networks use a sigmoid activation
function.
The major parameter governing complexity is the number of nodes to allow in this single layer.
We choose the number of nodes by searching over a grid of values and employing 5-fold cross
validation to test each candidate number of nodes. As with the other algorithms, we repeat this
process 10 times, and choose the average parameter.
Since each predictor has a weight for each node in the hidden layer, training of the neural
network can involve the computation of thousands of parameters. The computation costs are
magnified during the grid search process. To alleviate this pressure, we preprocess the data by
standardizing the predictors and calculating principal components of the predictor set. We use
these principal components as predictors. We use 30 principal components in Indonesia and 20
in Colombia. This rotation of the predictor space dramatically increases speed without throwing
away much important variation. We also test different neural net architectures that do not require
this pre-processing of the data, described in Appendix B.3 below.
Our Ensemble Bayesian Model Average is computed by generating a 5-fold cross-validation
set of probabilistic predictions for each algorithm using the parameters chosen above. We take these
predictions and calculate posterior likelihoods that each model is correct given their predictions
and the observed levels of violence. These likelihoods, when normalized to sum to 1 give us weights
for our model average. We repeat this process 10 times to get ten sets of weights and average them
to aggregate our predictions.

B.2

Alternative Cross-Validation

We choose our hyper-parameters by 5-fold cross-validation, which introduces some randomness into
our analysis. With a small sample, we might worry that idiosyncratic splits of data might generate
extreme values of hyper-parameters that do not produce strong performance out of sample. For
this reason, we repeat the cross-validation procedure 10 times and take the average optimal hyper-

32

parameters, rounding to the nearest integer where hyper-parameters need to be discrete.
We also compare our baseline models’ performance to models trained using hyper-parameters
from a single cross-validation run in Table B.1. We see that there are not appreciable returns to
our approach, as models using hyper-parameters from a single CV run do just about as well, on
average. At the same time, the computational costs of our approach are minimal, so we maintain
our conservative strategy of averaging over 10 runs throughout the paper.

33

Table B.1: Performance with Hyper-Parameters chosen from 1 CV run,
AUC

LASSO
(1)

Random Adaptive Neural
Forest Boosting Network
(2)
(3)
(4)

EBMA
(5)

(a) Any violent event
Indonesia
10 CV Runs (Baseline)
1 CV Run

0.819
0.818

0.818
0.818

0.823
0.823
Colombia

0.792
0.786

0.823
0.822

10 CV Runs (Baseline)
1 CV Run

0.845
0.845

0.847
0.847

0.849
0.849

0.825
0.823

0.850
0.850

(b) ≥ 5 violent events
Indonesia
10 CV Runs (Baseline)
1 CV Run

0.940
0.940

0.935
0.935

0.942
0.942
Colombia

0.910
0.910

0.941
0.940

10 CV Runs (Baseline)
1 CV Run

0.914
0.914

0.911
0.911

0.910
0.911

0.886
0.880

0.915
0.916

(c) ≥ 1 s.d. increase in events
Indonesia
10 CV Runs (Baseline)
1 CV Run

0.866
0.865

0.817
0.817

0.852
0.853
Colombia

0.825
0.807

0.860
0.862

10 CV Runs (Baseline)
1 CV Run

0.802
0.801

0.787
0.787

0.796
0.796

0.741
0.732

0.801
0.800

Notes: Each model is trained on all available data preceding the out-of-sample prediction
year. Training data starts in 1992 in Colombia and 2004 in Indonesia. Out-of-sample
prediction begins in 1998 in Colombia and 2008 in Indonesia. The AUC is the area
under the ROC curve, a measure of the trade-off between the true positive rate and false
positive rate at different thresholds. We report average performance over the out-ofsample years.

34

B.3

Alternative Neural Networks

Neural networks are notoriously difficult to train as there are many choices about network structure
that the researcher must make—including number of nodes and number of layers—as well as choices
about regularization parameters to prevent over-fitting of weights. These choices are generally made
using a combination of rules of thumb and cross-validation. In this section, we explore alternative
neural network constructions and compare their performance to our baseline. Our goal is not
to conduct an exhaustive search across all potential neural net architectures in order to identify
one that strictly dominates the others. Rather, we aim to test a more limited number of equally
plausible alternatives to explore whether other approaches are likely to generate better performance
than our baseline.
With data sets such as ours, which are relatively small for the machine learning literature,
overfitting is a chief concern. As a result, we opt to reduce the dimension of our predictor space using
principal components—20 in Colombia and 30 in Indonesia—so that the neural networks will have
fewer weights to optimize. In column 2 of B.2 we eliminate the dimension reduction by principal
components. We see a drop in performance across the board. Column 3 adds further flexibility by
eliminating regularization for the weight-fitting objective function. In this case, performance drops
to about 0.5. These overly flexible models perform no better than would be expected from random
chance. In column 4, we allow for more complex interactions by adding an additional hidden layer.
This added flexibility still underperforms our benchmark model.
Finally, in column 5, we fit a model using the Keras package in R. Keras is a wrapper for
the TensorFlow platform, developed by Google AI, which has become widely used in recent years.
With this package, we fit a network that consists of two fully connected layers and two dropout
layers. The dropout layers randomly set a subset of hidden nodes to zero during the training
stage. This procedure guards against overfitting, since the set of active nodes changes stochastically
as fitting occurs. This is a substitute for a direct regularization term in the objective function
(Srivastava et al., 2014). We see that performance is markedly worse than for our main neural
network specification. This table is by no means exhaustive, but it does offer some justification for
the conservative approach we take in our baseline model. In general, our environment is not ideal
for the deployment of neural networks whose strength comes from their ability to identify complex

35

patterns in very large datasets.

Table B.2: Alternative Neural Networks, AUC
Baseline
PC Step
1 layer
nodes by CV
0 Regularization
(1)

No PC Step
1 layer
7 nodes
0.15 Regularization
(2)

No PC Step
1 layer
7 nodes
0 Regularization
(3)

No PC Step
2 layers
10,5 nodes
0 Regularization
(4)

No PC Step
2 layers
256, 128
nodes
.5, .3 dropout
(5)

Any violent event
≥ 5 violent events
≥ 1 s.d. increase in events

0.792
0.910
0.825

0.658
0.720
0.697

Indonesia
0.636
0.500
0.500

0.615
0.713
0.656

0.516
0.655
0.682

Any violent event
≥ 5 violent events
≥ 1 s.d. increase in events

0.825
0.886
0.741

0.646
0.660
0.596

Colombia
0.620
0.500
0.500

0.662
0.662
0.598

0.502
0.524
0.519

Notes: Each model is trained on all available data preceding the out-of-sample prediction
year. Training data starts in 1992 in Colombia and 2004 in Indonesia. Out-of-sample
prediction begins in 1998 in Colombia and 2008 in Indonesia. The AUC is the area
under the ROC curve, a measure of the trade-off between the true positive rate and false
positive rate at different thresholds. We report average performance over the out-ofsample years.

36

C

Data Appendix

C.1
C.1.1

Indonesia
Administrative Levels

Indonesia is divided into four tiers of government. In 2014, 34 provinces were divided into 514
districts composed of 7,094 subdistricts with more than 80,000 villages. The number of districts and
the number of subdistricts have ballooned over time. Concurrent with the wave of decentralization,
the Indonesia government created many new districts through a process of redistricting known
colloquially as pemekaran or blossoming. After remaining steady from 1980 to 1998, the number
of new districts ballooned from 302 in 1999 to 514 in 2014. Subdistricts have also split (and a
small few amalgamated) over time. Despite the increase in the number of districts, the number of
subdistricts per district has increased. The number of villages has remained relatively more steady
and thus the number of villages per-district and per-subdistrict decline over time.
The unit of analysis in this paper is the 2000 subdistrict. Since subdistricts have increased over
time, we map them back to the larger 2000 borders. The SNPK and most covariate data (unless
otherwise specified) is recorded at units of analysis smaller than the 2000 subdistrict level, enabling
us to map these data onto the 2000 boundaries.

C.1.2

Violence

The conflict data comes from the Indonesian National Violence Monitoring System (known by
its Indonesian acronym SNPK). The data are reported at the 2011 subdistrict level and include
incident dates. Subdistrict codes are non-missing in 84% of cases. We aggregate incidents to the
2000 subdistrict borders in each year. Our main conflict measures are binary indicators for any
conflict in a given subdistrict–year. Table C.1 presents the violence definitions in the SNPK.
Table C.2 reports the rates at which each of these indicators occur. While around half of
subdistricts experience some conflict in a given year, only around 12% experience more than five
incidents, and even fewer experience a large increase in the number of events relative to the prior
year. Finally, Figure C.2 reports the distribution of conflict counts in subdistrict-years with any

37

violence. We see tremendous right skew, motivating our approach of predicting subdistricts with
five or more incidents of violence.

Table C.1: Violence Categories in the SNPK
Resource Conflict

Violence triggered by resource disputes (land, mining, access to employment, salary, pollution, etc.).

Governance Conflict

Violence is triggered by government policies or programs (public services,
corruption, subsidy, region splitting, etc).

Popular Justice Con- Violence perpetrated to respond to/punish actual or perceived wrong
flict
(group violence only).
Elections and Ap- Conflict Violence triggered by electoral competition or bureaucratic appointment Conflict
pointments.
Separatist Conflict

Identity-Based
flict

Violence triggered by efforts to secede from the Unitary State of the
Republic of Indonesia (NKRI).

Con- Violence triggered by group identity (religion, ethnicity, tribe, etc).

Other Conflict

Violence triggered by other issue.

Violence During Law
Enforcement

Violent action taken by members of formal security forces to perform lawenforcement functions (includes use of violence mandated by law as well
as violence that exceeds mandate for example torture or extrajudicialshooting).

Violent Crime

Criminal violence not triggered by prior dispute or directed towards specific targets.

Domestic Violence

Physical violence perpetrated by family member(s) against other family
member(s) living under one roof/same house including against domestic
workers and violence between cohabiting couples.

38

3000
2000
0

1000

Violent Incidents

4000

5000

Figure C.1: Violence by Category, Indonesia

2006

2008
Separatist
Identity
Election

2010
Governance
Resource
Popular Justice

2012

2014

Police
Other

Notes: The graph above plots violent incident counts according to the SNPK. Crimes
and domestic violence are not included. The panel is balanced from 2005 onward.

Table C.2: Annual Rates of Conflict in Indonesian Subdistricts

2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014

Any
Conflict
(1)

≥5
Conflict
Incidents
(2)

≥ 1 std.
dev.
increase in
Incidents
(3)

0.540
0.537
0.509
0.550
0.527
0.536
0.531
0.573
0.541
0.539

0.130
0.122
0.114
0.125
0.120
0.119
0.127
0.144
0.127
0.129

0.029
0.028
0.030
0.031
0.034
0.040
0.045
0.034
0.034

Notes: Conflict incidents above exclude crime and domestic violence.

39

0.2
0.0

0.1

Density

0.3

0.4

Figure C.2: Distribution of Violent Events, Indonesia

0

10

20

30

40

50

Violent Events

Notes: This histogram depicts the distribution of violent event counts in subdistrictyears with at least one incident. 19 subdistict-years with over 50 events are excluded
from graph for scaling.
C.1.3

Comparison to Other Violence Data

The SNPK offers significantly more comprehensive coverage than a widely used, cross-country,
subnational data source. The Uppsala Conflict Data Program (UCDP) Georeferenced Event Data
(GED) (Sundberg and Melander, 2013) has been fruitfully deployed in a range of subnational
conflict studies and with particular success in sub-Saharan Africa alongside the widely used Armed
Conflict Location & Event Data Project (ACLED) data. Both data are available for Indonesia, but
ACLED coverage only begins in 2015.
Mapping the UCDP-GED events to our (unbalanced) subdistrict-year panel for 2000–2014,
we find very limited coverage of social conflict events in Indonesia. UCDP-GED covers only 328
subdistrict-year incidents between 2000-2014 within the geographical boundaries covered by SNPK.
Of these, 316 subdistrict-years also have an incident in SNPK. Meanwhile, 24,784 subdistrictyears have incidents that are recorded in SNPK but not in UCDP-GED. Together, these 24,784
subdistrict-year incidents involve over 24,331 deaths. The more limited coverage by UCDP-GED
is explained by both its more narrow focus on large-scale conflict and by its reliance on international news sources and/or English-based ones in Jakarta. The SNPK offers much deeper coverage

40

precisely because it digitized millions of old newspapers from outlying regions of the country that
allowed for coverage of violence that may have otherwise missed the attention of international reporters. Barron et al. (2016) offer a systematic comparison of SNPK to alternative Indonesian
sources, consistently finding greater coverage by the SNPK. They attribute the differences to the
use of 123 provincial and sub-provincial newspapers, far more than prior efforts.

C.1.4

Covariates

2000 Population Census
We use the following predictors constructed at the 2000 subdistrict level from Indonesia’s 2000
universal Population Census.
• Employment Shares: Fraction of persons in agriculture, forestry and fishing, industry,
services, trade, and transportation. We compute the fraction of persons in self-employment
and the fraction that are employers.
• Demographic Variables: Share of people in each of the following religions: Muslim,
Catholic, Protestant, Hindu, Buddhist, Confucian, and other. Shares of the population
that are ethnic Chinese and ethnic Arab. Share of men and share married. Finally, share of
persons under 10 and from 10 to 30 years old.
• Education: Share of individuals who completed no school and the average years of schooling.
• Rural Population Share: Share of villages within the subdistrict classified as rural.
• Ethnic Fractionalization: Ethnic fractionalization in district d is given by F =

PMe

g=1 πg (1−

πg ), where Me is the number of ethnic groups in the district, and πg is the population share of
group g as reported in the 2000 Census. We observe over 1,000 ethnicities and sub-ethnicities
speaking over 400 languages.
• Ethnic Polarization: Same as ethnic fractionalization but own group share is emphasized:
P e 2
P = M
g=1 πg (1 − πg ).
• Religious Fractionalization: Religious polarization, RF =

PMr PMr
g=1

h=1 πg πh ,

where Mr is

the number of religious groups, and πg (πh ) is the population share of group g (h). There

41

are seven religions recorded in the Census, but in most districts, there is a single cleavage
between a Muslim and a non-Muslim group.
• Religious Polarization: Same as ethnic polarization but own group share is emphasized:
P e 2
RP = M
g=1 πg (1 − πg ).
• Ethnic Residential Segregation: Following Alesina and Zhuravskaya (2011), we use the
2000 Census to compute Ethnic segregation by comparing ethnic fractionalization at the
village level to that of the subdistrict level. Specifically we compute:

S=

M X
S
X
1
ts (πsm − πm )2
M −1
T
πm
m=1 s=1

where M is the number of ethnic groups, T is the total population of the subdistrict, ts is the
population in village s, πm is the fraction of group m in the district, and πsm is the fraction
of group m in subdistrict s. We drop the smallest 1% of ethnic groups so that M remains
reasonable (< 25).
• Interethnic Marriage: We also construct the share of interethnic marriages in each subdistrict.

Potensi Desa (Podes)
We construct the following variables using the quasi-triennial administrative village census Potensi
Desa, abbreviated Podes. We use the 1999, 2002, 2005, 2008 and 2011 rounds.
• Police and Security: We compute the number of security and police posts as well as the
number of security officers.
• Population: Subdistrict population in each round.
• Health Care: We construct the number of health care facilities per thousand people, which
we classify into hospitals (hospital, maternity hospitals, and polyclinics) and middle care
(puskesmas and supporting puskesmas). We also construct the numbers of doctors, midwives,
and traditional birth attendants per thousand.
• Schooling: We compute the number of kindergarten, primary, junior high schools, high
schools, and universities per thousand. We also calculate the share of villages with any

42

Islamic boarding schools.
• Crime and Conflict: In each wave, we record the share of villages that experienced any
crime or conflict. We do the same for each type of crime recorded (theft, robbery, looting,
thuggery, arson, rape, murder) and type of conflict (between citizens, security forces, students,
tribes). We also include the total number of deaths and injuries resulting from conflict
• Communication: In each wave, we record the number of households with a telephone, and
the percent of villages with access to public television, a phone stall, and postal access. For
the 2005, 2008, and 2011 waves, we also have indicators for whether a strong or weak cell
phone signal is present in the village, and in 2011 an indicator for a cell tower in the village.
In the 1999 wave, we also have the percent of households with a radio, telephone, television,
and satellite dish.
• Transportation: We include the percent of villages with a bridge, bus terminal, seaport,
road lighting, and a passable road in the 1999 wave. We have the road lighting and passable
road indicators in all waves. We also construct the village-population-weighted distance to
the district capital in each wave. It can vary due to the creation of new district capital as a
result of district proliferation. We also include the land area in 1999.
• Public Goods and Infrastructure: We include the percent of villages with access to safe
water, and garbage facilities, toilets, gas/electric cooking facilities, and a permanent market.
We also construct the number of households with electricity. In 2002, we also compute
the population-weighted mean access to irrigation, an indicator for rice being the primary
commodity, and the number of small and large rice mills per village.
• Natural Disasters: Each wave records the share of villages that experienced a mudslide,
flood, fire, earthquake, and other disaster in the past three years.
• Subdistrict Revenues: From the 2002 wave, we construct total revenue and expenditures
at the subdistrict level. We include the breakdown of revenue into its various sources: the
different levels of government, taxes, social organizations, ROSCAs, and other villages.
Whenever available, we use measures from the previous two Podes rounds as predictors.

43

National Socioeconomic Survey (Susenas)
The National Socioeconomic Survey (Susenas) is an annual survey of about 200,000 nationally
representative households. The survey measures household income and expenditures. It is not
formally representative at the subdistrict level, so we construct measures at the larger district
level.
• Income and Expenditures: We use the expenditure data to construct mean and median
per-capita total, food, and non-food expenditure. We also calculate unemployment rates and
working rates.
• Income Inequality: We use the expenditure data to construct an expenditure Gini and the
ratio of the 80th percentile to the 20th percentile.
• Poverty: We construct the share below the poverty line (P0 ) as well as higher order (P1 )
and (P2 ) poverty measures. We also construct indicators for household participation in the
nationally subsidized rice for the poor program (Raskin).
• Health: We construct the fraction of children and adults with self-reported health problems.
• Education: We construct the fraction of 5–21 year olds in school, as well as the percent of
adults (15+) who are literate.
• Communication: We construct indicators for whether anyone in the household has a telephone, cell phone, computer, or has accessed the internet in the past 3 months (2006–2013).
• Age: We also use this data to measure the annual average age.
We use three lags of each of these measures.

Agricultural Census
• Food Price Shocks: Using the 2002 Agriculture Census module of Podes, we calculate the
quantity of each crop produced within the 2000 subdistrict borders. We use the UN Food
and Agriculture price series for each crops to construct log changes in crop prices and weight
these changes by the 2002 production share. We group into cash crops and food crops. We
include three lags of each of these price shocks.

44

• Agricultural GDP: Using the 2002 Agriculture Census module of Podes, we calculate the
quantity of each crop produced within the 2000 subdistrict borders and then use the UN
Food and Agriculture price series to construct total agricultural value in each year.
• Other: We also include output shares of important cash and food crops and the share of
households with any agricultural land and large agricultural land.

Night Lights
• Light Intensity: Annual night light data to proxy for GDP (Henderson et al. (2012)). We
use mean stable light intensity at the village level, which ranges from 0 to 63. This attempts
to filter out background noise and unstable sources of light. We compute the (population
weighted) average light intensity across villages at the 2000 subdistrict boundary level. We
include two lags of this measure.

Global Precipitation Climatology Project (GPCP)
The Global Precipitation Climatology Project (GPCP) provides annual rainfall at the district level.
We calculate historical averages and annual deviations from the historical average.

University of Delaware Global Climate Resource Database (UDel)
The University of Delaware Global Climate Resource Database provides monthly rainfall and temperature data at the subdistrict level from 1900 onward. We calculate historical averages and
annual deviations from the average. We include 3 lags of each of these deviation measures.

Mineral Shocks (SNL/GEM)
Geocoded mine data from the SNL Mine Production Data. For each mineral, we calculate the
distance from the center of the subdistrict to the nearest active mine producing that mineral. We
multiply log mineral price changes from the World Bank’s GEM Commodity Price Database by
the inverse of the distance to the nearest mine. We include three lags of these mineral price shocks.

45

Disaster Information Management System (DIMS)
The Disaster Information Management System lists the major disasters such as floods or volcano
eruptions at the district level. We also use this data to construct event counts and deaths from
terrorism and unrest. We include two lags of each of these disaster measures.

Database for Policy and Economic Research (DAPOER)
We use the World Bank’s Indonesia Database for Policy and Economic Research (DAPOER), which
in turn obtains data from the Indonesia Ministry of Finance data, to keep track of total district
revenue in each year.
• Total District Revenue Per Capita: District revenue figures come from the World Bank’s
Indonesia Database for Policy and Economic Research (DAPOER), which in turn obtains
data from the Indonesia ministry of finance data. They are given for each district-year at
the time of existence. We aggregate up to the 2000 district boundary. Population data is
taken from the same dataset. All figures are inflation adjusted using 2010 as the base year.
We also construct district own-revenue, as opposed to revenue from shared rents, grants, and
taxes.
• GDP: DAPOER also includes annual District level GDP and Agricultural GDP measures.
We include three lags of each of these measures.

Political Data (GEC)
Our political data is gathered from documents published by the General Election Commission
(GEC), used in Martinez-Bravo et al. (2017) and also provided to us by Audrey Sacks who collected
this information from the GEC.
• Vote Share Fractionalization/Polarization within 2000 subdistrict: Data on vote
share by party and subdistrict in the 1999 district parliamentary (DPRD-II) elections were
used—the first of the post-Suharto era—to construct a measure of vote share polarization at
the subdistrict level. Forty-eight parties competed in these elections.

46

• Vote Shares: We also use the 1999 parliamentary (DPRD-II) data to construct vote shares
for major parties and Islamist parties. We also construct turnout as total votes over population.
• Time-varying vote Share Fractionalization/Polarization at District Level: To construct time-varying vote share fractionalization and polarization measures we use national
parliamentary (DPR) vote share data in 1999, 2004, 2009 recorded at the district level.
• Time-varying Party Shares at District Level: Using this same national parliamentary
vote data (DPR), we also retain the votes for certain parties. We consider Golkar and PDIP
shares, as well as vote shares for Islamist parties. We also track the number of parties.
• Direct Election Data: Direct local elections for district mayors were phased in beginning
2005 across districts and occur every 5 years. We record the date of each of these elections.
We include measures from the latest election as our predictors.

Topographical Variables
• Slope and Elevation Data: Topographical variables were created using raster data from
the Harmonized World Soil Database (HWSD), Version 2.0 (Fischer et al., 2008). The raster
files are compiled from high-resolution source data and aggregated to 30 arc-second grids.
The terrain, slope, and aspect database provided by HWSD researchers was compiled from a
high-resolution digital elevation map constructed by the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission
(SRTM).
Elevation data were computed for each village as the average elevation over the entire village polygon, using raster data from HWSD. Slope and aspect data were also recorded for
each village and calculated similarly. Variables equal to the average share of each village
corresponding to each slope class (0-2 percent, 2-4 percent, etc.) were constructed using
ArcView.
• Ruggedness: A 30 arc-second ruggedness raster was computed for Indonesia according to
the methodology described by Sappington et al. (2007), and village-level ruggedness was
recorded as the average raster value. The authors propose a Vector Ruggedness Measure

47

(VRM), which captures the distance or dispersion between a vector orthogonal to a topographical plane and the orthogonal vectors in a neighborhood of surrounding elevation planes.
To calculate the measure, one first calculates the x, y, and z coordinates of vectors that are
orthogonal to each 30-arc second grid of the Earth’s surface. These coordinates are computed
using a digital elevation model and standard trigonometric techniques. Given this, a resultant
vector is computed by adding a given cell’s vector to each of the vectors in the surrounding
cells; the neighborhood or window is supplied by the researcher. Finally, the magnitude of
this resultant vector is divided by the size of the cell window and subtracted from 1. This
results in a dimensionless number that ranges from 0 (least rugged) to 1 (most rugged).8.
• Soil Quality: We also make use of the HWSD data for soil quality measures. HWSD
provides detailed information on different soil types across the world. The HWSD data for
Indonesia is taken from information printed in the FAO-UNESCO Soil Map of the World
(FAO 1971-1981), a map printed at a 1:5,000,000 scale. For each subdistrict, we we use the
following measures of soil types: percentage of land covered by coarse, medium, and fine soils,
percentage of land covered by soils with poor or excessive drainage, average organic carbon
percentage, average soil salinity, average soil sodicity, and average topsoil pH.
While each of the above datasets covers the entire country, there are inevitably minor missing
data issues as we combine so many sources. Rather than exclude entire predictors or observations,
we impute these missing predictors via regression on contemporaneous predictors for which data is
available. Violence measurements are not used for the imputation of other variables, nor are any
violence measures imputed. The sample is restricted to observations where we have full violence
data.

48

C.2
C.2.1

Colombia
Administrative Levels

The municipality is the second level of administrative authority in Colombia (the first is the Department) and is the fundamental territorial entity in the political-administrative division of the
State. It has political, fiscal and administrative autonomy within the framework of the Colombian
law.
As of 2015, Colombia has 1,101 municipalities in 32 departments. The departments are composed by municipalities and are also a territorial entity with administrative autonomy. They must
perform administrative and coordination functions complementing the municipal action and should
serve as intermediaries between the Nation and the municipalities.

C.2.2

Violence

Our main conflict data in Colombia comes from the Conflict Analysis Resource Center (CERAC)
which contains data on military confrontation from 1988 to 2005. The data are reported at the
event level and episodes are characterized either as bilateral clashes between sides or unilateral
attacks from one side against another. We aggregate incidents by municipality-year in our main
specification including events involving all three conflict actors: the guerrillas, the paramilitaries,
or the government. However, we also consider a specification where the aggregation excludes
government attacks or clashes (results available on request). Our main dependent variables are
binary indicators for any event in a given municipality-year; more of than five events and more
than 1 standard deviation increase in violence.
Table C.3 presents a descriptive analysis of the dependent variable (total onsets, any incident,
more than five incidents or ‘high’, and greater than a 1 s.d. increase in violent events or ‘spike’)
for Colombia. We cover the period between 1992 to 2005 at the municipality level and see that
violence rates are rising over the period and then subsiding. Figure C.3 depicts the distribution of
violent event counts in municipality-years that experience violence. We observe a significant right
tail with a handful of municipalities experiencing dozens of events each year.
Appendix A.8 described an additional data source on violence in Colombia running through

49

2014.

C.2.3

Comparison to Other Violence Data

Similar to our coverage analysis of the SNPK data, the CERAC dataset offers a more comprehensive
coverage of Colombian armed conflict event compared to other cross-country, subnational data
sources. The UCDP-GED is available for Colombia since 1998 whereas the ACLED is only available
beginning in 2019. After geolocating violent events in UCDP-GED to match them to Colombian
municipalities, we find limited coverage of conflict events. In the period of 1998-2005, UCDP-GED
covers 1,431 municipality-year incidents. 1,199 of these municipality-years also have an incident in
CERAC. CERAC, on the other hand, has 1,933 municipality-years that have incidents but are not
in UCDP-GED. These is equivalent to 7,247 casualities not recorded in UCDP-GED but present
in CERAC.

50

Table C.3: Annual Rates of Conflict in Colombian Municipalities

1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005

Any
Conflict
(1)

≥5
Conflict
Incidents
(2)

≥ 1 std.
dev.
increase in
Incidents
(3)

0.352
0.323
0.340
0.276
0.317
0.301
0.375
0.374
0.417
0.421
0.454
0.376
0.335
0.308

0.081
0.049
0.063
0.057
0.066
0.056
0.079
0.073
0.106
0.122
0.145
0.101
0.099
0.068

0.039
0.021
0.043
0.018
0.042
0.031
0.045
0.040
0.073
0.064
0.082
0.038
0.053
0.020

Notes: Conflict incidents above include paramilitary attacks, guerrilla attacks, government attacks, and bilateral clashes between these groups.

C.2.4

Covariates

Centro de Estudios Sobre Desarrollo Económico (CEDE)
The Centro de Estudios Sobre Desarrollo Económico (CEDE) at the University of Los Andes
maintains a warehouse of data that we use as a main source of municipality-level annual covariates.
Many of the datasets below are found via CEDE.

National Administrative Department of Statistics (DANE)
Reported by CEDE, the National Administrative Department of Statistics (DANE) constructs projections of population in each municipality each year using Census data. We use this log population,

51

0.2
0.0

0.1

Density

0.3

0.4

Figure C.3: Distribution of Violent Events, Colombia

0

10

20

30

40

50

Violent Events

Notes: This histogram depicts the distribution of violent event counts in subdistrict-years
with at least one incident.
and we create population density measures as well as indicators that a given municipality has over
250,000 inhabitants and that the municipality is part of a larger metro area.
DANE also reports measures of deprivation based on the 1993 Census. These include the
percent of households with unmet basic needs such as education and housing, a land ownership
inequality index, and a life quality survey-based index.
CEDE also provides measures of paved roads, unpaved roads, and rivers in 1995, as well as
measures slope, elevation and ruggedness.

National Planning Department (NPD)
Again, via CEDE, fiscal revenue and spending data from the National Planning Department (NPD)
are collected. Specifically, information on municipal income, spending, deficit and transfers. We
include three lags of these measures.

Minisry of Agriculture
The Ministry of Agriculture supplies data on the suitability of areas for various crops. We use data
on the suitability of lands for sugar cane and palm oil production.

52

Commodities and International Prices (Dube and Vargas, 2013)
We use commodity data compiled by (Dube and Vargas, 2013). We construct shocks as the interaction between the log commodity price change and measures of local commodity production at a
fixed point in time. We include three lags of each of these commodity price shocks.
• Internal coffee prices are tabulated by the Colombian Coffee Growers Federation (NCFG),
and hectares of coffee cultivation is measured in the 1997 coffee growers’ survey.
• Data on 1988 oil production comes from the Ministerio de Minas y Energia (MME). The
international price of oil comes from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics.
• Coal reserve presence is reported by a 1978 U.S. Geological Survey. The international price
of coal comes from Global Financial Data.
• Precious metal presence is measured by 1978 mining applications to the MME. An hectares
of minable land are interacted with gold, silver, and platinum prices from Global Financial
Data.
We consider both the local production and international price of coffee, oil, coal, silver, platinum,
and precious metals.
Dube and Vargas (2013) obtain data on coca cultivation for Colombia from two sources: Direccion Nacional de Estupefacientes (DNE) and from the United Nations Office of Drug Control
(UNODC). DNE reports illicit drug cultivation in 1994. The UNODC uses satalite imagery to estimate annual coca production in Colombia. UNODC also reports U.S. cocaine prices. We interact
log changes in U.S. cocaine prices with coca production in 1994. We include three lags of each of
these time-varying drug production variables.

Historical Variables Acemoglu et al. (2015)
From Acemoglu et al. (2015), we include measures of colonial institutions and infrastructure, such
as number of crown employees, presence of colonial cities and royal roads, population in 1843,
slave share of the population in 1843, number of Indians in 1560, number of encomiendas in 1560,
colonial gold mines, foundation dates, and population in 1843.

53

University of Delaware Global Climate Resource Database (UDel)
The University of Delaware Global Climate Resource Database provides monthly rainfall and temperature data at the subdistrict level from 1900 onward. We calculate historical averages and
annual deviations from the average. We include three lags of each of these weather deviations.

Registraduria Nacional del Estado Civil (“National Registry”)
Information on mayoral and congressional elections (lower and upper house) were used from the
entire period of analysis. Universidad de los Andes compiled a database of electoral results since
1958 and has been updating it until 2014. The original data comes from the Registraduria Nacional
del Estado Civil (“National Registry”)1 . In particular, we generate parties’ vote shares, turnout,
and time dummies for electoral periods.
Each of this elections represent different levels of political power in Colombia, at the local,
regional and national level. We consider measures of concentration, polarization and fractionalization index for competitiveness of the elections, margin between winner and runner-up, party’s vote
share and political leaning. We include measures from the latest elections as predictors.

Distance to DMZ (Delimitarized Zone)
The Caguan DMZ was a delimitarized zone of 42,000 square kilometers in southern Colombia
authorized by the government to negotiate a peace process with the FARC-EP. The region was
made up by the municipalities of Vista Hermosa, La Macarena, La Uribe, Mesetas, and San Vicente
del Caguan. The DMZ started in January of 1999 and ended in February 2002. Its existence
coincides with the escalation of the conflict in Colombia. Therefore, we calculate the distance of
each municipality in Colombia to the DMZ as a covariate.

US Military Aid
We use the dataset created by Dube and Naidu (2015) of US military aid and Colombian military
bases. One feature of US military aid is that it is disbursed to particular Colombian military

1

Universidad de los Andes CEDE makes the database publicly available through its’ database
website (https://datoscede.uniandes.edu.co).
54

brigades, each of which is attached to and operates out of a particular government military base.
We consider the natural log of US military and antinarcotics aid to Colombia interacted with
a dummy that defines if a particular municipality has a military base. In total, we covered 34
municipalities with military bases, of which 32 appear in the sample for which the conflict data is
available. We include three lags of the military aid variable.

As in Indonesia, we restrict our sample to observations with full violence data. There are
inevitably minor missing data issues as we merge other covariates. Rather than exclude entire
predictors or observations, we impute these missing predictors via regression on contemporaneous
predictors for which data is available. Violence measurements are not used for the imputation of
other variables, nor are any violence measures imputed.

55

C.3
C.3.1

Predictor Groupings
Indonesia

56

Table C.4: Violence Predictors (Indonesia): SNPK
(1)

Incidents per 10,000, social conflict
Any social conflict
More than 5 social conflict incidents
More than 1 s.d. increase in social conflict incidents
Number of social conflicts
Deaths per 10,000, social conflict
Injuries per 10,000, social conflict
Destroyed buildings per 10,000, social conflict
Incidents per 10,000, ALL
Incidents per 10,000, Resource
Incidents per 10,000, Governance
Incidents per 10,000, Election
Incidents per 10,000, Identity
Incidents per 10,000, Popular Justice
Incidents per 10,000, Law Enforcement
Incidents per 10,000, Crime
Incidents per 10,000, Domestic
Incidents per 10,000, Separatist
Incidents per 10,000, Other
Deaths per 10,000, ALL
Deaths per 10,000, Resource
Deaths per 10,000, Governance
Deaths per 10,000, Election
Deaths per 10,000, Identity
Deaths per 10,000, Popular Justice
Deaths per 10,000, Law Enforcement
Deaths per 10,000, Crime
Deaths per 10,000, Domestic
Deaths per 10,000, Separatist
Deaths per 10,000, Other
Injuries per 10,000, ALL
Injuries per 10,000, Resource
Injuries per 10,000, Governance
Injuries per 10,000, Election
Injuries per 10,000, Identity
Injuries per 10,000, Popular Justice
Injuries per 10,000, Law Enforcement
Injuries per 10,000, Crime
Injuries per 10,000, Domestic
Injuries per 10,000, Separatist
Injuries per 10,000, Other
Damaged buildings per 10,000, ALL
Damaged buildings per 10,000, Resource
Damaged buildings per 10,000, Governance
Damaged buildings per 10,000, Election
Damaged buildings per 10,000, Identity
Damaged buildings per 10,000, Popular Justice
Damaged buildings per 10,000, Law Enforcement
Damaged buildings per 10,000, Crime
Damaged buildings per 10,000, Domestic
Damaged buildings per 10,000, Separatist
Damaged buildings per 10,000, Other
Destroyed buildings per 10,000, ALL
Destroyed buildings per 10,000, Resource
Destroyed buildings per 10,000, Governance
Destroyed buildings per 10,000, Election
Destroyed buildings per 10,000, Identity
Destroyed buildings per 10,000, Popular Justice
Destroyed buildings per 10,000, Law Enforcement
Destroyed buildings per 10,000, Crime
Destroyed buildings per 10,000, Domestic
Destroyed buildings per 10,000, Separatist
Destroyed buildings per 10,000, Other
Total active papers, SNPK

(2)

Mean

Median

2.61
0.53
0.13
0.03
2.18
2.15
1.45
0.19
4.50
0.08
0.05
0.09
0.06
0.34
0.15
1.69
0.20
1.78
0.06
2.63
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.44
0.04
2.04
0.01
2.31
0.06
0.04
0.07
0.06
0.41
0.16
0.75
0.11
0.58
0.08
0.62
0.04
0.02
0.02
0.05
0.03
0.00
0.11
0.00
0.33
0.03
0.23
0.02
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.00
0.04
0.00
0.13
0.00
51.46

0.14
1.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.73
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.42
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.37
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
20.79

57

(3)

(4)

25th Pct. 75th Pct.
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.21
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
10.60

0.50
1.00
0.00
0.00
2.00
0.00
0.45
0.00
1.68
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.19
0.00
1.03
0.12
0.00
0.00
0.24
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.12
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.13
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.17
0.00
0.52
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
33.79

(5)
Corr.
w/
Any
0.05
0.38
0.32
0.15
0.31
0.03
0.05
0.01
0.06
0.02
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.05
0.03
0.07
0.05
0.04
0.02
0.03
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.01
-0.00
0.03
0.02
0.03
0.01
0.07
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.04
0.05
0.02
0.08
0.05
0.03
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.02
-0.01
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
-0.00
0.01
0.01
-0.00
0.01
-0.01
0.02
-0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00

(6)

(7)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
2.31
0.0
1.17
0.0
0.85
0.0
1.88
0.0
0.66
0.0
2.88
0.0
2.07
0.0
3.13
0.0
1.72
0.0
2.32
0.0
1.91
0.0
2.13
0.0
1.28
0.0
1.53
0.0
1.96
0.0
1.04
0.0
1.61
0.0
3.04
0.0
2.59
0.0
2.70
0.0
3.26
0.0
3.50
0.0
3.52
0.0
1.57
0.0
3.47
0.0
3.49
0.0
2.26
0.0
3.14
0.0
2.92
0.0
3.52
0.0
1.56
0.0
2.97
0.0
3.25
0.0
2.82
0.0
1.72
0.0
1.69
0.0
2.61
0.0
1.28
0.0
2.21
0.0
3.37
0.0
3.51
0.0
3.02
0.0
3.15
0.0
2.88
0.0
3.05
0.0
2.73
0.0
2.56
0.0
3.51
0.0
2.63
0.0
3.48
0.0
3.43
0.0
3.45
0.0
2.99
0.0
3.17
0.0
3.52
0.0
3.37
0.0
3.29
0.0
3.17
0.0
3.52
0.0
3.07
0.0
3.49
0.0
3.19
0.0
3.51
0.0
1.08
0.0

(8)
Source
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK
SNPK

Table C.5: Violence Predictors (Indonesia): Podes
(1)

Theft, % villages
Robbery, % villages
Looting incident, % villages
Thuggery, % villages
Arson, % villages
Rape, % villages
Murder, % villages
Fight among citizens, % villages
Fights with security officers, % villages
Conflict among students, % villages
Conflict between tribes, % villages
Indicator for any conflict, % villages
Deaths per 10000
Injuries per 10000
Security Post Present,% villages
Police Post Present,% villages
Number of security officers
Terrorism (Count)
Terrorism (Deaths)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Mean

Median 25th Pct. 75th Pct.

Corr.
w/
Any

0.04
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.21
0.79
0.15
283.42
0.00
0.00

0.02
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.95
0.10
234.00
0.00
0.00

0.15
0.13
0.04
0.10
0.00
0.08
0.10
0.06
0.04
0.06
0.02
0.08
0.01
0.00
0.14
0.17
0.14
0.02
0.01

0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.67
0.06
117.00
0.00
0.00

0.05
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.17
402.00
0.00
0.00

(6)

(7)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
0.53
0.0
0.86
0.0
0.83
0.0
0.94
0.0
1.54
0.0
0.99
0.0
1.15
0.0
1.20
0.0
1.20
0.0
1.07
0.0
1.33
0.0
1.09
0.0
1.63
0.0
1.39
0.0
0.53
0.0
0.45
0.0
0.36
0.0
2.60
0.0
2.83
0.0

Table C.6: Violence Predictors (Indonesia): DIMS

Terrorism (Count)
Terrorism (Deaths)
Unrest (Count)
Unrest (Deaths)

(1)

(2)

Mean

Median

0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

(3)

(4)

25th Pct. 75th Pct.
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

58

(5)
Corr.
w/
Any
0.02
0.01
0.03
-0.01

(6)

(7)

(8)

Within/
Be% Miss Source
tween
Var.
2.60
0.0
DIMS
2.83
0.0
DIMS
2.70
0.0
DIMS
3.48
0.0
DIMS

(8)
Source
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
DIMS
DIMS

Table C.7: Population Predictors (Indonesia)
(1)

(2)

(3)

Mean Median 25th Pct.
Population (ln)
Population (ln)
Number of villages
Population growth (ln ch.), change over last 2 Podes
Number of villages

10.41
10.63
18.76
0.05
19.79

10.54
10.65
15.00
0.04
16.00

9.93
10.13
10.00
0.00
11.00

(4)

(5)

75th Pct.

Corr.
w/
Any

10.99
11.10
22.00
0.10
23.00

0.27
0.42
0.07
0.06
0.06

(6)

(7)

(8)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
0.28
2.3
0.17
0.0
0.02
0.7
1.81
0.0
0.25
0.0

Source
Census
Podes
Census
Podes
Podes

Table C.8: Religion Predictors (Indonesia)
(1)

(2)

Mean Median
Religious Fractionalization
Religious Polarization
Muslim share
Catholic share
Protestant share
Hindu share
Buddhist share
Confucian share
Christian share
Any Islamic Boarding School, % villages

0.15
0.07
0.75
0.08
0.14
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.22
0.24

(3)

(4)

(5)

25th Pct. 75th Pct.

0.04
0.02
0.95
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.03
0.12

0.00
0.00
0.59
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.27
0.13
1.00
0.04
0.13
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.29
0.41

(6)

(7)

(8)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
0.08
2.3
0.07
2.3
0.10
2.3
0.19
2.3
0.10
2.3
0.59
2.3
0.60
2.3
0.54
2.3
0.10
2.3
0.02
0.7

Corr.
w/
Any
-0.03
-0.02
0.18
-0.14
-0.11
-0.06
0.11
-0.08
-0.17
0.19

Source
Census
Census
Census
Census
Census
Census
Census
Census
Census
Podes

Table C.9: Ethnicity Predictors (Indonesia)
(1)

(2)

(3)

Mean Median 25th Pct.
Ethnic Fractionalization
Ethnic Polarization
Ethnic Segregation (village-kecamatan comparison)
Chinese share
Arab share
Interethnic Marriage, share

0.30
0.09
0.43
0.01
0.00
0.19

59

0.15
0.07
0.53
0.00
0.00
0.12

0.02
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.03

(4)
75th Pct.
0.58
0.16
0.85
0.00
0.00
0.30

(5)

(6)

(7)

Within/
Corr.
Be% Miss
w/
tween
Any
Var.
0.08
0.15
2.3
0.08
0.12
2.3
0.08
0.12
2.3
0.11
0.60
2.3
0.08
0.18
2.3
0.21
0.14
2.3

(8)
Source
Census
Census
Census
Census
Census
Census

Table C.10: Education Predictors (Indonesia)
(1)

(2)

(3)

Mean Median
Mean years of schooling
No school share
Kindergarten present, per thsd.
Elementary School present, per thsd.
High School present, per thsd.
Madrasa present, per thsd.
University present, per thsd.
In school, % school age
Literate, % population over 15yo

7.96
0.35
0.40
0.97
0.08
0.21
0.01
0.70
0.90

(4)

(5)

25th Pct. 75th Pct.

7.76
0.34
0.36
0.89
0.07
0.07
0.00
0.70
0.92

7.29
0.27
0.19
0.67
0.04
0.00
0.00
0.66
0.86

8.43
0.42
0.55
1.19
0.11
0.26
0.01
0.74
0.96

(6)

Corr.
w/
Any
0.35
-0.26
-0.03
-0.37
0.09
0.04
0.19
0.12
0.13

(7)

(8)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
0.15
2.3
0.12
2.3
0.62
0.0
0.28
0.0
0.61
0.0
0.63
0.0
0.72
0.0
0.75
0.0
0.28
0.0

Source
Census
Census
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Susenas
Susenas

Table C.11: Remoteness Predictors (Indonesia)
(1)

Rural population share
Main Road Electrified, % villages
Road Access Year Round, % villages
Distance to province capital
Distance to district capital
Bridge present, % villages
Bus terminal present, % villages
Seaport present, % villages
Land area
Light Transport present, % villages
Road Pass present, % villages

(2)

(3)

(4)

Mean

Median

25th Pct. 75th Pct.

0.78
0.61
1.05
85.39
47.59
0.54
0.05
0.04
32805.15
0.46
0.88

0.94
0.71
1.00
69.55
27.63
0.57
0.00
0.00
11856.30
0.40
1.00

0.67
0.24
1.00
36.19
12.78
0.29
0.00
0.00
4722.80
0.09
0.86

60

1.00
1.00
1.09
115.97
55.01
0.82
0.07
0.01
34865.00
0.83
1.00

(5)

(6)

(7)

Within/
Corr.
Be% Miss
w/
tween
Any
Var.
-0.37
0.12
2.3
0.26
0.03
0.7
-0.08
0.04
0.7
-0.23
0.00
0.0
-0.23
0.57
0.0
0.05
0.13
3.9
0.17
0.23
3.9
-0.05
0.29
3.9
-0.09
0.15
3.9
0.27
0.54
0.0
0.25
0.40
0.0

(8)
Source
Census
Census
Census
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes

Table C.12: Demographics Predictors (Indonesia)
(1)
Mean
Male share
Married share
Share of population under 10
Share of population from 10 to 30
Average age

0.50
0.44
0.02
0.04
28.66

(2)

(3)

(4)

Median 25th Pct. 75th Pct.
0.50
0.44
0.02
0.04
27.85

0.49
0.40
0.02
0.03
26.44

0.51
0.48
0.02
0.04
30.67

(5)
Corr.
w/
Any
-0.00
-0.03
-0.23
-0.02
0.02

(6)

(7)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
0.21
2.3
0.20
2.3
0.16
2.3
0.29
2.3
0.19
0.0

(8)
Source
Census
Census
Census
Census
Susenas

Table C.13: Health Care Predictors (Indonesia)
(1)
Mean
Hospital present, per thsd.
Maternal Hospital present, per thsd.
Medical School Polytechnic present, per thsd.
Puskesmas present, per thsd.
Pustu present, per thsd.
Doctor present, per thsd.
MidWife present, per thsd.
Traditional Birth present, per thsd.
Health problem, % children
Serious health problem, % children
Health problem, % >5 year old
Serious health problem, % >5 year old

(2)

(3)

Median 25th Pct.

0.00
0.01
0.03
0.04
0.13
0.15
0.56
1.06
0.41
0.27
0.29
0.17

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.03
0.06
0.08
0.43
0.66
0.41
0.26
0.28
0.16

61

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.04
0.26
0.25
0.33
0.21
0.23
0.12

(4)

(5)

75th Pct.

Corr.
w/
Any

0.00
0.00
0.03
0.05
0.17
0.17
0.71
1.35
0.48
0.32
0.34
0.20

0.15
0.14
0.09
-0.17
-0.20
0.19
-0.05
-0.25
0.03
-0.02
0.01
-0.06

(6)

(7)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
0.91
0.0
1.13
0.0
1.27
0.0
1.16
0.0
1.03
0.0
0.51
0.0
0.79
0.0
0.80
0.0
0.89
0.0
1.02
0.0
0.92
0.0
0.92
0.0

(8)
Source
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Susenas
Susenas
Susenas
Susenas

Table C.14: Geography Predictors (Indonesia)
(1)

North facing slope, percent
East facing slope, percent
South facing slope, percent
Slope below 2%, percent
West facting slope, percent
Elevation, meters
Forest coverage, percent
Grass and scrub coverage, percent
Vector ruggedness, 3x3 window
Vector ruggedness, 5x5 window
Vector ruggedness, 9x9 window
Slope between 0-0.5%, percent
Slope between 0.5-2%, percent
Slope between 2-5%, percent
Slope between 5-8%, percent
Slope between 8-16%, percent
Slope between 16-30%, percent
Slope between 30-45%, percent
Slope above 45%, percent
Nutrient availability
Nutrient retention capacity
Favorable rooting conditions
Oxygen availability to roots
Excess salts
Toxicity
Workability
Organic Carbon (%)
Topsoil Salinity
Topsoil Sodicity
Topsoil pH
Topsoil Gypsium
Topsoil Base Saturation
Coarse texture soil, percent
Medium texture soils, percent
Fine texture soils, percent
Soil w/ very poor drainage, percent
Soil w/ poor drainage, percent
Soil w/ imperfect drainage, percent
Soil w/ moderately good drainage, percent
Soil w/good drainage, percent
Soil w/ somewhat excessive drainage, percent

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Mean

Median 25th Pct. 75th Pct.

Corr.
w/
Any

16.96
16.82
15.59
33.71
16.35
234.54
28.38
18.77
0.23
0.34
0.45
5.33
28.38
22.83
13.46
7.43
12.74
5.93
3.33
1.74
1.49
1.28
1.18
0.97
0.97
1.54
2.47
0.11
1.47
5.88
0.00
60.98
0.07
0.59
0.34
0.09
0.19
0.13
0.53
0.02
0.04

16.76
16.89
15.17
23.10
16.46
109.94
26.04
19.27
0.24
0.36
0.49
2.25
20.79
20.48
11.84
6.32
7.10
1.31
0.20
1.33
1.32
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.04
1.67
0.10
1.40
6.01
0.00
54.84
0.00
0.62
0.30
0.00
0.12
0.01
0.50
0.00
0.00

-0.14
-0.14
-0.18
0.22
-0.17
-0.13
-0.19
-0.24
-0.13
-0.15
-0.18
0.17
0.22
0.09
-0.13
-0.20
-0.21
-0.16
-0.10
-0.03
-0.05
-0.10
-0.00
-0.04
-0.04
-0.07
-0.02
-0.07
0.12
-0.01
0.01
0.02
-0.04
0.00
0.03
0.10
0.11
-0.10
-0.03
0.04
-0.07

62

8.05
8.28
6.50
6.51
7.95
34.32
10.20
11.29
0.13
0.20
0.29
0.48
5.98
10.69
4.15
0.36
0.02
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.30
0.10
1.25
5.07
0.00
43.98
0.00
0.49
0.17
0.00
0.02
0.00
0.30
0.00
0.00

23.34
22.96
22.42
58.37
23.18
308.11
43.39
25.25
0.32
0.48
0.63
8.06
50.36
33.64
21.28
12.80
24.37
9.76
4.15
2.69
2.00
1.34
1.23
1.00
1.00
2.00
2.81
0.10
1.65
6.63
0.00
75.47
0.04
0.75
0.49
0.17
0.35
0.14
0.80
0.00
0.00

(6)

(7)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
0.03
0.2
0.01
0.2
0.02
0.2
0.02
0.2
0.02
0.2
0.01
0.2
0.09
19.1
0.12
19.1
0.03
0.3
0.04
0.8
0.11
4.2
0.03
0.2
0.02
0.2
0.02
0.2
0.02
0.2
0.01
0.2
0.02
0.2
0.02
0.2
0.03
0.2
0.11
19.1
0.13
19.1
0.16
19.1
0.17
19.1
0.19
19.1
0.19
19.1
0.15
19.1
0.03
0.4
0.03
0.4
0.03
0.4
0.03
0.4
0.00
0.4
0.04
0.4
0.02
0.4
0.04
0.4
0.04
0.4
0.04
0.4
0.03
0.4
0.03
0.4
0.04
0.4
0.02
0.4
0.02
0.4

(8)
Source
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD
HWSD

Table C.15: Public Goods Predictors (Indonesia)
(1)

(2)

(3)

Mean Median 25th Pct.
Permanent Market Present, % villages
Safe water present, % villages
Garbage disposal present, % villages
Toilets present, % villages
Cooking facilities present, % villages
Has electricity, % households
Without electrictiy, % households

0.18
0.15
0.13
0.69
0.16
0.64
0.10

0.13
0.00
0.00
0.82
0.00
0.72
0.03

(4)

(5)

75th Pct.

Corr.
w/
Any

0.25
0.16
0.09
1.00
0.08
0.89
0.14

0.14
0.23
0.31
0.22
0.17
0.30
-0.11

0.07
0.00
0.00
0.43
0.00
0.43
0.00

(6)

(7)

(8)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
0.04
0.7
0.30
0.0
0.23
0.0
0.67
0.0
1.20
0.0
0.44
0.0
1.30
0.0

Source
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes

Table C.16: Sector Shares Predictors (Indonesia)
(1)
Mean
Trading share
Self-employed share
Agriculture output share
Services output share
Employer share
Population share in agriculture
Population share in forestry
Population share in industry
Population share in trade
Population share in service
Population share in transport

0.04
0.14
0.29
0.07
0.09
0.21
0.08
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.01

(2)

(3)
th

Median 25
0.03
0.13
0.31
0.05
0.07
0.20
0.06
0.01
0.03
0.04
0.01

Pct.

0.02
0.09
0.18
0.03
0.03
0.09
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.02
0.00

63

(4)
th

75

Pct.

0.06
0.18
0.42
0.09
0.14
0.32
0.11
0.03
0.06
0.08
0.01

(5)
Corr.
w/
Any
0.31
-0.07
-0.38
0.36
-0.24
-0.31
-0.18
0.17
0.31
0.35
0.32

(6)

(7)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
0.13
2.3
0.14
2.3
0.12
2.3
0.16
2.3
0.21
2.3
0.15
2.3
0.22
2.3
0.30
2.3
0.13
2.3
0.16
2.3
0.18
2.3

(8)
Source
Census
Census
Census
Census
Census
Census
Census
Census
Census
Census
Census

Table C.17: Distance to Mines Predictors (Indonesia)
(1)

Distance
Distance
Distance
Distance
Distance
Distance
Distance
Distance

to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to

nearest
nearest
nearest
nearest
nearest
nearest
nearest
nearest

Bauxite mine
Coal mine
Gold mine
IronOre mine
Nickel mine
Tin mine
Zinc mine
Silver mine

(2)

(3)

Mean

Median 25th Pct.

632.65
152.17
58.98
125.14
412.61
519.98
311.11
640.47

611.33
107.38
46.41
88.66
320.62
433.28
295.87
545.76

479.02
59.21
26.61
62.74
196.41
251.94
122.64
446.26

(4)

(5)

(6)

75th Pct.

Corr.
w/
Any

802.41
163.82
72.96
146.54
434.30
787.78
460.07
947.37

0.06
-0.02
-0.06
-0.08
0.06
-0.04
-0.07
0.10

(7)

(8)

Within/
Be% Miss Source
tween
Var.
0.00
0.0
SNL
0.00
0.0
SNL
0.00
0.0
SNL
0.00
0.0
SNL
0.00
0.0
SNL
0.00
0.0
SNL
0.00
0.0
SNL
0.00
0.0
SNL

Table C.18: Agricultural Features Predictors (Indonesia)
(1)

(2)

(3)

Mean Median 25th Pct.
Access to Irrigation, % households
Has small rice mill, % villages
Has large rice mill, % villages
Major cash crop output share
Major crop output share
Major food crop output share
Share of HHs with any ag land
Share of HHs with Ag land >0.1 Ha
Rice is primary commodity, % villages

0.38
0.18
0.06
0.32
0.53
0.38
0.64
0.59
0.40

0.28
0.06
0.00
0.15
0.57
0.30
0.73
0.65
0.33

64

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.16
0.03
0.45
0.36
0.00

(4)
75th Pct.
0.73
0.25
0.05
0.61
0.90
0.70
0.89
0.85
0.75

(5)

(6)

(7)

Within/
Corr.
Be% Miss
w/
tween
Any
Var.
-0.00
0.11
2.8
-0.11
0.04
0.7
0.03
0.02
0.7
-0.16
0.03
0.7
-0.14
0.03
0.7
0.02
0.03
0.7
-0.39
0.19
9.8
-0.37
0.20
10.6
-0.08
0.04
0.7

(8)
Source
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes

Table C.19: Communication Predictors (Indonesia)
(1)
Mean
Telephone present, % respondents
Cell phone present, % respondents
Computer present, % respondents
Accessed internet in past 3 months, % respondents
Telephone, % households
Public TV present, % villages
Phone Stall Present, % villages
Postal access, % villages
Strong cell signal present, % villages
Weak cell signal present, % villages
Cell tower present, % villages
Radio, % households
Satellite dish, % households
Television, % households

0.07
0.53
0.07
0.07
0.00
0.05
0.03
0.02
0.05
0.02
0.03
0.01
0.04
0.27

65

(2)

(3)

Median 25th Pct.
0.04
0.58
0.05
0.05
0.00
0.04
0.01
0.01
0.04
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.21

0.02
0.27
0.02
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.09

(4)

(5)

75th Pct.

Corr.
w/
Any

0.08
0.79
0.09
0.10
0.00
0.07
0.04
0.02
0.07
0.02
0.04
0.01
0.05
0.40

0.27
0.16
0.25
0.26
0.17
0.19
0.23
0.15
0.21
-0.19
0.21
-0.05
-0.00
0.31

(6)

(7)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
0.46
0.0
1.61
0.0
0.67
0.0
0.69
0.0
0.50
0.0
0.45
0.0
0.46
0.0
0.51
0.0
0.33
0.0
0.85
0.0
0.00
0.0
0.45
3.9
0.20
3.9
0.25
3.9

(8)
Source
Susenas
Susenas
Susenas
Susenas
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes

Table C.20: Natural Disaster Predictors (Indonesia)
(1)
Mean
Mudslide, % villages
Flood, % villages
Earthquake, % villages
Fire, % villages
Other disaster, % villages
Land abrasions (Count)
Land abrasions (Deaths)
Disease outbreaks (Count)
Disease outbreaks (Deaths)
Droughts (Count)
Earthquakes (Count)
Earthquakes (Deaths)
Floods (Count)
Floods (Deaths)
Forest Fires (Count)
Industrial Accidents (Count)
Industrial Accidents (Deaths)
Tornadoes (Count)
Tornadoes (Deaths)
Transport accidents (Count)
Transport accidents (Deaths)
Tsunami (Count)
Tsunami (Deaths)
Volcanoes (Count)
Deaths from any disaster
Total number of disasters

0.08
0.21
0.11
0.12
0.06
0.03
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.20
0.03
56.43
0.83
0.22
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.42
0.02
0.02
0.06
0.04
56.39
0.01
113.27
1.88

(2)

(3)

(4)

Median 25th Pct. 75th Pct.
0.00
0.10
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

66

0.08
0.35
0.00
0.14
0.04
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
3.00

(5)
Corr.
w/
Any
-0.11
-0.02
0.03
-0.06
-0.08
0.03
-0.03
-0.00
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.01
0.06
-0.01
-0.01
0.02
0.02
0.01
-0.01
-0.00
-0.03
0.03
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.03

(6)

(7)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
0.05
0.7
0.04
0.7
0.06
0.7
0.03
0.7
0.03
0.7
2.25
0.0
2.89
0.0
2.76
0.0
3.56
0.0
2.28
0.0
2.45
0.0
3.52
0.0
1.48
0.0
2.64
0.0
3.32
0.0
2.07
0.0
2.55
0.0
1.87
0.0
3.54
0.0
2.76
0.0
2.52
0.0
2.33
0.0
3.52
0.0
2.48
0.0
3.52
0.0
1.35
0.0

(8)
Source
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
DIMS
DIMS
DIMS
DIMS
DIMS
DIMS
DIMS
DIMS
DIMS
DIMS
DIMS
DIMS
DIMS
DIMS
DIMS
DIMS
DIMS
DIMS
DIMS
DIMS
DIMS

Table C.21: Electoral Predictors (Indonesia)
(1)
Mean
Mainstream party (Golkar/PDIP) share, 1999 local elec. (DPRD-II)
Islamist Party Share, 1999 local elec. (DPRD-II)
Vote share Fractionalization, 1999 local elec. (DPRD-II)
Vote share Polarization, 1999 local elec. (DPRD-II)
Number of Votes Over Population, 1999 local elec. (DPRD-II)
District-Head Direct Election in Given Year
Number of Votes Over Population, national elec. 99,04,09 (DPR)
Mainstream party (Golkar/PDIP) share, national elec. 99,04,09
Islamist Party Share, national elec. 99,04,09 (DPR)
Vote share Fractionalization, national elec. 99,04,09 (DPR)
Vote share Polarization, national elec. 99,04,09 (DPR)
Number of Parties, national elec. 99,04,09 (DPR)

0.56
0.14
0.69
0.16
0.53
0.32
0.47
0.32
0.16
0.85
0.11
32.66

(2)

(3)

(4)

Median 25th Pct.
0.58
0.11
0.72
0.16
0.52
0.00
0.49
0.30
0.15
0.86
0.11
38.00

0.45
0.04
0.65
0.15
0.46
0.00
0.38
0.21
0.09
0.82
0.09
24.00

75th Pct.
0.69
0.21
0.78
0.18
0.58
1.00
0.55
0.42
0.22
0.89
0.13
38.00

(5)

(6)

(7)

Within/
Corr.
Be% Miss
w/
tween
Any
Var.
-0.10
0.10
4.8
0.11
0.14
4.8
0.13
0.08
4.8
-0.05
0.14
4.8
-0.03
0.27
5.8
-0.04
0.44
0.0
0.04
0.60
1.4
-0.18
0.79
0.0
0.16
0.49
0.0
0.05
1.19
0.0
-0.02
1.21
0.0
0.02
39.05
0.0

Table C.22: Government Finance Predictors (Indonesia)
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Mean Median 25th Pct. 75th Pct.
Total Revenue (000s Rp), (ln)
Total revenue within village resources, (ln)
Revenue from taxes, (ln)
Revenue from social organizations, (ln)
Revenue from ROSCAs, (ln)
Revenue from other within village, (ln)
Revenue from higher government admin, (ln)
Revenue from central government, (ln)
Revenue from provincial government, (ln)
Revenue from district government, (ln)
Revenue from district government, (ln)
Routine Expenditures, (ln)
Total Revenue District per-cap (ln)
Self-Generated Kab. Rev. per-capita (ln)

13.03
11.94
9.74
10.79
10.17
9.29
12.24
11.54
9.19
10.75
11.97
12.31
14.12
11.14

13.07
12.12
9.88
10.87
10.27
9.29
12.18
11.62
9.21
10.87
11.97
12.40
14.08
11.19

67

12.31
10.85
8.79
9.72
9.14
8.11
11.60
10.85
8.08
9.68
11.23
11.56
13.63
10.61

13.74
13.16
10.77
11.89
11.29
10.48
12.80
12.26
10.28
11.86
12.72
13.16
14.59
11.72

(5)

(6)

(7)

Within/
Corr.
Be% Miss
w/
tween
Any
Var.
0.12
0.28
7.0
0.13
0.29
12.9
0.12
0.43
22.3
0.17
0.32
15.9
0.07
0.38
21.3
0.11
0.49
30.6
0.05
0.33
7.4
-0.05
0.39
25.8
0.10
0.66
51.0
0.09
0.47
19.9
0.13
0.27
8.2
0.06
0.36
9.4
-0.04
1.34
38.4
0.08
1.73
38.4

(8)
Source
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
Podes
DAPOER
DAPOER

(8)
Source
GEC
GEC
GEC
GEC
GEC
GEC
GEC
GEC
GEC
GEC
GEC
GEC

Table C.23: Output Predictors (Indonesia)
(1)

GDP from 2002 ag. census and curr. comm. pr., (ln)
Nighttime light intensity
Unemployment rate
Total GDP District (ln)
Ag GDP District per-cap (ln)
Median PCE, (ln)
Mean PCE, (ln)
Unemployed, % working age

(2)

(3)

(4)

Mean

Median

25th Pct.

75th Pct.

22.17
9.73
0.04
2.45
0.98
12.65
12.80
0.05

22.58
2.87
0.03
2.44
1.22
12.66
12.80
0.04

21.04
0.06
0.01
1.92
0.67
12.34
12.45
0.03

23.74
9.94
0.05
2.89
1.66
12.97
13.13
0.06

(5)

(6)

(7)

Within/
Corr.
Be% Miss
w/
tween
Any
Var.
-0.13
0.14
9.3
0.34
0.16
2.3
0.08
0.47
6.4
0.14
1.08
36.5
-0.14
0.79
36.5
0.23
1.04
0.0
0.25
1.04
0.0
0.04
1.35
0.0

(8)
Source
Podes Ag Module/FAO
Henderson et al. (2012)
Susenas
DAPOER
DAPOER
Susenas
Susenas
Susenas

Table C.24: Distributional Measures Predictors (Indonesia)
(1)

(2)

(3)
th

Mean Median 25
Wage Gini
Poverty (P 0)
Poverty (P 1)
Poverty (P 2)
PCE Inequality 90-10, (ln)
PCE Inequality 80-20, (ln)
Worked, % working age
Mean months bought subsidized rice

0.25
16.54
2.88
0.78
1.08
0.70
0.64
0.53

0.24
15.04
2.36
0.57
1.06
0.68
0.64
0.55

Pct.

0.20
10.31
1.51
0.35
0.86
0.54
0.59
0.34

68

(4)
th

75

Pct.

0.29
21.59
3.78
1.00
1.28
0.83
0.69
0.70

(5)
Corr.
w/
Any
0.18
-0.11
-0.09
-0.07
0.18
0.18
-0.20
-0.09

(6)

(7)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
1.16
0.0
0.46
0.0
0.68
0.0
0.90
0.0
1.17
0.0
1.19
0.0
0.54
0.0
0.40
0.0

(8)
Source
Susenas
Susenas
Susenas
Susenas
Susenas
Susenas
Susenas
Susenas

Table C.25: Commodity Shock Predictors (Indonesia)
(1)
Mean
Cash crop pr. shock
Maj cash crop pr. shock
Food pr. shock
Bauxite price shock
Coal price shock
Copper price shock
Gold price shock
IronOre price shock
Nickel price shock
Tin price shock
Zinc price shock
Silver price shock
Avocado Price, (ln ch.)
Live Buffalo Price, (ln ch.)
Cabbage Price, (ln ch.)
Carrot Price, (ln ch.)
Cashew Price, (ln ch.)
Cassava Price, (ln ch.)
Live Chicken Price, (ln ch.)
Chili Pepper Price, (ln ch.)
Cocoa Price, (ln ch.)
Coffee Price, (ln ch.)
Cucumber Price, (ln ch.)
Eggplant Price, (ln ch.)
Green Bean Price, (ln ch.)
Groundnut Price, (ln ch.)
Maize Price, (ln ch.)
Mango Price, (ln ch.)
Palm Oil Price, (ln ch.)
Orange Price, (ln ch.)
Papaya Price, (ln ch.)
Pepper Price, (ln ch.)
Potato Price, (ln ch.)
Rubber Price, (ln ch.)
Soybean Price, (ln ch.)
Sweet Potato Price, (ln ch.)
Tomato Price, (ln ch.)
Bauxite Price, (ln ch.)
Coal Price, (ln ch.)
Copper Price, (ln ch.)
Gold Price, (ln ch.)
Iron Ore Price, (ln ch.)
Nickel Price, (ln ch.)
Tin Price, (ln ch.)
Zinc Price, (ln ch.)
Silver Price, (ln ch.)

0.02
0.01
0.02
-0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.03
0.05
0.09
0.11
0.06
0.04
0.05
0.02
0.05
0.10
0.04
0.14
0.06
0.04
-0.02
0.03
-0.01
0.00
0.01
0.03
0.01
0.02
0.06
0.04
-0.02
0.06
0.08
0.12
0.08
0.00
0.12
0.03
0.12

(2)

(3)

(4)

Median 25th Pct. 75th Pct.
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.00
0.00
-0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.00
0.00
-0.00
0.00
0.03
-0.01
-0.00
0.10
0.08
0.02
-0.00
0.03
-0.02
0.00
0.05
0.02
0.02
0.08
0.02
-0.04
0.02
-0.01
-0.01
0.05
-0.01
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.02
-0.03
0.01
-0.00
0.15
0.07
-0.04
0.15
-0.06
0.06

-0.01
-0.00
-0.00
-0.00
-0.00
-0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.00
-0.00
-0.00
0.00
-0.10
-0.06
-0.02
-0.04
0.02
-0.03
-0.04
-0.11
-0.09
-0.04
-0.03
-0.02
-0.01
0.00
-0.01
-0.13
-0.03
-0.02
-0.03
-0.04
-0.07
-0.07
-0.03
-0.03
-0.03
-0.10
-0.14
-0.09
0.07
0.04
-0.25
-0.17
-0.07
0.01

69

0.04
0.02
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.04
0.07
0.10
0.20
0.13
0.14
0.15
0.22
0.11
0.08
0.11
0.06
0.15
0.11
0.04
0.10
0.08
0.00
0.05
0.11
0.10
0.11
0.03
0.10
0.14
0.12
0.28
0.34
0.17
0.51
0.36
0.37
0.23
0.28

(5)
Corr.
w/
Any
0.00
-0.02
0.00
0.01
-0.01
-0.03
0.01
-0.00
-0.00
-0.02
-0.01
-0.05
0.01
-0.05
0.01
0.00
0.05
0.01
-0.03
0.01
0.03
0.02
-0.05
0.01
-0.01
0.04
0.02
0.02
0.00
0.02
0.01
0.02
0.03
-0.02
0.01
0.04
0.01
-0.02
-0.01
-0.03
0.00
-0.01
-0.02
0.00
-0.02
0.00

(6)

(7)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
5.29
0.7
4.99
0.7
4.55
0.7
84.31
0.0
6.06
0.0
3.38
0.0
1.17
0.0
4.26
0.0
9.99
0.0
2.91
0.0
12.42
0.0
2.50
0.0
8.69
0.0
5.16
0.0
15.05
0.0
9.42
0.0
7.18
0.0
91.71
0.0
16.78
0.0
271.30
0.0
8.31
0.0
11.32
0.0
5.49
0.0
21.58
0.0
23.91
0.0
5.30
0.0
7.86
0.0
60.98
0.0
8.80
0.0
5.31
0.0
435.33
0.0
28.05
0.0
14.53
0.0
22.71
0.0
47.42
0.0
18.56
0.0
19.81
0.0
16.43
0.0
22.58
0.0
11.37
0.0
18.76
0.0
18.75
0.0
12.35
0.0
52.24
0.0
23.47
0.0
96.84
0.0

(8)
Source
Podes Ag Module/FAO
Podes Ag Module/FAO
Podes Ag Module/FAO
SNL/GEM
SNL/GEM
SNL/GEM
SNL/GEM
SNL/GEM
SNL/GEM
SNL/GEM
SNL/GEM
SNL/GEM
FAO
FAO
FAO
FAO
FAO
FAO
FAO
FAO
FAO
FAO
FAO
FAO
FAO
FAO
FAO
FAO
FAO
FAO
FAO
FAO
FAO
FAO
FAO
FAO
FAO
GEM
GEM
GEM
GEM
GEM
GEM
GEM
GEM
GEM

Table C.26: Commodity Volatility Predictors (Indonesia)
(1)
Mean
Cash crop shock, std. dev.
Food crop shock, std. dev.
Major cash crop shock, std. dev.

0.07
0.04
0.04

(2)

(3)

Median 25th Pct.
0.06
0.03
0.01

0.01
0.00
0.00

(4)

(5)

75th Pct.

Corr.
w/
Any

0.11
0.06
0.08

-0.11
0.02
-0.16

(6)

(7)

(8)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
0.06
0.7
0.04
0.7
0.04
0.7

Source
Podes Ag Module/FAO
Podes Ag Module/FAO
Podes Ag Module/FAO

Table C.27: Weather Shock Predictors (Indonesia)
(1)

Temperature, log deviation from average
Rainfall, log deviation from average

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Mean Median 25th Pct. 75th Pct.

Corr.
w/
Any

0.01
-0.10

0.01
0.04

0.01
-0.09

0.00
-0.24

0.02
0.09

(6)

(7)

(8)

Within/
Be% Miss Source
tween
Var.
0.69
0.0
UDel
1.39
0.0
UDel

Table C.28: Weather History Predictors (Indonesia)
(1)

Rainfall, 1900-1990 average
Temperature, 1900-1990 average
Rainfall, 1900-1990 standard deviation
Temperature, 1900-1990 standard deviation

(2)

(3)

(4)

Mean

Median 25th Pct. 75th Pct.

224.22
25.32
0.19
0.01

221.46
25.93
0.18
0.01

70

184.44
24.32
0.14
0.01

260.17
26.66
0.22
0.02

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Within/
Corr.
Be% Miss Source
w/
tween
Any
Var.
-0.15
0.00
0.0
UDel
0.06
0.00
0.0
UDel
0.03
0.00
0.0
UDel
0.05
0.00
0.0
UDel

C.3.2

Colombia

Table C.29: Violence Predictors (Colombia)

Guerilla attacks, number
Paramilitary attacks, number
Clashes, number
Casualties
Government attacks, number
Paramilitary initiated massacres
Guerilla initiated massacres
Paramilitary attacks on infrastructure
Paramilitary attacks, non-infrastructure
All attacks, number
Violent events (attacks and clashes)
Any violent event, indicator
Five or more violent events, indicator
More than 1 s.d. increase in non-crime incidents

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Mean

Median

25th Pct.

75th Pct.

Corr.
w/
Any

0.62
0.09
0.54
2.23
0.10
0.06
0.01
0.00
0.09
0.81
1.36
0.36
0.09
0.05

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.00

0.33
0.20
0.35
0.27
0.22
0.17
0.09
0.05
0.19
0.35
0.38
0.46
0.35
0.23

(6)

(7)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
0.94
0.0
1.67
0.0
1.19
0.0
1.47
0.0
1.78
0.0
1.89
0.0
2.29
0.0
2.76
0.0
1.72
0.0
0.88
0.0
0.88
0.0
1.18
0.0
1.19
0.0
2.27
0.0

(8)
Source
CERAC
CERAC
CERAC
CERAC
CERAC
CERAC
CERAC
CERAC
CERAC
CERAC
CERAC
CERAC
CERAC
CERAC

Table C.30: Population Predictors (Colombia)
(1)

(2)

Mean Median
log population, millions
Large municipalities (pop. exceeds 250K)
Population density
Population Growth (ln ch.)

-4.27
0.02
0.00
0.01

-4.34
0.00
0.00
0.01

71

(3)

(4)

25th Pct. 75th Pct.
-4.97
0.00
0.00
-0.01

-3.68
0.00
0.00
0.02

(5)

(6)

(7)

Within/
Corr.
Be% Miss
w/
tween
Any
Var.
0.30
0.08
0.0
0.13
0.00
0.0
0.04
0.09
0.0
0.04
0.91
0.0

(8)
Source
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE

Table C.31: Historical Traits Predictors (Colombia)
(1)

Total Crown Employees
Non-military Crown Employees
Colonial State Presence Index
City Status Dummy
Distance to royal roads
Share of slaves in population in 1843
Slave presence in 1843 dummy
Number of Indians in 1560
Number of encomiendas in 1560
Presence of encomiendas in 1560 dummy
Presence of colonial gold mines in 1560 dummy
Foundation date
Population in 1843 (mean imputed)
Dummy for missing population in 1843

(2)

(3)

(4)

Mean

Median

25th Pct.

75th Pct.

0.23
0.23
0.57
0.04
29.09
0.01
0.42
1.99
0.32
0.32
0.04
1783.59
2990.87
0.41

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
14.39
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1799.00
2892.24
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
6.29
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1701.00
2087.00
0.00

0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
32.51
0.00
1.00
5.14
0.69
1.00
0.00
1888.00
3073.00
1.00

72

(5)

(6)

(7)

Within/
Corr.
Be% Miss
w/
tween
Any
Var.
0.11
0.00
3.6
0.11
0.00
3.6
0.06
0.00
3.6
0.09
0.00
3.6
0.11
0.00
3.6
0.12
0.00
3.6
0.07
0.00
3.6
-0.13
0.00
3.6
-0.07
0.00
3.6
-0.11
0.00
3.6
0.10
0.00
3.6
0.05
0.00
3.7
0.05
0.00
3.6
0.05
0.00
3.6

(8)
Source
Acemoglu
Acemoglu
Acemoglu
Acemoglu
Acemoglu
Acemoglu
Acemoglu
Acemoglu
Acemoglu
Acemoglu
Acemoglu
Acemoglu
Acemoglu
Acemoglu

et
et
et
et
et
et
et
et
et
et
et
et
et
et

al.
al.
al.
al.
al.
al.
al.
al.
al.
al.
al.
al.
al.
al.

2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015
2015

Table C.32: Geography Predictors (Colombia)
(1)
Mean
Surface area, sq. km.
Proportion of Land Uninhabitable
% optimal sutiable for sugar cane
% suboptimal suitable for sugar cane
% suitable for sugar cane
% no suitable for sugar cane
% optimal sutiable for palm
% suboptimal suitable for palm
% suitable for palm
% no suitable for palm
Slope Mean
Slope Standard Deviation
Percentage of slightly flat terrain
Percentage of slightly sloped terrain
Percentage of moderately sloped terrain
Percentage of strongly sloped terrain
Percentage of slightly steep terrain
Percentage of moderately steep terrain
Percentage stongly steep terrain
Mean of water availability
Standard Deviation of water availability
Meters of main rivers
Meters of secondary rivers
Meters of tertiary rivers
Density of Primary Rivers, km/km2
Density of Secondary Rivers, km/km2
Density of Tertiary Rivers, km/km2
Flat land share
Hill share
Mountain share
Valley share
Water bodies share
Hilly terrain proportion
Mountainous terrain proportion
Rugged terrain proportion
Maximum slope

1088.29
0.16
0.36
0.11
0.47
0.62
0.43
0.25
0.68
0.41
35.62
19.50
0.20
0.05
0.07
0.15
0.14
0.30
0.11
2.30
0.53
11436.58
23726.09
12113.59
33.62
28.93
22.40
0.02
0.21
0.68
0.14
0.00
0.27
0.10
0.01
43.63

(2)

(4)

(5)

Median 25th Pct.

75th Pct.

Corr.
w/
Any

289.95
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.25
1.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.50
36.63
21.06
0.14
0.02
0.05
0.12
0.14
0.33
0.08
2.27
0.51
0.00
381.10
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.92
0.00
0.00
0.28
0.06
0.00
50.98

709.77
0.30
1.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.50
1.00
0.75
46.94
23.09
0.26
0.08
0.07
0.19
0.18
0.41
0.15
2.60
0.64
5503.38
17630.90
8811.40
12.71
40.34
24.12
0.00
0.32
1.00
0.18
0.00
0.44
0.16
0.01
65.60

0.08
0.03
-0.02
0.03
-0.01
0.10
-0.04
0.01
-0.04
0.14
0.08
0.10
0.04
0.02
-0.07
-0.06
-0.04
0.07
0.01
0.15
0.02
0.02
0.09
0.17
-0.01
0.04
0.02
0.01
0.06
-0.01
0.04
0.00
0.05
0.04
0.07
0.21

73

(3)

133.25
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.25
0.00
21.04
15.74
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.04
0.05
0.09
0.00
1.90
0.45
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.25
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.00
0.00
14.86

(6)

(7)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
0.11
0.0
0.00
3.2
0.00
0.7
0.00
0.7
0.00
0.7
0.00
0.7
0.00
0.7
0.00
0.7
0.00
0.7
0.00
0.7
0.00
32.3
0.00
32.3
0.00
32.3
0.00
32.3
0.00
32.3
0.00
32.3
0.00
32.3
0.00
32.3
0.00
32.3
0.00
32.3
0.00
32.3
0.00
2.3
0.00
2.3
0.00
2.3
0.00
3.2
0.00
3.2
0.00
3.2
0.00
1.8
0.00
1.8
0.00
1.8
0.00
1.8
0.00
1.8
0.00
0.3
0.00
0.3
0.00
0.3
0.00
0.4

(8)
Source
CEDE
CEDE
Agriculture Ministry
Agriculture Ministry
Agriculture Ministry
Agriculture Ministry
Agriculture Ministry
Agriculture Ministry
Agriculture Ministry
Agriculture Ministry
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE

Table C.33: Remoteness Predictors (Colombia)

Paved Roads, km
Unpaved Roads, km
Paved Secondary Roads, km
Unpaved Secondary Roads, km
Dirt Roads, km
Paved Roads Density, km/km2
Unpaved Roads Density, km/km2
Paved Secondary Roads Density, km/km2
Unpaved Secondary Roads Density, km/km2
Dirt Roads Density, km/km2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Mean

Median

25th Pct.

75th Pct.

Corr.
w/
Any

5749.71
2493.58
3533.15
14256.91
16590.36
19.47
4.64
13.71
46.53
40.05

0.00
0.00
0.00
6858.80
4618.80
0.00
0.00
0.00
22.51
16.08

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

7352.70
0.00
1807.24
20421.30
18743.80
28.18
0.00
6.05
72.47
57.52

0.15
0.11
0.10
0.15
0.14
-0.05
0.02
-0.09
-0.09
-0.05

(6)

(7)

(8)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
0.00
1.8
0.00
1.8
0.00
1.8
0.00
1.8
0.00
1.8
0.00
4.7
0.00
4.7
0.00
4.7
0.00
4.7
0.00
4.7

Source
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE
CEDE

Table C.34: Distributional Measures Predictors (Colombia)
(1)

(2)

(3)
th

Mean Median
Gini Coefficient for Land Holdings
Unmet Basic Needs Index, 1993
Life Quality Index

0.72
59.80
55.80

25

0.72
52.41
54.20

(4)
th

Pct. 75

0.64
38.24
46.80

Pct.

(5)
Corr.
w/
Any

0.76
68.73
64.30

0.06
0.12
0.10

(6)

(7)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
0.00
16.6
0.00
0.0
0.00
1.9

(8)
Source
DANE
DANE
DANE

Table C.35: DMZ Proximity Predictors (Colombia)
(1)
Mean
Municipality is part of Demilitarized Zone
Distance to DMZ

0.00
99.39

(2)

(3)

Median 25th Pct.
0.00
91.80

74

0.00
55.42

(4)

(5)

75th Pct.

Corr.
w/
Any

0.00
127.33

0.05
0.01

(6)

(7)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
0.00
0.0
0.00
1.6

(8)
Source
Authors’ Calculations
Authors’ Calculations

Table C.36: Government Finance Predictors (Colombia)
(1)

Total Government Revenue, Mil. Pesos per Cap.
Total Government Spending, Mil. Pesos per Cap.
Current Government Revenue, Mil. Pesos per Cap.
Current Government Spending, Mil. Pesos per Cap.
Current Government Deficit, Mil. Pesos per Cap.
Capital Spending, Mil. Pesos per Cap.
Tax Revenue, Mil. Pesos per Cap.
Nontax Revenue, Mil. Pesos per Cap.
Functional Government Spending, Mil. Pesos per Cap.
Capital Spending (Remaining Investments), Mil. Pesos per Cap.
Land tax revenue, Mil. Pesos per Cap.
Industry tax revenue, Mil. Pesos per Cap.
Other tax revenue, Mil. Pesos per Cap.
Personel spending, Mil. Pesos per Cap.
Capital Revenue, Mil. Pesos per Cap.
Total Deficit, Mil. Pesos per Cap.
Financing Spending, Mil. Pesos per Cap.
Current Transfer Income, Mil. Pesos per Cap.
Spending on Capital Formation, Mil. Pesos per Cap.
Internal or External Credit, Mil. Pesos per Cap.
Balance Sheet Resources, Mil. Pesos per Cap.
General Expenditure, Mil. Pesos per Cap.
Spending for Transfers, Mil. Pesos per Cap.
National Expenditure, Mil. Pesos

(2)

(3)

(4)

Mean

Median

25th Pct.

75th Pct.

4.91
4.90
4.03
3.77
0.01
4.43
2.52
1.90
3.69
3.19
1.89
1.28
1.46
3.03
3.83
-0.01
0.01
3.34
3.90
-0.00
0.01
2.61
1.87
35266.08

5.11
5.11
3.97
3.82
0.01
4.72
2.43
1.80
3.73
3.85
1.79
0.89
1.13
3.05
4.64
0.00
-0.00
3.31
3.97
-0.00
-0.00
2.58
1.86
8228.00

4.02
3.99
3.50
3.18
-0.00
3.30
1.47
0.96
3.11
1.08
1.02
0.27
0.29
2.42
1.92
-0.02
-0.01
2.89
3.10
-0.00
-0.02
2.03
0.81
4378.00

5.72
5.72
4.49
4.33
0.03
5.43
3.45
2.72
4.26
4.83
2.66
1.91
2.44
3.59
5.38
0.01
0.02
3.78
4.67
0.01
0.01
3.14
2.65
16382.00

75

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Within/
Corr.
Be% Miss Source
w/
tween
Any
Var.
-0.04
2.05
9.3
CEDE
-0.04
2.08
9.0
CEDE
-0.11
1.26
9.3
CEDE
-0.06
1.53
9.2
CEDE
-0.01
3.71
9.0
CEDE
-0.03
2.35
9.3
CEDE
-0.03
1.29
9.5
CEDE
-0.03
1.57
10.0
CEDE
-0.07
1.47
9.4
CEDE
0.01
4.06
12.3
CEDE
-0.11
1.14
10.2
CEDE
0.02
1.08
12.3
CEDE
0.00
1.65
10.6
CEDE
-0.07
1.43
9.8
CEDE
-0.01
3.50
27.4
CEDE
0.00
6.59
9.0
CEDE
-0.00
6.59
9.0
CEDE
-0.17
0.92
11.7
CEDE
-0.08
1.64
9.4
CEDE
-0.00
3.53
26.1
CEDE
-0.00
4.47
9.0
CEDE
-0.10
1.30
9.4
CEDE
-0.02
2.05
13.1
CEDE
0.07
0.00
0.7
CEDE

Table C.37: Electoral Predictors (Colombia)

Mayor Senate Election Participation Rate
Chamber Election Participation Rate
Senate Election Participation Rate
National Election, indicator
Presidential Election, indicator
Local Election, indicator
Mayoral Election, indicator
Herfindahl Index, Chamber
Factionalization Index, Chamber
Polarization Index, Chamber
Herfindahl Index, Senate
Factionalization Index, Senate
Polarization Index, Senate
Winner’s Margin, Chamber
Winner’s Margin, Senate
Winner’s Share, Mayor
Winner’s Share, Chamber
Second Party’s Share, Chamber
Winner’s Share, Senate
Second Party’s Share, Senate
Winning Party Leans Other, Chamber, Indicator
Winning Party Leans Right, Chamber, Indicator
Winning Party Leans Left, Chamber, Indicator
Winning Party Leans Other, Senate, Indicator
Winning Party Leans Right, Senate, Indicator
Winning Party Leans Left, Senate, Indicator
Second Party Leans Other, Chamber, Indicator
Second Party Leans Right, Chamber, Indicator
Second Party Leans Left, Chamber, Indicator
Second Party Leans Other, Senate, Indicator
Second Party Leans Right, Senate, Indicator
Second Party Leans Left, Senate, Indicator
Winning Party Other, Mayor, Indicator
Winning Party Liberal, Mayor, Indicator
Winning Party Conservative, Mayor, Indicator
Winning Party Other, Chamber, Indicator
Winning Party Liberal, Chamber, Indicator
Winning Party Conservative, Chamber, Indicator
Winning Party Other, Senate, Indicator
Winning Party Liberal, Senate, Indicator
Winning Party Conservative, Senate, Indicator
Second Party Other, Chamber, Indicator
Second Party Liberal, Chamber, Indicator
Second Party Conservative, Chamber, Indicator
Second Party Other, Senate, Indicator
Second Party Liberal, Senate, Indicator
Second Party Conservative, Senate, Indicator

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Mean

Median

25th Pct.

75th Pct.

Corr.
w/
Any

0.33
0.23
0.23
0.29
0.21
0.43
0.36
4101.27
0.64
0.19
3461.82
0.71
0.18
0.32
0.29
0.58
0.50
0.18
0.46
0.17
0.03
0.29
0.69
0.05
0.20
0.76
0.14
0.51
0.37
0.20
0.50
0.32
0.31
0.43
0.28
0.18
0.62
0.21
0.20
0.69
0.13
0.43
0.26
0.33
0.52
0.22
0.28

0.32
0.21
0.21
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
3679.04
0.65
0.18
3064.05
0.71
0.17
0.27
0.26
0.54
0.48
0.18
0.45
0.17
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00

0.25
0.15
0.14
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
2770.71
0.54
0.16
2358.01
0.61
0.16
0.12
0.11
0.47
0.37
0.11
0.34
0.10
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.40
0.29
0.29
1.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
4871.35
0.74
0.20
4102.43
0.78
0.19
0.48
0.44
0.66
0.63
0.25
0.57
0.23
0.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.00
1.00

-0.16
-0.09
-0.10
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
-0.01
0.04
0.09
0.08
0.03
0.10
0.07
-0.00
0.01
0.01
-0.01
-0.02
-0.01
-0.05
0.02
-0.11
0.12
0.03
-0.06
0.06
0.07
0.01
-0.04
0.06
-0.04
0.01
0.06
0.04
-0.09
0.03
0.09
-0.11
0.02
0.04
-0.06
0.05
-0.06
0.03
0.04
-0.01
-0.01

76

(6)

(7)

(8)

Within/
Be% Miss Source
tween
Var.
0.66
1.9
CEDE
0.76
0.2
CEDE
0.96
0.2
CEDE
Inf
0.0
CEDE
Inf
0.0
CEDE
Inf
0.0
CEDE
Inf
0.0
CEDE
0.74
0.2
CEDE
0.75
0.2
CEDE
0.65
0.2
CEDE
0.88
0.2
CEDE
0.81
0.2
CEDE
0.64
0.2
CEDE
0.92
0.7
CEDE
1.36
0.7
CEDE
1.55
2.8
CEDE
1.07
0.7
CEDE
0.99
0.7
CEDE
1.33
0.7
CEDE
1.37
0.7
CEDE
1.50
0.3
CEDE
0.70
0.3
CEDE
0.73
0.3
CEDE
1.48
0.3
CEDE
1.06
0.3
CEDE
1.09
0.3
CEDE
1.06
0.3
CEDE
1.06
0.3
CEDE
1.00
0.3
CEDE
1.32
0.3
CEDE
1.18
0.3
CEDE
1.14
0.3
CEDE
1.47
1.9
CEDE
0.90
1.9
CEDE
0.88
1.9
CEDE
1.46
0.2
CEDE
0.90
0.2
CEDE
0.85
0.2
CEDE
1.59
0.2
CEDE
1.27
0.2
CEDE
1.41
0.2
CEDE
1.22
0.2
CEDE
1.14
0.2
CEDE
1.28
0.2
CEDE
1.67
0.2
CEDE
1.54
0.2
CEDE
1.61
0.2
CEDE

Table C.38: U.S. Military Involvement Predictors (Colombia)
(1)

Log U.S. military aid to Colombia
Log U.S. narcotics aid to Colombia
Log U.S. military and narcotics aid to Colombia
Base Presence
Base Presence X US mil. and narc. assistance (ln ch.)
Base Presence X US military assistance (ln ch.)
Base Presence X US narcotics assistance (ln ch.)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Mean

Median

25th Pct.

75th Pct.

0.01
0.22
0.09
0.03
0.00
-0.00
0.01

0.18
0.11
0.11
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

-1.04
-0.01
-0.41
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.81
0.74
0.71
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

(6)

(7)

Within/
Corr.
Be% Miss
w/
tween
Any
Var.
-0.03
Inf
0.0
-0.00
Inf
0.0
-0.01
Inf
0.0
0.11
0.06
0.0
0.01
12.80
0.0
-0.01
47.80
0.0
0.02
5.20
0.0

(8)
Source
USAID
USAID
USAID
Dube and Naidu 2015
USAID/Dube and Naidu 2015
USAID/Dube and Naidu 2015
USAID/Dube and Naidu 2015

Table C.39: Commodity Production Predictors (Colombia)
(1)
Mean
Oil production, 1988, 00,000s bar/day
Coal Reserves, 1978, indicator
Precious metal mining, 1978, hectares
Gold production, Department, 1987
Coal production, Department, 1990
Coffee Cultivation, thsd. hectares, 1997

0.00
0.32
589.02
2605.27
638.18
0.85

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Median 25th Pct. 75th Pct.

Corr.
w/
Any

0.00
0.00
0.00
223.15
0.00
0.05

0.07
-0.07
0.09
0.15
-0.16
0.14

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

0.00
1.00
0.00
555.26
948.00
0.96

(6)

(7)

(8)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
0.00
0.0
0.00
0.0
0.00
0.0
0.00
0.3
0.00
1.2
0.00
1.9

Source
MME
USGS
Jacome (1978)
Igneominas
Igneominas
NFCG

Table C.40: Commodity Shock Predictors (Colombia)

Coffee Cultivation (000s hec., 1997) X Coffee Price (log ch.)
Oil Production (00,000s barrels/day, 1988) X Oil Price (log ch.)
Mining (000s hectares, 1978) X Gold Price (log ch.)
Coal Reserves Indicator (1978) X Oil Price (log ch.)
Mining (000s hectares, 1978) X Silver Price (log ch.)
Mining (000s hectares, 1978) X Platinum Price (log ch.)
log internal coffee price, thsds 2006 pesos/lb
log int’l oil price, thsds 2006 pesos/barrel
log int’l gold price, millions 2006 pesos/ounce
log int’l coal price, thsds 2006 pesos/ton
log int’l silver price, millions 2006 pesos/ounce
log int’l platinum price, millions 2006 pesos/ounce

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Mean

Median

25th Pct.

75th Pct.

Corr.
w/
Any

-0.04
0.00
-14.01
-0.00
0.61
10.66
-0.04
0.01
-0.02
-0.01
0.00
0.02

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.07
-0.11
-0.04
-0.02
0.03
-0.03

-0.04
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
-0.16
-0.17
-0.10
-0.12
-0.10
-0.08

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.06
0.16
0.07
0.02
0.08
0.06

-0.04
0.00
-0.02
-0.02
-0.00
0.01
-0.04
0.03
0.04
0.00
-0.00
0.04

77

(6)

(7)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
4.36
1.9
30.28
0.0
5.28
0.0
33.11
0.0
37.22
0.0
10.19
0.0
Inf
0.0
Inf
0.0
Inf
0.0
Inf
0.0
Inf
0.0
Inf
0.0

(8)
Source
NFCG
IFS/MME
GFD/Jacome (1978)
IMF/USGS
GFD/Jacome (1978)
GFD/Jacome (1978)
NFCG
IFS
GFD
IMF
GFD
GFD

Table C.41: Drug Production Predictors (Colombia)
(1)
Mean
Poppy Production, hectares, 1994
Poppy Production, indicator, 1994
Coca Production, hectares, 1994
Coca Production, indicator, 1994
Erradicated hectares, 1994
Erradication occured, indicator, 1994

(2)

(3)
th

Median 25

19.89
0.14
70.12
0.05
3.78
0.01

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

(4)

Pct.

th

75

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

(5)

Pct.

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

Corr.
w/
Any
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.12
0.05
0.07

(6)

(7)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
0.00
0.0
0.00
0.0
0.00
0.0
0.00
0.0
0.00
0.0
0.00
0.0

(8)
Source
DNE
DNE
DNE
DNE
DNE
DNE

Table C.42: Drug Shock Predictors (Colombia)
(1)

(2)

(3)

Mean Median 25th Pct.
Coca Production in Colombia, hectares
Coke Production in Colombia, tons
Eradication in Colombia, hectares
Coca Leaf Production in Colombia, tons
Cocaine Production in Colombia, tons
Cocaine Retail Price, Europe, log change
Cocaine Wholesale Price, Europe, log change
Cocaine Wholesale Price, U.S., log change
Coca Production in Bolivia, hectares
Coca Production in Peru, hectares
Coca Production in Bolivia, Colombia, and Peru, hectares
coca leaf production, world total
Coke Production in Bolivia, tons
Coke Production in Peru, tons
Coke Production in Bolivia, Colombia, and Peru, tons
Coke Production in Bolivia and Peru, tons
Eradication in Bolivia, hectares
Coca Leaf Production in Bolivia, tons
Cocaine Production in Bolivia, tons
cocaine exports to switzerland from colombia
Eradication in Peru, hectares
Coca Leaf Production in Peru, tons
Cocaine Production in Colombia, tons
cocaine exports to switzerland from peru
U.S. Wholesale Price (log ch.) X Hect. Coca Prod. 1994

0.05
-0.07
0.37
0.09
0.14
-0.02
-0.05
-0.03
-0.04
-0.06
-0.02
-0.01
-0.04
0.14
0.01
-0.06
0.00
-0.05
-0.05
0.09
0.02
-0.05
-0.04
-0.07
1.85

78

0.04
0.01
0.39
0.01
0.14
-0.01
-0.05
-0.01
0.00
-0.00
-0.02
-0.01
0.01
0.14
0.00
0.03
-0.07
-0.00
0.01
0.05
-0.00
0.03
0.05
0.08
0.00

-0.07
-0.29
-0.11
-0.06
-0.04
-0.12
-0.07
-0.08
-0.06
-0.20
-0.08
-0.08
-0.11
-0.04
-0.06
-0.21
-0.39
-0.12
-0.11
-0.25
-0.39
-0.31
-0.29
-0.25
0.00

(4)
75th Pct.
0.17
0.06
0.67
0.25
0.27
0.05
-0.00
0.07
0.08
0.06
0.03
0.08
0.15
0.27
0.07
0.06
0.28
0.06
0.15
0.47
0.63
0.12
0.06
0.18
0.00

(5)

(6)

(7)

Within/
Corr.
Be% Miss
w/
tween
Any
Var.
-0.00
Inf
0.0
-0.04
Inf
0.0
-0.03
Inf
0.0
-0.02
Inf
0.0
-0.04
Inf
0.0
-0.03
Inf
0.0
-0.04
Inf
0.0
-0.03
Inf
0.0
-0.03
Inf
0.0
-0.01
Inf
0.0
-0.01
Inf
0.0
-0.03
Inf
0.0
-0.04
Inf
0.0
-0.04
Inf
0.0
-0.05
Inf
0.0
-0.04
Inf
0.0
0.00
Inf
0.0
-0.03
Inf
0.0
-0.04
Inf
0.0
-0.01
Inf
0.0
0.02
Inf
0.0
-0.04
Inf
0.0
-0.04
Inf
0.0
-0.02
Inf
0.0
0.01
3.98
0.0

(8)
Source
UNODC
UNODC
UNODC
UNODC
NA
UNODC
UNODC
UNODC
UNODC
UNODC
UNODC
NA
UNODC
UNODC
UNODC
UNODC
UNODC
UNODC
UNODC
NA
UNODC
UNODC
UNODC
NA
DNE/UNODC

Table C.43: Weather History Predictors (Colombia)
(1)

Rainfall, 1900-1990 average
Rainfall, 1900-1990 S.D.
Temperature, 1900-1990 average
Temperature, 1900-1990 S.D.

(2)

(3)

Mean

Median 25th Pct.

168.37
0.15
21.07
0.03

154.98
0.14
21.03
0.03

115.96
0.12
17.27
0.02

(4)

(5)

75th Pct.

Corr.
w/
Any

201.61
0.17
25.37
0.03

0.16
-0.13
0.14
-0.07

(6)

(7)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
0.00
0.2
0.00
0.2
0.00
0.2
0.00
0.2

(8)
Source
UDel
UDel
UDel
UDel

Table C.44: Weather Shock Predictors (Colombia)
(1)
Mean
Rainfall, log deviation from average
Temperature, log deviation from average

-0.09
0.01

(2)

(3)

Median 25th Pct.
-0.08
0.01

79

-0.17
0.00

(4)

(5)

75th Pct.

Corr.
w/
Any

-0.00
0.03

0.04
-0.04

(6)

(7)

Within/
Be% Miss
tween
Var.
3.47
0.2
2.42
0.2

(8)
Source
UDel
UDel

C.4

Correlating Commodity Price and Weather Shocks to Conflict

Our finding that time varying shocks add little to our predictive power in forecasting conflict over
time is surprising. To ascertain that this does not stem from data quality issues, in this section, we
look more closely at two specific types of shocks constructed in our data — weather and commodity
price shocks. Specifically, we verify that these shocks correlate with conflict outcomes in ways that
are consistent with prior findings in the literature on causes of conflict. To this end, we regress
each of our outcomes—both the year-ahead and contemporaneous conflict outcomes—on the price
and weather shocks as well as year and location fixed effects. We report the coefficient estimates
with standard errors clustered at the sub-district/municipality level.
Table C.45 reports the results of these regressions for Indonesia. Rainfall has a statistically
negative association with future conflict escalations but exhibits no other correlations. Temperature
shocks have a statistically significant positive association with the incidence of five or more events
in the current year and in the following year. This is consistent with Hsiang et al. (2013) who
find more extreme weather associated with a higher incidence of conflict across countries and with
Wright and Signoret (2016) who find that positive temperature shocks increase the likelihood of
(most types of) intergroup conflict within Indonesia.
Food crop prices do not exhibit a consistent relationship with any indicators of conflict. This
is somewhat inconsistent with McGuirk and Burke (2017) who find that higher food prices in SubSaharan Africa are positively associated with conflict in areas that are net consumers. Of course,
our shocks are weighted by production, so we might expect the opposite effect, as commodity
prices raise demand for labor. Major cash crops, on the other hand, have a negative association
with indicators of five or more events and with future escalations. Since they are not consumed
locally, the likely mechanism is an increase in wages and the opportunity cost of conflict. These
results, that correlations are statistically significant for some but not all indicators, underscore that
the relationship between weather and conflict incidence is complex—with different correlations with
the intensive and extensive margin as well as different correlations with levels versus changes.
Table C.46 shows a similar exercise for Colombia. We do not find a statistically significant

80

relationship between weather and conflict. In examining the correlations with commodity prices,
we look at coffee and oil price shocks, as in Dube and Vargas (2013). However, our specifications
differ along three dimensions. First, to account for endogeneity, their paper instruments coffee prices
with the coffee production levels of other countries — as Colombia was a major producer of coffee
in the international market over 1988-2005. Second they examine effects on number of conflict
events in each municipality-year, while we examine indicators for the occurrence of any conflict
event, more than five events and an escalation. Third, they examine effects on contemporaneous
conflict, while we examine effects contemporaneously and in the following year.
Consistent with Dube and Vargas (2013), we find that coffee price shocks are negatively associated with current conflict. However, we observe an insignificant association with future conflict.
With oil prices, we observe positive significant positive correlations with indicators of five or more
events and escalations of conflict one year ahead.
These results are not meant to comment on the mechanisms that cause conflict in Indonesia
nor Colombia. As discussed above, the conflict literature has taken more sophisticated approaches
to estimating these relationships that takes into account endogeneity and other modeling concerns.
Instead, we emphasize that the commodity price and weather shocks we examine are correlated
with conflict in ways that are largely consistent with results on the literature examining the causes
of conflict. To the extent that there is variation in the strength of this correlation, this variation
may reflect, in part, nuanced underlying relationships between time varying shocks and conflict
outcomes.

81

Table C.45: Indonesia Shocks with Fixed Effects
Rainfall
Dep. Var.: conflict in

t

t+1

Type of Shock
Temperature
Food Price
t

t+1

t

t+1

Major Cash Crop Price
t

t+1

-0.005
(0.004)

0.001
(0.004)

0.018*** 0.006* -0.003
0.004 -0.003**
(0.004) (0.004) (0.003) (0.003) (0.001)
(c) ≥ 1 s.d. increase in events

-0.003**
(0.001)

(a) Any violent event
shock in t

0.004
(0.006)

-0.002
(0.005)

shock in t

-0.002
(0.003)

-0.004
(0.003)

shock in t

-0.003
(0.003)

-0.006**
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.007)

-0.009 -0.003 -0.003
(0.008) (0.004) (0.004)
(b) ≥ 5 violent events

0.003
(0.003)

-0.001
(0.002)

0.001
0.003
(0.002) (0.002)

-0.002
(0.001)

-0.002*
(0.001)

Notes: Right hand-side variables are standardized to have mean zero and standard
deviation 1. Standard errors clustered at the sub-district level. Sub-district and year
fixed effects included but not reported. Price shocks are defined as 1 year log change.
Food prices are weighted by each food crops share of agriculture in 2002, as are cash
crop prices. Weather shocks are defined as log differences from historical means.

82

Table C.46: Colombia Shocks with Fixed Effects
Rainfall
Dep. Var.: conflict in

t

t+1

Type of Shock
Temperature
Coffee Price
t

t+1

t

t+1

Oil Price
t

t+1

0.000
(0.001)

(a) Any violent event
shock in t

0.003
(0.005)

0.000
0.005
0.013*
-0.001
0.003
(0.005) (0.007) (0.007)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(b) ≥ 5 violent events

-0.003
(0.002)

shock in t

0.000
(0.003)

-0.004
0.003
0.002 -0.008*** -0.001
(0.003) (0.004) (0.004)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(c) ≥ 1 s.d. increase in events

0.002 0.008***
(0.001) (0.002)

shock in t

0.003
(0.002)

-0.002
0.002
(0.002) (0.003)

0.001 0.009***
(0.001) (0.001)

0.001
(0.003)

-0.002
(0.002)

-0.004
(0.002)

Notes: Right hand-side variables are standardized to have mean zero and standard
deviation 1. Standard errors clustered at the municipality level. Municipality and year
fixed effects included but not reported. Price shocks are defined as 1 year log change.
Coffee prices are weighted by coffee cultivation in 1997, oil prices are weighted by 1988
oil production. Weather shocks are defined as log differences from historical means.

83

