Audits for Accountability:
Evidence from Municipal By-Elections in South Africa
May 14, 2021
Daniel Berliner* and Joachim Wehner†
London School of Economics and Political Science
Conditionally accepted, The Journal of Politics
*

Associate Professor of Political Science and Public Policy, Department of Government, London
School of Economics and Political Science, d.berliner@lse.ac.uk.
†
Associate Professor in Public Policy, Department of Government, London School of
Economics and Political Science, j.h.wehner@lse.ac.uk.
Abstract:
Theories of retrospective accountability assume that voters punish poor governance and reward
improvements, yet empirical evidence remains mixed. We extend this research to a new context,
assessing the impact of audits on electoral outcomes in South African municipalities. Our novel
identification strategy focuses on by-elections triggered by deaths in office of local councilors
and compares those taking place before and after audit results are announced each year. We find
that timely audit information affects the vote share of the responsible party, with voters
rewarding improvements and punishing poor audits by about 5 percentage points. Additional
individual-level survey evidence confirms the underpinning behavioral response more generally.
Our study is the first to demonstrate electoral accountability effects of audit information at full
scale, involving universal spatial and temporal coverage as well as public and organic
dissemination.
Keywords: Accountability; audits; corruption; elections; South Africa; transparency

Supplementary material for this article is available in the Appendix in the online edition.
Replication files are available in the JOP Data Archive on Dataverse
(http://thedata.harvard.edu/dvn/dv/jop). We gratefully acknowledge financial support for this
project from the Suntory and Toyota International Centres for Economics and Related
Disciplines (STICERD) and the Department of Government at LSE.

1

Can institutions of horizontal accountability serve to enable vertical accountability through
electoral sanctioning? To retrospectively reward or punish politicians, voters require timely and
credible information on their actions in office (e.g., Fiorina 1981, Przeworski et al. 1999). A
large literature investigates voter responses to information about corruption or the performance
of incumbents (e.g., Healy and Malhotra 2013, de Vries and Solaz 2017, Dunning et al. 2019a),
including from audits by official oversight bodies suggesting financial malfeasance. While some
find that audits do allow voters to punish poor governance (Ferraz and Finan 2008, Larreguy et
al. 2014, Bobonis et al. 2016), others yield mixed results (Chong et al. 2015, Buntaine et al.
2018; Arias et al. 2019a, 2019b). Boas et al. (2019: 398) even conclude that their findings “cast
doubt upon the ability of horizontal accountability institutions to induce vertical accountability
through public information campaigns.” Yet this scholarly pessimism comes at a time of
renewed investment in audit institutions around the world.
Clarifying when and where audit information can support electoral accountability
remains essential, for several reasons. First, effective horizontal accountability institutions have
been identified as crucial for the consolidation of new democracies (O’Donnell 1998), including
potentially enabling electoral sanctions (Boas et al. 2019). Second, increased funding is being
channeled towards supporting “supreme audit institutions” such as auditors-general or audit
courts. In 2017, one initiative recorded USD 68.4 million in annual support for capacity building
of these bodies in developing countries, with 583 projects in 198 locations.1 One stated aim of
this work is to increase their impact on accountability. Third, research highlights the importance

1

Since 2009, 23 bilateral and multilateral donors, including the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund,

have coordinated this work in cooperation with the International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions
(INTOSAI). See https://intosaidonor.org/sai-capacity-database/ [accessed October 15, 2019].

2

of public dissemination, political salience, and opportunities for coordination as conditions for
information to influence electoral behavior (e.g., Chang et al. 2010, Adida et al. 2019). While
audit information can enable these conditions, this potential varies importantly by context.
We offer new evidence, from a new context, by studying the effects of municipal audits
in South Africa. As every municipality is audited every year, and local elections are held all at
once every five years, we adopt a novel strategy for comparison. We focus on by-elections
triggered by deaths in office, comparing those where citizens do, and do not, have access to
timely audit information. Analyzing the period 2008 to 2015, we assess the impact on governing
party vote shares of the Auditor-General’s annual release of municipal audit results. This report
receives a high level of media attention and its findings are used by political actors. Comparing
by-elections held in the periods after each report’s release date, with those held during the rest of
each year, allows us to isolate the effect of audit information from underlying governance
conditions themselves. Our identification strategy thus relies on a natural experiment created by
the confluence of by-elections and audit releases. Our qualitative and quantitative assessments
rule out manipulation of their relative timing.
We find that voters punish poor audits and reward improvements, with effects on the vote
share of the responsible mayor’s party equivalent to roughly 5 percentage points. We also detect
very similar patterns in a separate analysis, using individual-level evidence from a nationwide
survey in the field before and after the release of the 2016-17 municipal audit report. Comparing
the periods before and after the release date, evaluations of mayoral performance improved in
municipalities where the new information demonstrated positive change and vice versa. Further,
we find that the post-release period sees increases in information salience, but not issue salience.

3

Studying these questions in the case of South Africa is particularly important for several
reasons. First, our evidence is from a new context where information is published by a credible
(and politically independent) official oversight body, based on audits conducted annually across
all municipalities rather than only a selection, and transmitted through regular media and
organizational channels that ensure nationwide attention. To our knowledge, no prior study
published to date has documented electoral impacts of audit information at similarly full scale in
both coverage and transmission. Second, we analyze two separate but closely aligned datasets,
complementing evidence on election outcomes with micro-level survey data to verify
underpinning behavioral assumptions. Third, our approach avoids potential concerns about
researchers or external actors manipulating information in the context of elections (CroninFurman and Lake 2018, Johnson 2018).
Finally, the South African context offers a “hard case” to identify accountability effects
of information, given the importance of both strong parties and racial identities to voting patterns
(Ferree 2011), and limited voter knowledge of individual local politicians (Mattes 2008). Most
research on the electoral effects of audits has examined directly-elected mayors or other
candidate-centered elections. In our case, few voters know the identity of candidates as opposed
to their party affiliation.2 Moreover, the information treatment pertains to a political party
governing a municipality rather than an individual seeking reelection – after all, the incumbent is
deceased. South African mayors are not directly elected but chosen from among local councils
based on party majorities. By examining the electoral effects of information in a party-centered
system, we help to clarify scope conditions (Grossman and Michelitch 2018: 295).

2

Only 14 percent of South Africans could name their local councilor in 2006, the third-lowest figure among 17

African countries (Mattes 2008: 120).

4

We proceed as follows: The next sections discuss our contribution in the context of prior
work and provide background on our empirical setting. We then discuss our research design, data
and specification, and results, before assessing the wider implications of our findings.

Why and When Audit Information Works for Accountability
Theories of retrospective accountability (e.g., Fiorina 1981, Przeworski et al. 1999) suggest that
credible and salient information about performance allows voters to reward incumbents for better
outcomes and punish them for worse ones. This expectation has been tested with different types
of information, including on the job performance of individual politicians (e.g., Humphreys and
Weinstein 2012, Grossman and Mitchelitch 2018, Adida et al. 2019), quality of public services
(e.g., Boyne et al. 2009, Lieberman et al. 2014, Gottlieb 2016), or, as in this study, corruption
and financial malfeasance. Many donors, policymakers, and civil society organizations advocate
information-based interventions to improve governance (Kosack and Fung 2014).
We situate our study within one specific domain of research on the electoral effects of
information about performance in office: where information originates with official government
audit bodies and concerns financial malfeasance; and where studies leverage experimental,
quasi- or natural-experimental research designs.3 We summarize selected features of existing

3

Dunning (2012: 18-20) distinguishes quasi-experiments with nonrandom treatment assignment from natural

experiments with “as-if” randomly-assigned treatments. Other research assesses voter responses to malfeasance
using survey experiments (e.g., Winters and Weitz-Shapiro 2013), or observationally based on scandals (e.g., Eggers
2014). However, such research designs each face different limitations. It may be difficult for survey experiments to
link to real-world voting behavior; or for observational studies to address concerns over selection-into-treatment,
discern the effects of information from scandal itself, or consider positive as well as negative information.

5

research in this domain in Table A1 in the Online Appendix, including studies in Brazil (Ferraz
and Finan 2008, Boas et al. 2019), Mexico (Larreguy et al. 2014; Chong et al. 2015; Arias et al.
2019a, 2019b), Puerto Rico (Bobonis et al. 2016), and Uganda (Buntaine et al. 2018).
Even holding constant the type and source of information – financial audits by official
bodies – within this subset of research, however, studies vary along several dimensions. Below,
we highlight several of these and suggest that audit institutions can indeed play an important role
in enabling electoral accountability, not only due to their potential credibility as sources, but also
their potential to introduce information at full scale. By scale we mean both the scale of
information – the spatial, temporal, and substantive coverage of information produced about
government performance – and scale of transmission – the extent to which the dissemination of
this information is both public and organic. These features highlight the novel context of our
study, offering the first-ever evidence (to our knowledge) on the electoral impacts of audits at
full scale on both dimensions, with a research design that enables identification of causal effects
even in the absence of randomized audits4 or researcher-manipulated treatments.

Credibility
Weitz-Shapiro and Winters (2016) show that voters discern between more and less credible
sources, and that a country’s supreme audit institution can be a trusted source of impartial and
reliable information. Several studies thus focus on information that originates with such a source.
For instance, in the Metaketa I study, three of six fully-implemented field experiments employed
information from a national or subnational audit body (Dunning et al. 2019a).

4

Several studies have leveraged Brazil’s randomized municipal audit program for inferential purposes (e.g., Ferraz

and Finan 2008, 2011; Brollo 2010; Avis et al. 2018).

6

Arguably as important is the credibility of the transmitter of this information. Some
studies highlight the crucial role of traditional media, especially local radio stations (Ferraz and
Finan 2008, Larreguy et al. 2014). Others evaluate information interventions delivered by
research organizations (Chong et al. 2015), paid enumerators (Boas et al. 2019), or nongovernmental organizations (Arias et al. 2019a, 2019b; Buntaine et al. 2018). The credibility of
these actors can differ substantially across different contexts. For instance, Botero et al. (2015)
find that radio stations and newspapers are among the most trusted institutions in Colombia,
while non-governmental organizations and political parties are the least trusted. This also points
towards an important distinction we discuss further below: some studies involving audit findings
examine the effects of these audits per se, as transmitted in their natural environment, while
others evaluate campaigns by other actors that reuse this information.

Scale of Information
One key difference across studies is the scale of audits themselves, in terms of spatial, temporal,
and substantive coverage. Audits at full scale are annual and universal in their coverage of the
relevant entities and funds audited. Many existing studies, however, focus on contexts where
only a limited selection of municipalities are audited each year (e.g., Ferraz and Finan 2008;
Larreguy et al. 2014; Arias et al. 2019a, 2019b), where resource constraints mean audits are less
frequent (Bobonis et al. 2016: 2376), or where audits cover intergovernmental transfers only.5
For instance, the Brazilian audit program of federal transfers evaluated by Ferraz and Finan
(2008: 707) excluded the largest 8 percent of municipalities and started with a sample of 26

5

In addition, delays dilute the relevance of audits. In the study by Boas et al. (2019: 390) in Pernambuco, Brazil,

audits only inform voters about performance in a new mayor’s first year by the end of a four-year term.

7

municipalities and then expanded to 50 and 60 in monthly lotteries – implying an annualized
audit probability of up to 14 percent for about 5000 authorities covered during this period.
Why might audit scale matter? Information that is nationwide in scope is likely to receive
more media attention and thus be more salient to voters (McCombs and Shaw 1972).
Universality of coverage enables systematic comparisons across entities, and repetition over time
facilitates comparisons with past performance. A more established audit program also means that
the resulting information has had time to become a regularized, expected part of the political
context, and to establish a track record of credibility – all features that may be more difficult for
a new form of political information introduced for the first time. Regular and timely intervals aid
the relevance of information for electoral decisions. Hence, studies of partial-scale information
may underestimate the effects of full-scale information.
But importantly, the reverse may also be true. Others have noted how results from smallscale development interventions may not hold when scaled up (Banerjee and Duflo 2009:167169, Deaton and Cartwright 2018), for reasons including negative spillovers, heterogeneous
effects, or general equilibrium adjustments. In the case of audit information, full spatial and
temporal scale could offer politicians greater opportunities to adjust their behavior or induce
political backlashes. The “novelty factor” of audits may wear off once they are ubiquitous and
familiar. It is thus essential to confirm whether the effects of partial-scale audits identified in
existing studies can, in fact, hold at full scale.

Scale of Transmission
How do voters receive information about politician malfeasance? In ordinary electoral situations,
information reaches voters through both public dissemination from media sources and private

8

dissemination via communications from political organizations or through social networks. This
diffusion of information is organic, arriving endogenously via familiar channels in which the
political context is clear, rather than induced (Mansuri and Rao 2012) as in the case of
externally-manipulated information interventions delivered by private companies, researchers, or
civil society organizations. Information that reaches citizens through channels that are regular
and familiar may be more likely to receive attention, and to be understood and trusted. Media
attention in particular means that information occupies scarce space on the public agenda (Chang
et al. 2010), further increasing its salience. This can also help induce common knowledge (Adida
et al. 2019) and enable voter coordination (Arias et al. 2019a) through the recognition that
citizens in other locales have access to similar information.
Quasi- or natural-experimental studies of audits (Ferraz and Finan 2008, Larreguy et al.
2014, Bobonis et al. 2016) are able to capture public dissemination through organic channels.
However, the difficulty of experimentally manipulating such transmission, and the popularity of
civil society-led information campaigns, have led many studies to instead evaluate information
interventions in which the availability of information is induced. Such studies involve partnering
with civil society or research organizations to disseminate information privately via flyers
(Chong et al. 2015, Boas et al. 2019), leaflets (Arias et al. 2019a, 2019b), or SMS messages
(Buntaine et al. 2018). Arias et al (2019b) sought to activate a public transmission channel by
accompanying the distribution of leaflets with loudspeaker announcements. Yet in these voter
campaigns, such induced transmission of audit results is often distinct from established channels
that individuals trust to convey credible and politically-relevant information.
Recent work also aligns with this argument. A meta-analysis of six coordinated field
experiments about electoral accountability found “no evidence of overall impact of standard,

9

nonpartisan voter information campaigns targeted to individual voters” but noted that “we cannot
rule out the possibility that interventions at a much greater scale could have positive effects”
(Dunning et al. 2019b: 7-8). Moreover, some pre-registered tests did identify effects of
information specifically when provided in a public setting (Dunning et al. 2019a: 369-372).

Our Study
To our knowledge, this study is the first to assess the electoral impacts of full-scale audit
information that is annual, well-established, and universal in coverage, and that is fully public
and organic in transmission. Indeed, it is precisely the partial scale of audits in Brazil, Mexico,
and Puerto Rico that has been crucial to past research designs enabling the study of information
transmitted via public channels. A context like South Africa, in which every municipality is
audited every year, has normally presented challenges for identifying a comparison group.
We thus offer evidence from a novel and important context, in terms of the credibility
and scales of information and dissemination of audits. Given the macro-level nature of these
contextual features, we cannot explicitly vary them. Rather, our study fills a major gap in
existing research and highlights the importance of these factors in light of the range of findings
made by past work. We demonstrate that previous quasi- or natural-experimental findings with
partial-scale audits can, in fact, scale up.

The South African Context
We examine the electoral effects of South African local government audits. Following the
country’s transition to democracy, the 1996 Constitution charged municipalities with providing
essential basic services (Kroth et al. 2016). Despite reforms to improve municipal financial

10

management and service delivery, progress remained disappointing (Berliner 2017). In 2009,
President Jacob Zuma of the African National Congress (ANC) launched an ambitious
turnaround initiative, “Operation Clean Audit 2014.”6 It promised “clean audits” – certifying
flawless financial and other reporting and full compliance with legislation – for all provincial and
local governments within five years (Appendix Table A2 provides full definitions of audit
outcomes). The target was missed by a wide margin (Table A3).
South Africa’s 1996 Constitution establishes the Auditor-General as one of six
institutions meant to “strengthen constitutional democracy” (section 181). As the country’s
supreme audit institution, the Auditor-General audits and reports on the accounts, financial
statements, and financial management of national, provincial, and municipal governments
(section 188). All reports must be made public. The audit process is set out in the Municipal
Finance Management Act of 2003 (sections 126 and 127). Within two months after the end of
the financial year on June 30, the accounting officer of a municipality has to submit financial
statements to the Auditor-General. Upon receipt, the Auditor-General has three months to
complete an audit and to submit the results to the municipality. Hence, each municipality’s audit
result should be finalized by the end of November. No later than seven months after the end of a
financial year, the mayor of a municipality must table an annual report including the audit
outcome in the municipal council. In practice, however, local releases rarely align with this
January deadline, and audit results often receive little attention until months later.
Since 2009, the Auditor-General has publicly released a summary report on audit results
for all municipalities pertaining to the financial year ending roughly one year prior, published on
a date around the middle of each year. It is these nationwide reports that receive predominant

6

This followed an earlier initiative, “Project Consolidate,” launched by President Thabo Mbeki in 2004.

11

attention, and are widely reported in national and local media, including newspapers,7 radio,
television,8 and the internet.9 The Auditor-General holds a series of events to publicize the results
and to maximize their local salience.10 Figure 1 plots newspaper articles mentioning terms
indicative of municipal audits (see also Appendix Figure A1). The seven highest article counts
all immediately follow release dates, yet such mid-year spikes are absent prior to the 2009
introduction of comprehensive nationwide summary reports.
In 2018, the South African Citizen Survey asked a representative sample of South
Africans about municipal audits and the Auditor-General. Weighted responses for March and
April 2018 show 24 percent of respondents claimed they had heard, seen, or read about their
municipality’s audit result, while 25 percent claimed to have heard, seen, or read about reports of
unauthorized, irregular, or fruitless and wasteful spending by their municipality (with 35 percent
having heard of either). Moreover, excluding “don’t knows,” 56 percent had “a lot of” or “some”
trust in the Auditor-General, against 42 percent for their mayor. Fully 59 percent of respondents
said that information about corruption and financial mismanagement in their municipality was
“very” important, and another 25 percent “somewhat” important, in deciding which political
party to vote for in a municipal election or by-election. Municipalities and political parties also
use audit results in their own campaigns.11

7

E.g., “All eyes on auditor-general’s local government audit”, Sunday Independent, August 11, 2013.

8

E.g., “Auditor-general's report shows irregular expenditure in municipalities”, SABC News, June 1, 2016.

9

E.g., Eyewitness News, a news publisher, established a “Municipal Audits” website (Appendix Figure A2).

10

E.g., “A-G’s roadshow paints a bleak picture”, Diamond Fields Advertiser, March 30, 2012.

11

Appendix Figures A3 and A4 show adverts by an ANC-run municipality boasting a clean audit ahead of local

elections, and the opposition Democratic Alliance (DA) using audits as evidence of good governance credentials.

12

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Number of Articles (Seven−Day Rolling Sum)

Figure 1: Media attention to municipal audits spikes after the release of the Auditor-General’s report

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

Year

Note: The grey shaded areas indicate 90-day periods following the release of an Auditor-General’s summary report on municipal audits. The number of articles
was calculated as the seven-day rolling sum of newspaper articles extracted from Sabinet’s SA Media database over the period January 29-31, 2018, using the
following search query: (municipal OR municipality OR "local government") AND (audit OR "auditor general" OR "irregular expenditure" OR "unauthorised
expenditure" OR "fruitless and wasteful expenditure"). At the time of data extraction, the database covered 38 mainstream South African media publications with
national or regional distribution. A change in Sabinet’s collection procedure resulted in a gap in coverage from late 2014 to early 2015, visible as the flat line
over that period.

13

The first elections to restructured local councils took place in late 2000, followed by
regular elections in 2006, 2011, and 2016. Municipalities are headed by mayors chosen by a
majority on the local council, in some cases (roughly 15 percent after the 2011 elections)
requiring a coalition where no party holds a majority of seats. Municipalities use a mixed system
whereby half of the seats on a council are elected under plurality rule in single-member wards,
and the other half under proportional representation with closed party lists. Our focus is on ward
seats, for which by-elections are held to fill vacancies. According to the Municipal Structures
Act (section 25), these have to occur within 90 days of a vacancy.

Research Design
South Africa’s Auditor-General audits every municipality in each year. This creates a challenge
for evaluating the electoral effects of this information, as regular elections are also held for all
municipalities at the same time, every five years. If we were to compare the performance of the
mayor’s party in local elections between municipalities with good and poor audit results, we
would have no control group where citizens received no information. Our solution is to focus on
by-elections (Appendix Table A4). From 2007 to 2015, there were a total of 949 by-elections in
209 municipalities out of 234 in total as of 2011. These by-elections took place irregularly
throughout the year and the IEC grouped several on the same day, generally every few weeks.
The average by-election date saw elections for new councilors in about ten wards around the
country, and roughly ten such dates were held each year on average in this period.
We thus compare by-elections held shortly after the annual release of the AuditorGeneral’s nationwide report on municipal audit results – when information closely related to
corruption and financial mismanagement is available, prominent, and timely – with by-elections

14

held during the rest of the year. The number of by-elections is smaller when we examine a
narrower window just before and after the release dates, which we do in a robustness check. As
shown in Appendix Figure A5, our “treatment” of interest is the presence of timely and salient
audit information at the time of a by-election. Our primary treatment window is the 90 days
immediately following each audit release. We vary this period to validate that recency matters.
To support a causal interpretation of our results, we analyze by-elections triggered by the
death of an incumbent councilor for a particular ward (Jones and Olken 2005). Other triggers
involve greater potential for strategic timing or reflect political conditions.12 Our identifying
assumption is thus that our information treatments can be considered “as-if” random, exogenous
to by-election outcomes or the underlying differences in the location or context of by-elections.
In other words, the timing of the by-elections in our sample relative to the national release of
audit information has to be random. The remainder of this section probes this assumption.
Following Dunning (2012), we focus on three factors to evaluate the plausibility of our as-if
random natural-experimental treatment: information, incentives, and capacities.
In this case, municipal politicians do indeed know their audit results before the national
release date. They also plausibly have incentives to manipulate timing: The governing party of a
municipality would presumably prefer to face by-elections ahead of the release date if the results
will reflect poorly on their performance, and afterwards if results will reflect positively. In terms
of capacities, some by-election triggers such as resignations and expulsions could indeed be
strategically timed such that by-elections fell either before or after the release date of audits.

12

Ward by-elections are triggered when a councilor resigns, is no longer qualified (as set out in section 158 of the

1996 Constitution), is removed from office due to a violation of the Code of Conduct for Councilors, changes
partisan affiliation, or dies.

15

Deaths in office, however, are presumably randomly timed. Moreover, the Municipal Structures
Act (section 25) requires the municipal manager, not political officials or parties, to liaise with
the IEC so that a by-election is held within 90 days of the date on which a vacancy occurred.13
While the IEC theoretically could attempt to manipulate a timetable (on which several
by-elections are held around the country), this would require overcoming a coordination problem
between potentially diverging local needs of the ruling ANC in different municipalities. In one
municipality the local ANC might prefer the by-election be held before audit information is
available, in another afterwards, depending on the nature of the information and which party is
responsible. By-elections on any given date are likely to fall into different provinces, so collusion
would also require coordination across provincial authorities. Moreover, the 90-day deadline
allows very little slack (footnote 13). Taken together, these factors make it arguably impossible
for the IEC to act in this way – even if it were unable to resist political pressure.
Another possibility is that the Auditor-General’s national release date itself might be
strategically manipulated for political gain. Might the nationally-governing ANC pressure the
Auditor-General to delay the release by a few weeks until after a series of competitive byelections had passed? We do not think this is plausible, given the independence of the AuditorGeneral and the same coordination problem across different localities. In practice, the annual
release date for the municipal audit report is set by the Auditor-General in an internal planning

13

News of the death of a local politician is difficult to suppress and any attempts by municipal managers to delay

notification of the IEC would be highly unusual. If a municipal manager fails to consult the IEC and announce a byelection date within 14 days of the vacancy occurring, the Act requires the provincial government to do so. In
practice, electoral officials suggested average timelines of around 80 days to fill a ward vacancy, and slightly longer
since a 2016 Constitutional Court ruling requiring improved voter data (email communication).

16

meeting months before the dates of any relevant by-elections are known. This also means there is
no scope for any actor to attempt to strategically manipulate the outcomes of individual audits,
which are finalized before future by-elections are triggered.
We can even observe a most-likely case for political pressure to succeed. The 2016
municipal elections, originally scheduled for February, had to be delayed until August due to a
Constitutional Court ruling about updates to the voters’ roll. These elections, in which every
local council would be reelected, were widely seen as important and ultimately delivered the
largest electoral blow yet to the ANC’s hold on power (Olver 2017). Originally scheduled to take
place before the national audit release in June, the court ruling meant that these elections would
instead take place shortly afterwards. If ever there were a time for the ANC to pressure the
Auditor-General to delay the release, this was it. That the national audit release instead took
place as scheduled, attracting substantial news coverage in the context of the upcoming elections,
shows the limited potential for such manipulation.14
It is equally unlikely that local politicians or the ANC can manipulate media coverage of
the Auditor-General’s report, for example by delaying the transmission of this information to
voters or suppressing specific results. South Africa has a vibrant and diverse media landscape.
The Press Freedom Index produced by Reporters Without Borders acknowledges threats to
media independence but ranks the country similarly to established democracies such as the
United States and the United Kingdom.15 Figure 1 confirms immediate media transmission
following the release of the Auditor-General’s report.

14

As City Press noted on June 5, 2016: “The release on Wednesday of the Auditor-General’s report on

municipalities could be the worst timing for political parties trying to win in the local government elections.”
15

See https://rsf.org/en/ranking/2016 (accessed December 10, 2018).

17

To further assess the potential for manipulation in the timing of by-elections, we
examined balance on several ward- and municipality-level covariates between by-elections
inside and outside of 90-day windows following each regular audit release date (Appendix Table
A5). Across all by-elections, some imbalanced covariates suggest potential for strategic timing.
For by-elections due to death only, we see fewer imbalances and only two are statistically
significant at the 10 percent level – roughly what could be expected by chance. We also
conducted sorting tests (Figure A6), using the time to or from the nearest national audit release
date as the running variable (and excluding years in which no release took place). These detect
evidence of sorting across all by-elections, with more by-elections ahead of the release date
(p<0.001), but not for by-elections due to deaths only (p=0.433). These results are consistent
with our expectation that deaths in office are randomly timed relative to audit release dates.16

Data and Specification
We combine data on elections and by-elections from South Africa’s IEC and on audits from the
Auditor-General of South Africa, supplemented with municipal-level information collected from
Statistics South Africa and other sources.
Our main outcome of interest is the vote share of the party that governs the municipality,
but we also examine voter turnout. Turnout is relatively direct – does audit information spur
more or fewer registered voters to turn out to vote in by-elections? Notably, turnout is lower in

16

One final concern may be that murders could be strategically timed. One investigation (“In Search of a Political

Murder”, Daily Maverick, October 20, 2016) found allegedly political murders linked to a variety of local political,
business, and employment disputes, as well as theft or mistaken identity, but not audits. Most took place in
KwaZulu-Natal, which we exclude in supplementary results.

18

by-elections than in regular local elections (across all by-elections, the average ward saw turnout
drop from 54.7 percent in the previous regular local election to 38.3 percent in the by-election).
Voter turnout is observed for all by-elections, except in the 8.5 percent of by-elections which
were uncontested. In these cases, only one party fielded a candidate, and no actual by-election
was held. As these situations offer no voter behavior to study, we treat them as missing.17
Assessing who citizens vote for in by-elections, however, raises thorny issues of
attribution. Unlike in Brazil, mayors in South Africa are indirectly elected. The incumbent party
in any given ward is thus not necessarily the party responsible for how a municipality is run (but
given ANC dominance, this is the case in the majority of observations). Further, as we examine
by-elections to replace deceased councilors, incumbents are not on the ballot. Audit information
is thus attributable not to the incumbent party for a particular ward council seat, but rather to the
party of the mayor who governed the municipality at the time to which the audit pertains. It is
this party that citizens would either punish or reward for weak or strong performance. We thus
measure the “relevant” or “responsible” party’s vote share in each ward, even if this party is not
the incumbent party in that ward. For observations with coalition councils we researched the
party affiliation of the individual mayor at the close of the fiscal year to which the audit applied
(as no centralized source of data on council coalitions yet exists in South Africa).
Attribution is most straightforward where a municipality was run by a single party that
held a majority of council seats throughout the relevant fiscal year to which the audit applies and
where this party is still in charge at the time of the by-election. Conversely, barriers to attribution
may arise when, during the relevant fiscal year covered by the audit, a municipality was
governed by a coalition or had multiple mayors from different parties, or when the mayor’s party

17

However, we also check our main findings using a Heckman selection approach in the Appendix (see Table A6).

19

changed in the interim period since the end of the relevant fiscal year (e.g., Schwindt-Bayer and
Tavits 2016). In 23 percent of by-elections triggered by death, one or more of these barriers to
attribution were present, and we check whether this affects the results.
Our main independent variables are an indicator for a by-election held in the 90 days
following a national audit release date, a measure of audit performance, and the interaction
between these. Release dates are when the Auditor-General publishes the report on municipal
financial management. Audit outcomes fall into several categories defined in Appendix Table
A2. In some cases, later reports update previous findings, particularly where municipalities
submit missing information at a later date. We use only the contemporaneous audit outcomes as
publicized at the time of each national release date. The Auditor-General uses color-coding in
reports, in part to aid interpretation of results and their use by citizens (Fung et al. 2007). Clean
audits are identified with green, unqualified with yellow, qualified with purple, adverse with
pink, disclaimer with red, and outstanding with grey (Figure A7). This audit terminology
features regularly in media coverage, as other audits are released at different times of the year for
national and provincial departments. Moreover, the reports use a traffic light system and arrows
to categorize movements in performance over the prior year as either improved, unchanged, or
regressed (e.g., Figure A8). This approach abstracts from the underlying technical categories by
focusing on the trend in performance, which is more intuitively understandable.
Our coding of audit outcomes is based on changes over time. These offer new and salient
information that has the potential to enable voters to reward the governing party for
improvements, or to punish deteriorations. Using the official hierarchy of audit outcomes
described above, we adopt the Auditor-General’s trichotomous representation of movements
over time, with values of one for an improvement, negative one for a decline, and zero for the

20

same audit outcome as in the previous financial year. In our sample, 13 percent of observations
involve deteriorations in audit performance, and 26 percent improvements.
Our basic model is as follows:
Vote sharew,m,t = a + b1DOutcomem,t + b2Windowt + b3(DOutcome x Window)m,t + ew,m,t
where Vote share is the share of votes in a by-election in ward w of municipality m at time t of
the party of the mayor of the municipality who was in power at the end of the fiscal year to
which the audit applies. The change in Outcome is our trichotomous measure and captures the
latest year-on-year change in the audit outcome for municipality m that should be available at
time t. We assume municipal audits are finalized as required within five months after the end of a
fiscal year, and update the information referenced by Outcome every December 1. Window
indicates whether a by-election falls within the post-release window, so that it is treated with
timely audit information. We set the post-release window to x days following the nationwide
release of the Auditor-General’s municipal report, where x is 30, 60, 90 or 120, with 90 as our
default. We cluster standard errors at the by-election date level, the unit of “as-if-random”
treatment assignment, and report various alternatives. We also account for the relevant initial
vote share (in the last regular election) and province and year-specific shocks.18 We further
dispense with the assumption of linearity and examine deteriorations and improvements in audit
performance separately, and report other robustness checks below. The Data Appendix contains
definitions and summary statistics (Tables A21 and A22).

18

We adjust the year effects to capture the 12 months to 30 November each year, to reflect the statutory audit cycle.

With 268 observations from 144 municipalities in our main regressions, there is no within-variation in the majority
of local authorities. We include results with municipality fixed effects from our second dataset.

21

We are interested in the coefficient on Window, and how it is conditioned by audit
performance. Specifically, retrospective accountability leads us to expect the vote share of the
responsible party to get a boost from timely news revealing improved audit performance, and for
it to drop following news of a deterioration. It is perhaps less obvious what impact we should
expect when voters receive timely information that an audit result is the same as in the previous
year. The period we examine was characterized by deep and widespread discontent with the
dismal state of local governance, including a wave of “service delivery protests” across
municipalities that reached “insurrectionary proportions” in some cases (Alexander 2010: 37).
The vast majority of municipalities failed to achieve “clean” audits (Appendix Table A3). Where
stagnation means the continuation of a poor status quo, it is likely to get punished as well.19

Results
We first evaluate the average effect of a by-election falling into the post-release window, by
omitting the interaction term (column 1 of Table 1). The coefficient on Window is negative but
not significant at standard levels. This is expected, as the impact of the information treatment is
likely to depend on the nature of the news it conveys. Next, we run the basic interactive model
specified above (column 2). The coefficient on Window now captures the impact of a by-election
being treated with timely information conveying stagnation in audit performance. The coefficient
on the interaction term shows a difference of 10 percentage points when an audit outcome
improves. The joint effects at the bottom of the table – the sum of the two coefficients – show an

19

E.g. “Service Delivery Protests in South Africa”, CCTV News, February 8, 2014, available at

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=guNv1-bNeOE (accessed September 26, 2018). In this example, community
members explain their protest with a lack of progress. Says one: “There is no change at all!”

22

overall positive (negative) impact of timely news of better (worse) audit performance of about 10
percentage points. This pattern is similar once we account for the initial vote share of the
relevant party in that ward in the last regular municipal election (column 3) as well as province
and audit year-specific shocks (column 4).
Finally, our baseline model assumes that positive and negative news effects are equal in
magnitude. Splitting the audit change variable into two separate indicators (column 5) shows that
timely information on deteriorations is punished, and improvements rewarded, by about 5
percentage points, but the effect of deteriorations is not significantly different from that of
stagnation. While the number of deteriorations in our dataset may not be enough to distinguish
these effects, this result is consistent with a context where new information on stagnation also
constitutes “bad news” and voters respond to it just as negatively as to information on worsened
performance. Appendix Figure A9 visualizes the effects in columns 4 and 5. Overall, we detect
sizable impacts of highly-credible audit information on these as-if-randomly-timed by-elections.
Prior work suggests that recency bias shapes the effect of audits on election outcomes, in
that voters give more weight to recent than to older information (Bobonis et al. 2016). We test
this by varying the length of the treatment window (Appendix Table A7). When we restrict the
window to 30 days, timely dissemination documenting stagnation or a decline in performance
incurs penalties of 9 and 21 percentage points of vote share, respectively (column 1). The
equivalent figures decline for the 60 and 90-day windows and finally reach zero and 4
percentage points for the 120-day window (columns 2-4). Timely improvements boost electoral
performance throughout by about 4 percentage points, although these estimates lack precision.
Finally, with a continuous measure of the (logged) number of days since the release of the last

23

audit report, improvements are estimated to get less reward, and stagnations and deteriorations
less punishment, the further away a by-election is from the release date (column 5).
We report further robustness checks in the Appendix. First, restricting the sample to byelections within 90 days on each side of a release date returns a strong pattern of consistent
results, despite the small sample (Table A8). Second, various alternative standard errors make no
difference (Table A9). We then drop, in turn, all by-elections that occurred in each of the nine
provinces (Table A10). When we exclude by-elections in KwaZulu-Natal, which has been
particularly associated with political violence (footnote 16), the magnitude of the coefficient on
the interaction term increases (column 4), but the basic pattern from the main results is evident
throughout. We also drop by-elections from each calendar year at a time, and again the results
are stable (Table A11). Our results are not driven by a particular region or period. Next, we vary
control variables. We include fixed effects for the previous year’s audit category, district instead
of province fixed effects, month-of-year fixed effects, socio-economic characteristics of a
municipality, and the number of days since the last regular municipal elections. Again, the basic
pattern is not affected (Table A12). In case the probability of by-elections falling in the treatment
window varies geographically, we also show our main results are robust to employing inverse
probability weights, including based on interacted province and year fixed effects (Table A13).
We also explore effect heterogeneity. Voters face barriers to attribution when the party of
the mayor changed during or since the end of the relevant financial year, or no party had a
council majority. Their mobilization may depend on the competitiveness of a council, which we
capture by splitting the sample at the median absolute seat difference between the first and
second-largest party. As voter reactions may depend on the party in power, for instance due to
varying loyalty or forms of attachment, we also interact with an indicator for ANC council

24

majorities. To check if our results are amplified by local presence of media, we code whether a
radio station or newspaper has its headquarters in a municipality.20 We also measure the share of
households in the municipality with internet access, a radio, or a television. Clientelistic
relationships may dampen the effect of audits, and we proxy this with whether a municipality is
officially classified as rural, and the presence of traditional authorities in a ward (De Kadt and
Larreguy 2018). Finally, as salient ethnic cleavages may affect voting behavior, we condition on
linguistic fractionalization. The coefficients on these three-way interaction terms are
insignificant in eight out of ten regressions (Appendix Table A14). Curiously, internet
penetration dampens the effect of our audit treatment, which is unexpected. The competitiveness
of the local council boosts the impact of the audit treatment.
To check whether voters react to levels instead of trends, we use a different trichotomous
measure to capture audit performance (Appendix Table A15). Here, we assign values of one for
clean or unqualified (i.e., “good”) audits, zero for a qualified outcome (the median category), and
negative one for all other (i.e., “bad”) outcomes. We also interact our windows indicator
separately with “good” and “bad” audits (column 5). The results show no robust patterns. The
release of audit results affects by-elections by revealing changes from previous performance.
Finally, we consider voter turnout: When we run our main models but replace our
outcome variable with ward-level turnout, there are again no robust patterns (Appendix Table
A16). Although our data do not allow us to investigate this, the electoral performance of parties
may reflect mobilization differentials rather than voters switching their support (e.g., Holbein
2016, Justesen and Schulz-Herzenberg 2018).

20

The near-universal availability of radio signal in South Africa means that a research design leveraging signal

presence (akin to Larreguy et al. 2014) is not possible.

25

One potential concern is that our sample of by-elections might not be representative.
Although the timing of deaths in office is plausibly random, their frequency reflects local
characteristics. We confirm this in an ancillary model, in a cross-section of municipalities, of
overall frequency of councilor deaths in office (Appendix Table A17). Deaths in office are more
likely where councils are larger (more eligible individuals), but less likely in municipalities with
a major hospital (in one of the three highest-level categories: central, regional, or provincial
tertiary). Yet more general health-related conditions, such as the prevalence of flush toilets or
running water, are unrelated to the frequency of deaths. The fact that our main sample includes
by-elections from 70 percent of all municipalities, and that larger councils and the presence of
hospitals are generally offsetting conditions, suggest no major concerns over representativeness.
We next assess the micro-foundation of our model with survey data, examining effects of
the 2018 audit release date at the individual-level, conditional on local audit trends. Although our
outcome variable here is expressed evaluations of mayoral performance, rather than voting
behavior, consistent ancillary results increase confidence in our by-election models. The South
African Citizen Survey included questions on evaluations of mayoral performance from March
through June 2018, overlapping with the May 23 release of the 2016-17 municipal audit report.
We mirror our by-election research design, by interacting an indicator for the post-release period
with a trichotomous measure reflecting the information for each respondent’s municipality –
either declining, unchanged, or improving. We control for individual-level demographics,
province fixed effects, and time trends (both linear and with third-order polynomials). We omit
respondents from 26 municipalities with mayoral changes between the 2016 local elections and
the period covered by the survey in 2018, as these present a challenge to attribution.

26

Comparing the periods before and after the release date, post-release mayoral evaluations
are better on average by 0.18 (on a four-point approval scale) where the local audit outcome
improved, and vice versa (column 1 in Table 2). When we enter positive and negative audit
changes separately, the effect is driven more by improvements (column 2). The results are robust
to inclusion of municipality fixed effects (column 3), a linear rather than cubic running variable
(column 4), and alternate models using logistic (column 5) or ordered logit regression (column
6). A placebo test using evaluations of the national government as an outcome variable shows no
significant interaction term (column 7). In supplementary models, we vary the length of the postrelease window from one to four weeks and find that the effect sizes decline monotonically over
time (Table A18). These findings also provide reassurance about the external validity of our byelection results, as we identify the underpinning behavioral pattern more generally, in a
representative survey and outside the specific context of by-elections.
Finally, we also investigate two different individual-level mechanisms through which the
audit report treatment might operate: information salience and issue salience. Research in this
area often faces difficulty disentangling whether treatments serve primarily to make individuals
more aware of the information content itself, or rather to raise the salience of the relevant issues
in their voting decisions. We thus assess whether post-release respondents are more likely to
claim to have heard about their municipal audit results or problematic spending, and similarly if
they are more likely to state that information about corruption and financial mismanagement is
very important for their voting decisions. We find significant increases in information salience
(Table A19), but no consistent relationship with issue salience (Table A20). In sum, audit
information reaches voters in ways that are highly consistent with our by-election results,
without necessarily affecting issue salience as well.

27

Table 1: Audits and by-election vote shares
Outcome change
Window 90

(1)
0.007
(0.023)
0.017
(0.030)

Window 90 x Outcome change

(2)
-0.012
(0.024)
-0.002
(0.032)
0.102*
(0.058)

(3)
-0.017
(0.013)
-0.030**
(0.014)
0.056**
(0.027)

(4)
-0.020
(0.013)
-0.037**
(0.016)
0.071***
(0.025)

Better
Window 90 x Better
Worse
Window 90 x Worse
Constant
Window 90 | Outcome change = 1
Window 90 | Outcome change = -1

0.649***
(0.016)

0.651***
(0.016)
0.100*
(0.059)
-0.103
(0.072)

Window 90 | Better = 1

0.070**
(0.029)
0.027
(0.028)
-0.086***
(0.032)

0.112***
(0.038)
0.034
(0.027)
-0.108***
(0.032)

(5)
-0.053***
(0.018)
-0.027
(0.018)
0.105***
(0.024)
0.010
(0.023)
-0.003
(0.050)
0.108***
(0.038)

0.052**
(0.024)
Window 90 | Worse= 1
-0.056
(0.044)
Initial vote share (at last regular election)
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Province and year fixed effects
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Observations
268
268
268
268
268
R-squared
0.001
0.012
0.704
0.731
0.733
Note: Standard errors clustered by by-election date in parentheses. Year effects capture the 12 months to 30 November to reflect the statutory audit cycle.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

28

Table 2: Audits and mayoral approval (survey data)
Outcome change
Post-release
Post-release x Outcome change

(1)
0.018
(0.053)
0.002
(0.141)
0.181**
(0.086)

Better

Worse
Post-release x Worse

Post-release | Outcome change = -1

0.015
(0.141)

(3)
-0.552
(0.576)
0.055
(0.142)
0.172**
(0.083)

(4)
0.018
(0.053)
-0.012
(0.074)
0.176**
(0.086)

(5)
0.081
(0.128)
0.237
(0.348)
-0.469**
(0.209)

(6)
0.034
(0.103)
0.003
(0.279)
0.339**
(0.166)

(7)
0.108**
(0.044)
0.090
(0.119)
0.018
(0.070)

0.228
(0.167)
-0.117
(0.162)

0.164
(0.126)
-0.189*
(0.098)

-0.232
0.413
0.707*
(0.398)

0.342
(0.330)
-0.337
(0.319)

0.107
(0.145)
0.072
(0.132)

0.125
(0.109)
0.275
(0.173)
0.030
(0.066)
-0.140
(0.113)

Post-release x Better

Post-release | Outcome change = 1

(2)

0.182
(0.167)
-0.179
(0.162)

Post-release | Better = 1

0.290
(0.219)
Post-release | Worse= 1
-0.125
(0.176)
Approval measure
Mayor
Mayor
Mayor
Mayor
Mayor v. bad
Mayor
National gov.
Model
Linear
Linear
Linear
Linear
Logistic
Ordered
Linear
Fixed effects
Province
Province
Municipality
Province
Province
Province
Province
Running variable
Nonlinear
Nonlinear
Nonlinear
Linear
Nonlinear
Nonlinear
Nonlinear
Observations
3,402
3,402
3,402
3,402
3,402
3,402
3,547
R-squared
0.065
0.067
0.157
0.065
0.048
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. All models also include controls for the running variable (cubic or linear); indicator for metropolitan, urban, or rural; age;
education; income (with a separate dummy variable for no response); unemployment; gender; race. Sample restricted to respondents in municipalities without
mayoral changes between the 2016 local elections and the period covered by the survey in 2018 (excluding 26 such municipalities).
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

29

Conclusions
Recent research casts doubt on the potential of transparency to improve governance (e.g., Kosack
and Fung 2014, Dunning et al. 2019a). Such findings should prompt systematic analysis of when
and where information is most likely to improve political accountability. This article builds on a
small number of prior studies to show that independent audit bodies can help voters hold those
who govern to account, by releasing credible information at a time when it is most relevant: prior
to an election. Our core result is that such timely and salient audit information shapes electoral
behavior, with voters rewarding improvements and punishing stagnation or deteriorations by
about 5 percentage points in the relevant party’s vote share. Our study is the first to demonstrate
electoral effects of audits that are at full scale in both information coverage and transmission.
Our results complement earlier observational studies on the effects of audits on mayoral
elections in Brazil (Ferraz and Finan 2008), Mexico (Larreguy et al. 2014), and Puerto Rico
(Bobonis et al. 2016), thus lending support to their generalizability beyond Latin America and
the Caribbean, and beyond partial-scale audit programs. By examining a “hard case” with voting
shaped by strong parties and racial identities (Ferree 2011), we also clarify the scope conditions
of this work and demonstrate that the electoral effects of audits are not limited to individual
accountability in systems where mayors are directly elected. Our micro-level results give
confidence that we identify patterns in local political behavior more generally, beyond byelections alone, and further allow us to distinguish between information salience and issue
salience. Our main research design is potentially replicable in other systems with by-elections,
allowing researchers to probe external validity outside rare settings with randomly-timed audits.
Field experiments involving information campaigns by other actors that use audit
findings have thus far not found similarly consistent impacts (e.g., Dunning et al. 2019a). Our

30

discussion suggests this might be because such interventions cannot easily achieve the scale in
transmission of audit bodies that reach voters organically through established channels.
Moreover, non-governmental organizations or researchers that use audit information in their
campaigns may struggle to project the same credibility as official audit bodies.
A major policy implication is that transparency and accountability initiatives by donors
and international bodies should not neglect constitutional institutions and formal oversight
practices. Many official bodies conduct regular and universal audits, often without the random
selection or staggered timing that have enabled past research designs, thus highlighting the need
for learning about the impacts of such information at full scale. Our study demonstrates
important promise for scaling up the scope, capacity, and publicity of official auditors.
Our study also directly contributes to debates about voting patterns in South Africa.
Using subnational and individual-level survey data, de Kadt and Lieberman (2020) find a robust
negative association between basic service provision and electoral returns for the incumbent
party. One explanation they offer is that those who receive basic services have closer contact
with government, which increases opportunities to observe or perceive corruption. We show that
credible and timely information suggesting localized corruption does affect the electoral fortunes
of governing parties, independent from the underlying governance conditions themselves.
Perhaps most importantly, our results are good news for reformers: improved governance
can produce electoral rewards. Although corrupt politicians may resist greater transparency in
order to avoid sanction, these results suggest a more positive flipside that has received less
attention in a literature that often emphasizes negative voter responses to poor performance. If
these potential benefits were more widely known, this might increase political support for
reforms that enhance transparency and accountability.

31

Acknowledgments:
For helpful comments and assistance, we would like to thank Jim Alt, Ben Ansell, Thomas
Bräuninger, Christian Breunig, Natalia Bueno, Hugh Cole, Paolo de Renzio, David Doyle, Andy
Eggers, Aaron Erlich, Alice Evans, Karen Ferree, Omar García-Ponce, Mark Hallerberg, Robin
Harding, David Heald, Macartan Humphreys, Ryan Jablonski, Eckhard Janeba, Stephen Kosack,
Horacio Larreguy, Bob Mattes, Zeev Maoz, Nishendra Moodley, Aneesh Raghunandan, Vivek
Ramkumar, Philip Rathgeb, Anselm Rink, Petra Schleiter, Kathryn Schneider, Collette SchulzHerzenberg, Daniel Sturm, Anjali Thomas, Christian Traxler, Jonathan Weigel, Martin J.
Williams, Stephane Wolton, and Lauren Young. Trishna Kurian provided outstanding research
assistance. Versions of this paper were presented at the 2017 MPSA, 2017 EPSA and 2017 and
2020 APSA annual meetings, the City of Cape Town, and seminars at Hertie, Konstanz, LSE,
Mannheim, Oxford, Stellenbosch, and UC Davis. Our research into news coverage was possible
due to database access in the National Library of South Africa. We would also like to thank staff
at the Auditor-General and at the Electoral Commission, especially Stuart Murphy, for data and
patiently answering our queries. We are indebted to Washeelah Kapery and Reza Omar for the
data from the South African Citizen Survey. All interpretations and conclusions are entirely our
own and should not be attributed to any of the above individuals or institutions.

References
Adida, Claire, Jessica Gottlieb, Eric Kramon, and Gwyneth McClendon. 2019. "Breaking the
Clientelistic Voting Equilibrium: The Joint Importance of Salience and Coordination."
Comparative Political Studies (forthcoming).
Alexander, Peter. 2010. "Rebellion of the Poor: South Africa's Service Delivery Protests – a
Preliminary Analysis." Review of African Political Economy 37(123): 25-40.
32

Arias, Eric, Pablo Balán, Horacio A. Larreguy, John Marshall, and Pablo Querubin. 2019a.
"Information Provision, Voter Coordination, and Electoral Accountability: Evidence from
Mexican Social Networks." American Political Science Review 113(2): 475-498.
Arias, Eric, Horacio A. Larreguy, John Marshall, and Pablo Querubin. 2019b. "When Does
Information Increase Electoral Accountability? Lessons from a Field Experiment in Mexico."
In Dunning et al. (Eds.), Information, Accountability, and Cumulative Learning: Lessons
from Metaketa I. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press: 118-155.
Avis, Eric, Claudio Ferraz, and Frederico Finan. 2018. "Do Government Audits Reduce
Corruption? Estimating the Impacts of Exposing Corrupt Politicians." Journal of Political
Economy 126(5): 1912-1964.
Banerjee, Abhijit V., and Esther Duflo. 2009. "The Experimental Approach to Development
Economics." Annual Review of Economics 1: 151-178.
Berliner, Daniel. 2017. "Sunlight or Window Dressing? Local Government Compliance with
South Africa's Promotion of Access to Information Act." Governance 30(4): 641-661.
Boas, Taylor C., F. Daniel Hidalgo, and Marcus André Melo. 2019. "Norms versus Action: Why
Voters Fail to Sanction Malfeasance in Brazil." American Journal of Political Science 63(2):
385-400.
Bobonis, Gustavo J., Luis R. Cámara Fuertes, and Rainer Schwabe. 2016. "Monitoring
Corruptible Politicians." American Economic Review 106(8): 2371-2405.
Botero, Sandra, Rodrigo Castro Cornejo, Laura Gamboa, Nara Pavao, and David W. Nickerson.
2015. "Says Who? An Experiment on Allegations of Corruption and Credibility of Sources."
Political Research Quarterly 68(3): 493-504.
Boyne, George, Oliver James, Peter John, and Nicolai Petrovsky. 2009. "Democracy and
Government Performance: Holding Incumbents Accountable in English Local
Governments." Journal of Politics 71(4): 1273-1284.
33

Brollo, Fernanda. 2010. "Who Is Punishing Corrupt Politicians: Voters or the Central
Government? Evidence from the Brazilian Anticorruption Program." IGIER Working Paper.
Buntaine, Mark T., Ryan Jablonski, Daniel L. Nielson, and Paula M. Pickering. 2018. "SMS
Texts on Corruption Help Ugandan Voters Hold Elected Councilors Accountable at the
Polls." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115(26): 6668-6673.
Chang, Eric C. C., Miriam A. Golden, and Seth J. Hill. 2010. "Legislative Malfeasance and
Political Accountability." World Politics 62(2): 177-220.
Chong, Alberto, Ana L. De La O, Dean Karlan, and Leonard Wantchekon. 2015. "Does
Corruption Information Inspire the Fight or Quash the Hope? A Field Experiment in Mexico
on Voter Turnout, Choice, and Party Identification." Journal of Politics 77(1): 55-71.
Cronin-Furman, Kate, and Milli Lake. 2018. "Ethics Abroad: Fieldwork in Fragile and Violent
Contexts." PS: Political Science and Politics 51(3): 607-614.
Deaton, Angus, and Nancy Cartwright. 2018. "Understanding and Misunderstanding
Randomized Controlled Trials." Social Science and Medicine 210: 2-21.
De Kadt, Daniel, and Evan S. Lieberman. 2020. "Nuanced Accountability: Voter Responses to
Service Delivery in Southern Africa." British Journal of Political Science 50(1): 185-215.
De Kadt, Daniel, and Horacio A. Larreguy. 2018. "Agents of the Regime? Traditional Leaders
and Electoral Politics in South Africa." Journal of Politics 80(2): 382-399.
De Vries, Catherine E., and Hector Solaz. 2017. "The Electoral Consequences of Corruption."
Annual Review of Political Science 20: 391-408.
Dunning, Thad. 2012. Natural Experiments in the Social Sciences: A Design-Based Approach.
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Dunning, Thad, Guy Grossman, Macartan Humphreys, Susan D. Hyde, Craig McIntosh, and
Gareth Nellis, eds. 2019a. Information, Accountability, and Cumulative Learning: Lessons
from Metaketa I. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
34

Dunning, Thad, et al. 2019b. "Voter Information Campaigns and Political Accountability:
Cumulative Findings from a Preregistered Meta-analysis of Coordinated Trials." Science
Advances 5(7): eaaw2612.
Eggers, Andrew C. 2014. "Partisanship and Electoral Accountability: Evidence from the UK
Expenses Scandal." Quarterly Journal of Political Science 9(4): 441-472.
Ferraz, Claudio, and Frederico Finan. 2008. "Exposing Corrupt Politicians: The Effects of
Brazil's Publicly Released Audits on Electoral Outcomes." Quarterly Journal of Economics
123(2): 703-745.
Ferraz, Claudio, and Frederico Finan. 2011. "Electoral Accountability and Corruption: Evidence
from the Audits of Local Governments." American Economic Review 101(4): 1274-1311.
Ferree, Karen E. 2011. Framing the Race in South Africa: The Political Origins of Racial Census
Elections. New York, NY, Cambridge University Press.
Fiorina, Morris P. 1981. Retrospective Voting in American National Elections. New Haven, CT,
Yale University Press.
Fung, Archon, Mary Graham, and David Weil. 2007. Full Disclosure: The Perils and Promise of
Transparency. New York, NY, Cambridge University Press.
Gottlieb, Jessica. 2016. "Greater Expectations: A Field Experiment to Improve Accountability in
Mali." American Journal of Political Science 60(1): 143-157.
Grossman, Guy, and Kristin Michelitch. 2018. "Information Dissemination, Competitive
Pressure, and Politician Performance between Elections: A Field Experiment in Uganda."
American Political Science Review 112(2): 280-301.
Healy, Andrew, and Neil Malhotra. 2013. "Retrospective Voting Reconsidered." Annual Review
of Political Science 16: 285-306.
Holbein, John. 2016. "Left Behind? Citizen Responsiveness to Government Performance
Information." American Political Science Review 110(2): 353-368.
35

Humphreys, Macartan, and Jeremy Weinstein. 2012. "Policing Politicians: Citizen
Empowerment and Political Accountability in Uganda." Mimeo.
Johnson, Jeremy B. 2018. "Protecting the Community: Lessons from the Montana Flyer Project."
PS: Political Science and Politics 51(3): 615-619.
Jones, Benjamin F., and Benjamin A. Olken. 2005. "Do Leaders Matter? National Leadership
and Growth Since World War II." Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3): 835-864.
Justesen, Mogens K., and Collette Schulz-Herzenberg. 2018. "The Decline of the African
National Congress in South Africa’s 2016 Municipal Elections." Journal of Southern African
Studies 44(6): 1133-1151.
Kosack, Stephen, and Archon Fung. 2014. "Does Transparency Improve Governance?" Annual
Review of Political Science 17: 65-87.
Kroth, Verena, Valentino Larcinese, and Joachim Wehner. 2016. "A Better Life for All?
Democratization and Electrification in Post-Apartheid South Africa." Journal of Politics
78(3): 774-791.
Larreguy, Horacio A., John Marshall, and James M. Snyder, Jr. 2014. "Revealing Malfeasance:
How Local Media Facilitates Electoral Sanctioning of Mayors in Mexico." NBER Working
Paper 20697.
Lieberman, Evan S., Daniel N. Posner, and Lily L.Tsai. 2014. "Does Information Lead to More
Active Citizenship? Evidence from an Education Intervention in Rural Kenya." World
Development 60: 69-83.
Mansuri, Ghazala, and Vijayendra Rao. 2013. Localizing Development: Does Participation
Work? Washington, DC, World Bank.
Mattes, Robert. 2008. "South Africans' Participation in Local Politics and Government."
Transformation: Critical Perspectives on Southern Africa 66/67: 117-141.

36

McCombs, Maxwell E., and Donald L. Shaw. (1972). "The Agenda-Setting Function of Mass
Media." Public Opinion Quarterly 36(2): 176-187.
O'Donnell, Guillermo. 1998. "Horizontal Accountability in New Democracies." Journal of
Democracy 9(3): 112-126.
Olver, Crispian. 2017. How to Steal a City: The Battle for Nelson Mandela Bay. Jeppestown,
Jonathan Ball Publishers.
Przeworski, Adam, Susan C. Stokes, and Bernard Manin, eds. 1999. Democracy, Accountability,
and Representation. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Schwindt-Bayer, Leslie, and Margit Tavits. 2016. Clarity of Responsibility, Accountability and
Corruption. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Weitz-Shapiro, Rebecca, and Matthew S. Winters. 2016. "Can Citizens Discern? Information
Credibility, Political Sophistication, and the Punishment of Corruption in Brazil." Journal of
Politics 79(1): 60-74.
Winters, Matthew S., and Rebecca Weitz-Shapiro. 2013. "Lacking Information or Condoning
Corruption: When Do Voters Support Corrupt Politicians?" Comparative Politics 45(4): 418436.

Biographical Statements:
Daniel Berliner is Associate Professor of Political Science and Public Policy at the London
School of Economics and Political Science, London, United Kingdom. Joachim Wehner is
Associate Professor in Public Policy at the London School of Economics and Political Science,
London, United Kingdom.

37

Online Appendix for “Audits for Accountability: Evidence from Municipal By-Elections in South Africa”

1

Table A1: Selected features of studies of the electoral impacts of audit information
Table A2: Official descriptions of audit outcomes
Table A3: Overview of municipal audit outcomes for financial years 2006-7 to 2013-14
Table A4: By-elections from 2007 to 2015 by type of triggering event
Table A5: Balance statistics
Table A6: Heckman selection-correction model
Table A7: Different time windows
Table A8: Sample restricted to by-elections within 90 days of a release date
Table A9: Alternative standard errors
Table A10: Excluding by-elections in individual provinces
Table A11: Excluding by-elections in individual calendar years
Table A12: Additional controls
Table A13: Inverse probability weighting
Table A14: Context conditions
Table A15: Audit outcome in levels
Table A16: Turnout as dependent variable
Table A17: Frequency of by-elections triggered by death across municipalities
Table A18: Different time windows (survey data)
Table A19: Respondents who have heard of municipal audits (survey data)
Table A20: Respondents who say corruption and financial mismanagement information is very important in voting (survey data)
Figure A1: Media attention to municipal audits spikes after the release of the Auditor-General’s report (overlay version)
Figure A2: Eyewitness News municipal audits portal
Figure A3: Example of ANC-run municipality advertising audit outcomes
Figure A4: Example of DA advertising municipal audit outcomes
Figure A5: Treatment assignment of by-elections
Figure A6: McCrary sorting tests
Figure A7: Overview of municipal audit outcomes for financial years 2006-7 to 2013-14 (line graph version)
Figure A8: Use of color-coding and arrows in audit reports
Figure A9: Graph of main regression results
Data appendix
Table A21: Summary statistics (by-elections data)
Table A22: Summary statistics (survey data)

2

Table A1: Selected features of studies of the electoral impacts of audit information
Study
Ferraz and Finan (2008)
Setting: Brazil
Type: Natural experiment
Larreguy et al. (2014)
Setting: Mexico
Type: Quasi-experiment*

Auditor
National: Comptroller
General of the Union
(Controladoria-Geral da
União, CGU)
National: Superior Audit
Office of the Federation
(Auditoría Superior de la
Federación, ASF)

Chong et al. (2015)
Setting: Mexico
Type: Field experiment

National: Superior Audit
Office of the Federation
(Auditoría Superior de la
Federación, ASF)

Bobonis et al. (2016)
Setting: Puerto Rico (US)
Type: Quasi-experiment*

Subnational: Office of the
Comptroller General of
Puerto Rico (Oficina del
Contralor de Puerto Rico,
OCPR)
National: Superior Audit
Office of the Federation
(Auditoría Superior de la
Federación, ASF)

Arias et al. (2019a, 2019b)**
Setting: Mexico
Type: Field experiment

Boas et al. (2019)**
Setting: Pernambuco (Brazil)
Type: Field experiment

Subnational: State
Accounts Court of
Pernambuco (Tribunal de
Contas do Estado de
Pernambuco, TCE-PE)

Scale of information
Partial: CGU audits federal
transfers to municipalities. It
randomly samples municipalities
for audit.
Partial: The ASF audits federal
grants from the Fund for Social
Infrastructure (FISM). It selects
municipalities in each state to be
audited according to fixed criteria.
Partial: The ASF audits federal
grants from the Fund for Social
Infrastructure (FISM). It selects
municipalities in each state to be
audited according to fixed criteria.
Partial: All municipalities should be
audited every other fiscal year,
following a prespecified order, but
audit cycles can take longer due to
resource constraints.
Partial: The ASF audits federal
grants from the Fund for Social
Infrastructure (FISM). It selects
municipalities in each state to be
audited according to fixed criteria.
Full: Routine annual audits of
municipal accounts. Most audits are
completed within three years.

Scale of transmission
Public and organic: Natural
diffusion via established
channels (e.g., media).

Core results
Poor audit outcomes reduce the reelection
chances of incumbent mayors, especially
in municipalities with local radio stations.

Public and organic: Natural
diffusion via established
channels (e.g., media).

Voters punish the party of mayors
responsible for poor audit outcomes, but
only in electoral precincts where local
media stations transmit from within the
municipality.
Poor audit performance decreases
incumbent party support in local
elections, decreases voter turnout and
support for the challenger party, and
erodes partisan attachments.
Audit performance is better in
municipalities with pre-election audits,
where it improves mayors’ reelection
rates. Good performance is not sustained
in subsequent audits.
Both good as well as poor audit
performance increase turnout and
electoral support, on average, for the
incumbent party. A related study found
these effects vary by communities' social
network connectedness.

Private and induced: Flyers
distributed in collaboration
with a research
organization (Innovations
for Poverty Action).
Public and organic: Natural
diffusion via established
channels (e.g., media).
Private (plus weakly
public) and induced:
Leaflets distributed by an
NGO (Borde Político); in a
“public treatment” arm,
loudspeakers announced
the distribution.
Private and induced: Flyers
handed out by enumerators
during the baseline survey.

Audit information has no effect on selfreported voting behavior in actual
municipal elections. In a vignette
experiment, respondents are less willing
to vote for a hypothetical mayor with
poor audit results.
Buntaine et al. (2018)**
National: Office of the
Full: Routine annual audits of
Private and induced: SMS
Recipients of SMS messages describing
Setting: Uganda
Auditor General (OAG)
district council accounts, typically
messages sent out in
more (fewer) irregularities than expected
Type: Field experiment
completed within a year.
cooperation with a local
reported voting for incumbent councilors
NGO (Twaweza).
less (more) often. The messages have no
effect on reported voting for incumbent
council chairs.
This study
National: Auditor General Full: Routine annual audits of
Public and organic: Natural The responsible mayor’s party is
Setting: South Africa
of South Africa (AGSA)
municipal accounts, typically
diffusion via established
rewarded for improvements in audit
Type: Natural experiment
completed within a year.
channels (e.g., media).
results and punished for both stagnation
and deteriorations.
Notes: * Following Dunning (2012: 18-20), we distinguish quasi-experiments with nonrandom treatment assignment from natural experiments characterized by “as-if” randomlyassigned treatments. ** These studies were part of or are related to the Metaketa I initiative (Dunning et al. 2019a).

3

Table A2: Official descriptions of audit outcomes
Audit outcome

Description
The financial statements are free from material misstatements (in other words, a financially unqualified audit opinion) and there are
Clean
no material findings on reporting on performance objectives or non-compliance with legislation.
The financial statements contain no material misstatements. Unless we express a clean audit outcome, findings have been raised on
Unqualified
either reporting on predetermined objectives or non-compliance with legislation, or both these aspects.
The financial statements contain material misstatements in specific amounts, or there is insufficient evidence for us to conclude that
Qualified
specific amounts included in the financial statements are not materially misstated.
The financial statements contain material misstatements that are not confined to specific amounts, or the misstatements represent a
Adverse
substantial portion of the financial statements.
The auditee provided insufficient evidence in the form of documentation on which to base an audit opinion. The lack of sufficient
Disclaimer
evidence is not confined to specific amounts or represents a substantial portion of the information contained in the financial
statements.
Outstanding
Audit not finalized at legislated date.
Note: Clean audits have at times been also called “unqualified with no findings,” in which case unqualified audits were called “unqualified with findings.”

4

Table A3: Overview of municipal audit outcomes for financial years 2006-7 to 2013-14
Financial year

Release date

Clean

Unqualified

Qualified

Adverse

Disclaimer

Outstanding

2006-7

Feb. 10, 2009

0.008

0.161

0.246

0.089

0.458

0.038

2007-8

July 10, 2009

0.017

0.270

0.197

0.039

0.330

0.146

2008-9

June 7, 2010

0.013

0.340

0.179

0.026

0.311

0.132

2009-10

June 29, 2011

0.017

0.400

0.179

0.030

0.217

0.157

2010-11

July 23, 2012

0.034

0.389

0.184

0.017

0.222

0.154

2011-12

Aug. 13, 2013

0.021

0.342

0.248

0.004

0.299

0.085

2012-13

July 30, 2014

0.073

0.329

0.295

0.034

0.222

0.047

2013-14
June 3, 2015
0.120
0.389
0.248
0.004
0.201
0.038
Note: Audit findings are ordered from best (“clean”) to worst (“disclaimer”), followed by “Outstanding,” referring to cases where municipalities did not even
submit the required documentation to the Auditor-General. There was no release in either 2007 or 2008, and a new format with more explicitly comparative
tables was introduced for annual municipal audit reports published from 2009 onwards. Release dates were provided by the Auditor-General of South Africa and
double checked against press reports and official press releases. We use audit outcomes as contemporaneously released and reported, not any updates made
subsequently in rare cases. Note that the February 2009 release of the 2006-2007 audit is not treated as a “post-release window” in our dataset, since publication
had been delayed by an extra year and was no longer timely.

5

Table A4: By-elections from 2007 to 2015 by type of triggering event
By-election due to

Frequency

Proportion in 90-day window

Resignation

363

0.154

Death

347

0.187

Expulsion

120

0.217

Termination

82

0.207

Higher office

33

0.364

Other
4
0.250
Note: We have excluded 31 by-elections (arising from only four distinct incidents) triggered by the
dissolution of an entire municipal council, requiring all seats to be re-elected at once.

6

Table A5: Balance statistics

Variable
Audit outcome better
Audit outcome change
Audit outcome worse
Audit: Adverse
Audit: Clean
Audit: Disclaimer
Audit: Outstanding
Audit: Qualified
Audit: Unqualified
Barriers to attribution
By-election is uncontested
Educational attendance
First and second-largest party seat difference
Governing party (of municipality) not running
Governing party is ANC
Largest party seat share
Linguistic fractionalization
Log average income
Log population
Media outlet has office in municipality
Metropolitan municipality
Number of parties contesting by-election
Original election ANC seat share
Original election governing party vote share
Original election turnout
Original election winner is ANC
Original election winning party vote share
Proportion with flush toilets
Proportion with internet
Proportion with matric
Proportion with radio
Proportion with water at home
White population proportion
Note: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

All by-elections (excl. full council dismissal)
Mean
Mean
outside
inside
window
window
p-value
0.312
0.267
0.238
0.156
0.148
0.877
0.156
0.119
0.194
0.008
0.017
0.411
0.077
0.107
0.241
0.259
0.249
0.772
0.059
0.079
0.370
0.266
0.198
0.047**
0.325
0.350
0.534
0.320
0.226
0.044**
0.089
0.090
0.945
0.504
0.530
0.127
26.924
27.593
0.696
0.032
0.017
0.191
0.783
0.774
0.796
0.684
0.692
0.522
2.102
2.153
0.685
10.417
10.385
0.501
12.245
12.307
0.552
0.459
0.492
0.442
0.180
0.158
0.478
3.069
2.774
0.004***
0.637
0.634
0.862
0.641
0.620
0.399
0.546
0.573
0.001***
0.694
0.638
0.165
0.719
0.738
0.185
0.577
0.532
0.100
0.295
0.294
0.883
0.342
0.336
0.550
0.660
0.655
0.483
0.676
0.652
0.319
0.080
0.075
0.427

7

By-elections due to death only
Mean
Mean
outside
inside
window
window
p-value
0.261
0.277
0.803
0.127
0.169
0.614
0.135
0.108
0.545
0.008
0.046
0.161
0.057
0.031
0.323
0.308
0.200
0.066*
0.049
0.077
0.434
0.251
0.246
0.936
0.324
0.400
0.267
0.296
0.215
0.313
0.097
0.154
0.250
0.554
0.552
0.944
25.317
25.523
0.936
0.028
0.015
0.489
0.826
0.785
0.469
0.697
0.713
0.394
2.050
2.130
0.708
10.278
10.300
0.766
12.161
12.082
0.594
0.413
0.446
0.634
0.130
0.077
0.186
2.976
2.662
0.082*
0.645
0.651
0.820
0.677
0.705
0.417
0.535
0.556
0.153
0.777
0.800
0.690
0.720
0.747
0.243
0.517
0.493
0.594
0.283
0.280
0.839
0.329
0.330
0.983
0.655
0.651
0.686
0.618
0.661
0.253
0.068
0.063
0.587

Table A6: Heckman selection-correction model
Dependent variable
Biggest party seat share (on council)
Outcome change

(1)
Vote share

(2)
Contested
-5.749***
(0.875)
-0.213
(0.199)
-0.491**
(0.242)
0.632**
(0.251)
5.623***
(0.712)

-0.014
(0.025)
Window 90
-0.025
(0.036)
Window 90 x Outcome change
0.120**
(0.058)
Constant
0.620***
(0.017)
λ (inverse Mills)
0.172***
(0.026)
ρ
0.683
σ
0.251
Wald Χ2 test of independent equations (ρ = 0)
28.79***
Observations
303
Censored observations
34
Uncensored observations
269
Note: Heckman selection-correction model for the vote share model in column 2 of Table 1
and selection on whether more than one party participated in the by-election, with standard
errors clustered by by-election date in parentheses. The estimated correlation between the
errors in the selection and vote share equations is ρ and the standard error of the residual in
the vote share equation is σ. The estimate of the selection hazard is λ = ρσ and its significance
suggests a meaningful selection effect in the vote share model. Including the initial vote share
at the last regular election results in the seat share of the biggest party no longer being
significant in the selection equation. Models with fixed effects do not converge.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

8

Table A7: Different time windows
Outcome change
Window 30
Window 30 x Outcome change

(1)
-0.008
(0.012)
-0.087*
(0.044)
0.127*
(0.072)

Window 60
Window 60 x Outcome change

(2)
-0.017
(0.013)

(3)
-0.020
(0.013)

(4)
-0.024
(0.016)

-0.041**
(0.018)
0.079**
(0.031)

Window 90

-0.037**
(0.016)
0.071***
(0.025)

Window 90 x Outcome change
Window 120

0.003
(0.015)
0.042**
(0.021)

Window 120 x Outcome change
Days since last release (log)

0.015
(0.014)
-0.038**
(0.015)

Days since last release (log) x Outcome change
Window x | Outcome change = 1

0.040
(0.039)
Window x | Outcome change = -1
-0.214*
(0.114)
Initial vote share (at last regular election)
Yes
Province and year fixed effects
Yes
Observations
268
R-squared
0.727
Note: Standard errors clustered by by-election date in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

0.188**
(0.074)

0.038
(0.032)
-0.120***
(0.039)
Yes
Yes
268
0.730

0.034
(0.027)
-0.108***
(0.032)
Yes
Yes
268
0.731

9

0.045*
(0.024)
-0.039
(0.027)
Yes
Yes
268
0.728

Yes
Yes
209
0.711

Table A8: Sample restricted to by-elections within 90 days of a release date
Outcome change
Window 90

(1)
0.014
(0.041)
-0.019
(0.039)

Window 90 x Outcome change

(2)
-0.043
(0.054)
-0.038
(0.037)
0.133*
(0.076)

(3)
-0.033*
(0.018)
-0.063***
(0.016)
0.075**
(0.030)

(4)
-0.040
(0.026)
-0.054***
(0.017)
0.096***
(0.033)

Better
Window 90 x Better
Worse
Window 90 x Worse
Constant
Window 90 | Outcome change = 1
Window 90 | Outcome change = -1

0.684***
(0.026)

0.688***
(0.024)
0.095
0.085
-0.171**
(0.083)

Window 90 | Better = 1

0.130**
(0.060)
0.012
(0.030)
-0.138***
(0.038)

0.188***
(0.066)
0.042
(0.032)
-0.149***
(0.042)

(5)
-0.084***
(0.019)
-0.078***
(0.027)
0.146***
(0.029)
-0.006
(0.043)
-0.016
(0.062)
0.199***
(0.065)

0.062**
(0.029)
Window 90 | Worse= 1
-0.100*
(0.056)
Initial vote share (at last regular election)
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Province and year fixed effects
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Observations
104
104
104
104
104
R-squared
0.003
0.039
0.714
0.777
0.781
Note: Standard errors clustered by by-election date in parentheses. This regression table replicates the analysis in Table 1 with a sample
restricted to by-elections within 90 days prior to and after the mid-year release dates specified in Table A2.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

10

Table A9: Alternative standard errors
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
-0.020
-0.020
-0.020
-0.020
(0.013)
(0.014)
(0.013)
(0.013)
Window 90
-0.037**
-0.037*
-0.037*
-0.037*
(0.015)
(0.021)
(0.022)
(0.019)
Window 90 x Outcome change
0.071***
0.071**
0.071**
0.071**
(0.021)
(0.033)
(0.028)
(0.028)
Initial vote share (at last regular election)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Province and year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
268
268
268
268
R-squared
0.731
0.731
0.731
0.731
Note: Main model (column 4 in Table 1) with alternative standard errors in parentheses: two-way
clustered by date and municipality (column 1), ordinary (column 2), bootstrapped with 1000 repetitions
(column 3), and bootstrapped with 1000 repetitions and clustered by by-election date (column 4).
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Outcome change

11

Table A10: Excluding by-elections in individual provinces
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
-0.011
-0.021
-0.020
-0.032** -0.017
-0.017
-0.025*
-0.020
-0.018
(0.015)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.016)
(0.014)
(0.013)
(0.013)
(0.014)
(0.014)
Window 90
-0.034** -0.040** -0.027
-0.033
-0.039** -0.034** -0.037** -0.039** -0.042**
(0.014)
(0.017)
(0.017)
(0.023)
(0.018)
(0.015)
(0.017)
(0.017)
(0.018)
Window 90 x Outcome change
0.071** 0.071*** 0.067** 0.081*** 0.078*** 0.066**
0.070*** 0.069**
0.077***
(0.028)
(0.026)
(0.028)
(0.026)
(0.026)
(0.026)
(0.025)
(0.027)
(0.024)
Sample excluding by-elections in
EC
FS
GP
KZN
LIM
MP
NW
NC
WC
Initial vote share (at last regular election) Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Province and year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
224
243
243
187
239
252
254
251
251
R-squared
0.749
0.721
0.714
0.720
0.741
0.739
0.733
0.736
0.730
Note: Standard errors clustered by by-election date in parentheses. Province abbreviations: EC = Eastern Cape, FS = Free State, GP = Gauteng Province,
KZN = KwaZulu-Natal, LIM = Limpopo, MP = Mpumalanga, NW = North West, NC = Northern Cape, WC = Western Cape.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Outcome change

12

Table A11: Excluding by-elections in individual calendar years
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
-0.013
-0.026*
-0.021
-0.016
-0.021
-0.022
-0.021
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.013)
(0.015)
(0.015)
(0.014)
Window 90
-0.037**
-0.049*** -0.051*** -0.036**
-0.037*
-0.035**
-0.024
(0.016)
(0.016)
(0.017)
(0.016)
(0.021)
(0.017)
(0.014)
Window 90 x Outcome change
0.064**
0.059*
0.080**
0.066**
0.091***
0.075***
0.070***
(0.024)
(0.031)
(0.034)
(0.026)
(0.024)
(0.026)
(0.024)
Sample excluding calendar year
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Initial vote share (at last regular election) Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Province and year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
235
217
226
258
223
239
240
R-squared
0.723
0.763
0.751
0.731
0.722
0.722
0.748
Note: Standard errors clustered by by-election date in parentheses. No observations fall into December 2007, so this year is not dropped.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Outcome change

13

(8)
-0.019
(0.014)
-0.033*
(0.017)
0.063**
(0.024)
2015
Yes
Yes
238
0.717

Table A12: Additional controls
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
-0.014
-0.011
-0.019
-0.019
-0.020
(0.014)
(0.015)
(0.014)
(0.013)
(0.013)
Window 90
-0.036**
-0.034
-0.059***
-0.032*
-0.036**
(0.016)
(0.021)
(0.020)
(0.016)
(0.016)
Window 90 x Outcome change
0.073***
0.063**
0.069***
0.077***
0.073***
(0.025)
(0.024)
(0.026)
(0.024)
(0.025)
Previous year audit category fixed effects
Yes
No
No
No
No
District fixed effects
No
Yes
No
No
No
Month of year fixed effects
No
No
Yes
No
No
Socio-economic characteristics
No
No
No
Yes
No
Days since last regular election
No
No
No
No
Yes
Initial vote share (at last regular election)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Province fixed effects
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
268
268
268
267
268
R-squared
0.734
0.794
0.743
0.744
0.732
Note: Standard errors clustered by by-election date in parentheses. Municipality characteristics include average household
income (logged), population (logged), linguistic fractionalization, proportion of households with radio, proportion of the
population with matric or higher education, all from the 2011 Census by StatsSA.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Outcome change

14

Table A13: Inverse probability weighting
Outcome change
Window 90
Window 90 x Outcome change

(1)
-0.020
(0.013)
-0.036**
(0.014)
0.068***
(0.024)
Yes
Yes
267
0.730

(2)
-0.014
(0.014)
-0.023
(0.018)
0.066**
(0.027)
Yes
Yes
268
0.745

(3)
-0.013
(0.014)
-0.020
(0.017)
0.063**
(0.028)
Yes
Yes
267
0.744

Initial vote share (at last regular election)
Province and year fixed effects
Observations
R-squared
Inverse probability weights from
Interacted province and year fixed effects
No
Yes
Yes
Municipal characteristics
Yes
No
Yes
Note: Standard errors clustered by by-election date in parentheses. Main model (column 4 in Table
1) with stabilized weights based on the predicted probabilities of a series of logistic regression
models where the outcome is whether or not each by-election from the primary sample of interest
falls into the post-audit report release date window. The municipal characteristics used are Log
seats, Flush toilets, and Hospital (as in Table A17).
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

15

Table A14: Context conditions
Window 90
Window 90 x Outcome change
Window 90 x Outcome change x Attribution barriers
Window 90 x Outcome change x Competitive council

(1)
-0.043**
(0.018)
0.066***
(0.025)
0.010
(0.053)

(2)
-0.045
(0.030)
0.029
(0.036)

(3)
0.002
(0.027)
0.039
(0.042)

(4)
-0.034
(0.025)
0.089***
(0.031)

(5)
-0.200
(0.144)
0.109
(0.189)

(6)
-0.051
(0.054)
0.225***
(0.078)

(7)
-0.124
(0.089)
0.157
(0.136)

(8)
-0.049
(0.032)
0.098**
(0.043)

(9)
-0.036
(0.022)
0.060*
(0.030)

(10)
-0.010
(0.024)
0.036
(0.058)

0.076*
(0.045)

Window 90 x Outcome change x ANC majority

0.044
(0.047)

Window 90 x Outcome change x Media office

-0.062
(0.067)

Window 90 x Outcome change x Households with radio

-0.060
(0.297)

Window 90 x Outcome change x Households with internet

-0.567**
(0.277)

Window 90 x Outcome change x Households with TV

-0.125
(0.199)

Window 90 x Outcome change x Chief

-0.039
(0.050)

Window 90 x Outcome change x Rural

0.027
(0.060)

Window 90 x Outcome change x Linguistic fractionalization

0.017
(0.024)
Initial vote share (at last regular election)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Province and year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
268
267
268
268
267
267
267
268
267
267
R-squared
0.734
0.737
0.746
0.733
0.735
0.736
0.735
0.739
0.734
0.735
Note: Standard errors clustered by by-election date in parentheses. In this table, we report results where our main model from column 4 of Table 1 is augmented with a three-way
interaction with the relevant context variable indicated above. A full set of constituent interactions is included in each model, but we omit these here for presentational purposes.
The replication package includes the code with which to obtain the full sets of coefficients.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

16

Table A15: Audit outcome in levels
Outcome in levels
Window 90

(1)
-0.035*
(0.019)
0.018
(0.029)

Window 90 x Outcome in levels

(2)
-0.022
(0.022)
0.024
(0.027)
-0.066*
(0.034)

(3)
0.018*
(0.010)
-0.019
(0.014)
-0.021
(0.019)

(4)
0.007
(0.015)
-0.023
(0.016)
-0.014
(0.019)

Good audit
Window 90 x Good audit
Bad audit
Window 90 x Bad audit
Constant
Window 90 | Outcome in levels = 1
Window 90 | Outcome in levels = -1

0.653***
(0.016)

0.653***
(0.016)
-0.042
0.047
0.089**
(0.039)

0.058**
(0.029)
-0.041*
(0.024)
0.002
(0.022)

0.104**
(0.040)
-0.037
(0.026)
-0.009
(0.024)

Window 90 | Good audit = 1
Window 90 | Bad audit = 1
Initial vote share (at last regular election)
No
No
Province and year fixed effects
No
No
Observations
269
269
R-squared
0.018
0.027
Note: Standard errors clustered by by-election date in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Yes
No
269
0.705

17

Yes
Yes
269
0.728

(5)
0.017
(0.045)
0.024
(0.027)
-0.065
(0.063)
0.011
(0.029)
-0.040
(0.055)
0.087*
(0.049)

-0.048
(0.031)
-0.023
(0.026)
Yes
Yes
269
0.729

Table A16: Turnout as dependent variable
Outcome change
Window 90

(1)
0.002
(0.013)
0.016
(0.020)

Window 90 x Outcome change

(2)
0.013
(0.013)
0.027
(0.022)
-0.058
(0.036)

(3)
0.011
(0.010)
0.004
(0.014)
-0.044*
(0.022)

(4)
0.008
(0.010)
0.004
(0.012)
-0.033
(0.023)

Better
Window 90 x Better
Worse
Window 90 x Worse
Constant
Window 90 | Outcome change = 1
Window 90 | Outcome change = -1

0.387***
(0.008)

0.386***
(0.008)
-0.031
(0.037)
0.085*
(0.047)

-0.027
(0.049)
-0.040*
(0.022)
0.048
(0.030)

0.030
(0.062)
-0.029
(0.027)
0.037
(0.025)

Window 90 | Better = 1
Window 90 | Worse= 1
Initial turnout (at last regular election) No
No
Province and year fixed effects
No
No
Observations
268
268
R-squared
0.003
0.016
Note: Standard errors clustered by by-election date in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Yes
No
268
0.406

Yes
Yes
268
0.554

18

(5)
0.009
(0.015)
0.016
(0.015)
-0.043
(0.034)
0.004
(0.017)
0.017
(0.032)
0.028
(0.063)

-0.035
(0.032)
0.026
(0.028)
Yes
Yes
268
0.556

Table A17: Frequency of by-elections triggered by death across municipalities
Log seats
Flush toilets

(1)
0.907***
(0.093)
0.159
(0.190)

(2)
1.003***
(0.103)
0.345
(0.246)

Piped water
Hospital

-0.348**
(0.174)

-0.475***
(0.177)

(3)
0.977***
(0.105)

(4)
0.931***
(0.103)
0.260
(0.251)

0.114
(0.273)
-0.405**
(0.177)

-0.376*
(0.211)
Quasi-Poisson
Yes
234

Larger hospital

(5)
1.881***
(0.367)
-0.668
(0.806)
-1.250*
(0.662)

Model
Quasi-Poisson Quasi-Poisson Quasi-Poisson
Logistic
Province fixed effects
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
234
234
234
234
***
p < 0.01, **p < 0.05, *p < 0.1
Note: Cross-sectional models of the total frequency of by-elections triggered by deaths in office for each
municipality over the period 2007-2015. In Model 5 only, the outcome is dichotomous for the incidence of any byelections triggered by death. Log seats is the natural log of the total number of council seats. Flush toilets and Piped
water are the proportion of municipal population reporting access to each (in their home) in the 2011 Census.
Hospital is an indicator for the presence of a provincial, central, or regional hospital in the municipality, based on
the official categories of public hospitals published by the Department of Health in Government Gazette No. 35101
(March 2, 2012). Larger hospital is an indicator for a provincial or central hospital only.

19

Table A18: Different time windows (survey data)
Outcome change
Post-release (1-week window)
Post-release (1-week window) x Outcome change
Post-release (2-week window)
Post-release (2-week window) x Outcome change

(1)
0.066
(0.049)
0.539*
(0.286)
0.506
(0.375)

(2)
0.043
(0.050)

(3)
0.017
(0.053)

(4)
0.020
(0.053)

0.025
(0.090)
0.257*
(0.143)

Post-release (3-week window)

0.021
(0.082)
0.197**
(0.093)

Post-release (3-week window) x Outcome change
Post-release (4-week window)

0.037
(0.119)
Post-release (4-week window) x Outcome change
0.175**
(0.086)
Post-release (x-week window) | Outcome change = 1
1.044*
0.282
0.218
0.211
(0.618)
(0.202)
(0.140)
(0.157)
Post-release (x-week window) | Outcome change = -1
0.033
-0.232*
-0.177*
-0.138
(0.251)
(0.127)
(0.105)
(0.136)
Observations
3,402
3,402
3,402
3,402
R-squared
0.064
0.065
0.066
0.065
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Linear models of Mayor approval. All models also include province fixed
effects and controls for the running variable (cubic); indicator for metropolitan, urban, or rural; age; education;
income (with a separate dummy variable for no response); unemployment; gender; race. Sample restricted to
respondents in municipalities without mayoral changes between the 2016 local elections and the period covered by
the survey in 2018 (excluding 26 such municipalities).
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

20

Table A19: Respondents who have heard of municipal audits (survey data)
Post-release
Model
Fixed Effects
Running Variable
Observations
R-squared

(1)
0.129**
(0.061)
Linear
Province
Nonlinear
5,200
0.052

(2)
0.135**
(0.065)
Linear
Municipality
Nonlinear
5,200
0.126

(3)
0.051*
(0.029)
Linear
Province
Linear
5,200
0.052

(4)
0.595**
(0.274)
Logistic
Province
Nonlinear
5,200

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. All models also include controls for the running variable (cubic or
linear); indicator for metropolitan, urban, or rural; age; education; income (with a separate dummy variable
for no response); unemployment; gender; race.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

21

Table A20: Respondents who say corruption and financial mismanagement
information is very important in voting (survey data)
Post-release
Model
Fixed Effects
Running Variable
Observations
R-squared

(1)
-0.020
(0.061)
Linear
Province
Nonlinear
5,069
0.044

(2)
-0.104*
(0.062)
Linear
Municipality
Nonlinear
5,069
0.140

(3)
-0.001
(0.030)
Linear
Province
Linear
5,069
0.043

(4)
-0.147
(0.303)
Logistic
Province
Nonlinear
5,069

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. All models also include controls for the running variable (cubic or
linear); indicator for metropolitan, urban, or rural; age; education; income (with a separate dummy variable
for no response); unemployment; gender; race.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

22

60
10

20

30

40

50

2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017

0

Number of Articles (Seven−Day Rolling Sum)

70

Figure A1: Media attention to municipal audits spikes after the release of the Auditor-General’s report (overlay version)

Jan.

Feb.

March

April

May

June

July

Aug.

Sept.

Oct.

Nov.

Dec.

Date

Note: The vertical lines indicate the release date of the Auditor-General’s summary report on municipal audits. The number of articles count was calculated as
the seven-day rolling sum of newspaper articles extracted from Sabinet’s SA Media database over the period January 29-31, 2018, using the following search
query: (municipal OR municipality OR "local government") AND (audit OR "auditor general" OR "irregular expenditure" OR "unauthorised expenditure" OR
"fruitless and wasteful expenditure"). At the time of data extraction, the database covered 38 mainstream South African media publications with national or
regional distribution. A change in Sabinet’s collection procedure resulted in a gap in coverage from late 2014 to early 2015, visible as the flat line over that
period.

23

Figure A2: Eyewitness News municipal audits portal

Source: Screenshot of Eyewitness News municipal audit portal, http://ewn.co.za/tools/municipal-audits/ (accessed April 17, 2018).

24

Figure A3: Example of ANC-run municipality advertising audit outcomes

Source: Mail & Guardian, print edition, April 8-14, 2016, page 14.

25

Figure A4: Example of DA advertising municipal audit outcomes

Source: Screenshot of Democratic Alliance website, https://www.da.org.za/da-governed-municipalities/george/ (accessed April 17, 2018).

26

Figure A5: Treatment assignment of by-elections

Note: By-elections E are triggered by the death of an incumbent ward councilor and occur at
time t throughout the year. Here, the third and fourth by-elections are “treated” as they fall into
the period of x days following the release of the Auditor-General’s municipal audit report.

27

Figure A6: McCrary sorting tests
All By−Elections
p−value = 0.000007

By−Elections from Death Only
p−value = 0.433

●

0.008

●
●

●

0.006

●
●

●

●

●

●

0.004

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

0.000

0.002

●
●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●
●

●●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●●●

●

−100

●●

●

●

●

0

●

●

100

●

●

●●

●●

●

0.000 0.001 0.002 0.003 0.004 0.005 0.006

●

0.010

●

●
●

●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

−200

●

−100

Days to/from Audit Release

●

0

●

100

Days to/from Audit Release

28

●

●

200

0.6

Figure A7: Overview of municipal audit outcomes for financial years 2006-7 to 2013-14 (line graph version)

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.0

0.1

Proportion of Audits

0.5

Clean
Unqualified
Qualified
Adverse
Disclaimer
Outstanding

2006−2007

2007−2008

2008−2009

2009−2010

2010−2011

Financial year

Source: See Table A2.

29

2011−2012

2012−2013

2013−2014

Figure A8: Use of color-coding and arrows in audit reports

Source: Auditor-General of South Africa. 2016. Consolidated General Report on the Audit Outcomes of Local Government 2014-15. Pretoria,
Auditor-General of South Africa. Extract from Annexure 3, page 133.

30

Figure A9: Graph of main regression results

Deterioration

Deterioration

Stagnation

Stagnation

Improvement

Improvement
.2
.1
0
.1
(a) Trichotomous Measure

.2
.1
0
.1
(b) Separate Indicators

Marginal Effect of Audit Information on the Relevant Party’s Vote Share
Note: Based on the results in columns 4 (left) and 5 (right) of Table 1 and with 90% confidence intervals.

31

Data appendix
(i) By-elections dataset
ANC majority: Equal to 1 where the ANC holds a majority of seats on the council. Source: Original election results from Electoral
Commission of South Africa (IEC), http://www.elections.org.za/content/Elections/Municipal-elections-results/; updated with
subsequent by-election results and floor-crossings.
Attribution barriers: Equal to 1 if any one or more of the following conditions hold, 0 otherwise: (i) the political party of the mayor at
the time of the by-election is different from the political party of the mayor at end of relevant financial year, (ii) mayors from more
than one political party were in office during the relevant financial year, and (iii) no single party had a majority on the council at any
point during relevant financial year, e.g., several parties or independents formed a coalition. Source: Own data collection.
Bad audit: Equal to 1 if the Auditor-General reports an adverse opinion, disclaimer, or outstanding audit in the relevant annual report
on municipal audits, 0 otherwise. Source: Annexure 1 of the Consolidated General Reports on the Audit Outcomes of Local
Government for the 2006-7 to 2013-14 financial years, https://www.agsa.co.za/Reporting/MFMAReports.aspx.
Better: Equal to 1 if a municipality had a year-on-year improvement in audit outcome, 0 otherwise. Source: Outcome change.
Biggest party seat share (on council): The seat share of the largest party on the council. Source: Original election results from
Electoral Commission of South Africa (IEC), http://www.elections.org.za/content/Elections/Municipal-elections-results/; updated with
subsequent by-election results and floor-crossings.
Chief: Equal to 1 if any ward of a municipality falls within the territory of a former Bantustan created under the apartheid regime, 0
otherwise. Source: De Kadt and Larreguy (2018).
Competitive council: Equal to 1 where the seat difference between the first and second-largest parties on the council is below the
median value (22). Seat difference is measured in absolute not relative terms, as – for instance – a ten percent seat difference would be
indicate far more competitiveness on a smaller council than on a larger one. Source: Original election results from Electoral
Commission of South Africa (IEC), http://www.elections.org.za/content/Elections/Municipal-elections-results/; updated with
subsequent by-election results and floor-crossings.
Contested: Equal to 1 if more than one party participated in a by-election, 0 otherwise.

32

Days since last regular election: At the time of a by-election, the number of days that have passed since the last countrywide regular
municipal election (either March 1, 2006, or May 18, 2011).
Days since last release (log): The log of the number of days since the last Auditor General’s municipal audit report release date, with
the day of the release set to one. Observations before the first release date used in our study (July 10, 2009) are coded as missing.
Source: Appendix Table A2.
Good audit: Equal to 1 if the Auditor-General reports a clean or unqualified audit outcome in the relevant annual report on municipal
audits, 0 otherwise. Source: Annexure 1 of the Consolidated General Reports on the Audit Outcomes of Local Government for the
2006-7 to 2013-14 financial years, https://www.agsa.co.za/Reporting/MFMAReports.aspx
Households with internet: Proportion of municipal households with access to the internet according to the 2011 Census. Source:
StatsSA.
Households with radio: Proportion of municipal households with a radio according to the 2011 Census. Source: StatsSA.
Households with television: Proportion of municipal households with a television according to the 2011 Census. Source: StatsSA.
Initial turnout: Ratio of the number of votes cast to the number of registered voters in the last regular municipal election. Source:
Electoral Commission of South Africa (IEC), http://www.elections.org.za/content/Elections/Municipal-elections-results/.
Initial vote share: Vote share in the last regular municipal election of the party of the municipality’s mayor at the end of the financial
year to which the relevant audit outcome applies. For example, for a ward by-election in May of 2013, this is the vote share in the
2011 municipal election of the party of the mayor in office at the end of June 2012. Source: Electoral Commission of South Africa
(IEC), http://www.elections.org.za/content/Elections/Municipal-elections-results/.
Linguistic fractionalization: Equal to 1 divided by the Herfindahl Index computed with language shares from the 2011 Census.
Source: StatsSA.
Media office: Equal to 1 where the municipality hosts the office of a community, regional, or national newspaper, magazine, or radio
station. Source: South Africa GCIS Media Directory, https://www.gcis.gov.za/sites/default/files/docs/services/media.pdf.

33

Outcome change: Equal to 1 if the Auditor-General reports a year-on-year improvement in audit outcome in the relevant annual report
on municipal audits, 0 for no year-on-year change, and -1 for a year-on-year deterioration. An improvement (deterioration) is defined
as a move up (down) the list of official audit categories in Appendix Table A1. We use only the contemporaneous audit outcomes as
reported by the auditor general, not including subsequent updates for instance in the case of outstanding audits, so as to capture the
information available to the public at that time. Following the statutory timeline that envisages the finalization of audits five months
after the end of the relevant financial year, we update this variable to the latest results for the previous financial year on 1 December of
each calendar year. For South African municipalities, the financial year runs from 1 July to 30 June of the following calendar year.
Source: Annexure 1 of the Consolidated General Reports on the Audit Outcomes of Local Government for the 2006-7 to 2013-14
financial years, https://www.agsa.co.za/Reporting/MFMAReports.aspx.
Outcome in levels: Equal to 1 if the Auditor-General reports a clean or unqualified audit outcome in the relevant annual report on
municipal audits, 0 for a qualified audit outcome, and -1 for an adverse opinion, disclaimer, or outstanding audit. Source: Annexure 1
of the Consolidated General Reports on the Audit Outcomes of Local Government for the 2006-7 to 2013-14 financial years,
https://www.agsa.co.za/Reporting/MFMAReports.aspx.
Rural: Equal to 1 if a municipality is classified as “mainly rural with communal tenure and with, at most, one or two small towns in
their area” (category B4 municipality) according to the government’s Municipal Infrastructure Investment Framework (MIIF), 0
otherwise. Source: Municipal Demarcation Board, State Municipal Capacity Assessment 2010/2011: National Trends in Municipal
Capacity, September 30, 2012: Annexure A.
Turnout: Ratio of the number of votes cast to the number of registered voters in the ward by-election. Source: Electoral Commission
of South Africa (IEC), http://www.elections.org.za/content/Elections/Municipal-by-elections-results/.
Vote share: Vote share in the ward by-election of the party of the municipality’s mayor at the end of the financial year to which the
relevant audit outcome applies. For example, for a ward by-election in May of 2013, this is the vote share of the party of the mayor in
office at the end of June 2012 (just prior to the start of the new financial year on July 1, 2012). Source: Electoral Commission of South
Africa (IEC), http://www.elections.org.za/content/Elections/Municipal-by-elections-results/.
Window 30/60/90/120: Indicator of whether a by-election is held within 30/60/90/120 days of the timely release of an AuditorGeneral’s annual report on municipal audit outcomes as reported in Appendix Table A2. The release of the 2006-7 report is not
deemed timely, as it occurred almost two years after the end of the relevant financial year. Source: Release dates were provided by the
Auditor-General of South Africa (AGSA) and verified against press reports extracted from Sabinet’s SA Media Database as well as
official AGSA press releases, https://www.agsa.co.za/MediaRoom/Mediareleases.aspx.

34

Worse: Equal to 1 if a municipality had a year-on-year deterioration in audit outcome, 0 otherwise. Source: Outcome change.
(ii) Survey dataset
Age: Age reported in years.
Corruption very important: Equal to 1 for individuals who claim information about corruption and financial mismanagement in their
municipality is VERY important in deciding which political party they will vote for in a municipal election or by-elections; 0
otherwise.
Date: Number of days elapsed from the first day in the sample.
Education: Reported education coded into an ordinal variable with 11 values: 0 for “No school,” 1 for “Some primary school,” 2 for
“Primary school completed,” 3 for “Some high school,” 4 for “High school completed,” 5 for “Some college,” 6 for “College
completed,” 7 for “Some university,” 8 for “Technicon diploma / degree,” 9 for “University degree / diploma,” and 10 for “Postgraduate degree.”
Female: Equal to 1 for individuals whose reported gender was “Female,” 0 otherwise.
Heard of audits: Equal to 1 for individuals who claim they have heard, seen, or read about EITHER the audit results of the municipal
audit carried out for their local municipality, OR reports of unauthorized, irregular, or fruitless and wasteful spending by their
municipality; 0 otherwise.
Income (no answer): Equal to 1 for individuals who did not share their income, 0 otherwise.
Income: Reported monthly income coded into an ordinal variable with 14 values: 0 for “No income,” 1 for “R1-R500,” 2 for “R 501R750,” 3 for “R 751-R1,000,” 4 for “R1001-R1,500,” 5 for “R1,501-R2,000,” 6 for “R2,001-R3,000,” 7 for “R3,001-R5,000,” 8 for
“R5,001-R7,500,” 9 for “R7,501-R10,000,” 10 for “R10,001-R15,000,” 11 for “R15,001-R20,000,” 12 for “R20,001-R30,000,” and
13 for “R30,001+.” Where respondents refused to answer or did not know, the response is coded as 0, but we allow for a separate
intercept with the “Income (no answer)” indicator.

35

Locale: A set of indicator variables for whether respondents are residents of “Metropolitan” (the reference category), “Urban,” or
“Rural” locales.
Mayor approval: Responses to the SACS survey question “How well or badly do you feel that the Mayor of the municipality in which
you live is doing his/her job?” Responses coded 0 for “Very badly,” 1 for “Badly,” 2 for “Well,” and 3 for “Very well.” “Don’t know”
is coded as missing, although results are robust to coding them as a middle category instead.
National government approval: Responses to the SACS survey question “How well or badly do you feel that the National Government
is doing its job?” Responses coded 0 for “Very badly,” 1 for “Badly,” 2 for “Well,” and 3 for “Very well.” “Don’t know” is coded as
missing.
Mayor approval (very bad): Responses to the SACS survey question “How well or badly do you feel that the Mayor of the
municipality in which you live is doing his/her job?”, coded as a dichotomous indicator equal to 1 only for the response “Very badly,”
0 otherwise. “Don’t know” is coded as missing.
Worse: See above (by-elections dataset).
Better: See above (by-elections dataset).
Outcome change: See above (by-elections dataset).
Post-release (1-week window): Equal to 1 for dates in the one week following May 23, 2018, 0 otherwise.
Post-release (2-week window): Equal to 1 for dates in the two weeks following May 23, 2018, 0 otherwise.
Post-release (3-week window): Equal to 1 for dates in the three weeks following May 23, 2018, 0 otherwise.
Post-release (4-week window): Equal to 1 for dates in the four weeks following May 23, 2018, 0 otherwise.
Post-release: Equal to 1 for dates on or after May 23, 2018, the release date of the Auditor General’s report in that year, 0 otherwise.
Race: A set of indicator variables based on reported race, including categories “Black” (reference category), “Coloured,” “Indian,”
and “White.”

36

Unemployed: Equal to 1 for individuals whose response to the question on “Work status” was “Not working: unemployed,” 0
otherwise.

37

Table A21: Summary statistics (by-elections data)
Variable
ANC majority
Attribution barriers
Bad audit
Better
Chief
Competitive council
Days since last regular election
Days since last release (log)
Good audit
Households with internet
Households with radio
Households with television
Initial turnout
Initial vote share
Linguistic fractionalization
Media office
Outcome change
Outcome in levels
Rural
Turnout
Vote share
Window 120
Window 30
Window 60
Window 90
Worse

Obs
270
270
269
268
270
269
270
211
269
269
269
269
270
270
269
270
268
269
269
270
270
270
270
270
270
268

Mean
0.763
0.233
0.346
0.261
0.633
0.520
1060.033
4.797
0.409
0.284
0.652
0.670
0.541
0.673
2.076
0.411
0.131
0.063
0.383
0.390
0.655
0.352
0.030
0.144
0.200
0.131

Std. Dev.
0.426
0.424
0.476
0.440
0.483
0.501
433.242
0.926
0.493
0.094
0.077
0.144
0.101
0.224
1.478
0.493
0.613
0.868
0.487
0.124
0.235
0.478
0.170
0.352
0.401
0.338

38

Min
0
0
0
0
0
0
112
0.000
0
0.125
0.346
0.277
0.004
0.028
1.013
0
-1
-1
0
0.030
0.012
0
0
0
0
0

Max
1
1
1
1
1
1
1785
5.943
1
0.514
0.787
0.873
0.743
1.000
6.887
1
1
1
1
0.713
0.980
1
1
1
1
1

Table A22: Summary statistics (survey data)
Variable
Obs
Mean
Std. Dev.
Min
Max
Age
3,972
40.806
16.151
18
100
Better
3,920
0.065
0.247
0
1
Corruption very important
3,873
0.653
0.476
0
1
Date
3,972
55.314
34.759
1
112
Date cubed
3,972 363672.700 394929.200
1
1404928
Date squared
3,972
4267.512
3802.219
1
12544
Education
3,972
3.982
1.991
0
10
Female
3,972
0.580
0.494
0
1
Heard of audits
3,972
0.372
0.483
0
1
Income
3,972
2.690
3.414
0
13
Income (no answer)
3,972
0.386
0.487
0
1
Locale: Rural
3,972
0.210
0.408
0
1
Locale: Urban
3,972
0.256
0.436
0
1
Mayor approval
3,447
1.299
0.965
0
3
Mayor approval (very bad)
3,447
0.265
0.441
0
1
National government approval
3,594
1.563
0.852
0
3
Outcome change
3,920
-0.193
0.535
-1
1
Post-release
3,972
0.259
0.438
0
1
Post-release (1-week window)
3,972
0.010
0.097
0
1
Post-release (2-week window)
3,972
0.102
0.303
0
1
Post-release (3-week window)
3,972
0.231
0.421
0
1
Post-release (4-week window)
3,972
0.256
0.436
0
1
Race: Coloured
3,972
0.134
0.341
0
1
Race: Indian
3,972
0.035
0.185
0
1
Race: White
3,972
0.219
0.414
0
1
Unemployed
3,972
0.402
0.490
0
1
Worse
3,920
0.258
0.438
0
1
Note: Sample restricted to respondents in municipalities without mayoral changes between the 2016 local
elections and the period covered by the survey in 2018 (excluding 26 such municipalities), as in Table 2.

39

