Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.14

Pp. 165-180

Speech Act of Refusal on the Phone
Imed Samaali
Department of English, College of Education Azulfi,
Majmaah University, Al-Majmaah, Saudi Arabia
Tahar Bayouli
Department of English, College of Education Azulfi,
Majmaah University, Al-Majmaah, Saudi Arabia

Abstract:
This paper investigates the speech act of refusal taking as a case study British responses to a
salesperson’s offer through the study of recordings of 109 conversations between the salesperson
and a potential British customer. The data are analyzed quantitatively and qualitatively with the
aim of finding the most frequent responses that denote refusal by the English native speakers. Most
of the expressions used to reflect the British people’s annoyance with the use of cold calls, the
majority being brief phrases of refusal. In addition to the recorded calls, two questionnaires were
conducted in Britain to shed light on the frequent expressions used on the phone in response to the
salesperson. It is interesting here to catalog the range of strategies used by individuals, most of the
time verbal, to avoid talking to the salesperson. These strategies seem to exist on a continuum of
directness-indirectness. Firstly to perform an act of refusal efficient enough to end the call.
Secondly to make the balance between the impacts of refusal per se and the keeping up with the
social convention of mutual cooperation presented in the theory of politeness.
Key words: phone conversation, politeness theory, refusal, speech act, salesperson-customer
Cite as: Samaali, I., & Bayouli, T. (2019). Speech Act of Refusal on the Phone. Arab World
English Journal, 10 (2) 165-180.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.14

165

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Speech Act of Refusal on the Phone

Samaali & Bayouli

Introduction
Background to the study:
This paper studies some verbal phrases used in response to a salesperson in a phone conversation
focusing on negative attitudes that British people had towards cold calls in the light of speech-act
theory. Upon analysis of the responses, the researcher noticed that most of the strategies that had
been used by the potential British customers consisted of using some phrases that are typical of
answering cold calls over the phone. Most of the time, these phrases denote refusal. In addition,
these phrases signal the kind of relationship that characterizes the potential British customers and
the salesperson. In this respect, the potential British customers employed certain strategies in an
attempt to stop the flow of the calls.
Theoretical framework
This paper draws on the work of eminent researchers who showed that refusal as a speech act
required deep studies in different cultures. A good deal of such studies worked on the multiple
aspects of the speech act of refusals like Beebe, Takahashi, and Uliss-Weltz (1990), Tnack (2002),
and Nelson et al. (2002). These researchers demonstrated that refusals comprise a series of other
speech acts like requests for clarification, the promise to comply, and the expression of regret or
apology. Along with the refusal response, there is often a positive remark, an expression of
willingness, an expression of gratitude and showing a partial agreement with the interlocutor
(Félix-Brasdefer, 2008, p. 196). According to Nelson, Carson, Al Batal and El Bakary (2002)
refusals are “particularly interesting because they are face-threatening acts, and we would expect
many face-saving strategies to be used, especially in refusing individuals of higher status” (p. 165).
Based on the influential studies led by Beebe et al. (1990), other researchers followed their method
of eliciting data. They used Discourse Completion Test (DCT) as a tool for collecting data from
participants. Nelson et al. (2002) defined the Discourse Completion Test as “a structured written
discourse that provides the context/impetus for the speech act being studied with rejoinders that
cue for eliciting the desired speech act being studied” (p. 165). It is worth pointing out that most
of the studies on refusal used DCT to collect data. However, Nelson et al. (2002) criticize it arguing
that “what people claim they would say in a hypothetical situation is not necessarily what they
actually would say in a real situation” (p. 168). In most cases these studies are carried out in order
to understand the discrepancies between native and non-native complaints and refusals (Tnack,
2002). Nelson et al. (2002) studied refusals in American English and Egyptian Arabic. Similarly,
Beebe et al. (1990) investigate the speech act of refusal produced by two different language groups:
native speakers of Japanese and native speakers of English. Al-Kahtani (2005) also worked on the
speech act of refusal studying how Americans, Arabs, and Japanese refuse, seeking to see whether
there was any difference in the ways people realize this speech act. Cold calling requires the
presence of two main participants, the cold caller and the customer. The success of the cold caller’s
task depends entirely on the rapport that the salesperson establishes with the customers.
For our own study, the analysis will rely on 109 recorded calls of salespersons-customers
exchanges and two questionnaires carried out in the UK with native speakers of English. The
framework of the present study also takes into consideration the politeness theory by Brown and
Levinson (1987). The choice of the theoretical framework stems from the fact that both the phone
call operator and the potential customer act and react according to what may be called a stimulusresponse pattern. As for the salespersons, the initiators of the exchange, they expect the
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

166

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Speech Act of Refusal on the Phone

Samaali & Bayouli

interlocutor to acknowledge, or “co-operate” to realize the goals above-mentioned, technically
called wants/desires.
Research objectives:
The present study has three objectives:
• Explore British answers on the phone to the salesperson.
• Document negative attitudes the British have towards the cold calls that they receive.
• Unveil most of the responses used by the potential British customers in an attempt to cover
most of the contents of their strategies of refusal on the phone.
Methodological Design
The researchers had work experience in an offshore oriented call center. This call centre is
established in Tunis. As in any call center’s strategy, they provided workers with a script to use
that is supposed to lead to the establishment of some kind of relationship between the salesperson
and the potential customer, and ultimately to a sale. Despite the script, we realized that to a large
extent the answers were the same. These similarities lie in the strategies of refusal used to deal
with the sale proposal. So, the researchers became interested in the replies potential British
customers made on the phone. There were two means used in collecting data from the potential
British customers: recorded calls and questionnaires.
Structure of the study
The research is divided into five parts. The first part gives a description of the call center and refers
to studies conducted on the speech act of refusal and the politeness theory. It highlights some issues
linked to call centers in Tunisia and the United Kingdom. While Tunisia has witnessed a rapid
growth in the industry of call centres, the United Kingdom passed laws to organize electronic
marketing and reduce or even stop cold calls. The second part presents the methodology followed
in the analysis of the data as well as the instruments used in collecting that data. The instruments
included in the present study are 109 recorded phone calls with two questionnaires conducted in
the United Kingdom. The third part focuses on the analysis of the recorded data and the two
questionnaires. It reveals most of the strategies used by the British people to respond in refusal to
call centers’ offers. The fourth part summarizes the findings. Finally, the last chapter is dedicated
to the conclusion that provides the recommendations and the limitations of the study.
Literature review
A number of studies have so far been carried out on the speech act of refusal and its
classifications along with the politeness theory.
Politeness and face
Holmes (1995) describes politeness as a “behaviour which actively expresses positive concern
for others, as well as non-imposing distancing behaviour” (p. 5). This makes of politeness a
“general form of an expression of good-will or camaraderie, as well as the more familiar nonintrusive behaviour which is labelled ‘polite’ in everyday usage” (p. 5). As a fundamental
constituent, “face” is a frequently recurring concept in the literature about politeness and can even
amount to a defining agent in theory. The notion of face is derived from “the work of Goffman
(1967) and Brown Levinson (1987)” (p. 5). This “technical term”, as mentioned in Holmes (1995)
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

167

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Speech Act of Refusal on the Phone

Samaali & Bayouli

and Yule (1996), refers to “the emotional and social sense of self that everyone has and expects
everyone else to recognize” (Yule, 1996, p. 60). From this perspective, “everybody has face needs
or basic wants”, which requires that “people generally cooperate” to maintain and show concern
for each other (Holmes 1995, p.5). In other words, politeness will materialize only if its
prerequisites, namely face needs, are respected. This is obvious in Yule’s (1996) linkage between
the two notions when he defines politeness as “the means employed to show awareness of another
person’s face… accomplished in situations of social distance or closeness” (Yule, 1996, p. 60).
Accordingly, if an interlocutor transgresses the social convention to “cooperate” to satisfy the
hearer’s face needs, the latter is said to disobey the very basics of polite conduct. That very basic
conduct of politeness is a covenant where both the speaker and the hearer cooperate to satisfy their
mutual basic wants. This is an effort made by participants where they employ strategies meant to
show “respect for each other’s” expectations regarding self-image, take account of their feelings,
and avoid face-threatening acts (FTAs)” (Cutting, 2002, p.45). FTAs are a central core in the
theory of politeness around which evolves much of the literature. According to Brown and
Levinson (1987), there are certain acts that threaten face as they “run contrary to the face wants of
the addressee and/ or of the speaker” (p. 65). Holmes (1995) considers suggestions, advice and
requests as potential face- threatening acts. She claims that “polite people” avoid face-threatening
acts such as “insults” and “orders” by “softening them or expressing them indirectly” (p. 5). Facethreatening acts are incorporated in the broader sphere of politeness which is divided in the
literature into “positive politeness‟ and “negative politeness‟. Positive politeness is portrayed by
Brown and Levinson (1987), cited in Holmes (1995), as “sociable behaviour expressing warmth
towards an addressee” (p. 5). Negative politeness on the other hand is the “behaviour which avoids
imposing on others” (p. 5). In their approach to politeness, Brown and Levinson (1987) distinguish
between two kinds of face needs: “negative and positive.” Positive face needs are “the want of
every member that his wants be desirable to at least some others” while negative face needs are
“the want of every „competent adult‟ that his actions be unimpeded by others” (p. 62). In this
regard, FTAs are the acts whereby cooperation between participants collapses, which results in a
difficulty “to maintain the face of all people involved in an interaction” (Nelson et al., 2002, p.165).
In the context of an interaction, an FTA, according to Nelson et al. (2002), can either be threatening
to the hearer’s or to the speaker’s face. Some other acts, nonetheless, are threatening to both
participants‟ face wants. Holmes (1995) advocates that “any utterance which could be interpreted
as making a demand or intruding on another person’s autonomy can be regarded as a potential
face-threatening act” (p. 5).
Gender and politeness
As a response to the question dealing with gender as to who is more polite, men or women,
Holmes (1995, p.6) affirms that women are more polite. She justifies this on the ground of
women’s expression of positive politeness or friendliness in the way they use language. In an
attempt to show that women tend to be more verbally polite than men, Holmes (1995, p. 193) cites
a variety of evidence to prove this claim by saying: Women give more encouraging verbal
feedback to their conversational partners than men do, they disruptively interrupt less often than
men. Women ask questions and introduce topics aimed at maintaining talk that is of interest to
others in informal and private interactions. In public where the floor is highly valued, they
participate much less and leave the floor to men more often. Women agree with others, compliment
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

168

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Speech Act of Refusal on the Phone

Samaali & Bayouli

others, and apologise more often than men, demonstrating sensitivity to the feelings of other people
and using these speech acts as tokens of solidarity.
The speech act of refusal
It is of great importance at this stage to note that most of the responses in the recorded calls
expressed refusal, whether directly or indirectly; hence the significance of studying the speech act
of refusal. However, with the scarcity of work done on the speech act of refusal on the phone, it
seems necessary to study in depth the main articles that have so far been written about the general
use of this speech act.
Definition
Researchers have been attempting to provide an accurate and precise definition to cover the
entire meaning of the speech act of refusal. Most of the time, the use of this speech act reflects an
intention of declining an offer, suggestion or request on the part of the speaker. Basically, it is
when the speaker directly or indirectly says “no” to a request or invitation (Tnack, 2002, p. 2).
According to Tnack (2002), refusal is “a face-threatening act to the listener because it contradicts
his own expectation and is often realized through an indirect strategy” (p. 2). Refusal is claimed
to “respond negatively to an offer, request, invitation, etc” (AlKahtani 2005, p. 37). In fact, refusal
denotes the state of being uncooperative with someone about something. Al Kahtani (2005, p. 37)
refers to Searle and Vanderveken (1985) who define the speech act of refusal as “the negative
counterparts of acceptances and distinguish them from rejections”. It has been noted that “how one
says “no” is probably more important than the answer itself” and therefore “sending and receiving
a message of “no” is a task that needs a special skill” (p. 37).
Methodology
The background
This chapter describes the methodology adopted to investigate the research problem stated in
the introduction. It also presents the description of the data collection methods that were followed
throughout the analysis of the recorded calls and the two questionnaires. In the analysis of the
recorded conversations and the questionnaires, the researcher followed the descriptive method.
The descriptive method is mainly used in analyzing the common responses that are found in both
the questionnaires and the recorded calls. The recorded calls and the questionnaires are analyzed
qualitatively and quantitatively. They are classified according to the responses of the potential
British customers to the salesperson. The basic concern is to reveal and explore the most common
phrases spoken by the potential British customers to the salesperson. These responses aim at
mapping the verbal strategies of refusal that are more likely to be used in answering cold calls
along with some features that are typical of the telephone conversations.
Subjects
When preparing for this study, a decision was made concerning the specific population which
the researchers were working on. The participants for the current study included 109 English native
speakers that made up the recorded calls which were conducted in Tunis, with 91 people in the
first questionnaire and 75 in the second one in London.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

169

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Speech Act of Refusal on the Phone

Samaali & Bayouli

Instruments
Most of the researchers who worked on the speech act of refusals like Beebe et al (1990),
Nelson et al (2002), and Tnack (2002) used a Discourse Completion Test (DCT) in eliciting
refusals in which participants should respond to some situations as prompts. Nelson (2002, p. 167)
mentioned three reasons which account for the use of a DCT as an efficient tool for eliciting data.
To elicit data, Nelson et al. (2002) made some modifications on the DCT; subjects had to respond
verbally on audiotape. Beebe and Cummings (as cited in Nelson et al., 2002) made a comparison
of two kinds of methods in eliciting data, „talk versus written questionnaire‟ and they found “that
subjects talked four times more than they wrote” (p. 168). The DCT also has some limitations
pointed out in the work of Nelson et al. (2002). They referred to Rose and Ono (1995) who said
that “we should not expect a single data source to provide all the necessary insights into speech
act usage” (p. 207). This section provides the data for this present research including the
participants in both the recorded calls and the questionnaires.
Two types of data were used in this study:
✓ 109 recorded calls.
✓ Two written questionnaires.
The way of classifying the recorded calls
We thoroughly considered the influential method used by Beebe et al. (1990), in which the
speech act of refusal was classified in terms of semantic formulae and adjuncts. This classification
influenced a lot of studies like those by Nelson et al. (2002), Tnack (2002), and Al Kahtani (2005).
We developed a method, based on collecting the major responses uttered by the potential British
customers because we were more concerned with the content of different responses given to the
salesperson rather than classifying them according to Beebe et al. (1990) classifications. We
followed this method in analyzing the content of both recorded calls and the questionnaires for
several reasons. While considering the method used by Beebe et al. (1990) to classify refusals, we
found that it could not be applicable to the phone conversations because there was a new context
that would govern the whole conversations. First, the inapplicability evolves around the nature of
the phone conversations under scrutiny. This call was in essence commercially oriented, and
procedure which molded the way operators conversed. Beebe et al. (1990) used the Discourse
Completion Test (DCT) to elicit refusals; while our way of collecting data was recording 109 calls
using a script as a 32 prompt. In the light of the responses given by the potential British customers,
we wrote two questionnaires depending on the frequent responses given by the potential British
customers. The whole conversation occurred on the phone, which meant the absence of eye-contact
as an essential part in establishing any kind of relationship between speaker and interlocutor.
Furthermore, and as far as our experience is concerned, while starting the phone call, we as
salespersons could not predict the answer to be “no”. Yet to our surprise, most responses look the
same even if the strategies differ. This was among the main motives behind the choice of
considering the responses of the potential British customers as the focal points. These responses
typify the features of answering cold calls. Therefore, we developed our own classification of the
British answers based on the content.

The Transcription of the conversations
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

170

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Speech Act of Refusal on the Phone

Samaali & Bayouli

Relying on the recorded calls, as our primary data, we transcribed the conversations the way
they were said by the potential customers and the agent. This method was used because we were
interested in the content of what was said by the potential customer and using phonetics is beyond
the scope of this paper. In the recorded calls, there were certain phrases that were used by the
potential customers in order not to be engaged in long conversations with the salesperson. These
answers were spoken repeatedly, which made us consider them as the components on which these
classifications were based.
Classifying the conversations
After transcribing the conversations, the researchers used their own way of classifying the
recorded calls based on the content and found that the potential British customers used different
refusal strategies with the intention of avoiding speaking to the salesperson in general and of
ending the conversations in particular. In answering cold calls, the potential British customers may
use some expressions regularly to show their discontent in receiving such kinds of telemarketing.
These expressions were quite revealing; they were in fact ways of refusing the proposed offers of
the salesperson. It meant that they were verbal strategies of refusals, which were typical of the
phone. After studying the recorded calls, we realized the common ground that was omnipresent in
most of the British answers to the salesperson. We chose these classifications because they stated
some of the refusal expressions, which were more likely to be used in dealing with a cold call.
These conversations were classified according to their types of refusals.
There were nine main categories:
• General not interested “I am not interested”.
• Hanging up.
• Direct rejection and the notion of “Ex-directory”.
• Polite rejection: “No thanks”.
• Excuse: “Being busy” and” in the middle of doing something”.
• “I have not got any money” and “it is expensive”.
• Rejection: Not wanting anything.
• “Call me back”.
• Other reasons “I could not hear properly” or “someone has phoned me before.”
Based on these nine categories, we analyze these conversations quantitatively and qualitatively.
3.6. Piloting
In order to determine the frequent strategies of refusal, we used two questionnaires. We
suggested some of them to a few people. Then we stopped, and discussed the pilot results. Piloting
gave us the opportunity to see whether there should be any modifications or revisions of the
questionnaires. Both questionnaires were piloted with a small sample of the target population. No
changes were needed, so we carried on as the pilot data was considered valid to be taken into
consideration.
Conclusion
The previous part has dealt with the methodology employed in the study. It has been devoted
to describing the corpus chosen to work on, and the two instruments used in collecting data which
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

171

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Speech Act of Refusal on the Phone

Samaali & Bayouli

have contributed to identifying most of the British responses to the salesperson on the phone and
stressing the negative attitude towards the reception of the cold calls.
Analysis
British responses
Receiving phone calls for British people is not a new phenomenon. Throughout the researchers
experience in the call center, they have become familiar with the different responses they use in
responding to the sale proposal. After subdividing 109 calls, we ended up with nine parts.
British refusal responses on the phone
Most of the responses were direct when it came to talking to a salesperson over the phone, in
such a way as to quickly end the call. While the salesperson tried to convince the potential British
customer to buy a basket of Italian biological products, the latter seemed to develop verbal
strategies to deal with the cold call offers and not to be engaged in such conversations which may
necessitate buying, with a simultaneous concern to maintain the salesperson’s face wants: the need
not to be rejected. These verbal strategies reflect disinterest in Italian products. The answers were
expressed with precision and clarity through the 39 choices of words given by the potential British
customers in an attempt to avoid leaving any opportunity for the salesperson to stay a longer time
on the phone and selling any of their products. The data elicited from the recorded calls and the
two questionnaires were analyzed quantitatively and qualitatively. The responses can be classified
as follows:
General, not interested
This category was often expressed by phrases like “I am not interested, thank you”, “I do not
think I am interested” and “I am not interested in whatever you are selling or offering”. With these
people not being interested, it was hard to confirm whether the British customers did not find the
content of the offer interesting, or just say it so that they can end the call as quickly as possible.
Here positive politeness is not attended to and the speaker, here the customers, can be said to
breach the “covenant” of cooperation to maintain the salesperson’s face needs by setting forth their
reason for not conversing in a direct manner or, in Brown and Levinson’s (1987) terms, “without
redressive action, baldly” (p. 60). The very answer, “not being interested” was ubiquitous in
various parts of the conversations. There were some interlocutors who gave the “I am not
interested” response at a too early stage of the conversation, without even recognizing the person
they were talking to. The statistics above confirm that “general not interested” is the dominant
strategy of refusal which the respondents tend to use to react to the different cold calls they receive.
This strategy is realized by two components which are a reason/ excuse “I am not interested” and
a statement of gratitude, “Thank you”. Out of 109 calls, 24 people said that they were not
interested. These potential clients represented 20.33%, which means that a considerable portion
was interested neither in the salesperson nor in the offer. It is worth pointing out that the potential
customers tended to say “I`m not interested” even before the salesperson utters a word about their
merchandise, leaving them just with the opportunity to introduce themselves This “general not
interested” can be divided into four categories: Firstly, “not being interested” came before the
salesperson even introduces themselves. There was one person who reacted this way in
conversation 52. One possible interpretation of this is that the potential clients, being greatly
targeted by cold calls, recognized that the voice was not familiar to them, and thus it must be a
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

172

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Speech Act of Refusal on the Phone

Samaali & Bayouli

salesperson. Secondly, “not being interested” came after knowing the person they were talking to
was a salesperson. As can be seen from conversations 9, 22, 36, 46, 48, 70, 81 and 98 after the
salesperson 'A' has introduced himself “Hello my name is Paolo Castello…,” the potential client
'B' end the conversation straight away. The possible interpretation is that 'B' is not listening to 'A',
the salesperson, in the first place, with B‟s presupposing 'A' is selling some worthless products.
Another way of interpreting this is to assume that 'B', after having heard the name of the
salesperson, realized that it was not someone they knew. Therefore, by way of being accustomed
to such situations, 'B' infers it must be someone selling a product. All that 'B' wants to do now is
stop the conversation as quickly as possible. This results in B's reaction exemplified in the
utterance “No thank you, goodbye;” which is to end the exchange politely. Thirdly, “not being
interested” came after being asked by the salesperson whether they have tasted Italian food or not.
In conversations 1, 50, 66 and 90 the potential customers wanted to end the dialogue. “Have you
ever tasted Italian food?” the question asked by the salesperson triggers 'B' into ending the
conversation quickly. It may be tempting to note that B could construe this question as one asked
by a salesperson selling something, or, in some cases, as someone making a survey. In either case,
the potential customers by no means wish to be involved in a series of questions that may invade
their privacy. Fourthly, “not being interested” came after mentioning the name of the firm the
salesperson works for. In conversations 15, 16, 17, 20, 43, 49, 64, 68, 100 and 104 the 41 potential
British clients allowed the salesperson to introduce the company and the reason of this call. After
“B” had an idea about the purpose of the call, they were still not interested.
Hanging up
There were 20 people who simply hung up the phone. Generally speaking, at different parts of the
script the potential customers abruptly ended the call. It is worth pointing out that putting the phone
down is a typical way of refusal and/ or rejection on the phone. At this point, both the salesperson
and the potential customers can be said to have made a face-threatening act. As to the former, the
act of calling seems not to respect the customers’ want to be independent and not imposed on
simply because from the perspective of the customers this act invades their “territories, personal
preserves, rights to non-distraction” (Brown & Levinson, 1987, p. 61). The customers’ reaction is
manifested through putting the phone down, an act which may be among the toughest of facethreatening acts. Here the customers do not pay attention, of course intentionally, to the
salesperson’s want to be accepted and therefore do not employ a face-saving strategy. There was
one person who hung up the phone after saying “Hello”. This was in conversation 75. This person
recognized that the person on the phone was unknown to her. As a consequence, she put the phone
down straight away. There were five people who hung up the phone after the salesperson ‘A’
wanted to check if 'B' was the potential British customer they intended to speak to. This can be
observed in conversations 19, 26, 53, 78 and 92. 42. Another five people hung up the phone after
the salesperson mentioned their name. These are in conversations 3, 23, 61, 67 and 87. Six people
hung up the phone after the salesperson asked them this question: “Have you ever tasted Italian
food?” These are in conversations 2, 12, 47, 58, 88 and 97. In these cases, the potential British
customers were aware of the trigger behind this cold call. However, the so-called special offer
failed in drawing the attention of the potential customers. This was because the salesperson
managed only to speak four turns, which was not enough to establish “relationship” with the
customers. Only two people let the salesperson continue with their speech till he started
introducing the firm he was working for. This stage of the script witnessed the cut of the call.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

173

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Speech Act of Refusal on the Phone

Samaali & Bayouli

These are in conversations 84 and 65. There was only one person in conversation 95 who put the
phone down, once he knew that the salesperson wanted to talk to someone who did not live in the
house anymore. Hanging up seems to be the safest strategy on the part of the customers, in order
not to have any conversation with the operator.
Polite rejection
The people included in this section tended to use the thanking expression “no, thank you” or “no,
thanks” with the intermediary intention of minimizing the threat to the salesperson’s positive face,
thereby softening the directness of rejecting the offer, which is the ultimate goal. From this angle,
the customer can be said to satisfy, even to a minor degree, their interlocutor’s need to be, and
have their request accepted. Making use of positive politeness is just a superficial utilization of a
strategy that maximizes the benefit to the speaker, here customer, and minimizes benefit to the
hearer, here call center operator. In other words, the salesperson’s want to be accepted is not really
considered since what they aimed at, the act of selling; is declined with an expression that
apparently stands for acceptance. This part is divided into four categories: Firstly, the potential
customers said “no thank you,” before even knowing the person they were talking to. In
conversation 59 the potential customer said “no thank you,” and she hung up without knowing the
person she was talking to. For her, the person who was talking was a stranger. Secondly, the
potential customers said “no thank you,” after recognizing the person they were talking to. In
conversations 4, 29, 40, 57, 60, 86, 99 and 101 the potential customers noticed that “A” is a
salesperson at the moment “A” mentioned the country they are calling from. Thirdly, the potential
customers said “no thank you,” after the salesperson “A” asked them the key question “have you
ever tasted Italian food before?” In conversations 10, 21, 37, 39 and 63, the potential customers
seemed to be disturbed by the question, and in order not to be perceived as impolite, they just said
“no thank you,” and put the phone down. Fourthly, the potential customers said “no thank you,”
after knowing the offer. In conversations 31, 54, 56, 94 and 101 the potential customers ended the
conversations saying “no thank you”. This reveals disinterest in the offer promoted by the
salesperson. By saying “no thank you”, the salesperson could not carry on with their patterned
speech because the customers put the phone down.
Excuse: “Being busy”; “In the middle of doing something”
Eighteen people said that they were busy or in the middle of doing something. Often, the potential
British customers’ statement that they were busy was followed by an expression of apology like
“sorry”. There were two potential customers who said that they were in the middle of doing
something and had no time to discuss anything. Firstly, in conversations 51 and 107, there were
two potential customers who said that 44 they were in the middle of doing something before
knowing who the caller was. One possible interpretation is that the salesperson is unknown to them
so they do not want to talk to them. Secondly, the potential customers said that they were busy
after knowing the name of the salesperson, as can be seen in conversations 5, 35, 74 and 82. This
reveals that the potential British customers just made excuses in order not to speak to the
salesperson.
What is common to all responses is that the potential customer avoids direct rejection of
the offer in a way that may seem to reflect their care for the salesperson’s positive face, that of the
need to be accepted. Yet, and once more, what the customer cares for most is to end the exchange
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

174

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Speech Act of Refusal on the Phone

Samaali & Bayouli

as soon as possible. This appears in their use of the same excuse even before the callers uttered a
word about what they were calling for.
Not wanting anything
This part includes 12 people. “I do not want anything,” “No, I do not care,” or “I am not interested
in buying anything,” are the common expressions used in this part. These expressions illustrate a
negative willingness and show the indifference on the part of the 45 customer to the special offer
proposed by the salesperson. The British customers used these phrases so as to avoid having a talk
with the salesperson. These are in conversations 6, 7, 14, 32, 38, 41, 43, 44, 45, 48, 93 and 96. As
a reaction to the flow of unwanted calls, the customers used different expressions showing that
they do not need anything. This directness on the part of the clients, and which is face-threatening
in essence, pushed the salesperson to end the call with a minimum degree of embarrassment to
save his face simply because his wants were not accepted nor shared by the call recipient.
Rejection: “I do not like it” and “I like my own food”
There are six potential customers who said “I like my own food”, or “I like Scottish/ Indian
dishes”. Though they may express dissatisfaction with the Italian food, the two statements are not
typical of face-saving strategies given that the speakers here do not attend to the hearer’s want to
be admired. Rather, what the customers aim at is an entire linguistic switch off and a direct way
out once they know about the aim of the salesperson. That very directness, especially in “I like my
own food”, might be considered as a categorical excuse, but more importantly¸ it leaves
salespersons little or no chance to go along with their speech having lost their face-wants. These
are in conversations 5, 20, 33, 34, 55 and 62.
Direct rejection and the notion of “Ex-directory‟
There were certain expressions that were used to show people’s discontent with being called
because they were “ex-directory” or just for “not accepting cold calls” as a principle. The refusals
were achieved by these expressions that act as reasons for not talking to the salesperson: “I do not
accept cold calls,” “you should not have this number,” “how did you get my number, because I am
ex-directory?” and “you should not be calling me.”
Common to all of the above-mentioned responses, there is absolutely no desire on the part of
47 of the customers to exhibit any degree of concern for their interlocutors’ positive face given
that their own negative face has been threatened. Noticeably, when some customers find out that
their privacy has been transgressed, they become very suspicious to the extent that they are no
longer concerned about the face-wants of the person they are talking to, let alone the latter’s offer.
“Call me back”
In conversations 10, 20, 27 and 105, there were four potential British customers who were busy
and asked the salesperson to call them back. These potential customers have some reasons for not
talking at the moment the salesperson rang. “Call me back” seems to be the less face-threatening
and the most face-saving. Unlike the other statements, this one does not aim at abruptly ending the
call nor somehow deceiving the hearer by giving fake reasons for not answering the call, but rather
gives an extra chance for the call center’ operators to have their offer considered next time they
call. What contributes to making this strategy less face-threatening to the hearers is that the
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

175

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Speech Act of Refusal on the Phone

Samaali & Bayouli

customers themselves are at ease enough not to feel they are under the threat of the former’s
intrusion into their territories, and thereby abstain from using a counter positive face-threatening
reaction.
“I have not got any money” and “it is expensive”
Here the target of the call can be said to have proceeded by respect to their interlocutors’
positive face wants, the need to have one’s proposition appreciated by others. By being patient
enough to give excuses, while not being obliged to, the customer treats the addressee not as a
stranger but “as a member of an in-group”, in Brown and Levinson’ s (1987) terms. This in-group
is any business deal between a seller and a customer. It remains to say that the initial intention of
the customer in this exchange is not total cooperation or acknowledgement of the addressee’s total
freedom of action, but just to minimize the potential face threat of the hidden intent of refusal.
Here the means to hide the threat is to be tolerant enough to speak about the financial situation.
In both questionnaires, it was very rare for potential British customers to reveal their personal
financial situations to strangers. However, there were some exceptions revealed in the recorded
phone calls. There was one older person who was frank enough to reveal that she was a pensioner
and she could not afford to buy these products. There were two customers who had become
disinterested after coming to prices.
Results and Discussions
This part surveys the different reasons that may account for the failure of some call centers in
achieving success in doing the business over the phone in the UK, and also provides a summary
of the different responses used as strategies of refusal on the phone. 5.1. Strategies of refusal over
the phone. The two questionnaires together with the 109 recorded calls investigate the responses
which the British people would normally use to reply to a salesperson’s sale offers on the phone.
Both have led to cataloging a variety of strategies most frequent to phone exchanges of this kind
and that reveal how potential British customers would refuse the sale proposal when answering
the cold caller. These strategies classified according to their frequency help make a comparison
between the recorded calls and the questionnaires.
The first observable piece of information is the fact that the recorded calls reveal more
strategies of refusal as compared to the two questionnaires. As outlined above, there are four extrastrategies particular to the recordings, namely “Not wanting anything”, “other reasons” like not
being able to hear the salesperson, the notion of ex-directory, and “I do not have money” and “it
is expensive”. This result may have two different interpretations. First, in the questionnaires
participants seem to have more time to reflect as to the best thing to say or do to decline cold calls;
and therefore the absence of spontaneity in the questionnaires may make some kind of feedback
that would possibly come out otherwise in other situations, and which is not called for on the part
of the customers. Second, some strategies are typical of telephone exchanges. An instance of this
falls under the category “other reasons”. Here the interlocutor may intentionally or unintentionally
say that they are not able to hear the caller. The notion of ex-directory is also quite likely to appear
in direct telephone conversations because the potential customers presuppose that they would
never receive strangers’ calls when their phone numbers are ex-directory, which explains why the
first thing these customers say is “I am ex-directory”, being surprised by a call from somebody
they does not know. In addition to mentioning the refusal strategies that are particular to the
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

176

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Speech Act of Refusal on the Phone

Samaali & Bayouli

recorded calls, it is also important to refer to those strategies that are common to both recorded
calls and questionnaires, and which constitute the largest bulk of data.
These strategies are:
• General not interested
• Hanging up
• Excuse: Being busy
• Polite rejection
• Direct rejection: I do not buy over the phone
• Call me back later
Both questionnaires and recorded calls confirm the fact that the potential British- customers, in
about 50% of cases, tried just to give excuses in order not to be engaged in a conversation which
may lead to a loss of time or, to the very detriment of the customer, loss of money. However, the
British potential customer may ultimately succumb to the overwhelming rush of words and agree
to the salespersons’ offers. After examining most of the given strategies, it is noticeable that the
potential customers once called have one thing in mind, which is impeding all kinds of attempts
made by the cold caller to “defeat” the customer’s resistance. The attempt of the customer in half
of the exchanges to give excuses may fall into the attempt not to be too direct and therefore not
threaten the face of the interlocutor, the salesperson, and give some space however small or
“freedom of action”. It is very important to note that “General not interested” came as the most
frequent/dominant strategy of refusal used by the potential British customers. This might be due
to the disinterest and the negative attitudes that customers hold towards such kind of business, or
it can be the customer’s disinterest in the product itself. Concerning the “polite rejection” strategy,
it appears in the third place in the recorded calls and the two questionnaires. It is also worth
pointing out that in the second questionnaire, where questions were asked in an open-ended style,
the polite rejection seems to be more familiar to female rather than male. However, in the first one,
the close-ended questionnaire, showed that males remarkably may use this strategy to put an end
to the cold call. Refusals as face-threatening acts pose a difficult challenge on the part of the hearer,
here the salesperson. On the phone, the salesperson is left with little room to persuade the client
and go on with his speech, and therefore he does not have any chance to draw the attention of the
latter. The potential customers just give their responses without considering the impact on the
hearer. This lack of concern might be explained by the cold caller’s invasion of the territory of the
interlocutors, one which, from the client’s perspective, maximizes benefit only to the salesperson.
This irritation-caused rejection is manifested in the form of the strategies present in most of the
conversations. Once the rejection takes place, the caller’s script, ideally thought to lead to success,
has to be instantaneously reconsidered or none of the goals would be realized. At this point, the
most difficult challenge is the struggle to keep the hearer listening, something that both the
recorded calls and the questionnaires have proved to be difficult to attain. At this point we must
question the effectiveness of telemarketing in such a cold-call targeted country as the UK. Here
the notion of privacy and claim to territory seem to be central in the “conflict of wills” between
the caller and the target of the call.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

177

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Speech Act of Refusal on the Phone

Samaali & Bayouli

Conclusion
This conclusion gives a summary of the main findings of the study. It also draws attention to the
limitations of the research.
The study set out to investigate the responses given by British people to cold calls. Two
types of data were collected: primary data collected through recording phone calls of potential
British customers and a salesperson, and secondary data gathered by means of two questionnaires
to provide feedback on how native speakers of English tend to respond to cold calls, and to explain
the negative attitudes towards cold calls in general. The analysis of the primary data, the recorded
calls, raised a number of questions that needed to be more closely scrutinized later through the two
questionnaires. One of those questions, one which makes the core of the study, is the background
of responses used by the potential British customers to answer the salesperson. These responses
have a unique and conspicuous function, one that denotes refusal. None of the given responses
showed attempts on the part of the customers to cooperate with the caller. This lack of cooperation
is quite understandable since every stimulating action of the caller directly results in proportionate
feedback on the part of the interlocutor. For instance, the operator’s intrusion into the potential
customer’s privacy on a regular basis brings about a seemingly inevitable consequence: rejection
of the offer. This is because that action was threatening enough to the negative face wants of the
customer that the latter’s claims to intrusion-free territory were violated. The use of the politeness
theory suggested by Brown and Levinson (1987) proved how difficult it is to have two parties with
two contradictory sets of wants cooperate. In Brown and Levinson’s terms (1987), negative
politeness is “essentially avoidance-based, and realisations of negative-politeness strategies
consist in assurances that the speaker recognises and respects the addressee’s negative-face wants
and will not (or will only minimally) interfere with the addressee’s freedom of action” (p. 70). It
is quite important here to note that what the call centre agent aims at is by no means intrinsically
threatening since it is legitimate, at least from the seller’s own perspective, to exhibit his
merchandise to others within the conventional frames of social exchanges. But it is also important
to note that if we follow the claim that the seller has to proceed by total avoidance, they will end
up abstaining from the deal altogether. It remains therefore to note here that the failure of the
exchange rests in factors other than the mere seller’s want to exhibit the product. These factors can
be said to have an even more intense effect of threat than the primary intrusion of the call.
About the authors:
Imed Samaali is currently a lecturer of English language and Applied Linguistics at the
Department of English, Azzulfi College of Education, Majmaah University, KSA. He obtained his
Master's Degree from the Faculty of letters, Arts and Humanities Manouba, Tunisia in 2011. He
taught from 2011 to 2014 at the Higher School of Economic and Social Sciences of Tunis, Tunisia.
Tahar Bayouli is an assistant lecturer of English language and literature at the Department of
English, Azzulfi College of Education, Majmaah University, KSA. He obtained his PhD from the
University of Paris West France in 1994. Thesis "The Image of the Orient in Elizabethan
Drama". His research interests include drama, semiotics and orientalism.
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9133-8290

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

178

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Speech Act of Refusal on the Phone

Samaali & Bayouli

References
Austin, J. L. (1962). How to Do Things with Words. Oxford.
Al-Kahtani, S. A. (2005). Refusals Realizations in Three Different Cultures: A
Speech Act Theoretically-based Cross-cultural Study. J. King Saud Univ: Lang.
& Transl., 18: 35-57, Riyadh. Aperçu (2009).
Baldwin, H. (n.d.). Inbound vs Outbound call. Retrieved January 15, 2009, from
http://www.allbusiness.com/company-activitiesmanagement/managementpersonal/7396089-1.html
Barmak, A. (2007). The accidental salesperson. USA: iUniverse.
Beebe, L. M., Takahashi, T, & R. Ultiz-Weltz. (1990). Pragmatic transfer in ESL
refusals. In R. Scarcella, E. Anderson, & S.D. Krashen(eds), On the Development
of Communicative Competence in Second Language (pp.55-73). New York:
Newbury house.
Brown, P. & S. C. Levinson, (1987). Politeness: Some universals in language
usage. Cambridge University Press.
Cambridge Advanced Learner’s Dictionary (3rd ed.) (2008). UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Cameron, D. (2000). Good to Talk. London: Sage Publications Ltd.
Cold calls (2009). Cold calls and the law. Retrieved January 10, 2009, from
http://www.aboutidentitytheft.co.uk/cold-calls-law.html
Collins Concise English Dictionary (7th ed.). (2008). UK: HarperCollins
Publishers.
Coney, J. (2009). Phone Shopping puts card details of millions at risk as
Fraudsters target call centres. Daily Mail. Retrieved November 20, 2009 from
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1220731/Phone-shopping-puts-card- detailsmillionsriskas-fraudsters-target-centres.html
Cutting, J. (2002). Pragmatics and Discourse: A Resource Book for Students.
London: Routledge.
Dawson, K. (1999). Call Center Savvy. The United States of America: Telecom
Books.
Ellis, R. (1994). The Study of Second Language Acquisition. UK: Oxford University
Press.
Fatnassi, C. (2005). A cross-cultural study of Tunisian and English Refusals.
Unpublished M.A. dissertation. Université 7 Novembre à Carthage, Tunis.
Félix-Brasdefer, J. César. (2008). Politeness in Mexico and the United States: A
contrastive study of realization and perception of refusals. Amsterdam:John
Benjamins
Félix-Brasdefer, J. César. (2008). Perceptions of Refusals to Invitations: Exploring
the minds of foreign language learners. Language Awareness, 17(3): 195-211.
Gardner, D., Knill, R. & Smith J. (2005). Horizons: Geography 11-14 1. UK:
Nelson Thomas Ltd.
Gass, S. M. & Selinker, L. (2001). Second Language Acquisition. The United
States Of America: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Gass, S. M & Houck, N. (1999). Interlanguage refusals: A cross-cultural study of
Japanese-English. Studies on language Acquisition. New York: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Gauntlett, A. (2004). Net Spies. UK: Firewall Media.
Goldner, P. S. (2006). Red Hot Cold Call Selling: Prospecting Techniques That
Really Pay Off. USA: AMACOM

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

179

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Speech Act of Refusal on the Phone

Samaali & Bayouli

Hargie, O., Dickson, D. & Tourish, D. (1999). Communication in Management.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Hargie, O., Dickson, D. & Tourish, D. (1999). Communication in Management.
England: Gower Publishing Limited.
Hocutt, J. (2007). Cold Calling for Cowards: How to Turn the Fear of Refection into
Opportunities, Sales and Money. The United States of America: Chugwater.
Publishing. Holmes, J. 1995. Women, Men and Politeness. USA: Longman
Group Limited.
Kwon, J. (2004). Expressing refusals in Korean and American English. Multilingua,
24 (4): 339-364.
Kitao, S. K. (1996). Communicative competence, preference organization, and
refusals in British English. Sougou Bunka Kenkyujo Kiyou, 13: 47-58.
Lowe, I. (2007). Textbook of Research Writeup and Statistics. Tunis: Centre de
Publication Universitaire.
Marmaridou, S. A. (2000). On Speech Acts. In: Pragmatic Meaning and Cognition.
Amsterdam /Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Mey, J. (1993). Pragmatics. An Introduction. Oxford: Blackwell.
Miller, B. E. (n.d.). Patterns of Refusal for requests and invitations in Costa Rican
Spanish Speakers. USA: Framingham State College, MASS.
Nelson, G. L., J. Carson, M. Al Batal, & W. El-Bakary (2002). Cross-cultural
pragmatics: Strategy use in Egyptian Arabic and American English refusals.
Applied Linguistics, 23(2): 163-189.
Price, J. ,Smith, S., Grig, R., Jacobs, R. M., & Roncoroni, S. (2008).
TPS REPORT on unwelcome calls 2008. UK. Retrieved September 10, 2009 from
http://www.dma.org.uk/docframe/docview.asp?id=4957&sec=-1
Privacy (2003). The Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive)
Regulations. Retrieved January 10, 2010 from
http://195.99.1.70/si/si2003/20032426.htm.
Serale, J. R.(1979). Expression and Meaning. Studies in the Theory of Speech Acts.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sharp, D. (2003). Call Center Operation. Design, Operation, and Maintenance. The
United States of America: Digital Press.
Sinha, P. K & Sinha, S. (2007). Current Trends in Management. Mumbai: Nirali
Prakashan.
Tonkiss, F. (2006). Contemporary economic sociology: globalisation, production,
inequality. USA and Canada: Routeledge.
Tanck, S. (2002). Speech Act Sets of Refusal and Complaint: A Comparison of Native
and NonNative English Speakers' Production. Retrieved January 2, 2010 from
http://www1.american.edu/tesol/wptanck.pdf
Telephone directory. (n.d). Wikipedia. Retrieved February 10, 2010, from
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Telephone_directory
Telephone Preference Service. Retrieved January 10, 2010, from
http://www.tpsonline.org.uk/tps/what/
UK phone numbers. Over 60% of UK phone numbers now registered with the
Telephone Preference Service. Retrieved January 15, 2010, from
http://www.prleap.com/pr/102600/
Yule, G. (1996). Pragmatics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

180

