18  Journal of Social Health Volume 2 Issue 1  February 2019 Article

Rudolf Cymorr Kirby P. Martinez, Augustine Beth D. Cortez, Vanessa Joy M.
Contreras

Understanding the concept of Usog among the Aetas
of Nabuclod, Pampanga, Philippines

O

INTRODUCTION
ne fundamental characteristic of an indigenous community is the belief in
the deep connectedness of persons. This belief is anchored on their
traditional way of life and its preservation is a reflection of the how well the
community maintains its belief system and cultural knowledge amidst

modernity's amalgamation. The Aetas, considered as one of the earliest inhabitants of the
Philippines (Waddington, 2002), is one of the indigenous group found scattered
throughout the archipelago. They are often described as traditionally animist, nomadic in
nature and are short in stature (Balila et al, 2014; Shimzu, 1989). Being animist and
nomadic, Aetas have adopted aspects of the local neighboring culture they associate with.
One such belief is the concept of “usog” which is a concept shared among Filipinos but are
understood differently depending on cultural affiliation.
Among traditional Filipino families, the expression “P'wera Usog!” is commonly uttered as
visitors compliment a newborn child. The visitor is then asked to smear some saliva on
the baby's forehead or abdomen (De La Pena, 2012; Jocano, 1970; Rabuco, 2009; Tan,
2008). Roughly translating to "except Usog," this concept greatly varies among the different regions of the Philippines although it is similar in the aspect of causing harm on another person. For the Ati of the Visayas, 'usog' is synonymous to 'buyag' - powerful energy
which overcomes that of a child; thereby causing fever or stomachache (De La Pena,
2012). On the other hand, Muslim Tausug believe that illness can be caused by human
breath or spoken words, also called "pasu simud." Consequently, when a newborn is complimented they would say: "Pasu simud hi babu/kaka - may it be transferred to an aunt or
elder cousin (Tan, 1982)."
In spite of the diverse understanding of Usog, only a few of the literature that exists
explain such from the Aetas' point of view. This, coupled with the impact of Usog on the
Martinez, Cortez, and Contreras 18

19  Understanding the concept of Usog

health beliefs of many Filipinos, urged the researchers to explore the concept of Usog
among the Aetas of Nabuclod Pampanga. Through this case study, the researchers aim to
identify the Aetas' conceptualization of Usog and its implication to their sense of health
and wellbeing.
Locale of the study
The present site of barangay Nabuclod in Floridablanca Pampanga is a resettlement area
created after the Mt. Pinatubo eruption in 1998. It is declared as one of the ancestral
domain of the Aeta in Pampanga and its population is currently composed of Aetas
indigenous to the locale prior to the Mt. Pinatubo eruption, Aetas from the neighboring
Zambales area and a few “lowlanders” mostly consisting of Kapampangans and Tagalogs.
Majority of the population of the present day Nabuclod belongs to the indigenous
population of the area prior to the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo. National Statistic Office latest
available data from 2010 shows that Nabuclo ‘s estimated population is 3,000 from its
seven (7) sitios (“Municipal Profile-Official website of Municipality of Floridablanca,
Province of Pampanga”, 2018). The exact population of the Aetas residing in Nabuclod
cannot be ascertained since there are still families residing in the mountain of Nabuclod
which is inaccessible during formal surveys coupled with the nomadic nature of the Aetas’
way of life. Nabuclod is accessible through land travel via small vehicle thru rough road
and is roughly thirty (30) minutes away from the town center of Floridablanca. Nabuclod’s
hilly terrain can also be accessed thru a motorcycle but the heavily roughed mountainous
part can only be accessed by foot with the farthest sitio approximately two (2) hours away
from the Nabuclod’s Barangay Center. The declared area of Ancestral Domain of the Aeta
in Nabuclod includes the Barangay Center, the seven sitios and the surrounding
mountains bordering Zambales. The local governance is a mixture of a modern and
traditional system with an elected barangay captain and a council of elders. The council at
times may convene to decide on things that affect the whole community. The belief
systems practiced by the Aetas of Nabuclod are folk variants of major religious systems
which includes Catholicism, Islam, Iglesia and varied sect of Christianity. Traditional belief
and folk healing is still present in the community and is functionally integrated into the
practice of their individual religion. Houses near the center of Nabuclod is mostly built

Martinez, Cortez, and Contreras  19

20  Understanding the concept of Usog

with cement and concrete materials while traditional Nipa houses are sparsely scattered
around the area and are more prominent as one moves away from the center. Aetas’ main
source of living in Nabuclod is farming with bitter gourd being the primary product of the
barangay. Occasionally, charcoal making is also practiced by some Aetas to augment their
meager income from farming. The locale was once one of the formally adopted
communities of the researchers' institution where they were formally affiliated with.
METHODS
Prior to data gathering, consent from the Nabuclod’s Barangay captain was sought and
permission with the Elders of the Aetas was also gathered. This is to assure that the
dignity and autonomy of the respondents will be respected throughout the duration of the
study. Informed consent from the key informants and informants was gathered as well
prior to the interview and confidentiality of the information and the participant’s identity
was upheld during the conduct of this study. Purposive criterion sampling was utilized to
select the five key informants of the study. They were selected based on their extensive
knowledge of the concept of “usog” and them being indigenous to the area. The key
informants were three female and two male Aetas and were resident of the Nabuclod
resettlement even before the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo. Because of the lack of legal
documents showing their birthdate and subsequently their age, it was difficult to ascertain
their legal age. During the data gathering process, all of the key informants are at least 40
years old based on their oral tradition and them having at least one grandchild at the time
of the interview. The key informants served as the elder of their extended family and were
also seen as the cultural bearers of their community. On the other hand, family members
and other individual Aetas within the community served as informants of the study during
the data gathering process. The informants’ personal experience and stories serve to
complement and enrich the narratives gathered from the key informants. The key
informants and informants provided stories and their personal experience on “Usog”
reflecting their community’s perspective and beliefs on the said concept. Theoretical
saturation served as the grounding by which the number of participants was achieved
(Smith & Sparkes, 2016). In-depth interview and story-telling were utilized to gather data
from the participants in this study. Both techniques are utilized when conducting

Martinez, Cortez, and Contreras  20

21  Understanding the concept of Usog

qualitative research that involves conducting intensive individual narration with a small
number of respondents. It was the research method used in this study because it
facilitates a loosely structured interview; allowing freedom for both the interviewer and
interviewee to explore additional points and elicit significant information, as necessary, in
order to achieve a holistic understanding of the interviewee's point of view (Boyce &
Neale, 2006). Conventional content analysis was utilized to elicit the patterns found
within the narratives of the key informants and informants.
FINDINGS
Content analysis revealed that the Aetas of Pampanga see Usog as a transmittable mystical
force unintentionally inflicted by humans through an eye or physical contact; thereby
producing physical symptoms among its victims. Moreover, they believe that these
symptoms may be cured through the inhalation of the smoke coming from a burnt
Amyong – the seed of a certain tree.
Transmittable mystical force inflicted by humans and not spirits
Among all those interviewed, it was evident that the Aetas deem Usog as a force that
humans unintentionally transmit, with one respondent saying: "Yun nga…parang
kapangyarihan [yung Usog]. (That’s it... it is like some sort of “power”) [R1]" Moreover,
one respondent highlighted on it being an unintentional act: “Yong ganon po (Kulam)
sinasadya pong gawin. Yong sa Usog po hindi po. (If you are bewitched, that intentional,
with “Usog” it is not) [R3]” However, those interviewed had contradicting views on the
sources of Usog. According to one respondent, Usog may come not only from humans but
also from bad spirits and dwarfs: “Pwede [makausog] yung tao pero pwede din dwende o
anito tulad nung nangyari sa anak ko (You can get it from dwarf too or from an ancestral
spirit like what happen to my son) [R3]” On the other hand, another respondent insisted
that humans are the sole sources of this force: “tao lang naman ang nakakausog (Only
human can give you “usog”) [R5]”. Although an alternative source of Usog was presented
beside a person, it is a common thread among the response that the most common, if not
the sole source, of Usog is a human person.

Martinez, Cortez, and Contreras  21

22  Understanding the concept of Usog

Use of eye or physical contact
The Aetas believe that words need not be uttered for one to inflict Usog. Instead, a
powerful look or a pat on the child's head is sufficing to impart this force: "Kapag
hinawakan ng ang bata o kaya tinitigan ka sa malayo, mauusog na po (When someone
touches a child or look at a child even from afar, that is enough to cause Usog) [R2]"
Furthermore, they narrated how this can also occur when an adult, who, upon coming
home from a long day's work, touches the child: "Kapag yoong galing ka sa pagod tapos
hinawakan mo yong mga bata tulad nito o kaya ngumiti ka lang sa kanila…ayon po
mauusog na po (When someone arrived tired (from work) and then touches the child or
just smile at the child, it is enough for the child to have Usog) [R4]”.
Physical Symptoms
Although children and adults may also get Usog, the Aetas' claimed that infants and
toddlers were its usual victims; with crying fits as its most common symptom. Another
usual symptom was a pain, such as a stomachache or a headache. Although these are
rarely life-threatening from a Western medical perspective, the Aetas see this as an urgent
condition which ought to be treated immediately: “Minsan po dinadala sa albolaryo kapag
hindi gumaling […]. Kapag hindi po agad madala sa albolaryo, pwede pong mamatay yong
bata po. Nanginginig at nakapikit nalang basta ang mata (Sometimes we get the herbalist
help when the symptoms do not subsides, else the child might die. They shiver and just
closes their eyes)[R3]”
‘Amyong' or saliva as a cure for Usog When asked on their standard regimen for the
symptoms of Usog, the Aetas had a consistent answer: ‘Amyong.’ Made out of the bark of
certain trees, the Aetas regularly wear the Amyong as a necklace or bracelet. Most of these
seeds are aromatic with a hint of mint in its odor. According to them, burning the seed and
inhaling its smoke may ward-off Usog and its accompanying symptoms. Some Aetas also
boil the Amyong in water and drink the solution. Moreover, many of them explained that
these were taken from special trees that are not easily found: “Hindi Basta-basta yung
kahoy na yun. […] Hindi naman Basta basta laging namumunga (The tree is not just
ordinary... it rare for it to bear seeds) [R1]” The more aromatic version of Amyong is called
‘Dalaw.’ Unlike the Amyong, Dalaw has a sweeter odor. When boiled in water, some Aetas
Martinez, Cortez, and Contreras  22

23  Understanding the concept of Usog

also use this as a treatment for cough: “Yong mas mabango po sa amyong. Yong parang
galing po sa puno ng kahoy iyan. Papakuluan yong tubig tapos ilalagay ko po yan sa tubig
tapos po ipapainom ko po sakanila yan kapag nausog po o kaya may ubo (The one more
aromatic than Amyong is the Dalaw. It came from a certain tree. We boil water, place it in
the boiling water they use the concoction for those who have Usog or cough) [R4]” Aside
from the use of Amyong or Dalaw, other Aetas mentioned the use of saliva to cure the
child with Usog. Others mentioned that when the person who unconsciously sends the
Usog to the child wipes his/her saliva on the child’s abdomen or forehead, the symptoms
of Usog will be released. If all of these fail to relieve the symptoms of Usog, the Aetas turn
to the Albolaryo, a herbalist-soothsayer-healer of the community.
ANALYSIS
The Aetas' view of Usog as a transmittable mystical force is parallel to the Christian
Tagalog's 'bisa' - an internal force of high potency (Jocano, 1970). It is also similar to the
concept of ‘buyag' - energy said to be emanated together with words of admiration (De La
Pena, 2012; Rabuco, 2009) According to Tan (2008), the indigenous' belief in these vital
forces is linked to illness causation. Specifically, it is understood that humans with a
potent life-force may unintentionally cause illness to another, thereby explaining the
concept of Usog. Among Ilonggo's, this is attributed to the concept of ‘dungan’ or
completeness. The Ilonggo's believe that individuals with a strong dungan may
overpower those with a weaker dungan, such as infants, thereby causing illness (Rabuco,
2009; Jocano, 1970). Although the Aetas believe that humans are the primary sources of
Usog, literature claims that this vital or mystical force is likewise present in inanimate objects such as plants (Fox, 1952; Tan, 2008).
It must be highlighted that the Aetas view of Usog as being transmitted through powerful
eye contact is different from the popular notion that Usog is imparted through words of
praise; as is the belief of the Muslim Tausug, Ilonggos, and Cebuanos (Jocano, 1970;
Rabuco, 2009; Tan, 2008). However, Tan (2008) relates this view of the Aetas to the
Mediterranean and Latin American belief in the ‘mal de ojo’ or evil eye, which is evoked
by simply looking at or admiring a child. Moreover, the Aetas belief of fatigued individuals
transmitting Usog was explained by the literature which claimed that exhausted
Martinez, Cortez, and Contreras  23

24  Understanding the concept of Usog

individuals severely desire for energy and unconsciously take such from others, usually
through touch (Fadul, 2014; Tan, 2008).
Additionally, the physical symptoms identified by the Aetas are parallel to those
highlighted in the literature, which includes crying fits, vomiting, and abdominal pain
(Fadul, 2014; Tan, 2008). Researchers have tried to explain this phenomenon
scientifically, claiming that these are manifestations of a disruption in the child’s
homeostasis. Simply put, the child’s physical symptoms are attributed to the distress he/
she feels upon meeting a stranger who is deemed as overpowering him/her. Specifically,
the stranger may serve as a stressful stimulus for the child on the physical (e.g., having
heavy hands), mental (e.g., having a high-pitched voice), or physiological (e.g., having a
strong irritating smell) level. Consequently, there is a perceived discrepancy between the
demands of the situation and the child's perceived or actual physiological or social
resources. As the child fails to adapt to the change in environment and is distressed, he/
she easily succumbs to illness and may manifest the physical symptoms of Usog (Abad et
al., 2014; Fadul, 2014, Tan, 2008).
On the other hand, the Aetas use of the stranger’s saliva as a cure for the symptoms of
Usog is parallel to the common practice among other Filipinos, indigenous or
non-indigenous alike. Traditionally, the visitor is asked to rub the infant’s forehead or
abdomen with his/her saliva using his/her thumb (Tan, 2008; Fadul, 2014; Jocano, 1970).
According to researchers, this act may reduce the child's stress as it helps the visitor
become more familiar for the child. Moreover, the visitor's utterance of the words: "pwera
usog" serve to be reassuring for the child, thereby alleviating his/her discomfort.
The findings in this study regarding the Aetas’ use of the Amyong as a cure for Usog is also
similar to other literature which explores the traditional practices of indigenous groups.
For one, it was found that the Ati from Visayas also prevent Usog through bracelets and
necklaces made of hand-shaped twigs and vines, with some calling it ‘Banawug.’
Collectively, the materials used to prevent Usog are called ‘Panagang’ (De La Pena, 2012).
Similarly, Jocano (1970) claims that one of the items used by the Tagalogs of Laguna to
counter Usog is ‘puasong kahoy,’ a rainforest tree of the genus Harpullia. Furthermore, in

Martinez, Cortez, and Contreras  24

25  Understanding the concept of Usog

a study conducted among the Aetas of Porac, Pampanga, it was found that herbs and
shrubs were commonly used as medicinal plants, with Bayabas and the roots of a coconut
tree being the most common treatment for sore throat, stomachaches, headaches, and skin
diseases. If the Aetas of Nabuclod usually burn the plants as incense, the Aetas of Porac
usually boil the plants or its roots to be used as a decoction. Similar to the Aetas of
Nabuclod, they also use the bark of a mango tree as a medicinal plant, usually for the treatment of ‘pasma’ or joint pains and fever (Ragragio, Zayas, & Obico, 2013).
IMPLICATIONS
In this study, identifying and understanding the culture and practices of the Aeta
community regarding the concept of Usog allows nurses, particularly community health
nurses, to become adept with the knowledge on how to make adjustments with the new
culture or environment they are being immersed into.
It must be noted that the findings of the study suggest that the Aeta’s health-seeking
behavior is still grounded in their unique cultural belief system although they are already
exposed to the realities of Western medical practices. The values and beliefs of the Aeta
community regarding the concept of Usog is a reflection that they still cling to their
indigenous beliefs and practices. As nurses, especially those working in the community
setting, the findings suggest that there is a need to be more observant and flexible to the
beliefs and practices present in the community for an inclusive approach to care be
developed. Integrating, rather than secluding the seemingly harmless practices of the
members of the community may encourage the formation of trust and build confidence
between the nurse and the community members.

REFERENCES
Abad, P., Tan, M., Baluyot, M., Villa, A., Talapian, G., Reyes, M. Suarez, R... Laurino, M.
(2014). Cultural beliefs on disease causation in the Philippines: challenge and
implications in genetic counseling. Journal of Community Genetics, 5(4), 399-407.
Balilla, V. S., McHenry, J. A., McHenry, M. P., Parkinson, R. M., & Banal, D. T. (2014). The
assimilation of western medicine into a semi-nomadic healthcare system: A case
Martinez, Cortez, and Contreras  25

26  Understanding the concept of Usog

study of the indigenous Aeta Magbukun, Philippines. EcoHealth, 11(3), 372-382
Boyce, C., & Neale, P. (2006). Conducting in-depth interviews: A guide for designing and
conducting in-depth interviews for evaluation input. Pathfinder International Tool
Series,

Monitoring

and

Evaluation-2.

From:

http://www.pathfind.org/site/

DocServer/m_e_tool_series_indepth_interviews.pdf?docID=630
De La Pena, L. C. (2012). The power to influence and to protect: Interconnectedness of the
human bodies among the Visayans and the indigenous people. LJHER Liceo Journal of
Higher Education Research, 6(1), 25-36. doi:10.7828/ljher.v6i1.46
Fadul, J. (2014). Encyclopedia of theory & practice in psychotherapy & counseling. New
York, USA: Lulu Press.
Fox, R. (1952). The Pinatubo Negritos: Their useful plants and material culture. Philippine
Journal of Science, 81, 173-395.
Jocano, F. (1970). Maternal and child care among the Tagalogs in Bay, Laguna, Philippines.
Asian Studies, 8(3), 277-300.
Rabuco, A. C. (2009). Hiligaynon folk utterances: Interjections and proverbs. Augustinian,
12(0). doi:10.3860/aug.v12i0.1230
Ragragio, E., Zayas, C., & Obico, J. (2013). Useful Plants of Selected Ayta Communities from
Porac, Pampanga, Twenty Years after the Eruption of Mt. Pinatubo. Philippine Journal
of Science, 142, 169-181.
Shimizu, H. (1989). Pinatubo Aytas: Continuity and change. Quezon City, Philippines:
Ateneo de Manila University Press.
Smith, B. M., & Sparkes, A. C. (Eds.). (2016). Routledge handbook of qualitative research in
sport and exercise. Taylor & Francis: USA
Tan, M. L. (1982). Social structure and the traditional medical system in the Philippines
(Unpublished master's thesis).
Tan, M. L. (2008). Revisiting usog, pasma, kulam. Diliman, Quezon City: University of the
Philippines Press. World Health Organization. (2013, November 25). Adolescents

Martinez, Cortez, and Contreras  26

27  Understanding the concept of Usog

falling through gaps in HIV services. Retrieved from World Health Organization:
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2013/hiv-adolescents20131125/en/
Yu, D., Souteyrand, Y., Banda, M. A., Kaufman, J., & Perriens, J. H. (2008). Investment in
HIV/AIDS Programs: Does it help Strengthen Health Systems in Developing
Countries. Global Health.

Martinez, Cortez, and Contreras  27

