Take Back the SAA
Member-Led Organizing and Action in the Wake of #SAA2019
Awesome Small Working Group
ASWG is a collective of archaeologists consisting of, in alphabetical order, Valerie Bondura (Columbia University / @ValerieBondura),
Christyann Darwent (University of California, Davis / @CMDarwent), Stephanie Halmhofer (Independent / @Bones_Canada), Annalisa Heppner (Haffenreffer
Museum of Anthropology, Brown University / @NorthernSirena), Kristina Killgrove (University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill / @DrKillgrove),
Hanna Marie Pageau (Independent / @TinySapien), Jolene Smith (Virginia Department of Historic Resources / @aejolene),
Kisha Supernant (University of Alberta / @ArchaeoMapper), and Heather Walder (University of Wisconsin, La Crosse / @HeatherWalder).

O

n Thursday, April 11, 2019, the second day of the
84th Annual Meeting of the Society for American
Archaeology in Albuquerque, New Mexico, some SAA
members in attendance noted the presence of David Yesner,
a former archaeology professor at the University of Alaska
Anchorage (UAA). Yesner was the subject of a Title IX investigation by UAA that determined there were at least nine credible
allegations of sexual assault, harassment, discrimination, and
exploitation against him. An investigation started in December
2017 was publicized on March 25, 2019, by KTVA (Rivera 2019a),
a television station in Anchorage. On April 8, KTVA described
how UAA had banned Yesner from campus (Rivera 2019b). In
spite of these well-publicized sanctions, Yesner was able to register for the SAA conference in person on-site on April 11, and
archaeologists in attendance who had been participants in the
Title IX case were shocked to see him. Word quickly spread, particularly on social media, through the archaeological community
about the presence of a sanctioned abuser at the conference and
the concerns of his former targets, and the ensuing events came
to define the conference. The social media hashtag #SAA2019
came to represent both a practical means of following unfolding
events and complaints online in real time as well as a shorthand
to refer to the events themselves.

As a result of the handling of #SAA2019 and the media firestorm
that ensued,1 the authors of this article came together to discuss
what a committed group of SAA members could do in response
to issues raised by students, faculty, and the archaeological
public at large. We nicknamed ourselves the Awesome Small
Working Group (ASWG).2 This article outlines what happened,
how we are seeking to effect change within the SAA, and why
we believe that the SAA should recommit itself to being a member-led organization.

I. #SAA2019
Events related to #SAA2019 largely occurred in two waves and
were recorded in real time through social media.3 First was the
reaction from SAA members and the archaeological community

16

The SAA Archaeological Record • September 2019

during the conference itself (April 11–15). Word of the presence of a known harasser spread quickly through Twitter and
Facebook, with several requests addressed to the SAA to revoke
his registration. On April 11, several members, including several
Title IX complainants, attempted to meet with SAA organizers
regarding Yesner’s attendance, resulting in the filing of official
complaints about his presence at the conference. One conference
attendee took it upon himself to escort Yesner from the conference, which led to that attendee’s expulsion from the conference
on April 12, while Yesner was still in attendance. Outrage from
SAA members continued to grow dramatically, both in person
and online. Figure 1 represents all tweets using the #SAA2019
Twitter hashtag that were published during the month of April
and subjected to a sentiment analysis, in which green and yellow
dots suggest more positive engagement while orange and red
dots suggest more negative sentiments. This graph illustrates a
sizeable increase in members using Twitter to express negative
sentiments about the SAA 2019 annual meeting in the weeks
following the conference, providing a visualization of both the
intensity of members’ outrage and the clear drop in positive sentiment that continues at least through the end of April.
In other examples, Stephanie Halmhofer and others interrupted
their sessions to highlight the situation and ask that members
in attendance press the SAA Board and staff for action. At the
annual business meeting on April 12, outgoing SAA president
Susan Chandler was asked for commentary on the situation but
suggested that due to privacy concerns, public comment was not
possible at that time. Many members left the business meeting
and subsequent committee meetings in which #SAA2019 was
addressed with the impression that the SAA’s outgoing leadership
believed that the burden of reporting, and therefore the burden
of keeping members safe from sharing conference spaces with
individuals found responsible for harassment and assault, fell primarily to survivors. It was suggested that the organization at the
time was legally and ethically constrained in its ability to address
any situation that was not reported, evidenced, and advised on by
the original direct complainants in an investigation, a suggestion

TAKE BACK THE SAA

Figure 1. Sentiment analysis of tweets containing the #saa2019 (https://twitter.com/search?q=%23saa2019) hashtag posted during March and April of 2019.
Sentiment gradually trends upward (green and yellow) before the meeting, followed by a steep decline (orange and red) during the meeting. After the meeting
there is very high variance in sentiment. Figure prepared by Jolene Smith. Code and data derived from prior work by Ben Marwick, available at http://doi.
org/10.17605/OSF.IO/4CRH8 and http://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/VCKTS.

that many members found concerning in light of the substantial
emotional and professional labor involved in asking survivors to
bear responsibility for holding others accountable.
The second wave of the #SAA2019 response followed the erratic
reactions of SAA staff and incoming SAA president Joe Watkins
to members and non-members over social media and e-mail following the conference. Following SAA’s published statement on
April 17 (SAA 2019), in which SAA stated that it only received
official complaints starting on April 12, sentiment soured.
Tweets and e-mails from the SAA staff, president, and a newly
hired crisis public relations manager4 regarding #SAA2019 then
began to use what many have described as “gaslighting” and
“victim-blaming” language (Figure 2).
Most of these tweets were deleted following immediate backlash to the contents from members and, in the case of Figure 2,
in response to a complaint from UAA’s lawyers. Some Twitter

users, including Kristina Killgrove and Hanna Marie Pageau,
were blocked by @SAAorg; they were not given a reason, but
President Watkins has referred repeatedly to the “uncivil” nature
of discourse on social media. A handful of members reported
receiving a semi-personalized e-mail from President Watkins
on April 24 asking for their input on #SAA2019, but it was not
until April 30 that an e-mail regarding #SAA2019 was sent to the
entire SAA membership. That e-mail and video were posted at
www.SAA.org on May 2 and outline a six-point plan that includes
additional training for staff and SAA members in sexual harassment and a promise of more open dialogue going forward.5
Because of our collective disappointment with the inadequacy
and torpidity of the SAA’s response to #SAA2019, we formed
the Awesome Small Working Group (ASWG) shortly after the
conference concluded. Having seen half a dozen other organizations, such as the Canadian Archaeological Association, Society
for Historical Archaeology, Archaeological Institute of America/

September 2019 • The SAA Archaeological Record

17

TAKE BACK THE SAA

Society for Classical Studies, American Association of Physical
Anthropologists, and Register of Professional Archaeologists
(RPA), specifically address #SAA2019 in e-mails to their membership and reinforce their policies and bylaws surrounding
harassment in the immediate weeks following the April conference, we decided to pursue member-led action to bring the SAA
in line with these other organizations.

II. Member-Led Action Using Social Media in Response
to #SAA2019
Social media is a collaborative tool with benefits that differ from
other forms of communication. In particular, social media
allows for (1) increased access to participation; (2) the protection
of those in contingent or vulnerable positions when engaging in
collective action; (3) agility, letting people connect and respond
in real time as well as asynchronously to produce action quickly;
and (4) information sharing and transparency.
Social media was therefore a crucial tool for #SAA2019 attendees to connect with others who shared their concerns and wished
to take action. Because official communiques from the SAA
were slow,6 conference-goers not active on social media were
less likely to be aware of the incident or to participate in at-conference actions, such as interrupting their sessions or bringing
complaints. The SAA’s organizational failure to provide swift and
transparent communications during the conference reflected a
reproduction of existing hierarchies within professional archaeology, in that most of the complaints filed and discussions that
were raised originated with securely employed or well-networked
archaeologists and those with professional service experience.
By using the #SAA2019 hashtag to identify shared concerns, a
broader swath of SAA members were able to organically connect
in order to take collective action. #SAA2019 therefore facilitated
coalition-building in a more equitable way than would have been
possible by relying on personal and professional networks alone.
Social media also facilitated the protection of member-advocates in precarious professional and personal positions. As Sara
Ahmed’s work “Why Complain?” makes clear, those in vulnerable positions are often made more vulnerable through complaint.7
But the reason for complaint weighs heavily against this risk,
especially when that complaint relates to the safety of all individuals who make up an organization. Ahmed writes, “You have to
record what you do not want to reproduce” (italics in original). With
#SAA2019, social media became both the means for recording
what members did not want to reproduce—namely, the specific
events of the conference as well as related cultures of misconduct, harassment, assault, and institutional negligence—and
also a means for distributing the risk of complaint by allowing
members to create ad hoc collectives.
ASWG was formed within the span of a few days in late April
over Twitter, initially over a shared concern about the inadequacy

18

The SAA Archaeological Record • September 2019

SAA
@SAAorg

Update: U. of Alaska Anchorage failed
to notify SAA prior to its Annual
Meeting that Dr. Yesner was a threat to
its students. UAA inaction put its
students in a hostile environment.
Going forward, SAA & its task force
will review this process to ensure this
doesn’t happen again.
4:17 PM • 4/22/19 • Twitter Web Client
Figure 2. Now-deleted SAA tweet dated April 22, 2019, insinuating the
University of Alaska Anchorage, David Yesner’s former employer, was to
blame for #SAA2019. Re-created from screencapture by Kristina Killgrove
on April 22, 2019.

of the SAA’s response and their reliance on a weak “anti-harassment policy.”8 That policy clearly did not prevent #SAA2019,
nor did it generate a swift response or ensure the safety and
ethical treatment of individuals involved. ASWG’s early Twitter
direct messages (DMs) discussed SAA’s lack of accountability,
the absence of an official means for members to organize and
demand action, and concerns about the vulnerability of members
who were publicly advocating for accountability. Notably, ASWG
did not conceive of itself as a group charged with defining detailed
policy objectives regarding assault and harassment.9 None of us
are experts, legal or otherwise, in this area, and we all have varying degrees of professional and personal experience with these
topics. Instead, ASWG hoped from the beginning to be a tool for
amplifying the voices of all members and to provide new channels for clear communication, transparency, and accountability.
From the outset, we have collectively viewed ASWG’s role to be a
conduit for thinking with all SAA members about how to align
the fundamental structure, governance, and accountability of
our professional organization with our core values.
As such, ASWG members began to research the SAA’s bylaws
as a means for action and discovered that existing bylaws did
not properly address sexual harassment and assault, despite the

TAKE BACK THE SAA

When things get tough, we need members like you to help guide us forward.
We’ve read your emails, open letters, and social media posts and are grateful
for your input. We want to encourage members to join us in our efforts to effect
much-needed change. That said, the types of change being discussed require
that we conduct a civil conversation both online and off. Placing blame or
rehashing past mistakes is nowhere near as productive as coming together to
figure out what we need to do now.
Figure 3. Portion of official SAA e-mail sent April 30, 2019, from President Joe Watkins to all membership in which the #SAA2019 discourse is implied to be
uncivil and unproductive, framed as “placing blame” and “rehashing past mistakes.” Re-created from screencapture by Valerie Bondura on April 30, 2019.

prevalence of both in archaeology (Clancy et al. 2014; Meyers et
al. 2018) and the existence of previous SAA task forces charged
with developing strong anti-harassment measures. We quickly
identified a clause that required a bylaw referendum to go to a
member-wide vote if the petition was endorsed by at least 10% of
the SAA, or roughly 800 members.

on the current Task Force on Sexual and Anti-Harassment
Policies and Procedures and on the Committee on the Status of
Women in Archaeology (COSWA). We are optimistic that our
petition will receive due consideration by the SAA Board and that
it will be put to a vote of the full membership in the near future.

Our first formal action was the Petition to the SAA Board of
Directors, initiated May 1, 2019.10 We drafted this petition in a collaborative Google Doc two weeks after the conference and shared
it publicly as a Google Form that collected digital signatures
in a Google Sheet. We publicized our petition via social media
threads, distributing the risk and labor of organizing among our
group, and via e-mail to all SAA members who had signed a previous open letter.11 In the first 24 hours that the ASWG petition
was open, it received signatures from over 425 members agreeing that “individuals who are currently sanctioned for assault
or harassment by an adjudicating institution (e.g., a university,
court, or other recognized adjudicating body) will be barred from
taking part in SAA events, including annual meetings. Appeals
may be requested in the case of advance registration; on-site registration for such individuals will not be permitted. If a current
member is sanctioned for sexual misconduct, their membership
may be terminated, subject to the procedures defined in the SAA
bylaws, Article IV, Section 13, ‘Termination of Membership.’”
Signatures came from SAA member archaeologists working in
the United States as well as in 16 other countries, and we reached
our goal of 10% of SAA members signing in less than one week.

ASWG came together quickly in April 2019 with the express
purpose of engaging in a social justice response to the intransigence of the SAA staff and board to #SAA2019. Over the past few
months, we have noted a continued lack of transparency in the
upper echelons of the SAA. Neither the staff nor the board has
suggested that they support our member-led efforts to remedy
gaps in the organization’s bylaws. More importantly, however,
our coordination through social media has been a source of
apparent frustration to SAA leadership, who have framed it
repeatedly in public and private communications as uncivil and
antagonistic (Figure 3).12

On May 6, ASWG sent the completed petition to President
Watkins and the SAA Board of Directors. On May 22, President
Watkins responded via e-mail, indicating that “the petition has
far-reaching impacts on the Society beyond just adding language
to the Bylaws.” By May 31, President Watkins provided us with
a more detailed response, noting that the SAA had convened
a Bylaws Committee charged with reviewing the petitioned
change. Members of the ASWG have been in touch with the
Bylaws Committee, and at least one ASWG member also serves

III. Where We Go from Here

ASWG strongly resists this framing. Social media allows us,
members who have collectively been a part of the SAA for
decades, to instantiate thoughtful and efficient changes in order
to shape a professional organization that is (or should be) at its
core, member led and member focused. Our social media-based
collective enables a radical transparency in which we can advocate
for change and converse widely, in sharp contrast to the SAA’s
constrained, legalistic, unidirectional approach to #SAA2019. In
short, social media is an important tool with which we can continue to build an equitable, safe professional organization that
truly reflects our shared values.
We suggest that all SAA members, the SAA Board of Directors,
and SAA staff pay close attention to the many and diverse voices
of those who make up this organization. In response to our petition and e-mail updates, we have received numerous supportive
comments that begin “As a survivor myself . . .” Several respondents praised our efforts to “actually do something” because they
were “disgusted with the SAA response.” One wrote that they

September 2019 • The SAA Archaeological Record

19

TAKE BACK THE SAA

“fully support this effort and [are] ashamed of how our organization has handled this.” If ASWG and SAA members are accused
of being “uncivil” on social media, it is not because we are a small
group of perceived troublemakers; it is because we are leveraging
our collective power to amplify hundreds of members’ voices and
effect real change in a large, intractable institution that has so far
appeared to be averse to fundamental change.
The petitioned bylaws referendum is just the beginning of our
quest to reframe the SAA as a truly member-led organization.
ASWG is watching closely as the SAA searches for and elects
new board members. While we at ASWG all believe we can effect
more change on behalf of the SAA membership if we do not stand
for board positions, we hope to see a strong slate of nominees
for these positions and will be investigating nominees’ stances
on sexual harassment, organizational governance, and social
media once those names are made public. In addition, the RPA
also has an upcoming election, and Kristina Killgrove has been
nominated to stand for registrar. We wholeheartedly encourage
all SAA and RPA members to research board candidates and to
vote accordingly.
The ASWG will continue working to ensure that meaningful
change occurs within the SAA, whether through refining bylaws
or through challenging assumptions about which members’
voices and which modes of communication are relevant, worthwhile, or part of “civil” conversation. You can participate in and
follow our activities by e-mailing us or finding us on Twitter (all
of our Twitter handles are provided in our author byline).
Joseph Simone’s (1999) maxim that “institutions don’t love you
back” has held true here. Institutions—or people in the upper
ranks of them—tend to make decisions that benefit those same
institutions rather than individual members. The negative
consequences of #SAA2019 are a direct result of institutional
decision-making clashing with the ideal outcome that a majority of individual SAA members expected in response to an
emergency situation related to gender-based misconduct. We
ASWG members love the organization we have been a part of for
decades, but by its very nature, it cannot love us back. Only its
members can.
#SAA2019 laid bare a division between the SAA as an institution
and the SAA as a member collective. ASWG rejects this divide
and seeks to overcome it by elevating the voices of members
above those of an institutional bureaucracy. It is our strongest
hope that the model of collective action we have laid out here
will inspire other SAA members to renew their commitment to
making the SAA an organization that is reflective of our shared
values and goals as professional archaeologists and students.

20

The SAA Archaeological Record • September 2019

Notes

1. See, for example, Flaherty 2019a, 2019b; Grens 2019;
Wade 2019a, 2019b. A new piece was recently posted at Inside
Higher Ed (Flaherty 2019c) that deals with the fallout after
Elic Weitzel, a graduate student member of the SAA Media
Relations Committee, posted to Twitter an SAA e-mail he
received in which his comments that SAA solicited were
referred to as “engagement, but not in the way we would like.”
He has since received a public Twitter apology from @SAAorg.
2. Our group’s name evolved organically from our sincere and
repeated expressions of mutual support (and memes). It’s
also slightly less than “serious,” pushing against currents of
institutional elitism, hierarchy, and tone policing stemming
from #SAA2019.
3. Several full timelines of events are published online,
including “Summary of David Yesner situation and SAA
executive board actions” (https://docs.google.com/document/
d/1gxa-BYj-dTeCb7w5LLCTUbEwm2v4NyE2uIuCCLy18lw/
edit; Liz Quinlan, April 17, 2019); blog post “That time the
Society for American Archaeology blocked me on Twitter”
(https://www.poweredbyosteons.org/2019/04/that-timesociety-for-american.html; Kristina Killgrove, April 26, 2019);
and blog post “#SAA2019 and the public face of harassment:
thoughts and resources on #metoo and the SAA” (http://
mapabing.org/2019/05/01/saa2019-and-the-public-face-ofharassment-thoughts-and-resources-on-metoo-and-the-saa/;
Nathan Klembara and Patricia Markert, May 1, 2019).
The SAA (2019) published a brief news post on April
17 (https://www.saa.org/quick-nav/saa-media-room/
news-article/2019/04/17/dispelling-the-rumors-regarding-dr.david-yesner’s-removal-from-the-saa-meeting) that included
a small part of the timeline of events. We do not dispute this;
however, it is only a portion of the timeline, and SAA has not
been at all transparent about how, when, and whether they
addressed members’ concerns. Because the SAA Board has
been tight-lipped, neither we nor any other members know
what was discussed during the SAA 2019 annual meeting or
what has been discussed since.
4. Adele Cehrs was hired by SAA for an unknown period
of time. When she accidentally tweeted a link to her own
LinkedIn page, some SAA members active on Twitter
noticed. She deleted that tweet, but a screenshot can
be found here: https://twitter.com/DSAArchaeology/
status/1125494992489844736?s=20.
5. SAA.org, “A Letter to SAA Members and a Video Message
from Joe Watkins” (May 2, 2019). https://www.saa.org/
quick-nav/saa-media-room/news-article/2019/05/02/a-letterto-saa-members-and-a-video-message-from-joe-watkins,
accessed August 16, 2019.
6. The SAA’s first public acknowledgment of the situation
came over 24 hours after complaints about Yesner’s
presence were made, and their first statement was posted to
SAA.org five days later, after the conference had concluded.

TAKE BACK THE SAA

An e-mail to all membership was not sent until April 30,
two weeks after the conference ended. Given the severity of
the issue that unfolded at the conference for Yesner’s victims
and those concerned about their safety, the lack of updates to
the conference attendees, members, and journalists present,
and the SAA’s privileging Yesner’s privacy over the needs of
the survivors, the SAA’s sluggish response surprised many.
7. Blog post “Why Complain?” (https://feministkilljoys.
com/2019/07/22/why-complain/; Sarah Ahmed, July 22,
2019). See also blog post “Complaint as Diversity Work”
(https://feministkilljoys.com/2017/11/10/complaint-asdiversity-work/; Sarah Ahmed, November 10, 2017).
8. The SAA publicly noted that they would be following their
existing anti-harassment policy in a Twitter post from user
@SAAorg on April 12 at 3:24 p.m. An identical message
was also posted to the SAA’s official Facebook page. A copy
of the SAA’s policy can be found at https://www.saa.org/
annual-meeting/submissions/anti-harassment-policy.
9. Many committees, individuals, and groups have made
specific procedural and policy asks in the wake of #SAA2019,
and many ASWG members were directly involved in these
related but distinct efforts. See, for example, the SAA
Committee on the Status of Women in Archaeology’s
(COSWA) letter to President Joe Watkins, Executive
Director Oona Schmid, and the SAA Board dating April 19,
2019, available here: https://docs.google.com/document/
d/1SGWJ0WSRAJPRiytvCTe6YffqBsGBG-r43mNlIkNCY4k/
edit?usp=sharing (accessed August 18, 2019).
10. ASWG’s petition to the SAA Board of Directors: https://
web.archive.org/web/20190731183301/https://docs.
google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSf1-nOg2yg8gshv9ZxxwsvtIWESW0rjcOfds_Csh6SEldMcw/viewform
(accessed August 16, 2019).
11. The open letter, created and circulated by Dani Bradford and
signed by thousands of academics around the world, can be
found here: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1FOUtSgr
2LmPqhPl65MdyUItqzytrbt7-e86m64Wwwek/edit (accessed
August 16, 2019).
12. See also blog post “SAA President Joe Watkins Answers
Questions about Why the Organization’s Officers Did
Nothing at First about the Presence of a Sexual Predator
at #SAA2019 and Related Matter” (http://michael-balter.
blogspot.com/2019/05/saa-president-joe-watkins-answers.
html; Michael Balter, May 7, 2019), which publishes an
e-mail purportedly from President Watkins suggesting that
Twitter is “inflammatory and self-serving,” and noting that
the ASWG petition is “a knee-jerk reaction to something the
SAA needs to craft on its own.”

References Cited

Clancy, Kathryn B. H., Robin G. Nelson, Julienne N. Rutherford, and
Katie Hinde
2014 Survey of Academic Field Experiences (SAFE): Trainees
Report Harassment and Assault. PLoS ONE 9(7):e102172.

Flaherty, Colleen
2019a Archaeology Group Faces Backlash Over How It Handled
Known Harasser’s Attendance. Inside Higher Ed, April 15, 2019.
http://web.archive.org/web/20190415232503/https://www.
insidehighered.com/news/2019/04/15/archaeology-group-facesbacklash-over-how-it-handled-known-harassers-attendance, accessed
August 16, 2019.
2019b How Not to Handle a #MeToo Related Public Relations
Crisis. Inside Higher Ed, April 30, 2019. http://web.archive.
org/web/20190502103439/https://www.insidehighered.com/
news/2019/04/30/how-not-handle-me-too-related-public-relationscrisis, accessed August 16, 2019.
2019c Another Day, Another Blunder: Archaeology Society
Continues to Anger Members with How It Responds to Negative
Feedback. Inside Higher Ed, August 8, 2019. https://www.
insidehighered.com/news/2019/08/08/archaeology-societycontinues-anger-members-how-it-responds-negative-feedback,
accessed August 16, 2019.
Grens, Kerry
2019 Archaeologists Ask Society for Harassment Policy
Change. The Scientist, April 16, 2019. http://web.archive.org/
web/20190417152300/https://www.the-scientist.com/news-opinion/
archaeologists-ask-society-for-harassment-policy-change-65745,
accessed August 16, 2019.
Meyers, Maureen S., Elizabeth T. Horton, Edmond A. Boudreaux,
Stephen B. Carmody, Alice P. Wright, and Victoria G. Dekle
2018 The Context and Consequences of Sexual Harassment
in Southeastern Archaeology. Advances in Archaeological Practice
6:275–287.
Rivera, Daniella
2019a Title IX Investigation Reveals Decades of Sexual Misconduct
by Former UAA Professor. KTVA.com, March 25, 2019. https://
web.archive.org/web/20190401092651/https://www.ktva.com/
story/40180592/title-ix-investigation-reveals-decades-of-sexualmisconduct-by-former-uaa-professor, accessed August 16, 2019.
2019b UAA Police: Former Professor Accused of Sexual
Misconduct Banned from University Property, Events.”
KTVA.com, April 8, 2019. https://web.archive.org/
web/20190409173620/https://www.ktva.com/story/40272991/
uaa-police-former-professor-accused-of-sexual-misconduct-bannedfrom-university-property-events, accessed August 16, 2019.
SAA (Society for American Archaeology)
2019 Dispelling the Rumors Regarding Dr. David Yesner’s
Removal from the SAA Meeting. SAA News, SAA.org, April
17, 2019. https://www.saa.org/quick-nav/saa-media-room/
news-article/2019/04/17/dispelling-the-rumors-regarding-dr.-davidyesner’s-removal-from-the-saa-meeting, accessed August 16, 2019.
Simone, Joseph V.
1999 Understanding Academic Medical Centers: Simone’s
Maxims. Clinical Cancer Research 5:2281–2285.
Wade, Lizzie
2019a #MeToo Controversy Erupts at Archaeology Meeting. Science,
April 15, 2019. http://web.archive.org/web/20190417074954/https://
www.sciencemag.org/news/2019/04/metoo-controversy-eruptsarchaeology-meeting, accessed August 16, 2019.
2019b Archaeological Society Tries to Stem Continuing
Controversy Over #MeToo Scandal. Science, April 18, 2019. http://
web.archive.org/web/20190421131037/https://www.sciencemag.
org/news/2019/04/archaeological-society-tries-stem-continuingcontroversy-over-metoo-scandal, accessed August 16, 2019.

September 2019 • The SAA Archaeological Record

21

