AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies, Volume3, Number3. August 2019
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no3.8

Pp.113-122

Fadia Faqir The Cry of the Dove (2007): Identity Wandering between Tradition and
Modernity
Wafa Kheira LASRI
Department of English, University of AbouBekr Belkaid
Tlemcen, Algeria
Wassila HAMZA REGUIG MOURO
Department of English, University of AbouBekr Belkaid
Tlemcen, Algeria

Abstract
It is widely known that Western invasion brought new ideologies over colonized countries, from
eradicating its traditions to impressive news reforms. Thus, the colonized country becomes torn
between former traditions and newly modern perspectives. In this respect, the focus of this research
paper will fall over as it witnessed Western imposition over its society that tried, in its turn, to
maintain a traditional lifestyle, while there were attempts for change. Hence, the researcher
attempts to shed light on Jordan-as it sways between traditions and imposed reforms- through the
literary work of Fadia Ahmed Faqir, whose main motivation resides in the strong messages she
conveys in her novel The Cry of the Dove. Thus, the concern of this paper is how far carrying a
double identity affects people’s sense of belonging? In this respect, the article introduces a hint of
the author’s life embodied in the protagonist Salma, who carries a swaying identity torn between
tradition and modernity through her adventures. Salma moves forward and backward through
time, then she- the protagonist-wins a voice in a foreign country and adopts a new standard of
living, releasing herself from the cultural boundaries of Jordan. Salma is naïve but loses her
original identity while she had an opportunity to be a wife, with her husband who travels to provide
for his family. But she flies to Britain rejecting the double life she leads between her traditional
and modern habits. As this paper submits, the addressees should depict the impact of living a
double identity adopted by a traditional character living in an imposed body and culture.
Keywords: Cultural boundaries, double identity, social change, tradition vs. modernity, Western
reforms, women’s oppression
Cites as: LASRI, W. K., & MOURO, W. H. R. (2019). Fadia Faqir The Cry of the Dove (2007):
Identity Wandering between Tradition and Modernity. Arab World English Journal for
Translation & Literary Studies, 3 (3) 113-122. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no3.8
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 |www.awej-tls.org

113

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Fadia Faqir The Cry of the Dove (2007): Identity
LASRI & MOURO
Introduction:
For writers, Literature is a means to tackle issues dealt with in real life, from political problems to
personal ones. Thus, the novel has been relating to society throughout centuries, which gives
literature new reasons to take distinct horizons and perspectives in writing, until it deals with issues
of postcolonialism in order to picture unspoken Western impositions and resistance in literary
works authors. Postcolonial literature, as a new movement, is the writing which has been – as
Ashcroft claims - “affected by the imperial process from the moment of colonization to the present
day” (1989, p.2). In this respect, many authors collaborate within literature, such as Arudhati Roy,
whose novels reflect indigenous modes of invention and creation besides many others, who
characterize postcolonial literature as a literature of change, invention of new words and styles to
communicate how a special behavior, in a sense, has been forced upon them.
Much of postcolonial literature attempts to restore the voices that have been silenced for a
remarkable period of time. Literature justifies actions as violence against those who resist colonial
rules. As an answer to this, a category of human beings has been gathering its strengths, a voice
from Africa, another from India, and many others from colonized countries; all voices are female
ones. The post colonial literature impacts not only men but women as well. Using the English
language as means of self-expression, women write about the way men and society oppress them;
they explain that being a woman means she has no role in society, so she is marginalized. As a
result, post colonial woman literature deals with social differences between men and women in a
male dominated society. Though postcolonial women literature is criticized, it still attempts to
widen its roots to win a space among men, for instance, the best known writers Leila Aboulela,
Nawal al-Saadawi, Edna O’Brian, Fadia Faqir and Assia Djebbar.
This research paper will be dealing with the impacts that affect Middle Eastern societies –
especially Jordan- by Western invasion that carry huge and political difference over Jordan,
meaning that Jordan has been trying to stick to its traditions, but Western colonialism resumes the
change, especially Arabic novels.
Westerners affect other countries too, but Jordan is known by its rude applications of
political, traditional and religious rules, even if it costs the dearest person of one’s life; rules are
rules. Its famous women writers expose this country: FadiaFaqir and Layla Habaly.
In discussion of general matters facing women in the Middle East, the lifestyles and
conditions are often lost. Westerners perceive Middle East as passive, weak and veiled. The
oddness that might occur here turns around the type of causes women are put into, and the kind of
literature occurred in that era. Jordan, as a subject matter to study, demands answers about its
context as a Middle East society.
1.

Middle Eastern War and its impact on Arab Women
Arab world witnessed many wars for the most of the twentieth century. For varied reasons,
Western colonial projects had an impact on regions in Ottoman Empire at the end of World War
I, culminating until 1948. This period-according to every Arab in the region- marked the beginning
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

114

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Fadia Faqir The Cry of the Dove (2007): Identity
LASRI & MOURO
of the reign of terror and unsettlement, characterized by geographical and spiritual displacement.
Therefore, the Civil War is imposed over men and women, whether victim ones, or unwilling
participants. In this respect, political literature-a new genre- outlined interpretation of legacy of
pain and displacement.
By evaluating past events, the researcher relates with the fact that Jordan witnessed extreme
changes because of terrorists of the West. Therefore, the writer’s concern is about Jordanian
context as responsible for transgression of crimes, especially honor.
1.1 Jordan society
Jordanians’ social life lies on the family; Nyrop (2008) details its importance:
The household is composed of Kinsman, and family ties ramify into the structure of clans
and tribes. In principle and usually in practice the individual’s loyalty to his family . . .
overrides other obligations . . . often outweighs personal achievements in regulating social
relationships. (Nyrop, p. 82).
The quotation communicates the idea that that good reputation of kinsmen must have good
reputation. This concerns women beliefs that the dignity of a group is tied to its kin and when the
status of women is good, it reflects a significant concept of honor both in Jordan and in the Middle
Eastern society in general. Besides, Jordanian society is characterized by the deep roots in
patriarchal tradition, which creates a deep fissure between men and women. Due to the scope of
this paper, it is necessary to limit the dynamic feminine background. Hence, this section will
maintain a focus on educational system and the occupation kept by women in order to mirror the
status of women in Jordan. During Postcolonial era, Arab women were not given any voice or
importance as they are seen as cook and raise children.
1.2. Women in Jordan
The long-established roles within households, Jordanian society incite women to attain
certain occupations. Despite that they are low paid and are not granted much power in the work
place, she is allowed to maintain her traditional household responsibilities without having total
control on her money since the latter is controlled by the husband, and in rare occasion is used
towards any means that can empower her. In some cases, women are submitted to crimes practiced
over those who are not highly-paid, most of them are victims because they are dependent on their
husbands who, in return, strike their wives of any “monetary freedom autonomous power, which
directly results in her subjection in almost every other area of her life and reiterates her
submissiveness to her husband and his standards.” (Fargues, 2005, p. 38). In response to that,
Miller adds: “Many times, this results in domestic violence, and in extreme cases involving family
honor, the death of young women” (Miller,2009, p. 65). Lately, women are favored with some
liberating movements towards the male domination and authority, but are futile, perhaps because
of political representation of women in the Lower House of the Parliament.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

115

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Fadia Faqir The Cry of the Dove (2007): Identity
LASRI & MOURO
From another perspective, and due to the Western influence over Jordanian women, many
of them demonstrate their movements, through gaining place among men, and establishing
organizations for protesting against issues related to discrimination in opposition to them. This
organization pushes the government to adopt the UN’s Convention on the Elimination of All forms
of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), giving result to two articles, for the Article 9
concerns citizenship and the Article 16 having concern with equal rights in marriage, divorce and
parenthood. However, issues like honor based violence, sexual harassment are issues with no
solution that women keep skeptical once being outside home.
Women fail in competing with men in legislative and municipal elections because of the idea
that women are inferior in Jordanian society when it comes to their ability in political work, so,
men are better placed in such domain. According to Owemer (2012) “Because women lack the
support of official and unofficial leaderships that affect the process of political participation, who
do not aspire to the development of modernization due to the weak cultural, social, and religious
pretexts” (p. 187). All in all, Political participation of women is an issue affecting not only Jordan
but nearly the whole Arab world as well, but it is crucial in Jordan because women constitute half
of the population in there.
2. Isolated Echoes
Nothing hunts a woman but her feelings most, as a result, some change their ways of looking:
some sing, some establish institutions to help women and some include their words into history;
becoming writers, all of them, believing to share their lived experiences and narrate their stories
in a way or another, hoping to transmit a particular message, and for some, imagining a better
world. The researcher is mainly concerned with what the Arab women writers try to say and what
they do not.
To live into Arab women’s writing in the twentieth century, going back to the latest half of
the nineteenth is needed; the cultures over the Arabs heartland their worlds characterized by a
climate of openness and acceptance of the new. Thus, it is easy to share Cooke’s belief that male’s
writings differ from female’s ones, for the former write about reflective of reality that need reform,
while the latter’s being less graphic, less violent and perhaps for that reason less known.
Lebdai in Arab Women Lives (2007); she mentions that today’s Post-colonial African
Literature has evolved by including themes such as duality, hybridity and self-analysis for ultimate
purpose of (dis)covering and defining one’s individuality and one’s positioning in the course of
“History” . He cites many women writers dealing with distinct topics as confirms Bill Ashcroft in
The Empire Writers: “Contemporary accounts . . . are beginning to assert the hybridized nature of
postcolonial experience” (p. 35). This refers to the harshness of migration that causes both
physical and psychological aches because of the impossible adaptations to new environment. As a
result, post-colonial women writers tackle such issues and become the leaders.
It remains to be seen that women are finally captivated by uprisings that mark both the
Middle East and the Arab countries. Abbas’ Revolution is Female: The uprising of women in the
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

116

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Fadia Faqir The Cry of the Dove (2007): Identity
LASRI & MOURO
Arab world 2002 says that: “The moment was poignant one for the Arab feminists. Though few
outside that the Arab world knows it, women’s radicalism in the region has long and deep roots
that span more than a century”. Besides, it cannot be erased that Arab women’s writings are
critiqued, though, but from a feminist perception, they feel a must to fight hard to gain recognition
as artists. However, some of Arab women seem to be more feminist then others, since they engage
with extra feminist themes than others. Literature written by women themselves brings to another
dimension as the real experiences of life and hardship have a touch of femininity, not only in the
Arab world, but in foreign one as well.
To be more precise, Fewzia Bedjaoui, in her distinct articles tackles a novel which mirrors
all what echoes of women sound like. In one of her titles (Trying to Belong),she refers to Monica
Ali’s Brick Lane as a story that debates the perennial of how the individual can remain constant
and change, exploring the challenges that exist in identity and “femininity”, keeping the Indian
traditional discourse. She (2011) argues that:
Writing for Indian women among other is a way of expressing feelings of suffering,
loneliness, frustration, fear, alienation as well as hopes and dreams” while she sheds light on
how men see the women writings: “The argument that women writers were not active in
literary production is simply untenable, for the illustration of Kali publishing shows the
opposite. Indian male critics may quickly point out that Western literary awards are not
reliable indicator of the artistic achievement of women writers. (p.39)
As an appropriate way to sum up all what is said is that feminine writings and more precisely Arab
writers tend to open doors to silenced voices, capable of saying a lot, hoping a better expectations
through their writings, using whether “harsh” direct words or most of the time killing the beast by
their sweetness of lines. Though the attempted works, male domination still remain, and though
the Arab women writers still fight with their words. They may encounter some problems in dealing
with stereotyped world, trying to belong, feeling urged to be adopted with social change.
2.1. Salma’s Belongingness
Linguistically speaking, Fadia Faqir seems to represent a suitable example with her book Lost in
Translation, when referring to the difficulty of publishing in their countries and problems of
translation while living in the West, trying to adopt the language of the other. So, Arab women
writers living in the West feel urged to create a new shape of pen for writing, in another sense “an
Arab book” in the culture of the other, since they are displaced in exile. Pillars of Salt is the
instanced novel in which she inhabits transcultural and translinguistic position using proverbs,
translated Arabic words, phrases as well as culturally specific moments and actions in her English
texts. In this respect, Maleh’s Arab Voices in Diaspora: Critical Perspectives Anglophone
Literature, says that:
What Faqir’s Pillars of Salt attempt at can best be described by what Miriam Cooke has
identified in the work of other Arab women writers as “multiple critique” in which authors
critique simultaneously the global system, their own political regimes and religions and
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

117

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Fadia Faqir The Cry of the Dove (2007): Identity
LASRI & MOURO
family contexts and the patriarchal vein that runs through them all and still remain wary of
other ‘desire to coop their struggles. (Maleh,2009, p. 242).
She confirms, thus, that: “Although the text empowers the Arabic reader, it does not mean at all to
sugar-coat Arab women’s oppression, while the West is already certain that such oppression exists
and exults in seeing it displayed” (p.254) when dealing with Western Arab issues.
Anastassia Valassopoulos’ Contemporary Arab Women’s Writing: Cultural Expression in
Context, deals with problems and prospects feminist Arab writers face, arguing that: “In her article
“Publishing in the West: Problems and Prospects for Arab Women Writers”, AmalAmireh argues
that it is often easy to discern why certain works by Arab Women Writers succeed in the West and
are embraced as somehow ‘enlightening’ . . . What has also been interesting is the way in which
women writers have been critical for each other in terms of whom their work appeals to and
why”(Valassopoulos 23). In her turn, Amireh uses Nawal el-Saadawi as an example of an
established author and feminist, argues- pointing out the difficulties that Arab women writers have
had in avoiding certain predictable responses-that:
I agree that el-Saadawi is popular in the West partly because her works have played into
Western prejudices. But I do not think this fact should be merely used to dismiss her
achievements. This current generation of Arab women writers faces the same problems of
reception she has faced and will be better of reflecting as the historical factors behind this
kind of reception than evaluating themselves at the expense of their predecessor. (Amireh,
p.56).
In a nutshell, the telling of Arab women writers display a variety of themes, among them the
delicate one about wearing the veil. Whatever approach, these women find finally the capacity to
say that they are responding creatively and vigorously to the existed dilemmas, and that they can
challenge the rapid social change through exposing abusive situations, raising controversial issues
and criticizing many aspects of Arab society, with the goal of generating a constructive dialogue
by both men and women. They gain their places in interpreting their personal experiences in sight
fully and offer authentic accounts of realities of their lives. The use of their reasoning voices rise
above the male-dominating space, and all this, believing on the ink falling down from their pens
with an inch of distinctive, especially inner talents.
2.2. The Bleeding of Pens
With the appearance of literature, specific framework arecategorized by the recent impressive
boosting narratives, produced in English by women authors who are Arab British/ American
immigrants, or daughters of early Arab American/British immigrants. This category is widely
recognized by Western critics and interested in by many academics and researchers. From Long
years of British colonization in most Middle Eastern countries, ‘Anglophony’ did not make its
appearance as it is the case with other South Asian and South African countries. Hybridity writings
and the emergence of hybrid identities are favored after Bhabha. The list of writings produced by
Middle Eastern Arabs-compared with the literature in French produced by North African
(Algerian, Tunisian or Moroccan)-become one on the whole unimpressive challenges after that,
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

118

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Fadia Faqir The Cry of the Dove (2007): Identity
LASRI & MOURO
by increasing of English production by Arab writers, mainly like AhdafSoueif, Leila Aboulela,
FadiaFaqir and others who either live in Britain, in the USA or between the US/Britain and the
Arab world.
The methodology applied in the following literary analysis is the feminist qualitative
research approach in literary studies with specific reference to Arab immigrant writers. The
challenges faced by Arab women have been interpreted throughout their lines, attempting to give
voice to the voiceless. How do they envisage their revolution of these challenges? Why women
are challenged? The purpose of this paper is to provide a framework that can give an adequate
account of challenges through evaluating solution found between the Arab women writers in the
UK’s lines.
To conclude, those women are dealing with such writings since they feel a kind of
displacement, so they speak articulately to the diversity of Arab women wherever they are –to their
ideas, desires emotions and strategies for survival. The works of those writers do not, in the name
of unity and solidarity, gloss over socio-economic and political differences among the women they
represent. In fact, difference becomes a site for investigating commonalities, since the works cited
show a commitment to approaching the politics of location as a site for understanding
particularized experiences within a global framework. Broadly speaking, all novels tend to
enumerate characters through which the reader is given a chance to examine different context in
which characters live, and all this, in order to shape contemporary Arab cultural identity.
3.

Fadia’s Shadow in Salma
The writings of Fadia Faqir scream the silence and pain that a woman passes through,
because of male domination and harsh governmental laws, and the way that property owns a
property, the way Arabs interpret the Islamic canons and known as a victim that owns her rights.
The novel formally constructs empathy and compassion. Faqir utilizes Salma as a mirror of her
life. More than any novel, Fadia uses descriptive themes in which she shows that Salma is affected
with tastes of food, herbs, trees and flowers, and evocates language as in Lavender, ripe olive,
orange blossoms, jasmine, sage tea, lentils, frozen fish sticks, spicy ghee butter sandwiches and
many others. Was this done consciously? What does this tell us about Salma? A stranger in a
country? England or Hima? In this respect, we will attempt to clarify some of the key words that
Faqir uses as a reference to her being and beliefs.
Beginning with FadiaFaqir’s You arrive at a Truth, not The truth: An interview with Fadia
Faqir by Lindsey Moore; Fadia explains the most influential factors that she pictures in Salma,
beginning with the fact that she-Fadia- used to live next to an English club and that the Jordanian
people never had the access in, thus, she pictures it in Salma when-in Britain- she is always looking
into other people’s gardens in England, since she is always on the outside. She-Fadia-adds that she
hates the fact that her father urges her to put the veil and do her prayers at time; she responds to
his behavior, she says: “all kinds of things that made me react against institutional religion” which
means that she does the contrary of what her father asks her to do.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

119

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Fadia Faqir The Cry of the Dove (2007): Identity
LASRI & MOURO
Next, Faqir mentions that her influence of her mother’s liberality makes her able to express
her needs, even if this reaction enters her to fight with her father. But the last one, which she
characterizes as ‘the biggest fracture in my life”, is the verity that she loses her son, she says:
My father insisted on my marriage, but then pulled me out of it when it turned out to be a
disastrous match. . . I lost custody of my son as a condition of my divorce. I broke down
after that, after they took away my son . . . I went to University but if people spoke to me,
I would consider myself as not worthy of their greeting . . . I was riddled with guilt. I started
writing because it was perhaps a way to talk to my son perhaps it is a long letter to him, all
of it.
Fadia Faqir pictures themes through the adventure of Salma, moving forward and backward
through time. She portrays what a post-colonial woman can pass through and how such character
as Salma can flee this condition to be killed at last, just as her sisters, who have committed honor
crimes. Fadia wins voice in a foreign country and adopts a new life style.
The connection between past and actual generations illustrate that when the topic is about a
woman, there are no boundaries in both time and place. The post colonial period has given birth
to such women who do not know how to keep silent but yell their pains between their lines.
As a scale of this study, the message extends over several steps, as it is recommended the
move from the general to specific, the story takes the top. As for the rest, they attempt to dig deeper
between the lines until Fadia Faqir, and her relation with her main character. Being aware of what
a post colonial literature wants us to know, themes vary from one setting to another, and eager to
reflect such issues that affect women especially, Faqir pictures each theme at the level of
possibility. History is part of each soul, and one of Salma gives answers to how a woman should
free from oppression, from grief; that is to have a character, not to stay aside and cry as a baby,
just as Salma did. Everyone commits mistakes, but we have to learn to pardon ourselves in order
to know peace, Salma did not. The message seeks to empower women, to sparkle the inside of her
capacity; to be a real feminist.
Conclusion
Wishing to represent the experiences of people and their societies in all works to mirror the
society by using language, which is the medium of expression, holding the story as it is, the
researcher can deduce that literature espouses, therefore, such interventions and hopes at
documenting the lived experiences of a people. Curiously, one of the sharpest points comes to shed
light on, is the literature written on women, since whenever feelings are found, it refers to the fact
that this part of self-expression is shown through her writings, depicting the sense of belonging in
her literary works.
Fadia Faqir, in her novel, diversifies in the use of a variety of cultural elements such as songs,
beliefs and Arabic words, wishing to keep the original speech of characters. She uses as many
descriptions as she can, as in:
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

120

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Fadia Faqir The Cry of the Dove (2007): Identity
LASRI & MOURO

I would watch how the sea woke up when touched by morning light, its colours changing
from grey to corcel, to gold, then to turquoise. . . The sun would fight the darkness of the
sea. The sunlight would win the day, filling the air with light. The dark-blue sea, exhausted,
grew mossy around the edges. (72-3)
In a nut shell, several findings resume the concepts that have emerged during post-colonialism,
which, finally, favor women to speak out and loud in a male dominated society, in addition to carry
an identity free from ups and downs in terms of belonging, culture or lifestyle. Besides, the
Western invasion over Jordan liberates and gives birth to a new kind of writing that has spread
over the journals and even media.

About the authors:
Wafa Kheira LASRI is a Doctoral student at Abou Bakr Belkaid university of Tlemcen, majoring
in comparative Literature. She currently works as an assistant teacher of English at the Department
of Commercial Economics and Management at the University Centre of Maghnia, Tlemcen.
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4832-0057
Wassila Hamza Reguig Mouro is Associate Professor at the Department of English, University
of AbouBekr Belkaid Tlemcen. She holds a PhD in Literature and Civilization as well as a
habilitation. Her research interests are mostly literary and turn around Postmodernism
(metafiction, intertextuality, dialogism and narration…), Women’s Writing, Postcolonial literature
and the Victorian era. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5011-3551
References:
Alghamdi, A. (2011). Transformations of the liminal self: Configurations of home and identity
for Muslim characters in British postcolonial fiction. Bloomington: IUniverse.
Ashcroft, B., Griffiths, G., & Tiffin, H. (2004). The post-colonial studies reader. London:
Routledge.
Ashcroft, B., Griffiths, G., & Tiffin, H. (2010). The empire writes back: Theory and practice in
post-colonial literatures. London: Routledge.
Bedjaoui, F. (2001). Politique britannique vis-à-vis de l’entrée des immigrants. Insaniyat /
,(14-15), 221-226. doi:10.4000/insaniyat.9673‫إنسانيات‬
Bedjaoui, F. (2009). Indian Women Cries of the Other India. Impressions,III(II). Retrieved from
http://impressions.50webs.org/jul09/ar_fewziab.html
Bedjaoui, F. (2013). Recreating Literature Texts through Translations. Muse India,(51), 30.
Retrieved from http://www.museindia.com/focuscontent.asp?issid=51&id=4431
Faqir, F. (2012). Lost in Translation: The Arab Book in the Language of the Other. SAGE
Journals. Retrieved from https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/03064220408537345.
Fuller, M., Reynolds, L. J., & Fuller, M. (1998). Woman in the nineteenth century: An
authoritative text, backgrounds, criticism. New York: W.W. Norton.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

121

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Fadia Faqir The Cry of the Dove (2007): Identity
LASRI & MOURO
Lambert, T. (2003, May 30). Women in the Middle Class in the Nineteenth Century. Retrieved
April 10, 2019, from http://www.localhistories.org/middleclass.html
Maleh, L. A. (2009). Arab voices in diaspora: Critical perspectives on anglophone Arab
literature. Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Miller, A. (2009). A Sociological Analysis of Crimes of Honor: Examining the Effects of
Higher Education on the Concepts of Honor and Notions of Gender Equality in Jordan.
Independent Study Project (ISP) Collection,750. Retrieved from
https://digitalcollections.sit.edu/isp_collection/750.
Moore, L. (2011). 9042027185. Postcolonial Text,6(2). Retrieved from
https://www.postcolonial.org/index.php/pct/article/viewArticle/1320.
Chouhrette, C. (2011, April 29). My Name Is Salma by Fadia Faqir. Retrieved May 10, 2019,
from https://www.1stbookreview.com/my-name-is-salma-by-fadia-faqir/
Oswald, B. (2013, June 30). Women’s Right. Retrieved July 30, 2013, from
https://www.studymode.com/essays/Women-s-Rights-1855711.html
Sowarski, B. (2009, June 12). Subaltern Studies. Retrieved May 9, 2019, from
http://web.csulb.edu/~ssayeghc/theory/subalternstudies.htm
Understanding the role of Muslim women. (2007, July 07). Retrieved May 10, 2019, from
http://www.khilafah.com/understanding-the-role-of-muslim-women/
Valassopoulos, A. (2007). Contemporary Arab women writers cultural expression in context.
London: Routledge.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

122

