Late-Stage Educational Inequality: Can Selection on Noncognitive Skills Explain Waning
Social Background Effects?

Christian Michael Smitha, Eric Grodskya, John Robert Warrenb

a

University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1180 Observatory Drive, Madison, WI 53706, USA

b

University of Minnesota, 267 19th Avenue South, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA

Corresponding author: Christian Michael Smith

E-mail addresses: csmith59@wisc.edu (C.M. Smith), egrodsky@ssc.wisc.edu (E. Grodsky),
warre046@umn.edu (J.R. Warren)

The research reported here was supported by the Institute of Education Sciences, U.S.
Department of Education, through Award #R305B150003 to the University of WisconsinMadison. The opinions expressed are those of the authors and do not represent views of the U.S.
Department of Education.

1

1. Introduction
Social scientists have identified education as a crucial component of the stratification
process that links social origins to adult resources including income, occupational standing, and
health (Ashenfelter & Rouse, 1998; Blau & Duncan, 1967; Cutler & Lleras-Muney, 2008).
Education both enables social reproduction for those more advantaged and paves the way to
social mobility, helping many people transcend disadvantages stemming from ascribed
characteristics. For example, among those with a terminal bachelor's degree, parental income
does not predict achieved income (Hout, 1988; Torche, 2011).
Given the importance of education in stratification processes, social scientists have taken
special interest in how education is allocated across groups. As American income inequality
increased over the second half of the 20th century, the relationship between parent income and
the academic achievement of youth became more pronounced (Reardon, 2011). Concurrently,
attainment gaps based on parental income grew at three critical stages of education: high school
completion, college attendance, and college completion (Bailey & Dynarski, 2011).
Intergenerational educational persistence did not change as appreciably over these decades as the
association between educational attainment and parental income (Hout & Janus, 2011), but the
U.S. remains one of the high-income countries with the most intergenerational educational
persistence (Hertz et al., 2007).
The process of educational attainment unfolds in successive stages over the life-course.
Some educational transitions may be more closely tied to social reproduction and mobility than
others. Identifying transitions that are especially challenging for less advantaged students is an
important step toward targeting interventions at particularly unequal stages. Theoretical claims
about the importance of different transitions for social stratification vary. Gamoran (2001)

2

divides theoretical accounts of education’s role in social stratification into those based on
economic factors and those based on cultural and social factors. Economic factors that influence
educational attainment include access to amenities that boost achievement, such as quiet study
spaces, tutors, books, and supplies, as well as resources necessary to pay tuition, fees and other
costs of attendance at the postsecondary level. Cultural and social factors include tastes and
habits that facilitate educational success and social networks that serve as information channels
about navigating school. On the one hand, late stages might be less egalitarian because early
stages enjoy public provision, which removes the barrier of affordability for schooling per se. On
the other hand, early stages might be more egalitarian because parents arguably have a greater
influence on their children’s cultural dispositions and social networks when the children are
young (Müller & Karle, 1993).
Empirical research extending back to Mare (1980) has suggested that earlier transitions
are more closely tied to social stratification than later transitions. Mare found that socioeconomic
gradients in completion were more pronounced in the early grades than later grades, to the point
of appearing irrelevant for postsecondary outcomes conditional on high school attainment. This
has come to be called the “waning coefficients” finding. The waning coefficients finding was
striking in part because of its policy implications: if disparities are greater early on, then public
policy should target socioeconomic inequalities in early transitions and put less emphasis on later
inequalities. After all, interventions designed to close disparities in college attendance, for
example, are fruitless if there is no conditional disparity to begin with.
Mare used an innovative analytical strategy to assess how much SES effects differed
across levels of schooling. Instead of conceiving of educational attainment as a singular outcome
(highest grade completed), he approached it as a series of binary decisions to continue schooling.

3

For each major educational transition—starting with the attainment of 8th grade and ending with
entry into graduate school—he used a logistic regression model to estimate the odds of making
the transition conditional on having successfully made all prior transitions and observed that the
estimated effect of SES was smaller for successively higher transitions. By conditioning out
marginal changes in the distribution of education, Mare’s approach became important in
stratification scholarship because it allowed researchers to compare the extent of socioeconomic
advantage across nations (Shavit & Blossfeld, 1993) and across cohorts (Raftery & Hout, 1993.)
An important limitation of Mare’s method is that the true effects of SES may not
decrease but only appear to do so because of selective attrition (Cameron & Heckman, 1998;
Mare, 1980). For example, if conscientiousness has a positive impact on one’s propensity to
make educational transitions, those low-SES persons who graduate high school will be more
conscientious than those who do not, and therefore will be a subset of the low-SES population
disproportionately likely to enter college. Meanwhile, high-SES students, who can rely on
material and sociocultural advantages, are likely to graduate high school even if they lack
conscientiousness. Selective attrition may then decrease the apparent association between SES
and conscientiousness, translating to a downwardly biased estimate of the effect of SES on
college entry. Selective attrition occurs whether or not SES moderates the effect of skills on
school continuation (Elwert & Winship, 2014), but for skills that benefit low-SES individuals
more than high-SES individuals (Lundberg, 2013), selective attrition is driven both by uniform
screening processes that disproportionately reduce continuation among low-SES people and by
socioeconomic differences in the relationship between school continuation and these skills.
Selective attrition has implications not only for intergenerational educational mobility,
but also intergenerational mobility more broadly defined. Research in the last three decades has

4

asked whether a bachelor’s degree makes one’s social background irrelevant for achieved
occupational status, personal income, and total family income. Estimates from a variety of data
sources indicate that social background is not significantly associated with occupational and
earnings outcomes among those with a terminal bachelor’s degree (Hout, 1988; Torche, 2011).
However, if the apparent egalitarianism in graduate school entry (Mare, 1980) is due to selective
attrition at the transition to college attainment, then the equal occupational and earnings
outcomes of low-SES and high-SES bachelor’s degree holders is likely also due to selective
attrition. In this case, the bachelor’s degree does not actually level the playing field, but rather,
low-SES college graduates compensate for their disadvantaged background with exceptional
cognitive or noncognitive skills.
This paper explores the extent to which selective attrition based on noncognitive skills
contributes to observed declines in the association between social origins and educational
continuation across levels of educational attainment. While previous work has estimated the
extent of selective attrition bias due to academic and cognitive characteristics of students (Lucas,
1996; Mare, 1980) and general unobserved heterogeneity (Buis, 2011; Cameron & Heckman,
1998; Holm & Jæger, 2011; Tam, 2011), noncognitive skills are an empirically unexplored
source of additional bias.

2. Noncognitive Skills and Educational Success
Noncognitive skills include but are not limited to locus of control, self-esteem,
conscientiousness, openness to new experiences, extraversion, agreeableness, emotional stability,
grit, and self-discipline. While noncognitive skills in fact involve cognition, they are distinct
from cognitive ability, which reflects the ability to solve abstract problems (Borghans,

5

Duckworth, Heckman, & ter Weel, 2008). Farkas (2003, pg. 541) argues that an “emerging
interdisciplinary paradigm” suggests that noncognitive skills merge with cognitive skills in
driving stratification processes. Noncognitive skills predict not only academic achievement and
educational attainment (Heckman & Kautz, 2012), but also labor market outcomes (Lee &
Ohtake, 2012; Wang, Kick, Fraser, & Burns, 1999) and health-related behaviors (Hampson,
Goldberg, Vogt, & Dubanoski, 2007; Reed, Pritschet, & Cutton, 2012). For some outcomes,
noncognitive skills appear to be more influential than cognitive ability (Heckman & Kautz,
2012). Since the present study can include only the noncognitive skills of locus of control, selfesteem, and conscientiousness, we focus the following review on these three skills.

2.1.

Locus of control and educational success

Individuals who interpret events as the result of luck, chance, or fate are said to have an external
locus of control, while those who interpret events as the result of their own actions or
characteristics are said to have an internal locus of control (Rotter, 1966). Students with an
external locus of control may have worse educational outcomes if, due to their view that actions
are unrelated to outcomes, they are not motivated to try harder after initially performing poorly
(Coleman et al., 1966). Locus of control may also influence educational attainment by affecting
students’ cost-benefit analyses of continuing their education: students with an internal locus of
control estimate higher returns to additional education than those with an external locus of
control, who see their labor market outcomes as largely outside their control (Coleman &
DeLeire, 2003).
Among the most significant work on the relationship between locus of control and
educational success is Coleman et al.’s Equality of Educational Opportunity study (1966).

6

Coleman and his colleagues found that locus of control was more strongly associated with
academic achievement than any social background characteristic, and that an internal locus of
control was particularly beneficial for low-SES and racial minority students. Using longitudinal
data with locus of control measured before ultimate educational attainment, more recent studies
have confirmed that an internal locus of control is associated with educational attainment
(Coleman & DeLeire, 2003; Flouri, 2006; Wang et al., 1999). However, scholars since Coleman
have also considered that locus of control may be a realistic perception of the degree to which
structural constraints limit one’s options, rather than simply a disposition that one ought to
acquire regardless of context (Bar-Tal & Bar-Zohar, 1977). For example, undocumented youth
experience real, external barriers that compress their opportunities in life, including educational
opportunities. Undocumented youth with an external locus of control may simply be aware of the
barriers they face, while those with an internal locus of control may simply be misguided. Any
interpretation of the association between locus of control and educational attainment should
consider that this association may come from life circumstances that the researcher does not
observe and over which the student has no control.

2.2.

Self-esteem and educational success

An individual’s self-esteem is his summative evaluation of his own worth (Rosenberg, 1965).
Rosenberg’s self-esteem scale is based on responses to items such as “On the whole, I am
satisfied with myself” and “I am able to do things as well as most other people.” Global selfesteem is distinct from self-concept in a specific domain, for example academic self-concept
(Marsh & O’Mara, 2008; Rosenberg, Schooler, Schoenbach, & Rosenberg, 1995). Still,
academic self-concept influences individuals’ global self-esteem, and vice versa, especially for

7

those who highly value academics (Rosenberg et al., 1995). Therefore, any effect of self-esteem
on educational success is likely due to what self-esteem says about academic self-concept: those
with low self-esteem are more likely to have a low academic self-concept, and those with a low
academic self-concept are likely to shy away from academic challenges because they judge the
potential difficulties as more daunting than they really are.
Coleman and his colleagues (1966) thought the strong association between
contemporaneous measures of academic self-concept and academic achievement reflected the
effects of the latter on the former, but more recent work has shown that, net of prior
achievement, academic self-concept is positively associated with later academic achievement
and educational attainment (Marsh & O’Hara, 2008; Rosenberg et al., 1995). While global selfesteem is also positively associated with later educational success, this association is far weaker
than the association with academic self-concept (Marsh & O’Hara, 2008; Rosenberg et al.,
1995). Thus, self-esteem probably has some bearing on academic achievement and educational
attainment, but pales in comparison to both academic self-concept and locus of control.

2.3.

Conscientiousness and educational success

Conscientiousness is the tendency to be organized, responsible, and hardworking. Conscientious
people are probably better equipped to succeed academically even net of cognitive ability, since
they will work to accomplish the academic tasks in front of them and will navigate the hurdles
on the path to attainment. For example, students cannot get satisfactory grades solely by having
strong cognitive skills; they must also pay attention in class, come prepared with the requisite
books or materials, and, especially at higher levels of education, do work at home. In everyday
discourse, parents and teachers lament when students do not “apply themselves,” i.e., are not

8

conscientious. Research confirms that conscientiousness promotes academic achievement and
educational attainment in the U.S. (Hampson et al., 2007; Kaiser & Diewald, 2014; Trapmann,
Hell, Hirn, & Schuler, 2007).
Conscientiousness is one of the “Big Five” personality traits (Almlund et al., 2011). Of
these personality traits, conscientiousness has received the most attention in education research
because typically it is the strongest predictor of educational outcomes (Lundberg, 2013). On
average, conscientiousness increases with age (Soto, John, Gosling, & Potter, 2011) and has
higher test-retest reliability for older people (Roberts & DelVecchio, 2000). Conscientiousness is
moderately rank-stable even between elementary school and midlife, with a rank-order stability
coefficient of 0.25 (Hampson & Goldberg, 2006). As we will elaborate in later sections of this
article, we lack direct measures of conscientiousness in adolescence. As proxies for adolescent
conscientiousness, we rely on behavioral indicators in high school as well as a direct measure of
conscientiousness for a subsample at midlife.

3. Hypotheses
In what follows, we assess how much selective attrition by levels of noncognitive skills (together
with selective attrition by cognitive skills) can account for the pattern of waning SES effects. In
particular, we test the following hypotheses for a cohort of Americans:
(1) Before conditioning on cognitive and noncognitive skills, the estimated effect of
socioeconomic variables wanes across transitions.
(2) Conditioning on cognitive and noncognitive skills adjusts for a substantial share of
selection attrition bias, yielding estimated SES effects that do not attenuate across transitions.

9

Hypothesis (1) follows directly from the fact that the waning coefficients pattern has
arisen in multiple prior studies with nonexhaustive covariates (Mare, 1980; Shavit & Blossfeld,
1993). Whether it is a statistical artifact or not, logistic response models have often displayed a
pattern of waning coefficients.
Hypothesis (2) says that the waning coefficients finding is a statistical artifact. The logic
is that bias arises since the subset of low-SES individuals at risk of, say, entering college, is a
particularly cognitively and noncognitively skilled subset of the low-SES population, and highSES individuals at risk of entering college probably constitute a less steeply selected subset
based on such skills, since they have socioeconomic advantages to carry them forward in lieu of
skills. When this is the case, parameter estimates are based on a comparison between exceptional
low-SES individuals and fairly typical high-SES individuals. Hence, the effect of SES on college
entry may appear small relative to its effect on high school attainment simply because the lowSES students who graduate high school are those who have the academic chops to get into
college, the internal locus of control to change their initially unfavorable life circumstances, the
high self-esteem to deem themselves capable of completing a postsecondary degree, or the effort
to acquire college information not available to them at home. We are especially interested in
noncognitive skills’ contribution to selective attrition bias above and beyond bias due to
cognitive skills.

4. Data and Methods
4.1.

Data source

We use data from High School and Beyond, a nationally representative, longitudinal study of a
stratified random sample of American high school students. We specifically use the base year

10

(1980) and follow-up (1982, 1984, 1986, 1992, 2014) surveys of the 1980 sophomore cohort.
The base-year study surveyed 30,030 high school sophomores. The first follow-up solicited
responses from all 30,030 persons in the achieved base-year sample. Additionally, a subsample
of about 15,000 individuals was selected for a transcript survey the same year (1982). These
15,000 individuals were solicited to participate in the third follow-up (1984), and 98% responded
for an achieved sample of 14,830 cases. About 12,000 of these individuals were resurveyed in
1986 and 1992, and about 9,000 of them were resurveyed in 2014, with 3,710 taking a long form
questionnaire that, among other things, included items for measuring conscientiousness. In this
paper, we draw most heavily on the 1980 and 1992 surveys. We restrict our main analytic sample
to those who responded to both the 1980 and 1992 surveys and who have nonmissing values on
their educational attainment and entry. Our final analytic sample size is 10,510.

4.2.

Model specification

Following Mare (1980), we consider a series of five school transitions: high school attainment
(transition 0), baccalaureate college entry (transition 1), baccalaureate college attainment
(transition 2), graduate school entry (transition 3), and graduate school attainment (transition 4).
For each transition j in [0,4], our Logistic Response Model (LRM) is of the form

where pij is the probability that person i will make transition j given that she has made transition
j-11, Xik is the value of the kth explanatory variable for individual i, βj is a transition-specific
intercept, βjk is a transition-specific coefficient corresponding to explanatory variable k, and εij is

1

In practice, therefore, we delete persons who did not make transition j-1 when estimating the model for transition j.

11

a person-specific and transition-specific error term. The outcome variables, corresponding to
transitions j in [0,4] respectively, are summarized in Table 1. Each is based on self-reports from
the 1982-1992 follow-up questionnaires. Table 1 also summarizes the explanatory variables, all
of which are measured in 1980 and determined by self-report unless otherwise specified. Table
A.1 in the Appendix gives descriptive statistics on these measures for the main analytic sample
in this study. We estimate each model using cluster standard errors and generally using panel
weights corresponding to the 1992 wave of data, although some analyses require panel weights
corresponding to the 2014 wave.
We want to estimate the effect of socioeconomic variables for different school
transitions, and we are particularly interested in how these effects change when conditioning on
confounders between successive school transitions. Accordingly, for each transition, we use
three different sets of covariates, each with successively more factors that predict a student’s
educational trajectory. The first consists of only the demographic variables, including the
socioeconomic variables (parental education, family income, parental SEI, and sibship size). The
second consists of the demographic variables as well as the cognitive variables. The third
consists of all variables: demographic, cognitive, and noncognitive.

4.3.

Missing data

We delete cases that are missing in any of the outcomes. Percentages of missing observations in
the explanatory variables range from 0% (race, gender) to 25% (family income). To handle
missingness in the explanatory variables, we use multivariate imputation by chained equations.
We conduct ten imputations, using all the outcome and explanatory variables detailed above as

12

well as a set of auxiliary variables2 from both waves 1 and 2. Because many of the continuous
variables appear non-normally distributed, we impute continuous variables using Predictive
Mean Matching rather than basic linear regression.

4.4.

Two-Level Regression

To assess whether SES coefficients wane across transitions, we use a two-level regression
approach. This involves three steps:
● (Step 1, “level-1”) For each schooling transition, obtain SES coefficients from the LRM.
● (Step 2, “level-2”) Code the transitions as 0 (high school attainment) to 4 (grad school
attainment). Take the coefficients from Step 1 and regress them on their corresponding
transition, using variance weighted least squares with the standard error of each
coefficient as a weight.
● (Step 3) Interpret the level-2 slope. If it is negative, then the coefficients wane. If it is
positive, then the coefficients grow. If it is practically zero, then the coefficients are
stable.
The linear level-2 regressions are a heuristic meant to quantify the overall tendency of SES
effects to wane across the five transitions. The SES effects may vary nonlinearly with the
transitions, but the purpose is to assess if the SES effects go down on average, rather than to find
a model that precisely fits these potential nonlinearities. We focus on SES as measured by
parental education and family income and do not present results for which parental SEI and
sibship size are the socioeconomic variables of interest, but these results are available upon
request. All conclusions we present below also hold in the case of parental SEI and sibship size.
2

Namely: 8-point family income at wave 2, self-report of high school grades at waves 1 and 2, locus of control at
wave 2, self-esteem at wave 2, and effort at wave 2.

13

5. Results
5.1.

Selective attrition

Table 2 demonstrates that the sample of respondents becomes increasingly advantaged
when restricting it to those making each successively higher transition. For example, on average,
those who attained a graduate or professional degree have parents with about 2.5 more years of
education than the parents of those in the original sample of 10th graders. Table 3 demonstrates
that the disadvantaged persons who advance in their education are a bit more steeply selected
along cognitive skills than advantaged persons. For example, the high school GPA gap between
people with low and high parental education for the original sample of 10th graders is 0.3 grade
points, but is only 0.1 grade points for the sample who attained a graduate or professional degree.
The gap is even smaller at the college attainment level, where it is virtually nonexistent. For most
cognitive variables, the gap between advantaged and disadvantaged people is smallest at the
college attainment level, which may help explain the apparent null effect of social origins on the
labor market outcomes of terminal bachelor’s degree holders despite the importance of social
origins among those with a graduate or professional degree (Torche, 2011). Finally, Table 3 also
shows that the gap in noncognitive skills substantially narrows for successively higher
educational transitions, in some cases even shifting in favor of the people with low parental
education. A notable case is effort. People with high parental education in the original sample of
10th graders have an effort advantage of 0.15 standard deviations, but have an effort
disadvantage of 0.05 standard deviations in the sample of those who attained a graduate or
professional degree. In sum, attrition is mostly selective: the gap between advantaged and
disadvantaged people in cognitive and noncognitive skills tends to shrink at successively higher

14

levels of education. Still, this is only suggestive evidence of selective attrition bias, since there
can be selective attrition without substantial bias.

5.2.

Hypothesis 1: Before conditioning on cognitive and noncognitive skills, the
estimated effect of socioeconomic variables wanes across transitions

The pattern of coefficients shown in Table 4 is generally consistent with Hypothesis (1), with a
few important exceptions. Table 4 shows coefficients for socioeconomic variables from each
LRM3. Figure 1 plots the level-1 parental education coefficients for each transition along with
the level-2 regression lines4. Inspecting the solid regression line in Figure 1, it is clear that in the
aggregate the effect of parental education gets closer to zero for higher transitions. However, the
circular points in Figure 1, representing the effect of parental education at each transition, show
that this pattern is not universal. The effect of parental education is greater at college entry than
at high school attainment. Family income coefficients display a similar pattern (Figure 2). These
results are at odds with Mare’s (1980) finding of universally waning coefficients but lend
credence to Lucas’s (1996) argument that SES became more important for college entry between
Mare’s cohort and the High School and Beyond 1980 sophomore cohort, who according to Lucas
entered adulthood under a hostile regime of Reagan-era policies that made college less
affordable for low-income students.

5.3.

Hypothesis 2: Conditioning on cognitive and noncognitive skills adjusts for a
substantial share of selection attrition bias, yielding estimated SES effects
that do not attenuate across transitions.

3
4

Full model output from all LRMs is available in the online supplement.
Table A.2 gives the slopes of the level-2 regression lines corresponding to parental education and family income.

15

Even though there is marked selective attrition along both cognitive and noncognitive variables
(Table 3), we find that only the omission of cognitive variables contributes to selective attrition
bias; omitting noncognitive skills does not induce bias, above and beyond the bias corresponding
to cognitive skills. With cognitive covariates, the level-2 regression line for parental education is
flatter than the level-2 regression line from the models without cognitive covariates, hence
omitting cognitive variables induces selective attrition bias (Figure 1). Therefore, failing to
control for cognitive skills leads to exaggerated claims of late-stage egalitarianism.
Omitting available measures of noncognitive variables, however, does not induce
selective attrition bias net of cognitive skills, since the level-2 regression lines from the models
with noncognitive covariates in Figures 1 and 2 are virtually identical to the lines from the
models without. Net of demographic characteristics and cognitive skills, noncognitive skills are
not outstanding predictors of schooling transitions5. Across transitions, coefficients for locus of
control and self-esteem tend to be statistically and practically insignificant. Coefficients for
effort tend to be significant, ranging from -0.037 at grad school entry to 0.316 at high school
attainment, but the estimated effect of this one skill is meager compared to the combined effect
of all measured cognitive skills.
Perhaps the point estimates are virtually the same after controlling for the noncognitive
skills simply because cognitive skills capture all of the variance that noncognitive skills can
capture on their own. For example, effort may have a strong influence on educational attainment
but this influence may be mediated by the effect of effort on high school GPA. To test this
theory, we estimate models with just demographic and noncognitive covariates. The estimates
for this covariate set are closer to the estimates with only demographic covariates than they are to

5

Full model output is available in the online supplement.

16

the estimates with demographic and cognitive covariates (Figures A.1 and A.2 in the Appendix).
Therefore, the noncognitive variables do not induce much selective attrition bias even when
considered on their own.
Does previously unobserved conscientiousness induce selective attrition bias? We
attempt to answer this question by running a set of LRMs with an additional covariate, namely
conscientiousness as measured in 2014, meant to be a proxy for conscientiousness in 1980.
While the effort scale probably captures some aspects of conscientiousness, adding an explicit
measure of conscientiousness may elucidate some selective attrition bias that would otherwise go
uncaptured. However, this specification suffers from a reduction in power because only a
fraction of the original 1980 sample took the long form 2014 questionnaire. Perhaps more
importantly, conscientiousness measured around age 50 may not be a strong proxy for
conscientiousness around age 16; Hampson and Goldberg (2006) estimate a stability coefficient
of 0.25 for conscientiousness between elementary school and age ~50. As it turns out, even after
including 2014 conscientiousness as a covariate, SES effects are practically the same with and
without noncognitive covariates. Figure 3 illustrates this result in the case of family income: the
level-2 regression line from the models with noncognitive covariates is no flatter than the level-2
regression line from the models without. The same is true of parental education (Figures 4). We
suspect that the 2014 measure of conscientiousness fails to flatten the trends because it is only
moderately related to conscientiousness in adolescence6. The lack of selective attrition bias due
to this measure of conscientiousness is of interest in its own right, though. Given mounting
evidence that conscientiousness affects educational attainment (Burks et al., 2015; Hampson et

6

In case the apparent irrelevance of consciousness arose because the effort scale already accounted for all of the
effect of consciousness, we computed the Pearson correlation between consciousness in 2014 and effort in 1980 and
found it to be only 0.123.

17

al., 2007; Heckman & Kautz, 2012; Kaiser & Diewald, 2014; Lee & Ohtake, 2012; Lundberg,
2013; Trapmann et al., 2007), this result is surprising unless middle-aged conscientiousness is a
poor proxy for conscientiousness in adolescence. The available measure of conscientiousness has
only a tenuous conditional association with school transition probabilities. Conscientiousness
coefficients range from -0.05 to 0.12 depending on the school transition, and none of these
coefficients is statistically significant at the 0.05 level7.
At least with respect to the cognitive and noncognitive skills that we observe, we cannot
claim that selective attrition bias fully explains the waning coefficients pattern. Even after
controlling for these skills, there is a general slight pattern of waning coefficients. The dotted
level-2 regression lines in Figures 1-4 show that SES effects generally trend towards zero for
successively higher transitions even with cognitive and noncognitive covariates, though the trend
is slight. However, the level-2 regression lines obscure the important exceptions to this pattern.
Notably, we reconfirm Lucas’s (1996) finding that SES has a larger effect on college entry than
on high school attainment. Family income and parental education are more influential on college
entry than on any other transition (Figures 1-2, triangular points), and the effect of each is
substantial. The estimated family income and parental education coefficients are, respectively,
0.019 and 0.155. Hence, holding constant all observed demographic, cognitive, and noncognitive
covariates, a family income increase of $10,000 (measured in 1980 dollars) is associated with a
20% increase in the odds of entering college given high school attainment, and a 4 year increase

7

Full model output is available in the online supplement.

18

in parental education is associated with an 85% increase in odds8. Educational attainment is not
egalitarian in its late stages9.

5.4.

Robustness to alternative college entry definition

In our preferred models, we choose to have only one pathway for college entry and
operationalize this as having ever entered a baccalaureate college. It is not immediately obvious
whether this definition makes more theoretical sense than a definition of college entry that
includes entry into two-year colleges. Mare’s (1980) conceptualization of educational attainment
rests on the sequential nature of school transitions, i.e., transition j-1 is a strict prerequisite to
transition j. For Mare, educational attainment is one non-winding path, starting at school entry
and ending at postgraduate education, with a decision to continue at each milestone. While this
was more or less the case for Mare’s sample born between 1908 and 1953, the rise of two-year
postsecondary enrollment has made this type of transition more important to consider. By the
1980s, more people were entering a two-year college and either dropping out, terminating their
schooling with an Associate’s degree, or transferring to a baccalaureate college before (or after)
receiving an Associate’s degree. While research on horizontal stratification (e.g., Karlson, 2011;
Lucas, 2001) provides a framework to investigate these different pathways, we focus on vertical
stratification because we seek to build on Mare’s work, and therefore we must devise a hierarchy
of schooling transitions based on quantitative differences in schooling. Thus, our preferred

8

These estimates are very robust. We use Frank and Xu’s (2017) sensitivity analysis to estimate that a confounding
variable would have to be correlated at 0.3 with both parental education and college entry, conditional on all
covariates, to drop the coefficient down to statistical insignificance. This correlation corresponds to an impact of
0.09, which is far greater than the maximum impact of the observed variables (0.04, parental SEI). A confounding
variable would have to be conditionally correlated at 0.21 with both family income and college entry to drop the
coefficient down to statistical insignificance. This correlation corresponds to an impact of 0.05, compared to the
maximum impact of the observed variables of 0.03 (parental SEI).
9
For both hypotheses, the substantive conclusions are the same when we stratify the sample by sex.

19

definition of college entry is entry into a baccalaureate college, since this definition allows us to
have one clean pathway for which each transition is a strict prerequisite to the next.
Our definition of college entry has the drawback of conflating high school graduates with
persons whose highest educational credential is an Associate’s degree, thus we test whether our
results change under an alternative definition of college entry based on whether the individual
entered either a baccalaureate or a two-year college. Using the alternative college entry
definition does not alter the essence of our findings. Table A.3 in the Appendix shows that the
results with respect to selective attrition bias are virtually identical under the alternative
definition. The main difference that arises is that the college entry coefficients are slightly
attenuated and the college (i.e., baccalaureate) attainment coefficients increase in magnitude
compared to the coefficients under our preferred definition of college entry. Both of these
changes occur because low-SES college attenders have a higher propensity to attend two-year
colleges than high-SES college attenders. Nevertheless, these results are still consistent with the
essential point that education is not egalitarian in its late stages.

5.5.

Educational inequality later in the life-course

Does the effect of SES on school transitions look the same later in the life-course, after
individuals have had several decades to make further transitions? To address this question, we
estimate a set of LRMs with 2014 educational attainment data rather than 1992 educational
attainment. Taking a longer view, first, does little to change our understanding of the extent of
selective attrition bias induced by ignoring variation in noncognitive skills and, second,
reinforces the finding that SES is more associated with college entry than high school attainment
(Figures 5 and 6, exact coefficients in Table A.4). However, taking a longer view yields a

20

slightly larger estimated effect of SES on college attainment and slightly lower estimated effect
on college entry. The pattern is driven by people from low-SES backgrounds who attend college
later in adulthood but drop out. Those who drop out later in adulthood are more disadvantaged
than those who drop out early in adulthood. For example, among those who attended college but
did not complete between 1980 and 1992, the average income for the student’s family in 1980
was $23,000. In contrast, among those who attended college for the first time between 1993 and
2014 but had not completed, the average was $18,500. This difference equals about one third of
a standard deviation. The patterns are similar for parental education, parental SEI, and sibship
size (Table 5). Hence, time does not erase the socioeconomic inequality that initially exists for
this cohort. When considering the cohort’s education levels at midlife, college entry remains a
highly unequal transition and college attainment becomes an especially unequal transition.
While college entry and attainment are stubbornly unequal transitions over the lifecourse, our findings point to equality at the very latest stage of schooling. Among middle-aged
adults who at some point entered graduate school, parental education and family income of
origin seem to have no bearing on attainment of a graduate degree (Figures 5 and 6). Graduate
school entrants of modest social origins “catch up” to their more advantaged counterparts as they
age, even though the odds may have been against them to get to that point.

6. Conclusion
The waning coefficients finding (Mare, 1980) has captured the attention of social scientists in
part because it has real policy implications. If socioeconomic advantage truly declines for
successively higher transitions, then public funding is better spent on alleviating early rather than
late educational disparities. However, the coefficients for later educational transitions may be

21

downwardly biased due to unobserved, selective attrition that leaves low-SES people holding
more atypically high cognitive and noncognitive skills (Cameron & Heckman, 1998; Mare,
1980). Here, we have assessed the extent of selective attrition bias due to noncognitive variables.
The presence of this form of bias contradicts what Lucas, Fucella, and Berends (2011, pg. 283)
call “the claim of late stage egalitarianism.”
Analyzing data from the High School and Beyond 1980 high school sophomore cohort,
we find that marginal SES associations across schooling transitions generally wane, though this
pattern is not universal; omitting cognitive skills induces selective attrition bias in the SES effect
estimates, but omitting noncognitive skills does not induce additional bias; and that in the
aggregate, SES effects wane slightly after controlling for cognitive and noncognitive skills, but
socioeconomic status appears especially important at the college entry transition.
Socioeconomically disadvantaged and advantaged individuals in this cohort do not fare
similarly in the educational sphere, even once they have finished high school. Hence, any effort
to focus attention solely on early interventions misses inequality at later stages. Socioeconomic
advantage appears especially strong at the point of college entry. We find that net of high school
attainment and demographic, cognitive, and noncognitive covariates, a $10,000 increase in
(1980) family income is associated with a 20% increase in the odds of entering college given
high school completion, and a four-year increase in parental education is associated with an 85%
increase in these odds. The transitions at later stages are thus far from equal.
Even though estimated SES effects on educational transitions are biased when not
controlling for cognitive skills, noncognitive skills appear to contribute little of anything to this
bias. This result is surprising given the established importance of noncognitive skills for
educational success. Scholars have speculated that unobserved heterogeneity in noncognitive

22

skills could help explain the waning coefficients finding (Cameron & Heckman, 1998; Holm &
Jaeger, 2011), but the findings of this study fail to support this hypothesis. Additional
noncognitive skills that we do not observe may play a role, but the skills we do observe capture
much of the variation in these other skills (Judge, Erez, Bono, & Thoresen, 2002; Nakaya, Oshio,
& Kaneko, 2006). Our findings, then, could reflect a legitimate lack of selective attrition bias due
to noncognitive skills, or flawed measurement. If selective attrition along noncognitive skills
truly does not help explain the waning coefficients finding, researchers should reconsider why
coefficients wane in so many contexts. Selective attrition by noncognitive skills has been a
leading explanation, but Müller and Karle’s (1993) life-course perspective provides a possible
alternative: the effect of SES might wane as parents’ influence on habits, tastes, and material
richness weakens. Perhaps noncognitive skills do help explain the waning coefficients finding,
though, and the noncognitive skills at our disposal are error-prone. In this case, stratification
researchers should gather better longitudinal data containing noncognitive skills. We suspect that
our findings would be different with better measures of conscientiousness in particular. Ample
research points to the importance of conscientiousness for educational attainment, but most of
this research measures conscientiousness prior to or contemporaneously with educational
attainment. Our measure of conscientiousness comes well after most respondents had finished
their education. As better longitudinal data become available, future research might replicate this
study using more appropriate measures of conscientiousness.

References
Almlund, M., Duckworth, A. L., Heckman, J. J., & Kautz, T. D. (2011). Personality psychology
and economics (No. w16822). National Bureau of Economic Research.

23

Ashenfelter, O., & Rouse, C. (1998). Income, schooling, and ability: Evidence from a new
sample of identical twins. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1), 253-284.

Bailey, M. J., & Dynarski, S. M. (2011). Inequality in postsecondary education. In Whither
Opportunity?: Rising Inequality and the Uncertain Life Chances of Low-Income Children
(pp. 117–131). Russell Sage Foundation.

Bar-Tal, D., & Bar-Zohar, Y. (1977). The relationship between perception of locus of control
and academic achievement: Review and some educational implications. Contemporary
Educational Psychology, 2(2), 181-199.

Blau, P. M., & Duncan, O. D. The American occupational structure. New York: Wiley, 1967.

Borghans, L., Duckworth, A. L., Heckman, J. J., & Ter Weel, B. (2008). The economics and
psychology of personality traits. Journal of human Resources, 43(4), 972-1059.

Buis, M. L. (2011). The consequences of unobserved heterogeneity in a sequential logit model.
Research in Social Stratification and Mobility, 29(3), 247-262.

Burks, S. V., Lewis, C., Kivi, P. A., Wiener, A., Anderson, J. E., Götte, L., ... & Rustichini, A.
(2015). Cognitive skills, personality, and economic preferences in collegiate success.
Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 115, 30-44.

24

Cameron, S.V. and J.J. Heckman. 1998. "Life Cycle Schooling and Dynamic Selection Bias:
Models and Evidence for Five Cohorts of American Males." The Journal of Political
Economy 106:262-333.

Cobb-Clark, D. A., & Schurer, S. (2012). The stability of big-five personality traits. Economics
Letters, 115(1), 11-15.

Coleman, J. S., & Department of Health USA. (1966). Equality of educational opportunity (Vol.
2). Washington, DC: US Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Office of
Education.

Cutler, D. M., & Lleras-Muney, A. (2006). Education and health: evaluating theories and
evidence (No. w12352). National bureau of economic research.

Duckworth, A. L., & Seligman, M. E. (2005). Self-discipline outdoes IQ in predicting academic
performance of adolescents. Psychological science, 16(12), 939-944.

Duckworth, A. L., Peterson, C., Matthews, M. D., & Kelly, D. R. (2007). Grit: perseverance and
passion for long-term goals. Journal of personality and social psychology, 92(6), 1087.

Elwert, F., & Winship, C. (2014). Endogenous selection bias: The problem of conditioning on a
collider variable. Annual Review of Sociology, 40, 31-53.

25

Farkas, G. (2003). Cognitive skills and noncognitive traits and behaviors in stratification
processes. Annual review of sociology, 29(1), 541-562.

Finn, J. D., & Rock, D. A. (1997). Academic success among students at risk for school failure.
Journal of applied psychology, 82(2), 221.

Flouri, E. (2006). Parental interest in children's education, children's self-esteem and locus of
control, and later educational attainment: Twenty-six year follow-up of the 1970
British Birth Cohort. British journal of Educational psychology, 76(1), 41-55.

Frank, K. A., & Xu, R. (2017). KONFOUND: Stata module to quantify robustness of causal
inferences. Statistical Software Components.

Gamoran, A. (2001). American schooling and educational inequality: A forecast for the 21st
century. Sociology of education, 135-153.

Hampson, S. E., & Goldberg, L. R. (2006). A first large cohort study of personality trait stability
over the 40 years between elementary school and midlife. Journal of personality and
social psychology, 91(4), 763.

Hampson, S. E., Goldberg, L. R., Vogt, T. M., & Dubanoski, J. P. (2007). Mechanisms by which
childhood personality traits influence adult health status: educational attainment and

26

healthy behaviors. Health psychology, 26(1), 121.

Heckman, J. J., & Kautz, T. (2012). Hard evidence on soft skills. Labour economics, 19(4), 451464.

Hertz, T., Jayasundera, T., Piraino, P., Selcuk, S., Smith, N., & Verashchagina, A. (2007). The
inheritance of educational inequality: International comparisons and fifty-year trends. The
BE Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 7(2).

Hodge, R.W. 1981. "The measurement of occupational status." Social Science Research 10:396415.

Holm, A., & Jæger, M. M. (2011). Dealing with selection bias in educational transition models:
The bivariate probit selection model. Research in Social Stratification and Mobility,
29(3), 311-322.

Hout, M. (1988). More universalism, less structural mobility: The American occupational
structure in the 1980s. American Journal of sociology, 93(6), 1358-1400.

Hout, M., & Janus, A. (2011). Educational mobility in the United States since the 1930s.
In Whither Opportunity?: Rising Inequality, Schools, and Children's Life Chances (pp.
165-185). Russell Sage Foundation.

27

Hout, M., T.W. Smith, and P.V. Marsden. 2015. "Prestige and Socioeconomic Scores for the
2010 Census Codes." Methodological Report MR124, Chicago, NORC.
http://gss.norc.org/get-documentation/methodological-reports

Judge, T. A., Erez, A., Bono, J. E., & Thoresen, C. J. (2002). Are measures of self-esteem,
neuroticism, locus of control, and generalized self-efficacy indicators of a common core
construct?. Journal of personality and social psychology, 83(3), 693.

Kaiser, T., & Diewald, M. (2014). Social origin, conscientiousness, and school grades: Does
early socialization of the characteristics orderliness and focus contribute to the
reproduction of social inequality?. Research in Social Stratification and Mobility, 38, 93105.

Karlson, K. B. (2011). Multiple paths in educational transitions: A multinomial transition model
with unobserved heterogeneity. Research in Social Stratification and Mobility, 29(3),
323-341.

Lee, S., & Ohtake, F. (2012). The Effect of Personality Traits and Behavioral Characteristics on
Schooling, Earnings and Career Promotion. Journal of Behavioral Economics and
Finance, 5, 231-238.

Lucas, S. R. (1996). Selective attrition in a newly hostile regime: The case of 1980 sophomores.
Social forces, 75(2), 511-533.

28

Lucas, S. R., Fucella, P. N., & Berends, M. (2011). A neo-classical education transitions
approach: A corrected tale for three cohorts. Research in Social Stratification and
Mobility, 29(3), 263-285.

Lucas, S. R. (2001). Effectively maintained inequality: Education transitions, track mobility, and
social background effects 1. American journal of sociology, 106(6), 1642-1690.

Lundberg, S. (2013). The college type: Personality and educational inequality. Journal of Labor
Economics, 31(3), 421-441.

Mare, Robert D. 1980. "Social Background and School Continuation Decisions." Journal of the
American Statistical Association 75:295-305.

Marsh, H. W., & O'Mara, A. (2008). Reciprocal effects between academic self-concept, selfesteem, achievement, and attainment over seven adolescent years: Unidimensional and
multidimensional perspectives of self-concept. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 34(4), 542-552.

Nakaya, M., Oshio, A., & Kaneko, H. (2006). Correlations for Adolescent Resilience Scale with
big five personality traits. Psychological reports, 98(3), 927-930.

Olneck, M. R., & Bills, D. B. (1980). What makes Sammy run? An empirical assessment of the

29

Bowles-Gintis correspondence theory. American Journal of Education, 89(1), 27-61.

Plug, E., & Vijverberg, W. (2005). Does family income matter for schooling outcomes? Using
adoptees as a natural experiment. The Economic Journal,115(506), 879-906.

Raftery, A. E., & Hout, M. (1993). Maximally maintained inequality: Expansion, reform, and
opportunity in Irish education, 1921-75. Sociology of education, 41-62.

Reardon, S. F. (2011). The widening academic achievement gap between the rich and the poor:
New evidence and possible explanations. In Whither Opportunity? Rising Inequality and
the Uncertain Life Chances of Low-Income Children (pp. 91-116). Russell Sage
Foundation.

Reed, J., Pritschet, B. L., & Cutton, D. M. (2013). Grit, conscientiousness, and the
transtheoretical model of change for exercise behavior. Journal of health psychology,
18(5), 612-619.

Roberts, B. W. (2009). Back to the future: Personality and assessment and personality
development. Journal of research in personality, 43(2), 137-145.

Roberts, B. W., & DelVecchio, W. F. (2000). The rank-order consistency of personality traits
from childhood to old age: a quantitative review of longitudinal studies. Psychological
bulletin, 126(1), 3.

30

Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self-image (Vol. 11). Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

Rosenberg, M., Schooler, C., Schoenbach, C., & Rosenberg, F. (1995). Global self-esteem and
specific self-esteem: Different concepts, different outcomes. American sociological
review, 141-156.

Rotter, J. B. (1966). Generalized expectancies for internal versus external control of
reinforcement. Psychological monographs: General and applied, 80(1), 1.

Sewell, W. H., Haller, A. O., & Ohlendorf, G. W. (1970). The educational and early
occupational status attainment process: Replication and revision. American Sociological
Review, 1014-1027.

Shavit, Y., & Blossfeld, H. P. (1993). Persistent Inequality: Changing Educational Attainment in
Thirteen Countries. Social Inequality Series. Westview Press, 5500 Central Avenue,
Boulder, CO 80301-2847.

Snyder, T. D. (Ed.). (1993). 120 years of American education: A statistical portrait. DIANE
Publishing.

Soto, C. J., John, O. P., Gosling, S. D., & Potter, J. (2011). Age differences in personality traits

31

from 10 to 65: Big Five domains and facets in a large cross-sectional sample. Journal of
personality and social psychology, 100(2), 330.

Tam, T. (2011). Accounting for dynamic selection bias in educational transitions: The Cameron–
Heckman latent class estimator and its generalizations. Research in Social Stratification
and Mobility, 29(3), 287-310.

Thiel, H., & Thomsen, S. L. (2013). Noncognitive skills in economics: Models, measurement,
and empirical evidence. Research in economics, 67(2), 189-214.

Torche, F. (2011). Is a college degree still the great equalizer? Intergenerational mobility across
levels of schooling in the United States. American Journal of Sociology, 117(3), 763-807.

Trapmann, S., Hell, B., Hirn, J. O. W., & Schuler, H. (2007). Meta-analysis of the relationship
between the Big Five and academic success at university. Zeitschrift für
Psychologie/Journal of Psychology, 215(2), 132-151.

Wang, L. Y., Kick, E., Fraser, J., & Burns, T. J. (1999). Status attainment in America: The roles
of locus of control and self-esteem in educational and occupational outcomes.
Sociological Spectrum, 19(3), 281-298.

Young, K., Drought, N., & Bergstresser, J. (1937). Social and emotional adjustments of
freshmen at the University of Wisconsin. American Sociological Review, 2(2), 166-177.

32

33

Tables
Table 1. Summary of variables used in Logistic Response Models.
OUTCOME VARIABLES
High School Attainment. Indicator equal to 1 if respondent has at least attained a high school diploma or GED
by 1992, 0 otherwise.
College Entry. Indicator equal to 1 if respondent has at least entered a baccalaureate college by 1992, 0
otherwise.
College Attainment. Indicator equal to 1 if respondent has at least attained a baccalaureate college degree by
1992, 0 otherwise.
Grad School Entry. Indicator equal to 1 if respondent has at least entered a graduate or professional degree
program by 1992, 0 otherwise.
Grad School Attainment. Indicator equal to 1 if respondent has attained a graduate or professional degree by
1992, 0 otherwise.
EXPLANATORY VARIABLES
Demographic Variables
Parental Education. The average of the highest years of schooling completed by the respondent’s mother and
father. Respondents report their parents’ highest level of education completed (categorically) and we code each
category as follows: Less than high school=8 years; High school=12 years; Some college=14 years; associate’s
degree=14 years; bachelor’s degree=16 years; Master’s degree or higher=18 years. We estimate that the typical
HSB sample member's parent who completed less than high school had completed 8 grades of schooling―we
assume that sample members' parents were about 25 years old in 1964 and, using National Center for Education
Statistics (Snyder, 1993, pg. 18) grade completion rates for age 25+ men, we estimate the average years of
schooling for those who did not finish high school. The average comes to 7.3 years, and we round up to 8 years
since HSB parents are probably more educated than others in their generation, given that their children entered
10th grade. We also tried using the education level of the more educated parent but found that this specification
yielded worse-performing models on the basis of F-statistics.
Family Income. Transformation of a 7-point family income scale from 1 ($6,999 or less) to 7 ($38,000 or
more). We take the midpoint of each response category (except for the top response category, for which we take
the minimum and add the range of the previous response category) and obtain the following seven values: $3,500,
$9,500, $14,000, $18,000, $22,500, $31,500, $51,000. We divide each by 1,000 in order to measure family
income in thousands of dollars.
Parental SEI. Maximum socioeconomic index (Hodge, 1981) between the respondent’s parents. Respondents’
free-form reports of their parents’ occupations were translated into Standard Occupational Classification 2010
codes. We transformed these codes into Census 2010 occupation codes, and obtained SEI values for each Census
2010 occupation code, following Hout, Smith, and Marsden (2015). Some respondents provided a general
occupational category but no free-form report. We assign these respondents a parental SEI value equal to the
average SEI of example occupations within the specified general category, as listed in the survey item that asks
for a general occupational category. Range: 1 to 100, higher implies greater occupational standing. We also tried
using the average SEI between the two parents but found that this specification yielded worse-performing models
on the basis of F-statistics.
Sibship Size. Respondent’s number of siblings, reported at first follow-up (top coded at 6).
Race. Respondent’s race, with response categories “Black,” “White,” “American Indian or Alaskan Native,”
“Asian or Pacific Islander,” and “Other.” If respondent also indicates that their “origin or descent” is “Hispanic or
Spanish,” the respondent’s racial category is coded as “Hispanic or Spanish.”
Female. Indicator equal to 1 if female, 0 otherwise.
Foreign Born. Indicator equal to 1 if born outside of the U.S., 0 otherwise.

34

Mother in Home. Indicator equal to 1 if respondent lives with mother, 0 otherwise.
Father in Home. Indicator equal to 1 if respondent lives with father, 0 otherwise.
Academic Variables
Vocabulary. Z-score on a test of vocabulary.
Reading. Z-score on a test of reading ability.
Math. Z-score on a test of mathematics ability.
Science. Z-score on test of science knowledge.
Writing. Z-score on test of writing ability.
Civics. Z-score on test of civics knowledge.
High School GPA. High school GPA determined by final transcripts. On 4.0 scale.
Highest Math Course. Highest math course taken by spring of 1982. 1=Less than first year algebra, 2=First year
algebra, 3=Geometry, 4=Second year algebra, 5=Trigonometry, 6=Calculus. The F-statistics from our models are
not meaningfully different whether we specify highest math course as a categorical or interval-ratio variable, so
we specify it as the latter for the sake of simplicity.
Noncognitive Variables
Self-Esteem. Composite score on scale derived from self-esteem items, in z-scores. Items are a subsample of
those from Rosenberg’s (1965) self-esteem scale.
Locus of Control. Composite score on scale derived from locus of control items, in z-scores, where a higher
score denotes a more internal locus of control. Items are a subsample of those from Rotter’s (1966) locus of
control scale.
Effort. Composite score on scale derived from effort-related items, in z-scores. The effort-related items are selfreports from the base year of (1) average amount of time the student spends on homework per week, (2) how
often the student comes to class without pencil or paper, (3) how often the student comes to class without books,
(4) how often the student comes to class without her homework done, (5) how often the student is absent from
school not counting instances of illness, (6) how often the student is late to school, and (7) the student’s longest
string of absences so far that school year. We conjecture that this scale predicts educational attainment
approximately, but not precisely, how conscientiousness would if a 10th grade measure of it were available,
noting that prior work has shown that scales derived from measures of effort-making behavior predict educational
success (Finn & Rock, 1997; Olneck & Bills, 1980).
Conscientiousness (only used in small-sample analyses). Composite score on scale derived from
conscientiousness items, in z-scores. Measured in 2014. Items are a subsample of those used in the Big Five
Inventory.

35

Table 2. Means of socioeconomic variables among those who made each educational transition (or a higher
transition) by 1992.
Enter 10th
Attain High Enter
Attain
Enter Grad Attain Grad
Grade
School
College
College
School
School
Sample Size
Parental Education Mean
Family Income Mean
Parental SEI Mean
Sibship Size Mean

10,510
13.2
$21,000
47.6
3.0

9,640
13.4
$22,000
48.4
2.9

4,560
14.4
$25,000
54.0
2.6

2,890
14.8
$26,000
55.9
2.6

840
15.2
$28,000
59.9
2.5

440
15.6
$29,000
61.6
2.4

36

Table 3. Means of academic and noncognitive variables for those who made each educational transition (or a higher
transition) by 1992, by parental education (college graduate or higher vs. high school graduate or less). Categories
correspond roughly to the top third and bottom third of the parental education distribution.
10th
High
Grad
Grad
Parental
Bachelor's Bachelor's
Grade
School
School
School
Education
Entry
Attainment
Entry
Attainment
Entry
Attainment
Mean Vocabulary ≤ HS
-0.24
-0.14
0.27
0.40
0.49
0.60
Scores
College + 0.42
0.50
0.75
0.83
1.00
1.07
Mean Reading
≤ HS
-0.20
-0.10
0.30
0.46
0.56
0.77
Scores
College + 0.36
0.43
0.70
0.79
1.02
1.03
Mean Math
≤ HS
-0.20
-0.10
0.35
0.54
0.71
0.81
Scores
College + 0.40
0.47
0.75
0.87
1.13
1.20
Mean Science
-0.18
-0.08
0.27
0.40
0.54
0.71
≤ HS
Scores
College + 0.31
0.39
0.61
0.69
0.86
0.90
Mean Writing
≤ HS
-0.17
-0.06
0.31
0.46
0.52
0.63
Scores
College + 0.34
0.42
0.64
0.74
0.89
0.93
Mean Civics
≤ HS
-0.14
-0.05
0.32
0.44
0.51
0.64
Scores
College + 0.27
0.33
0.53
0.61
0.75
0.80
Mean High
≤ HS
2.4
2.5
2.9
3.0
3.1
3.2
School GPA
College + 2.7
2.8
2.9
3.0
3.2
3.3
Mean Highest
≤ HS
3.1
3.2
4.2
4.5
4.7
4.9
Math Course
College + 4.2
4.2
4.6
4.8
5.1
5.2
Mean Self≤ HS
-0.07
-0.04
0.08
0.11
0.15
0.28
Concept
College + 0.07
0.10
0.18
0.21
0.21
0.22
Mean Locus of
≤ HS
-0.15
-0.06
0.26
0.32
0.41
0.51
Control
College + 0.24
0.29
0.46
0.51
0.54
0.52
Mean Effort
≤ HS
-0.07
0.05
0.35
0.47
0.49
0.60
College + 0.16
0.22
0.36
0.44
0.44
0.54
Mean
≤ HS
-0.01
0.01
0.03
0.02
0.01
-0.03
Conscientiousness College + -0.01
0.00
0.00
0.04
0.08
0.16

37

Table 4. Coefficients for socioeconomic variables from 15 logistic response models (1 for each schooling transition
predicted with the listed covariate sets). Clustered standard errors are in parentheses and asterisks (*) denote
statistical significance at the 0.05 level.
Parental
Family Income
Covariate Set
Transition
Education
Coefficient
Coefficient
Attain High School 0.232* (0.028)
0.018* (0.006)
Enter College
0.293* (0.018)
0.018* (0.003)
Demographic
Attain College
0.133* (0.023)
0.000 (0.004)
Covariates
Enter Grad School
0.069* (0.030)
0.004 (0.005)
Attain Grad School 0.125 (0.051)
0.011 (0.008)

+Academic
Covariates

+Noncognitive
Covariates

Attain High School
Enter College
Attain College
Enter Grad School
Attain Grad School

0.143* (0.032)
0.202* (0.019)
0.109* (0.024)
0.051 (0.031)
0.128* (0.053)

0.015* (0.006)
0.019* (0.003)
0.001 (0.004)
0.003 (0.005)
0.013 (0.009)

Attain High School

0.143* (0.032)

0.016* (0.006)

Enter College

0.202* (0.019)

0.019* (0.003)

Attain College

0.114* (0.024)

0.002 (0.004)

Enter Grad School

0.051 (0.031)

0.004 (0.005)

Attain Grad School

0.126* (0.054)

0.014 (0.009)

Demographic covariates are parental education, family income, parental SEI, sibship size, race, sex, whether the
respondent is foreign born, whether the mother is in the home, and whether the father is in the home. Academic
covariates are high school GPA, highest math course taken in high school, and test scores in vocabulary, reading,
math, science, writing, and civics. Noncognitive covariates are self-esteem, locus of control, and effort.

38

Table 5. Statistics on socioeconomic status of origin for those who attended a baccalaureate college but did not
attain a bachelor’s degree between 1980 and 1992 (top row), and those who attended a baccalaureate college for the
first time between 1993 and 2014 but had no bachelor’s degree by 2014 (bottom row).
Mean (SD) of
Mean (SD) of Family Mean (SD) of
Mean (SD) of Sibship
Period
Parental Education
Income
Parental SEI
Size
1980-1992 13.81 (2.82)
$23,010 ($13,240)
50.68 (21.01)
2.67 (1.65)
1993-2014 12.77 (2.76)
$18,480 ($9,400)
45.93 (19.57)
3.14 (1.72)

39

Figures
Figure 1. Level-2 regression lines of Level-1 parental education coefficients (represented by points) for each
covariate set.

40

Figure 2. Level-2 regression lines of Level-1 family income coefficients (represented by points) for each covariate
set.

41

Figure 3. Level-2 regression lines of Level-1 family income coefficients (represented by points) for each covariate
set, using the smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire and with 2014
conscientiousness as an additional noncognitive covariate.

42

Figure 4. Level-2 regression lines of Level-1 parental education coefficients (represented by points) for each
covariate set, using the smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire and with
2014 conscientiousness as an additional noncognitive covariate.

43

Figure 5. Level-2 regression lines of Level-1 parental education coefficients (represented by points) for each
covariate set, with educational attainment determined by 2014 reports as well as 1992 reports. Results corresponding
to models with only demographic and cognitive covariates are omitted because they are virtually identical to results
corresponding to models with all covariates.

44

Figure 6. Level-2 regression lines of Level-1 family income coefficients (represented by points) for each covariate
set, with educational attainment determined by 2014 reports as well as 1992 reports. Results corresponding to
models with only demographic and cognitive covariates are omitted because they are virtually identical to results
corresponding to models with all covariates.

45

Appendix Tables
Table A.1. Descriptive statistics of measures used in this study for the main analytic sample of 10th grade students.
Mean

Standard Deviation

Family Income

$21,000 $13,000

Parental Education

13.2

3.0

Parental SEI

47.6

20.9

Sibship Size

3.0

1.8

Race (Black)

0.13

N/A

Race (White)

0.61

N/A

Race (American Indian or Alaskan Native) 0.02

N/A

Race (Asian or Pacific Islander)

0.03

N/A

Race (Hispanic or Spanish)

0.21

N/A

Race (Other)

0.01

N/A

Female

0.52

N/A

Foreign Born

0.07

N/A

Vocabulary Score

0.05

0.99

Reading Score

0.05

1.00

Math Score

0.05

1.00

Science Score

0.05

0.99

Writing Score

0.06

0.99

Civics Score

0.04

0.99

High School GPA

2.6

0.7

Highest Math Course

3.6

1.6

Self-Esteem

0.01

0.99

Locus of Control

0.04

0.98

Effort

0.04

0.98

Conscientiousness

0.00

1.00

46

Table A.2. Level-2 slopes estimated using variance-weighted least squares regressions of socioeconomic
coefficients on corresponding schooling transitions, with transitions 0 (high school attainment) to 4 (grad school
attainment). Standard errors are in parentheses and asterisks (*) denote statistical significance at the 0.05 level.
Parental
Covariate Set
Family Income
Education
Demographic Covariates
-0.0626* (0.011)
-0.0051* (0.002)
+Academic Covariates
-0.0339 (0.011)
-0.0047* (0.002)
+Noncognitive Covariates -0.0337 (0.011)
-0.0046* (0.002)

47

Table A.3. Coefficients for socioeconomic variables from 15 logistic response models (1 for each schooling
transition predicted with the listed covariate sets), where college entry is defined as attendance at either a 2-year or a
Baccalaureate institution. Clustered standard errors are in parentheses and asterisks (*) denote statistical significance
at the 0.05 level.
Parental
Family Income
Covariate Set
Transition
Education
Coefficient
Coefficient
Attain High School 0.232* (0.028)
0.018* (0.006)
Enter College
0.240* (0.16)
0.014* (0.003)
Demographic
Attain College
0.213* (0.020)
0.008* (0.003)
Covariates
Enter Grad School
0.069* (0.030)
0.004 (0.005)
Attain Grad School 0.125 (0.051)
0.011 (0.008)

+Academic
Covariates

+Noncognitive
Covariates

Attain High School
Enter College
Attain College
Enter Grad School
Attain Grad School

0.143* (0.032)
0.153* (0.017)
0.166* (0.022)
0.051 (0.031)
0.128* (0.053)

0.015* (0.006)
0.013* (0.003)
0.008* (0.004)
0.003 (0.005)
0.013 (0.009)

Attain High School

0.143* (0.032)

0.016* (0.006)

Enter College

0.152* (0.017)

0.013* (0.003)

Attain College

0.171* (0.022)

0.009* (0.004)

Enter Grad School

0.051 (0.031)

0.004 (0.005)

Attain Grad School

0.126* (0.054)

0.014 (0.009)

Demographic covariates are parental education, family income, parental SEI, sibship size, race, sex, whether the
respondent is foreign born, whether the mother is in the home, and whether the father is in the home. Academic
covariates are high school GPA, highest math course taken in high school, and test scores in vocabulary, reading,
math, science, writing, and civics. Noncognitive covariates are self-esteem, locus of control, and effort.

48

Table A.4. Coefficients for socioeconomic variables from logistic response models using 1992 educational
attainment for outcome variables, compared to coefficients using 2014 educational attainment. For both educational
attainment specifications, the coefficients are estimated using each listed covariate set.
Parental
Family Income
Covariate Set
Transition
Education
Coefficient
Coefficient
1992
2014
1992
2014

Demographic
Covariates

+Academic
Covariates

+Noncognitive
Covariates

Attain High School

0.232

0.272

0.018

-0.012

Enter College

0.293

0.238

0.018

0.006

Attain College

0.133

0.173

0.000

0.018

Enter Grad School

0.069

0.096

0.004

0.003

Attain Grad School

0.125

0.043

0.011

-0.004

Attain High School

0.143

0.135

0.015

-0.015

Enter College

0.202

0.161

0.019

0.000

Attain College

0.109

0.114

0.001

0.014

Enter Grad School

0.051

0.073

0.003

0.002

Attain Grad School

0.128

0.041

0.013

-0.001

Attain High School

0.143

0.127

0.016

-0.014

Enter College

0.202

0.162

0.019

0.000

Attain College

0.114

0.115

0.002

0.014

Enter Grad School

0.051

0.073

0.004

0.002

Attain Grad School 0.126
0.039
0.014 -0.004
Demographic covariates are parental education, family income, parental SEI, sibship size, race, sex, whether the
respondent is foreign born, whether the mother is in the home, and whether the father is in the home. Academic
covariates are high school GPA, highest math course taken in high school, and test scores in vocabulary, reading,
math, science, writing, and civics. Noncognitive covariates are self-esteem, locus of control, and effort.

49

Appendix Figures
Figure A.1. Level-2 regression lines of Level-1 parental education coefficients (represented by points) for each
covariate set, with a fourth covariate set containing only demographic and noncognitive variables.

50

Figure A.2. Level-2 regression lines of Level-1 family income coefficients (represented by points) for each
covariate set, with a fourth covariate set containing only demographic and noncognitive variables.

51

Online Supplement for “Late-Stage Educational Inequality: Can Selection on Noncognitive Skills Explain
Waning Social Background Effects?”
Contents
pp. 2-27: Models Using the Main Analytic Data Set
pp. 2-5
Outcome: High School Attainment
pp. 6-9
Outcome: College Entry
pp. 10-13
Outcome: College Attainment
pp. 14-17
Outcome: Grad School Entry
pp. 18-21
Outcome: Grad School Attainment
pp. 22-24
Outcome: Alternate College Entry
pp. 25-27
Outcome: College Attainment Given Alternate College Entry
pp. 28-42: Models Using Smaller Sample who Completed Long-Form 2014 Questionnaire (1992
Educational Attainment)
pp. 28-30
Outcome: High School Attainment
pp. 31-33
Outcome: College Entry
pp. 34-36
Outcome: College Attainment
pp. 37-39
Outcome: Grad School Entry
pp. 40-42
Outcome: Grad School Attainment
pp. 43-57: Models Using Smaller Sample who Completed Long-Form 2014 Questionnaire (2014
Educational Attainment)
pp. 43-45
Outcome: High School Attainment
pp. 46-48
Outcome: College Entry
pp. 49-51
Outcome: College Attainment
pp. 52-54
Outcome: Grad School Entry
pp. 55-57
Outcome: Grad School Attainment

52

Table S.1. Logistic response model of high school attainment estimated with demographic covariates and the main
analytic data set.
High School Attainment
Family Income
0.018***
(0.006)
Parental Education
0.232***
(0.028)
Parental SEI
0.005
(0.003)
Sibship Size
-0.137***
(0.031)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.394***
(0.133)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.016
(0.357)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
1.853***
(0.652)
Black (ref.: White)
0.156
(0.153)
Other (ref.: White)
-0.061
(1.101)
Female
0.378***
(0.096)
Foreign Born
0.310
(0.257)
Mother in Home
0.763***
(0.137)
Father in Home
0.401***
(0.113)
Constant
-1.598***
(0.346)
Observations
10,508
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

53

Table S.2. Logistic response model of high school attainment estimated with demographic and cognitive covariates
and the main analytic data set.
High School Attainment
Family Income
0.015**
(0.006)
Parental Education
0.143***
(0.032)
Parental SEI
0.002
(0.003)
Sibship Size
-0.111***
(0.033)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.209
(0.148)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) 0.230
(0.379)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
1.594**
(0.801)
Black (ref.: White)
0.829***
(0.174)
Other (ref.: White)
1.109
(1.054)
Female
0.062
(0.116)
Foreign Born
0.387*
(0.230)
Mother in Home
0.639***
(0.162)
Father in Home
0.259**
(0.124)
Vocabulary
0.165
(0.108)
Reading
-0.038
(0.101)
Math
0.309***
(0.111)
Science
0.111
(0.098)
Writing
0.201**
(0.102)
Civics
0.040
(0.083)
High School GPA
1.662***
(0.145)
Highest Math Course
0.134**
(0.065)
Constant
-3.944***
(0.526)
Observations
10,508
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

54

Table S.3. Logistic response model of high school attainment estimated with demographic, cognitive, and noncognitive
covariates and the main analytic data set.
High School Attainment
Family Income
0.016***
(0.006)
Parental Education
0.143***
(0.032)
Parental SEI
0.002
(0.004)
Sibship Size
-0.101***
(0.034)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.210
(0.144)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White)
0.369
(0.395)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
1.624**
(0.768)
Black (ref.: White)
0.721***
(0.176)
Other (ref.: White)
1.404
(1.213)
Female
-0.069
(0.122)
Foreign Born
0.459*
(0.236)
Mother in Home
0.650***
(0.169)
Father in Home
0.197
(0.125)
Vocabulary
0.141
(0.106)
Reading
-0.015
(0.103)
Math
0.328***
(0.112)
Science
0.073
(0.100)
Writing
0.202*
(0.105)
Civics
-0.014
(0.084)
High School GPA
1.479***
(0.150)
Highest Math Course
0.094
(0.066)
Self-Esteem
0.044
(0.052)
Locus of Control
0.092
(0.058)
Effort
0.436***
(0.055)
Constant
-3.207***
(0.546)
Observations
10,508
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

55

Table S.4. Logistic response model of high school attainment estimated with demographic and noncognitive
covariates and the main analytic data set.
High School Attainment
Family Income
0.017***
(0.006)
Parental Education
0.204***
(0.030)
Parental SEI
0.004
(0.004)
Sibship Size
-0.107***
(0.033)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.191
(0.135)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) 0.314
(0.419)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
1.971***
(0.660)
Black (ref.: White)
0.170
(0.156)
Other (ref.: White)
0.567
(1.374)
Female
0.102
(0.104)
Foreign Born
0.423
(0.267)
Mother in Home
0.730***
(0.150)
Father in Home
0.297**
(0.116)
Self-Esteem
0.095**
(0.048)
Locus of Control
0.340***
(0.052)
Effort
0.660***
(0.047)
Constant
-0.810**
(0.373)
Observations
10,508
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

56

Table S.5. Logistic response model of college entry estimated with demographic covariates and the main analytic
data set.
College Entry
Family Income
0.018***
(0.003)
Parental Education
0.293***
(0.018)
Parental SEI
0.007***
(0.002)
Sibship Size
-0.090***
(0.019)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.380***
(0.092)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.656**
(0.280)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.736***
(0.218)
Black (ref.: White)
-0.040
(0.106)
Other (ref.: White)
0.259
(0.770)
Female
-0.070
(0.058)
Foreign Born
0.011
(0.192)
Mother in Home
0.315**
(0.134)
Father in Home
0.055
(0.081)
Constant
-4.772***
(0.278)
Observations
9,636
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

57

Table S.6. Logistic response model of college entry estimated with demographic and cognitive covariates and the
main analytic data set.
College Entry
Family Income
0.019***
(0.003)
Parental Education
0.202***
(0.019)
Parental SEI
0.003
(0.002)
Sibship Size
-0.052**
(0.022)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.340***
(0.112)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.288
(0.305)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.538**
(0.220)
Black (ref.: White)
0.745***
(0.130)
Other (ref.: White)
1.232
(1.217)
Female
-0.238***
(0.081)
Foreign Born
-0.051
(0.248)
Mother in Home
0.091
(0.167)
Father in Home
-0.206**
(0.096)
Vocabulary
0.199***
(0.058)
Reading
0.114*
(0.059)
Math
0.040
(0.057)
Science
0.097*
(0.059)
Writing
0.010
(0.061)
Civics
0.153***
(0.048)
High School GPA
0.836***
(0.074)
Highest Math Course
0.494***
(0.030)
Constant
-7.220***
(0.400)
Observations
9,636
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

58

Table S.7. Logistic response model of college entry estimated with demographic, cognitive, and noncognitive covariates and the
main analytic data set.
College Entry
Family Income
0.019***
(0.003)
Parental Education
0.202***
(0.019)
Parental SEI
0.003
(0.002)
Sibship Size
-0.045**
(0.023)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.342***
(0.113)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White)
-0.245
(0.306)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.581***
(0.224)
Black (ref.: White)
0.694***
(0.129)
Other (ref.: White)
1.290
(1.286)
Female
-0.270***
(0.082)
Foreign Born
-0.054
(0.250)
Mother in Home
0.076
(0.168)
Father in Home
-0.222**
(0.096)
Vocabulary
0.190***
(0.059)
Reading
0.110*
(0.059)
Math
0.046
(0.058)
Science
0.086
(0.059)
Writing
-0.003
(0.061)
Civics
0.144***
(0.048)
High School GPA
0.744***
(0.076)
Highest Math Course
0.479***
(0.030)
Self-Esteem
0.052
(0.036)
Locus of Control
0.120***
(0.046)
Effort
0.151***
(0.045)
Constant
-6.914***
(0.403)
Observations
9,636
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

59

Table S.8. Logistic response model of college entry estimated with demographic and noncognitive covariates and
the main analytic data set.
College Entry
Family Income
0.018***
(0.003)
Parental Education
0.274***
(0.018)
Parental SEI
0.007***
(0.002)
Sibship Size
-0.063***
(0.020)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.218**
(0.097)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.410
(0.282)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.855***
(0.228)
Black (ref.: White)
0.021
(0.109)
Other (ref.: White)
0.866
(1.172)
Female
-0.280***
(0.062)
Foreign Born
-0.005
(0.210)
Mother in Home
0.238*
(0.142)
Father in Home
-0.050
(0.086)
Self-Esteem
0.088***
(0.033)
Locus of Control
0.455***
(0.037)
Effort
0.471***
(0.041)
Constant
-4.465***
(0.288)
Observations
9,636
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

60

Table S.9. Logistic response model of college attainment estimated with demographic covariates and the main
analytic data set.
College Attainment
Family Income
0.000
(0.004)
Parental Education
0.133***
(0.023)
Parental SEI
0.001
(0.002)
Sibship Size
-0.017
(0.026)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.438***
(0.151)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.772**
(0.336)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.281
(0.237)
Black (ref.: White)
-0.582***
(0.157)
Other (ref.: White)
-1.072
(1.219)
Female
0.002
(0.089)
Foreign Born
0.208
(0.236)
Mother in Home
0.219
(0.178)
Father in Home
0.466***
(0.117)
Constant
-1.776***
(0.346)
Observations
4,562
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

61

Table S.10. Logistic response model of college attainment estimated with demographic and cognitive covariates and
the main analytic data set.
College Attainment
Family Income
0.001
(0.004)
Parental Education
0.109***
(0.024)
Parental SEI
-0.002
(0.003)
Sibship Size
-0.012
(0.027)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.174
(0.160)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.584
(0.372)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.009
(0.245)
Black (ref.: White)
-0.240
(0.172)
Other (ref.: White)
-0.022
(1.058)
Female
-0.142
(0.100)
Foreign Born
0.167
(0.226)
Mother in Home
0.066
(0.197)
Father in Home
0.317***
(0.120)
Vocabulary
0.037
(0.078)
Reading
-0.060
(0.077)
Math
0.024
(0.073)
Science
-0.089
(0.076)
Writing
-0.017
(0.086)
Civics
0.203***
(0.064)
High School GPA
0.779***
(0.099)
Highest Math Course
0.264***
(0.045)
Constant
-4.472***
(0.478)
Observations
4,562
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

62

Table S.11. Logistic response model of college attainment estimated with demographic, cognitive, and noncognitive covariates
and the main analytic data set.
College Attainment
Family Income
0.002
(0.004)
Parental Education
0.114***
(0.024)
Parental SEI
-0.002
(0.003)
Sibship Size
-0.005
(0.027)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.138
(0.161)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White)
-0.566
(0.361)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.035
(0.251)
Black (ref.: White)
-0.266
(0.171)
Other (ref.: White)
0.072
(1.044)
Female
-0.178*
(0.101)
Foreign Born
0.169
(0.227)
Mother in Home
0.032
(0.196)
Father in Home
0.281**
(0.120)
Vocabulary
0.033
(0.078)
Reading
-0.048
(0.078)
Math
0.035
(0.073)
Science
-0.092
(0.077)
Writing
-0.021
(0.085)
Civics
0.201***
(0.064)
High School GPA
0.680***
(0.103)
Highest Math Course
0.242***
(0.046)
Self-Esteem
-0.010
(0.049)
Locus of Control
0.048
(0.057)
Effort
0.234***
(0.056)
Constant
-4.207***
(0.482)
Observations
4,562
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

63

Table S.12. Logistic response model of college attainment estimated with demographic and noncognitive covariates
and the main analytic data set.
College Attainment
Family Income
0.002
(0.004)
Parental Education
0.137***
(0.023)
Parental SEI
-0.000
(0.002)
Sibship Size
-0.001
(0.026)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.319**
(0.156)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.697**
(0.325)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.289
(0.249)
Black (ref.: White)
-0.580***
(0.157)
Other (ref.: White)
-0.561
(1.014)
Female
-0.106
(0.091)
Foreign Born
0.201
(0.242)
Mother in Home
0.138
(0.177)
Father in Home
0.360***
(0.117)
Self-Esteem
0.006
(0.047)
Locus of Control
0.181***
(0.051)
Effort
0.427***
(0.052)
Constant
-1.858***
(0.340)
Observations
4,562
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

64

Table S.13. Logistic response model of grad school entry estimated with demographic covariates and the main
analytic data set.
Grad School Entry
Family Income
0.004
(0.005)
Parental Education
0.069**
(0.030)
Parental SEI
0.008**
(0.003)
Sibship Size
0.031
(0.038)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.014
(0.223)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.395
(0.625)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.717***
(0.273)
Black (ref.: White)
0.038
(0.212)
Other (ref.: White)
Female
Foreign Born
Mother in Home
Father in Home
Constant
Observations

-0.085
(0.106)
0.274
(0.254)
0.090
(0.286)
0.083
(0.156)
-2.812***
(0.496)
2,894
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

65

Table S.14. Logistic response model of grad school entry estimated with demographic and cognitive covariates and
the main analytic data set.
Grad School Entry
Family Income
0.003
(0.005)
Parental Education
0.051
(0.031)
Parental SEI
0.007**
(0.003)
Sibship Size
0.037
(0.040)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.216
(0.238)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.158
(0.635)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.701**
(0.282)
Black (ref.: White)
0.391*
(0.226)
Other (ref.: White)
Female
Foreign Born
Mother in Home
Father in Home
Vocabulary
Reading
Math
Science
Writing
Civics
High School GPA
Highest Math Course
Constant
Observations

-0.011
(0.124)
0.230
(0.255)
0.038
(0.294)
0.025
(0.161)
0.023
(0.101)
0.071
(0.098)
0.186*
(0.097)
0.103
(0.099)
-0.140
(0.114)
0.094
(0.088)
0.308**
(0.140)
0.085
(0.064)
-4.109***
(0.676)
2,894
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

66

Table S.15. Logistic response model of grad school entry estimated with demographic, cognitive, and noncognitive covariates
and the main analytic data set.
Grad School Entry
Family Income
0.004
(0.005)
Parental Education
0.051*
(0.031)
Parental SEI
0.007**
(0.003)
Sibship Size
0.035
(0.040)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.222
(0.241)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White)
-0.109
(0.616)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.681**
(0.284)
Black (ref.: White)
0.433*
(0.228)
Other (ref.: White)
Female
Foreign Born
Mother in Home
Father in Home
Vocabulary
Reading
Math
Science
Writing
Civics
High School GPA
Highest Math Course
Self-Esteem
Locus of Control
Effort
Constant
Observations

-0.042
(0.126)
0.239
(0.257)
0.022
(0.293)
0.017
(0.164)
0.016
(0.101)
0.070
(0.098)
0.175*
(0.097)
0.105
(0.099)
-0.147
(0.115)
0.092
(0.088)
0.336**
(0.144)
0.089
(0.065)
-0.132**
(0.065)
0.073
(0.079)
-0.023
(0.085)
-4.177***
(0.685)
2,894
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

67

Table S.16. Logistic response model of grad school entry estimated with demographic and noncognitive covariates
and the main analytic data set.
Grad School Entry
Family Income
0.004
(0.005)
Parental Education
0.067**
(0.030)
Parental SEI
0.008**
(0.003)
Sibship Size
0.033
(0.038)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.035
(0.226)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.320
(0.606)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.710**
(0.276)
Black (ref.: White)
0.091
(0.213)
Other (ref.: White)
Female
Foreign Born
Mother in Home
Father in Home
Self-Esteem
Locus of Control
Effort
Constant
Observations

-0.148
(0.109)
0.285
(0.258)
0.067
(0.284)
0.062
(0.158)
-0.122*
(0.064)
0.192**
(0.076)
0.072
(0.082)
-2.835***
(0.491)
2,894
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

68

Table S.17. Logistic response model of grad school attainment estimated with demographic covariates and the main
analytic data set.
Grad School Attainment
Family Income
0.011
(0.008)
Parental Education
0.125**
(0.051)
Parental SEI
-0.003
(0.005)
Sibship Size
-0.119*
(0.064)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.689**
(0.331)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.373
(0.957)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
-0.113
(0.440)
Black (ref.: White)
0.027
(0.368)
Female
0.010
(0.194)
Foreign Born
0.196
(0.413)
Mother in Home
-0.598
(0.419)
Father in Home
-0.175
(0.277)
Constant
-0.836
(0.803)
Observations
841
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

69

Table S.18. Logistic response model of grad school attainment estimated with demographic and cognitive covariates
and the main analytic data set.
Grad School Attainment
Family Income
0.013
(0.009)
Parental Education
0.128**
(0.053)
Parental SEI
-0.004
(0.006)
Sibship Size
-0.133**
(0.065)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.545
(0.370)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.163
(0.998)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
-0.232
(0.443)
Black (ref.: White)
0.213
(0.409)
Female
-0.107
(0.209)
Foreign Born
0.253
(0.436)
Mother in Home
-0.522
(0.450)
Father in Home
-0.251
(0.290)
Vocabulary
0.017
(0.190)
Reading
-0.327**
(0.166)
Math
-0.034
(0.160)
Science
0.151
(0.168)
Writing
0.070
(0.196)
Civics
0.143
(0.143)
High School GPA
0.753***
(0.219)
Highest Math Course
-0.067
(0.112)
Constant
-2.856**
(1.119)
Observations
841
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

70

Table S.19. Logistic response model of grad school attainment estimated with demographic, cognitive, and
noncognitive covariates and the main analytic data set.
Grad School Attainment
Family Income
0.014
(0.009)
Parental Education
0.126**
(0.054)
Parental SEI
-0.003
(0.006)
Sibship Size
-0.130**
(0.066)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.559
(0.372)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.254
(1.026)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
-0.255
(0.435)
Black (ref.: White)
0.209
(0.421)
Female
-0.082
(0.210)
Foreign Born
0.258
(0.422)
Mother in Home
-0.563
(0.465)
Father in Home
-0.234
(0.293)
Vocabulary
0.035
(0.195)
Reading
-0.308*
(0.170)
Math
0.016
(0.163)
Science
0.151
(0.170)
Writing
0.095
(0.200)
Civics
0.169
(0.145)
High School GPA
0.673***
(0.228)
Highest Math Course
-0.100
(0.119)
Self-Esteem
0.101
(0.109)
Locus of Control
-0.194
(0.134)
Effort
0.198
(0.125)
Constant
-2.573**
(1.132)
Observations
841
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

71

Table S.20. Logistic response model of grad school attainment estimated with demographic and noncognitive
covariates and the main analytic data set.
Grad School Attainment
Family Income
0.012
(0.009)
Parental Education
0.132**
(0.051)
Parental SEI
-0.003
(0.006)
Sibship Size
-0.115*
(0.065)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.696**
(0.331)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.422
(1.010)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
-0.162
(0.426)
Black (ref.: White)
-0.009
(0.384)
Female
-0.010
(0.196)
Foreign Born
0.197
(0.403)
Mother in Home
-0.607
(0.433)
Father in Home
-0.176
(0.282)
Self-Esteem
0.095
(0.108)
Locus of Control
-0.111
(0.124)
Effort
0.272**
(0.115)
Constant
-1.033
(0.804)
Observations
841
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

72

Table S.21. Logistic response model of alternately defined college entry, estimated with demographic covariates
and the main analytic data set. College entry is defined as entry into either a baccalaureate college or a two-year
college.
College Entry (2yr or 4yr)
Family Income
0.014***
(0.003)
Parental Education
0.240***
(0.016)
Parental SEI
0.008***
(0.002)
Sibship Size
-0.083***
(0.019)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.435***
(0.087)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.406*
(0.221)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.435**
(0.213)
Black (ref.: White)
-0.052
(0.102)
Other (ref.: White)
0.219
(0.748)
Female
0.143**
(0.057)
Foreign Born
0.302*
(0.175)
Mother in Home
0.267**
(0.125)
Father in Home
0.097
(0.076)
Constant
-3.427***
(0.246)
Observations
9,636
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

73

Table S.22. Logistic response model of alternately defined college entry, estimated with demographic and cognitive
covariates and the main analytic data set. College entry is defined as entry into either a baccalaureate college or a
two-year college.
College Entry (2yr or 4yr)
Family Income
0.013***
(0.003)
Parental Education
0.153***
(0.017)
Parental SEI
0.004**
(0.002)
Sibship Size
-0.048**
(0.022)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.115
(0.098)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.072
(0.259)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.198
(0.206)
Black (ref.: White)
0.514***
(0.117)
Other (ref.: White)
0.861
(1.133)
Female
0.073
(0.076)
Foreign Born
0.303
(0.184)
Mother in Home
0.084
(0.149)
Father in Home
-0.079
(0.086)
Vocabulary
0.147***
(0.054)
Reading
0.188***
(0.054)
Math
0.042
(0.058)
Science
0.070
(0.055)
Writing
-0.041
(0.057)
Civics
0.109**
(0.046)
High School GPA
0.676***
(0.073)
Highest Math Course
0.398***
(0.028)
Constant
-5.062***
(0.337)
Observations
9,636
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

74

Table S.23. Logistic response model of alternately defined college entry, estimated with demographic, cognitive, and
noncognitive covariates and the main analytic data set. College entry is defined as entry into either a baccalaureate college or a
two-year college.
College Entry (2yr or 4yr)
Family Income
0.013***
(0.003)
Parental Education
0.152***
(0.017)
Parental SEI
0.004**
(0.002)
Sibship Size
-0.043*
(0.022)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.114
(0.098)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White)
-0.025
(0.262)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.232
(0.212)
Black (ref.: White)
0.461***
(0.118)
Other (ref.: White)
0.917
(1.236)
Female
0.044
(0.078)
Foreign Born
0.301*
(0.183)
Mother in Home
0.075
(0.150)
Father in Home
-0.091
(0.086)
Vocabulary
0.140**
(0.055)
Reading
0.188***
(0.054)
Math
0.047
(0.058)
Science
0.059
(0.055)
Writing
-0.051
(0.058)
Civics
0.099**
(0.046)
High School GPA
0.595***
(0.074)
Highest Math Course
0.384***
(0.028)
Self-Esteem
0.061*
(0.034)
Locus of Control
0.090**
(0.039)
Effort
0.134***
(0.041)
Constant
-4.777***
(0.338)
Observations
9,636
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

75

Table S.24. Logistic response model of college attainment given alternate college entry definition, estimated with
demographic covariates and the main analytic data set. College entry is defined as entry into either a baccalaureate
college or a two-year college.
College Attainment
Family Income
0.008**
(0.003)
Parental Education
0.213***
(0.020)
Parental SEI
0.002
(0.002)
Sibship Size
-0.039*
(0.023)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.360***
(0.131)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.793***
(0.299)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.584***
(0.218)
Black (ref.: White)
-0.429***
(0.132)
Other (ref.: White)
-0.964
(0.990)
Female
-0.145*
(0.074)
Foreign Born
-0.009
(0.209)
Mother in Home
0.235
(0.156)
Father in Home
0.345***
(0.103)
Constant
-3.529***
(0.304)
Observations
5,996
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

76

Table S.25. Logistic response model of college attainment given alternate college entry definition, estimated with
demographic and cognitive covariates and the main analytic data set. College entry is defined as entry into either a
baccalaureate college or a two-year college.
College Attainment
Family Income
0.008**
(0.004)
Parental Education
0.166***
(0.022)
Parental SEI
-0.002
(0.002)
Sibship Size
-0.019
(0.025)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.045
(0.149)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.455
(0.322)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.307
(0.230)
Black (ref.: White)
0.075
(0.156)
Other (ref.: White)
0.031
(1.010)
Female
-0.253***
(0.089)
Foreign Born
-0.093
(0.233)
Mother in Home
0.020
(0.179)
Father in Home
0.187*
(0.110)
Vocabulary
0.105
(0.070)
Reading
-0.062
(0.072)
Math
0.039
(0.067)
Science
-0.048
(0.068)
Writing
0.010
(0.077)
Civics
0.222***
(0.056)
High School GPA
0.875***
(0.089)
Highest Math Course
0.391***
(0.040)
Constant
-6.651***
(0.436)
Observations
5,996
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

77

Table S.26. Logistic response model of college attainment given alternate college entry definition, estimated with demographic,
cognitive, and noncognitive covariates and the main analytic data set. College entry is defined as entry into either a baccalaureate
college or a two-year college.
College Attainment
Family Income
0.009**
(0.004)
Parental Education
0.171***
(0.022)
Parental SEI
-0.002
(0.002)
Sibship Size
-0.011
(0.025)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.071
(0.151)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White)
-0.428
(0.317)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.356
(0.239)
Black (ref.: White)
0.045
(0.156)
Other (ref.: White)
0.112
(0.997)
Female
-0.290***
(0.091)
Foreign Born
-0.103
(0.236)
Mother in Home
-0.016
(0.180)
Father in Home
0.161
(0.109)
Vocabulary
0.097
(0.070)
Reading
-0.058
(0.073)
Math
0.054
(0.068)
Science
-0.054
(0.068)
Writing
0.005
(0.077)
Civics
0.218***
(0.056)
High School GPA
0.770***
(0.091)
Highest Math Course
0.368***
(0.040)
Self-Esteem
0.006
(0.046)
Locus of Control
0.088
(0.054)
Effort
0.234***
(0.053)
Constant
-6.363***
(0.440)
Observations
5,996
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

78

Table S.27. Logistic response model of high school attainment estimated with demographic covariates and the
smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
High School Attainment
Family Income
-0.000
(0.010)
Parental Education
0.241***
(0.043)
Parental SEI
0.002
(0.006)
Sibship Size
-0.172***
(0.051)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.154
(0.229)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
Black (ref.: White)
Other (ref.: White)
Female
Foreign Born
Mother in Home
Father in Home
Constant
Observations

0.948
(1.029)
-0.186
(0.260)
-0.705
(1.151)
0.340**
(0.168)
0.596
(0.544)
0.711***
(0.246)
0.491**
(0.204)
-0.626
(0.533)
3,369
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

79

Table S.28. Logistic response model of high school attainment estimated with demographic and cognitive covariates
and the smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
High School Attainment
Family Income
-0.006
(0.010)
Parental Education
0.104**
(0.048)
Parental SEI
-0.005
(0.006)
Sibship Size
-0.119**
(0.056)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.489**
(0.243)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
Black (ref.: White)
Other (ref.: White)
Female
Foreign Born
Mother in Home
Father in Home
Vocabulary
Reading
Math
Science
Writing
Civics
High School GPA
Highest Math Course
Constant
Observations

0.612
(1.103)
0.514*
(0.303)
-0.359
(1.430)
0.204
(0.199)
0.740
(0.578)
0.309
(0.276)
0.257
(0.224)
0.151
(0.179)
0.205
(0.188)
0.238
(0.213)
0.354**
(0.170)
0.333**
(0.152)
0.025
(0.151)
1.233***
(0.208)
0.209**
(0.098)
-1.541*
(0.825)
3,369
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

80

Table S.29. Logistic response model of high school attainment estimated with demographic, cognitive, and noncognitive
covariates and the smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
High School Attainment
Family Income
-0.006
(0.010)
Parental Education
0.095*
(0.050)
Parental SEI
-0.005
(0.006)
Sibship Size
-0.126**
(0.058)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.466*
(0.243)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
Black (ref.: White)
Other (ref.: White)
Female
Foreign Born
Mother in Home
Father in Home
Vocabulary
Reading
Math
Science
Writing
Civics
High School GPA
Highest Math Course
Self-Esteem
Locus of Control
Effort
Conscientiousness
Constant
Observations

0.960
(1.249)
0.463
(0.308)
-0.553
(1.480)
0.074
(0.207)
0.762
(0.680)
0.294
(0.283)
0.196
(0.223)
0.137
(0.178)
0.246
(0.190)
0.247
(0.220)
0.324*
(0.171)
0.323**
(0.155)
-0.014
(0.157)
1.096***
(0.221)
0.162
(0.100)
0.015
(0.088)
0.065
(0.121)
0.349***
(0.099)
0.147
(0.090)
-0.730
(0.866)
3,369
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

81

Table S.30. Logistic response model of college entry estimated with demographic covariates and the smaller sample
of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
College Entry
Family Income
0.012***
(0.004)
Parental Education
0.261***
(0.021)
Parental SEI
0.008***
(0.002)
Sibship Size
-0.118***
(0.025)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.082
(0.126)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.583
(0.407)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.629**
(0.251)
Black (ref.: White)
0.283**
(0.143)
Other (ref.: White)
-0.318
(0.915)
Female
-0.014
(0.085)
Foreign Born
0.323
(0.209)
Mother in Home
0.619***
(0.170)
Father in Home
0.386***
(0.105)
Constant
-4.291***
(0.318)
Observations
3,245
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

82

Table S.31. Logistic response model of college entry estimated with demographic and cognitive covariates and the
smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
College Entry
Family Income
0.009*
(0.005)
Parental Education
0.176***
(0.024)
Parental SEI
0.006**
(0.003)
Sibship Size
-0.078**
(0.031)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.579***
(0.144)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) 0.004
(0.486)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.414
(0.311)
Black (ref.: White)
0.820***
(0.162)
Other (ref.: White)
0.548
(1.266)
Female
-0.100
(0.115)
Foreign Born
0.231
(0.253)
Mother in Home
0.360*
(0.201)
Father in Home
0.213*
(0.124)
Vocabulary
0.400***
(0.082)
Reading
0.129
(0.079)
Math
-0.038
(0.083)
Science
0.000
(0.083)
Writing
-0.050
(0.088)
Civics
0.148**
(0.067)
High School GPA
0.805***
(0.101)
Highest Math Course
0.541***
(0.043)
Constant
-7.269***
(0.490)
Observations
3,245
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

83

Table S.32. Logistic response model of college entry estimated with demographic, cognitive, and noncognitive covariates and the
smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
College Entry
Family Income
0.010**
(0.005)
Parental Education
0.176***
(0.024)
Parental SEI
0.006**
(0.003)
Sibship Size
-0.074**
(0.031)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.591***
(0.145)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White)
0.040
(0.472)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.489
(0.310)
Black (ref.: White)
0.830***
(0.165)
Other (ref.: White)
0.572
(1.290)
Female
-0.163
(0.117)
Foreign Born
0.257
(0.254)
Mother in Home
0.350*
(0.201)
Father in Home
0.183
(0.125)
Vocabulary
0.391***
(0.082)
Reading
0.121
(0.080)
Math
-0.043
(0.082)
Science
-0.016
(0.083)
Writing
-0.054
(0.088)
Civics
0.136**
(0.067)
High School GPA
0.742***
(0.106)
Highest Math Course
0.528***
(0.044)
Self-Esteem
-0.037
(0.054)
Locus of Control
0.116*
(0.061)
Effort
0.193***
(0.063)
Conscientiousness
-0.107**
(0.049)
Constant
-7.065***
(0.503)
Observations
3,245
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

84

Table S.33. Logistic response model of college attainment estimated with demographic covariates and the smaller
sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
College Attainment
Family Income
0.009*
(0.005)
Parental Education
0.153***
(0.028)
Parental SEI
-0.004
(0.003)
Sibship Size
0.035
(0.038)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.481***
(0.161)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.435
(0.579)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.149
(0.320)
Black (ref.: White)
-0.546***
(0.186)
Other (ref.: White)
0.099
(1.018)
Female
0.081
(0.106)
Foreign Born
0.345
(0.232)
Mother in Home
0.174
(0.243)
Father in Home
0.487***
(0.141)
Constant
-1.955***
(0.432)
Observations
1,883
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

85

Table S.34. Logistic response model of college attainment estimated with demographic and cognitive covariates and
the smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
College Attainment
Family Income
0.008
(0.005)
Parental Education
0.120***
(0.029)
Parental SEI
-0.003
(0.003)
Sibship Size
0.045
(0.039)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.377**
(0.168)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.121
(0.745)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
-0.167
(0.346)
Black (ref.: White)
-0.300
(0.207)
Other (ref.: White)
0.310
(0.880)
Female
0.055
(0.127)
Foreign Born
0.328
(0.237)
Mother in Home
0.000
(0.276)
Father in Home
0.385**
(0.150)
Vocabulary
0.001
(0.101)
Reading
-0.093
(0.096)
Math
0.153
(0.095)
Science
-0.054
(0.104)
Writing
-0.053
(0.108)
Civics
0.115
(0.075)
High School GPA
0.659***
(0.124)
Highest Math Course
0.335***
(0.058)
Constant
-4.752***
(0.612)
Observations
1,883
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

86

Table S.35. Logistic response model of college attainment estimated with demographic, cognitive, and noncognitive covariates
and the smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
College Attainment
Family Income
0.008
(0.005)
Parental Education
0.120***
(0.029)
Parental SEI
-0.004
(0.003)
Sibship Size
0.048
(0.039)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.389**
(0.168)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White)
-0.158
(0.751)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
-0.159
(0.352)
Black (ref.: White)
-0.336
(0.212)
Other (ref.: White)
0.320
(0.896)
Female
0.065
(0.128)
Foreign Born
0.335
(0.241)
Mother in Home
-0.022
(0.277)
Father in Home
0.376**
(0.151)
Vocabulary
0.015
(0.100)
Reading
-0.073
(0.097)
Math
0.163*
(0.095)
Science
-0.056
(0.106)
Writing
-0.057
(0.109)
Civics
0.115
(0.076)
High School GPA
0.588***
(0.128)
Highest Math Course
0.316***
(0.058)
Self-Esteem
0.088
(0.058)
Locus of Control
-0.043
(0.077)
Effort
0.133*
(0.072)
Conscientiousness
0.031
(0.061)
Constant
-4.496***
(0.623)
Observations
1,883
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

87

Table S.36. Logistic response model of grad school entry estimated with demographic covariates and the smaller
sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
Grad School Entry
Family Income
0.007
(0.006)
Parental Education
0.090**
(0.036)
Parental SEI
0.001
(0.004)
Sibship Size
-0.027
(0.043)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.343
(0.222)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.875
(0.900)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.242
(0.314)
Black (ref.: White)
0.070
(0.222)
Other (ref.: White)
Female
Foreign Born
Mother in Home
Father in Home
Constant
Observations

-0.190
(0.126)
0.194
(0.286)
0.489
(0.372)
-0.162
(0.194)
-2.474***
(0.642)
1,282
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

88

Table S.37. Logistic response model of grad school entry estimated with demographic and cognitive covariates and
the smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
Grad School Entry
Family Income
0.007
(0.006)
Parental Education
0.059
(0.038)
Parental SEI
0.002
(0.004)
Sibship Size
-0.011
(0.044)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.242
(0.225)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.589
(1.038)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.117
(0.318)
Black (ref.: White)
0.396*
(0.232)
Other (ref.: White)
Female
Foreign Born
Mother in Home
Father in Home
Vocabulary
Reading
Math
Science
Writing
Civics
High School GPA
Highest Math Course
Constant
Observations

-0.143
(0.144)
0.203
(0.288)
0.362
(0.385)
-0.193
(0.198)
-0.047
(0.121)
0.061
(0.106)
0.187
(0.115)
0.074
(0.124)
-0.027
(0.130)
0.158
(0.100)
0.398***
(0.141)
0.225***
(0.087)
-4.712***
(0.861)
1,282
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

89

Table S.38. Logistic response model of grad school entry estimated with demographic, cognitive, and noncognitive covariates
and the smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
Grad School Entry
Family Income
0.007
(0.006)
Parental Education
0.058
(0.038)
Parental SEI
0.002
(0.004)
Sibship Size
-0.011
(0.044)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.236
(0.224)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White)
-0.566
(1.037)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.107
(0.321)
Black (ref.: White)
0.400*
(0.236)
Other (ref.: White)
Female
Foreign Born
Mother in Home
Father in Home
Vocabulary
Reading
Math
Science
Writing
Civics
High School GPA
Highest Math Course
Self-Esteem
Locus of Control
Effort
Conscientiousness
Constant
Observations

-0.165
(0.147)
0.205
(0.292)
0.327
(0.385)
-0.215
(0.200)
-0.033
(0.122)
0.076
(0.108)
0.192*
(0.114)
0.086
(0.126)
-0.038
(0.133)
0.162
(0.100)
0.375***
(0.144)
0.217**
(0.087)
-0.097
(0.077)
-0.012
(0.088)
0.082
(0.102)
0.078
(0.068)
-4.589***
(0.868)
1,282
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

90

Table S.39. Logistic response model of grad school attainment estimated with demographic covariates and the
smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
Grad School Attainment
Family Income
0.017*
(0.009)
Parental Education
0.050
(0.057)
Parental SEI
-0.004
(0.006)
Sibship Size
-0.127*
(0.072)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.460
(0.360)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) 0.714
(1.827)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.092
(0.438)
Black (ref.: White)
-0.226
(0.378)
Other (ref.: White)
-0.881
(1.168)
Female
-0.025
(0.213)
Foreign Born
0.345
(0.414)
Mother in Home
-0.087
(0.674)
Father in Home
-0.320
(0.304)
Constant
-0.149
(1.025)
Observations
435
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

91

Table S.40. Logistic response model of grad school attainment estimated with demographic and cognitive covariates
and the smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
Grad School Attainment
Family Income
0.017*
(0.010)
Parental Education
0.030
(0.059)
Parental SEI
-0.005
(0.006)
Sibship Size
-0.131*
(0.073)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.467
(0.384)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) 1.171
(2.312)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
-0.047
(0.476)
Black (ref.: White)
-0.038
(0.413)
Other (ref.: White)
-0.991
(1.078)
Female
-0.176
(0.238)
Foreign Born
0.389
(0.493)
Mother in Home
-0.126
(0.672)
Father in Home
-0.381
(0.322)
Vocabulary
0.140
(0.220)
Reading
-0.081
(0.187)
Math
0.173
(0.193)
Science
-0.269
(0.195)
Writing
-0.035
(0.214)
Civics
0.036
(0.159)
High School GPA
0.751***
(0.257)
Highest Math Course
-0.064
(0.143)
Constant
-1.765
(1.301)
Observations
435
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

92

Table S.41. Logistic response model of grad school attainment estimated with demographic, cognitive, and noncognitive
covariates and the smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
Grad School Attainment
Family Income
0.016*
(0.010)
Parental Education
0.034
(0.060)
Parental SEI
-0.005
(0.006)
Sibship Size
-0.133*
(0.074)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.487
(0.379)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White)
1.159
(2.317)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
-0.052
(0.482)
Black (ref.: White)
-0.052
(0.412)
Other (ref.: White)
-0.993
(1.068)
Female
-0.202
(0.240)
Foreign Born
0.396
(0.482)
Mother in Home
-0.100
(0.669)
Father in Home
-0.413
(0.325)
Vocabulary
0.156
(0.226)
Reading
-0.069
(0.200)
Math
0.209
(0.198)
Science
-0.290
(0.200)
Writing
-0.023
(0.220)
Civics
0.030
(0.162)
High School GPA
0.674***
(0.262)
Highest Math Course
-0.094
(0.151)
Self-Esteem
-0.038
(0.127)
Locus of Control
0.007
(0.146)
Effort
0.206
(0.161)
Conscientiousness
0.037
(0.120)
Constant
-1.552
(1.319)
Observations
435
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

93

Table S.42. Logistic response model of 2014 high school attainment estimated with demographic covariates and the
smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
High School Attainment
Family Income
-0.012
(0.011)
Parental Education
0.272***
(0.051)
Parental SEI
-0.001
(0.006)
Sibship Size
-0.217***
(0.062)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.310
(0.272)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)

-

Black (ref.: White)

-0.445
(0.296)
-

Other (ref.: White)
Female
Foreign Born
Mother in Home
Father in Home
Constant
Observations

0.287
(0.198)
0.976
(0.704)
1.011***
(0.268)
0.437*
(0.242)
-0.215
(0.631)
3,207
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

94

Table S.43. Logistic response model of 2014 high school attainment estimated with demographic and cognitive
covariates and the smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
High School Attainment
Family Income
-0.015
(0.012)
Parental Education
0.135**
(0.058)
Parental SEI
-0.008
(0.006)
Sibship Size
-0.175**
(0.069)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.273
(0.281)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)

-

Black (ref.: White)

0.171
(0.330)
-

Other (ref.: White)
Female
Foreign Born
Mother in Home
Father in Home
Vocabulary
Reading
Math
Science
Writing
Civics
High School GPA
Highest Math Course
Constant
Observations

0.175
(0.231)
1.156
(0.715)
0.753**
(0.294)
0.131
(0.262)
0.007
(0.195)
0.211
(0.225)
0.210
(0.219)
0.488***
(0.177)
0.265
(0.195)
-0.026
(0.182)
1.266***
(0.276)
0.268
(0.238)
-1.408
(1.033)
3,207
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

95

Table S.44. Logistic response model of 2014 high school attainment estimated with demographic, cognitive, and
noncognitive covariates and the smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
High School Attainment
Family Income
-0.014
(0.012)
Parental Education
0.127**
(0.060)
Parental SEI
-0.008
(0.007)
Sibship Size
-0.185***
(0.071)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.241
(0.282)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)

-

Black (ref.: White)

0.128
(0.338)
-

Other (ref.: White)
Female
Foreign Born
Mother in Home
Father in Home
Vocabulary
Reading
Math
Science
Writing
Civics
High School GPA
Highest Math Course
Self-Esteem
Locus of Control
Effort
Constant
Observations

0.043
(0.241)
1.326
(0.895)
0.763**
(0.300)
0.048
(0.258)
-0.007
(0.192)
0.226
(0.227)
0.210
(0.228)
0.458**
(0.181)
0.241
(0.196)
-0.048
(0.182)
1.165***
(0.279)
0.226
(0.249)
0.012
(0.108)
0.070
(0.125)
0.329***
(0.123)
-0.748
(1.105)
3,207
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

96

Table S.45. Logistic response model of 2014 college entry estimated with demographic covariates and the smaller
sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
College Entry
Family Income
0.006
(0.004)
Parental Education
0.238***
(0.024)
Parental SEI
0.009***
(0.003)
Sibship Size
-0.078***
(0.028)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.024
(0.125)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) 0.047
(0.360)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.200
(0.272)
Black (ref.: White)
0.523***
(0.161)
Other (ref.: White)
-1.522*
(0.790)
Female
0.070
(0.092)
Foreign Born
0.412*
(0.247)
Mother in Home
0.427**
(0.172)
Father in Home
0.175
(0.117)
Constant
-2.901***
(0.331)
Observations
3,240
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

97

Table S.46. Logistic response model of 2014 college entry estimated with demographic and cognitive covariates and
the smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
College Entry
Family Income
-0.000
(0.005)
Parental Education
0.161***
(0.028)
Parental SEI
0.006*
(0.003)
Sibship Size
-0.032
(0.033)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.337**
(0.139)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) 0.612
(0.383)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
-0.045
(0.311)
Black (ref.: White)
0.936***
(0.189)
Other (ref.: White)
-1.108
(1.044)
Female
0.080
(0.115)
Foreign Born
0.340
(0.263)
Mother in Home
0.211
(0.199)
Father in Home
-0.007
(0.132)
Vocabulary
0.309***
(0.080)
Reading
0.112
(0.088)
Math
-0.080
(0.088)
Science
0.180*
(0.094)
Writing
-0.092
(0.091)
Civics
0.054
(0.068)
High School GPA
0.523***
(0.103)
Highest Math Course
0.408***
(0.044)
Constant
-4.484***
(0.481)
Observations
3,240
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

98

Table S.47. Logistic response model of 2014 college entry estimated with demographic, cognitive, and noncognitive
covariates and the smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
College Entry
Family Income
0.000
(0.005)
Parental Education
0.162***
(0.028)
Parental SEI
0.006*
(0.003)
Sibship Size
-0.033
(0.033)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.343**
(0.140)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) 0.627
(0.386)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
-0.052
(0.313)
Black (ref.: White)
0.965***
(0.192)
Other (ref.: White)
-1.105
(1.053)
Female
0.071
(0.117)
Foreign Born
0.343
(0.264)
Mother in Home
0.215
(0.199)
Father in Home
-0.014
(0.131)
Vocabulary
0.313***
(0.081)
Reading
0.120
(0.088)
Math
-0.083
(0.088)
Science
0.186**
(0.094)
Writing
-0.089
(0.091)
Civics
0.059
(0.068)
High School GPA
0.527***
(0.109)
Highest Math Course
0.409***
(0.045)
Self-Esteem
-0.045
(0.052)
Locus of Control
-0.051
(0.060)
Effort
0.029
(0.059)
Constant
-4.521***
(0.497)
Observations
3,240
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

99

Table S.48. Logistic response model of 2014 college attainment estimated with demographic covariates and the
smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
College Attainment
Family Income
0.018***
(0.005)
Parental Education
0.173***
(0.025)
Parental SEI
0.001
(0.003)
Sibship Size
-0.030
(0.032)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.077
(0.144)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.281
(0.447)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.895**
(0.351)
Black (ref.: White)
0.088
(0.173)
Other (ref.: White)
0.012
(1.019)
Female
0.208**
(0.097)
Foreign Born
0.279
(0.221)
Mother in Home
0.379*
(0.195)
Father in Home
0.399***
(0.123)
Constant
-2.707***
(0.381)
Observations
2,387
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

100

Table S.49. Logistic response model of 2014 college attainment estimated with demographic and cognitive
covariates and the smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
College Attainment
Family Income
0.014***
(0.005)
Parental Education
0.114***
(0.027)
Parental SEI
0.001
(0.003)
Sibship Size
-0.010
(0.036)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.272*
(0.162)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White)
0.122
(0.555)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.666*
(0.369)
Black (ref.: White)
0.495***
(0.190)
Other (ref.: White)
0.184
(0.977)
Female
0.152
(0.115)
Foreign Born
0.222
(0.228)
Mother in Home
0.152
(0.225)
Father in Home
0.238*
(0.136)
Vocabulary
0.091
(0.091)
Reading
-0.039
(0.090)
Math
0.183**
(0.086)
Science
-0.094
(0.097)
Writing
-0.038
(0.100)
Civics
0.099
(0.074)
High School GPA
0.788***
(0.119)
Highest Math Course
0.338***
(0.051)
Constant
-5.304***
(0.531)
Observations
2,387
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

101

Table S.50. Logistic response model of 2014 college attainment estimated with demographic, cognitive, and
noncognitive covariates and the smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
College Attainment
Family Income
0.014***
(0.005)
Parental Education
0.115***
(0.027)
Parental SEI
0.001
(0.003)
Sibship Size
-0.007
(0.035)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.257
(0.161)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) 0.112
(0.543)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.721**
(0.360)
Black (ref.: White)
0.437**
(0.193)
Other (ref.: White)
0.137
(1.011)
Female
0.147
(0.117)
Foreign Born
0.213
(0.231)
Mother in Home
0.129
(0.225)
Father in Home
0.223
(0.136)
Vocabulary
0.084
(0.091)
Reading
-0.037
(0.090)
Math
0.188**
(0.087)
Science
-0.106
(0.097)
Writing
-0.045
(0.101)
Civics
0.090
(0.075)
High School GPA
0.736***
(0.123)
Highest Math Course
0.326***
(0.051)
Self-Esteem
0.080
(0.053)
Locus of Control
0.076
(0.066)
Effort
0.075
(0.065)
Constant
-5.085***
(0.543)
Observations
2,387
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

102

Table S.51. Logistic response model of 2014 grad school entry estimated with demographic covariates and the
smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
Grad School Entry
Family Income
0.003
(0.005)
Parental Education
0.096***
(0.028)
Parental SEI
-0.002
(0.003)
Sibship Size
0.008
(0.038)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.033
(0.162)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.279
(0.484)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.336
(0.269)
Black (ref.: White)
0.219
(0.173)
Other (ref.: White)
Female
Foreign Born
Mother in Home
Father in Home
Constant
Observations

-0.067
(0.107)
-0.073
(0.235)
0.433
(0.267)
-0.114
(0.142)
-1.832***
(0.454)
1,643
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

103

Table S.52. Logistic response model of 2014 grad school entry estimated with demographic and cognitive
covariates and the smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
Grad School Entry
Family Income
0.002
(0.005)
Parental Education
0.073**
(0.030)
Parental SEI
-0.002
(0.003)
Sibship Size
0.016
(0.038)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.121
(0.166)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.104
(0.554)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.281
(0.268)
Black (ref.: White)
0.406**
(0.184)
Other (ref.: White)
Female
Foreign Born
Mother in Home
Father in Home
Vocabulary
Reading
Math
Science
Writing
Civics
High School GPA
Highest Math Course
Constant
Observations

0.011
(0.124)
-0.130
(0.240)
0.346
(0.271)
-0.175
(0.147)
-0.083
(0.089)
0.070
(0.089)
0.091
(0.098)
0.129
(0.098)
-0.060
(0.099)
-0.007
(0.081)
0.184
(0.126)
0.127**
(0.060)
-2.749***
(0.580)
1,643
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

104

Table S.53. Logistic response model of 2014 grad school entry estimated with demographic, cognitive, and
noncognitive covariates and the smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
Grad School Entry
Family Income
0.002
(0.005)
Parental Education
0.073**
(0.030)
Parental SEI
-0.002
(0.003)
Sibship Size
0.016
(0.038)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
0.122
(0.167)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) -0.109
(0.552)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.285
(0.267)
Black (ref.: White)
0.397**
(0.188)
Other (ref.: White)
Female
Foreign Born
Mother in Home
Father in Home
Vocabulary
Reading
Math
Science
Writing
Civics
High School GPA
Highest Math Course
Self-Esteem
Locus of Control
Effort
Constant
Observations

0.009
(0.127)
-0.132
(0.240)
0.345
(0.272)
-0.174
(0.147)
-0.087
(0.090)
0.067
(0.090)
0.091
(0.098)
0.127
(0.098)
-0.061
(0.099)
-0.009
(0.081)
0.183
(0.130)
0.126**
(0.061)
0.009
(0.059)
0.033
(0.070)
-0.006
(0.072)
-2.742***
(0.590)
1,643
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

105

Table S.54. Logistic response model of 2014 grad school attainment estimated with demographic covariates and the
smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
Grad School Attainment
Family Income
-0.004
(0.011)
Parental Education
0.043
(0.061)
Parental SEI
0.001
(0.007)
Sibship Size
-0.026
(0.077)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.251
(0.346)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) 0.148
(1.150)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.379
(0.668)
Black (ref.: White)
0.140
(0.409)
Other (ref.: White)
-2.756**
(1.253)
Female
0.256
(0.251)
Foreign Born
-0.251
(0.522)
Mother in Home
-0.473
(0.768)
Father in Home
0.143
(0.323)
Constant
1.741
(1.197)
Observations
723
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

106

Table S.55. Logistic response model of 2014 grad school attainment estimated with demographic and cognitive
covariates and the smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
Grad School Attainment
Family Income
-0.001
(0.011)
Parental Education
0.041
(0.066)
Parental SEI
0.002
(0.007)
Sibship Size
-0.043
(0.079)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.301
(0.370)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) 0.323
(1.290)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.298
(0.680)
Black (ref.: White)
0.231
(0.441)
Other (ref.: White)
-2.750**
(1.198)
Female
0.303
(0.280)
Foreign Born
-0.369
(0.557)
Mother in Home
-0.470
(0.762)
Father in Home
0.090
(0.345)
Vocabulary
-0.211
(0.216)
Reading
0.078
(0.222)
Math
0.372
(0.240)
Science
0.072
(0.225)
Writing
-0.227
(0.253)
Civics
-0.233
(0.183)
High School GPA
0.396
(0.272)
Highest Math Course
-0.172
(0.138)
Constant
1.425
(1.387)
Observations
723
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

107

Table S.56. Logistic response model of 2014 grad school attainment estimated with demographic, cognitive, and
noncognitive covariates and the smaller sample of respondents who completed the long-form 2014 questionnaire.
Grad School Attainment
Family Income
-0.004
(0.011)
Parental Education
0.039
(0.067)
Parental SEI
0.002
(0.007)
Sibship Size
-0.036
(0.079)
Hispanic or Spanish (ref.: White)
-0.315
(0.369)
American Indian or Alaskan Native (ref.: White) 0.295
(1.284)
Asian or Pacific Islander (ref.: White)
0.255
(0.690)
Black (ref.: White)
0.169
(0.446)
Other (ref.: White)
-2.730**
(1.195)
Female
0.322
(0.280)
Foreign Born
-0.375
(0.574)
Mother in Home
-0.532
(0.788)
Father in Home
0.111
(0.351)
Vocabulary
-0.237
(0.216)
Reading
0.068
(0.224)
Math
0.372
(0.239)
Science
0.067
(0.225)
Writing
-0.202
(0.253)
Civics
-0.221
(0.183)
High School GPA
0.359
(0.269)
Highest Math Course
-0.182
(0.137)
Self-Esteem
0.165
(0.118)
Locus of Control
0.103
(0.172)
Effort
-0.049
(0.164)
Constant
1.619
(1.424)
Observations
723
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

108

