The Effect of the Post-Socialist Transition on Inequality of
Educational Opportunity: Evidence from German Unification
Bastian Betthäuser *
University of Oxford
ABSTRACT: In 1990, German unification led to an abrupt and extensive restructuring of the
educational system and economy of the German Democratic Republic (GDR) as the latter was
reintegrated into the Federal Republic of Germany (FRG). However, the consequences of this largescale institutional change for the educational inequality between children from different social class
backgrounds in East Germany continue to be poorly understood. This article seeks to shed new light
on this question by using a quasi-experimental approach to examine the difference in educational
inequality between East and West Germany before and after German unification. We compare
changes in the class gradient in educational attainment in East and West Germany across six birth
cohorts, including three cohorts of individuals who completed their schooling after unification.
Contrasting with past findings, our results show that before unification, educational inequality at the
mid-secondary, upper-secondary and tertiary level was substantially lower in East Germany than in
West Germany and that unification led to a substantial and sustained convergence of the level of
educational inequality in East Germany towards that of West Germany.
Published version: Betthäuser, B. A. (2019). The Effect of the Post-Socialist Transition on Inequality of
Educational Opportunity: Evidence from German Unification. European Sociological Review 35(4): 461473, doi: 10.1093/esr/jcz012

* Nuffield College, University of Oxford, 1 New Road, Oxford OX1 1NF, UK
bastian.betthaeuser@nuffield.ox.ac.uk

1

Introduction
The ideological basis of the German Democratic Republic (GDR) as a ‘worker and
peasant state’ mandated a strong commitment to educational equality and the
promotion of educational opportunities for working-class youth (Fischer, 1992; Below,
1997). The ruling Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED) sought to achieve this goal
by fundamentally restructuring the GDR’s educational system and economy during
the post-war transition to communism (Geißler, 1983; Connelly, 2014). Accordingly,
the Law for the Democratisation of the German School that was passed in 1946 stated that
“[…] the new school system must be structured in a way that guarantees to all youth,
girls and boys, children from urban and rural areas, independent of the economic
resources of their parents, an equal right to education and its realisation according to
their ability and predisposition” (as cited in Fischer, 1992, p. 34, author translation).
The substantial restructuring of the educational system and economy that
occurred in the GDR and other state-socialist regimes of Central and Eastern Europe
renders them a large-scale historical experiment in increasing equality of opportunity
by way of institutional reform (Szelényi, 1998). Amongst all state-socialist countries,
the reform trajectory of GDR is particularly well suited for empirical analysis. Not only
were the educational system and the economy of the GDR fundamentally restructured
under state socialism, but this restructuring was then abruptly reversed with German
unification in 1990, when the GDR was reintegrated into the Federal Republic of
Germany (FRG). Moreover, the strong institutional continuity of the FRG’s education
system and economy throughout the second half of the twentieth century makes the
FRG a robust control case, demonstrating the development of educational inequalities
in the absence of state-socialist reforms and their reversal with unification.
Despite the unique reform trajectory of East Germany, there continues to be
little evidence on the extent to which the GDR succeeded in reducing educational
inequality between children from different social class backgrounds, and on whether
these achievements were subsequently reversed after unification. Some studies found
a decline in inequality of educational opportunity (IEO) in the early years of the GDR
(see e.g., Below, 1997; Geißler, 1983). Yet, these studies tend to draw on official
statistics from the GDR that are of questionable reliability and do not allow for a
precise measurement of individuals’ parental class background.1 Moreover, there is
some evidence of an increase in IEO in the GDR starting in the mid-1970s (Solga,
1997; Geißler, 1983). This finding is consistent with the ‘socialist transformation
hypothesis’, which expects an initial decline in IEO as socialist reforms are
implemented, but suggests that these early gains are lost as parents in advantaged
positions adapt to the changed institutional context and find new ways to advantage
their children (see Blossfeld and Shavit, 1993; Szelényi, 1998). However, it is not clear
whether in the late phase of the GDR, the level of IEO in the GDR had reverted fully
towards that of the FRG, or whether working class children in the GDR still had better
educational prospects than their peers in the FRG.

2

Evidence on changes in IEO in other state-socialist countries is mixed. With
regards to Hungary, Bukodi and Goldthorpe (2010) find a decline in IEO in the early
period of state socialism and a subsequent increase in later years as the country
transitioned to a market-based economy (also see Szelényi and Aschaffenburg, 1993,
and Szelényi, 1998). A similar pattern is found in Russia by Gerber and Hout (1995).
However, with regards to Czechoslovakia and Poland, Mateju (1993) and Heyns and
Bialecki (1993) find that educational inequality between individuals from different
social backgrounds did not decline or may even have increased compared to the presocialist period.
Aside from the lack of comparable evidence on the level of IEO in the GDR
and the FDR before unification, few studies have systematically examined whether and
to what extent the level of IEO in the GDR changed with the fundamental
restructuring of the GDR’s educational system and economy in the wake of German
unification. A notable exception is the study by Kesler (2003), which seeks to examine
the level of IEO in East and West Germany before and after unification. However,
Kesler acknowledges several serious limitations of her study. First and most
importantly, the small sample used in in Kesler’s study puts it at risk of making a type
II error (false negative), i.e. concluding that there are no differences between her
comparison groups, when in fact such differences exist. This casts doubt on the
robustness of Kesler’s findings that there was little difference in IEO between East
and West Germany before unification, and that IEO did not increase after unification
in East Germany.
A second limitation of the study by Kesler – in part due to the study having
been conducted only about a decade after German unification – is that it compares
only one pre-unification cohort and one post-unification cohort, as opposed to
examining over-time change across multiple cohorts in East and West Germany. This
prevents her study from identifying whether a potential change in IEO after unification
reflects only a short-lived effect that may be due to the economic crisis triggered by
unification, or whether unification had a sustained effect on IEO which may be
attributed to the institutional restructuring of the East German educational system and
economy.
Third, Kesler’s study is limited in that it only considers IEO in terms of
individuals’ completion of upper-secondary education. Therefore, it remains unclear
whether potential differences in IEO between East and West Germany pre- and postunification apply to the upper-secondary level only, or whether they are already visible
at the mid-secondary level and carry through to the tertiary level.
Kesler’s finding that IEO did not increase with German unification contrasts
with studies of other post-socialist countries, which generally find an increase in the
intergenerational transmission of inequality after the post-socialist transition (see
Gerber and Hout, 2004, on Russia, Lippényi and Gerber, 2016, and Bukodi and
Goldthorpe, 2010, on Hungary; and the cross-national study by Jackson and Evans,
2017). However, as discussed in further detail below, these studies are themselves
limited in that they tend to only focus on one or more (post-)socialist countries, and

3

thus lack a control case that would permit them to identify the observed over-time
changes in inequality as resulting from the post-socialist transition per se, as opposed to
other over-time trends at the time that are not primarily related to the post-socialist
transition.
The main aim of this article is to overcome the abovementioned limitations of
the existing literature in order to address the following two research questions: First,
was IEO lower in East Germany than in West Germany before unification? Second,
if such east-west difference in IEO existed before unification, did the level of IEO in
East Germany increase and converge towards the level of IEO in West Germany after
unification? In order to address these two questions, we compare the level of IEO
between individuals from different social class backgrounds in East and West
Germany across six five-year birth cohorts: 1960-64, 1965-69, 1970-74, 1975-79, 198084, 1985-89. This multiple cohort design and the use of West Germany as a
comparison case allows us to distinguish the unification effect from potentially
confounding over-time trends in IEO. Furthermore, it enables us to examine both the
short and long-term consequences of German unification. Rather than relying on
official statistics from the GDR, we work with data from two German survey
programmes which provide comparable information on the social class backgrounds
and educational careers of a large sample of East and West German individuals. As
discussed in further detail below, we focus our analysis on school and university
qualifications that are substantively comparable across the GDR and the FRG.
Why expect IEO to be lower in the GDR than in the FRG?
With the goal of breaking the ‘educational privilege’ of the middle and upper classes
and to advance the educational and labour market chances of individuals from
working-class backgrounds the Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED) radically
restructured the educational system and economy of East Germany after the Second
World War (Geißler, 1983; Below, 1997). This interventionist approach by the GDR
leadership stands in sharp contrast to the liberal educational and economic policies of
the FRG, which largely upheld the institutional structure of the pre-war period.
One key reform implemented by the GDR leadership was the universalisation
of education up until the mid-secondary level and the abolishment of the traditional
tripartite structure that allocated students into a lower-secondary, mid-secondary and
upper-secondary school track after primary school (Below, 1997). This tripartite
system had been in place before the war and prevailed in the FDR thereafter (Cortina
et al., 2008). In the GDR, it was replaced by a comprehensive school, the Polytechnische
Oberschule (POS), which jointly schooled all children until grade ten (Below, 1997).
Contrasting with the universalisation of mid-secondary education, upper-secondary
education in the GDR continued to be highly selective. Importantly however, the
GDR administration implemented a series of ‘counter-privileging’ measures that were
designed to facilitate the access of children from working-class backgrounds to the
upper-secondary school, the Erweiterte Oberschule (EOS). Accordingly, the selection of

4

pupils into upper-secondary school was not only based on their performance, but also
depended on their social background – by way of a quota system that positively
discriminated in favour of children from working-class backgrounds – and on the
‘political attitude and societal engagement’ of children and their parents (Marggraf,
1993). Moreover, the GDR provided several alternative avenues for obtaining the
Abitur, including via advanced dual vocational training (the Berufsausbildung mit Abitur)
and via so-called Worker and Farmer Colleges (Arbeiter-und-Bauern-Fakultäten) (Geißler,
1983). By contrast, in the FRG alternative routes to the Abitur were relatively scarce
and admission to the upper-secondary school track was primarily based on teacher
recommendations as well as parents’ preferences (Cortina et al., 2008).
Both the universalisation of mid-secondary education and the ‘counterprivileging’ measures at the upper-secondary level can be expected to have decreased
cross-class inequalities in educational attainment at the mid- and upper-secondary level
in the GDR. This may be expected to further have translated into increased educational
equality at the tertiary level, which is likely to have been reinforced by the provision of
stipends for children from working-class backgrounds and targeted publicity
campaigns (Bildungswerbung) that informed members of the working class and the rural
population of the benefits of pursuing higher education (Geißler, 1983).
Aside from the educational reforms discussed above, the flattening of the
income distribution in the planned economy of the GDR (Speder and Habich, 1999)
may also have had a bearing on the educational inequality between children from
different parental class backgrounds. More specifically, the reduced level of inequality
in the economic resources that parents in different social class positions could devote
to the development and education of their children – e.g., via providing additional
tutoring and learning materials – can be expected to have further decreased IEO in
the GDR, relative to the FRG.2
It is also conceivable that the motive of status maintenance in educational
decision making – which has been central to sociological explanations of the
intergenerational transmission of inequality (see Breen and Goldthorpe, 1997) – was
less prominent amongst parents and children in East Germany prior to unification,
given the ideological commitment of the GDR to equalising individuals’ socioeconomic position. Moreover, in as far as the motive of status maintenance was still a
concern amongst individuals, it may be the case that employment guarantees and the
importance of political capital for individuals’ labour market position in the GDR
made individuals from advantaged backgrounds less dependent on and therefore less
invested in maximizing their educational attainment in order to maintain their parents’
social status.
While the educational and economic characteristics of the GDR reviewed
above would lead one to expect a lower level of IEO in the GDR, as compared to the
FRG, it is important to note potentially countervailing forces that may have moderated
or offset potential advances in equalising educational opportunity in the GDR. As
suggested by the abovementioned socialist transformation hypothesis (Blossfeld and
Shavit, 1993), parents from higher social class positions may have adapted to the

5

counter-privileging reforms in the GDR by finding new ways of leveraging their
economic, political and cultural resources to advantage their children. This expectation
has received some support by research suggesting that that the political elite in the
GDR used their political clout to advance their children’s educational and labour
market careers (see Solga, 1994). Such dynamic may have been reinforced by the
substantial in-kind privileges – such as luxury homes and goods – that accompanied
high political office in the GDR (see Lenski, 1994) and by the founding of ‘special
schools’ (Spezialschulen) that predominantly admitted students from privileged social
backgrounds (see Opitz, 1979; Meier and Reimann, 1977).3 It thus remains an empirical
question to what extent the GDR succeeded in realising its ideological commitment to
reducing the level of IEO.
Why expect a unification effect on IEO in East Germany?
German unification in 1990 led to an abrupt reintegration of the educational system
of the GDR into that of the FRG. Starting in 1991 pupils in East Germany found
themselves attending the same type of schools as their West German peers. Similarly,
the East German economy was remoulded along the lines of West Germany’s social
market economy in a rapid process of economic liberalisation. The radical institutional
reconfiguration of the East German educational system and economy contrasts with
what can be described as a frozen landscape of institutional stasis in West Germany at
the time of unification (see, e.g., Cortina et al., 2008).
The assimilation of the East German educational system into the West
German model meant that universal schooling until the mid-secondary level was
abolished and ability tracking into different school types after fourth grade was
reintroduced.4 At the same time, the abovementioned measures of positive
discrimination in favour or working class youth at the secondary and tertiary level were
abandoned (Mintrop and Weiler, 1994). Considering the likely equalising effects of the
reforms of the educational system in the GDR discussed in the previous section, the
reversal of these reforms with German unification can be expected to have led to an
increase in IEO in East Germany (i.e. the former GDR) after unification. Given the
known class-gradient in lower-secondary attainment in West Germany (Blossfeld,
1993; Betthäuser, 2017), the re-introduction of the lower-secondary school track and
the lower-secondary qualification (Hauptschulabschluss) is likely to have increased the
proportion of children from working-class backgrounds who leave school before
obtaining a mid-secondary qualification, thus increasing IEO at the mid-secondary
level. Similarly, the abolition of positive discrimination in favour of working-class
youth and the removal of the vocational route to obtaining the Abitur can be expected
to have led to an increase in IEO at the upper-secondary and tertiary level.
Key reforms of the East German economy included the liberalisation of prices
and trade and the privatisation of previously state-run businesses in the span of four
years (Mayer 2006; Gebel, 2011; Windorf, 1996). These reforms stood in sharp
contrast to the planned economy of the GDR. As was the case for most other former

6

member states of the soviet bloc, the East German ‘shock therapy’ was more shock
than therapy and led to a deep economic recession that was accompanied by a vast
increase in unemployment, economic insecurity and income inequality (Hunt, 2008;
Hauser and Becker, 2000; Gebel, 2011). Given the likely rigidifying consequences of
economic recessions for IEO (see Jackson and Evans, 2017), the crisis may have
reinforced the effects of the educational restructuring on IEO in East Germany after
unification. In our analysis, we therefore examine both the short-run effect of German
unification on IEO, which may be magnified by the effects of the economic recession,
and the long-run effect, which can be taken to reflect the institutional changes that
occurred with German unification.
Method, data and variables
The abrupt assimilation of the institutional structure of the East German educational
system and economy into that of West Germany with unification constitutes a unique
quasi-experimental setting for studying the effects of large-scale institutional change
on IEO. We examine the effects of this institutional restructuring by way of a differencein-difference design, comparing the difference in IEO in East and West Germany before
and after unification (Angrist and Pischke, 2009; Gangl, 2010).5 Using West Germany
as a control unit allows us to examine whether any over-time change in IEO in East
Germany is due to the institutional restructuring in the wake of unification, as opposed
to other potentially confounding over-time changes. For this reason, using a differencein-difference design constitutes an advantage over existing studies of the post-socialist
transition which lack a comparison unit (cf. Jackson and Evans, 2017; Gerber and
Hout, 2004, Lippényi and Gerber, 2016, Bukodi and Goldthorpe, 2010).
We examine the level of educational inequality between individuals from
different social class backgrounds in East and West Germany across six five-year birth
cohorts: 1960-64, 1965-69, 1970-74, 1975-79, 1980-84, 1985-89.6 The 1970-74 cohort
is the last cohort of individuals who received their full schooling before unification.
We therefore use this cohort as the reference category in all our analyses. All members
of the 1975-79 cohort made the transition to upper-secondary education after
unification and the younger members of this cohort received their full secondary
education in unified Germany. Similarly, all members of the 1980-84 and 1985-89
cohorts received their full secondary education after unification. Accordingly, if the
institutional changes in East Germany in the wake of unification had an effect on IEO,
we would expect to see a convergence in the level of IEO between East and West
Germany in the younger three cohorts.
We use the German Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP) as the primary dataset for
our analyses (see Wagner et al., 2007). In order to avoid any potential bias due to survey
specificities, we replicate our results by running all our models on a secondary dataset.
For this purpose, we use the German General Social Survey (ALLBUS/GGSS) (see
Wasmer et al., 2014). All results from our replication analyses are reported in the
Appendix. While most previous studies on educational and labour market inequalities

7

in Germany use the ‘complete case analysis’ approach and thus rely on the assumption
that missingness in the data is completely at random (White et al., 2010), we impute
missing data points using multiple imputation by chained equations and thereby limit
the risk of potential bias related to systematic item missingness in our data.7
The dependent variables of our analyses are three binary educational threshold
variables, measuring first, whether individuals have attained a school qualification at
the mid-secondary level or above, second, whether they have attained a school
qualification at the upper-secondary level, and third, whether they obtained a university
qualification.8 When comparing the level of educational inequality between individuals
from different social backgrounds in the GDR and the FRG it is essential to work with
measures of educational attainment that are comparable across the two countries.
Attaining the mid-secondary school-leaving qualification was an important educational
threshold in both the GDR and the FRG that is comparable across the two countries,
since pupils in both countries had to complete ten years of general schooling to obtain
this qualification. Likewise, the upper-secondary school qualification can be taken to
indicate a similar level of schooling in the GDR and the FRG, since pupils had to
complete a further two to three years of schooling after completing their midsecondary education. The upper-secondary school-leaving qualification constituted the
precondition for enrolling in university in both the GDR and the FRG and was
nominally identical in both countries (known as the Abitur). By contrast, vocational
qualifications are not comparable across the two countries, since in the GDR
vocational training certificates were at times awarded based on working experience
alone and without further formal training, while in the FRG these qualifications
necessitated further schooling in the Berufsschule, generally alongside completing an
apprenticeship. We therefore focus our main analysis of educational attainment at the
secondary-level on comparing school-leaving qualifications, rather than vocational
qualifications. In order to remain consistent with our focus on general/academic
education at the secondary level, we also focus our analysis of tertiary level attainment
on academic tertiary education only, i.e. attainment of a university qualification. Similar
to our measures of educational attainment at the secondary-level, obtaining a university
qualification is comparable across the GDR and the FRG, while the system of
vocational and more applied tertiary education differed substantially across in the two
countries.
Our focal independent variable, parental class, is operationalised using the
European Socio-Economic Classification (ESeC). The ESeC schema allocates
individuals to different social class positions based on their occupation and
employment status (see Wirth et al., 2010; Rose and Harrison 2010). This clear and
transparent allocation principle allows for a consistent classification of parents in East
and West Germany and permits us to avoid issues of comparability due to different
interpretations of the meaning and scope of social class categories, which constitutes
a serious limitation of previous studies of social inequality in the GDR (see, e.g., Below,
1997, and Geißler, 1983).

8

We measure parents’ social class position using a four-category version of the
ESeC schema, differentiating between (1) the unskilled working class, (2) the skilled
working class, (3) the intermediate class and (4) the salariat. We differentiate between
individuals from unskilled and skilled working-class backgrounds, as it has been shown
that there is a substantial difference in the mean educational attainment between these
two groups in Germany (Betthäuser, 2017). However, given the ideological agenda of
the GDR, we expect its reforms to have affected the educational attainment of
individuals from working-class backgrounds at large. We derive the parental class
position from fathers’ and mothers’ class positions using the dominance approach
(Erikson, 1984). This approach allocates parents to a social class position according to
the higher social class position of the two spouses. Parents’ social class position is
measured at age fifteen of the cohort members. We control for individuals’ gender and
age in all our models.9 The distributions of our focal variables are shown in Table A13
in the Appendix.
Results
As noted above, the first aim of this paper is to assess whether and to what extent IEO
was lower in the GDR than in the FRG before unification. Second, we seek to examine
whether, if such east-west difference in IEO existed before unification, the level of
IEO in the East Germany increased and converged towards the level of IEO in West
Germany after unification. To address these questions, we run a series of binary logit
models for East and West Germany respectively with the three binary educational
thresholds as the outcome variables.10 Our focal explanatory variables are individuals’
parental class background and birth cohort. We present our results in the form of a
series of figures showing the predicted probabilities of crossing the three educational
thresholds for different social origin groups in East and West Germany. Tables
reporting average marginal effects and their statistical significance are given in the
Appendix (Tables A1-A6). We replicated all our results using the ALLBUS data (see
Tables A7-A12 in the Appendix) and found the results to be highly consistent between
the SOEP and the ALLBUS data.
Figure 1 shows the predicted probability of children from different social class
backgrounds to obtain a qualification at the mid-secondary level or above, for each
birth cohort in East and West Germany respectively. For the three birth cohorts of
children who completed their schooling before unification, we observe, first, that the
total share of pupils attaining an educational qualification at the mid-secondary level
or above was higher in the GDR than was the case in the FRG. Second, we observe
that IEO was substantially lower in the GDR than was the case in the FRG.11 Both the
higher overall level of mid-secondary attainment and the lower level of educational
inequality between individuals from working-class backgrounds and individuals from
higher class backgrounds at the mid-secondary level may be a result of efforts in the
GDR to universalise education up until tenth grade. However, Figure 1 also shows
that even in the late phase of the GDR, there was still a substantial proportion of pupils

9

who did not attain the mid-secondary qualification – thus leaving school without a
qualification – and a considerable class gradient in mid-secondary attainment.
Figure 1. Predicted probabilities of obtaining a mid-secondary school-leaving qualification for
different birth cohorts in West and East Germany

Notes: Predicted probabilities based on logistic regression models with the binary measure of obtaining a mid-secondary
school-leaving qualification as the outcome variable (SOEP).

With regards to the effect of unification, we observe a notable drop in the
overall proportion of pupils who obtain a qualification at the mid-secondary level or
above between the third and fourth birth cohort in East Germany. This development
likely reflects the reintroduction of the lower-secondary school track (Hauptschule) and
the lower-secondary leaving qualification (Hauptschulabschluss) after unification.
Importantly however, the drop in mid-secondary attainment appears to have been
concentrated amongst children from working-class backgrounds, thus leading to an
increase in the educational inequality between this group and individuals from
intermediate class and salariat backgrounds.12 This increase in IEO appears to persist
across the three birth cohorts who completed their schooling after unification,
suggesting that it is not primarily a result of the post-unification economic crisis, but
instead can be attributed to the institutional changes that occurred with unification. It
is important to note, however, that despite a clear convergence in the level of inequality
in mid-secondary attainment in East Germany towards that of West Germany, IEO at
the mid-secondary level remained lower in East Germany compared to West Germany
even after unification.13

10

Figure 2. Predicted probabilities of obtaining an upper-secondary school-leaving qualification
for different birth cohorts in West and East Germany

Notes: Predicted probabilities based on logistic regression models with the binary measure of obtaining an uppersecondary school-leaving qualification as the outcome variable (SOEP).

Figure 2 shows the predicted probabilities of attaining a qualification at the uppersecondary level for different social origin groups in East and West Germany
respectively. In contrast to our findings for the mid-secondary level, for the three preunification cohorts we find that the overall share of pupils attaining an uppersecondary qualification was substantially lower in the GDR than in the FRG. This is
likely to be a consequence of the restrictive admission requirements for uppersecondary enrolment in the GDR (Gebel, 2011). We also observe a considerable level
of inequality in upper-secondary attainment in the GDR. Children from salariat
backgrounds were about 25 percentage points more likely to obtain an uppersecondary qualification than was the case for children from working-class
backgrounds. However, the left-hand panel of Figure 2 shows that in the FRG the
level of inequality in upper-secondary attainment between children from salariat and
working-class backgrounds was larger yet, at about 40 percentage points.14 Hence,
while a considerable level of inequality in upper-secondary attainment remained in the
GDR, the counter-privileging measures in the country appear to have succeeded in
compressing cross-class inequality at this level, relative to the FRG.
Regarding the effect of unification, we observe a notable rise in the proportion
of individuals who obtain the upper-secondary qualification between the third and
fourth birth cohort in East Germany. This development is consistent with past
findings and has been attributed to the relaxation of admission criteria and the
founding of new upper-secondary schools (Gymnasien) in East Germany (Schreier,
1996; Below, 1997; Gebel, 2011). However, this rise in upper-secondary attainment
appears to have mainly benefitted children from salariat and intermediate class

11

backgrounds, while the probability of obtaining an upper-secondary qualification rose
to a much lesser degree for children from unskilled and skilled working-class
backgrounds. Consequently, IEO at the upper-secondary level in East Germany
increased after unification and came to closely resemble the level of IEO in West
Germany.15 Similar to the observed increase in inequality at the mid-secondary level,
this rise in IEO at the upper-secondary level was sustained across all three postunification cohorts. It can thus not be attributed principally to the rigidifying effects
of the economic post-unification crisis, but is likely to reflect the institutional changes
that occurred with unification, particularly the re-introduction of early ability tracking
and the abolishment of positive discrimination in favour of pupils from working-class
backgrounds.
Figure 3. Predicted probabilities of obtaining a university qualification for different birth
cohorts in West and East Germany

Notes: Predicted probabilities based on logistic regression models with the binary measure of obtaining a university
qualification as the outcome variable (SOEP).

Figure 3 demonstrates that the east-west differences and over-time development in
IEO at the upper-secondary level are mirrored at the tertiary level. For the three preunification cohorts, we find that the overall share of individuals attaining a tertiary
qualification appears to have been notably lower in the GDR than in the FRG. Again,
this is consistent with previous findings and has been attributed to the lower share of
individuals who obtained an upper-secondary qualification in the GDR (Gebel, 2011;
Kehm, 2004). While we observe a considerable gap in tertiary-level attainment between
different social origin groups in the GDR, this gap was substantially larger in the
FRG.16 This East-West difference in the inequality in tertiary-level attainment is likely
to be a consequence of the lower degree of inequality in upper-secondary attainment
in the GDR, relative to that in the FRG, and may also reflect the abovementioned

12

provision of stipends for working-class youth and the publicity campaigns targeted at
this group to inform them about the benefits of higher education (Bildungswerbung).
With unification, we observe a notable rise in the level of educational inequality
between different origin groups at the tertiary level in East Germany after unification.
As shown in Figure 3, after unification the level of IEO in East Germany almost
completely converged towards the level of IEO in West Germany.17 This rise in IEO
at the tertiary level after unification is sustained across the three post-unification
cohorts and as such appears not to result mainly from the post-unification economic
crisis. Instead it may be attributed to the sustained increase in inequality at the uppersecondary level and the abolishment of stipends and information campaigns targeted
at individuals from working-class backgrounds in East Germany.
Conclusion
Using the FRG as a comparison case, this article has sought, first, to examine the extent
to which state socialism in the GDR succeeded in reducing educational inequalities
between children from different social class backgrounds. Second, we investigated
whether the institutional assimilation of the (former) GDR into the FRG with German
unification led to a convergence of the level of IEO in East Germany towards that of
West Germany.
Our first main finding is that IEO at the mid-secondary, upper-secondary and
tertiary level was substantially lower in the GDR than in the FRG, even in the late
phase of the GDR. This lower level of IEO in the GDR is likely to reflect the efforts
of the GDR leadership to universalise mid-secondary education, as well as a range of
‘counter-privileging’ measures that sought to promote the educational attainment of
children from working-class backgrounds at the upper-secondary and tertiary level.
These measures included a quota-system that positively discriminated in favour of
working-class children in the admission to upper-secondary schools (Erweiterte
Oberschulen), as well as stipends and information campaigns targeted at increasing the
participation of working-class children in tertiary education.
One further reason for the lower level of IEO between different social origin
groups in the GDR as compared to the FRG may have been that – due to employment
guarantees and the importance of political capital for individuals’ labour market
position in the GDR – individuals from advantaged backgrounds in the GDR were
less dependent on and therefore less invested in maximising their educational
attainment in order to maintain their parents’ social status, relative to their counterparts
in the FRG. Moreover, and given the goal of state socialism to equalise individuals’
socio-economic position, it may be the case that the goal of status maintenance itself
was less prominent in individuals’ educational decision making in the GDR than was
the case in the FRG.
Our second main finding is that IEO at the mid-secondary, upper-secondary
and tertiary level in East Germany increased substantially after German unification and
converged towards the level of IEO in West Germany. While the level of IEO at the

13

mid-secondary level in East Germany remained somewhat below that of West
Germany, the level of IEO at the upper-secondary and tertiary level all but resembled
that of West Germany after unification. Children from working-class backgrounds in
East Germany lost out most in relative terms after unification. They were overrepresented in the increased proportion of children leaving school before completing
mid-secondary education and they hardly benefitted from the educational expansion
that occurred at the upper-secondary and tertiary level in the wake of unification.
Our finding that the educational expansion at the upper secondary and tertiary
level benefitted individuals from high social class backgrounds more than individuals
from working-class backgrounds is in line with the Maximally Maintained Inequality
(MMI) hypothesis. MMI predicts that an expansion in the overall share of education
in a given society tends to primarily benefit individuals from more advantaged social
backgrounds until the educational attainment of this group has reached the point of
saturation, thus reinforcing educational inequalities between different social origin
groups (Raftery and Hout, 1993). Interestingly, our findings on over-time change in
the pattern of mid-secondary attainment in East Germany also suggest that the inverse
of the MMI hypothesis appears to hold. Individuals from high social class backgrounds
in East Germany were largely able to evade the declining trend in mid-secondary
attainment after unification, whilst individuals from working-class backgrounds were
most strongly affected.
Importantly, our multiple cohort design allowed us to examine whether the
increase in IEO in East Germany after unification was merely a short-term
phenomenon that may have been caused by the post-unification economic crisis, or
whether the increase in IEO persisted in the long-run, reflecting the permanent
changes in the institutional structure of the East German educational system and
economy that occurred in the wake of unification. We find the latter to be the case, as
the post-unification increase in IEO in East Germany was sustained across the three
post-unification cohorts we examine.
In interpreting our results, it should be kept in mind that – for reasons of
comparability of qualifications across East and West Germany – our analysis focuses
on examining the main school-leaving qualifications and academic tertiary
qualifications, rather than vocational qualifications. However, we do not expect the
empirical patterns we observe to differ with respect to vocational qualifications. If
anything, our estimates of the level of equality of educational opportunity in East
Germany before unification are likely to be conservative estimates, given that the
practice of awarding vocational qualifications on work-experience alone in the GDR
is likely to have led to an even lower level of educational inequality between social
origin groups with respect to vocational qualifications, as compared to general schoolleaving qualifications.
Our findings suggest that the results of the study by Kesler (2003) that showed
little difference in IEO between East and West Germany before unification and no
increase IEO in East Germany after unification are likely to be false negatives that are
due to the very small sample size used in her study. By contrast, our findings are in line

14

with studies from other post-socialist countries that have shown an increase in the
intergenerational transmission of inequality after the post-socialist transition (Gerber
and Hout, 2004, Lippényi and Gerber, 2016, and Bukodi and Goldthorpe, 2010;
Jackson and Evans, 2017). This is likely to be a result of the fact that the main
institutional changes in the educational system and economy that occurred under statesocialism in East Germany were common to most state-socialist countries at the time.
For instance, most state-socialist states mandated compulsory schooling in
comprehensive schools until the mid-secondary level and introduced measures that
positively discriminated in favour of children from working-class backgrounds in the
admission to upper-secondary and tertiary education (see Kogan et al., 2011; Diewald
et al., 2006). These institutional changes were reversed during the post-socialist
transition when early ability tracking was reintroduced, positive discrimination was
abolished and parental choice for educational transitions was extended (see, e.g.,
Kogan et al., 2011, pp.16-26). Similarly, state-socialist countries adopted similar
economic policies, characterised by strongly centralised economic planning and stateownership of enterprises. The economies of these countries were liberalised in the
rapid process known as ‘shock therapy’ after the post-socialist transition (see, e.g.,
Kogan et al., 2011; Diewald et al., 2006; Jackson and Evans, 2011).
Last, our findings speak forcefully to the debate in social stratification research
on the role of institutional change in the intergenerational transmission of inequality
(Blossfeld and Shavit, 1993; Goldthorpe, 2016; Betthäuser, 2017; Esping-Andersen
and Wagner, 2012). The tenor of much of the literature on this issue has been that
educational inequality is highly persistent across generations and largely immune to
efforts to decrease IEO by way of policy reforms. While our study does not allow us
to identify the role of any specific institution in accounting for the east-west and overtime differences in IEO that we observe, it provides strong evidence that the combined
institutional differences between the GDR and the FRG had a substantial effect on
the relative level of IEO in the two countries and that the institutional restructuring of
the East German educational system and economy after unification led to a marked
increase in IEO. Clearly, the low level of IEO in the GDR came at a high cost to
personal and political liberty. An important agenda for future research is to shed light
on the role and relative importance of specific macro-level institutions in equalising
educational opportunities across individuals from different social backgrounds, and to
examine whether and how such reforms can be implemented without compromising
personal and political liberties to the extent that it was the case in the GDR.

15

Notes
GDR statistics tend to be based on a very broad definition of ‘the working class’, which at times
includes state bureaucrats. Furthermore, rather vague categories such as ‘the intelligence’ (die Intelligenz)
are used to describe privileged social groups (see, Below, 1997; Geißler, 1983).
2 See Erikson and Goldthorpe (1992) for a discussion of the importance of inequalities in parental
economic resources for the intergenerational transmission of (dis-)advantage.
3 These Spezialschulen were designed to support exceptionally gifted children in achieving outstanding
performances in the sciences, arts and sports. Only about 2-5 percent of pupils were enrolled in these
Spezialschulen (Opitz, 1979; Meier and Reimann, 1977).
4 The upper-secondary school track (Gymnasium) was reinstated as a school form in all East German
states and even in states where the lower and mid-secondary tracks (Hauptschule and Realschule) were
combined in one school – this was the case in Saxony and Thuringia – pupils were separated into
distinct ability groups. The lower-secondary qualification (Hauptschulabschluss) after ninth grade was reestablished as a school leaving qualification.
5 A similar research design has been used by Goldstein and Kreyenfeld (2011) to study the effects of
German unification on fertility.
6 Individuals were allocated to these cohorts based on their year of birth, and to East and West
Germany based on whether they attended school in East or West Germany.
7 For a detailed discussion of the advantages of multiple imputation using chained equations in
research on social stratification see Kuha (2013).
8 Where individuals where interviewed more than once, the information on educational attainment is
taken from the last interview.
9 We also ran all our models separately by gender, which led to the same conclusions for both women
and men. Controlling for age is important particularly in the East German context, given the
prominence of alternative avenues for obtaining secondary and tertiary qualifications (Geißler, 1983).
10 We consider running binomial logit models on the entire sample to be preferable over restricting
the sample to subsets of individuals as practiced in the Mare-Model approach to analysing educational
inequalities. This allows us two avoid two considerable disadvantages associated with the latter
approach. First, given that we are interested in over-time change in the level of IEO across birth
cohorts, restricting the sample to those who qualify for a given educational transition is problematic,
since the composition of this group is likely to vary considerably across cohorts, thus introducing
severe selection biases into the analysis. Moreover, given the multiple routes to obtaining a given
qualification, any attempt at identifying the group of individuals who qualify for a given educational
transition is likely to be imprecise at best.
11 To confirm the statistical significance of the difference in IEO between East and West Germany
before unification, we run a binary logit model for the combined pre-unification cohorts and compute
the interaction between parental class and a dummy variable indicating whether individuals received
their schooling in East or West Germany (See Table A2 in the Appendix). The statistically significant
interaction confirms the difference in IEO at the mid-secondary level between East and West
Germany that we observe in Figure 1.
12 Table A1 in the Appendix shows a substantial and statistically significant rise in the inequality
between children from unskilled working-class backgrounds (the reference category) and children
from intermediate class and salariat backgrounds for the last three cohorts. While the average marginal
effects also suggest a rise in the educational inequality between children from unskilled and skilled
working-class backgrounds, this is not statistically significant.
13 The statistical significance of this post-unification difference is indicated by the interaction in Table
A2.
14 The statistical significance of this East-West difference is confirmed by the interaction shown in
Table A4 in the Appendix.
15 The statistical significance of this increase in IEO after unification is confirmed by the interaction
shown in Table A3 in the Appendix.
16 The statistical significance of this East-West difference is confirmed by the interaction shown in
Table A6 in the Appendix.
17 The statistical significance of this increase in IEO after unification is confirmed by the interaction
shown in Table A5 in the Appendix.
1

16

References
Angrist, J. D., & Pischke, J.-S. (2009). Mostly harmless econometrics. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Below, S. von. (1997). Bildung und soziale Ungleichheit in Ostdeutschland. In R.
Hauser & T. Olk (Eds.), Soziale Sicherheit für alle? (pp. 135–171). Opladen: Leske
and Budrich.
Betthäuser, B. (2017). Fostering Equality of Opportunity? Compulsory Schooling
Reform and Social Mobility in Germany. European Sociological Review, 33(5),
633–644.
Blossfeld, H.-P. (1993). Changes in educational opportunities in the Federal Republic
of Germany. In Y. Shavit & H.-P. Blossfeld (Eds.), Persistent inequality. Boulder,
Colorado: Westview Press.
Blossfeld, H.-P., & Shavit, Y. (1993). Persisting Barriers: Changes in Educational
Opportunities in Thirteen Countries. In Y. Shavit & H.-P. Blossfeld (Eds.),
Persistent inequality (pp. 1–23). Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press.
Breen, R., & Goldthorpe, J. H. (1997). Explaining educational differentials: Towards
a formal rational action theory. Rationality and society, 9(3), 275-305.
Bukodi, E., & Goldthorpe, J. H. (2010). Market versus meritocracy: Hungary as a
critical case. European Sociological Review, 26(6), 655–674.
Connelly, J. (2014). Captive University: The Sovietization of East German, Czech, and Polish
Higher Education, 1945-1956. UNC Press Books.
Cortina, K. S., Baumert, J., Leschinsky, A., Mayer, K. U., & Trommer. (2008). Das
Bildungswesen in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland. Hamburg: Rowohlt.
Diewald et al. (2006): Diewald, M., Goedicke, A., & Mayer, K. U. (2006). After the
Fall of the Wall: Life Courses in the Transformation of East Germany. Stanford
University Press.
Erikson, R. (1984). Social class of men, women and families. Sociology, 18(4), 500–514.
Erikson, R., & Goldthorpe, J. (1992). The constant flux. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Esping-Andersen, G., & Wagner, S. (2012). Asymmetries in the opportunity
structure: Intergenerational mobility trends in Europe. Research in Social
Stratification and Mobility, 30(4), 473–487.
Fischer, A. (1992). Das Bildungssystem der DDR: Entwicklung, Umbruch und Neugestaltung
seit 1989. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft.
Gangl, M. (2010). Causal inference in sociological research. Annual Review of Sociology,
36, 21–47.
Gebel, M. (2011). Hard Times for the Less Educated. In I. Kogan, C. Noelke, & M.
Gebel (Eds.), Making the transition: Education and labor market entry in Central and
Eastern Europe (pp. 58–85). Stanford University Press.
Geißler, R. (1983). Bildungschancen und Statusvererbung in der DDR. Kölner
Zeitschrift Für Soziologie Und Sozialpsychologie, 35(4), 755–770.
Gerber, T. P., & Hout, M. (1995). Educational Stratification in Russia During the
Soviet Period. American Journal of Sociology, 101(3), 611–660.
Gerber, T. P., & Hout, M. (2004). Tightening up: Declining class mobility during
Russia’s market transition. American Sociological Review, 69(5), 677–703.
17

Goldstein, J. R., & Kreyenfeld, M. (2011). Has East Germany overtaken West
Germany? Recent trends in order-specific fertility. Population and Development
Review, 37(3), 453–472.
Goldthorpe, J. H. (2016). Social class mobility in modern Britain: Changing structure,
constant process. Journal of the British Academy, 4, 89–111.
Hauser, R., & Becker, I. (2000). Der Einfluss des Steuer-und Transfersystems auf die
Einkommensverteilung in den neuen und alten Bundesländern. In H.-H. Noll &
R. Habich (Eds.), Vom Zusammenwachsen einer Gesellschaft: Analysen zur Angleichung
der Lebensverhültnisse in Deutschland. (pp. 63–82). Frankfurt: Campus Verlag.
Heyns, B., & Bialecki, I. (1993). Educational Inequalities in Postwar Poland. In Y.
Shavit & H.-P. Blossfeld (Eds.), Persistent inequality: Changing educational attainment
in thirteen countries. Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press.
Hunt, J. (2008). The economics of German reunification. In S. N. Durlauf & L.
Blume (Eds.), The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (Vol. 6). New York:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Jackson, M. V., & Evans, G. (2017). Rebuilding Walls: Market Transition and Social
Mobility in the Post-Socialist Societies of Europe. Sociological Science, 4, 54–79.
Kehm, B. M. (2004). Hochschulen in Deutschland. Aus Politik Und Zeitgeschichte:
Beilage Zur Wochenzeitung Das Parlament, 109–119.
Kesler, C. (2003). Educational stratification and social change: Evidence from
German unification. European Sociological Review, 19(5), 467–482.
Kogan et al. (2011): Kogan, I., Noelke, C., & Gebel, M. (2011). Making the transition:
Education and labour market entry in Central and Eastern Europe. Stanford
University Press.
Kuha, J. (2013). Trends in intergenerational class mobility in Britain: New findings
from the analysis of birth cohort data.
Lenski, G. (1994). New light on old issues: The relevance of “really existing socialist
societies” for stratification theory. In D. B. Grusky (Ed.), Social stratification:
Class, race, and gender in sociological perspective (pp. 55–61). Boulder, Colorado:
Westview Press.
Lippényi, Z., & Gerber, T. P. (2016). Inter-generational micro-class mobility during
and after socialism: The power, education, autonomy, capital, and horizontal
(PEACH) model in Hungary. Social Science Research, 58, 80–103.
Marggraf, H. J. (1993). Bildungswesen der ehemaligen DDR. In Statistisches
Bundesamt (Ed.), Einführung in dei Bundesstatistik in den neuen Bundesländern (pp.
119–131). Stuttgart: Metzger-Pöschel.
Mateju, P. (1993). Who won and who lost in a socialist redistribution in
Czechoslovakia. In Y. Shavit & H.-P. Blossfeld (Eds.), Persistent inequality.
Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press.
Mayer, K. U. (2006). After the fall of the wall: Living through the post-socialist
transformation in East Germany. In M. Diewald, A. Goedicke, & K. U. Mayer
(Eds.), After the fall of the wall: Life courses in the transformation of East Germany (pp.
1–29). Stanford, California: Stanford University Press.

18

Meier, A., & Reimann, A. (1977). Überblick über Ergebnisse bildungssoziologischer Forschung
in der DDR (Informationen zur soziologischen Forschung in der DDR No. 13)
(pp. 1–37).
Mintrop, H., & Weiler, H. (1994). The relationship between educational policy and
practice: The reconstitution of the college-preparatory Gymnasium in East
Germany. Harvard Educational Review Harvard Educational Review, 64(3), 247–278.
Opitz, G. (1979). Bildung für das ganze Volk. Berlin: Dietz.
Raftery, A. E., & Hout, M. (1993). Maximally Maintained Inequality: Expansion,
Reform, and Opportunity in Irish Education, 1921-75. Sociology of Education,
66(1), 41–62.
Rose, D., & Harrison, E. (Eds.). (2010). Social class in Europe: An introduction to the
European Socio-economic Classification. London: Routledge.
Schreier, G. (1996). Förderung und Auslese im Einheitsschulsystem Debatten und
Weichenstellungen in der SBZ/DDR 1946 bis 1989. Böhlau, Köln; Weimar; Wien.
Solga, H. (1994). “Systemloyalität” als Bedingung sozialer Mobilität im
Staatssozialismus, am Beispiel der DDR. Berliner Journal Für Soziologie, 4(4), 523–
542.
Solga, H. (1997). Bildungschancen in der DDR. In S. Häder, H.-E. Tenorth, & O.
Anweiler (Eds.), Bildungsgeschichte einer Diktatur: Bildung und Erziehung in SBZ und
DDR im historisch-gesellschaftlichen Kontext (pp. 275–294). Weinheim: Deutscher
Studien Verlag.
Speder, Z., & Habich, R. (1999). Income Dynamics in Three Societies: An Investigation of
Social Dynamics Using “Old” and “New” Types of Indicators (No. FS III) (pp. 99–
403). Berlin: Wissenschaftszentrum für Sozialforschung.
Szelényi, S. (1998). Equality by design: The grand experiment in destratification in Socialist
Hungary. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.
Szelényi, S., & Aschaffenburg, K. (1993). Inequalities in educational opportunity in
Hungary. In Y. Shavit & H.-P. Blossfeld (Eds.), Persistent inequality. Boulder,
Colorado: Westview Press.
Wagner, G., Frick, J., & Schupp, J. (2007). The German Socio-Economic Panel Study
(GSOEP): Scope, evolution and enhancements. Journal of Applied Social Science
Studies, (127), 139–169.
Wasmer, M., Blohm, M., Walter, J., Scholz, E., & Jutz, R. (2014). Konzeption und
Durchführung der Allgemeinen Bevölkerungsumfrage der Sozialwissenschaften (ALLBUS)
(GESIS Technical Report No. 22). Mannheim: GESIS.
White, I. R., Royston, P., & Wood, A. M. (2010). Multiple imputation using chained
equations: Issues and guidance for practice. Statistics in Medicine, 30(4), 377–399.
Windorf, P. (1996). Die Transformation der Ostdeutschen Betriebe. Berliner Journal
Für Soziologie, 4, 467–488.
Wirth, H., Gresch, C., Müller, W., Pollak, R., & Weiss, F. (2010). Measuring social
class: The case of Germany. In D. Rose & E. Harrison (Eds.), Social class in
Europe: An introduction to the European Socio-economic Classification (pp. 114–137).
London: Routledge.

19

