Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Pp.73- 83

DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no1.7
Effect of Project-Based Learning Using E-Poster on Indonesian EFL Students’ Speaking
Ability across Personality Types

Wulan Wuryantari Winasih
Graduate Program in English Language Teaching
Universitas Negeri Malang, Malang, Indonesia
SMK Muhammadiyah 1 Genteng, Banyuwangi, Indonesia
Bambang Yudi Cahyono
English Department, Faculty of Letters
Universitas Negeri Malang, Malang, Indonesia
Johannes Ananto Prayogo
English Department, Faculty of Letters
Universitas Negeri Malang, Malang, Indonesia

Abstract
Preparing students to compete and face any challenges of the rapid changes of globalization is a
responsibility of any form of education. Students’ success in today’s learning lies on their ability
to utilize technology as the heart of globalizationas well as to communicate in English effectively
within a variety of purposes. Project-based learning, as one of the technology-based activities, is
believed to be an effective method to facilitate the use of technology and oral communication
skill in English as a foreign language (EFL) classroom. This article investigates whether there is
a significant difference in students’ speaking ability between students taught through PBL using
e-poster and those taught through conventional method. It also determines whether there is a
significant difference in students speaking ability between extrovert and introvert students taught
through PBL using e-poster. Sixty-one Indonesian secondary level students from two intact
classes were involved and assigned randomly into experimental and control groups. The
quantitative data were collected through pre-test and post-test from both groups. Analysis of the
first result revealed that students who were taught through PBL using E-poster significantly
outperformed those who were taught through a conventional method. Conversely, the second
result showed that students’ personality types (extrovert and introvert) did not affect their
speaking achievement.
Keywords: e-poster, EFL students, personality types, project-based learning, speaking ability
Cite as: Winasih, W. W., Cahyono, B.Y., & Prayogo, J. A. (2019). Effect of Project-Based
Learning Using E-Poster on Indonesian EFL Students’ Speaking Ability across Personality
Types. Arab World English Journal, 10 (1) 73- 83.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no1.7
73

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Effect of Project-Based Learning Using E-Poster on Indonesian

Winasih, Cahyono, & Prayogo

Introduction
The development of information and communication technology (ICT) brings a change in the
context of educational need. ICT is often perceived as a device in constructing knowledge in the
education system to increase its quality (Sangrà & González-Sanmamed, 2010). By emerging ICT
into the classroom, traditional teaching method transforms into a new model of teaching where
teacher and students are essentially linked into limitless platforms and opportunities of tools,
experiences, material resources to increase their productivity. ICT also exposes connection and
access to knowledge and information from the global context that would fit into the classroom and
it offers a vivid and authentic environment to involve teacher and students in engaging learning
process. Thus, with the use of ICT, the classroom instructional purpose not only focusses on
teaching about technology or explaining how to utilize it, but also encouraging students to apply
technology to relate their knowledge and skill (Eady & Lockyer, 2013).
The ability to employ technology should be completedwith the ability to demonstrate and
share what is learned. Meaningful and successful use of technology is acquired when students are
able to communicate their ideas and thoughts clearly and effectively within different context and
purposes (Eady & Lockyer, 2013). In order to facilitate EFL students to be successful in the today’s
learning, Project-based Learning (PBL) as one of the learning methods proposed by the 2013
Curriculum in Indonesia, is regarded as a way to facilitate the integration of ICT and
communication skill as part of the 21st century skills in the classroom (Education and Culture
Ministry of Indonesia, 2017).
The present study was intended to examine students' speaking ability after being taught by
using PBL through e-posters as the final product of the integration of technology in learning to
speak in English. It aimed to combine ICT with a traditional poster appearance to make it more
visually appealing, effective, and efficient to deliver ideas (Shin, 2012 as cited in Masters, 2017).
More specifically, the students were assigned to create a paperless format of a poster displayed
through LCD projector by including various ranges of media elements (texts, colors, graphs,
pictures, etc.) on the poster. The research questions are formulated as follows:
(1) Is there any significant difference in the speaking ability of EFL students taught through
project-based learning (PBL) using e-poster and those taught using the conventional teaching
strategy?
(2) Is there any significant difference in the speaking ability of the extrovert students and introvert
students taught through project-based learning (PBL) using e-poster?
Literature Review
EFL Students’ Speaking Ability
For Indonesian EFL students, in particular, the ability to communicate orally signifies a
real challenge as not all students have the experience in speaking in English (Hosni, 2014).
Students do not have enough confidence and have severe anxiety to speak English. They are also
too shy, reluctant, and often have high pressure to speak. Consequently, they prefer speaking in
their mother tongue to speaking English (Ur, 2012). This complexity may rise from the lack of an
effective instructional teaching strategy applied by the teacher and the shortage of opportunities to
practice English in a formal setting.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

74

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Effect of Project-Based Learning Using E-Poster on Indonesian

Winasih, Cahyono, & Prayogo

Project Based Learning
Project Based Learning (PBL) extends the beneficial and effective method of instruction
in the classroom (Thomas, 2000). The students who experience PBL are proven to achieve better
in language skills including speaking, critical thinking and knowledge attainment (Du & Han,
2016). PBL as students-centered learning focuses the process of learning on real-world problem
as directed by the essential question to drive the project. Students then explore their creativity to
provide an open-ended answer to the problem throughout the completion of the project.
Additionally, Krauss and Boss (2013) assert that students obtain essential knowledge, skills, and
personalities by working in teams or groups to conduct an investigation. Through PBL, the
students also respond to authentic questions which enable them to communicate in purposeful
ways through the stages of PBL.
There have been a number of studies performed to provide evidence of the significant use
of PBL focussing on students’ speaking ability. Zare-Behtash and Sarlak (2017) conducted
research that tried to examine the influence of PBL on EFL university students’ speaking ability.
The result of this study can be concluded that PBL was an effective method to promote EFL
students’ speaking ability. On a different level of students, Torres and Rodriguez (2017)
investigated how elementary students could enhance their speaking ability in the EFL classroom
through PBL. From the results of data analysis collected from field notes, students’ oral
performance and interview, it was revealed from both studies that PBL encouraged students to
increase oral production, helped to lessen speaking anxiety in the second language as well as
improved the school life and community learning interest. Shortly stated, PBL has been
implemented in speaking activities and successfully improved the students’ speaking ability.
It is important to note that many of the studies on PBL focussed on university and primary
school students. Therefore, it is necessary to investigate studieson the use of PBL to enhance the
speaking ability of students in another level of education in the Indonesian context in particular.
In addition, only a few studies included technology into students’ final project during PBL. For
example, a study conducted by Gónzalez, Molina, and Cardona (2017) integrated the use of
technology in the project assigned to students. The result showed that students could improve their
oral production in English, creativity in using technology and collaboration.
Personality Types
Further review of literature indicated that students’ personality types (extrovert and
introvert) could be as variables which affected students’ success on foreign and second language
learning (Ellis, 1994; Dornyei, 2005). A result of the study by Yusef-Hasirchin (2014) showed that
extrovert students speak more fluently compared to introvert ones. In contrast, Souzandehfar,
Souzandehfar, Farsi, et al. (2014) and Chen, Jiang, and Mu (2015) testified that introversionextroversion was not the main factor influencing students’ accomplishment in oral English
learning since there was no significant difference in students’ speaking scores between students
from different types of personalities. Thus, a further investigation on the effect of personality types
(extroversion and introversion) on students’ oral communication achievement is still possibly
needed since the result of some research are inconsistent and contradictory.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

75

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Effect of Project-Based Learning Using E-Poster on Indonesian

Winasih, Cahyono, & Prayogo

Method
Design and Subjects of the Study
This study employed a quasi-experimental research design because it is not possible to
select the students randomly as the subjects of the study. The subjects of the study were 61 students
of a vocational high school at Banyuwangi Regency, East Java, Indonesia. The students were from
two intact classes and assigned randomly into the experimental group (31 students) and the control
group (30 students). Before the study was conducted, these two groups of students were
homogenous in terms of their speaking ability. In this study, the independent variable was the
application of PBL using e-poster and the dependent variable was the students’ speaking ability.
In addition, personality types were used as the moderating variables to divide the students in the
experimental group into two smaller groups: extrovert and introvert students.
Procedure of the Study
Session
Experimental Group
1
Pre-test administration
2 • Students were givenmaterialson procedure
•
textsand exercises
• They were introduced to PBLand asked to work in•
pair or a small group tothink of the importance of
procedure text in the digital era. (Stage 1)
• They were also asked to plan a project and make a
work schedule. (Stages 2& 3)
3
• Students were asked to present the draft
they had orally. Their oral presentations
were given feedback by the teacher.
• Theyrevised their procedure textsand as
the project they were guided to make eposters based on their procedure texts.
They continued working on e-posters
outside the class period. (Stage 4)
4
• The students present their e-posters in
groups using LCD projector.
• The students’ presentationswere scored by
the teacher using scoring rubricsfor
speaking and multimedia. (Stage 5,
continued)
5
• The remaining students presented their eposters. (Stage 5)
• The students were asked to share their
opinion about the project implementation.
(Stage 6)
6
Post-test administration

Control Group
Pre-testadministration
Students were givenmaterialson procedure
texts and exercises
Students were given homework to think of a
procedure text in pair or a small group.

• Students were asked to make a draft of
procedure text by using mind
mapping.
• The students’ drafts were given
feedback by the teacherand
theyrevised their procedure texts.
• The students present their procedure
textsin groups. (Continued)
• The students’ presentationswere
scored by the teacher using
scoringrubric for speaking.
• The remaining students presented their
procedure texts.
• The studentswere asked to share their
opinion about the teaching and
learning process.
Post-test administration

The research ran in 6 sessions. The first and last sessions were used for pre-test and posttest administration. The second to the fifth sessions were used for the teaching process in which
the students in the experimental group were taught through PBL using e-poster,while those in the
control group were taught conventionally without PBL. The PBL was conducted by following
the six stages of PBL: (1) Start with essential questions; (2) design a plan for the project; (3)
Arab World English Journal
76
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Effect of Project-Based Learning Using E-Poster on Indonesian

Winasih, Cahyono, & Prayogo

create a schedule; (4) monitor students and project progress; (5) assess the outcome, and (6)
evaluate the experiences (Harun, 2006). The schedule for research is shown in Table 1.
Table 1. The Schedule of Research
The final works of the students in the experimental group were e-posters produced in pairs or
groups through PBL. Some of the titles of the e-posters are “How to Wash Clothes in Washing
Machine,” “How to Shop Online” and “How to Draw Cash from ATM Machine”
Data Collection
The data on students’ speaking ability was derived from speaking test scores gained from
pre-test and post-test administered before and after treatment respectively. The students’ speaking
ability was scored by using a scoring rubric adapted from Hughes (2003) containing a number of
speaking elements: content, vocabulary, pronunciation, accuracy, and fluency. The different scores
of the pre-test and post-test were used to indicate the students’ progress in their speaking ability.
The scores also showed the difference of the speaking ability of the students in the extrovert and
introvert sub-groups. The data of the students’ personality types were gained by using
questionnaire distributed to the experimental group. The questionnaire were constructed based on
Jung model (1971, as cited in Maltby, Day & Macaskill, 2010) and adapted according to how
extrovert and introvert students think, behave, interact and learn within the teaching and learning
process. There were 21 questionnaire items which were arranged to represent dimensions of
extrovert and introvert personality types namely: direct energy outward to people and conversation
(extrovert) and direct energy inward to one’s own world (introvert). Based on the questionnaire
data the students were classified into extrovert or introvert students.
Results
The results of the study are presented in the order of the answers of the two research questions.
The Difference in Speaking Ability of Students Taught through PBL Using E-Poster and those
Taught Using Conventional Teaching Strategy
To determine the result of the research, preliminary statistical analyses of the pre-test
scores of the experimental and control groups were performed to ensure that the requirement of
the assumption of normality of the distribution and homogeneity of the scores were fulfilled. The
result of Kolmogorov-Smimov test showed that the speaking ability scores of students in the
experimental and the control groups were normally distributed since all of the p-values of pre-test
(0.317 and 0.158) in the two groups were greater than 0.05 level of significance. The scores were
also homogenous as the result of the Levene test indicated that the comparison of the pre-test
scores of both groups (0.268) was greater than 0.05.
Since there was no violation on normality and homogeneity on the pre-test scores of the two
groups, parametric statistical analysis with independent samples t-test was administered to
investigate the difference in the speaking ability of the students in the experimental and control
groups. The result of independent samples t-test between the experimental and control groups in
the speaking pre-test is depicted in Table 2.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

77

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Effect of Project-Based Learning Using E-Poster on Indonesian

Winasih, Cahyono, & Prayogo

Table 2. Comparison of Pre-test Scores of the Experimental and Control Groups
Score
Group
N
Mean
SD
t-count
p-value
Analysis
Pre-test Experimental
31
56.16
11.748
0.326
0.746
Not significant
Control
30
55.23
10.423
Note: ttable (5%; 59) = 2.001
Table 2 shows that the pre-test scores of experimental and control groups test are quite
comparable. Since the comparison of the mean of the experimental group (56.16) and that of the
control group (55.23) with t-count 0.326 is smaller than t-table (2.001) and the p-value (0.746) is
greater than 0.050 level of significance, it can be conjectured that there is no significant difference
in speaking ability of the students in the experimental and control groups before being given the
treatment. Accordingly, the comparison of the post-test scores of the two groups was also
conducted by using independent samples t-test,and the result is displayed in Table 3.
Table 3. Comparison of Post-test Scores of the Experimental and Control Groups
Score
Post-test

Group
Experimental
Control
Note: ttable (5%; 59) = 2.001

N
31
30

Mean
67,68
62,10

SD
10.943
9.716

t-count

p-value

Analysis

2.102

0.040

Significant

Table 3 reveals that the comparison of the mean of the experimental group of students (67.68)
is higher than the mean of the control group of students (62.10). Furthermore, with t-count (2.102)
greater than t-table (2.001) and p-value (0.40) smaller than 0.050 level of significance, it is
apparent that the difference of speaking ability between experimental and control groups of
students after being exposed to the treatment is significant. The null hypothesis stating that there
is no significant difference in the speaking ability of EFL students taught through PBL using eposter and those taught using the conventional teaching strategy is rejected. In other words, the
treatment of PBL using e-poster affected the speaking ability of the students in the experimental
group which is better than the speaking ability of the students in the control group who were taught
using the conventional teaching strategy.
The Difference in Speaking Ability of the Extrovert and Introvert Students Taught through PBL
Using E-Poster
Given that the result of analysis of the data to answer the first research question showed
that there was a significant difference in the speaking ability of students taught through PBL using
e-poster and those taught using conventional teaching strategy, the analysis continued to test the
hypothesis of the second research question. The null hypothesis states that there is no significant
difference in the speaking ability of extrovert and introvert students taught through PBL using eposter. Independent samples t-test was also utilized to test the second hypothesis. Based on the
data analysis from the personality type questionnaire distributed to 31 students of the experimental
group, it was revealed that there were 17 extrovert students and 14 introvert students. The result
of the analysis between extrovert and introvert students in the experimental group was
demonstrated in Table 4.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

78

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Effect of Project-Based Learning Using E-Poster on Indonesian

Winasih, Cahyono, & Prayogo

Table 4. Comparison of the Post-test Scores of the Extrovert and Introvert Students
Score
Group
N
Mean
SD
t-count
p-value
Analysis
Speaking
Extrovert
17
66.50
11.269
0.654
0.518
Not-significant
post-test
Introvert
14
69.11
10.771
Note: ttable (5%; 29) = 2.045
Table 4 portrays that the speaking ability of extrovert and introvert students is not
significantly different, even though the mean of the extrovert students (66.50) is smaller than the
mean of introvert students (69.11). Moreover, the t-count (0.654) is smaller than the t-table (2.045),
and the p-value (0.518) is bigger than 0.05 level of significance. Thus, the null hypothesis stating
that there is no significant difference in the speaking ability of extrovert and introvert students
taught through PBL using e-poster is accepted. This indicates that there is no significant difference
in the speaking ability of the extrovert students and introvert students taught PBL using e-poster.
It also means that the personality types, extrovert and introvert in particular, do not contribute to
students’ speaking ability when they were exposed with the treatment of PBL using e-poster.
Discussion
The results of the present study are discussed about the two research questions. The discussion is
intended to interpret the results in relation to the existing theories and relevant research studies.
The Difference of Speaking Ability of Students Taught through PBL Using E-Poster and those
Taught Using Conventional Teaching Strategy
This study revealed that there was a significant difference in the speaking ability of students
who were taught through PBL using e poster and those who were taught conventionally without
PBL. The finding of this study is pertinent to the experts who assert that PBL is an instructional
method which is more effective than the traditional method (e.g., Thomas, 2000). In EFL speaking
classes, PBL created a learning circumstance in which the students work in teams to generate oral
communicative forms in the target language (Dooly & Sadler, 2016). At the beginning of the
project, students were anxious to express themselves using English since they have never spoken
in English. They mostly communicated in their mother tongue because they were hesitant and
embarrassed to use English to speak (Ur, 2012). They could not speak in complete sentences since
they did not have enough vocabulary. In addition, they still pronounced some words
inappropriately and somehow were also afraid to make mistakes on grammar.
Nevertheless, such speaking problems gradually subsided as the treatment of PBL exposed
students to more opportunities to speak in English, enabled them to practice more and concentrate
more on content rather than on the form. By doing the project, the students could explore any
possible resources, to design and organize the ideas, to prepare their oral presentation, to rehearse
their oral presentation draft, and finally to present their e-posters orally. They were offered peer
and teacher feedback as well as assistance like translation especially for students having difficulty
with communication and the task (Torres & Rodriguez, 2017). This also provided them with
vocabulary, the pronunciation of some words, and sentence structure. In a nutshell, in spite of the
anxiety and language limitation, students essentially constructed their oral production through a
series of activities offered within the stages of PBL as it was verified by the higher speaking ability
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

79

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Effect of Project-Based Learning Using E-Poster on Indonesian

Winasih, Cahyono, & Prayogo

indicated by the scores obtained by students in the experimental group compared to those in the
control group who were taught traditionally without PBL.
This finding of the study is in line with the result of research studies conducted by ZareBehtash and Sarlak (2017). The result of this study was similar to the present study as they pointed
out that PBL was an effective method to increase EFL university students’ speaking ability. The
studies also showed students’ positive attitude toward the implementation of PBL in speaking
class. The result of studies carried out by Torres and Rodriguez (2017) also confirmed the success
of implementation of PBL in improving elementary students’ English-speaking ability as they
were exposed to several speaking activities in the projects. The results displayed that the students
were fostered to increase oral production in aspects of comprehension, vocabulary, grammar,
fluency, and pronunciation. From the analysis of data from fieldnotes and interviews, it was
indicated that students diminished their anxiety in speaking English and boosted awareness of their
school community and society.
Applying e-poster as students’ project-based technology for oral presentation in this study
signified a real assistance in generating students’ new ideas, activating their existing knowledge,
exploring creativity and expressing their communicative skills in the form of interesting
multimedia products to accommodate their procedural texts. By working together collaboratively
in teams to create e-poster project through PBL, students were involved in a conducive learning
environment that enabled them to discuss, decide and devote time, energy, and effort to produce a
finished product (Padgett, 1994 as cited in Boggu & Singh 2015). Gónzalez, Molina, and Cardona
(2017) highlighted the finding by concluding that applied project-based technology in language
classroom encouraged a meaningful learning process of speaking and improved students’ selfconfidence as well as their interaction. Additionally, with the integration of technology as the
students’ group project, PBL allowed them to increase their creativity, communication, and
collaboration skill needed in the 21st century learning.
The Comparison of Speaking Ability of Extrovert and Introvert Students Taught through
Project-Based Learning (PBL) Using E-Poster
With regard to the second research question, the result of this study revealed that there was no
significant difference in the speaking ability of extrovert and introvert students who were taught
through PBL using e-poster. In other words, personality types of students—be they extrovert ot
introvert—did not affect their speaking ability when they were taught through PBL using e-poster.
While it was stipulated that personality types could be a factor that affects second language
learning (e.g., Ellis, 1994; Dornyei, 2005) the application of PBL which gave students opportinities
to interact more with other students in teams in the completion of the project led to an effect which
is not supportive of the stipulation,
It is commonly postulated that extrovert students are more successful and fluent in oral
communication compared to introvert students (Dewaele & Furnham, 1999). This perception is
primarily based on the extroverts’ preference for social contact with their environment in which
they are active, showing a strong desire to communicate, and willing to express their ideas through
speaking with others. Introverts, on the contrary, tend to avoid public exposure as they are less
sociable and feel more comfortable for not taking part in communication (Khodareza & Taheri,
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

80

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Effect of Project-Based Learning Using E-Poster on Indonesian

Winasih, Cahyono, & Prayogo

2015). Yet, this study suggested the opposite result in that both extrovert and introvert students
could equally accomplish better in their speaking ability through PBL using e-poster.
Souzandehfar et al. (2014) reported the same finding which showed that there was no
meaningful correlation between extrovert-introvert personality types and students’ speaking
ability in IELTS test. Their research also reported that there was no significant difference between
extrovert and introvert students in their speaking ability. We suspected that the extrovert students
felt anxious when there was no exposure of English in the classroom. The extrovert students might
be comfortable and fluent in speaking in their mother language, but they found it hard to speak in
English. Conversely, introvert students who were interested more in the academic study felt
prepared in speaking English as they enjoyed more on reading and listening in English than
involving in oral interaction. They tend to have more exposure in English outside the classroom
by themselves.
This study was also supported by Chen et al. (2015) who testified that introversionextroversion was not the main factor influencing students’ accomplishment in oral English
learning. In line with Souzandehfaret al (2014.), the justification rooted from the observation
which showed there were probable factors concerning the result: the setting of foreign language
class which did not provide natural communication situation and students’ language output and
intake. When introvert students equipped themselves with enough language input from reading
any English resources and probably had suitable method to develop their English, on the other
hand, the nature of extrovert personality could not ensure that they speak accurately. Although
they were talkative and spoke much, they tend to speak with limited vocabulary, appropriate
pronunciation as well as sentence pattern. Chen at al. (2015) also included motivation and culture
as the factors influencing the students’ ability in speaking English. Students who were interested
in learning English, despite their personality types, would be highly motivated to perform better
in communicating in English. Moreover, unlike Western culture, Asian culture encouraged
students to be quiet and pay attention to the teacher’s explanation in classroom as a form of respect
to their teacher. Consequently, extrovert students who are active in their nature tend to be passive
and quiet during the teaching and learning process.
However, the result of this study was contradictory to what was resulted on studies conducted
by Yusef-Hasirchin (2014). The result of this study informed that the extrovert students achieved
better than introvert students in oral performance. Compared to the introvert students, extrovert
students more actively participated in an assigned task and accomplished a higher level of accuracy
and fluency. Their findings disclosed that there was a significant difference in speaking ability
between extrovert and introvert students and this is contradictory with the result of the present
study.
Conclusions
This article has presented the result of exploration on the effect of PBL using e-poster on
Indonesian EFL students’ speaking ability across personality types. The result revealed that there
was a significant difference on speaking ability between students taught through PBL using eposter and those taught conventionally without PBL.The treatment of PBL using e-poster
contributed to students’ speaking ability as it showed that the students in the experimental group
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

81

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Effect of Project-Based Learning Using E-Poster on Indonesian

Winasih, Cahyono, & Prayogo

achieve better scores than those in the control group. Compared to the conventional teaching
strategy applied in the control group, the speaking activities offered through learning stages of
PBL were proven effective to accommodate students in increasing their speaking ability in spite
of their fear of speaking and language limitation. The result also indicated that there was no
significant difference between extrovert and introvert students taught through PBL using e-poster.
Extrovert and introvert students had an equal chance to achieve better in speaking test since there
was no evidence that their personality types affected their speaking ability. The difference in the
students’ speaking ability was possibly influenced by factors of foreign language classroom
setting, students’ intake and output, motivation and culture. Thus, it is important that English
teachers take more concern on those possible factors and exclude the personality types to help
students improve their achievement in their speaking class. Recognition of those factors will assist
teachers to understand and decide which learning strategies are effective for extrovert as well as
introvert students in language learning and particularly in speaking.
About the Authors:
Wulan Wuryantari Winasih is a student of graduate program of English Language Teaching
(ELT) at Universitas Negeri Malang, Indonesia. She works as an English teacher at Sekolah
Menengah Kejuruan (SMK) Muhammadiyah 1 Genteng, Banyuwangi, Indonesia.
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0298-4923
Bambang Yudi Cahyono is a Professor in Applied Linguistics at Universitas Negeri Malang,
East Java, Indonesia. He earned his M.A. from Concordia University, Montreal, Canada and
Ph.D. from the University of Melbourne, Australia.
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0001-5210-5208
Johannes Ananto Prayogo is a senior lecturer in the English Department of Universitas Negeri
Malang, East Java, Indonesia. He earned his Doctorate degree in English Language Teaching
from the same university. ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8275-9368
References
Boggu, A. T., & Singh, J. S. (2015). Poster Presentation as An Effective Communication Tool in
An EFL Context. International Journal of Language and Linguistics, 2(5), 203-213.
Chen, Y., Jiang, Y., & Mu, Z. (2015). A Survey Study: The Correlation between
Introversion/Extroversion and Oral English Learning Outcome. Journal of Language
Teaching and Research, 6(3), 581-587. http://dx.doi.org/10.17507/jltr.0603.14
Dewaele, J-M. & Furnham, A. (1999). Extraversion: The Unloved Variable in Applied
Linguistics Research. Language Learning, 49(3), 509-544.
Dooly, M., & Sadler, R. (2016). Becoming Little Scientists: Technologically Enhanced ProjectBased Language Learning. Language Learning &Technology, 20(1), 54-78. Retrieved
from: http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2016/doolysadler.pdf
Dornyei, Z. (2005). The Psychology of the Language Learner: Individual Differences in Second
Language Acquisition.Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Du, X.,& Han, J. (2016). A Literature Review on the Definition and Process of Project-based
Learning and Other Relative Studies. CreativeEducation,7, 1079-1083.
http://dx.doi.org/10.4236/ce.2016.77112
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

82

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
Effect of Project-Based Learning Using E-Poster on Indonesian

Winasih, Cahyono, & Prayogo

Eady, M. J., & Lockyer, L. (2013). Tools for Learning: Technology and Teaching Strategies. in
Learning to Teach in the Primary School(pp, 71-92). Queensland: Queensland
University of Technology, Australia.Retrived from http://ro.uow.edu.au/asdpapers/403
Education and Culture Ministry of Indonesia, (2017). Model-Model Pembelajaran [Instructional
Models]: Jakarta: Direktorat Pembinaan Sekolah Menengah Atas Direktorat Jendral
Pendidikan Dasar dan Menengah Kementerian Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan.
Ellis, R. (1994). The Study of Second Language Acquisition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gónzalez, D. K., Molina, J. C., & Cardon, B. S. R. (2017). Project-based Learning to Develop
Oral Production in English as a Foreign Language. International Journal of Education
and Information Technologies, 11, 87-96.
Harun, Y. (2006). Project-based Learning Handbook: Educating the Millennial Learner. Kuala
Lumpur: Educational Technology Division Ministry of Education.
Hosni, S. A. (2014). Speaking Difficulties Encountered by Young EFL Learners. International
Journal on Studies in English Language and Literature (IJSELL), 2(6), 22-30.
Hughes, A. (2003). Testing for Language Teachers. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Khodareza, M. R., & Taheri, M. (2015). The Effect of Audio-visual Aids on Extrovert and
introvert Learners’ Speaking Ability. Indian Journal of Fundamental and Applied Life
Sciences, 5(3), 1075-1081. Retrieved from
http://www.cibtech.org/sp.ed/jls/2015/03/jls.htm
Krauss, J.,& Boss, S. (2013). Thinking through Project-based Learning: Guiding Deeper Inquiry.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Maltby, J., Day, L.,& Macaskill, A. (2010). Personality, Individual Differences and Intelligence
(2nd ed). Harlow: Prentice Hall (Pearson Education).
Masters, K., Gibbs, T., &Sandars, J. (2015). How to Make an Effective E-poster. MedEdPublish.
4(1), 1-9. http://dx.doi.org/10.15694/mep.2015.004.0001
Sangrà, A., & González-Sanmamed, M. (2010). The Role of Information and Communication
Technologies in Improving Teaching and Learning Processes in Primary and Secondary
Schools, ALT-J, 18(3), 207-220.
Souzandehfar, M., Soozandehfar, S. M. A., Farsi, M., & Shari, M. (2014). Which Personality
Trait Performs Better on IELTS Speaking Test? Extroverted or Introverted? Advances in
Environmental Biology, 8(6), 2159-2168.
Thomas, J. W. (2010). A Review of Research on Project-based Learning. Retrieved from
http://www.autodesk.com/foundation
Torres, A. M. V., & Rodríguez, L. F. G. (2017). Increasing EFL Learners’ Oral Production at a
Public School through Project-based Learning. Profile Issues in Teachers' Professional
Development, 19(2), 1-20. http://dx.doi.org/10.15446/profile.v19n2.59889
Ur, P. (2012). A Course in English Language Teaching (2nd ed). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Yusef-Hasirchin, M. (2014). The Effect of Extraversion and Introversion on Fluent Speaking on
Iranian EFL Students. Enjoy Teaching Journal (ETJ), 2(1), 28-39.
Zare-Behtash, E., &Sarlak, E. (2017). The Effect of Project Based Learning on the Components
of Speaking Ability of Iranian EFL Beginner Learners. Journal of Applied Linguistics
and Language Research, 4(3), 119-130.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

83

