This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv

Matters arising: Can transnational corporations leverage systemic change towards a
“sustainable” future?
Response to Folke et al. Transnational corporations and the challenge of biosphere
stewardship. Nat. Ecol. Evol. 3, 1396-1401 (2019).

Authors: Anselm Schneider1*, Jennifer Hinton2, David Collste2, Tais Sonetti González, Sofia
Valeria Cortes Calderon, Ana Paula Aguiar2
*Corresponding author: anselm.schneider@sbs.su.se

1

Stockholm Business School, Stockholm University, Sweden

2

Stockholm Resilience Centre, Stockholm University, Sweden

0

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv

We welcome the idea that transnational corporations (TNCs) can play a central role in the
protection of the biosphere recently contributed by Folke et al.1. It is certainly crucial to
understand how TNCs affect the biosphere. While the authors provide a comprehensive
overview of the impact of TNCs on the biosphere and propose some pathways through which
TNCs might contribute to the stabilization of the Earth system, we argue for increased attention
to several crucial intrinsic features of TNCs that are problematic for the central question posed
by the paper “Can TNCs leverage large-scale systemic change, accelerate positive
transformations towards sustainability, and contribute to a safe operating environmental space
for humanity?” (Folke et al., 2019, p. 1398).
Intrinsic features of TNCs
First, currently the incentive structures for TNCs, which are largely determined by global
financial markets2, demand continuous profits in order to deliver high returns on investment3.
Folke et al. (2019, p. 1401) concede that TNCs in many documented cases meet profit
expectations by instigating “excessive, wasteful consumption founded on a fossil-fuel driven
economy”. However, abstaining from such practices would for many TNCs (for instance in the
fossil fuel, mining, and garment industries) imply not only a minor adjustment of their business
model, but a discontinuation of their core purpose and structure. While the idea of “corporate
biosphere stewardship” as a “new business logic with the purpose of shepherding and
safeguarding the resilience of the biosphere for human well-being” (Folke et al., 2019, p. 1401)
is appealing, it seems to implicitly build on the assumption of a “business case for corporate
sustainability” where businesses can make money through contributing to environmental
integrity and social equity. This assumption is unlikely to apply to every business context, and
has not been empirically supported 4. Biosphere stewardship and social equity are in many cases
opposed to the profit expectations of the global financial system, and thus the incentives for
TNCs to engage in biosphere stewardship are limited. There is a contradiction between the
1

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv

vision of a sustainable and just world5,6 and the disproportional concentration of market share,
wealth and power in a few TNCs and their shareholders. Therefore, ownership and investment
structures of TNCs pose a key challenge, if not a barrier, to their potential to act as biosphere
stewards.
Second, TNCs typically operate in geographical areas that have weak political institutions
(including corruption, human rights violations, and even civil war; see, e.g., 7). Under these
conditions TNCs can capitalize on negative externalities, which are borne by the biosphere and
the citizens of the TNCs’ host countries8. The utilization of governance gaps, which are often a
result of colonialism by the Global North9, by TNCs to their benefit8 can exacerbate social and
economic inequalities between high-income countries, where most TNCs are headquartered,
and middle-to-low-income countries, which often host TNCs’ activities. In this way, they
actively erode local modes of biosphere stewardship, as is the case with mining TNCs in the
India10 and fossil fuel TNCs in Nigeria11. While Folke et al. (2019) explicitly mention that
“people, nations and the global economy are intertwined with the biosphere” (p. 1401) and refer
to the inequalities created by the global economy, their account of the role of TNCs in biosphere
stewardship overlooks these problematic aspects.
Problems with trusting biosphere “stewardship” to TNCs
In our eyes, the overly optimistic perspective of TNCs presented by Folke et al. (2019) harbours
several dangers. First, portraying TNCs as actors who have the potential to “leverage largescale systemic change” veils the fact that the TNC is one of the centrepieces of systemic
dynamics causing the current biosphere crisis. Acknowledging this makes it clear that system
change would also require a major structural transformation of TNCs, if not the search for
alternative forms of organizing the economic system, which goes beyond the emerging features
presented by Folke et al. (2019).

2

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv

Second, while explicitly mentioning the importance of effective and improved governmental
regulation, the authors suggest a rather unproblematic relationship between TNCs and national
and global regulation. However, the influence of TNCs on democratic political processes and
regulatory efforts across scales (be it through lobbying, tax evasion, or corruption12) suggests
that there is not so much of a congruence of goals as a sacrificing of the public interest in service
of private profit for TNCs. Folke et al. (2019) do not seem to acknowledge the immense social
and political power wielded by TNCs13 and the fact that their interference with political
processes is among the main reasons that stricter regulations of their practices are not
implemented.
Third, and crucially, we believe a rather unbalanced assessment of potential contributions of
TNCs to biosphere stewardship reinforces the economistic narrative of a mutually beneficial
relationship between global capitalism, biosphere stewardship, and social progress, which
seemingly does not hold. Accomplishing the “deep transformation based on a fundamental
reorientation of human values, equity, behavior, institutions, economies, and technologies“14
that is necessary for re-entering a safe operating space for humanity is unlikely to be found
within the traditional narrative of global capitalism15, of which TNCs are some of the most
powerful representatives - and supporters.
We suggest academia should engage in the quest for, and envisioning of, alternative economic
paradigms that safeguard the needs of all people, promote a less unequal world and ensure the
re-entering of a safe operating space for humanity. This requires an understanding of the lockins, complexities and resilience of the current dominating economic system, to avoid proposing
solutions which might only reinforce the root causes of the current situation.

3

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv

References
1.

Folke et al., Transnational corporations and the challenge of biosphere stewardship.
Nature Ecology & Evolution 3, 1396–1401 (2019).

2.

Davis, G. F. Managed by the markets: How finance re-shaped America (Oxford
University Press 2009).

3.

Stout, L. A. The shareholder value myth: How putting shareholders first harms
investors, corporations, and the public. Berrett-Koehler Publishers (2012).

4.

Adler, P. The 99% economy. Oxford: University Press (2007).

5.

Raworth, K. Doughnut economics (White River Junction: Chelsea Green Publishing
2018).

6.

Leach et al., Equity and sustainability in the Anthropocene: A social–ecological systems
perspective

on

their

intertwined

futures.

Global

Sustainability,

1,

E13.

doi:10.1017/sus.2018.12 (2018)
7.

Guidolin, M., & La Ferrara, E. (2007). Diamonds are forever, wars are not: Is conflict
bad for private firms?. Am. Econ. Rev. 97, 1978–1993 (2007).

8.

Muchlinski, P. Social and Human Rights Implications of TNC Activities in the
Extractive Industries. Transnational Corporations 18, 93–104 (2009).

9.

Acemoglu, D., & Robinson, and J. A. Why nations fail: The origins of power,
prosperity and poverty (Suffolk: Clays 2012).

10.

Kraemer, R., Whiteman, G., & Banerjee, B. Conflict and astroturfing in Niyamgiri: The
importance of national advocacy networks in anti-corporate social movements. Organ.
Stud., 34, 823–852 (2013).
4

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv

11.

Muchlinski, P. T. (2001). Human rights and multinationals: Is there a problem? Int. Aff.
77(1), 31–47 (2001).

12.

Fuentes-Nieva, R. & Galasso, N. Working for the few: Political capture and economic
inequality. (Oxford, UK: Oxfam GB 2014).

13.

Phillips, N. Power and inequality in the global political economy. Int. Aff. 93 (2), 429–
444 (2017).

14.

Steffen, W., Rockström, J., Richardson, K., Lenton, T. M., Folke, C., Liverman, D., ...
& Donges, J. F. Trajectories of the Earth System in the Anthropocene. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. 115, 8252–8259 (2018).

15.

Göpel, M. The great mindshift. Springer Nature: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-31943766-8 (2016).

5

