Preprint
Nga Than
City University of New York – The Graduate Center
Email: nthan@gradcenter.cuny.edu
Reviewlet for Contemporary Sociology
What is Political Sociology?, by Elisabeth S. Clemens, MA: Polity, 2016. 166 pp. $19.95 paper.
ISBN: 9780745691619.
In What is Political Sociology?, Elisabeth S. Clemens offers a smart primer on political
sociology that asks what is distinct about this sub-field. By surveying its main concepts and
research agendas—power and politics, states, nation-states, social movements, social change,
and transnationalism—she shows how political sociology examines social processes that
influence both formal politics and the politics that take place in everyday settings. Clemens notes
that that political sociology differs from political science in that the former studies politics in
various settings and that patterns of political participation and the distribution of political power
are shaped by social relations, while the latter studies “the formal institutions and acts of
governing” (p.1).
Chapter 1 creates a conceptual toolbox that undergirds the entire book. Clemens starts by
examining concepts such as “power,” “social cage,” and “social closure.” She argues “in
combination, the development of social cages, social closure, and restrictions on exit allow for
the formation of durable systems of political hierarchy and the conditions for intensified
extraction and coercion” (p. 23). In chapter 2, Clemens differentiates between two dominant
types of political order, namely empires and nation-states, and explains why states take different
forms. In addition, she examines cultures of nationalism as they operate within nation-states.
1

Preprint
Chapter 3 addresses political change by focusing on the question of revolution and the conditions
under which some countries become democratic while others become dictatorships.
Chapters 4 and 5 turn toward political dynamics within modern democratic states. Chapter
4 focuses on the networks and social embeddedness of individuals as political decision makers.
The relationship between state and society is viewed through the lens of the state structure, in
chapter 5. It expands on how policy shapes individual preferences and politics.
In chapter 6, Clemens approaches the topic of social movements by asking why some
people mobilize, others do not, and how individuals continue participating in a movement.
Finally, chapter 7 explores how globalization and transnational developments bring about
political change and how these forces affect nation-states.
Clemens’s thorough and concise writing makes What is Political Sociology? accessible to
a wide range of audiences. The book provides novice political sociologists with an introduction
to the field’s main concepts and arguments. It is recommended for students of sociology,
political science, and social movements.

2

