The Value of Toys: 6–8 -year-old children’s toy preferences and the functional analysis of
popular toys
Pekka Mertala*, Hannele Karikoski, Liisa Tähtinen & Vesa-Matti Sarenius
Faculty of Education, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
Abstract
The aim of this study was to explore the kinds of toy preferred by 6–8-year-old children, asking: how,
and on what basis, do children rationalize their preferences for particular toys? Data was collected by
interviewing children in their homes. Children chose 8 toys from a tailored catalog and explained why
they wanted those particular items. Toys were analyzed with the aid of a framework designed to test
their functional manipulation potential. The children's reasoning was analyzed by means of inductive
content analysis. Two kinds of values were found: 1.) those which reside in the toy itself; and 2.) those
which children give to toys. Sub-categories relating to material, social, and personal values were
identified from the given values. The present paper deepens knowledge of the value of toys not only
as playthings but also as cultural artifacts which children use as one form of their voice.
Keywords: toy, preference, play, affordance

Introduction: a Piagetian approach to playing with toys
This study is a part of broader research project `Play in different contexts´, which is being conducted
in collaboration with a Finnish toy importer and marketing company. 1 In this article, our focus is on
the views of 6–8-year-old children concerning the value of toys. The present paper compares the
views expressed by a test-group of children regarding the particular features of toys they consider
important during the process of toy selection with our own expectations (based on the available
research literature) concerning the impact of particular affordances and built-in features of toys in the
formation of children’s preferences.
As our focus in this study is on playing with toys, we will approach play as a form of object
manipulation. Here we are following a developmentalistic approach which finds its roots in Jean
Piaget who identified a strong relation between play and development which could be divided into
certain stages. Piaget addresses cognitive development as an internal process and separates out the
types of play that occur before and after children learn to combine imagination with action. The
earliest forms of play, where no use of imagination occurs, are what Piaget calls ‘practice play’. When
the imagination has developed enough, surrounding objects no longer determine the content of play
as children are capable of manipulating their meanings through symbolic object transformation (a
process which Piaget named ‘symbolic play’). A third stage, according to Piaget is ‘rule play’, in
which rules can be either given (as in games), or created spontaneously during play. (Blake & Pope,
2008; Matusov & Hayes, 2000, 216; Nicolopoulou, 1993; Piaget, 1962, 97–98, 143–146.) However
it should be noted that Piaget’s theory regarding the development of play does not hold a
monopolizing position in the field of play-theory, and that the broader idea of developmentalism has
*
1

Corresponding author. Email: pekka-oskari.mertala@oulu.fi
This work was supported by the LEIKKAAMO-project under Grant [24301143].

2

been criticized by deconstructionalist psychologists and proponents of the New Sociology of
Childhood. For example Nicolopoulou (1993) criticizes Piaget for neglecting the social features of
play and James, Jenks and Prout (1998, 17–18) state that there has been a growing dissatisfaction
towards the universal, predetermined and sequenced nature of children’s development (see also
Lourenco & Machado, 1996).
However, Piaget’s theory has been the base for many of the former toy classifications (Almqvist
1994). The latest approach following this path is Kudrowitz’s and Wallace's (2010) `play pyramid´,
where toys are labeled by means of Piagetian framework and a play scale based on classic play
theories from Caillois, Huizinga, and Parten. Classifications have also been based on the level of toys’
resemblance to real life objects and agents (Wright 2003) and their ability to promote social play
(Ivory & McCollum 1999). In several cases, categorizations are used as qualitative and descriptive
umbrella terms even though they have been derived from limited and potentially homogenous
samples. For example in Hughes's (1999) classification puzzles, drawing instruments and books are
labeled as gender neutral toys. The problem with these umbrella terms is that here are thousands and
thousands of different puzzles, pens and books and although some of them surely can be labeled
neutral there are roughly an equal number that cannot. To avoid this problem and an overwhelming
number of different umbrella classes (see Nelson 2005) we will next present the idea of the functional
manipulation potential of toys: a taxonomic model which is based on their built-in purposes.
The functional manipulation potential of toys
In our model, Piaget’s ideas on the relation of cognitive development to forms of object
manipulation are re-conceptualized in terms of functional thinking / symbolic thinking and functional
manipulation / symbolic manipulation. By 'functional thinking which leads to functional
manipulation' we mean forms of play in which no symbolic thinking is needed. Examples of such
play-types can be throwing or kicking a ball, sliding, flying a kite, playing a board game etc. By
'symbolic thinking that leads to functional manipulation' we mean forms of play in which symbolic
thinking is needed to actualize the functional manipulation potential of a certain toy, and which
describes the ways in which the user is intended to play with it. For example, acting out a caregiver–
child-role-play with a doll requires that the player transforms the doll into a baby by using his/her
ability for symbolic thinking. By 'symbolic thinking that leads to symbolic manipulation', we mean
cases in which the result of manipulation cannot be returned to the functional manipulation potential
of a toy. In the case of the baby doll, the play-type can be tracked back its functional play affordances
as it resembles a real baby and thereby creates the opportunity for socio-dramatic role-play. But if
children use hobbyhorses as rifles, the form of manipulation cannot be seen to result from a functional
manipulation potential of the toy even though the shape of actual toy and its symbolic transformation
have some physical resemblance. The model of functional manipulation potential is presented in table
1. Its affordances and elements including their sub-features and our model’s roots in former studies
are discussed in more depth in the following section.

3

Table 1. The functional manipulation potential of toys
Functional manipulation potential
Functional play value
Attractive affordance

Pragmatic affordance

Adaptive affordance

Representational element
realistic; fantasy-oriented
Gender element
female; male
Sensory element
visual; tactile; auditive; olfactory
Productive element
constructive; aesthetic; given; open ended
Performative element
performative; transitive
Normative element
Technological element
Social element
competitive; collaborative
Motoric element
cross; fine
Academic element
mathematic; linguistic;
memory; conceptualization

In the present context, functional refers to intentional built-in features that provide pragmatic,
attractive or adaptive affordances (e.g. Kudrowitz & Wallace, 2010; Papanek, 1971) and thus
encourage particular forms of play (Ruckenstein, 2010). Manipulation connotes the understanding of
play as different forms of object manipulation (e.g. Piaget, 1962). Potential accepts that the
actualization of functions depends on the subjective cognitive and motoric skills of the players as
well as their spatial or structural configuration (e.g. Kline, 1999; Piaget, 1962; Sutton-Smith, 1986;
Van Leeuwen, 2005). For example, the performative potential of a toy dog does not actualize for a
small baby who hasn't yet developed the ability to engage in symbolic thinking. Potential also tails
off as children develop. As soon as children learn to master a clock, an academic potential is lost from
games that practice such mastery (such as ‘Tick Tock’-game in this study), although other elements
(for example the social function of a multiplayer game) still remain.
To be labelled as a toy, an artifact must intentionally produce affordances for playing (Kudrowitz
& Wallace, 2010). It must, in other words, have a functional play value which can be dominant or
latent. A toy car by itself has all that is needed for playing with it, but a garage needs a car for
functional use. Therefore pragmatic affordances can be seen as the core-affordances. Attractive
affordances are the sum of built-in features that invite children to pick out a certain toy from the
broader toy-pool. Representationality is always an attractive affordance and, naturally, its attractive
purpose is clearest in cases where it provides no other affordances (for example a ball that has a

4

picture of a princess or a fairy on it). Likewise, different sensory features increase the realistic
representationality of a toy (a dog that barks / doll that cries) or may provide other attractive
supplements (pens that have a scent). By adaptive affordances, we mean instances in which toys can
act in at least two different roles. Examples of toys with adaptive affordances include construction
blocks, as these furnish the opportunity to create constructions which may then be used in sociodramatic role play (Van Leeuwen, 2005, 50–51).
Representational elements can be labeled as realistic or fantasy-oriented. The realistic label is
given to toys which replicate real life archetypes (Hughes, 1999; Kline, 1999; Nelson, 2005). This
feature is dominant when the whole toy is a replica of the target and moderate when a representational
element, usually a picture, is added to an otherwise non-representational toy. With respect to Genderoriented elements, we follow views represented in previous studies (e.g. Blakemore & Centers, 2005;
Eisenberg, Murray & Hite, 1982; Miller, 1987) and use familiar cultural constructions as a means of
defining what is masculine, feminine and neutral. For example a police car (along with all of its
baggage of cultural connotations relating to action and aggression) is labeled as strongly masculine
whereas a baby doll that relates to care-giving is labeled as strongly feminine. These are what Papanek
(1971) identifies as the `universal associations´ that derive from the human desire to give items other
values besides those which have already been designated. Sensory elements are those features of toys
that produce a sensory stimulus. Features created in this way may be auditory, visual, tactile and
olfactory and their effectiveness varies on a scale from moderate to dominant. For example a pram
rattle that moves and shakes has both pragmatic and attractive affordances for a small baby as the
rattling sound and colorful moving figures encourage children to reach their arms or legs towards it
(Van Leeuwen 2005, 79–86). Productive elements can be divided between constructions and aesthetic
productions. Constructions can be further subdivided into given and open-ended productions. A
jigsaw puzzle has a given constructive value, generic building blocks are open-ended, while themed
Lego sets are both as, although they direct children to build certain types of construction, they are not
restricted to this remit. Jigsaw puzzles also lack the adaptive affordance that construction blocks have.
The difference between aesthetic productions which elicit sensory responses and `plain´ sensory
response is determined by the extent to which the sensory response relates to other features. Pushing
a button that makes a baby doll cry does not come out as an aesthetic auditory product but as a realistic
representational feature. Kline (1999) describes performatives as representational hints of ‘what the
toy can do’ and ‘what type of role children should make the action figure play’. Our understanding
of performative element of toys is somewhat broader than Kline’s as we expand the idea of
performativeness to include also role play clothes, toy guns etc. Thus, in our model, performative
elements can actualize in two different features. The expression ‘performative feature’ refers to an
action where children act or embody a role (Kalliala, 1999, 153). For example a baby doll has a
performative value as, by playing with it, children embody themselves as the caregivers. Likewise,
‘Transitive features’ refer to forms of play where children act out a role by a toy. Thus types of toys
that represent something but are not meant to be used in socio-dramatic role play do not contain
transitive values as elements in their performative feature (see the case of ‘the digging set’ in table
2). According to Bretherton (1984), children can act in two different roles while playing with figures.
They can be both narrators who recount what the characters are doing and vicarious actors who act
and speak on behalf of the lifeless toys. In a broader sense the whole model of functional manipulation
potential is a normative term itself, as functionality tends to limit the possibilities for manipulation
(Norman, 1988, 9–11). The presence of normative elements implies that functional manipulation is

5

possible only by following rules. Rules are here understood not only as protocols followed when
playing games but also as `rules in form´ which, for example, have a dominant feature in jigsaw
puzzles and a moderate feature in types of Lego™ which offer both a model and instructions for
building a construction at the same time as they also encourage personal outcomes. Technological
elements are dominant in toys that can no longer be functionally manipulated if the technological
features are damaged and moderate in toys that can still fill their functional purpose even when
technological features don’t work (Allen, 2004, 179). With respect to social elements, Ivory and
McCollum (1999) suggest that toys can be divided in two categories: those which promote social play
and those which do not. Here it is somewhat problematic that our expectations regarding the social
use of toys and their actual use do not always match, and social use seems to be highly context related.
For example according to Sutton-Smith (1986, 37–38), toys, in the family context are meant to
encourage solitary play but children with siblings or peers in the neighborhood will naturally use toys
for social play. Borenstein (1996, 213–218) argues that toys increase the amount of social interaction
as they constitute a form of language that children can share and use. Bergen, Hutchinson, Nolan and
Weber (2010) have studied the social affordances of toys for infant-parent play and found that social
integration can be supported by certain features. However for present purposes, ‘social features’ are
understood as connoting a need for at least two players to use a toy functionally, while ‘social
interaction’ can be either co-operative or competitive. The motoric element of toys is divided in two
categories: fine and gross. Their features are dominant or moderate. To be dominant, the motoric
feature needs to be the main function of the toy (as in the cases of hula-hoop or a jumping rope).
Moderate motoric value is determined by comparing motoric tasks to other functional potentials
provided by the toy. We have chosen to use term academic (rather than ‘pedagogic’) element to
emphasize the ambiguous relation between ‘learning and play’ and ‘learning and toys’, as both
learning and play are concepts which are difficult to define unambiguously (see Almqvist, 1994).
Following the logic of functional manipulation, the academic element is limited to possible learning
experiences children can glean from intentionally inserted features. By emphasizing this, we are not
claiming that children would not learn from playing with other kinds of toys (or, indeed, no toys at
all); rather, we are merely underlining the point that some toys have been designed with the purpose
of teaching children about numbers or letters, for example (see Hartmann & Brougère, 2004, 47).
Children’s Toy Preferences
Contemporary toys in most Western contexts are predominantly understood as objects that have been
manufactured and purchased for children to play with (Gougoulis, 2003, 10; Nelson, 2005). Besides
their value as playthings, commercial toys are said to have various cultural values. Sutton-Smith
(1986) has observed that toys have meanings in relation to bond and obligation, solitariness,
consolation, technology, education, agency and market. Through cultural-semiotic analysis,
researchers have found that toys may enshrine views of gender and ethnic-based roles (Kress & Van
Leeuwen, 2006; Wright, 2003), or allude to gender, race and ethnic stereotypes (Best, 1998; Kline,
1999; Martens, Southerton & Scott, 2006; Sherman & Zurbriggen, 2014). To have toys and to know
what toys one should have are forms of children’s cultural knowledge that may be transformed into
social capital among peers (Kalliala, 1999; Puroila & Estola, 2012).
Children’s toy preferences have been subject to a moderate amount of study. The background
variable examined is usually the gender of informants (Cherney & Dempsey, 2010). Children’s levels

6

of reading (Billie, 1984), the social values of surrounding society (Nelson, 2005), the degree and
frequency of their exposure to toy commercials (Bujitzen & Walkenburg, 2000; Pine & Nash, 2002),
and brand awareness (O’Cass & Clarke, 2002) have also been the main subject or co-subject in past
studies, though – with the exception of Billie’s (1984) study – gender related analysis has played a
marked role in all of the works mentioned. According to Nelson (2005) there are is a body of literature
indicating that girls and boys tend to prefer and choose toys that are traditionally feminine or
masculine. Wright (2003) states that Barbie-doll is more than a toy as it mimics the female form,
stands for a woman and functions as a tool for self-imagining. Kline (1999) notes that, similarly, the
action figures designed for boys offer them hyper-masculine models of behavior. It seems that the
eagerness to focus on the gender-issue is built around the question of how playing with stereotypical
toys affects children’s views of themselves and views regarding their possible agency as members of
their gender (Sherman & Zurbiggen, 2014).
Two alternative data-gathering methods are usually followed in toy preference studies. The first
is to offer a set of actual toys or pictures of toys for children to choose from (Cherney & Dempsey,
2010; Eisenberg et al., 1982; Escudero, Robbins & Johnson, 2013). A second method has been to
collect and analyze children’s `Dear Santa´ -letters (Bujizen & Walkenburg, 2000; Downs, 1983;
Halkoaho, Laakso, Laaksonen & Lahti, 2009; Pine & Nash, 2002; O’Cass & Clarke, 2002). A
distinction can also be made between the studies where children name toys from a pool they know
well (for example toys that are their own or toys at their day care center, see Hartmann & Brougère
2004) and studies where children have no or only a little ‘hands on’ experience of the toys (dear Santa
-studies). Children tend to prefer toys related to their own gender (Cherney, 2006Cherney &
Dempsey, 2010; Hartmann & Brougère 2004; cf. Downs, 1983). According to Blakemore & Centers
(2005), boys over 4 years old tend to regard toys that they consider to be feminine as `hot potatoes´:
something to avoid. Children’s reasoning about toys and their preferences for particular toys is a less
well-studied subject. In an examination of 3–5 -year old children’s reasoning concerning toys and
gender relations (Cherney & Dempsey, 2010), the color of the toy was the key factor for labeling,
though only a few children were able to reason their preferences. A study by Eisenberg et al. (1982)
revealed that 3–4 -year-old children use a noticeable amount of gender related reasoning when
choosing toys for others but concentrate more on what they can do with the toy when picking toys
for themselves. In two studies egocentric views were the primary forms of reasoning, as in: `what I
like, children of my sex will also like and children of the other sex will not like´ (Martin, Eisenbud
& Rose 1995; see also Cherney, 2006). We believe that by examining toys as physical items with
certain functions, we are able to analyze in more depth and clarity the tapestry of toy-based values,
culture-based values, social-based values and subjective values which children see in toys. Through
this approach, we are also trying to avoid the problem of over-generalization found in some earlier
studies. For example in Miller’s (1987) classification, balls were said to relate to aggression and thus
to be masculine. A closer examination, however, reveals that the sample contained two balls, both of
which were replicas of balls that are used in ball games that include a great deal of contact (Almqvist,
1994; Blakemore & Centers, 2005). It can be argued that a similar study done with different balls
would come up with different results.
Method
Rather than aiming for a large scale study, we were keen to find fewer – but informant rich – cases
(Patton, 1990, 169). Thus a snowball method was used to reach suitable informants. At the first stage,

7

parents of a local preschool group were informed about the study. At the second stage they passed
the word to their friends and so on. In the end, a cohort of thirteen (13) children from six to eight
years old participated in the study, comprising seven girls and six boys from ten families. The study
was conducted in urban southern Finland and the socio-economic backgrounds of the families can be
described as middle-class or upper middle-class (Bureau of Statistics, 2012). A few days before the
interview, a tailored catalog of 45 age-appropriate toys was given to children along with the
instruction to choose eight toys that they would like to have (see appendix 1). The variety of items in
the catalog was diverse. It contained toys that could be labeled as masculine (Spy gear, cars), feminine
(princess costumes, fairy wings), trendy (Angry birds, Bratz) traditional (board games, Rubik's cube,
puzzles), or technology-enhanced (iPawn, Chatimals). All children were interviewed twice and every
child was interviewed individually. The data used in this study was collected from the first interview.
All the interviews were done by the same researcher. According to Adler & Adler (2002, 528) the
topic of the interview must determine where the interviews are done. Thus interviews were done in
children’s own homes as we thought that a familiar environment and the presence of their own toys
would support children’s narrations. Roos and Rutanen (2015) note that unpredictability is always
present when interviewing children: they can be extremely talkative or give one-word answers and
the gathered data may lead researchers to change their research questions. There were, indeed, notable
variations in the length of the children’s narratives. The shortest interview lasted 14 minutes and the
longest 61 minutes. It should be noted that toy preferences were only one of the themes discussed,
others being for example children’s concepts of what play is and what playing means to them. All the
interviews followed the same logic. First children were asked a few warm up questions (for example
how their day had been) and then interviewer started to guide the discussion towards play and toys.
Toys were discussed one toy at a time by using the catalog as a mediating tool. According to
Lipponen, Rajala, Hilppö & Paananen (2015) looking at, pointing to, and commenting on the same
representation helps different parties to understand each other. The children were asked during the
interview to explain their preferences to the interviewer and to discuss their ranking criteria. No fixed
questions, other than asking children why they want the particular toy, was used. All the interviews
were recorded and transcripted.
Our main research tasks were to study what type of toys children chose and how they reasoned
out their preferences. We were interested in the question as to whether children based their
preferences on actual features of toys or whether their preferences were bound up with other factors
(media, peers etc.). From a Piagetian perspective, children who participated in this study were either
at pre-operational or formal operational stages. According to Piaget’s play theory, the types of play
most common for children would then be role play and rule play. Our first hypothesis was based on
this view as we assumed that children would choose toys that promote role play (i.e. those which
have dominant values associated with performative and representational elements) and those which
promote rule play (i.e. have their dominant values associated with normative elements). Based on
previous studies, we also assumed that boys and girls would choose different toys and that boys would
be stricter with regard to choosing toys that they label as gender-appropriate.
An analysis of the toys’ functional manipulation potentials and their relation to hypotheses
based on Piaget’s theory concerning the development of play was conducted by means of deductive
content analysis by using the framework model of functional manipulation potential. Analysis of
children’s reasoning was done by means of inductive content analysis (Miles & Huberman, 1994, 10–
12). Limitations of the present study reside in the narrow and homogenous sample of informants, and

8

also the use of a catalog which restricted children’s choice options (especially as the catalog was built
around products of a single importing company).
Results
A total number of 25 toys was chosen. The digging set was the most popular toy as 11 out of 13
children wanted it. Table 2. presents the functional analysis of the five most popular toys from boys
and girls. The number is based on the `dear Santa´ -studies (Bujizen & Walkenburg, 2000; Downs,
1983; Halkoaho et al. 2009; Pine & Nash, 2002; O’Cass & Clarke, 2002), where the number of wishes
varied between 3,5 and 7,2 with the mean settling at 4,85 toys.
Table 2. Functional analysis of the five most popular toys2
Boys

Girls

Digging set
Representational (PATR); Productive (CG); Normative (X)

Speed pawn -dog
Representational (PATR), Performative (T)

Defiant track & car
Representational (PATR); Gender (M)
Productive (CG); Performative (t); Technology (X);
Normative (x)

Bratz winter world
Representational (PATRf); Gender (F); Performative (T)

Angry Birds Star Wars
Representational (PAtFr); Gender (m); Performative (T)

Bratzilla
Representational (PATFr); Gender (F); Performative (T)

Spy gear
Representational: (PATRf); Gender (M); Performative (P);
Technology (x)

Lalaloopsy
Representational (PATRf); Gender (F); Performative (P)

Nikko car
Representational (PAtR); Gender (M); Performative (t);
Technology (X)

Digging set
Representational (PATR); Productive (CG); Normative (X)

Based on Piaget’s theory of stages of play, our hypothesis was that children would choose toys that
contain representational, performative and normative elements. As shown in table 2, representational
elements with pragmatic affordances were notably high in both boys’ and girls’ wishes as were
performative elements with performative and transitive features. A normative element appeared in
the most popular toys as a `rule in form´. For example the dinosaurs in the digging set needed to be
put together by following instructions precisely. As there was only one possible solution for
constructing the dinosaur, the normative value was labeled high. With a ‘Defiant’ car track, children
can construct a variety of different types of race tracks – with the prerequisite that it be in a somewhat
circular shape – and all of these representations are valid in terms of functional manipulation: which
is not the case with the digging set. Combining this finding with the twelve wishes for games, reveals
an overall interest in toys that had a normative element, even though no game was interesting enough
to gain more than four wishes. Yet it should be noted that two most popular games were both either
2

Capital letters stand for dominant value and lower cases for moderate value; P is pragmatic affordance; AT is
attractive affordance; in representational element R is realistic value and F is fantasy-oriented value. In gender-oriented
element F is feminine value and M is masculine value. In productive value C is construction and G is given. In
performative element P is performative value and T is transitive value. In normative and technological elements their
existence is marked with an X.

9

dominant (iPawn) or moderate (Rubik’s Race) in their technological elements. The distinction
between performative and transitive features within the relevant performative element is based on the
different characteristics of the toys. For example, Lalaloopsy is a full-size doll and is thus equivalent
to classic baby dolls that are used in socio-dramatic play where children act as caregivers. Bratz-dolls
are smaller and more mature looking than Lalaloopsys and thus afford forms of manipulation where
children are expected to present their role via the figure rather than situating themselves and the figure
as actors, as they would with full-size dolls. The interest of Boys towards the ‘Defiant’ racing car and
that of the Girls towards Bratz-dolls are similar to Hartmann’s and Bourgue’s (2004) findings
indicating that in the context of contemporary western culture, there are some cross-cultural genderrelated similarities in children’s toy preferences. The representational elements of Angry Bird -space
figures were labeled highly fantasy-oriented, but with a moderate realistic feature. The realistic
feature comes from the fact that even though the figures are caricature-like and may even be
represented as Star Wars characters, they can still be labeled as birds and pigs. A similar reasoning is
used with Bratzilla-figures. Basic Bratz-dolls, despite their huge eyes and lips, are representations of
humans, and thus may be labeled as realistic with moderate fantasy-oriented features. Cars and
dinosaurs were highly realistic representations of real life objects and actors.
Four values of toys
Researcher: So you wanted that Baby born -dog?
Girl 1 (8): Well I wanted it because I like dogs a lot and it has its own bone and drinking
bottle and collar and it looks so cute! I’m going to name him Wally!
Researcher: Oh, you have already a name for him. That’s really nice!
Our analysis of the children’s reasoning revealed four types of values: functional play value, material
value, social value and personal value. Values are more overlapping than distinct (figure 1).

Figure 1. The four values of toys

10

Getting a new toy always increases children’s material resources even if children reason their needs
according to other types of values. Further, as noted earlier, toys as material resources and oases of
cultural knowledge may be transformed into forms of social capital that have an impact on children’s
social positions and their relations among their peers (Borenstein, 1996; Puroila & Estola, 2012). For
example the previous extract from an interview of an 8-year-old girl shows that her preferences are
based on personal and functional values, as she already has an existing interest in dogs which
complements the representational and performative elements found in the requisite toy. Naming the
dog also implies that she is going to play with it.
Functional value
Girl 1: I like babies. They are fun to carry and feed and dress-up. I can nurture it like
if it’s a real baby.
Functional play value refers to children’s reasoning based on the different functional elements of toys.
Eisenberg et al. (1982) call this `action oriented reasoning´, because it is based on what can be done
with the toy in question. The passage above is from an 8-year-old girl’s reasoning as to why she wants
a baby-doll. Her answer contains an understanding of the performative element whereby symbolic
thinking is needed to actualize the functional manipulation potential. Pragmatic affordances were
often mentioned as well. Another girl said that she would like to have the `Tick tock´ -game so that
she could learn time, implying that she was basing her reasoning on a desire to utilize the academic
element of the particular toy. Here, a boy reasons out his preferences by mentioning that engaging
with the normative element behind Rubik’s cube, solving the problem by following rules, fascinates
him.
Researcher: Why do you want to have a Rubik’s cube?
Boy 1 (8): Because it is interesting.
Researcher: Why do you find it interesting?
Boy 1: Because it must be solved by getting the colors right.
The attractive affordances activated by representational elements in toys were important to girls:
terms such as `cute, lovely, adorable´ etc., often appearing in their reasoning.
Material value
Girl 2 (8): It comes with lot of accessories! It’s good because I have only a few Bratzthings…
No children chose fewer than eight toys. Two boys asked for one extra toy outside the catalog. The
amount is higher than in `Dear Santa´ -studies where the number of wishes varied between 3,5 and
7,2 with the mean settling at 4,85 toys. The significance of ownership was notable in cases where
children reasoned that they collected certain types of toys or already had them but wanted more
(Puroila & Estola, 2012). In some of these cases children did not refer to playing with the toy at all.
In these cases, toys were seen more as collectibles than things to play with. Further, the amount of

11

extra material provided with the toy was important to children (One girl pointed out that she was
happily surprised when she later realized that her Lalaloopsy play set contained more extras than were
shown in the catalog). Girls also preferred a toy dog that came with care-giving accessories (water
pot, leash etc.), over a dog that came without accessories. Here material resources overlap with
functional affordances, as (according to the children) accessories make the dog more realistic (a clear
case of dominant values being based on realistic representationality). According to Piaget (1962, 135–
138) children’s role play develops in a more realistic direction as children grow older.
Social value
Researcher: So why did you want this spy gear -set?
Boy 2 (7): Well, maybe because Jonas likes to spy and he comes often to play at my
place.
The social value of toys can be seen to derive from socially constructed values and the expectation of
future social interaction. According to Borenstein (1996), toys are a language children share and use.
Some children said that they wanted certain toys because they knew their friends liked them and
having them would promote social play. Friends were also named as the source of information on the
subject of which toys are desirable (see Kalliala, 1999). Socially constructed preferences played a big
role in children’s reasoning as, for the majority of children participating, friends were related to at
least one toy preference. Two boys even asked for Skylander -figures that weren’t included in catalog
- as both of them had seen Skylanders when visiting a friend. Blakemore's and Centers’s (2005)
finding that boys consciously avoid feminine toys was notable in this study as well. Even though
some boys were interested in the Star wars Angry Bird -figures, none of them chose the feminine
Stella / Princess Leia -bird. One of the boys highlighted the point that he didn't like the `pink princessbird´.
Personal value
Girl 3 (8): Well because they go shopping and I really like to go to clothes-stores.
Researcher: Was there something else that you liked about it (a Bratz Boutique figure)?
Girl 3: No. I just really like shopping.
The extract above has many similarities with the example of the girl talking about a baby doll.
However, there is a one significant difference. Unlike the case of the baby doll, the girl here is not
saying that she likes role play which includes shopping or that she will play in this way with her new
doll. It is valuable for the girl because it represents something she finds pleasing in the real life.
Overall, children reflected their personal experiences and aesthetic views on toys a lot. Four girls
reported that they were interested in dogs and that they would therefore like to have a toy dog to play
with. Two girls explained their liking for a Bratzilla-doll by saying that they could use its hair-do and
costume as an inspiration for their Halloween-party apparels. Two girls also justified their preference
for a doll with a certain hair color through its similarity to the color of their own hair.

12

Researcher: What about that digging set then?
Boy 3 (6): Well because I like it a lot… and we did break ice at pre-school
Researcher: So you are a true digger then.
Boy 3: We pretended that ice was gold.
The preference here derives from earlier enjoyable experiences that the boy had associated with the
digging set as the latter promised similar activities to those connected with his earlier experience
(breaking ice with tools / breaking the stone around the fossil with tools). Likewise one girl, when
asked why she had chosen a digging set, replied that she used to collect dinosaurs and draw dinosaurbooks when she was younger.

Conclusions
Our findings indicate that the grounds on which children base their preferences for toys are multilayered, as the four values found (functional, material, social and personal) overlap one another. Our
Piagetian-based assumption, of children showing an interest in toys that had representational,
performative, and normative elements was supported by our findings. Representational elements with
pragmatic affordances were notably high in both boys’ and girls’ wishes, as were performative
elements with performative and transitive features. Different types of games gained twelve
nominations but no game was interesting enough to attract the attention of more than three children.
However, normative elements were present in the digging set and racing car track as ‘a rule in form’
because it was necessary that they were put together either by way of a precise following of
instructions or, at least, with some degree of freedom. In line with previous studies, gender-based
differences were also notable. Some children connected the amount of accessories with the realism
of toys that were replicas of real life agents. A dog with a leash and water-pot was ‘more dog’ than a
one without. The impact of socially constructed values was notable as well. Children said that having
a certain toy would promote their chances of social play as their friends were interested in those
particular toys. Friends and their toys were also named as the source of knowledge with regard to the
toys in which one was supposed to be interested. There were also some traces of meaningfulness with
regard to functional social elements, as four children wanted multiplayer board games. At a personal
level, children reflected their past experiences and current topics of interest, as well as their views of
aesthetics and self-realization, in terms of toys. For example the ways in which children react to the
attractive features of dolls (hair color, for instance), relate to their habitus or understanding of
aesthetics.
Our findings support those of Hartmann and Brougère (2004) as we both confirmed, for
example, that girls like doll-figures such as Barbie and Bratz while boys like cars. Besides that, our
small-scale approach was able to reveal something new about the basis on which children form their
preferences. For example, girls reasoned their preferences on many occasions by referencing material
and personal values. It seems that in many cases there is an existing interest towards certain themes
or phenomena which leads children to seek toys which manifest these wishes and ideas in a concrete
form. This is in line with Gibson’s (1979) argument that the experience of an affordance is always
subjective. However, understanding the actualization of affordances as subjective interpretations does
not preclude the existence of more general forms of affordance. Different types of affordances with

13

regard to functional manipulation potential were important for some of the children (see the cases of
the baby-doll and Rubik’s Cube). It is possible that functional features are something that children
just do not actively analyze as other values, such as the material, personal and social, may be the ones
they are more aware of. For example, boys didn’t express their keenness for racing cars and tracks
through function-based reasoning. Yet, nevertheless, cars were a shared target of interest: indicating
that there must be something in the toy itself which is visible and meaningful for a large group of
boys (see Hartmann & Brougère, 2004): even if these features are not discussed in an explicit manner
by children. According to Piaget (1962), the older the children get, the more realistic their role play
becomes. Thus it is possible that the dominant realistic representational value of the racing cars (and
the dinosaur-skeletons in the digging sets) could have been a significant factor even when it is not
explicitly articulated.
One interesting group comprised children who reported that they would like to own certain toys
but did not necessarily intend to play with them. In these cases, toys were seen more as collectibles
than things to play with. Some scholars have noted that the contemporary toy-industry primarily
relates to already existing stories that have proved their popularity in other forms, for example as
movies or TV-series (see Kline, 1999). Angry Birds Star Wars -figures in this study are a descriptive
example of multiple layers of media-references in toys. Both Angry Birds and Star Wars have been
a huge success in several fields of cultural production and here they are united in a one toy. This
raises questions as to what owning a lot of contemporary popular and highly media-related toys means
for children? One approach to this question could be to study the ownership of collectibles as forms
of cultural and social capital (Bourdieu, 1986). However these questions are left for future studies to
explore. Besides the questions already examined, it would be interesting as well as important to study
how both children’s reasoning and the functional manipulation potential of toys correlate with the
actual play activities children experience as they use them.
Notes on contributors
Pekka Mertala, Hannele Karikoski and Vesa-Matti Sarenius work in Department of Education in
University of Oulu, Mertala as a project researcher and Karikoski and Sarenius as tenured lecturers.
Liisa Tähtinen is a primary school teacher. This study is a part of broader research project `Play in
different contexts´, which is being carried out in collaboration with a Finnish toy importer and
marketing company AMO Oy.
Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Professor Anthony Johnson for proofreading our article and the anonymous
reviewers of The International Journal of Play for valuable comments.
References
Adler, P.A. & Adler, P. 2002. The reluctant respondent. In: J.A. Holstein & J. F. Gubrium (Eds.).
Handbook of interview research: Context and method. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 515–535.

14

Allen, M. (2004). Tangible interfaces in smart toys. In J. Goldstein, D. Buckingham & G. Brougère
(Eds.), Toys, games, and media. Mahwah, New Jersey. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 179–
194.
Almqvist, B. (1994). Approaching the culture of Swedish child care: A literature survey and a toy
inventory. Stockholm: Nordstedts Tryckeri AB.
Bergen, D., Hutchinson, K., Nolan, J.T. & Weber, D. (2009). Effects of infant-parent play with a
technology-enhanced toy: affordance-related actions and communicative interactions." Journal
of Research in Childhood Education 24(1), 1–17. doi:10.1080/02568540903439342
Best, J. (1998). Too much fun: Toys as social problems and the interpretation of culture. Symbolic
Interaction, 21(2), 197–212. doi:10.1525/si.1998.21.2.197.
Blake, B. & Pope, T. (2008). Developmental psychology: Incorporating Piaget’s and Vygotsky’s
theories in classrooms. Journal of Cross-Disciplinary Perspectives in Education, 1, 59–67.
Blakemore, J.E.O. & Centers, R.E. (2005). Characteristics of boys’ and girls’ toys. Sex Roles. 53(9–
10), 619–633. doi:10.1007/s11199-005-7729-0
Borenstein, L. (1996). The development of friendship in childhood: a clinical conversation. Child
and Adolescent Social Work Journal, 13(3), 213–224. doi:10.1007/BF01875788
Bourdieu, P. 1986. The forms of capital. In J. G. Richardson (Ed.) Handbook of theory and
research for the sociology of education. New York: Greenwood, 241–258.
Bretherton, I. (1984). Representing the social world in symbolic play: Reality and fantasy. In I.
Bretherton (Ed.), Symbolic play: The development of social understanding. New York:
Academic Press, 3–4l
Bujizen, M. & Walkenburg , P.M. (2000). The impact of television advertising to children’s
Christmas wishes. Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic media, 44. 456–470. doi:
10.1207/s15506878jobem4403_7
Bureau of Statistics (2014). Tulonjaon kokonaistilasto 2013, tuloskehitys alueittain [Statistics on
income distribution in 2013] [pdf]. Retrieved from
http://www.stat.fi/til/tjkt/2013/01/tjkt_2013_01_2014-12-18_fi.pdf
Cherney, I. (2006). Gender-linked differences in the toys, television shows, computer games, and
outdoor activities of 5- to 13-year-old children. Sex Roles, 54(9–10), 717–726.
doi:10.1007/s11199-006-9037-8
Cherney, I. & Dempsey, J. (2010). Young children’s classification, stereotyping and play behaviour
for gender neutral and ambiguous toys. Educational Psychology: An International Journal of
Experimental Educational Psychology, 30(6), 651–669. doi:10.1080/01443410.2010.498416
Cougoulis, C. (2003). The material culture of children’s play: Space, toys and the commoditization
of childhood in a Greek community. Doctoral dissertation, University College, London.
Downs, C.A. (1983). Letters to Santa Claus: Elementary school-age children’s sex typed toy
preferences in a natural setting, Sex Roles, 9(2), 159–163. doi:10.1007/BF00289620
Eisenberg, N; Murray, E. & Hite, T. (1982). Children's reasoning regarding sex-typed toy choices.
Child Development, 53(1), 81–86. doi:10.1111/1467-8624.ep8587561
Escudero, P., Robbins, R., & Johnson, S. (2013). Sex-related preferences for real and doll faces
versus real and toy objects in young infants and adults, Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 116(2), 367–379. doi:10.1016/j.jecp.2013.07.001
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Hillsdale, New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

15

Halkoaho, J., Laakso, M., Laaksonen, P. & Lahti, J. (2009). Joulun taikaa vai tahdottua tavaraa? –
Lasten lahjatoiveet joulun hengen osoittajina. [The magic of christmas or desired goods? –
Childrens christmas wishes as indicators of christmas spirirt]. Kulutustustkimus.Nyt, 1. 73–86.
Hartmann, W. & Brougère, G. (2004). Toy culture in preschool education and children’s toy
preferences. In: J.Goldstein, D. Buckingham and G. Brougère (Eds.) Toys, Games and Media,
N.Jersey and London: Lawrence Erlbaum. 37–54.
Hughes, F. P. (1999). Children, play and development. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Ivory, J. J. & McCollum, J. A. (1999). Effects of social and isolate toys on social play in an
inclusive setting. Journal of special education, 32(4), 238–243.
doi:10.1177/002246699903200404
James, A., Jenks, C. & Prout, A. (1998). Theorizing childhood. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Kalliala, M. (1999). Enkeliprinsessa ja itsari liukumäessä. Leikkikulttuuri ja yhteiskunnan muutos.
[The angel-princess and suicide in silde. Play-culture and changes in society], Helsinki:
Gaudeamus Oy, Yliopistokustannus University Press Finland Ltd.
Kline, S. (1999, June). Toys as media: The role of toy design, promotional TV and mother’s
reinforcement in the young males (3-6) acquisition of pro-social play scripts for Rescue Hero
action toys. Paper presented at ITRA Conference, Halmstadt, Sweden. [pdf]. Retrieved from
http://www.sfu.ca/media-lab/risk/docs/media-lab/toys_as_media_kline.pdf.
Kress, G. & Van Leeuwen, T. (2006). Reading images: The grammar of visual design. (2nd ed.)
London & New York: Routledge
Kudrowitz, B. & Wallace, D. (2010). The play pyramid: A play classification and ideation tool for
toy design. Int. Journal of Arts and Technology, 3(1), 36–56. doi:10.1504/IJART.2010.030492
Lambert, E.B. & Clyde, M. (2003). Putting Vygotsky to the test. In D. Lytle (Ed.), Play and
educational theory and practice. Play and culture studies 5. Westport CT: Praeger. 59–98.
Lipponen, L., Rajala, A., Hilppö, J., & Paananen, M. (2015). Exploring the foundations of visual
methods used in research with children. European Early Childhood Education Research
Journal, (ahead-of-print), 1-11. doi:10.1080/1350293X.2015.1062663
Lourenço, O., & Machado, A. (1996). In defense of Piaget's theory: A reply to 10 common
criticisms. Psychological review, 103(1), 143–164.
Martens, L; Southerton, D. & Scott, S. (2004). Bringing children (and parents) into the sociology of
consumption: Towards a theoretical and empirical agenda. Journal of Consumer Culture 4(2),
155–182. doi:10.1177/1469540504043680
Martin, C. L., Eisenbud, L. and Rose, H. (1995), Children's Gender-Based Reasoning about Toys.
Child Development, 66(5), 1453–1471. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8624.1995.tb00945.x
Matusov, E. & Hayes, R. (2000). Sociocultural critique of Piaget and Vygotsky. New Ideas in
Psychology, 18, 215–239. doi:10.1016/S0732-118X(00)00009-X
Miles, M.B. & Huberman, A.M. (1994). Qualitative Data Analysis (2nd ed.) London: Sage.
Miller, C.L. (1987). Qualitative differences among gender-stereotyped toys: Implications for
cognitive and social development in girls and boys. Sex Roles, 16(9-10), 473-487.
doi:10.1007/BF00292482
Nelson, A. (2005). Children’s toy collections in Sweden – A less gender-typed country? Sex Roles,
52(1–2), 93–102. doi:10.1007/s11199-005-1196-5
Nicolopoulou, A. (1993). Play, cognitive development and the social world: Piaget, Vygotsky, and
beyond. Human Development, 36(1), 1–23. doi:10.1159/000277285

16

Norman, D. (1988). The design of everyday things. New York: Basic Books.
Ortega, R. (2003). Play, activity, and thought: Reflections on Piaget’s and Vygotsky’s theories. In
Lytle, D. (Ed.). Play and educational theory and practice. Play and culture studies 5. Westport
CT: Praeger. 99–115.
O’Cass, A. & Clarke, P. (2002). Dear Santa, do you have my brand? A study of the brand requests,
awareness and request styles at Christmas time. Journal of Consumer Behavior, 2(1), 37–53.
doi:10.1002/cb.88
Papanek, V. (1971). Design for the real world: Human ecology and social change, New York,
Pantheon Books.
Patton, M. 1990. Qualitative evaluation and research methods. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. 169–186.
Piaget, J. (1962). Play, dreams and imitation in childhood. Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge.
Pine, K.J. & Nash, A. (2002). Dear Santa: The effects of television advertising on young children.
International Journal of Behavioral Development. 26(6), 529–539.
doi:10.1080/01650250143000481
Puroila, A-M. & Estola, E. (2012). Lapsen hyvä elämä? Päiväkotiarjen pienten kertomusten äärellä.
[A good life of a child? The small stories of daycare-children]. Journal of Early Childhood
Education Research, 1(1), 22–43.
Roos, P. & Rutanen, N. (2014). Metodologisia haasteita ja kysymyksiä lasten
tutkimushaastattelussa [Methodological challenges in reserach interviews with children].
Journal of Early Childhood Education Research, 3(2), 27–47.
Ruckenstein, M. (2010). Toying with the world: Children, virtual pets and the value of mobility.
Childhood 17(4), 500–513. doi: 10.1177/0907568209352812
Sherman, A. & Zurbriggen, E.L. (2014). “Boys Can Be Anything”: Effect of Barbie Play on Girls’
Career Cognitions. Sex Roles 70(5–6), 195-208. doi: 10.1007/s11199-014-0347-y
Sutton-Smith, B. (1986). Toys as culture. New York, London: Gardner Press.
Thomas, B. (1984). Early toy preferences of four-year-old readers and nonreaders. Child
Development, 55[2], 424–430. doi:10.1111/1467-8624.ep7304539
Van Leeuwen, T. (2005). Introducing social semiotics. Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge.
Wright, L. (2003). The wonder of Barbie: Popular culture and the making of female identity. Essays
in Philosophy, 4(1). [pdf] Retrieved from:
http://commons.pacificu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1075&context=eip

17
Appendix. An example page of the catalog

