The Women’s Movement and Indonesia’s Transition to Democracy
Chapter for Michele Ford and Thushara Dibley. Forthcoming. Activists in Transition: Contentious Politics in
the New Indonesia (Cornell University Press).

Rachel Rinaldo
Women’s rights activism is often a critical part of democracy movements (Moghadam 2013), but
democratic transitions have a mixed record when it comes to gender equality and women’s rights. Indeed,
research on democratic transitions in Latin America and Eastern Europe in the late 1980s and early 1990s
found that women’s parliamentary representation dropped, there were few improvements (and some
regression) in areas of gender related policy such as reproductive rights, maternity leave and childcare,
and in many cases, traditional gender expectations were strongly reasserted throughout society and by
states (Haney 1994; Shayne 2004; Viterna and Fallon 2008). Recent research also finds that with the
advent of democratization, women’s political representation often drops sharply, but over the long term,
increasing democratic freedoms and additional elections tend to improve their political participation
(Fallon, Swiss, and Viterna 2012).
The existence and quality of women’s rights mobilization, as well as the movement’s ability to
frame issues successfully in order to garner public support matters greatly, but these are often not
sufficient to ensure that a democratizing country moves in a more gender egalitarian direction (Viterna
and Fallon 2008; Walsh 2012; Htun and Weldon 2010 and 2015). In fact, there are numerous factors that
influence the outcomes of democratization for women. Pre-transition political and institutional legacies
can shape political culture in favorable or detrimental ways (Moghadam 2016) as does the relationship
between religious institutions and the state (Walsh 2012; Htun and Weldon 2015). Whether the regime
transition is complete or retains some aspects of authoritarianism also makes a difference (Viterna and
Fallon 2008). State capacity—and willingness—to implement reforms matters when there are
opportunities for policies or legislation that might empower women (Htun and Weldon 2010). These
factors combine and intersect in different ways in different national contexts, illustrating that while
support for democracy and women’s mobilization are important, they do not necessarily ensure that a
country takes a more egalitarian direction after democratization.
The struggle for women’s rights after democratization can also be significantly influenced by the
formation of counter movements, a factor which has not been considered as much by scholars of
democratization. Social movement scholars find that progressive social movements very often face
counter-mobilizations that can stymie potential reforms (Banerczak and Ondercin 2016). Such counter
movements are often successful where marginalized groups have made gains (Meyer and Staggenborg
1996). As Hughes, Krook and Paxton (2015) point out, this may be especially the case for women’s rights
activism, which has potential to disrupt men’s privileges. Scholars find that social movements interact
with and shape each other, in what some have called “co-evolution” (Oliver and Myers 2002; Fetner
2008). This phenomenon has been seen in cases such as Poland, where following democratization in the
1990s, a lesbian and gay rights movement emerged in tandem with a religious based counter-movement
which, with strong backing from the Catholic Church, succeeded in establishing a narrative that linked
LGBTQ rights to external threats to national values (Ayoub 2014). Such counter-mobilizations may be a
significant factor in the fate of social movements during and after democratization, as a more democratic
political sphere allows for expanded political expression and facilitates competition and interaction
between movements.
1

Indonesia is an especially interesting case study for democratization and women’s empowerment
because it is one of the few Muslim majority democracies and has a long history of women’s
mobilization. Women’s activism emerged along with the nationalist movement in the 1920s, and
remained a force through the 1960s, but along with other social movements, was subject to government
suppression when the Suharto regime gained control in 1967. Nevertheless, a vibrant and diverse
Indonesian women’s movement arose in the 1990s and played an important role in the democracy
movement. Since then, women’s rights activists have achieved some crucial reforms, but have also
confronted unprecedented and complex challenges—notably, the rise of religious conservatism. This
chapter examines how the Indonesian women’s rights movement has fared with the advent of
democratization. While democratization in Indonesia has produced important gains for women’s rights, it
has also empowered conservative activists who oppose much of the agenda of the women’s rights
movement. As a result, women’s rights activists have increasingly found themselves on the defensive.
This chapter investigates why this is the case.
This chapter examines how the Indonesian women’s movement has been ideologically divided
and since the 1990s, the more progressive side of the movement has been increasingly subsumed into
NGOs, which has made it harder to connect with a grassroots base and has resulted in organizational
fragmentation. Moreover, the political decentralization that came in the wake of 1998 has tended to
empower conservative religious forces. Women’s rights activists became more visible and had important
legislative achievements in the early democratization period (1998–04). During this era, the broader
culture was becoming influenced by more liberal views of gender and sexuality, prompting religious
conservatives to mount a strong pushback. Since the early 2000s, conservatives have been most
successful at the provincial level, where the women’s movement tends to be weaker, but they are now
increasingly driving the national agenda. Women’s rights activists have had difficulty responding to this
challenge because of ideological divisions and lack of a mass base, and because the state has been
increasingly willing to defer to conservative forces. In short, the key factors for the fate of women’s rights
activism during Indonesia’s democratization have been the pattern of women’s mobilization, the strength
of counter-movement mobilization, and political decentralization—all of which have been shaped by pretransition political legacies. The experience of activists in Indonesia suggests that the recent literature on
democratization and women’s rights would benefit from greater consideration of how and when
democratization processes can empower illiberal actors, counter-movements, and/or backlash against
women’s rights.
Women’s Activism during the New Order
The transfer of power to the Suharto regime and the subsequent New Order period (1967–98) left a
lasting imprint on the Indonesian women’s movement. The mass killings of communists and other regime
opponents in 1965 that marked the beginning of this period were extremely destructive for women’s
organizing (Wieringa 2002). The regime repressed independent mobilization, especially of the left.
Millions of women were mobilized into state-controlled organizations that were depoliticized and
promoted a domestic role for women (Suryakusuma 1996; Brenner 1998). Through the 1980s it was
difficult for women to mobilize outside these state organizations. Initially, religious organizations were
one of the only channels for women’s activism. By the end of the decade, a few women from more
privileged backgrounds took advantage of legal loopholes and a small political opening to establish
NGOs, then a new institutional form. The regime’s greater tolerance of religious organizations resulted in
the emergence of a dynamic religious civil society that helped to fuel a unique blend of women’s rights

2

activism and reformist Muslim discourses, but that also generated an expanding network of more
conservative Muslim activists that would become influential after 1998, when Suharto was compelled to
step down (Hefner 2000; Sidel 2008; also see Fealy, this volume).
Throughout this period, the government sought to balance its international image against its
domestic interests, and this created some space for the advancement of women’s rights. Understanding
this trajectory of government policy helps contextualize the decisions and strategies of women activists
during the New Order period. In the late 1970s, the government began responding to changing
international norms regarding women. It created the Ministry for Women’s Role in 1978 and ratified the
Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) in 1984
(Robinson 2008; CEDAW-in-Action). Moreover, Indonesian women’s workforce participation rate
increased to nearly 50% by 1990 (Australia Indonesia Partnership for Economic Governance 2017). Thus,
while the regime was still promoting women’s roles as housewives, women were increasingly working
outside the house, including in the factories manufacturing goods for global export that helped to fuel
Indonesia’s economic boom in the late 1980s and early 1990s (Ford 2002). By the 1990s, some
Indonesian bureaucrats were sufficiently influenced by transnational women’s rights discourses that they
began to use phrases such as women’s empowerment and gender equality (Blackburn 2004; Robinson
2008). Thus, some elements of the regime seemed open to women’s education, jobs, and rights, yet the
regime remained committed to the ideology of domesticity, particularly for middle class women (Brenner
1998) and suppressed social movement activism more generally.
Women did not only engage in activism through donor-funded programs and NGOs supported by
Western countries. Indeed, some of the earliest channels for women’s activism in Indonesia were through
religious organizations. In the 1980s, leading Muslim intellectuals began to explore ideas about
democracy, human rights, and pluralism, arguing that such ideas were fully compatible with Islam. This
intellectual ferment appears to have had global origins—many of the leading figures were educated
overseas and influenced by Muslim reformists whose ideas were circulating internationally. It was not
long before some of these figures, particularly Nurcholish Madjid and Abdurrahman Wahid (Gus Dur),
the long-time president of the large Muslim organization Nahdlatul Ulama (NU), also began to make
arguments in support of women’s rights. The discourse of women’s rights and gender equality soon
spread to Muslim women’s organizations (Hefner 2000; Robinson 2008; Brenner 2011).
Outside of religious organizations, repression drove many social movement activists underground
and meant that NGOs became the primary institutional form for women’s rights activism in the late 1980s
and 1990s (Blackburn 2004; Aspinall 2005; Brenner 2011). Many of these women were inspired by
attending the United Nations International Women’s Conferences, visits to Australia and India, where
they came into contact with feminists, as well as the expanding global women’s movement. One of the
first Indonesian women’s rights NGOs was Kalyanamitra, which provided services and advocacy for
victims of intimate partner violence. Another was the Indonesian Women’s Legal Aid Foundation (LBHAPIK). The new organizations obtained funding from international sources such as UNICEF and Oxfam
and the Ford Foundation, all of which were starting to prioritize women’s rights and equality. These
NGOs focused on providing services desperately needed by women, but many staff members also saw
themselves as building a foundation for a broader women’s movement (Blackburn 2004; Robinson 2008).
The 1990s saw a new generation of activists rise through the women’s NGOs, some of whom
established their own initiatives during this time (Ford 2002). These organizations argued for women’s
equality in both the public and private spheres. Their staff tended to be urban and highly educated. Many
of the women’s rights NGOs also took a more critical stance toward the government (Brenner 2005;

3

Blackburn 2004). For example, Rifka Annisa, which provided counseling for women dealing with
intimate partner violence, quickly began working toward policy change to address the problem of gender
based violence, in the process bringing a taboo subject into public view (Brenner 2011). Some NGOs
espoused critiques of global capitalism—ideas that in the wake of the 1960s repression of the left were
still quite taboo. As the Suharto regime adopted more neoliberal economic programs many NGOs began
to diversify and ally with lower class women. Solidaritas Perempuan, for example, was established in
1990 to advocate for the rights of the increasing numbers of Indonesian women who were migrating
overseas to as domestic workers. Solidaritas Perempuan also saw itself as part of a growing women’s
rights movement, and many of its early activists were especially critical of government economic policies
that emphasized labor export, export-led production and natural resource extraction (Ford 2002; Rinaldo
2013). These kinds of alliances between middle class activists and poor women migrants have proved
important for advocating change to migration regimes (Ford 2008). However, in the uncertain political
environment of the 1990s women’s rights NGOs had to maneuver carefully. While they were allowed to
hold conferences and workshops, participating in demonstrations often resulted in assault or arrest at the
hands of the military or the police (Rinaldo 2013).
In addition to the development of women’s NGOs, the 1990s also saw a continued growth in
women’s religious activism. Many of the activists who participated in trainings run by the Ford
Foundation during this period were part of a global trend for women to seek a more active role in the
interpretation of Muslim teachings (Badran 2013). In the early 1990s, writings about Islam and gender
equality by Middle Eastern feminists like Fatima Mernissi, Nawal el Saadawi, and Riffat Hassan were
translated and published in Indonesian by NGO activists, and became influential for many young people
(Robinson 2008; Brenner 2011; Rinaldo 2013). Over the next decade, Indonesian activists also became
aware of efforts by Muslim women scholars in the West, especially Asma Barlas and Amina Wadud, to
produce egalitarian interpretations of the Quran. Many women activists’ exposure to feminist ideas began
with reading Middle Eastern Muslim women activists/scholars Fatima Mernissi and Nawal el Sadaawi,
whose works were circulating in the student underground. The Ford Foundation’s gender trainings for
Muslim women’s organizations, some of which were conducted by the liberal Muslim activist Mansour
Faqih, seem to have been especially influential. By the mid-1990s, organizations such as English
(Perhimpunan Pengembangan Pesantren dan Masyarakat, P3M) had begun organizing workshops that
combined critical re-examinations of Islamic texts with advocacy for women’s rights. More established
Indonesian Muslim women’s organizations such as Fatayat, the women’s division of the large Muslim
organization Nahdlatul Ulama, were influenced by this trend. In their accounts, some Indonesian
women’s rights activists said that they began to think that the case for women’s rights had to be made
with religious grounding, and others commented that they were especially influenced by arguments that
included religious frameworks (Interviews, September 2002 to July 2003).
Lies Marcoes, who worked for P3M as well as the Asia Foundation, and now runs her own NGO,
believes that the ability for Indonesian secular and Muslim feminists to work together added a unique
element to the Indonesian women’s movement:
I saw that there was a weakness to the secular feminist approach which is that they didn’t
know what to do with religion, they weren’t brave enough to talk about fiqh [Islamic
jurisprudence]. I felt that I had something that other activists didn’t, which was an
understanding of theology, reinterpreting religious texts. How to read the Quran
critically…We could help secular feminist friends, and vice versa. I think this convergence

4

between feminists and Muslim friends made us distinctive, different from women’s
movements in other countries, even Malaysia (Interview, June 2016).
Some women’s rights activists in Indonesia, such as those involved in the NGO, Rahima, have continued
to pursue a strategy of creating and disseminating egalitarian interpretations of Islamic texts, as well as
training younger activists in such methods of interpretation. This strategy has helped to legitimize ideas
about women’s rights and gender equality among Muslims (Robinson 2008; Brenner 2011; Rinaldo 2013,
2014). For Marcoes, it was precisely the convergence between Muslim reformists and women’s rights
activists that made the Indonesian movement strong and less divided along religious–secular lines than
the women’s movements in many other Muslim majority countries.
The broader terrain of social movement activism also contributed to the dynamism of the
women’s movement in 1990s Indonesia. The women’s movement grew alongside other social
movements. Many women’s rights activists spoke of the thrilling atmosphere of the emerging movement
for democratic change, where they met activists from environmental, labor, and other social justice
movements (Interviews, various years). Many of the human rights and women’s NGOs founded in the
late 1980s and early 1990s became important actors in the pro-democracy mobilizations. Moreover, the
frequent mingling of the student movement and women’s groups during this period brought about a new
interest in gender and feminism among young people, and many student activists went on to work for
women’s rights NGOs and/or Muslim women’s rights organizations.
Alongside these social movements, another more conservative movement was developing
momentum. The renaissance of progressive and liberal Muslim thinking mentioned earlier was part of the
Islamic revival in Indonesia that began in the 1980s, but this Islamic revival also included a far more
conservative strain of Islamic thought that became particularly popular with underground student groups
on university campuses. The Tarbiyah movement, as it became known, was influenced by the Muslim
Brotherhood and Islamist thinkers from the Middle East, and its followers tended to espouse conservative
views on gender and sexuality. While they did not necessarily oppose women having education or
working outside the house, they emphasized “natural” differences between men and women, argued
against the liberalization of sexual mores, advocated much more conservative dress for women, and in
some cases entered into arranged marriages. Tarbiyah activists formed a huge underground network that
funneled members to new conservative organizations and political parties after 1998 (Van Bruinessen
2002; Sidel 2008; Machmudi 2012). While women’s rights activists were aware of this movement, and
many were to some degree influenced by it, they were not fully cognizant of its growing strength or its
conservative politics (Interviews 2002 – 2010).
The New Order era had a mixed impact and an enduring legacy for women’s activism in
Indonesia. Its repression made activism difficult and potentially dangerous, and resulted in more
progressive activism being contained within NGOs, which were tolerated due to a combination of legal
loopholes, their connections to the international community, and their strategy of employing the relatively
neutral language of development. While the women’s rights NGO community grew increasingly
outspoken, NGOs by their very nature are relatively small, tend to be led by middle class elites, and do
not constitute a mass movement (Alvarez 1999). Meanwhile, and especially as time went on, the Suharto
regime became more tolerant of religious organizations. This fostered the growth of religious activism,
including a unique and important blend of women’s rights and Muslim reformism, but also helped build
networks of much more conservative religious activists who were not supportive of women’s rights.
Nevertheless, the activism of the 1990s brought together a wide spectrum of forces that culminated in the

5

Reformasi movement and fostered crucial cross-fertilizations between student, labor, environmental, and
women’s rights activists that still reverberate decades later.
Women’s Activism in the Transition to Democracy
While the New Order era set the stage for women’s activism with its repression of secular and left social
movements, it did not wholly determine how women’s activism would develop in the transition to
democracy. The trajectory of women’s activism was also shaped by more contingent events. The key
factors that were most influential from 1998 onward were the developing pattern of women’s
mobilization, the emergence of counter-movement mobilization as a reaction, and political
decentralization that has empowered conservative and illiberal actors.
As the Reformasi movement built through 1997 and early 1998, women played a prominent role,
including in street demonstrations. Suara Ibu Peduli (Voice of Caring Women) was one of the most
visible groups organizing specifically as women – mobilizing to provide assistance to those affected by
the ongoing financial crisis, as well as to assist demonstrators with food and water (Budianta 2003, 2006).
Many younger women became involved in the movement through student organizations. Years later,
many women described the electric atmosphere of the time, as they went between risking arrest on the
streets and holing up in their rooms reading Xeroxed copies of forbidden foreign literature (Interviews,
September 2002 to July 2003). It was during this period that many activists from Muslim student
organizations encountered ideas about feminism and gender equality. Others, like Lies Marcoes,
described the early Reformasi period as being intellectually dynamic, a period of “progressive and
extraordinary thought” that provided an ideal context in which to think about gender and Islam (Interview
with Lies Marcoes, June 2016).
A key moment for the nascent women’s rights movement was the mass rapes of May 1998
(Budianta 2003; Purdey 2006; Robinson 2008). As political tension peaked and security forces fired on
student protestors in Jakarta and other cities, mass violence broke out. Mobs attacked Chinese Indonesian
areas, attacking both businesses and people. At least 168 women, mostly of Indonesian Chinese descent,
were sexually assaulted. Women from a huge variety of organizations and religious backgrounds
volunteered to assist the victims and push the police to investigate. In response, President Habibie created
a committee in July 1998 to investigate the attacks, and then in October 1998 establishing the National
Commission on Violence against Women (Komnas Perempuan) which has become the primary national
voice for women’s rights. Though officially a state supported organization, Komnas Perempuan remains
close to the activist and NGO communities and acts as an umbrella group for women’s rights activism
(Van Doorn-Harder 2017). More than this however, the mass rapes served as another galvanizing moment
for many women activists, and raised awareness about sexual assault. Despite the efforts of human rights
and women’s organizations, the government has never acted to prosecute anyone for these acts
(Anggreini 2014; Wargadiredja 2017).
The period from 1998 to the early 2000s was also a fertile period for the establishment of new
progressive NGOs devoted to women’s rights. Among the more notable ones that emerged were Rahima,
which promotes women’s rights within an Islamic framework; Koalisi Perempuan Indonesian (Indonesian
Women’s Coalition, a coalition of local women’s groups that works on issues of gender equality and
democracy; and Kapal Perempuan, which is particularly interested in women’s rights and religious/ethnic
pluralism. The proliferation of NGOs contributed to the professionalization of activism and the
recruitment of activists from a wider variety of backgrounds, compared to the more elite activists of the
1990s (Rinaldo 2013). But it did not lead to the development of a broader grassroots movement. Although

6

there are Indonesian women’s rights NGOs that do attempt grassroots mobilization and community
organizing, their efforts tend to be small-scale. Moreover, the consolidation of women’s rights activism
within NGOs may have undermined the building of a mass movement because NGOs compete for donor
funding and therefore usually specialize in particular issues or locations.
However, not all the Indonesian women activists emerging during Reformasi were interested in
women’s rights. Young women who had been involved in the Tarbiyah movement and the conservative
Indonesian Muslim Students Action Union (Kesatuan Aksi Mahasiswa Muslim Indonesia, KAMMI)
helped to establish the Justice Party (Partai Keadilan, PK)—which was soon to become the Prosperous
Justice Party (Partai Keadilan Sejahtera, PKS)—as well as the Indonesian branch of Hizbut Tahrir, both
of which sought a greater role for Islam in the state, in Hizbut Tahrir’s case, seeking the return of the
Islamic caliphate. Unlike the women’s rights NGOs and the women’s groups of the major Muslim
organizations, these women were involved in organizations that were not specifically oriented toward
women’s concerns, though they did aim to mobilize women in support of their broader cause. Many of
these new activists were unsettled by the increasing successes of more progressive women’s rights
activism, as well as by what they felt to be too much liberalization of cultural norms related to gender and
sexuality.
By 2001, it was clear that the women’s movement included several distinct strands. While this is
not unusual or necessarily a problem, in Indonesia these strands encompassed vast ideological
differences. On the one hand, there were the generally secular women’s rights NGOs such as
Kalyanamitra, Solidaritas Perempuan and LBH APIK (Women’s Legal Aid Foundation). On the other
hand, there were the increasingly energized women’s divisions of the major Muslim organizations—
Fatayat (Nahdlatul Ulama), Muslimat (Nahdlatul Ulama), and Aisyiyah (Muhammadiyah)—which
generally had a good relationship with the women’s rights NGOs. Then there was a new cohort of
conservative Muslim women activists involved in emerging political parties such as PKS, and Islamist
organizations such as Hizbut Tahrir and KAMMI (Kesatuan Aksi Mahasiswa Muslim Indonesia –
Indonesian Muslim Students Action). Many women activists do not consider these last groups of women
activists to be part of the women’s movement, but certainly they were women activists in the sense that
they were women actors in the field of politics and often voiced critiques of women’s rights agendas.
Thus, the major distinction that emerged in the women’s movement by the end of the Reformasi period
was not a religious–secular divide, but rather, a conservative-progressive divide (Rinaldo 2013).
The conservative–progressive distinction was initially not that apparent, as the women’s
movement united around the Anti Domestic Violence Law, which still stands as one of the most
important victories for women’s rights in Indonesia’s history. Beginning in 1999, women’s rights activists
began proposing a national plan to eradicate violence against women. At the time, the Indonesian
Criminal Code contained penalties only for physical abuse of wives, and these were rarely applied due to
widespread belief that domestic violence was a private issue (Eddyono, Fanani, Sabaniah, Maurice,
Ghazali, Warlif, Velayati, and Ciciek 2016, p. 36). Women’s rights activists produced a draft antidomestic violence bill, which recognized diverse forms of intimate partner violence, including marital
rape (Eddyono et al 2016). Activists reached out to diverse organizations and communities in formulating
and discussing the proposed bill, especially to women members of parliament. The Ministry of Women’s
Empowerment supported the bill, but initially, the powerful Ministry of Religious Affairs opposed it and
President Megawati seemed to be ambivalent (Eddyono et al, 40). Activists intensified their efforts, and
with the 2004 elections approaching, declared that they would not support Megawati if she opposed the
bill. Megawati finally changed her position, and Law No.23/2004 on the Elimination of Domestic

7

Violence was passed in September with the support of most of the political parties in parliament,
including women representatives from PKS. It was a huge victory for women’s activism in Indonesia, but
it marked the last time that the movement coalesced around a common goal.
The Conservative Backlash
Democratization has had many benefits for the women’s rights movement. The democratic public sphere
provides much greater access to women activists, both to engage with the state apparatus and to bring
their arguments to the public (Interviews, February–March 2008). The women’s movement used these
new opportunities to achieve several very significant gains. In addition to the Law on the Elimination of
Domestic Violence (2004), women’s rights activists were the leading advocates for a number of new laws
mandating child protection (2002), a gender quota for political parties (2008 and 2012), the
criminalization of trafficking in persons (2007) and the ratification of the UN Convention on the Rights of
Migrant Workers and their Families (2012). The movement also made a significant contribution to the
election of the reformist Joko Widodo for president in 2014, a campaign which involved many civil
society activists, particularly women.
Women’s rights activists are, however, not the only beneficiaries of a more democratic and open
public sphere. As Adriana Venny of Komnas Perempuan explained, “Democracy is moving along well,
but there are some people who take advantage of it for a different agenda” (Interview, June 2016). Since
2004, progressive women activists have faced an increasing challenge from those who do not support the
women’s rights agenda, including conservative women activists. One of the first and most conspicuous
examples of this was the struggle over Law No.44/2008 on Anti-Pornography and Pornographic Acts.
Although there had efforts to create legislation on pornography in the 1990s, there was renewed attention
to this issue after 1998, as media became much freer and deregulated and with the rise of the internet
there was a widespread perception that pornography was increasingly available and that pop culture was
becoming overly sexualized. The moral panic reached a peak in 2003 with the national controversy over
pop singer Inul Daratista, who was condemned for her sexy dancing style and revealing outfits, spurring
anti-pornography campaigners into action, particularly within the PKS (Robinson 2008; Allen 2009;
Rinaldo 2012). Although there were already statutes criminalizing sexually explicit images, the new
campaigners were pushing for a broader definition of pornography, which included public performances
that incite sexual desire (Tedjasukmana 2008)
The Pornography bill proved to be a divisive issue for the Indonesian women’s movement, with
some activists proudly supporting free speech and art, and others concerned about the impact of
pornography on women (Van Wichelen 2010). The key concern of women’s rights activists who oppose
the bill was that it sanctioned conservative interpretations of Islam that render women’s bodies as
immoral. Moreover, the controversy over the bill took up a great deal of the attention of women’s rights
activists during 2004–08, taking time away from other causes, such as reproductive health and rights,
reforms to benefit the many women who work as domestic workers, or simply doing more to mobilize
women outside major cities. But despite strong mobilization against it by women’s rights and anticensorship activists, religious conservatives succeeded in passing the Bill in 2008, with the support of
some Muslim women’s groups such as Aisyiyah (Allen 2009; Rinaldo 2012). Although the law is
unevenly enforced, it has led to a number of high-profile prosecutions of celebrities and politicians. More
recently, with the prosecution and jailing of Jakarta’s Christian governor on blasphemy charges,
increasing crackdowns on the LGBTIQ community (see Wijaya and Davies, this volume), and an

8

initiative to criminalize sex outside marriage, it appears that conservative religious actors are driving the
national agenda, leaving women’s rights activists increasingly on the defensive.
Concern about rising religious conservatism has fostered increased collaboration between secular
and religious women’s rights activists. More secular women’s rights activists in Indonesia now frequently
ask a progressive Muslim scholar to attend a training or speak at a conference. Some of these scholars are
themselves women, a development enabled by the increasing trend for Indonesian Muslim women to
attend Islamic universities and receive formal training in theology (Van Doorn-Harder 2007).1 However,
religious–secular collaboration has not helped women’s rights activists achieve the goal of reforming the
No. 1/1974 on Marriage, which many believe instills gender inequality at the heart of family life by
mandating that men are heads of household and women are responsible for the family (Mahmood 2016).
Collaboration between secular and religious women’s rights activists has also not been successful
in preventing the conservative backlash. In 2004, a team led by Muslim female scholar Musdah Mulia,
who was then working for the Ministry of Religion, produced a substantial revision of Islamic family law
that called for the banning of polygamy, equal inheritance rights for men and women, equal rights to
initiate divorce, among other things (Robinson 2008). What became known as the Counter-Legal Draft
was based on reinterpretations of Islamic law, a strategy that is very much within the tradition of
Indonesian Islam. However, it provoked an immediate angry reaction among both conservative and
mainstream Muslim organizations and was immediately buried (Cammack, Bedner, and Van Huis 2015;
also Fealy, this volume). While the backlash had been building since the 1990s, the moral panic around
pornography and the controversy around the Counter-Legal Draft provided issues around which
conservative religious actors could mobilize. In the following years women’s rights activists continued to
try to amend the Marriage Law, but they have had difficulty building consensus even among women’s
organizations, with the issues of polygamy and same-sex marriage being major obstacles (Van Wichelen
2010; Eddyono et al 2016).
One of the reasons that women’s rights activists’ efforts to achieve their aims has stalled is that
the movement is not well enough represented in parliament and the bureaucracy. Women’s rights activists
do have some political connections, which has helped them exert more influence than their small numbers
might suggest. After 1998, a number of veterans of the women’s movement and civil society including
Eva Sundari, Nursyahbani Katjasungkana, Rieke Dia Pitaloka, and Maria Ulfah Ansshor entered the
realm of formal politics (Mietzner 2013). Their work has been crucial in the major legislative efforts
supported by women’s rights activists. Among these achievements has been the adoption of a gender
quota in 2003 and its subsequent strengthening in 2008 and 2012). Law No.10/2008 required political
parties to include at least 30 per cent women candidates, and the electoral commission was required to
verify that parties had carried out this commitment. This quota has contributed to a significant increase in
the percentage of women legislators in the national parliament from 8.6 per cent in the 1999 elections to
17.32 per cent in the 2014 elections; however, this percentage is still lower than the global average of 19
per cent, and far lower than many of the other countries that have adopted quotas (Shair-Rosenfield 2012;
Hillman 2017; Prihatini 2018). Yet, while the gender quota was a measure that women’s rights activists
had long pushed for, it has not resulted in the major political parties prioritizing measures to empower
women.
1

Such collaboration between religious and secular women activists is unusual. In Muslim majority countries like
Egypt, Tunisia, Turkey, and Pakistan, the feminist movement is largely secular. Only in a few other instances,
mainly in Iran, Malaysia, and Morocco, has there been significant collaboration between Muslim and secular women
activists (Mir-Hosseini 2006; Salime 2011; Basaruddin 2016).

9

The activists who are involved in formal politics do nevertheless serve as a bridge between the
women’s movement and the state (Mietzner 2013), and they have helped to pass progressive legislation
such as ratifying the Convention on the Rights of Migrant Workers (2012), but their numbers may not be
enough to provide a strong counter to morality legislation such as the Anti-pornography Bill that gives
lawmakers a chance to prove their religious credentials, nor are they sufficient to push for significant new
legislation or policy changes. Compared to countries with democratic transitions that have been more
egalitarian, such as South Africa, the Indonesian women’s rights movement is not especially well
connected to formal politics. For example, in South Africa, the women’s rights movement historically had
influence within the main opposition party, the African National Congress, and at the time of the
transition, activists, politicians, and academics created the Women’s National Coalition, which
collaborated with women inside the trade unions, the ANC, and other organizations (Walsh 2012).
According to Walsh, despite the social conservatism of the previous authoritarian regime, during the
transition political parties and elites in South Africa came to support measures supported by the WNC,
including reforms to promote women’s equality in the workplace and measures to eradicate violence
against women. Currently, women hold 35% of seats in South Africa’s national legislature, making it one
of the top countries in the world for women’s representation in politics (Women in National Parliaments).
Initially, with the victories of the legislation on child protection and domestic violence, it looked
like Indonesia might follow in the steps of South Africa. But since 2004, it has become clear that the
women’s rights movement in Indonesia is relatively small and underfunded, and lacks influence in the
corridors of power. It does not compare well to the institutions in which conservative individuals tend to
be ensconced, such as PKS—which even with the downturn in its fortunes, still has the ability to mobilize
large numbers of supporters—or an extremist movement like the Islamic Defenders Front (Front Pembela
Islam, FPI), which claims 200,000 members and branches in 28 provinces (Varagur 2017). The trend
toward religious conservatism in Indonesia has strengthened these conservative parties and organizations,
as well as institutions like the state-supported Council of Indonesian Ulamas (Majelis Ulama Indonesia,
MUI), which has become something of a vanguard for conservative Islam in recent years. Moreover, it
has meant that the rank of file of the traditional Muslim organizations such as Nahdlatul Ulama and
Muhammadiyah are growing more conservative. Importantly, however, the role of the state throughout
these changes has not been neutral. Conservative actors are often willing to mobilize a powerful religious
discourse that stigmatizes anyone who disagrees with them as an unbeliever or immoral, and in many
cases, they have the backing of the military, police, or powerful elites. Indeed, as Aspinall (2010) argues,
in its bid for stability, the democratic state has sought to incorporate Islamists. While such cooptation
seems to have indeed brought Muslim conservatives into the democratic —for example, PKS has
moderated many of its stances, and even many hardline Islamists have embraced electoral politics—the
government has shown much less concern for appeasing moderates and progressives, because they are
less of a threat. Muslims with more conservative politics are better represented in state ministries,
including the powerful Ministry of Religion, than are progressive Muslims. These dynamics help to
explain why a fairly well mobilized women’s movement has had such difficulty confronting the challenge
of rising religious conservatism.
Decentralization and Patterns of Women’s Rights Mobilization
Imbalances between progressive and conservative forces are particularly evident at the local level, where
women’s rights organizations have little presence, as women’s rights activists themselves have long
recognized. As Eridani of the Muslim women’s rights NGO, Rahima, explains, one of the most

10

significant challenges for the women’s movement is the “disconnect” between the national movement and
women’s needs at the village level. However, she noted, villages can be difficult for women’s rights
activists to access as they tend to be quite socially conservative (Interview, June 2016).
This divide between urban women’s rights advocates and rural women has been exacerbated by
decentralization, which proved to have unanticipated consequences for progressive activism. One of the
major sources of disenchantment with the Suharto regime was its extreme centralization of administrative
authority. After his election as president in 1999, Abdurrahman Wahid quickly moved to decentralize
authority by giving greater administrative autonomy to provincial governments. The new system came
into effect in 2001, and provincial governments rapidly took on greater authority and responsibilities. This
initiative had widespread support, though some women activists were concerned that the potential
resurgence of customary law (adat) in certain regions could compromise women’s empowerment. But
what they did not foresee was that local authority might be used to impose new local ordinances inspired
by conservative interpretations of Islamic law.
Decentralization has given conservatives (often allied with secular parties) much more
opportunity to control local provinces and regions, because they are better organized at the local level and
often have inroads with the police and military (Budianta 2006; Buehler 2013; Buehler and Muhtada
2016). For example, in 2009, the city of Tasikmalaya passed a by-law for “Community Values Based on
Muslim Teachings,” and began planning to enact it in early 2012 with an ordinance requiring Muslim
women to wear headscarves (Suwarni 2012). As foreign news media noted, the timing of the
implementation was close to an election, in which the mayor, who represented a secular political party
was facing challengers (Hussain 2012). Indeed, since 2009, Tasikmalaya has become a stronghold of the
conservative Muslim political party PPP, which has supported many of the controversial by-laws
(Widhiarto 2014). Despite strong criticism from national women’s rights activists and progressive
Muslims, soon after the election, according to a Christian news service, the new mayor, Budi Budiman of
the PPP party, announced plans to continue implementing Sharia based laws due to the strong backing he
received from local Muslim leaders (Hariyadi 2012).
Perhaps the most significant concern for women’s rights advocates in the last 15 years, then, is
the unprecedented power to local governments to discriminate against women and minorities through
policies on decentralization and regional autonomy (Budianta 2006). The Tasikmalaya by-law is just one
of no less than 422 local by-laws legislating moral and religious behavior adopted between 1998 and 2013
(Buehler and Muhtada 2016). According to a report published by Komnas Perempuan in 2016, at least
389 of these by-laws discriminate against women and/or minorities (Putra 2017). Such laws may impose
criminal sanctions on women through regulations on prostitution and pornography, institute gendered
dress codes and religious standards, and place restrictions on women’s mobility such as barring them
from being outside at night without a male guardian. Although most of these policies are loosely inspired
by conservative interpretations of Sharia, they were in many cases sponsored by secular political parties
aiming to boost their Islamic credentials. Yet while they exist in 28 provinces, the six provinces in which
they are largely concentrated are East Java, South Kalimantan, South Sulawesi, West Java, West Nusa
Tenggara, and West Sumatra—all provinces with a history of Islamist activists pushing for a state
governed by Islamic law, suggesting that Islamist activists have benefited from decentralization (Buehler
and Muhtada 2016).
The architecture of the women’s rights movement has not made it easy for activists to grapple
with these complex challenges. Prominent women’s rights NGOs are relatively small, and their central
offices tend to be located in Jakarta or Yogyakarta. Certainly, there are many women’s NGOs outside the

11

major cities, but they tend to be small, lacking financial resources, and often very issue-specific (Eddyono
et al 2016).2 By contrast, the women’s wings of the Muslim mass organizations have potentially much
larger grassroots bases. With branches in cities, towns, and villages across the country, Fatayat NU claims
a membership of at least 3 million (Rinaldo 2013). However, membership in Fatayat NU is largely
informal and volunteer based, so these numbers are likely an estimate of potential adherents rather than
actual members. Moreover, NU is ideologically divided and its influence in the country is greatly
diminished due to competition from other religious organizations and political parties (Bruinessen 2013).
Moreover, though Fatayat NU’s leadership has generally been supportive of women’s rights, its local
branches tend to focus mostly on less controversial issues such as health care, helping poor women
formally register their marriages, and providing information and services to prevent trafficking.
Meanwhile, Aisyiyah, the younger women’s group of Muhammadiyah, claims some 15 million members
in branches across the archipelago, though similar to Fatayat these numbers may not be accurate (McKay
2016). Although Aisyiyah has done much to promote female leadership, the organization has tended
toward a somewhat more conservative interpretation of women’s rights (Van Doorn-Harder 2006).
Nationally, Aisyiyah also departed from most women’s rights activists by supporting the pornography
bill.
Komnas Perempuan and other women’s rights activists have kept close track of such by-laws and
have staged regular campaigns to make the public aware of them and their discriminatory content. They
have also published important research documenting the effects of such regulations. Nevertheless, the
attempts of women’s rights activists to legally challenge these by-laws, for example, campaigning for the
Constitutional Court to rule them unconstitutional, have been unsuccessful.3 In early 2017, in a major
defeat for reformist activists, the Constitutional Court ruled that the central government does not have the
authority to revoke such by-laws (Butt 2017).
Conclusions
The women’s movement was a critical part of the Indonesian Reformasi movement, and women’s rights
activists have had major successes since the era of democratization began in 1998. Major legislation they
have fought for has been passed, and women’s political representation has increased. Women are
becoming more active in public life and are more accepted as leaders in a variety of arenas. Collaboration
between secular and religious activists has been a significant factor in these advances, as has a more open
public sphere. Indeed, Indonesia continues to have one of the most dynamic civil societies of any Muslim
majority country. Yet women’s rights activists have had difficulty confronting the rise of religious
conservatives.
As I have shown in this chapter, the key factors influencing the fate of women’s rights activism
during Indonesia’s democratization have been the pattern of women’s rights mobilization, countermovement mobilization and political decentralization. Although the Indonesian women’s movement has
been vibrant since the 1990s, and has deep historical roots, women’s mobilization has been ideologically
divided and the more progressive side of the movement has been increasingly subsumed into NGOs. As
2

One exception is Solidaritas Perempuan, which has an unusual structure that includes a secretariat with paid
workers in Jakarta, as well as satellite “communities” around the country. Yet although it has larger numbers than
most Indonesian NGOs, based on the attendance rate at their 2008 national congress, there may be fewer than 500
people actively engaged in the organization (Field notes, July 2008).
3
Several activists reported that the judiciary has become increasingly influenced by conservative interpretations of
Islam, so that the courts are not necessarily friendly ground for rights activists (Interviews, June 2016).

12

women’s rights activists became more visible and had important legislative achievements in the early
democratization period (1998–04) and the broader culture was increasingly influenced by more liberal
views of gender and sexuality, religious conservatives mounted a strong pushback. This backlash, often
seen in response to progressive social movements, has been most successful at the provincial level, where
the women’s movement tend to lack strength (Budianta 2006). Women’s rights activists have had
difficulty responding to this challenge because of their ideological divisions and lack of a mass base, and
because the state has been increasingly willing to defer to conservative forces. Moreover, as religiously
conservative actors and institutions become more tightly linked to the state, it may become more difficult
for women’s rights activists to demand reforms that might provoke religious opposition, even when those
reforms are religiously framed (Htun and Weldon 2010).
By contrast, while the actual numbers of committed religious conservatives may not be that large,
they certainly have greater numbers and more grassroots organization than women’s rights activists, and
they have often garnered support from secular politicians seeking to bolster their moral credentials. While
women’s rights activists may very well have quiet public support, the voices of Muslim conservatives as
well as a small number of extremists are amplified in Indonesian public life.
In this newly democratized context, the proponents of the backlash against women’s rights have
the emotional energy of defending “tradition” and “religion” on their side. This has resulted, most
notably, in the passing of a pornography bill that defines pornography so expansively that it is now being
used crack down on the activism of sexual minorities as well as censorship of social media. It has made
the climate hostile to proposed reforms to the Marriage Law, and women’s rights activists have had little
success challenging local by-laws that institute dress codes and/or mobility restrictions for women. A
proposed Gender Equality bill, moreover, has remained stalled in parliament (Yamin 2012). Indeed,
authoritarian and intolerant actors have seized the national agenda with the goal of criminalizing same-sex
and extramarital sexual activities. While a petition for this was rejected by the Constitutional Court in
December 2017, the provisions on sex outside marriage are part of a revision to the criminal code now
under consideration by parliament (Bevins 2018). Although these provisions seem to be targeted mostly
toward the LGBTIQ community, they could have significant consequences for women, as pregnancy in
an unmarried woman would be a highly visible sign of engaging in extramarital sex.
In sum, as scholarship on democratization and women’s rights since the 1980s has shown,
democracy does not automatically empower women (Fraser 1990; Viterna and Fallon 2008; Walsh 2012;
Moghadam 2016). The experience of women’s rights activists in Indonesia illustrates how
democratization can empower counter-movements and/or backlash against progressive reforms. Although
this is a common theme in the literature on women’s rights and democratization, the case of Indonesia
shows that when women activists or other social justice oriented reformers lack grassroots strength, their
opponents may be better poised to capitalize on decentralized democracy. This indeed may be a central
tension for young democracies—in an era of rising conservative populism, the democratic apparatus can
empower those who mobilize strongly to impose an illiberal agenda.
References
Allen, Pam. 2009. “Women, Gendered Activism, and Indonesia’s Anti-Pornography Bill.” Intersections:
Gender and Sexuality in Asia and the Pacific 19. Accessed February 13, 2018.
http://intersections.anu.edu.au/issue19/allen.htm.
Alvarez, Sonia. 1999. “Advocating Feminism: The Latin American Feminist NGO ‘Boom.’”
International Feminist Journal of Politics 1 (2): 181-209.

13

Anggraeni, Dewi. 2014. Tragedi Mei 1998: Lahirnya Komnas Perempuan. Jakarta: Kompas Publishers.
Aspinall, Edward. 2005. Opposing Suharto: Compromise, Resistance, and Regime Change in Indonesia.
Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Aspinall, Edward. 2010. “The Irony of Success.” Journal of Democracy 21 (2): 20-34.
Australia Indonesia Partnership for Economic Governance, 2017. “Women’s Economic Participation in
Indonesia.” Accessed February 13, 2018.
https://www.monash.edu/business/cdes/research/publications/publications2/Womens-economicparticipation-in-Indonesia-June-2017.pdf
Ayoub, Phillip M. 2014. “With Arms Wide Shut: Threat Perception, Norm Reception, and Mobilized
Resistance to LGBT Rights.” Journal of Human Rights 13 (3): 337-362.
Badran, Margot. 2013. Feminism in Islam: Secular and Religious Convergences. London: Oneworld
Publications.
Banaszak, Lee Ann and Heather L. Ondercin. 2016. “Explaining the Dynamics between the Women’s
Movement and the Conservative Movement in the United States.” Social Forces 95 (1): 381-409.
Basaruddin, Azza. 2016. Humanizing the Sacred: Sisters in Islam and the Struggle for Gender Justice in
Malaysia. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Berg, Livia. 2015. “Women’s Pathways into Parliament: The Case of Indonesia.” Unpublished Master’s
Thesis, Lund University, Sweden.
Bevins, Vincent. 2017. “Once Tolerant Indonesia Moves to Outlaw Gay – and Extramarital – Sex.”
Washington Post, Friday, February 9.
Blackburn, Susan. 2004. Women and the State in Modern Indonesia. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Brenner, Suzanne. 1998. The Domestication of Desire: Women, Wealth, and Modernity in Java.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Brenner, Suzanne. 2005. “Islam and Gender Politics in New Order Indonesia.” In Spirited Politics:
Religion and Public Life in Contemporary Southeast Asia. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Brenner, Suzanne. 2011. “Private Moralities in the Public Sphere: Democratization, Islam, and Gender in
Indonesia.” American Anthropologist 113 (3): 478-490.
Bruinessen, Martin van. 2002. “Genealogies of Islamic Radicalism in Post-Suharto Indonesia.” Southeast
Asia Research 10 (2): 117-154.
Bruinessen, Martin van, ed. 2013. Contemporary Developments in Indonesian Islam: Explaining the
‘Conservative Turn’. Singapore: ISEAS Press.
Buehler, Michael. 2013. “Subnational Islamization through Secular Parties: Comparing Shari’a Politics in
Two Indonesian Provinces. Comparative Politics 46 (1): 63-82.
Budianta, Melani. 2003. “The Blessed Tragedy: The Making of Women’s Activism during the Reformasi
Years” in Ariel Heryanto and Sumit K. Mandal, eds. Challenging Authoritarianism in Southeast
Asia: Comparing Indonesia and Malaysia. London: Routledge Curzon.
Budianta, Melani. 2006. “Decentralizing Engagements: Women and the Democratization Process in
Indonesia.” Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society 31 (4): 915-923.
Buehler, Michael and Dani Muhtada. 2016. “Democratization and the Diffusion of Shari’a Law:
Comparative Insights from Indonesia.” Southeast Asia Research 24 (2): 262-182.
Butt, Simon. 2017. “Constitutional Court lets Local Governments off the Leash.” Indonesia at Melbourne
blog, July 4. Accessed February 12, 2018.

14

http://indonesiaatmelbourne.unimelb.edu.au/constitutional-court-lets-local-governments-off-theleash/.
Cammack, Mark, Adriaan Bedner and Stijn van Huis. 2015. “Democracy, Human Rights, and Islamic
Family Law in Post-Soeharto Indonesia.” New Middle Eastern Studies 5: 1-25.
CEDAW in Action, Indonesia Country Statistics. Accessed February 12, 2018.
http://cedaw-in-action.org/en/indonesia/.
Eddyono, Sri Wiyanti and Estu Fanani, Dini Anitasari Sabaniah, Yurra Maurice, Haiziah Ghazali, Juni
Warlif, Sisillia Velayati, and Farha Ciciek. 2016. “When and Why the State Responds to
Women’s Demands: Understanding Gender Equality Policy Change in Indonesia.” United
Nations Research Institute for Social Development. Accessed February 12, 2018.
http://www.unrisd.org/80256B3C005BCCF9/search/695474BA6D066870C1257FF60053961A?
OpenDocument
Fallon, Kathleen M., Liam Swiss, and Jocelyn Viterna. 2012. “Resolving the Democracy Paradox:
Democratization and Women’s Legislative Representation in Developing Nations, 1975-2009.”
American Sociological Review 77 (3): 380-408.
Fealy, Greg. 2007. “A Conservative Turn.” Inside Indonesia, July 15. Accessed May 25, 2017.
http://www.insideindonesia.org/a-conservative-turn.
Fetner, Tina. 2008. How the Religious Right Shaped Lesbian and Gay Activism. Minneapolis,: University
of Minnesota Press.
Ford, Michele. 2002. “Responses to Changing Labour Relations: The Case of Women’s NGOs in
Indonesia.” In Gills, Dong-Sook S. and Nicola Piper, eds. Women and Work in Globalising Asia.
London: Routledge.
Ford, Michele. 2008. “Women’s Labor Activism in Indonesia.” Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and
Society 33 (3): 510-515.
Fraser, Nancy. 1990. “Rethinking the Public Sphere: A Contribution to the Critique of Actually Existing
Democracy.” Social Text 25/26: 56-80.
Haney, Lynne. 1994. "From proud worker to good mother: Women, the state, and regime change in
Hungary." Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies 14 (3): 113-150.
Hariyadi, Mathias. 2012. “West Java: New Tasikmalaya Mayor Plans to Implement Sharia.” AsiaNews,
November 20. Accessed May 25, 2017. http://www.asianews.it/news-en/West-Java:-newTasikmalaya-mayor-plans-to-implement-Sharia-26400.html.
Hefner, Robert. 2000. Civil Islam: Muslims and Democratization in Indonesia. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Hillman, Ben. 2017. “Increasing Women’s Parliamentary Representation in Asia and the Pacific: The
Indonesian Experience.” Asia & The Pacific Policy Studies 4(1): 38-49.
Htun, Mala and S. Laurel Weldon. 2010. “When do Governments Promote Women’s Rights: A
Framework for the Comparative Analysis of Sex Equality Policy.” Perspectives on Politics 8 (1):
207-216.
Htun, Mala and S. Laurel Weldon. 2015. “Religious Power: The State, Women’s Rights, and Family
Law.” Politics & Gender 11: 451-477.
Hughes, Melanie M., Mona Lena Krook, and Pamela Paxton. 2015. “Transnational Women’s Activism
and the Global Diffusion of Gender Quotas.” International Studies Quarterly 59 (2): 357-372.
Hussein, Zakir. 2012. “Tasikmalaya Softpedals on ‘Headscarf for all’.” Straits Times, June 19. Accessed
May 25, 2017. http://asia-pacific-solidarity.net/news/st_tasikmalayasoftpedalsonhe_190612.htm.

15

Mahmood, Shahirah. 2016. “Contextualizing the Global and Remaking the Local: Islam and Women’s
Rights in Indonesia.” Unpublished PhD dissertation, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
McKay, Laura Jean. 2016. “Aisyiyah: 99 Years of Women’s Empowerment.” Development Policy Center
Aid Profiles. Accessed 12 February 2018. http://devpolicy.org/aidprofiles/2016/09/13/aisyiyah99-years-of-womens-empowerment/.
Meyer, David S. and Suzanne Staggenborg. 1996. “Movements, Countermovements, and the Structure of
Political Opportunity.” American Journal of Sociology 101: 1628-60
Mietzner, Marcus. 2013. “Fighting the Hellhounds: Pro-Democracy Activists and Party Politics in PostSuharto Indonesia.” Journal of Contemporary Asia 43 (1): 28-50.
Mir-Hosseini, Ziba. 2006. “Muslim Women’s Quest for Equality: Between Islamic Law and Feminism.”
Critical Inquiry 32 (4): 629-645.
Moghadam, Valentine. 2013. “What is Democracy? Promises and Perils of the Arab Spring.” Current
Sociology 61 (4): 393-408.
Moghadam, Valentine. 2016. “Women and Democracy after the Arab Spring: Theory, Practice, and
Prospects.” In Valentine Moghadam and Marwa Shalaby, eds. Empowering Women after the
Arab Spring. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Oliver, Pam and Daniel Myers. “The Coevolution of Social Movements.” Mobilization: An International
Quarterly 8 (1): 1-24.
Prihatini, Ella S. 2018. “How can Indonesia Increase the Number of Women Legislators?” The
Conversation, January 24. Accessed 12 February 2018 https://theconversation.com/how-canindonesia-increase-the-number-of-women-legislators-90446.
Purdey, Jemma. 2006. Anti-Chinese Violence in Indonesia, 1996-1999. Honolulu: University of Hawaii
Press.
Putra, Lutfy Mairizal. 2017. “Komnas Perempuan Nilai Kemendagri Masih Akomodasi Perda yang
Diskriminatif.” Kompas, August 2, 2017. Accessed February 13, 2018.
http://nasional.kompas.com/read/2017/02/08/21035141/komnas.perempuan.nilai.kemendagri.mas
ih.akomodasi.perda.diskriminatif.
Rinaldo, Rachel. 2012. “Religion and the Politics of Morality: Muslim Women Activists and the
Pornography Debate in Indonesia.” In Hui Yew-Foong, ed. Encountering Islam: The Politics of
Religious Identities in Indonesia. Singapore: ISEAS Press.
Rinaldo, Rachel. 2013. Mobilizing Piety: Islam and Feminism in Indonesia. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Rinaldo, Rachel. 2014. “Pious and Critical: Muslim Women Activists and the Question of Agency.”
Gender & Society 28 (6): 824-846.
Robinson, Kathryn. 2008. Gender, Islam, and Democracy in Indonesia. London: Routledge.
Salime, Zakia. 2011. Between Feminism and Islam: Human Rights and Sharia Law in Morocco.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Shair-Rosenfield, Sarah. 2012. “The Alternative Incumbency Effect: Electing Women Legislators in
Indonesia.” Electoral Studies 31: 576-587.
Shayne, Julie. 2004. The Revolution Question: Feminisms in El Salvador, Chile, and Cuba. New
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Sidel, John. 2008. Riots, Pogroms, Jihad: Religious Violence in Indonesia. Ithaca, CA: Cornell University
Press.

16

Suryakusuma, Julia. 1996. “The State and Sexuality in New Order Indonesia.” In Laurie J. Sears, ed.
Fantasizing the Feminine in Indonesia. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Suwarni, Yuli. 2012. “Tasikmalaya to make Muslim Women Wear Headscarves.” The Jakarta Post, June
5. Accessed May 25, 2017. http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2012/06/05/tasikmalaya-makemuslim-women-wear-headscarves.html.
Tedjasukmana, Jason. 2008. “Indonesia’s New Anti-Porn Agenda.” Time, November 6. Accessed
February 13, 2018. http://content.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,1857090,00.html.
Van Doorn-Harder, Pieternella. 2006. Women Shaping Islam: Reading the Quran in Indonesia.
Champaign: University of Illinois Press.
Van Doorn-Harder, Pieternella. 2017. “Gender, National Identity and Nation-Building: Komnas
Perempuan and Koalisi Perempuan Indonesia.” Contending Modernities, January 25. Accessed
12 February 2018. http://contendingmodernities.nd.edu/field-notes/gender-national-identity-andnation-building/.
Van Wichelen, Sonja. 2010. Religion, Gender, and Politics in Indonesia: Disputing the Muslim Body.
London: Routledge
Varagur, Krithika. 2017. “Indonesia’s Moderate Islam is Slowly Crumbling.” Foreign Policy, February
14. Accessed February 13, 2018. http://foreignpolicy.com/2017/02/14/indonesias-moderateislam-is-slowly-crumbling/.
Viterna, Jocelyn and Kathleen M. Fallon. 2008. “Democratization, Women’s Movements, and GenderEquitable States: A Framework for Comparison.” American Sociological Review 73: 668-689.
Walsh, Denise. 2012. “Does the Quality of Democracy Matter for Women’s Rights? Just Debate and
Democratic Transition in Chile and South Africa. Comparative Political Studies 45 (11): 13231350.
Wargadireja, Arzia Tivany. 2017. “Indonesia’s Mass Rape Victims are Waiting for Justice that May
Never Come.” Vice, May 21. Accessed 12 February 2018.
https://www.vice.com/en_nz/article/vv5jab/hundreds-of-women-were-raped-during-the-may-98riots-will-they-ever-see-justice.
Widhiarto, Hasyim. 2014. “Islamic Parties Find a Home in Tasikmalaya.” The Jakarta Post, January 6.
Accessed February 12, 2018. http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2014/01/06/islamic-partiesfind-a-home-tasikmalaya.html
Wieringa, Saskia. 2002. Sexual Politics in Indonesia. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Women in National Parliaments. Accessed 12 February 2018. http://archive.ipu.org/wmn-e/classif.htm.
Yamin, Kafil. 2012. “Islamists Stall Gender Equality Bill.” InterPress Service, May 9. Accessed February
13, 2018. http://www.ipsnews.net/2012/05/islamists-stall-gender-equality-bill/.

17

