Running head: FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

1

Appetizer or Main Dish?
Explaining the Use of Facebook News Posts as a Substitute for Other News Sources

Philipp Müllera, Pascal Schneidersa, & Svenja Schäfera

a

Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Department of Communication, Jakob-Welder-

Weg 12, 55128 Mainz, Germany

This is an authors’ postprint of the article:
Müller, P., Schneiders, P., & Schäfer, S. (2016). Appetizer or main dish? Explaining the
use of Facebook news posts as a substitute for other news sources. Computers in Human
Behavior, 65, 431-441. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2016.09.003

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

2

Appetizer or Main Dish?
Explaining the Use of Facebook News Posts as a Substitute for Other News Sources

Abstract
An increasing number of, especially younger, users use Facebook as their primary
source for news about political and societal issues. At the same time, research suggests
that Facebook use contributes to societal knowledge gaps. Against this background, we
investigate the antecedents of using Facebook as a substitute for other news sources. We
argue that exposure to news posts on Facebook increases the feeling of being wellinformed, regardless of actual knowledge acquisition. This might lead users, especially
those with a low need for cognition (NfC), to use Facebook as a substitute for other
news sources. We test these assumptions with an online survey (n = 390) of German
Internet users. Results show that the feeling of being well-informed through Facebook is
reinforced by the quantity of exposure to news content on Facebook but not by the
amount of actually read news posts. The feeling of being informed is an important
predictor of using Facebook news as a substitute. High NfC interferes with this effect. It
makes the substitution of other news sources less likely—but only for moderate to high
levels of the feeling of being informed. We discuss these results in the light of their
societal consequences.
Keywords: Facebook, News Exposure, Need for Cognition, Feeling of Being
Informed, Substitution

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

3

Appetizer or Main Dish?
Explaining the Use of Facebook News Posts as a Substitute for Other News Sources

1. Introduction
Facebook is altering the way people get in touch with news. News about current affairs
have become an integral part of the content that is shared on the platform (Kümpel,
Karnowski, & Keyling, 2015; Nielsen & Schrøder, 2014). Scrolling through the latest
posts of one’s Facebook news feed is often (more or less incidentally) related to
stumbling upon news content. Research has begun to discuss positive and negative
consequences of news exposure on Facebook. It has been found that accidental
exposure to political content on Facebook supports political participation (Valeriani &
Vaccari, 2015). However, research also shows that Facebook use interacts with
education when it comes to knowledge acquisition. Facebook exposure increases issue
and civic knowledge, but only for individuals with a high educational level (Yoo & Gil
de Zúñiga, 2014). Less educated users do not seem to acquire political and societal issue
knowledge from Facebook. That way, Facebook news posts could contribute to
widening societal knowledge gaps between cognitively high and low engaged
individuals.
The present study adds to this research. We argue that brief encounters with
news content on Facebook could influence further news seeking and exposure. Two
different effects on follow-up news exposure are conceivable: 1.) Users might use
Facebook as a starting point to collect further information by either clicking on the link
within the news post or seeking further information elsewhere. 2.) Or they might get the
feeling of being sufficiently informed about what is going on in the world (Hollander,
1995; Park, 2001) and refrain from further news exposure. For the latter to occur,
Facebook news exposure does not even have to contribute to actual knowledge. That

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

4

way, encountering news content on Facebook could reduce instead of enhance the
individual level of information—especially, if Facebook posts were only used as
heuristic indicators of feeling informed without being actually read and systematically
processed.
With a survey of Facebook users, we investigate whether the feeling of being
well-informed through Facebook is based upon the mere exposure to or actual reading
and processing of news posts on Facebook. Moreover, we explore how the feeling of
being informed is related to using Facebook as a substitute for other news sources. This
helps to clarify the societal effects of Facebook’s growing importance as a news outlet.
In the context of increasing societal knowledge gaps, it is also important to explore
whether an increased feeling of being well-informed through Facebook has the same
effects for all individuals. We therefore consider inter-individual differences in
substitutive Facebook use that trace back to differences in need for cognition (NfC;
Cacioppo & Petty, 1982). People with a high NfC are more intrinsically curious and
motivated to seek information (Cacioppo, Petty, & Morris, 1983; Olson, Camp, &
Fuller, 1984; Verplanken, 1993). Substitutive Facebook use could thus be more likely
for persons with low NfC. This might explain why Facebook news posts contribute to
the formation of knowledge gaps (Yoo & Gil de Zúñiga, 2014).
2. Literature Review
2.1 News content on Facebook as a substitute for other news sources
If news use patterns are investigated, Facebook cannot be neglected anymore
(Hermida, Fletcher, Korell, & Logan, 2012; Nielsen & Schrøder, 2014). According to a
recent study of the Pew Research Center, 63% of Facebook members say that they use
the social networking site (SNS) as a source for news (Pew Research Center, 2015).
Moreover, 40% even describe it as the most important or at least an important way to
receive news (Pew Research Center, 2015). 28% of Facebook members indicate that

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

5

they often or sometimes post news content (Pew Research Center, 2015). Facebook
itself tries to promote this trend by giving more emphasis to news content within the
news feed (Kacholia & Ji, 2013). At the same time, news providers extend their efforts
to distribute news content via Facebook: All US newspapers with a weekday circulation
of more than 100,000 run a Facebook page and spread links to their articles through the
network (Ju, Jeong, & Chyi, 2013). However, it should be mentioned, that Facebook
referrals generate only marginal traffic on the websites of news organizations (Ju et al.,
2013). Those who follow links from Facebook spend less time on news websites than
direct visitors (Pew Research Center, 2014). Exposure to Facebook news posts, thus,
does not seem to significantly boost the use of other news sources.
The intensity with which Facebook is used as a news medium is strongly related
to age. Concerning the sources for political news of the proceeding week, younger
cohorts name Facebook as their most important source (Pew Research Center, 2015).
This can be seen as a developing trend when compared to older data (Glynn, Huge, &
Hoffman, 2012). Since general patterns of media use remain relatively stable over the
life course (Peiser, 2000), cohort succession will probably lead to a continuously
growing importance of Facebook as a news medium in the future. On the individual
level, however, the use of Facebook news posts as a substitute for other news sources
could have severe consequences. The Facebook news feed does not offer full-length
articles but a very comprised form of information that consists only of a headline, two
to three sentences about the main content of a news story, a picture, and social
endorsement cues like comments or “likes” (Costera Meijer & Groot Kormelink, 2014).
Such posts are no sufficient form of information. Relying upon them without following
the integrated links and reading full-length articles could thus lead to a lower level of
information.
2.2 The importance of the feeling of being informed

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

6

2.2.1 Consequences of the feeling of being informed through Facebook
In order to predict whether or not news posts on Facebook will lead users to
consider Facebook as a sufficient substitute for other news sources, the most important
factor is probably how well users believe they are informed after using Facebook. The
feeling of being informed (or: subjective knowledge) is a meta-cognition, i.e. a
cognition about a cognition (Metcalfe & Shimamura, 1994). Feeling well-informed can
be understood as the knowledge that people believe to have, independent of their actual
knowledge (Hollander, 1995; Park, 2001). Studies from consumer research have shown
that the feeling of being informed can have consequences for further information
seeking behavior. It influences applied search strategies and used sources and increases
confidence in the own judgment (Brucks, 1985; Dodd, Laverie, Wilcox, & Duhan,
2005). High self-reported knowledge can even lead to less additional information search
(Wood & Lynch, 2002).
In consumer research and psychology, subjective knowledge is often
conceptualized in a domain-specific way (see, e.g., Ran, Yamamoto, & Xu, 2016).
However, communication researchers have also considered source-specific subjective
knowledge, i.e. the feeling of being well-informed through a certain media message or
outlet (see, e.g., Hollander, 1995; Mattheiß et al., 2013). For news content on Facebook,
the source-specific feeling of being well-informed through Facebook could be an
important predictor of exposure to news content from other sources. Individuals who
feel that their Facebook news feed provides them with sufficient information about what
is going on in the world should be less eager to look for further news content elsewhere.
Thus, we hypothesize:
H1: The feeling of being well-informed through news posts on Facebook
promotes the use of Facebook as a substitute for other news sources.
2.2.2 Antecedents of the feeling of being informed through Facebook

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

7

This assumption raises the question how the feeling of being informed through
Facebook is actually developed. This seems especially relevant since it has been
demonstrated that the feeling of being informed can lead to an “illusion of knowledge”
(Hall, Ariss, & Todorov, 2007). Park (2001) has argued that exposure to news media
content strengthens subjective knowledge without necessarily increasing actual
knowledge. Results by Mondak (1995) support this assumption. He found that the mere
access to news can create a feeling of being informed (also, see, Hollander, 1995).
The same could be true for news posts on Facebook. Especially younger people
use Facebook several times a day (Duggan, Ellison, Lampe, Lenhart, & Madden, 2014)
and that way frequently get in touch with news posts when scrolling through their news
feed. Research suggests that scrolling through the Facebook news feed induces flow
(Mauri, Cipresso, Balgera, Villamira, & Riva, 2011). Such a state of absorption in the
current behavior (Nakamura & Csikszentmihalyi, 2014) could lead users to take note of
the presented news content even if receiving news was not their original intention when
opening Facebook (Valeriani & Vaccari, 2015). The mere presence of news posts within
one’s news feed might have a reassuring effect on subjective knowledge. More
specifically, news posts on Facebook could activate existing news knowledge schemes
and, thereby, support individuals’ confidence that they possess sufficient knowledge
about current affairs. This effect, however, does not require that the content of news
posts, let alone the full-length articles that Facebook news posts usually refer to, are
actually read. Facebook news posts could thus increase the feeling of being informed
without contributing to actual knowledge.
To understand the underlying mechanisms of this assumption, it is necessary to
consider how cognitive psychology conceptualizes the representation of knowledge in
the human mind. It is assumed that knowledge is a very complex “[…] interconnected
network, with numerous levels, stratifications, categories, and trees, containing varieties

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

8

of relationships, schemata frames, and associations” (Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 1980, p.
208). Schemes represent concepts or units within this associative and adaptive network
which are built around an object and contain characteristics or attributes associated with
that object (Iran-Nejad, 1987). If external cues hint to an object or a specific aspect of it,
the complete scheme or associative network that is linked with this object can be
activated. Graber (1988, pp. 250–259) argued that scheme-based processing can have
paradox consequences for exposure to media news content. If media messages are
processed with low interest and involvement and thus inattentively, individuals tend to
predominantly remember which of the existing knowledge units have been activated
during exposure instead of memorizing the actual meaning of a processed message and
thus gaining new knowledge (also, see, Lodge, Steenbergen, & Brau, 1995).
Exposure to news posts on Facebook could that way boost the feeling of being
well-informed. Even in situations in which getting informed about current news topics
was not the primary purpose of visiting Facebook, news posts within the news feed will
probably be noticed. This should activate existing news knowledge schemes and also
the meta-cognitive scheme of being well-informed. This meta-cognition could even be
activated if users are extremely inattentive to the actual messages of news posts they
encounter. It could be sufficient that they realize seeing posts on their news feed that
stem from a well-known news outlet. The presence of one or more news organizations’
posts within the news feed could serve as a heuristic cue (see, e.g., Maheswaran,
Mackie, & Chaiken, 1992) that activates the cognitive patterns “receiving news” or
“being informed” and could thus contribute to a feeling of being well-informed.
Frequent exposure to the Facebook news feed should thus increase the feeling of
being well-informed through Facebook, even if individuals do not visit Facebook with
the intention to receive news and, as a consequence, also do not pay much attention to
the news posts they are exposed to. This assumption is in line with media dependency

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

9

theory which argues that media effects on audience members are stronger if the
respective media outlet has a greater importance within an individual’s life (BallRokeach, & Defleur, 1976). Thus, we pose the following hypothesis:
H2a: A higher frequency of exposure to the Facebook news feed increases the
feeling of being well-informed through Facebook.
Moreover, it can be argued that not only the frequency of exposure but also the
amount of news content individuals encounter when visiting Facebook should increase
the subjective feeling of being informed. Users whose news feed contains more posts
from news organizations get in touch with more news sources, headlines, images, and
short descriptions of news stories. For these users, news knowledge schemes are
activated with a higher frequency when scrolling through their Facebook news feed.
The amount of news posts might thus be a decisive predictor for the feeling of being
informed through Facebook—even if these posts are not actually read. For this
mechanism to occur, the subjective impression that there is a large amount of news
posts within the Facebook news feed is more important than their actual amount.
Therefore, we hypothesize:
H2b: A higher perceived percentage of news posts within the Facebook news
feed increases the feeling of being well-informed through Facebook.
However, subjective knowledge does not necessarily have to indicate an illusion
of knowledge. On the contrary, research shows that it often correlates positively with
objective knowledge (for a meta-analysis, see, Carlson, Vincent, Hardesty, & Bearden,
2009). Against this background, the way news posts are treated is very relevant. If users
do not merely take them as heuristic cues for the activation of news knowledge schemes
but instead actively turn their attention to the news posts and read instead of just
scanning them, existing knowledge schemes could be transformed and actual
knowledge could grow (Iran-Nejad, 1987). At the same time, the self-observation that

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

10

many news posts on Facebook are read and actual knowledge grows could also enhance
the feeling of being informed. The same is true for following the links within news
posts and reading (or watching) the complete linked news story. This leads us to the
following hypotheses:
H2c: A higher perceived percentage of read news posts within the Facebook
news feed increases the feeling of being well-informed through Facebook.
H2d: A higher perceived percentage of clicked links within news posts increases
the feeling of being well-informed through Facebook.
That said, it is important to determine whether the feeling of being wellinformed through Facebook is rather based upon the mere exposure to Facebook news
posts or upon actually reading the posts and linked full-length articles or videos. If mere
exposure to news posts had a higher impact on the feeling of being informed than actual
news processing this would leave room for the assumption of an “illusion of
knowledge” triggered by Facebook news posts (Hall, Ariss, & Todorov, 2007; Park,
2001). Therefore, we ask:
RQ1: Which of the hypothesized predictors of the feeling of being informed
through Facebook is the strongest?
2.2.3 The feeling of being informed through Facebook as a mediator
It can furthermore be assumed that there are indirect effects of exposure to news
posts. The feeling of being informed has been hypothesized to be influenced by the
percentage of news posts within a person’s news feed as well as by the percentage of
read and clicked news posts (H2a-d). Moreover, it has been assumed that the feeling of
being informed affects the use of Facebook news as a substitute (H1). It should,
therefore, mediate between exposure to news posts and the use of Facebook as a
substitute for other news sources:

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

11

H3a: A higher frequency of exposure to the Facebook news feed indirectly
increases the use of Facebook news as a substitute for other news sources through the
feeling of being informed (mediation)
H3b: A higher perceived percentage of news posts within the Facebook news
feed indirectly increases the use of Facebook news as a substitute for other news sources
through the feeling of being informed (mediation)
H3c: A higher perceived percentage of read news posts indirectly increases the
use of Facebook news as a substitute for other news sources through the feeling of being
informed (mediation)
H3d: A higher perceived percentage of clicked news posts indirectly increases
the use of Facebook news as a substitute for other news sources through the feeling of
being informed (mediation)
2.3 The moderating role of need for cognition
But not only the subjective feeling of being informed could influence whether or
not Facebook is used as a substitute for other news sources. There could also be
influences which derive from the individual users’ characteristics. Research has
discovered that civic and issue knowledge varies as a function of Facebook use and its
interaction with education (Yoo & Gil de Zúñiga, 2014). Individuals with a high
education level seem to gain knowledge from using Facebook whereas less educated do
not profit from Facebook exposure in terms of knowledge acquisition.
In our study, we focus on the perception of Facebook as a news source and its
behavioral results. In this context, instead of focusing on formal education we
concentrate on the more direct influence of the subjective importance of gaining
knowledge. Need for cognition (NfC) represents individuals’ general willingness to take
cognitive efforts and deal with complex information (Cacioppo & Petty, 1982). NfC is a
stable, discrete motivational construct (Cacioppo, Petty, Feinstein, & Jarvis, 1996).

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

12

Studies show that a high NfC coincides with a diversity of interests, intrinsic curiosity
and a stronger motivation to systematically search and process information (Cacioppo et
al., 1996; Cacioppo et al., 1983; Olson et al., 1984; Verplanken, 1993). Moreover,
individuals with a stronger NfC have a higher preference for news consumption and are
rather information- than entertainment-oriented (Cacioppo et al., 1996; Hallahan, 2009).
Against this background, it can be assumed that people high in NfC are less
easily ready to confine their news use to the news content that they encounter on
Facebook. Their drive for further information should be stronger and they should judge
the information received through Facebook more critically (Cohen, Stotland, & Wolfe,
1955). Therefore, it can be hypothesized that:
H4: Need for cognition reduces the use of Facebook news as a substitute for
other news sources.
Moreover, NfC could interact with the feeling of being informed which we
conceptualized as the most important predictor of using Facebook as a substitute for
other news sources. Tsfati and Capella (2005) have demonstrated that a high NfC can
reduce the impact of other factors on news exposure decisions. They found that media
skepticism decreases exposure to television news—but only for individuals with a low
NfC. Individuals with a high NfC watch more television news, regardless of whether
they trust them or not. Accordingly, a high NfC should also reduce the impact of the
feeling of being informed in our context. Individuals who have a higher NfC should be
less willing to use Facebook news content as a substitute for other news sources—even
if they feel well-informed through Facebook. Thus, we hypothesize:
H5: Need for cognition reduces the effect of the feeling of being informed
through Facebook on the use of Facebook news as a substitute for other news sources
(moderation).

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

13

Figure 1 gives an overview of the assumptions that have been made up to this
point.

-- Figure 1 about here --

3. Method
3.1 Data
The data for this study were collected via an online-survey of adult Internet users
in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland from June 23, 2015, to July 3, 2015. Participants
were recruited from the large noncommercial online access panel SoSciPanel. Since
participation rates in representative surveys via random digit dialing (RDD) are
continuously dropping (Battaglia et al., 2008), researchers have begun to discuss
alternative sampling modes. Research has shown that opt-in Internet panels as the one
we have used result in a data quality that is comparable to traditional methods such as
RDD (Ansolabehere & Schaffner, 2011; Yeager et al., 2011).
Panelists received an email invitation which stated that “we study how people
catch up on current affairs and which role Facebook plays in this context. If you are a
Facebook member, we would like to invite you to take part in our survey.” A similar
wording was used at the front page of the questionnaire. The main purpose of this text
passage was to convey the information that only individuals with a Facebook account
could participate in the survey. Otherwise, no information about the study’s purpose
was given beforehand. Additionally, we included a control question at the beginning of
the questionnaire which asked whether participants were members of Facebook and
used the services of the network at least once per month. Participants who answered
“no” to this question were thanked and debriefed. Participants who answered “yes”
continued to answer the survey.

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

14

This resulted in a total of n = 390 participants who completed the questionnaire
(age: M = 34.53; SD = 13.06; 59.7% female; 85.7% with high school diploma). 57.9%
of respondents indicated that they use Facebook several times per day. Another 20.3%
indicated that they use Facebook about once per day. Since Facebook does not publish
information on their user structure we cannot reliably judge how well the sample
represents the population of Facebook users. Survey data indicate that the age
distribution is in line with that of Facebook users in Germany (Tippelt & Kupferschmitt,
2015). Moreover, research suggests that social media users in European countries tend
to be rather well-educated as compared to the general population (OECD, 2015, p. 147).
Exploring the hypothesized relationships in a well-educated sample thus seems
advisable. This decision is further supported by the fact that, in existing research, NfC
only moderately correlates with formal education (Cacioppo et al., 1996, p. 217). Thus,
even in a well-educated sample inter-individual differences in NfC should be clearly
observable and effects of NfC can be tested.
3.2 Measures
Before participants were asked to self-report their news exposure on Facebook
they were provided with a short explanation about news posts on Facebook on a
separate page of the questionnaire. The page featured the screenshot of a single news
post from a large television network’s news division. The post dealt with the
introduction of a new car toll and contained a link to an article on the website of the
television network. However, in the questionnaire it was not possible to actually click
and follow the link. Above the screenshot, there was a short explanation: “There are
several ways to stay up-to-date about what is going on in the world. On Facebook, for
example, you might encounter reports from news sites. They summarize the respective
news topic in a few lines. Usually, they also contain a link to a longer piece of
information on the website of the news organization. Below you can see an example for

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

15

such a news post.” This explanation should assure that the participants understood
correctly what was meant with news posts on Facebook within the questionnaire.
3.2.1 Frequency of Facebook exposure
Participants were asked to self-assess with which frequency they open Facebook
and look at their news feed. They chose between five answer options: 5 = several times
per day (51.4%), 4 = at least once per day (18.0%), 3 = several times per week, but not
daily (12.8%), 2 = about once per week (3.7%), or 1 = less than once per week (2.8%).
For further analyses, the answers were treated as a quasi-metric scale (M = 4.26; SD =
1.06).
3.2.2 Impressions of news exposure on Facebook
The questions about perceived news exposure on Facebook followed
immediately after the explanation of news posts. All constructs were measured using a
slider bar that allowed all integer values between 0% and 100% as an answer. The
perceived percentage of news posts among all entries of the participants’ news feed was
measured using the following wording: “Your Facebook news feed does not only
contain news posts like the one you have just seen but also posts from your friends or
from celebrities or companies that you have liked. Please estimate for an average day:
Approximately how many of the posts within your Facebook feed feature news about
current affairs? 0% means that no post in your Facebook news feed is a news post,
100% means that all posts in your news feed are news posts” (M = 34.15; SD = 26.35).
The perceived percentage of news posts which were actually read by the participants
was measured as follows: “And how many of the news posts that you encounter while
skipping through your Facebook news feed do you read at least briefly? Please again
estimate a percentage using the slider bar” (M = 59.07; SD = 32.04). Moreover, we also
measured the perceived percentage of news posts that the participants usually click
upon. We asked: “Within news posts on Facebook you usually find links to a full-length

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

16

article. Sometimes news posts also feature videos that you can watch. You can click on
these links or videos and read or watch them or you can ignore them. Please indicate
how many of the videos or links within news posts on Facebook you usually click upon.
Again, please do so using the slider bar” (M = 34.57; SD = 26.03).
3.2.3 Feeling of being informed through Facebook
In order to measure the feeling of being informed through Facebook we adapted
a scale by Mattheiß et al. (2013) who experimentally investigated “subjective
information” after exposure to a political TV talk show. We took four of the original
items and changed the wording so that it related to Facebook instead of the talk show.
Participants answered the items on a seven-point Likert-type scale ranging from 1 = I do
not agree at all to 7 = I fully agree. The wording of the items can be found in Table 1.
The four items showed a good internal consistency (Cronbach’s α = .89).
3.2.4 Need for cognition
NfC was measured using a seven-item short version of the original NfC scale by
Cacioppo and Petty (1982). Again, Table 1 gives an overview over the items. We used
the same seven-point scale as for the feeling of being informed. However, the selected
items were all negatively worded, so that low values indicate a high NfC. For the sake
of clarity, the polarity of all items was reversed for further analyses in order to achieve
that high scores indicate a high NfC. The seven items show a good internal consistency
as well (Cronbach’s α = .81). In order to prevent halo effects on the feeling of being
informed need for cognition was assessed at the end of the questionnaire.
3.2.5 Use of Facebook as a substitute for other news sources
Whether news content on Facebook serves as substitute for the participants was
measured using four items. Participants answered these items on the same seven-point
Likert-type scale. Again, the four items yielded a good internal consistency (Cronbach’s
α = .89) and are summarized in Table 1.

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

17

--- Table 1 about here ---

3.3 Data analysis
Since our measures include several latent variables we opted to analyze the data
using the structural equation modeling framework. Analyses were conducted with the
software package MPlus 7.3 using maximum likelihood estimation and the full
information maximum likelihood procedure to handle missing values. In a first step, we
calculated a confirmatory factor analysis for the three latent constructs feeling of being
informed, NfC, and substitutive Facebook use in order to test our measurement model
(see Table 1). This model yielded a good fit as judged by absolute as well as
incremental fit indices (χ2(85) = 137.79, p ≤ .001; CFI = .983; RMSEA = .037;
SRMR = .040). Therefore, it is possible to introduce manifest factors and structural
paths into the model in order to test the hypotheses and the research question.
For this purpose, we proceeded in two steps. First, we calculated a structural
model that tested all hypothesized relationships but the moderation hypothesis (H5).
The resulting model is depicted in Figure 2. This model resulted in a good fit
(χ2(177) = 311.02, p ≤ .001; CFI = .952; RMSEA = .045; SRMR = .066).
A second version of the same model was calculated to control for commonmethod bias (Podsakoff, MacKenzie, & Podsakoff, 2012). The indicator variables of the
two latent constructs feeling of being informed through Facebook and use of Facebook
news as a substitute are operationalized rather similarly. It should, therefore, be tested
whether a significant relationship between these two factors indicates an actual
relationship between the two constructs or whether it is a product of common-method
variance. This can be achieved by including a latent method factor into the model
(Bagozzi & Phillips, 1982) which is composed of all indictor variables of both latent

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

18

constructs and is not allowed to correlate with any of the other constructs. The resulting
model has a slightly improved fit (χ2(169) = 282.29, p ≤ .001; CFI = .960;
RMSEA = .042; SRMR = .065). All other model coefficients, including the regression
coefficient for the relationship between feeling of being informed through Facebook and
use of Facebook news as a substitute, are also marginally improved, however, without
affecting the respective levels of significance. Thus, a common-method bias can be
ruled out.
In order to test the interaction that was assumed in H5, we additionally
calculated a latent moderation model following the LMS approach suggested by Klein
and Moosbrugger (2000). This procedure allows to integrate an interaction term of two
latent variables within a structural equation model. The resulting model is depicted in
Figure 3. Within the LMS approach, models are calculated based on the raw data rather
than on the variance-covariance structure of the variables (Klein & Moosbrugger,
2000). When this is the case, no chi-square and related test statistics are available to
judge the model fit. But, since the models depicted in Figures 2 and 3 can be considered
as nested models, the goodness of fit for the latent moderation model can be judged by
comparing it to the model in Figure 2.
The comparison can be achieved by applying the likelihood-ratio test for nested
models (Vuong, 1989). This test is built upon the fact that -2 times the loglikelihood
difference (often denoted as D) is distributed as chi-square. It is, therefore, possible to
calculate a p value from D and the degrees of freedom that result from comparing the
numbers of parameters of the two models. The p value indicates whether the more
complex model has a significantly better fit than the other. For our case, the result of the
likelihood-ratio test (D(1) = 20.13; p ≤ .001) suggests that this is true. The model fit has
significantly improved by adding the latent moderation term into the model. Since the
fit of the model depicted in Figure 2 was already acceptable, it can be assumed that the

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

19

LMS model has a good fit as well. This result of the likelihood-ratio test allows to
interpret the estimated parameters of the latent moderation model for hypothesis testing.

--- Figure 2 about here ---

4. Results
In order to test H1 to 3 as well as RQ1 it is sufficient to look at the model that
does not include the interaction effect proposed in H5. This model is depicted in Figure
2. In addition to the hypothesized relationships, the model also controls for possible
effects of demographic variables by including age, education (0 = without high school
diploma; 1 = with high school diploma), and gender (0 = male; 1 = female) as covariates
for both dependent variables. However, results show, that the feeling of being informed
through Facebook is independent of age (B = 0.000; SE = 0.006; n.s.), education (B =
0.213; SE = 0.206; n.s.), and gender (B = -0.173; SE = 0.213; n.s.). The use of Facebook
as a substitute is also not affected by age (B = -0.007; SE = 0.004; n.s.), education (B = 0.063; SE = 0.130; n.s.), and gender (B = 0.004; SE = 0.093; n.s.).
Concerning our hypotheses, the results show that the feeling of being informed
through Facebook makes it significantly more likely that Facebook is used as a
substitute for other news sources. This confirms H1. H2a, H2b, and H2d are also
supported: the frequency of Facebook exposure, the perceived percentage of news posts
within the news feed as well as the perceived percentage of followed links within news
posts lead to a stronger feeling of being informed through Facebook. Taken together,
these variables explain a considerable amount of variance (R2 = .43). However, H2c has
to be discarded. The percentage of read news posts does not affect the feeling of being
informed through Facebook. With RQ1, we asked which of the four variables has the
strongest impact on the feeling of being informed through Facebook. This can be judged

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

20

by comparing the standardized regression coefficients which are not depicted in Figure
2 that features unstandardized coefficients. The standardized coefficients indicate that
the influence of the perceived percentage of news posts within the news feed (β = .401)
as well as the frequency of exposure (β = .222) are stronger predictors of the feeling of
being informed than the perceived percentage of clicked news posts (β = .145). In other
words: In order to get the feeling to be well-informed through Facebook, it is more
important that many news posts appear in the news feed and that it is looked at
frequently than that news posts are actually read or their integrated links followed.
In order to test the mediation hypotheses H3a-d, we relied upon a procedure
suggested by Preacher and Hayes (2008). For this purpose, the model calculation also
featured direct paths from the three independent variables to the final dependent
variable Facebook as a substitute for other news sources. These paths have been omitted
from Figure 2 for the sake of clarity. However, only the frequency of exposure
significantly predicts substitutive Facebook use (B = 0.108; SE = 0.032; p ≤ .001). The
other three paths are insignificant which means that there are no direct effects of the
perceived percentage of news posts within the news feed (B = 0.003; SE = 0.002; n.s.),
the perceived percentage of read news posts (B = -0.003; SE = 0.002; n.s.) and the
perceived percentage of clicked news posts (B = 0.001; SE = 0.002; n.s.) on the use of
Facebook as a substitute.
The indirect effects were tested with 5,000 bias corrected bootstrap sub-samples
on a 95% confidence interval. These tests yield mixed results. H3c has to be discarded
since there is no significant direct effect of the amount of read news posts on the feeling
of being informed. H3a, H3b and H3d, however, are supported. The indirect effects of
frequency of exposure (β = .135; p ≤ .001; LLCI = .083; ULCI = .188) and the
perceived percentage of news posts within the news feed (β = .245; p ≤ .001; LLCI =
.165; ULCI = .324) are again considerably stronger than the indirect effect of the

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

21

perceived percentage of clicked news posts (β = .088; p ≤ .05; LLCI = .023; ULCI =
.154).

--- Figure 3 about here ---

With H4 it was hypothesized that a higher NfC decreases the use of Facebook
news as a substitute for other news sources. Judged by the model depicted in Figure 2
this is true. However, when we look at the latent interaction model depicted in Figure 3
we see that the effect is conditional. The main effect of NfC is diminished when the
interaction of NfC with the feeling of being informed is included in the model. It even
barely fails to reach significance (p = .053). Therefore, in the strict sense, H4 has to be
discarded. NfC affects the use of Facebook as a substitute for other news sources mainly
in interaction with the feeling of being informed which is indicated by the significant
regression coefficient of the interaction term in Figure 3. Together, the feeling of being
informed and its interaction with NfC explain 61% of the variance of the use of
Facebook news as a substitute.
In H5 it was hypothesized that a higher NfC decreases the effect of the feeling of
being informed through Facebook on the use of Facebook news as a substitute. To judge
whether this moderation effect occurs in the hypothesized way, we plotted the effect of
the feeling of being informed on substitutive Facebook use for medium, low (-1 SD),
and high (+1 SD) levels of NfC. The plot is depicted in Figure 4. It also features lines
for the lower and upper bounds of the three graphs on a 95 % confidence interval. The
scale of the feeling of being informed was normalized, i.e. the value 0 represents its
mean. The plot shows that, for low levels of feeling of being informed, NfC does not
moderate its relationship with the use of Facebook news as a substitute. Substitutive use
is equally unlikely for individuals with different levels of NfC if the feeling of being

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

22

informed is low. However, the plot reveals that the higher the feeling of being informed
through Facebook becomes the more decisive is NfC. When individuals feel wellinformed through Facebook those with a low level of NfC are significantly more likely
to use Facebook news as a substitute than those with medium and low levels of NfC.
This is indicated by the fact that the confidence interval for high NfC does not overlap
with those for medium and low NfC anymore. Therefore, there is partial support for H5.
A higher NfC does decrease the effect of the feeling of being informed through
Facebook on the use of Facebook news as a substitute—but only if the feeling of being
informed is also high or, at least, moderate.

--- Figure 4 about here ---

5. Discussion
The results from this study add to the growing body of scholarship investigating
the uses and impacts of online news behaviors and the role of social media in this
context. Recent research points in the direction that news content on Facebook
increasingly substitutes exposure to others news sources, especially among younger
users. Our data show that the use of Facebook as a substitute is still at a moderate level,
at least in our sample which consisted of many well-educated respondents. However,
our results have also revealed that there are considerable inter-individual differences
concerning the use of Facebook news as a substitute. The feeling of being wellinformed is an important predictor of substitutive Facebook use. Individuals who have
the impression that Facebook provides them with a sufficient amount of information
about what is going on in the world more strongly tend to regard Facebook as a good
substitute for other news sources.

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

23

Need for cognition interferes with this effect. Individuals with a high NfC have a
significantly lower probability of using Facebook news as a substitute. However, this is
a conditional effect. It is only true for users who feel well-informed through Facebook.
Persons who believe that Facebook does not provide them with sufficient information
hardly use it as a substitute for other news sources, independently of NfC. This can be
interpreted as a floor effect. To sum it up, it can be concluded that predominantly
Facebook users who feel well-informed through the SNS and have moderate or low
levels of need for cognition tend to use Facebook as a substitute for other news sources.
These findings have considerable societal consequences. Authors have argued
that the feeling of being informed might represent an illusion of knowledge, i.e.
individuals could be convinced to have a high level of knowledge whereas in fact they
have not (Hall et al., 2007; Hollander, 1995; Park, 2001). We have discussed a
mechanism that explains how Facebook news content could induce such an illusion of
knowledge. A large amount of news posts within an individuals’ Facebook news feed
could lead this person to believe to be well-informed about what is going on in the
world, even if the person did not actually read and memorize the content of the posts.
Since predominantly individuals with a low need for cognition use less other news
sources if they feel well-informed through Facebook, such an illusion of knowledge
could have negative effects on the distribution of knowledge within a society.
On a more positive note, however, the presence of news content within an
individuals’ Facebook news feed could also lead to unintended knowledge acquisition.
Since Facebook is still mainly a social networking platform, many users will probably
use it for social reasons. During their exposure to Facebook they could more or less
accidentally acquire knowledge from the confrontation with news content that they
stumble upon (Kim, Chen, & Gil de Zúñiga, 2013; Tewksbury, Weaver, & Maddex,
2001). That way, news posts on Facebook could also help diminish societal knowledge

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

24

gaps (Kobayashi & Inamasu, 2015). This effect, however, would require that news posts
on Facebook or, even better, the full-length articles they serve as teasers for, are actually
read.
Existing research suggests that this is true only for well-educated users.
Facebook exposure only promotes civic and issue knowledge for this group. News
content on Facebook thus appears to contribute to the formation and widening of
societal knowledge gaps (Yoo & Gil de Zúñiga, 2014). Our findings add to this
impression: Individuals with a low need for cognition use other news sources less often
if they feel sufficiently informed through Facebook. Moreover, the feeling of being
well-informed to Facebook does not increase as a function of how many news posts are
actually read. Rather, the frequency of exposure to the Facebook news feed and the
estimated amount of news content within the feed are the most important predictors of
feeling well-informed through Facebook. Subjective knowledge could thus be boosted
by a false heuristic inference. Individuals seem to interpret the mere presence of news
posts within their news feed and their own exposure to this feed as an indicator for their
own high news knowledge-regardless of whether they actually read and process the
news they encounter. This leaves room for the assumption that news content on
Facebook can induce an illusion of knowledge, at least for some users.
At the same time, however, we have observed that the perceived amount of
clicked news posts is positively related to the feeling of being well-informed through
Facebook. This rather points in the direction of actual knowledge acquisition as a
predecessor of using Facebook as a substitute for other news sources. In order to
determine more lucidly whether the feeling of being informed through Facebook is an
illusion, future research will have to include an assessment of objective knowledge
acquired from Facebook. Moreover, observational research should explore how users
engage with their Facebook news feed and process the different pieces of information it

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

25

provides. In this context, it appears important to explore the effects of flow (Mauri et
al., 2011) and addictive Facebook use (Hong, Huang, Lin, & Chiu, 2014; Kuss &
Griffiths, 2011) on information acquisition from the Facebook news feed. Frequent
checking of the news feed could strengthen the illusion of being well-informed and
support substitution of other news sources. The present results emphasize the
importance of these questions.
Inevitably, there are further limitations to the present study that call for future
research. First, we rely on an opt-in Internet panel for our results. As noted in the
method section, prior research has indicated that these volunteer samples provide data
of similar quality to random sampling methods. In line with the demographics of social
media users in Europe, our sample had a higher level of formal education than the
general population. This is mirrored by the fact that the mean level of need for cognition
is rather high in our data. That said, it has to be concluded that our results are especially
informative for well-educated individuals. Future research should therefore aim to
replicate the present findings with a special focus on formally less educated users.
However, the fact that we observe very strong effects of the feeling of being informed
and a conditional effect of NfC on substitutive use of Facebook news for a welleducated sample emphasizes the significance of these effects. In a sample with more
respondents featuring a low NfC these effects might be observable even more clearly.
Next, we have argued that the feeling of being informed through Facebook is a
self-perception and as such should largely depend on the individuals’ perception of
Facebook as a news source. That is why we decided to assess the perceived amount of
news posts within the Facebook news feed as well as the percentage of clicked and read
news posts via self-reports. However, this decision abbreviates the processes that are
taking place. In order to judge the influence that, e.g., Facebook’s decision to give more
emphasis to news posts (Kacholia & Ji, 2013) has on the feeling of being informed and

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

26

the use of Facebook news as a substitute, it would be necessary to include an objective
measure of exposure to news posts in the next step.
Experimental research could help to clarify with which intensity news posts on
Facebook are processed. It can be assumed that a spiral process is taking place: The
mere exposure to news on Facebook contributes to the feeling of being well-informed
and Facebook will be judged as a sufficient source of information. As a consequence,
users might use less other news sources, even if they do not sufficiently learn about
news from Facebook. They might even actively contribute to an increase of news posts
within their own news feed by “liking” more news organizations and within other
persons’ news feeds by “liking” and “sharing” more news posts (Costera Meijer
& Groot Kormelink, 2014). These behaviors could result in a further increase of the
feeling of being well-informed through Facebook, not only in the own person but
(because of the shared content) also in others. Future research should try to further
investigate this spiral process of which only the initial phase has been empirically
investigated in the present study.
Finally, it also remains unclear in the present study which news media outlets or
channels are the ones that suffer from the feeling of being well-informed after Facebook
usage. Our dependent variable was operationalized in a very general way leaving it open
to participants which other news sources they use less because of Facebook. Future
research could explore this in more detail. This question seems especially relevant from
a media business perspective. We have discussed that many, if not all, major news
organizations use Facebook with the intention to generate traffic for their individual
websites. However, providing news content within the Facebook infrastructure could
have the contrary effect. This is at least what our results indicate. Future studies should
thus more thoroughly investigate whether substitutive effects occur for all types of news
organizations and news topics.

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

27

6. Conclusion
Taken together, the results of the present research demonstrate that the exposure
to news content on Facebook has multi-faceted consequences for news exposure
through other channels. Our study shows that communication research benefits from
moving past the isolated investigation of exposure to particular news platforms and
focusing on the interrelations between different technologies. More specifically, our
results show that features of a media technology, in our case the amount of news posts
on Facebook, can contribute to a feeling of being informed that reduces exposure to
other information technologies. As the news environment continues to evolve due to the
development and diffusion of new information technologies, pervasive changes in
information behavior are inevitable. These changes could have far-reaching societal
consequences. Therefore, there is an urge for future research which captures the insights
from the present study and develops them further.
From a practical point of view, it seems important for news organizations to be
aware of the mechanisms described in the present study. They might not only have
negative consequences for the distribution of knowledge within society but also for
news producers. These organizations use social media platforms with the intention to
increase awareness for their content and, more specifically, to re-direct users to their
own websites in order to increase advertising revenues (Glynn et al., 2012). However,
our results suggest that news posts on Facebook have the opposite effect, especially for
users with a low need for cognition. The more news posts users with a low cognitive
motivation encounter on Facebook the less they feel inclined to use other news media.
This may be desirable for Facebook but not for organizations that actually produce news
content. For them, Facebook news posts are a double-edged sword. They should try to
make their users aware of the fact that news posts on Facebook can only be regarded as
teasers but not as a sufficient information diet.

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

28

References
Ansolabehere, S., & Schaffner, B. F. (2011). Does survey mode still matter? Findings
from a 2010 multi-mode comparison. Political Analysis, 22, 285–303.
doi:10.2139/ssrn.1868229
Bagozzi, R. P., & Phillips, L. W. (1982). Representing and testing organizational
theories—a holistic construal. Administrative Science Quarterly, 27, 459–489.
doi:10.2307/2392322
Ball-Rokeach, S. J., & DeFleur, M. L. (1976). A dependency model of mass-media
effects. Communication Research, 3, 3–21. doi:10.1177/009365027600300101
Battaglia, M. P., Khare, M., Frankel, M. R., Murray, M. C., Buckley, P., & Peritz, S.
(2008). Response rates: How have they changed and where are they headed? In J. M.
Lepkowski, C. Tucker, J. M. Brick, E. D. de Leeuw, L. Japec, P. J. Lavrakas,. . . R.
L. Sangster (Eds.), Advances in Telephone Survey Methodology (pp. 529–560).
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Brucks, M. (1985). The effects of product class knowledge on information search
behavior. Journal of Consumer Research, 12, 1–16.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Petty, R. E. (1982). The need for cognition. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 42, 116–131. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.42.1.116
Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R. E., Feinstein, J. A., & Jarvis, W. B. G. (1996). Dispositional
differences in cognitive motivation: The life and times of individuals varying in need
for cognition. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 197–253. doi:10.1037/00332909.119.2.197

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

29

Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R. E., & Morris, K. J. (1983). Effects of need for cognition on
message evaluation, recall, and persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 45, 805–818.
Carlson, J. P., Vincent, L. H., Hardesty, D. M., & Bearden, W. O. (2009). Objective and
subjective knowledge relationships: A quantitative analysis of consumer research
findings. Journal of Consumer Research, 35, 864–876. doi:10.1086/593688
Cohen, A. R., Stotland, E., & Wolfe, D. M. (1955). An experimental investigation of
need for cognition. The Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 51, 291–294.
doi:10.1037/h0042761
Costera Meijer, I., & Groot Kormelink, T. (2014). Checking, sharing, clicking and
linking: Changing patterns of news use between 2004 and 2014. Digital Journalism,
1–16. doi:10.1080/21670811.2014.937149
Dodd, T. H., Laverie, D. A., Wilcox, J. F., & Duhan, D. F. (2005). Differential effects
of experience, subjective knowledge, and objective knowledge on sources of
information used in consumer wine purchasing. Journal of Hospitality & Tourism
Research, 29, 3–19. doi:10.1177/1096348004267518
Duggan, M., Ellison, N. B., Lampe, C., Lenhart, A., & Madden, M. (2014). Social
Media Update 2014: While Facebook Remains the Most Popular Site, Other
Platforms See Higher Rates of Growth. Retrieved from
http://www.pewinternet.org/files/2015/01/ PI_SocialMediaUpdate20144.pdf
Glynn, C. J., Huge, M. E., & Hoffman, L. H. (2012). All the news that’s fit to post: A
profile of news use on social networking sites. Computers in Human Behavior, 28,
113–119. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2011.08.017
Graber, D. A. (1988). Processing the News: How People Tame the Information Tide
(2nd ed.). New York: Longman.

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

30

Hall, C. C., Ariss, L., & Todorov, A. (2007). The illusion of knowledge: When more
information reduces accuracy and increases confidence. Organizational Behavior
and Human Decision Processes, 103, 277–290. doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2007.01.003
Hallahan, K. (2009). Need for cognition as motivation to process publicity and
advertising. Journal of Promotion Management, 14, 169–194.
doi:10.1080/10496490802353790
Hermida, A., Fletcher, F., Korell, D., & Logan, D. (2012). Share, like, recommend.
Decoding the social media news consumer. Journalism Studies, 13, 815–824,
doi:10.1080/1461670X.2012.664430
Hollander, B. A. (1995). The new news and the 1992 presidential campaign: Perceived
vs. actual political knowledge. Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 72,
786–798. doi:10.1177/107769909507200403
Hong, F.-Y., Huang, D.-H., Lin, H.-Y., & Chiu, S.-L. (2014). Analysis of the
psychological traits, Facebook usage, and Facebook addiction model of Taiwanese
university students. Telematics and Informatics, 31, 597–606.
doi:10.1016/j.tele.2014.01.001
Iran-Nejad, A. (1987). The schema: A long-term memory structure or a transient
structural phenomena. In R. J. Tierney, P. L. Anders, & J. N. Mitchell (Eds.),
Understanding Readers’ Understanding. Theory and Practice (pp. 109–127).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ju, A., Jeong, S. H., & Chyi, H. I. (2013). Will social media save newspapers?
Journalism Practice, 8, 1–17. doi:10.1080/17512786.2013.794022
Kacholia, V. & Ji, M. (2013). News Feed FYI: Helping You Find More News to Talk
About. Retrieved from http://newsroom.fb.com/news/2013/12/news-feed-fyihelping-you-find-more-news-to-talk-about/

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

31

Kim, Y., Chen, H.-T., & Gil de Zúñiga, H. (2013). Stumbling upon news on the
Internet: Effects of incidental news exposure and relative entertainment use on
political engagement. Computers in Human Behavior, 29, 2607–2614.
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2013.06.005
Klein, A., & Moosbrugger, H. (2000). Maximum likelihood estimation of latent
interaction effects with the LMS method. Psychometrika, 65, 457–474.
doi:10.1007/BF02296338
Kobayashi, T., & Inamasu, K. (2015). The knowledge leveling effect of portal sites.
Communication Research, 42, 482–502. doi:10.1177/0093650214534965
Kümpel, A. S., Karnowski, V., & Keyling, T. (2015). News sharing in social media: A
review of current research on news sharing users, content, and networks. Social
Media + Society, 1. doi:10.1177/2056305115610141
Kuss, D. J., & Griffiths, M. D. (2011). Online social networking and addiction—A
review of the psychological literature. International Journal of Environmental
Research and Public Health, 8, 3528–3552. doi:10.3390/ijerph8093528
Lodge, M., Steenbergen, M. R., & Brau, S. (1995). The responsive voter: Campaign
information and the dynamics of candidate evaluation. American Political Science
Review, 89, 309–326. doi:10.2307/2082427
Maheswaran, D., Mackie, D. M., & Chaiken, S. (1992). Brand name as a heuristic cue:
The effects of task importance and expectancy confirmation on consumer judgments.
Journal of Consumer Psychology, 1, 317-336. doi:10.1016/S1057-7408(08)80058-7
Mattheiß, T., Weinmann, C., Löb, C., Rauhe, K., Bartsch, K., Roth, F. S.,. . . Vorderer,
P. (2013). Political learning through entertainment—Only an illusion? How
motivations for watching TV political talk shows influence viewers’ experiences.
Journal of Media Psychology, 25, 171–179. doi:10.1027/1864-1105/a000100

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

32

Mauri, M., Cipresso, P., Balgera, A., Villamira, M., & Riva, G. (2011) Why is
Facebook so successful? Psychophysiological measures describe a core flow state
while using Facebook. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 14, 723–
731. doi:10.1089/cyber.2010.0377
Metcalfe, J., & Shimamura, A. P. (1994). Metacognition: Knowing about Knowing.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mondak, J. J. (1995). Newspapers and political awareness. American Journal of
Political Science, 39, 513–527.
Nakamura, J, & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2014). The concept of flow. In M.
Csikszentmihalyi, Flow and the Foundations of Positive Psychology. The Collected
Works of Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (pp. 239–263). Berlin: Springer.
Nielsen, R. K., & Schrøder, K. (2014). The relative importance of social media for
accessing, finding, and engaging with news. Digital Journalism, 2, 472–489.
doi:10.1080/21670811.2013.872420
OECD (2015). Government at a Glance 2015. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Olson, K. R., Camp, C. J., & Fuller, D. (1984). Curiosity and need for cognition.
Psychological Reports, 54, 71–74. doi:10.2466/pr0.1984.54.1.71
Park, C.-Y. (2001). News media exposure and self-perceived knowledge: The illusion
of knowing. International Journal of Public Opinion Research, 13, 419–425.
doi:10.1093/ijpor/13.4.419
Peiser, W. (2000). Cohort replacement and the downward trend in newspaper
readership. Newspaper Research Journal, 21, 11–23.
Pew Research Center. (2014). Social, Search & Direct: Pathways to Digital News.
Retrieved from http://www.journalism.org/files/2014/03/SocialSearchandDirect_
PathwaystoDigitalNews.pdf

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

33

Pew Research Center. (2015). The Evolving Role of News on Twitter and Facebook.
Retrieved from http://www.journalism.org/files/2015/07/Twitter-and-News-SurveyReport-FINAL2.pdf
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2012). Sources of method bias
in social science research and recommendations on how to control it. Annual Review
of Psychology, 63, 539–569. doi:10.1146/annurev-psych-120710-100452
Preacher, K. J., & Hayes, A. F. (2008). Asymptotic and resampling strategies for
assessing and comparing indirect effects in multiple mediator models. Behavior
Research Methods, 40, 879–891. doi:10.3758/BRM.40.3.879
Raaijmakers, J. G. W., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1980). SAM: A theory of probabilistic search
in associative memory. In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The Psychology of Learning and
Motivation: Advances in Research and Theory (Vol. 14, pp. 207–262). New York:
Academic Press.
Ran, W., Yamamoto, M., & Xu, S. (2016). Media multitasking during political news
consumption: A relationship with factual and subjective political knowledge.
Computers in Human Behavior, 56, 352–359. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2015.12.015
Tewksbury, D., Weaver, A. J., & Maddex, B. D. (2001). Accidentally informed:
Incidental news exposure on the world wide web. Journalism & Mass
Communication Quarterly, 78, 533–554. doi:10.1177/107769900107800309
Tippelt, F., & Kupferschmitt, T. (2015). Social Web: Ausdifferenzierung der Nutzung –
Potenziale für Medienanbieter. Ergebnisse der ARD/ZDF-Onlinestudie 2015. Media
Perspektiven, 10/2015, 442–452.
Tsfati, Y., & Cappella, J. N. (2005). Why do people watch news they do not trust? The
need for cognition as a moderator in the association between news media skepticism
and exposure. Media Psychology, 7, 251–271. doi:10.1207/S1532785XMEP0703_2

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

34

Verplanken, B. (1993). Need for cognition and external information search: Responses
to time pressure during decision-making. Journal of Research in Personality, 27,
238–252. doi:10.1006/jrpe.1993.1017
Vuong, Q. H. (1989). Likelihood ratio tests for model selection and non-nested
hypotheses. Econometrica, 57, 307. doi:10.2307/1912557
Wood, S., & Lynch, J. G. (2002). Prior knowledge and complacency in new product
learning. Journal of Consumer Research, 29, 416–426.
Yeager, D. S., Krosnick, J. A., Chang, L., Javitz, H. S., Levendusky, M. S., Simpser, A.,
& Wang, R. (2011). Comparing the accuracy of RDD telephone surveys and internet
surveys conducted with probability and non-probability samples. Public Opinion
Quarterly, 75, 709–747. doi:10.1093/poq/nfr020
Yoo, S. W., & Gil de Zúñiga, H. (2014). Connecting blog, Twitter and Facebook use
with gaps in knowledge and participation. Communication & Society, 27, 33–48.
doi:10.15581/003.27.4.33-48

35

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE
Tables
Table 1: Measurement model of the three latent constructs
λ

M

SD

I do not like to have the responsibility of handling a situation that
requires a lot of thinking.

.63

2.41

1.71

Thinking is not my idea of fun.

.63

2.09

1.38

I would prefer a task that does not require much thought to one that is
intellectual, difficult, and important.

.70

1.97

1.25

I do not find satisfaction in deliberating hard and for long hours.

.60

2.77

1.68

I only think as hard as 1 have to.

.61

1.93

1.44

I prefer to think about small, daily projects to long-term ones.

.56

2.99

1.63

I try to anticipate and avoid situations where there is a likely chance I
will have to think indepth about something.

.75

1.84

1.27

I feel well informed about current events through Facebook news posts.

.87

3.95

1.76

Based on the news posts on Facebook, I think that I am able to explain
the important news of the day without difficulty.

.79

3.79

1.65

On the basis of news posts on Facebook, I think I could discuss current
news topics with someone else.

.82

4.04

1.77

News posts on Facebook provide me with a good overview about the
news of the day.

.82

4.56

2.00

Other news sources are less important to me because I receive all
important information on Facebook.

.76

2.74

1.35

To stay up to date about current news, I mostly use Facebook.

.90

3.02

1.55

Facebook replaces other news sources for me.

.69

2.46

1.13

Since I can find news on Facebook I use other news sources less often.

.80

3.16

1.69

Need for cognition

Feeling of being informed through Facebook

Facebook as a substitute for other news sources

Note: Confirmatory factor analysis of the three latent constructs. n = 390. χ2(85) = 137.79, p ≤ .001;
CFI = .983; RMSEA = .037; SRMR = .040. Values are standardized factor loadings. All items are
scaled from 1 (= I do not agree at all) to 7 (= I fully agree).

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE
Figures

Figure 1. Summary of the hypothesized relationships.

Figure 2. Structural equation model testing the explanation of substitutive Facebook
use. n = 390. χ2(177) = 311.02, p ≤ .001; CFI = .952; RMSEA = .045; SRMR = .066.
Values are unstandardized regression coefficients with standard errors in parentheses.
All paths are controlled for age, education, and gender.

36

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

37

Figure 3. Latent moderation model testing the explanation of substitutive Facebook use.
n = 390. Values are unstandardized regression coefficients with standard errors in
parentheses. All paths are controlled for age, education, and gender.

FACEBOOK NEWS AS A SUBSTITUTE

Figure 4. Plot of the latent moderation.

38

