The similarities between Hapi and Hebo(河伯
河伯)
Bohai,Xu
Address:Suzhou Industrial Park, Suzhou, China
Abstract: the pronunciation of Hebo(河伯)
Hebo(
) is similar to the Nile god
godHapi(Hep), and Hebo( 河 伯 ) resembles Hapi in its functions and
character.

The combination of

Egyptian hieroglyph

and

is similar to the

, which means Hapi. So from hieroglyph,

we can conclude that Hebo(河伯)
Hebo(
is Hapi in China. Besides, aanimals as
well as humans have been drowned in the river as sacrifices, including
young women destined
tined to become the god's wives, so this resembles the
bride of the Nile. So from the above, we can get a hypothesis that
Hebo(河伯)) is probably Hapi with Chinese characteristic.

Hapi (Hep, Hap, Hapy) was probably a predynastic name for the Nile later on, the Egyptians just called the Nile iterw, meaning 'the river' - and
so it became the name of the god of the Nile. ('Nile' comes from the
Greek corruption-Neilos-of the Egyptian nwy which means 'water'.) He
was mentioned in the Pyramid Texts ("who comest forth from Hep")
where he was to send the river into the underworld from certain caverns,
where he was thought to have lived at the First Cataract. The Nile was
thought to have flowed from the primeval waters of Nun, through the
land of the dead, the heavens and finally flowing into Egypt where it rose
out of the ground between two mountains which lay between the
Islands of Abu (Elephantine) and the Island of Iat-Rek (Philae). Hapi was
also mentioned in the Pyramid Texts as a destructive power, but one that
worked for the pharaoh.
Homage to thee, O Hapi, thou appearest in this land, and thou comest in peace to
make Egypt to live. Thou art the Hidden One, and the guide of the darkness on the
day when it is thy pleasure to lead the same. Thou art the waterer of the fields
which Ra has created, thou givest life unto all animals, thou makest all the land to
drink unceasingly as thou descendest on thy way from heaven.

-- Spence, L. 2008, Myths & Legends of Ancient Egypt, p. 171

Hapi

Hapi,the Nile god

Hapi, wearing the fish symbol of a local nome

Without Hapi, Egypt would have died, and so he was sometimes
revered even above Ra, the sun god. According to Donald A. MacKenzie
(1922), the "whitish muddy Nile may have been identified with milk".
Thus, these white, muddy waters that flowed from the breasts of Hapi
were probably linked to nurturing and suckling, and thus also to fertility.
At a very early period he absorbed the attributes of Nun, the primeval watery
mass from which Ra, the Sun-god, emerged on the first day of the creation; and as
a natural result he was held the father of all beings and things, which were
believed to be the results of his handiwork and his offspring. When we consider
the great
importance which the Nile possessed for Egypt and her inhabitants it
is easy to understand how the Nile-god Hapi held a unique position among the
gods of the country, and how he came to be regarded as a being as great as, if not
greater than Ra himself.
-- Tour Egypt, Hap, or Hapi, The God of the Nile

Hapi was the god of the annual flooding of the Nile in ancient Egyptian

religion. Its name in hieroglyph is

. The flood deposited rich silt

(fertile soil) on the river's banks, allowing the Egyptians to grow
crops(Wilkinson, p.106).Hapi was greatly celebrated among the Egyptians.
Some of the titles of Hapi were "Lord of the Fish and Birds of the
Marshes" and "Lord of the River Bringing Vegetation". Hapi is typically

depicted as an androgynous figure with a large belly and pendulous
breasts, wearing a loincloth and ceremonial false beard(Wilkinson, p.107).

Hapi, bearing offerings

The annual flooding of the Nile occasionally was said to be the Arrival
of Hapi. Since this flooding provided fertile soil in an area that was
otherwise desert, Hapi, as its patron, symbolised fertility. He had large
female breasts because he was said to bring a rich and nourishing
harvest. Due to his fertile nature he was sometimes considered the
"father of the gods"(Wilkinson, p.106), and was considered to be a caring
father who helped to maintain the balance of the cosmos, the world or
universe regarded as an orderly, harmonious system(Wilkinson, p.106). He
was thought to live within a cavern at the supposed source of the Nile
near Aswan(Wilkinson, p.108). The cult of Hapi was mainly located at the

First Cataract named Elephantine.

Its

name in

hieroglyphs is

. Known to the ancient Egyptians as Ibw "Elephant"
(Middle Egyptian: /ˈʀuːbaw/ → Medio-Late Egyptian: /ˈjuːbəʔ/ → Cop c:
/ˈjeβ/), the island of Elephantine stood at the border between
Egypt and Nubia.

Elephantine Island in the Nile,at Aswan, Upper Egypt.

View south (upstream) of Elephantine Island and Nile, from a hotel tower.

Hapi’s priests were involved in rituals to ensure the steady levels of
flow required from the annual flood. At Elephantine the official nilometer,
a measuring device, was carefully monitored to predict the level of the
flood, and his priests must have been intimately concerned with its
monitoring.

A nilometer (lower left) at Elephantine Island

Although male and wearing the false beard, Hapi was pictured with
pendulous breasts and a large belly, as representations of the fertility of
the Nile. He also was usually given blue(Wilkinson, p.107) or green skin,
representing water. Hapi was also both god of Upper and Lower Egypt this duality was shown by having twin Hapi deities, one wearing the
papyrus of the north (Lower Egypt) as a headdress, the other wearing
the south's (Upper Egypt) water lily (lotus) as a headdress. The Upper
Egyptian Hapi was called 'Hap-Meht' while the Lower Egyptian Hapi was
known

as

'Hap-Reset'. In

Lower

Egypt,

he

was

adorned

with papyrus plants and attended by frogs, present in the region, and
symbols

of

it.

Whereas

in

Upper

Egypt,

it

was

the lotus and crocodiles which were more present in the Nile, thus these
were the symbols of the region, and those associated with Hapi there.
Hapi often was pictured carrying offerings of food or pouring water from
an amphora, but also, very rarely, was depicted as a hippopotamus.
During the Nineteenth Dynasty Hapi is often depicted as a pair of figures,
each holding and tying together the long stem of two plants representing
Upper and Lower Egypt, symbolically binding the two halves of the
country around a hieroglyph meaning "union"(Wilkinson, p.107). This
symbolic representation was often carved at the base of seated statues
of the pharaoh(Wilkinson, p.107).

...the Egyptians had no clue how or why the Nile flooded each year. They believed
that the gods Khnum, Satet, and Anqet were the guardians of the source of the
Nile.
Their duty was to make sure that the right amount of silt was released
during the yearly inundation. Hapi was in charge of the waters that flowed during
the floods. The flood was commonly known as the "arrival of Hapi".
-- McDevitt, A., Hapi

Hapi was thought to come with the inundation (the 'Arrival of Hapi')
with a retinue of crocodile gods and frog goddesses. A great flood was
known as a 'large Hapi', whilst a low flood was a 'small Hapy'.
During inundation, statues of Hapi were carried about through the towns
and villages so that the people could honor and pray to him - it was a
solemn occasion.

Ramesses III worshipping Hapi, who is wearing a papyrus headdress

Even Akhenaten, the 'heretic king', could not banish Hapi completely
as he did with the other gods. Instead, he tried to suggest that Hapi was
an incarnation of the Akenaten himself:
Praises to thee, O Ua-en-Re (Akhenaten). I give adoration to the height of heaven. I
propitiate him who lives by truth (Ma'at), the Lord of Diadems, Akhenaten, great in
his duration; the Nile-god by whose decrees men are enriched; the food (kau) and
fatness of Egypt; the good ruler who forms me, begets me, develops me, makes
me to associate with princes; the light by sight of which I live - my Ka day by day.
-- Frankfort, H. 1978, Kingship and the Gods, p. 69

Limestone slab
ab showing the Nile flood god Hapi.
Hapi. 12th Dynasty. From the foundations
of the temple of Thutmose III, Koptos, Egypt. Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology,
London

Hapi, shown as an iconographic pair of genii symbolically tying
together upper and lower Egypt

Hapi is featured in Egyptian Money.

It also notable that before the expansion of Islam, human
sacrifices were common in Egypt, Egyptians conducted to sacrifice
female to River Nile, every year when it was flooded. The flood would
remain until a young female was thrown into it as a sacrifice to become
the bride of the Nile god Hapi. During the reign of Caliph Umar bin
al-Khattab, Amr bin al-Aas, the governor of Egypt, wrote to Umar askin
his direction for such activity. There is a story that Umar answered by
writing a note to be thrown into the Nile river instead of sacrificing a
female to it. The note enclosed verses from the Qur'an and a command
from Umar asking the Nile to flow fluently in the name of Allah without
causing any damage to inhabitants. When the note was thrown into the
Nile, the flood dissolved. After that they won't sacrifice human(p. 329 330 by Elias Kifon Bongmba).

A Bride of the Nile

Sacrifice a virgin to the Nile god

Feeling tired? Now let us back to China. Hebo (Chinese: 河伯; literally:
'Lord of the River') is the god of the Yellow River. The Yellow River (Huang
He) is one of the world's major rivers and a river of great cultural
importance in China. This is reflected in Chinese mythology by the tales
surrounding the deity Hebo. The name, Hebo, means "Lord of the River",
in this case "the River" referring to the main river of Northern China, the
Huang He, or Yellow River, which takes its name from the vast amount of
yellowish silt from the Loess plateau through which much of the river
flows. However, the descriptive term, Hebo, is not this deity's only name,
and worship is geographically widespread. Some of the character
ascribed to Hebo is related to the character of the Yellow River itself: a
river which has been described as one of China's greatest assets as well
as one of the greatest sources of sorrow. Some of the world's greatest
floods accompanied by tragic and stupendous loss of human life have
been due to the Yellow River overflowing its banks, and even shifting
course and establishing a new river bed. The Yellow River has also been
one of the major agricultural sources for irrigation of farms which have
provided for the dietary needs of the population at least from the cradle
of Chinese civilization through the present day. To some extent, the deity
Hebo is a personification of the character of this river. However, Hebo
has also had an important role in the history of religious worship in China
(especially North China), and also having a more general function in

terms of Chinese culture, including literature and poetry. So from the
above, the pronunciation of Hebo(河伯) is similar to the Nile godHapi(Hep), and Hebo(河伯) resembles Hapi in its functions.

Hebo as depicted in the Nine Songs, imprint from presumably the 14th century

Hebo(河伯)in Chinese Chu Culture(楚文化)

A Temple of Hebo

Hebo is also known as Bingyi (冰夷)（Christie, 79; Strassberg 2002, 201）.
He (河) may be used somewhat generically to refer to rivers in general,

or to various particular flowing bodies of water, but in this case is
particularly and primarily associated with the Yellow River of China.
The ancient Egyptian language of the Nile is called Iteru, which means
"river." The Chinese character “河” in ancient times refers specifically to
the Yellow River and the Milky Way in the sky. The ancient Egyptians also
imagined the Milky Way as the Nile River in the sky.

Egyptian hieroglyph Iteru

The prototype of “河”

Besides, the bronze character “伯” in “河伯” is

seal character “河” in “河伯” is

and

; the

. So the combination of

is similar to the in Egyptian hieroglyph

, which
ch means Hapi. So from hieroglyph,
hieroglyph, we can conclude that
Hebo(河伯)) is Hapi in China.
Hebo is the god of the Yellow River（Strassberg 2002, 201）
）, one of the
world's major rivers with close association to Chinese culture. Reflecting
the personification of the Yellow River, Hebo has been regarded as
benevolent,

but

also

greedy,

unpredictable,
unpredictable,

and

dangerously

destructive(Strassberg
Strassberg 2002, 202).
202 So in my point of view, Hebo resembles
Hapi in its character.
The Jin scholar Guo Pu commented that early illustrations depicted
Hebo on his chariot—
—pulled by two dragons through the clouds
clouds—riding
in all directions( Strassberg 2002, 201–202)
. In the "Nine
Nine Songs
Songs" from
201
the Songs of Chu,, the performer narrates a wedding journey with him in
a chariot drawn by two dragons( Strassberg 2002, 202). Some early

accounts—such as the book Shizi wherein he bestowed the River
Diagram to Yu the Great—describes Hebo as having a white face of a
human with the body of a fish( Strassberg 2002, 202).

Hebo as depicted in the Classic of Mountains and Seas, 1597 edition

The poem "Questions of Heaven" alludes to a myth about Yi shooting
Hebo( Strassberg 2002, 202). The Han commentator Wang Yi annotated it
with the following story:
Lord of the River transformed himself into a white dragon and was traveling
alongside the river when Yi the Archer saw him and shot an arrow at him, hitting
his left eye. Lord of the River complained to the Supreme God of Heaven, Di, and
said, "Kill Yi to avenge me!" The Supreme God asked, "Why were you struck by an
arrow?" and he answered, "I had transformed myself into a white dragon and was
traveling about." The Supreme God stated, "If you had only dedicated yourself to
carrying out your duties as a god, how would Yi have transgressed? Now you
became a beast, and it is natural that someone would shoot at you. Yi acted
properly, so what crime has he committed?"( Strassberg 2002, 203).

The Huainanzi stated that Houyi had shot Hebo for the latter had
drowned people(Strassberg 2002, 203).
The Yellow

River is

believed

to

have

originated

at

the

mythological Mount Kunlun, leading to a cult to Hebo within the ancient
states

of

northwestern

and

central

China

before

spreading

southward(Strassberg 2002, 202). So I think it resembles twin Hapi deities.
Hebo was worshiped at various times as an object of human sacrifice
and as a figure in the imperial cult(Christie, 79 and 82-83). Hebo has been
said to have helped Yu the Great to end the Great Flood of China, by
providing a map of the Yellow River(Yang, 131). Animals as well as humans
have been drowned in the river as sacrifices, including young women
destined to become the god's wives(Strassberg 2002, 202). So this
resembles the bride of the Nile. The oracle bone inscriptions provide
solid evidence of the sacrificial worship of Hebo during the Shang
dynasty( Strassberg 2002, 201 and Hawkes, 113).

Worship Hebo (河伯)with ten goats and ten boars

In Dingsi Day, burned the oxen in the sacrifice of Liao(尞(燎)), and drowned a woman
to worship Hebo(河伯) in the sacrifice of Shen(沈).

The oracle characters in the red box means cast jades into the Yellow River as
sacrifices to worship Hebo, unearthed in the South of Xiaotun Locus, Anyang(安阳小
屯南地)

Human sacrifice seems to have continued into the Warring States
period, prominently featuring the presentation of a virgin female human
bride, floated on a bridal raft upon the surface of the river, as an offering
to Hebo(Hawkes, 113-114). This practice was apparently ended (at
the Ye shamanic college) by scholar-official Ximen Bao( Christie, 82, who
refers to Ximen Bao as "Hsi-men Pao".).

Sacrifice a virgin to Hebo

Sacrifice a wizard to Hebo, it is higher than a virgin

However, other bridal sacrifices continued elsewhere, until the time
of Shi Huangdi, of Qin state(Christie, 82, who refers to the locale as "Lin-tsin".).
The book Zhuangzi stated that the wu-shamans and zhu-priests—who
were in charge of the rituals—considered oxen with white foreheads,

pigs with turned-up snouts, and humans with piles as unsuitable for
offerings(Strassberg 2002, 202).
There were cases where people drowned horses and cast valuables
into the river as sacrifices(Strassberg 2002, 202). During the Han dynasty,
occasional sacrifices of jade objects, together with a live horse are
recorded(Hawkes, 114).
Hebo is one of the main characters in the cast of Jiu Ge, the Nine
Songs, a work anthologized in the ancient poetic source Chu Ci. The Jiu
Ge lyrics, including the "He Bo" section seem to have originally been a
lyrical part an ancient religious dramatic performance which also
included costuming, choreography, musical accompaniment and other
features which unlike the lyrics themselves failed to survive the
vicissitudes of history. Of the deities specified therein, Hebo is the one
who has had the most mainstream cultural appeal(Hawkes, 113).

Hebo as depicted by Xiao Yuncong in the Lisao (离骚),
), imprint of 1645

Today people also worship Hebo(河伯)
Hebo
in Mengjin County, Henan
Province(河南省孟津县
河南省孟津县), and Taierzhuang, Shandong(山东台儿庄
山东台儿庄) and
so on, as shown in the following images.
i

Worship Hebo in Mengjin County, Henan Province(河南省孟津县)

Worship Hebo in Mengjin County, Henan Province(河南省孟津县)

Worship Hebo in Mengjin County, Henan Province(河南省孟津县)

Worship Hebo in Mengjin County, Henan Province(河南省孟津县)

Worship Hebo in Mengjin County, Henan Province(河南省孟津县)

Worship Hebo in Mengjin County, Henan Province(河南省孟津县)

Worship Hebo in Mengjin County, Henan Province(河南省孟津县)

Worship Hebo in Mengjin County, Henan Province(河南省孟津县)

Worship Hebo in Taierzhuang, Shandong(山东台儿庄)

Worship Hebo in Taierzhuang, Shandong(山东台儿庄)

Worship Hebo in Taierzhuang, Shandong(山东台儿庄)

Worship Hebo in Taierzhuang, Shandong(山东台儿庄)

Worship Hebo in Taierzhuang, Shandong(山东台儿庄)

Worship Hebo in Taierzhuang, Shandong(山东台儿庄)

Worship Hebo in Taierzhuang, Shandong(山东台儿庄)

Worship Hebo in Taierzhuang, Shandong(山东台儿庄)

Worship Hebo in Taierzhuang, Shandong(山东台儿庄)

Worship Hebo in Taierzhuang, Shandong(山东台儿庄)

Worship Hebo in Taierzhuang, Shandong(山东台儿庄)

Worship Hebo in Taierzhuang, Shandong(山东台儿庄)

Worship Hebo in Taierzhuang, Shandong(山东台儿庄)

Worship Hebo in Wuzhen,Zhejiang(浙江乌镇)

So from the above, we can get a hypothesis that Hebo(河伯) is
probably Hapi with Chinese characteristic.

References:
1.http://www.thekeep.org/~kunoichi/kunoichi/themestream/hapi.html
#.XP-KQfmsdXB
2.https://www.gettyimages.co.nz/photos/hapi?family=editorial&page=
2&phrase=Hapi&recency=anydate&sort=best&suppressfamilycorrection
=true#license
3. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hapi_(Nile_god)
4. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elephantine

5.https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Traditional_African_Religion_and_other
_religions
6.https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Woman_Triumphant/Women_During_t
he_Remote_Past
7.http://www.mummies2pyramids.info/pharaohs-kings/human-sacrifice
s.htm
8. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hebo
9. http://www.hbswl.gov.cn/doc/2017/09/20/20065.shtml (梦幻九歌—
大型楚文化神幻杂技秀)
10.https://baike.baidu.com/item/%E7%A5%AD%E6%B2%B3%E7%A5%9
E/8892321?fr=aladdin (百度百科—祭河神)
11. https://ssrn.com/abstract=3257214 (刘光保—尼罗河和黄河)
12. https://hanziyuan.net/
13. https://zhuanlan.zhihu.com/p/29783339 (甲骨文所见的大历史：
「祭
河」曰「沈」——沉牛沉羊也沉人！)
14. http://www.52shijing.com/zgls/70501.html (西门豹治邺是怎么回事
西门豹怎么死的 )
15. http://blog.sina.com.cn/s/blog_4b2968520102ebcw.html (赵跟喜—
壬辰年（孟津）黄河祈福大典)
16. http://www.lymjzx.gov.cn/news.asp?id=220 (孟津县成功举办首届
黄河祈福大典)
17. http://roll.sohu.com/20120627/n346686512.shtml (河南举办黄河

祈福大典(高清组图))
18. http://news.hexun.com/2012-02-23/138588830.html (“二月二”台
儿庄举行祭河神仪式 再现传统民俗)
19.http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/dfpd/sd/bwzg/2014-03/03/content_1
7316436.htm (农历“二月二”山东台儿庄古运河畔再现祭河神传统
民俗)
20. http://blog.sina.com.cn/s/blog_4dee30590102xcop.html (袁袤翔—
台儿庄古城：二月二“龙抬头”
，祭河神“行大运”
！)
21.https://bbs.fang.com/sfsyt~26~10994/150648309_150648901.htm
(月亮乌镇行风景和风情放在一起了)

