When the Police are the Problem:
The Philippine Constabulary and the
Hukbalahap Rebellion
Walter C. Ladwig III1
DOI:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198094883.003.0002
from C. Christine Fair and Sumit Ganguly, eds., Policing
Insurgencies: Cops as Counterinsurgents (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2014), pp. 19-45
Abstract

The issue of policing lies at the heart of the Hukbalahap Rebellion (1948–1954), in
large part because the indiscriminate and heavy-handed tactics employed by the
country’s national police force, the Philippine Constabulary (PC), was a leading
factor driving support for the Huk movement. A key turning point in the campaign
came with the reform and reorganization of the PC, as a result of which the bulk of
the PC’s personnel were transferred into the Army, which was given the lead for the
COIN campaign. Although the idea of a military-led COIN campaign, with the police
in a supporting role, would appear to run counter to the assumptions that inspired
this volume, the example of the Philippine Constabulary illustrates the damage that
an ineffectual police agency can do in counterinsurgency and the lengths that a
country may have to go to ameliorate the situation.

Keywords: Philippines, Hukbalahap, police, counterinsurgency, COIN

Department of War Studies, King’s College London, London, WC2R 2LS;
walter.ladwig@kcl.ac.uk.
1

THE RESPONSE OF THE PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT to the outbreak of
the Hukbalahap, or Huk, Rebellion (1946–54) illustrates a classic pathology
of weak counterinsurgent states: a fragile government attempted to forcibly
suppress the outbreak of internal violence with a paramilitary police force—
the Philippine Constabulary (PC)—that lacked both the training and
manpower for the task. In fact, the PC’s oppressive behaviour and
institutional corruption significantly increased popular support for the
insurgents. Only when the need to gain access to crucial American aid
compelled it to reform and restructure both its security forces and its overall
strategy did the Philippine government dramatically alter its failing
approach.
Not only does the experience of the PC highlight the problems that result
from the politicization of police forces, it also raises questions about the
utility of paramilitary-police style forces in counterinsurgency (COIN). Some
analysts have suggested that ‘indigenous police are most effective in
counterinsurgency efforts when structured along paramilitary lines’ (Mungie
2010: 1). They argue that such forces, charged with carrying out both police
and military functions, can make a valuable contribution to both COIN and
peace operations because they execute missions that would otherwise have to
be undertaken by regular military forces, harming the latter’s preparedness
for conventional military roles

19

(Havron, Chenault, Dodson, and Rambo 1969: iv, 5). Other scholars suggest
that even if the decision to ‘militarize’ the police is not a conscious one, police
forces in COIN may evolve into paramilitary forces as their roles and
responsibilities are pushed beyond traditional law enforcement (Schmidl
1998: 38).
What does the experience of the PC tell us about the efficacy of paramilitary
police forces in COIN? In this instance, the confused paramilitary nature of
the PC, combined with the limited ability of the Philippine government to
professionalize the force, rendered it poorly prepared to carry out either
police or military missions. The effectiveness of the PC in COIN was only
realized once it was bifurcated into a dedicated policing agency and a regular
military force.
This chapter, which explores the role of the PC in the Huk Rebellion, begins
with an overview of the Hukbalahap insurgents and an outline of the conflict.
It then turns its attention to the Constabulary itself, with subsequent
sections examining the deployment of the PC, the political constraints on its
effectiveness, and efforts to enhance its performance in COIN. This is
followed by a discussion of key supporting issues, including intelligence,
resources, and rule of law institutions. The chapter concludes with a
discussion of the lessons this case has for future COIN operations.
The Hukbalahap Rebellion
The Hukbalahap Rebellion, which lasted from 1946 to 1954, had its roots in
the agrarian unrest that had long plagued central Luzon. The largest island
in the Philippine archipelago, Luzon is larger than South Korea, and home to
both the capital of the Philippines and its most fertile agricultural land. In
1950, its population accounted for almost half of the country’s 20 million
people (CIA Report 1950: 9). At that time, nearly three-quarters of Filipinos
derived their livelihood, either directly or indirectly, from agriculture; but the
country’s political economy was characterized by a ‘feudalistic agrarian
system’ in which large landlords were the dominant political force (Letter,
Abbey to Cowen 1951; CIA Report 1950: 3). Half of all farmers in Luzon were
sharecroppers, working the estates of absentee landlords who claimed 50–70
per cent of their harvest as rent and compensation for the use of seed, work
animals, and farming implements (Office of Intelligence Research 1950: iii;
Crozier 1960: 38). With agricultural incomes stagnant, by the early 1940s,
the supermajority of tenant-farmers was deeply indebted to their landlords.

20

This highly stratified society was thrown into chaos by the Japanese invasion
in December 1941 and the consequent establishment of a puppet government
that employed many of the Philippine political and economic elite. The
largest and most aggressive resistance group in the islands, the Hukbalahap
(‘People’s Army against the Japanese’), consisted of tenant farmers from
central Luzon and labour unions led by the Philippine Communist Party in a
‘united front’. While fighting against the Japanese, the Huks (pronounced
‘hooks’) also set out to redress rural grievances by redistributing abandoned
estates. With 10,000 full-time guerrillas and another 100,000 part-time
militia members, the Huks claimed credit for killing over 25,000 of ‘the
enemy’—80 per cent of whom were collaborators and ‘obstructionists in the
class war’—and denying the Japanese access to much of the valuable rice
harvest in Luzon (Memorandum, Peralta to Roxas 1946; Lachica 1971: 115;
Scaff 1955: 23).
Following liberation, the Philippine government refused to recognize the
Huks as legitimate anti-Japanese guerrillas—which meant they were denied
compensation and benefits from the U.S. government—and replaced the
officials the Huks had appointed to govern the towns and provinces under
their control (Lansdale 1972: 8). As landlords began to reclaim the holdings
in Luzon they had abandoned during the war, they employed ‘civil guards’—
private militias up to 1,000 men strong—to forcibly collect back rent from
tenants and eject squatters (Letter, Locket to Marshall 1948). These attempts
to re-impose the pre-war social order by force were met with active
resistance, as Huk fighters regrouped to defend themselves from the civil
guards and defy returning landlords (Taruc 1953: 228–31).
At first the Huks attempted to achieve reform through the political system,
fielding a slate of candidates from a left-wing umbrella group called the
Democratic Alliance (DA) in the 1946 Congressional elections. Six DA
candidates won office; however, President Manuel Roxas—a minister in the
pro-Japanese government who was widely believed to have been one of the
‘guiltiest of the puppets’—refused to seat the men, alleging that they had won
through ‘coercion, violence, threats and intimidation’ (Abaya 1946: 9; Owens
1989: 194–5; Telegram 138 1949). For the Huks who fought against an
occupation that claimed the lives of tens of thousands of Filipinos, the world
seemed upside down. The collaborationist ruling class and the wealthy
landlords who backed them were returned to positions of authority—45
members of the collaborationist government had been

21

elected to Congress—while those who actually fought the Japanese were
regarded with suspicion. After a prominent peasant leader died in the
custody of the Constabulary, the Huks, once again turned central Luzon into
a battleground (Lachica 1971: 121).
The political leadership of the Huk movement was made up of urban
intellectuals from the Philippine Communist Party. With a rallying cry of
‘land for the landless’, they declared an intention to form a government of ‘the
proletariat, peasants, middle class, intellectuals, and progressive bourgeois’
which would redistribute large estates and nationalize industry, as well as
eject the ‘American imperialists’ and their military bases (Kerkvliet 1977:
224). However, analysts at the US embassy believed that the motivations of
the Hukbalahap were ‘essentially socio-economic, not political’
(Memorandum, O’Neal 1948). Among the rank-and-file, as one former
guerrilla noted, the prime reason for fighting was to stop ‘the civilian guards
and PC from beating up my family’ and see that ‘the DA congressmen hold
office’ (Kerkvliet 1977: 164).
Organized into 100-man squadrons, Huk bands operated at will across
central Luzon in formations as large as battalion-size (1,200). Exploiting
surrounding swamps and mountains as base areas, they attacked civil guards
and ambushed constabulary patrols, hijacked commercial trucking, and
robbed provincial treasuries, compelling the government to disperse its
limited forces to defend large areas of the countryside (Cable 1986: 50;
Kerkvliet 1977: 205, Scaff 1955: 28; Telegram 311 1949). As one scholar
assessed—‘in numbers, organization and small arms the Huk fighting units
were comparable to the government forces. In terms of morale and civilian
support in the areas of their operations, they had a decided advantage’ (Scaff
1955: 28).
The reach and power of the insurgents was shockingly illustrated in April
1949 when several squadrons of Huks ambushed a motorcade containing the
widow of Manuel Quezon, the country’s beloved wartime president-in-exile,
her daughter and son-in-law, the head of the Army Intelligence, and the
Mayor of the capital (Quezon City), killing them all (Telegram 1126 1949).
Large swaths of Luzon, including 6,000 square miles of the richest rice
growing region in the country, were soon being referred to as ‘Huklandia’ in
recognition of the insurgents’ domination. Independent assessments found
that ‘about half the people in dissident-infested areas are pro-Huk’, and
information the insurgents received from a sympathetic public and agents
within the Philippine government frustrated

22

the government’s efforts to hunt them down (Telegram 561 1949; Telegram
458 1950; ‘AFP Brief for Melby Mission’ 1950; JUSMAG 1951).
Following widespread fraud in the 1949 presidential election—perpetrated on
behalf of the ruling Liberal Party by the PC—the insurgents’ ranks swelled,
peaking at an estimated 15,000 guerrillas under arms at any one time
(drawn from a pool of 30,000–50,000 part-time fighters), 100,000-strong
clandestine political organization, and nearly two million active sympathizers
(Bohannan 1962: 21; Kerkvliet 1977: 155; Taruc 1967: 60; Telegram 578
1950; Telegram 458 1950). The frequency of Huk attacks increased tenfold,
and soon they were conducting near daily raids on army posts and spreading
their operations into outlying districts of Manila (Greenberg 1987: 65). By
April 1950, an estimated 500,000 Filipinos had fled or been displaced by the
fighting (Memo, Perez to Quirino 1950). The security situation in the country
was so precarious that armoured cars were deployed near key government
buildings in the capital, while the country’s president took to sleeping on his
yacht lest he need to make a quick escape (Lansdale 1971; Telegram 2694
1949). Fearful for their safety, those local government officials who had not
been co-opted by the Huks refused to remain in central Luzon after nightfall
and would return daily to the relative safety of Manila—thus further
weakening the link between the government and the governed.
However, following the rise of a new reform-minded Secretary of National
Defence, Ramon Magsaysay, government security forces were reorganized in
a manner that enhanced their COIN prowess and reduced the abuses of the
civilian population which were driving support for the insurgency. In 1951,
revitalized government forces were killing Huks at the rate of 40 to 50 a week
(Lachica 1971: 131). By the start of 1952, the estimate of the number of
guerrillas in the field had fallen from 15,000 to 8,000, and the U.S. embassy
was reporting that the ‘dissident problem [had been] reduced from a military
threat…to nuisance raids’ (Telegram 2318 1952). Increasingly cut off from
the population and lacking both supplies and solid intelligence, the
insurgents were soon spending more time and energy evading the
government forces than planning offensives. Although it was not entirely safe
to travel anywhere outside Manila after dark, by early 1953, the insurgency
was believed to be in a state of ‘continued deterioration’ having been
‘winnowed down to diehards’ (Telegram 1794 1952; Telegram 2200 1953).

23

Deployment of the Security Forces
At the start of the insurgency, internal security in the Philippines was
provided by the Philippine Constabulary, a 24,000-man paramilitary police
force. As a national police force, the PC’s remit was to respond to large-scale
disturbances such as riots and insurgency as well as maintain order in
remote areas where local police forces were non-existent. Organized into 100man companies, the PC was deployed across each of the country’s 50
provinces, with a Constabulary Provincial Commander overseeing one or
more companies in each province. When large-scale operations required it,
these companies could merge into battalion-size formations; however, to
provide effective police coverage, companies were more frequently subdivided into detachments of 5–50 men scattered in penny-packets throughout
a province, often in isolated or far-flung areas. In much of the archipelago,
the PC was the most visible symbol of law and order. It was also the
government institution with the most conspicuous presence and constant
contact with the population, which meant that its actions had a
disproportionate ability to shape popular perceptions of the government.
As a result of its remit and deployment patterns, the PC was the first
responder in cases of internal violence, such as the Huk Rebellion. Luzon had
a long history of agrarian unrest and the government initially believed that
Huk violence was merely small-scale banditry. From 1946–8, the Huks were
largely dealt with as a routine law and order issue, with no concentrated
attention given to the problem. The PC established check-points on major
highways in Huk-affected areas, but this practice had no appreciable military
utility since ‘out of inertia and lack of imagination’ the screening operations
were conducted at fixed locations, and were thus easy for the Huk to avoid
(Valeriano and Bohannan 1962: 134). The Constabulary occasionally
searched villages believed to be hiding insurgents; however, the majority of
its time was spent on garrison duty.
By 1948, the Huks had expanded the scope of their operations to the point
where President Roxas declared them an illegal organization seeking to
overthrow the government (Despatch 366 1948). Insisting that ‘the only way
to fight force is to meet it with superior force’, he dispatched the PC to
actively suppress the Huks in a ‘mailed fist’ campaign, with ‘extermination
through military action…the basic aim’ (quoted in Manila Chronicle 1948;
Scaff 1955: 28). These operations were, at best, inconclusive—the government
did manage to kill, capture,

24

or suppress roughly half the guerrilla fighters in the Huk army, but not only
were those losses replaced, the insurgents expanded by a further 3,000
fighters. The central government lacked interest in the conflict and failed to
provide sufficient resources to undertake operations. With little to show for
their operations, the security forces’ morale plummeted. Units adopted a
defensive mentality and merely went through the motions of attempting to
root out the insurgents. Some constabulary units purposefully patrolled areas
known to have no insurgent presence to avoid combat, while government
officials in Huk-dominated areas paid off the insurgents to avoid becoming
the latest victim of their assassination campaign (Airpouch 814 1950).
In mid-1950, the Philippine government reoriented its strategy, splitting the
constabulary into dedicated police and military agencies, and giving the army
the lead role in COIN. In conjunction with a series of reforms that
reorganized and revitalized the Philippine armed forces, this new army-led
approach put military pressure on the insurgents while actively seeking to
ameliorate the major grievances driving support for their cause.
Political Effects
The PC was largely organized according to the continental model of policing,
whereby the paramilitary force was the strong arm of the executive branch,
highly centralized and focused on crime suppression in order to protect the
state, rather than the citizenry. As a nation-wide force under the command of
the executive branch, the constabulary was primed for politicization. Indeed,
the head of the PC was appointed by the President—subject to confirmation
by Congress—and served at the president’s pleasure with no defined term of
office.
The Constabulary Commander, Brigadier Alberto Ramos, was a
collaborationist accused of having personally overseen the execution of
American and Filipino guerillas on behalf of the Japanese. The US embassy
in Manila reported that Ramos, who was also alleged to have previously been
involved in illegal arms trafficking, ‘does not appear to be well qualified’ for
his job (Airgram A-160 1949; Letter, Chapin to Gullion 1950). However, his
personal loyalty to the President secured his position. Under Ramos, the
constabulary was a tool of the ruling Liberal Party, used to falsify electoral
registers, shutdown local newspapers, and

25

attack opposition candidates and their supporters. Administratively, the
constabulary was under the control of the Ministry of the Interior, which
largely served to advance the interests of large landlords vis-à-vis
agricultural workers. Indeed, the Minister of the Interior himself was
described by the U.S. Embassy as a ‘reactionary member [of the] landed
gentry’ (Telegram 1862 1948).
At the sub-national level, provincial governors were charged with
maintaining peace and order in the cities and towns they oversaw. Thus,
constabulary companies and their commanders were subject to local political
influence as well. Though theoretically independent of the provincial
governor or local congressman, constabulary units often did the bidding of
these politicians, including collecting intelligence on political opponents
(Memorandum, Samaon Afdal to Chief of Constabulary 1949). Company
commanders who did not cooperate with local politicians or were unwilling to
overlook infractions of the law by the politically well-connected often found
themselves transferred or relieved of duty. Detachments that were supposed
to be protecting major population centres were frequently redeployed to
guard the estates of politically influential landed interests, which left towns
and villages vulnerable to infiltration by the insurgents. The politicization of
the constabulary further eroded its professionalism as the leadership of the
force was stocked with political loyalists rather than competent officers.
Instead of accurately reporting the situation, these officers repeatedly told
authorities in Manila that the Huks were being defeated in the field and that
‘ultimate victory was in sight’ (Smith 1958: 145–6).
Reform and restructuring of the constabulary—in particular moving it from
the Ministry of the Interior to the Ministry of National Defence—depoliticized
the force, which enhanced its COIN prowess, albeit at the cost of the Liberal
Party’s control. Free and fair elections held in 1951 gave as important a boost
to the prospects for peaceful democratic change as the fraudulent 1949
elections had given the Huks. But those on the losing end of the reforms were
not pleased with the change. After the Liberals suffered a significant defeat
in the 1951 Congressional elections—largely due to their inability to use the
constabulary to intimidate opposition candidates—several prominent party
leaders, including the Speaker of the House, attempted to undo the reforms
that had weakened their hold on power. In the run-up to the 1953
presidential election, the Liberals attempted to remove the constabulary from
the authority of the

26

steadfastly non-partisan Secretary of National Defence (Manila Chronicle
1951; Telegram 2000 1951; Airpouch 339 1952). It required the direct
intervention of the US—which threatened to immediately cut off military aid
if the constabulary were transferred back to the control of the Ministry of the
Interior—for the Liberals to retreat from their attempts to undo these critical
reforms (Telegram 1953 1953).
Enhancing Police Efficacy
As a paramilitary police force, the PC was supposed to be trained to perform
both military and policing duties; however, the force rarely excelled at either
task. The Philippine economy had been shattered by World War II and the
government did not invest sufficient funds to develop the PC into a highcalibre force. The Constabulary School at Camp Crane in Rizal Province
offered a 10-week Criminal Investigation Course, but limited training funds
and the deteriorating internal security situation meant that very few
personnel could actually attend (Department of the Army 1952: 5). Smallunit training for military operations, based on US infantry tactics, was
supposed to take place at the company level; however, this on-the-job training
was frequently disrupted by the fragmented deployment of individual
platoons and squads across a company’s area of responsibility.
In 1949, the deteriorating security situation led the Philippine government to
appeal for emergency American military aid. While the State Department
believed that the Philippine government could not bring the Huks under
control without significant financial assistance, the American ambassador in
Manila, Myron Cowen, was concerned that unconditional grants would
further encourage the Philippine government to use repression to solve its
problems (Memo, Ely to Allison 1949). Since the actions of the PC were
widely regarded as a key driver of support for the insurgency, augmenting its
capacity without also altering its behaviour could be extremely
counterproductive (Airpouch 307 1950).
Recognizing that abuse by the security forces was driving support for the
Huks, in mid-1950, the commander of the Joint US Military Assistance
Group (JUSMAG) warned Roxas’ successor, President Elpidio Quirino, that
the ‘Constabulary, combined with the vicious system of Civil Guards, has
gotten seriously out of hand during the past year’ (Letter, Anderson to
Quirino 1950). JUSMAG’s solution

27

was to shift responsibility for the COIN campaign to the non-partisan and
more professional 13,000-man army, which would then be quickly expanded
by consolidating the constabulary under the command of the Ministry of
National Defence. Not only would this move enhance the coordination of
COIN operations by bringing all of the security forces under a single
command, it would also allow US military aid, which could not be used for
police forces, to benefit the constabulary. Although the Philippine Secretaries
of the Interior and National Defence expressed their opposition to such a
move on the grounds that blurring the lines between policing and warfighting ‘would be dangerous’, JUSMAG observers believed that they really
objected to the fact that integration into the military chain of command
would put the constabulary beyond the influence of local politicians who
frequently used it for their own ends (Memorandum, Baluyut to Quirino
1949; JUSMAG 1949: 4 November, 8 December). This was, of course,
precisely what the JUSMAG intended.
The Embassy and the JUSMAG made it clear that American military
assistance was conditioned on the integration of the PC into the army
(Abueva 1971: 146). In the face of this pressure, Quirino tried to secure the
aid by bluffing his patrons. He agreed to cap the constabulary at 12,000 men,
with the rest of the force integrated into the army; but he avoided
implementing the measure for six months (JUSMAG 1949: 22 December).
During this time, he tried to place pressure on the United States by openly
criticizing the Truman administration’s failure to assist the Philippines
(Telegram 674 1950: 1418; Abueva 1971: 147). The United States stuck to its
guns, however, and held back additional military aid until the PC was
restructured.
In late March 1950, on the anniversary of their founding, the Huks launched
large-scale coordinated attacks across Luzon which put Philippine forces on
the defensive. Despite the increased insurgent threat, US military assistance
remained contingent on the reorganization of the constabulary and the
implementation of concrete reforms to reduce abusive treatment of the
civilian population. President Quirino, who was under considerable pressure,
finally relented, signing an order that reduced the PC to 7,000 men,
transferred 17,000 PC personnel to the army, and placed the PC under the
operational control of the Department of National Defence (Telegram 211
1950; Telegram 220 1950; JUSMAG 1950). The Philippine Armed Forces now
consisted of four branches—the Army, the Air Force, the Navy, and the PC.

28

This reorganization was closely followed by the emergence of energetic and
reform-minded leadership at the Department of National Defence. After a
major Huk offensive saw the insurgents attack a dozen towns across Luzon,
temporarily capture two provincial capitals, and overrun a constabulary
base—where they massacred the nurses, patients, and doctors in the facility’s
hospital before burning it down—frustration boiled over in the Philippine
government. When the Secretary of National Defence resigned, the US
embassy pushed for the appointment of Ramon Magsaysay, a Liberal Party
congressman and Chairman of the House National Defence Committee, as
Secretary of Defence. During the Japanese occupation, Magsaysay had fought
with a pro-American guerrilla unit and shared the views of many in the U.S.
Embassy and JUSMAG regarding the need for reorganization of the
Philippine armed forces (Abueva 1971: 147–8).
Once in office, Magsaysay proved to be a tireless and capable leader who set
out to transform the armed forces. He sought to reenergize the military,
raising their morale while simultaneously building public confidence in the
force. Magsaysay worked to eliminate a major cause of support for the
insurgents by curtailing the armed forces’ mistreatment of the civilian
population. He empowered vigorous young field commanders to operate in the
Huks’ ‘liberated zones’, denying them access to food and supplies. He also
depoliticized the military by cashiering cronies and reducing corruption,
while simultaneously augmenting training for regular soldiers to increase
their capacity and professionalism (Hart 1953: 67). Higher pay and greater
logistical support for units in the field improved discipline and eliminated the
need for soldiers to steal from the population or scavenge supplies when on
patrol (Letter, Jones to Quirino 1948; Greenberg 1987: 85; Valeriano and
Bohannan 1962: 2081). American military and economic aid facilitated
Magsaysay’s efforts, allowing him to raise the salaries of Armed Forces of the
Philippines (AFP) personnel and undertake civic action projects in rural
areas.
Following the force’s consolidation and incorporation into the Department of
National Defence (DND), the remaining elements of the PC were reorganized
for the enforcement of law and order (Department of the Army 1952: 2).
Although the company remained the PC’s basic unit, the size of these
formations was shrunk by a third. With the army taking the lead in COIN,
the primary contribution of the re-structured constabulary was to prevent
organized lawlessness in rural areas, which

29

might otherwise divert army resources from anti-Huk operations. The
constabulary primarily facilitated COIN operations by providing units with
intelligence on specific people and developments in their area of
responsibility and in some instances eliciting public support for army
operations. However, in the case of a Huk raid on a population centre, PC
units would attempt to engage the insurgents until the army could arrive.
The problem of training continued to plague the PC. With the army taking
the lead against the Huks, it took priority when it came to limited training
funds. Between January 1950 and June 1952, just 270 officers and 450 men
(10 per cent of the force) completed the training course at the Constabulary
School (Department of the Army: 6). Moreover, the continual demands of
police operations undercut the opportunities for unit training. The Philippine
government drew up plans ‘for bringing all Constabulary companies from the
field for eight weeks of training in basic and technical subjects…’ but the
requirements of on-going policing meant that throughput averaged only 12
per cent of the force per year (Department of the Army: 6).
With the constabulary free from the politicized influence of the Ministry of
Interior, Magsaysay was able to court martial ‘weak, inefficient and corrupt
officers and enlisted personnel’, resulting in the cashiering of over 400 unfit
officers in the subsequent three years, including the Constabulary
Commander Brigadier Ramos (Department of the Army: 5; Hart 1953: 67;
Lansdale 1972: 43). Since the constabulary and the army were both under the
DND, movement of personnel between the two organizations was quite
frequent. Unfortunately for the PC, the government’s policy of reassigning
energetic and capable constabulary officers to the army meant that the
organization continued to suffer from a shortage of competent leadership.
Nevertheless, under the DND’s strict oversight, the constabulary was free of
the political influence that had previously tainted its operations. In
combination with an aggressive effort to dismiss incompetent and corrupt
personnel, the PC began to shed its abominable reputation (Department of
the Army: 5).
Meanwhile, the elements of the constabulary merged into the army were
organized into 1200-man Battalion Combat Teams (BCT)—reinforced
infantry battalions complete with reconnaissance assets. It was envisioned
that the BCTs, as mobile, combined-arms forces, would be capable of
independent operations in the rough terrain of Luzon while having more
mobility and flexibility than the PC companies they

30

replaced. Moreover, these larger-sized formations would better deter Huk
ambushes. In early 1950, the Philippine army had just two combat-ready
infantry battalions, but by the end of the year it had 10 operational BCTs,
many of them formed from former constabulary companies. To professionalize
the force, army officers were assigned to command former PC companies, who
received modern weapons and advanced unit training.
Police Performance in the Fight
In the early years of the Huk Rebellion, poorly paid and trained enlisted
members of the constabulary contributed to the government’s problems
through the ‘irregularities of [their] conduct—one time too vicious in their
conduct, another time, so lax as to intermarry with Huk women’ (Telegram
1152 1950). Low—and frequently delayed—pay meant that the PC had to loot
supplies from the local peasantry. Road checkpoints, supposedly established
to reduce the insurgents’ freedom of movement, became opportunities for the
members of the PC to collect ‘tolls’ to supplement their wages (Valeriano and
Bohannan 1962: 79). The US embassy estimated that there was a ‘fineness of
demarcation’ between the Huks and the constabulary. ‘All have guns…and
all are completely irresponsible’ (Telegram 1152 1950). At the same time,
constabulary officers were accused of enriching themselves by levying illegal
taxes on plantations and forcing farmers to thresh their rice in constabularyrun mills (Melby Mission 1950). Not only did these practices create
widespread corruption among the PC, they harmed the government’s
relations with the local population.
With the majority of constabulary elements tied down in static protection
duties, the PC rarely took offensive action against the Huks unless compelled
to do so by high-level political pressure or ‘scathing newspaper comments’
(Valeriano and Bohannan 1962: 94). In offensive operations, employing the
conventional tactics of positional war, the constabulary repeatedly attempted
to encircle the highly mobile Huks and bring them to battle, which proved to
be as ineffective as it was destructive (Telegram 1011 1950; Telegram 492
1949). In the absence of a clear campaign plan or centralized command
mechanisms, PC companies conducted operations as the local commander
saw fit. Without effective intelligence, the PC relied on indiscriminate
measures to separate the guerrillas from the population—large scale cordonand-search operations,

31

food denials, and collective punishment. The latter included the slaughter of
livestock, the destruction of crops in the field, the demolition of dwellings,
mass arrests, and summary execution of hundreds of peasants (Moore 1971:
11). It is not without justification that some scholars judged that the PC
conducted itself ‘like an army of occupation’ (Greenberg 1987: 70; Lachica
1971: 121).
As Huk political leader Jesus Lava readily admitted—’The great majority of
Huks joined because of repression by the Philippine Government…and
civilian guards. Many felt it was either join or be killed without at least
putting up a fight’. The US embassy concurred, noting it was ‘reasonable to
assume that some of the Huks are merely trying to avenge mistreatment at
the hands of the PC’ (Telegram 1152 1950). Embassy personnel advised
Washington that—’so long as the constabulary seize foodstuffs without
paying for them, become drunk and disorderly, extract information by
inhumane methods, abuse women, shoot up country towns and generally
mistreat the populace, just so long they will continue to lose the Philippines
to the [Huks]’ (Despatch 432 1950: 1436).
Following the reorganization of the security forces and the designation of the
army as the lead COIN force, the situation changed markedly. Central Luzon
was blanketed with battalion combat teams, many in areas that had formerly
been Huk ‘safe zones’ (Kerkvliet 1977: 208). Each BCT was assigned a
specific zone of operations—typically half or a third of a province. Initial
deployments tied down the majority of the BCTs in static defensive positions
as they focused on protecting the population against Huk raids and
generating the local intelligence necessary for offensive operations against
the insurgents. Army BCTs began by establishing a presence in the major
barrios in their area of responsibility, where they disrupted the link between
the active guerrillas and their supporters by establishing roadblocks and
enforcing curfews.
The conspicuous large-scale sweep operations were replaced by small
formations which penetrated deeply into Huklandia in search of the
insurgents’ base areas (Kerkvliet 1977: 241). Not only had it been relatively
easy for the highly mobile insurgents to avoid the large-scale operations, it
was frequently during sweep operations that the security forces, unable to
corner their elusive prey, vented their frustrations on the civilian population.
Previously, the Filipino security forces had only conducted desultory patrols
along major roads adjacent to their cantonments. Under Magsaysay, the
security forces focused on off-road

32

patrolling by squadron or platoon sized units, conducted on an irregular basis
and often lasting several days at a time.
To demonstrate that the government could be a force for good, the
constabulary and other elements of the armed forces undertook ‘civic
action’—digging wells in remote areas, repairing roads and bridges, providing
basic medical treatment to rural peasants, and building schools. With
American aid, 300 miles of new roads were laid and over 2,000 wells were
dug across the island over the subsequent four years (Greenberg 1987: 139).
Government lawyers were ordered to assist citizens in pursuing legal action
against abusive military personnel and represent tenant farmers in their
legal disputes with landlords for free (Telegram 1194 1951: 1510–11;
Lansdale 1972: 48). To ensure that the security forces were accountable, the
Defence Secretary established a nickel telegram service that would allow any
Filipino to send a message reporting any abuse or problems directly to his
office.
Having fought as a guerrilla against the Japanese, Magsaysay knew how
hard the life of an insurgent can be. To provide rank-and-file Huks a way to
give up their struggle, he established an amnesty that allowed those who
were not guilty of a major crime to reintegrate into society. Surrendered
guerrillas were given the tantalizing option of joining the Economic
Development Corps (EDCOR), which used American aid to create
reintegration settlements on other less populated islands (Romulo and Gray
1957: 167, 221). EDCOR offered the opportunity to establish a 20-acre
homestead on the island of Mindanao, with the government helping him to
clear land, build a home, and purchase supplies. Retired soldiers and their
families lived alongside selected former insurgents and kept watch over their
formerly wayward fellow citizens. If the Huk worked his plot of land for
several years, he was granted the title in perpetuity.
Only 950 families were ever resettled by EDCOR—less than 250 of whom
were those of former guerrillas (Kerkvliet 1977: 239). However, the effort
directly responded to the Huks’ slogan of ‘land for the landless’. News that
the government was providing land to surrendered insurgents triggered a
wave of defections. Why fight for a farm and a future when the government
was giving it away? The Philippine government estimated 1,500 active
guerillas surrendered to try to join the EDCOR programme, which would
have otherwise tied up several thousand additional government troops had
they remained in the field.

33

By early 1951, Ambassador Cowen was reporting back to Washington that
the reforms were ‘injecting new enthusiasm in [the] armed forces which may
be [the] dominant factor in improving effectiveness’ (Telegram 2157 1951).
This view was corroborated by Huk leader Jesus Lava, who said that ‘when
Magsaysay started making reforms in the Philippine army and in the
government generally it had an impact not only on the movement’s mass
support but on the [guerrillas] as well’ (Kerkvliet 1977: 238). In the second
half of 1951, the new leadership of the AFP and the reforms instituted by
Magsaysay began to have an impact as the new BCTs successfully undertook
offensive operations against the insurgents. With morale on the rise, the
armed forces were displaying increasing levels of competence. The
reorganized BCTs slowed the Huks’ progress and began to place the
insurgents on the defensive, forcing them to abandon Luzon’s fertile
agricultural plains for the sanctuary of the island’s mountains and swamps.
Intelligence
In the early years of the conflict, the PC’s predatory treatment of the civilian
population hindered its ability to cultivate intelligence from the populace.
Moreover, according to JUSMAG assessments, the Philippine government’s
capacity to develop raw information into actionable intelligence and
disseminate it in a timely manner was ‘extremely poor’ (JUSMAG Brief for
Melby Mission 1950). Until the end of 1951, the government’s intelligence
efforts had been fragmented, with the PC, the Military Intelligence Service
(MIS), the National Bureau of Investigation, the Manila Police Department,
and a host of other agencies all independently collecting intelligence on the
Huks (Valeriano and Bohannan 1962: 138). Although these agencies did a
reasonable job of pushing intelligence up to the country’s national leadership,
there was little downward transmission of actionable information to units in
the field, nor was intelligence sharing across agencies a common practice.
One JUSMAG officer described the redundancy of effort across agencies as
‘phenomenal’ while noting that bureaucratic jealousy ‘was rampant’—a
situation that ‘would have frightened any organization-minded intelligence
officer’ (Valeriano and Bohannan 1962: 138).
The U.S. brought six experienced combat intelligence officers, with prior
knowledge of the Philippines, onto the JUSMAG staff to assist the

34

PC and army in developing techniques for cultivating information from
friendly civilians and captured insurgents (Memorandum, Hobbs to Joint
Chiefs of Staff 1950). JUSMAG also outlined a plan to reorganize intelligence
collection for COIN. Implemented in January 1951, this made the MIS the
lead agency for COIN intelligence. Intelligence teams were assigned to all the
BCTs, decentralizing intelligence collection and dissemination by making the
local area commander—rather than a separate intelligence agency or
organization—responsible for the intelligence effort in his area of operations
(JUSMAG Semi-Annual Report 1951).
To develop a professional intelligence corps, an intelligence school was
established which trained 240 officers and 570 enlisted men in the first 18
months of operation (JUSMAG Semi-Annual Report 1952). For the first
several years of the conflict, there was no systematic programme for the
interrogation of Huk prisoners—captured insurgents were simply locked
away and occasionally beaten for information. Under Magsaysay, the
maltreatment of prisoners ended, which made them more likely to cooperate
and their comrades in the field more likely to surrender. With American
guidance, the constabulary built a network of informants and assembled
dossiers on known Huks. They also began interrogating the families and
friends of insurgents, encouraging them to plead with their loved ones to give
up their armed struggle (JUSMAG Semi-Annual Report 1951).
To generate intelligence on the guerrillas while simultaneously
delegitimizing them, the government offered extraordinarily large cash
bounties for information leading to the capture of Huk leaders. The basic
reward began at a rate of 5,000 pesos—10 times the average annual
agricultural wage—and went as high as 100,000 for senior Huk commanders
(Shalom 1977: 160). Wanted individuals were always portrayed as criminals,
with corresponding details provided about the specific robbery, arson, or
murder of which they were accused. Publicizing the crimes reduced the
insurgents’ heroic image while creating divisions between the people and the
Huks, as well as between the rank-and-file insurgents and their leadership,
who began to worry about the temptations for betrayal such rewards created.
In the early years of the conflict, the security forces had been hamstrung by
their lack of reliable information about the insurgents and their organization.
This began to change as the combination of better

35

treatment of the civilian population and rewards for cooperation paid off in
the form of information. Rural inhabitants of Luzon heaped praise on
Magsaysay, saying that he ‘cleaned up the PC and Philippine army’ and ‘got
rid of the civilian guards’. As one provincial Huk commander noted—’All the
reforms that were promised and partially implemented, even though small
and show-case in nature, were encouraging for people. Many people believed
in the government…’ (Quoted in Kerkvilet: 238). Impressed with Magsaysay’s
sincerity, the Huk commander for greater Manila, Taciano Rizal, approached
the Secretary of National Defence with the intention of defecting to the
government’s side. Rizal provided the government with the location of the
insurgents’ safe houses in the capital. The simultaneous raid on 22 locations
across the city resulted in the arrest of over 100 people, including a large
percentage of the politburo as well as ‘two truckloads’ of the central
leaderships’ papers (Abueva 1971: 167).
Although the capture of so many senior leaders was a blow for the Huks, the
insurgents managed to carry on the fight for several more years. In the
months following the capture, they launched daily attacks while expanding
their operations into new areas—leading JUSMAG observers to conclude that
‘they were not weakened by the capture of the Manila members of their
Politburo’ (Lansdale 1972: 85–6). Indeed, the Huks themselves judged that
the capture of the politburo only resulted in a ‘slight lowering of the morale of
the ordinary rank-and-file member of the party’, while their leadership
actually debated expanding the scope of their military operations (‘Top Secret
Report on Communist Military Committee Conference’ 1950).
Resources
Over the course of the conflict, the weapons and equipment of both the PC
and the Philippine army were adjusted to render the forces better suited to
conduct discrete COIN operations among a civilian population in a manner
that minimized collateral damage. At the same time, a significant effort was
undertaken to provide field forces with sufficient provisions to reduce their
need to prey on the local civilian population for supplies.
Befitting their paramilitary role, the PC was initially equipped as a light
infantry force. Personal weapons consisted of .30 calibre M1 rifles and
carbines, supplemented by Browning automatic rifles and .45 calibre

36

submachine guns. Fire support came in the form of light and heavy .30 and
.50 calibre machine guns, 60 mm and 81 mm mortars, and occasionally,
batteries of 105 mm howitzers. Armoured cars and light tanks were employed
to maintain security on highways and other major roadways. Following the
restructuring of the armed forces, the new constabulary units were stripped
of their heavy weapons and armed primarily with .30 calibre rifles and billy
clubs—weapons that are more appropriate for police work (Department of the
Army 1952: 2).
The constabulary elements that were formed into BCTs also had their
armaments altered. Between 1946 and 1950, the PC made frequent use of
artillery to shell suspected Huk positions; however, they were rarely
successful in bringing major firepower to bear on insurgent bands. Far more
often, the local civilian population bore the brunt of this approach, and the
resulting casualties not only alienated the populace but also drew the scorn of
the insurgents. To facilitate small-unit operations, increase mobility, and
reduce collateral damage from COIN operations, the battalion’s artillery and
heavy mortar sections were replaced with additional rifle companies. Heavy
weapons were deployed only in specific scenarios, on an as-needed basis
(Valeriano and Bohannan 1962: 133).
For several years, JUSMAG had advised the Philippine government that the
‘niggardly attitude’ towards the ‘pay, clothing and substance allowance’ of
enlisted men was a major barrier to enhancing the effectiveness of the
constabulary and army (Letter, Jones to Quirino 1948). Magsaysay gave
emergency status to the procurement and distribution of field rations in order
to ensure that government forces were capable of sustaining themselves in
the field. This meant that they no longer needed to steal from the population
or scavenge supplies when on deployment, leading to a significant
improvement in relations with the local peasantry (Valeriano and Bohannan
1962: 208). (In the past, when deployed to the provinces, the underpaid and
poorly disciplined members of the constabulary would billet themselves in
private homes, appropriate foodstuffs, and force local women to do their
cooking and washing (Thorpe 1962: 98).) Magsaysay also used American aid
to raise the salary of the armed forces, which further reduced their incentive
to rob or extort the population. In 1950, a Filipino soldier did not earn enough
even to pay for his daily meals, but Magsaysay tripled wages, both raising
their morale and reducing corruption (Greenberg 1987: 85).

37

Rule of Law
The Philippine legal system was designed to protect citizens from capricious
and unfair treatment at the hands of the authorities, which posed difficulties
for responding to a large-scale insurgency. Since a captured insurgent was
entitled to the same due process protections as any other Philippine citizen, a
guerrilla was automatically released if they were not presented before a judge
within six hours of their arrest and a prima facie case presented against
them within 24 hours. Consequently, the constabulary ‘found it almost
impossible to hold a dissident captive, since the time-space element from the
field to the court offices…is frequently greater than six hours’ (JUSMAG
Semi-Annual Appraisal 1951). Moreover, if the charge filed against the
insurgent was anything short of murder, he had a right to demand to be
released on bail. As a result, one JUSMAG officer noted—‘it was literally true
that a Huk, captured in a fire fight could be free and back with his unit
within seventy-two hours or less’ (Valeriano and Bohannan 1962: 54).
Although they recognized this as a significant problem, politicians from the
ruling Liberal Party were unwilling to propose as drastic a step as
suspending the writ of habeas corpus, aware that such a move would be
deeply unpopular after the brutality of Japanese occupation. More
importantly, with a vocal and active press ready to condemn any curtailment
of civil liberties and a political opposition looking for any opportunity to
attack the government, Liberal Party leaders worried that such an action
would devastate their party’s electoral chances. The political environment
changed following the raid on the politburo in Manila, during which the
Philippine government discovered that the insurgents were ‘a better
organized [and] more potent force than had been imagined’ (Lansdale 1972:
63–4). The public revelation of the size and scope of the Huk organization
provided the government with the political cover it needed to temporarily
suspend the writ of habeas corpus in conflict zones. This move, in turn,
enhanced the ability of the government to collect intelligence on the Huks
(The Constabulary Story 1982: 302).
Lessons Learned
Although each insurgency is unique, the experience of the PC suggests
several lessons relevant to the deployment of police forces in other

38

insurgencies. The first regards the utility of paramilitary police forces in
COIN. Bringing the police under the control of the military seems to run
counter to the received wisdom of how to employ such forces in COIN,
however, the corruption and brutality of the PC made such actions necessary
to reform the institution. While some have suggested that paramilitary police
forces are well suited for COIN, the experience of the PC in the Huk
Rebellion raises doubts. The dual police and military missions were never
satisfactorily delineated and the force lacked the training and resources to
excel at either mission, let alone both. Although the resources of the
Philippine government were particularly scarce in the immediate aftermath
of World War II, it did not differ markedly from other countries facing an
active insurgency; they often suffer from ‘declining public order, rising
domestic violence, stagnating economies, and infrastructure deteriorating
because of the lack of basic maintenance’ (Olson 1993: 11).
Detecting and severing the links between insurgent groups and the civilian
supporters they rely on for shelter, transport, and information requires solid
investigatory police work. The paramilitary nature of the PC, combined with
the limited resources of the Philippine government, prevented that capability
from being widely developed among the PC. Furthermore, traditional police
forces are believed to be helpful in COIN because they have experience in
regularly dealing with civilians as well as achieving their missions using the
minimum amount of necessary force, unlike the regular military. That makes
them less likely to alienate the public when carrying out internal security
duties. In sharp contrast, the paramilitary PC, which did not possess either
connections in local society or deep experience in civil policing, responded to
the civilian population in Luzon with maximal force. The poor relations that
PC units developed with the population in their areas of responsibility
hindered the cultivation of the sort of human intelligence networks that
police forces can normally provide as a result of their regular interaction with
the civilian population. The Philippine government’s COIN prospects only
improved after the PC’s responsibilities for policing and military operations
were distributed to separate organizations.
Second, the constabulary experience highlights the critical importance of
ensuring adequate pay and logistical support for police forces. As one of the
primary points of contact between a government and its population, the
police have ample opportunity for corruption. As a result of this

39

regular contact, they play a significant role in shaping perceptions of the
government, which means major failings in the force can undermine public
confidence in the government as a whole. Ensuring sufficient pay and support
such that the police do not need to scavenge supplies or extort money from
the civilian population must be a priority, as is the establishment of
administrative procedures to swiftly dismiss corrupt officers when they are
discovered. For a resource-constrained government facing an insurgency,
raising police pay may seem like a luxury. However, ultimately it is cheaper
to pay to establish a police force made up of high-quality professional officers
than it is to undo the damaged inflicted by a repressive and dishonest police
force that drives civilians into the arms of the insurgents.
Finally, this episode also suggests that the steps necessary to enhance the
effectiveness of the police force (or of COIN operations, more generally) may
run directly counter to the interests of the local government. Although the
COIN strategies initially adopted by the government were ineffective, its
freedom of action was constrained by political considerations. Restructuring
of the PC was necessary to enhance its effectiveness, but these very actions
challenged the ruling Liberal Party’s grip on power. As a result, these
changes were bitterly opposed and were only made when the United States
linked aid to reform. As expected, the ‘loss’ of the constabulary cost the
Liberal Party first its grip on Congress and later the presidency. A
supporting power must be aware that its COIN prescriptions may not be
welcomed by the local government and that it may prove necessary to exert
significant pressure on an ally to compel reform.
***
Although subordinating the police to the army when conducting COIN
operations is contrary to the advice of most theorists, the Huk Rebellion
illustrates that there are no cookie-cutter solutions to insurgency. The
extraordinary step of putting the police and the army under a single
command proved necessary to end the PC’s abusive treatment of the civilian
population. Concrete grievances against the security forces and the landlords
they served were driving popular support for the Huk insurgents in Luzon.
Ending this mistreatment and having the security forces undertake civic
action projects, which made a tangible

40

improvement in the lot of many rural labourers, helped cultivate the
impression that government forces were on the side of the people, not the
powerful, which reduced the attractiveness of armed opposition. At the same
time, the improvement in the population’s perception of the security forces
enhanced their ability to cultivate intelligence on the insurgents. This proved
to be a key turning point—the effectiveness of government forces was not a
product of their firepower, but their ability to find the insurgents. In concert
with the decentralization of operations and intelligence collection, this
increased the effectiveness of forces in the field and allowed them to adapt to
local circumstances. Unlike the earlier large-scale sweep operations which
involved significant effort and disruption of the civilian population for little
gain, small-unit tactics driven by quality intelligence allowed the security
forces to put real pressure on the Huks.
The combination of these factors resulted in a COIN campaign that not only
proved to be militarily effective, but also convinced the population that the
government was worthy of support, undercut most of the justification for
armed violence, and provided real incentives for the insurgents to give up the
fight. This latter point is demonstrated by the fact that the number of
insurgents who surrendered to the government from 1947–53 (15,866) was
larger than the numbers who were captured (4,269) and killed (9,695)
combined. Although the PC were not leading the COIN effort at the end of
the Hukbalahap Rebellion, their experience confirms the importance of
reorganizing and retraining police forces to reduce corruption and abuse of
the population in order to develop the intelligence necessary to detect and
neutralize the insurgents and their supporters.
References
Primary Sources
Declassified Documents Reference Service, Farmington Hills, MI.
Office of Intelligence Research. 1950. Report No. 5209, ‘The Hukbalahaps’, 27
September 27.
Department of the Army. 1952. ‘Philippine Constabulary’, Intelligence
Research Project, 15 December.
Elpidio R. Quirino Papers, Filipinas Heritage Library, Manila.
Letter, Jones to Quirino. 5 May 1948, Box 23.

41

Letter, Anderson to Quirino. 14 June 1950, Box 23.
Memorandum, Baluyut to Quirino. 9 March 1949, Box 14.
Memorandum, Samaon Afdal to Chief of Constabulary. 1 April 1949. Box 14.
Memorandum, Perez to Quirino, April 14, 1950, Box 7.
‘Top Secret Report on Communist Military Committee Conference’, 8
November 1950, Box 17.
Foreign Relations of the United States 1950, vol. VI, East Asia and the
Pacific.
Telegram 674, Manila to State. 6 March 1950, p. 1418.
Despatch 432, Manila to State. 7 April 1950, p. 1436.
Foreign Relations of the United States 1951, vol. VI, East Asia and the
Pacific.
Telegram 1194, Manila to State, February 15, 1951, pp. 1510–11.
Manuel A. Roxas Papers, University of the Philippines Diliman.
Memorandum, Peralta to Roxas. 1946. ‘Capability of MPC to Deal with Huk
Problem’, 19 August. Series IV, Box 18.
Harry S. Truman Presidential Library, Independence, MO.
President’s Secretary’s Files
CIA Report ORE 33-50. 1950. ‘Current Situation in the Philippines’,
June 27, p. 9.
Memorandum, Melby to Jessup. 25 August 1949, Box 6, Philippine
General File.
John F. Melby Papers.
‘AFP Brief for Melby Mission’, 19 September 1950.
‘Embassy Briefing’, Melby Mission, 19 September 1950.
JUSMAG. 1950. Brief for Melby Mission, 18 September 1950.
U.S. Air Force Historical Research Agency, Maxwell, Alabama.
Lansdale, Edward G. 1971. Oral History Interview, 25 April.

42

U.S. National Archive at College Park, MD.
Records of the U.S. Department of State (RG 59).
Airgram A-160, Manila to State. 31 March 1949. 896.00/3-3149.
Airpouch 307, Manila to State. 15 March 1950. 796.00/3-1550.
———339, April 15, 1952. 796.00/4-1552.
———814, Manila to State. 28 June 1950. 796.00/6-2850.
Despatch 366, Manila to State. 9 April 1948. 896.00/4-949.
Letter, Abbey to Cowen. 27 November 1951. Box 1, Office of Philippine
Affairs.
Letter, Chapin to Gullion. 20 April 1950. Box 2, Office of Philippine
Affairs.
Letter, Locket to Marshall. 15 August 1948. 896.00/8-1548.
Memo, Ely to Allison. 2 February 1949. 896.20/2-249.
Memorandum, O’Neal. 19 February 1948. 896.00/2-948.
Telegram 138, Manila to State. 14 January 1949. 896.00/1-1449.
Telegram 211, Manila to State. 26 July 1950. 796.00/7-2650.
Telegram 220, Manila to State. 27 July 1950. 796.00/7-2750.
Telegram 311, Manila to State. 21 March 1949. 896.00/3-2149.
Telegram 458, Manila to State. 13 April 1950. 796.00/4-1350.
Telegram 492, Manila to State. 17 May 1949. 896.00/5-1749.
Telegram 561, Manila to State. 16 June 1949. 896.00/6-1649.
Telegram 578, Manila to State. 23 February 1950. 796.00/2-2350.
Telegram 1011, Manila to State. 8 April 1950. 796.00/4-850.

43

Telegram 1126, Manila to State. 28 April 1949. 896.00/4-2849.
Telegram 1152, Manila to State. 21 April 1950. 869.00.00/4-2150.
Telegram 1794, Manila to State. 19 December 1952. 796.00/12-1952.
Telegram 1862, Manila to State. 24 September 1948. 896.00/9-2848.
Telegram 1953, Manila to State, 5 January 1953. 796.00/1-553.
Telegram 2000, Manila to State, December 4, 1951. 796.00/12-451.
Telegram 2157, Manila to State. 26 January 1951. 796.00/1-2651.
Telegram 2200, Manila to State. 23 January 1953. 796.00/1-2353.
Telegram 2318, Manila to State. 4 January 1952. 796.00/1-452.
Telegram 2694, Manila to State. 11 November 1949. 896.00/11-1149.
Records of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff (RG 218)
Memorandum, Hobbs to Joint Chiefs of Staff. 30 June 1950, Box 48,
JCS Geographic Files, 1948–50.
Records of Interservice Agencies (RG 334).
JUSMAG. 1949. ‘Weekly Summary of Activities’, 4 November.
———. 1949. ‘Weekly Summary of Activities’, 8 December.
———. 1949. ‘Weekly Summary of Activities’, 22 December.
———. 1950. ‘Weekly Summary of Activities’, 29 July.
———. 1951. ‘Semi-Annual Appraisal, January 18, 1951’.
———. 1951. ‘Semi-Annual Report, January 1, 1951–June 30, 1951’.
———. 1952. ‘Semi-Annual Report, August 1, 1952’.
Secondary Sources
Abaya, Hernando. 1946. Betrayal in the Philippines. New York: A.A. Wyn.

44

Abueva, Jose Veloso. 1971. Ramon Magsaysay. Manila: Solidaridad Pub.
House.
Bohannan, Charles. 1962. ‘Antiguerrilla Operations’, Annals of the American
Academy of Political and Social Sciences, 341: 19–29.
Cable, Larry E. 1986. Conflict of Myths: The Development of American
Counterinsurgency Doctrine During the Vietnam War. New York: New York
University Press.
Crozier, Brian. 1960. The Rebels. Boston: Beacon Press.
Greenberg, Lawrence. 1987. The Hukbalahap Insurrection. Washington, DC:
U.S. Army Center of Military History.
Hansen, Annika. 2002. ‘Civil-Military Cooperation: The Military,
Paramilitaries and Civilian Police in Executive Policing’, in Renata Dwan
(ed.), Executive Policing: Enforcing the Law in Peace Operations. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, pp. 67–84.
Hart, Donn. 1953. ‘Magsaysay: Philippine Candidate’, Far Eastern Survey,
22(6): 67–70.
Havron, M. Dean, William Chenault, James Dodson, and A. Terry Rambo.
1969. Constabulary Capabilities for Low-Level Conflict. Washington, DC:
Office of Naval Research.
Kerkvliet, B.J. 1977. The Huk Rebellion: A Study of Peasant Revolt in the
Philippines. Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Lachica, Eduardo. 1971. The Huks: Philippine Agrarian Society in Revolt.
London: Praeger.
Lansdale, Edward G. 1972. In the Midst of Wars: An American’s Mission to
Southeast Asia. New York: Harper & Row.
Moore, William. 1971. The Hukbalhap Insurgency, 1948-1954. Carlisle, PA:
U.S. Army War College.
Mungie, Timothy. 2010. Indigenous Police Forces in Counterinsurgency. Fort
Leavenworth, Kansas: United States Army Command and General Staff
College.

45

Olson, William J. 1993. ‘The New World Disorder’, in Max G. Manwaring
(ed.), Gray Area Phenomena: Confronting the New World Disorder. Boulder,
Co.: Westview Press, pp. 3–32.
Owens, William. 1989. Eye-Deep in Hell: A Memoir of the Liberation of the
Philippines. Dallas: SMU Press.
Romulo, C.P. and M.M. Gray. 1957. The Magsaysay Story. New York: Pocket
Books.
Scaff, Alvin. 1955. The Philippine Answer to Communism. Stanford: Stanford
University Press.
Schmidl, Erwin A. 1998. ‘Police Functions in Peace Operations: An Historical
Overview’, in Robert B. Oakley, Michael J. Dziedzic, and Eliot M. Goldberg
(eds), Policing the New World Disorder: Peace Operations and Public Safety.
Washington, DC: National Defense University.
Shalom, Stephen. 1977. ‘Counter-Insurgency in the Philippines’, Journal of
Contemporary Asia, 7(2): 153–77.
Smith, Robert. 1958. Philippine Freedom, 1946-1958. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Taruc, Luis. 1953. Born of the People. Bombay: People’s Publishing House.
———. 1967. He Who Rides the Tiger: The Story of an Asian Guerrilla
Leader. New York: Praeger.
The Constabulary Story. 1982. Quezon City: Public Information Office.
Thorpe, William. 1962. ‘Huk Hunting in the Philippines, 1946-1953’, The
Airpower Historian, April: 95–100.
Valeriano, Napoleon D. and Charles T.R. Bohannan. 1962. Counter-Guerrilla
Operations: The Philippine Experience. London: Pall Mall Press.

46

