Integrated Insiders or Alienated Outsiders? How Strong Norms in
Organizations Relate to Contractors’ Cultural Integration∗
Matthew Corritore1 and Christos Makridis2
1

Desautels Faculty of Management, McGill University
2
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
December, 2019
WORKING PAPER

Abstract
Despite evidence that contract workers are often tightly integrated into organizations’ work
routines and processes, researchers still do not understand when contractors might be more
or less culturally integrated with their organizations. How do the prevailing cultural norms
in organizations relate to contract workers’ cultural integration? It is unclear whether strong
norms are conducive to culturally integrating both regular employees and contractors, workers
who may have different cultural preferences, and who differ in status as full versus provisional
organizational members. Using data from an employer review website, we examine how norm
strength in organizations relates to both contractors’ and regular employees’ cultural integration.
While regular employees exhibit more integration in organizations with stronger norms, we find
that norm strength is associated with less integration among contractors, specifically those doing
more independent jobs. We also examine whether strong collaborative and strong hierarchical
norms appear conducive to integrating contractors versus regular employees. The results have
implications for the returns to contracting in organizations, and suggest that organizational
cultures face trade-offs in integrating workers across different employment arrangements.

∗

We thank Glassdoor for providing the data that we used in this study. We also thank seminar participants at
McGill University, and participants at the Berkeley Culture Conference and the American Sociological Association
Annual Meeting. The usual disclaimer applies.

1

Although contract workers are often thought to maintain distant, “arms-length” relationships
with their client organizations (Pfeffer and Baron, 1988; Mayer and Nickerson, 2005), researchers
studying contracting now know that some are more tightly integrated into organizational work
processes and routines. Organizations often use contract workers and regular employees in similar
ways. Contractors frequently work alongside regular employees in the same jobs and as members of
the same teams (Ashford et al., 2007; Davis-Blake et al., 2003), perform core organizational tasks
(Bidwell, 2010), are managed like regular employees (Barley and Kunda, 2004; Bidwell, 2009), and
are sometimes even given central responsibilities for leading and managing other workers (Anderson
and Bidwell, 2019).
Despite this more nuanced understanding of how contractors are integrated into the workplace,
we still do not understand when contractors might be more or less culturally integrated with their
client organizations. Cultural integration, which we define as the extent to which a worker endorses
the prevailing cultural norms that guide work in an organization, is thought to benefit both workers
and firms. Culturally integrated workers tend to exhibit increased commitment, motivation, and
satisfaction (Kristof-Brown et al., 2005) and culturally integrated workforces should experience less
conflict and enhanced coordination (Sørensen, 2002; Chatman and O’Reilly, 2016).
Understanding when contracting distances workers from cultural life inside organizations, and
any consequences for contractors’ welfare, is a core unresolved issue in contracting research (Kunda
et al., 2002; Barley and Kunda, 2004; Van Dyne and Ang, 1998), and prior work on related outcomes,
such as contractors’ commitment to their organizations, has produced mixed findings (Kalleberg
and Reynolds, 2003; Thorsteinson, 2003; Pearce, 1993; Guest, 2004). Moreover, studying contractors’ cultural integration alongside regular employees’ experiences is important precisely because
organizations’ use of contractors is often blurring, in practice, the distinction between standard and
nonstandard workers. As Broschak et al. (2008) argue, understanding how nonstandard workers’
attitudes vary is key for assessing whether organizations’ efforts to use these workers will yield
expected benefits.
In this paper, we examine whether organizations with stronger cultures, cultures thought to

2

promote integration among regular employees, are similarly conducive to integrating contractors.
We ask: compared to regular employees, how do strong norms in organizations relate to contractors’
cultural integration? While all organizations develop a culture, work within some is guided by strong
norms, or a defined set of widely shared behaviors and ideas that guide work. One organization’s
culture, for example, might feature widely shared norms emphasizing slow, deliberate work, while
another might feature norms prioritizing speedy execution.
Prior research, which focuses on regular employees, generally assumes a positive association
between norm strength and workers’ cultural integration (Kotter and Heskett, 1992; O’Reilly and
Chatman, 1996). Stronger norms facilitate cultural integration for workers whose cultural preferences are more compatible with those norms, but inhibit integration for those with less compatible
preferences (O’Reilly et al., 1991). As such, organizations with strong-norm cultures often strive
to cultivate, through member selection and enculturation, a workforce comprised of members who
personally endorse the prevailing norms as appropriate or desirable (Deal and Kennedy, 1982).
Past work provides little guidance, though, in predicting how strong norms may or may not be
conducive to integrating nonstandard workers.
In contrast to regular employees, we propose that stronger norms will tend to impede, rather
than enhance, contractors’ cultural integration. While strong-norm organizations are often particularly effective at fostering integration among regular employees, there are a number of reasons
why their efforts may not extend to contractors, given contractors’ status as provisional members of the firm. Moreover, the kinds of workers who enter into contracting likely have different
cultural preferences than their regular employee counterparts. If the work styles and behaviors
reinforced by strong norms tend to cater to regular employees’ preferences, then contractors should
exhibit less integration in organizations with stronger norms as compared to organizations with
more fragmented cultures.
At the same time, there are reasons to suspect that norm strength may not impede cultural
integration for all types of contractors. In particular, we explore whether contractors doing work
involving more interpersonal interaction, such as teamwork, respond more favorably to strong-norm

3

environments. We also investigate whether particular types of strong norms, namely collaborative
and hierarchical norms, are more or less conducive to contractors’ cultural integration.
We test these ideas using worker-level data from Glassdoor.com, a leading employer review
website. Oft-used methods to study contractors, such as formal surveys and participant observation,
are not suited to observing workers across a large, culturally diverse set of organizations. This
website allows authenticated workers to anonymously evaluate their organizations’ cultures. We
analyze a sample, complete with detailed worker characteristics, of nearly 70,000 contractors and
regular employees observed across approximately 4,000 organizations. We measure the strength
and content of the prevailing cultural norms in these organizations by analyzing, using a natural
language processing technique previously developed using Glassdoor data (Corritore et al., 2019),
the free-text cultural descriptions contributed by a much larger set of workers.
To preview our results, we find that norm strength is positively associated with cultural integration for regular employees, but negatively associated with integration for contract workers,
specifically contractors doing more independent work. We also find that strong collaborative norms,
which might be particularly at odds with contractors’ cultural preferences, are no less conducive
to fostering cultural integration for contractors than for regular employees, although only workers
in teams exhibit higher integration under such norms. However, we find that contractors doing
more independent work exhibit higher cultural integration in organizations with strong hierarchical
norms, while both regular employees and contractors doing teamwork exhibit less integration in
these environments. The findings reveal the types of organizational cultures that are more or less
conducive to contractors’ cultural integration, and also suggest that organizational cultures face
trade-offs in integrating workers across different employment arrangements.

STRONG NORMS AND CULTURAL INTEGRATION

We define a worker’s cultural integration with her organization as the extent to which she
endorses, or approves of, the prevailing cultural norms that guide work within the firm. While
integration can be conceptualized in different ways (Mobasseri et al., 2019), our definition captures
4

the simple idea that some workers more than others embrace the normative order within their
organization (Harrison and Carroll, 2006).
Cultural integration can be beneficial for both individuals and organizations. Culturally integrated workers tend to be more committed, motivated, and satisfied (Schneider et al., 2013).
Accordingly, organizations with culturally integrated workforces exhibit less conflict and more productivity (Denison and Mishra, 1995; Kreps, 1996; Gordon and DiTomaso, 1992)
The literature on “strong culture” (Kotter and Heskett, 1992; Sørensen, 2002) emphasizes that
some organizations strive to maintain a culturally integrated workforce by cultivating strong norms,
or a limited set of widely shared behaviors or ideas that guide work (Morris et al., 2015). By widely
shared, we mean that most members recognize and work in accordance with these norms.
The presence of strong norms does not necessarily mean that members are highly integrated
– members can all acknowledge such norms, yet differ in whether they each endorse them. For
example, workers routinely deride strong bureaucratic norms, such as norms emphasizing adherence
to formal rules and procedures, even though these norms can strongly influence how work is done.
Nevertheless, we expect a positive association between strong norms in organizations and members’ cultural integration, at least among regular employees. Many strong-norm organizations make
deliberate efforts, through member selection and enculturation, to ensure members not only recognize and work in accordance with prevailing norms, but also embrace those norms as desirable and
appropriate (O’Reilly and Chatman, 1996; Sørensen, 2002). In fact, many purported benefits of
cultural strength, such as greater goal alignment, motivation, and commitment among members,
hinge on members approving of or buying into the organization’s norms (O’Reilly and Chatman,
1996).
Compared to more fragmented cultures, cultures with stronger norms put more emphasis on
members’ cultural compatibility, which should enhance integration for members with congruent cultural preferences or predispositions, but inhibit integration for misfits. Work on person-organization
fit shows that individuals have varying preferences, rooted in personality traits, past experiences,
or other factors, for the cultural characteristics of their ideal workplace (Kristof-Brown et al.,

5

2005). Workers exhibit a higher degree of fit to the extent that their preferences comport with
the prevailing norms that guide work within the organization, and fit is positively associated with
commitment, attainment, and retention (O’Reilly et al., 1991). By emphasizing adherence to a
limited set of norms, strong-norm organizations drive a wedge between those members who fit and
those members who do not.
Are strong norm environments similarly conducive to culturally integrating contract workers?
Or is norm strength more effective at fostering cultural integration among regular employees than
contractors, given contractors’ status as provisional members and potentially unique cultural preferences? These theoretical ideas about strong norms and cultural integration were largely developed
with standard, full-time members in mind. But as organizations rely more heavily on nonstandard
workers, blurring the line in practice between regular and provisional members, it is natural to
wonder whether strong norm organizations are effectively integrating contractors and other nonstandard labor.

CONTRACTORS’ CULTURAL INTEGRATION

A central question in contracting research is how contracting might, in some situations, distance
workers from cultural life inside client organizations, with negative consequences for worker welfare
(Ashford et al., 2007; Pfeffer and Baron, 1988). Some highly-skilled contractors report challenges
in learning and adapting to their client firms’ differing cultures, and bemoan how their provisional
status hinders their integration into social and cultural life within firms (Kunda et al., 2002; Barley
and Kunda, 2004). Recent media reports on Google’s nonstandard workers, who have expressed
discontent with their lack of access to many formal and informal employment perks, are consistent
with these accounts.1
Beyond its effects on worker welfare, contractors’ cultural integration is also important for
helping organizations coordinate work. Organizations often use and manage contract workers and
regular employees in similar ways, such that contract workers are often tightly integrated into
1

See, for example, https://www.nytimes.com/2019/05/28/technology/google-temp-workers.html

6

organizational work routines and processes. All else equal, contractors who are highly culturally
integrated should exhibit a greater ability to coordinate with other members.
To our knowledge, prior work has not studied contractors’ cultural integration directly, but
research on related outcomes, such as organizational commitment and identification, has produced
mixed findings (Guest, 2004; Broschak et al., 2008). For instance, Van Dyne and Ang (1998) found
that contractors observed in two service firms exhibited less organizational commitment and engaged in fewer organizational citizenship behaviors than regular employees. In contrast, Pearce
(1993) found no differences between contractors and regular employees in their commitment or
extrarole behaviors. She attributes this finding to the strong social pressures that contractors face
to normatively conform with their teams, pressures which stand in tension with the limited involvement prescribed in their contracts. We consider whether the strength of the prevailing norms
in organizations helps explain variance in contractors’ cultural integration. Existing work rarely
examines organizational-level factors, such as cultural differences, which may be contributing to
the mixed findings.

Norm Strength
While we expect norm strength to be positively associated with regular employees’ cultural integration, how might strong norms relate to the level of cultural integration that we observe among
contractors? It is tempting to posit that contract workers, like their regular employer counterparts,
will exhibit more cultural integration in organizations with stronger norms. Since strong-norm
organizations are often adept at selecting compatible members and quickly enculturating them
(Rivera, 2012; Harrison and Carroll, 2006), they might be particularly effective at maintaining a
highly integrated contractor workforce. Yet, prior research provides hints that contract workers,
given their status as provisional members, may face unique barriers to integration in more culturally
intense environments. For example, Kunda et al. (2002), studying highly skilled technical contractors, found that some contractors felt excluded from cultural life, and had difficulty acclimating to
new cultures.
7

In contrast to regular employees, we expect that contractors will exhibit comparatively less
integration in organizations with stronger norms. Although strong-norm organizations often excel at fostering integration among traditional members, formal organizations as a whole may be
disincentivized from integrating contract workers. Organizations face legal limits on the extent to
which they can control contractors outside of the formal terms stipulated in their contracts (Cappelli and Keller, 2013a; Masten, 1988), and they often take steps to clearly distinguish contractors
from regular employees in order to comply with employment law. These steps may entail excluding
contractors from onboarding activities and social events that facilitate integration, and selecting,
assigning, and managing contractors strictly on the basis of skills and qualifications rather than
cultural compatibility.
Additionally, strong-norm cultures may alienate contractors by accentuating contractors’ status
as provisional members. More intense cultures should draw starker boundaries between members
and nonmembers (Eliasoph and Lichterman, 2003; Lamont and Molnár, 2002), making it more
difficult for contractors to integrate. Consider, for example, how Google requires its “TVCs” (i.e.
temps, vendors, and contractors) to wear different colored badges than regular employees, reifying
status differentials between these worker classes.
Furthermore, contractors may be poor cultural fits in strong-norm organizations if their cultural preferences diverge significantly from regular employees’ preferences. Contracting can distance
workers from and reduce their engagement with organizations (Ashford et al., 2007). Workers might
select into contracting because they are attracted to a more “transactional” psychological contract
with an organization, as opposed to a standard employment relationship, which is often characterized by broader commitments to coworkers and the firm (Rousseau, 1995). The types of work
behaviors and ideas emphasized by strong-norm organizations, such as extra-role behaviors (Pearce,
1993), may align more with regular employees’ proclivities. For these reasons, we expect a positive
association between norm strength and cultural integration for regular employees, but that this
association will be weaker (i.e. less positive or, conversely, more negative) for contractors.

8

Hypothesis 1 (H1): The association between norm strength and cultural integration is weaker
for contractors than for regular employees.

While we expect that the association between norm strength and cultural integration is weaker
for contractors on average, it should be stronger for contractors doing work involving more social
interaction, such as teamwork, given the mechanisms we posit. Though contracting is often associated with independent work, many contractors are managed in teams alongside regular employees
(Ashford et al., 2007; Davis-Blake et al., 2003; Cappelli and Keller, 2013b), blurring the distinction
between these worker classes in practice. We expect that norm strength is more conducive to culturally integrating contractors working in teams than it is for contractors doing more independent
work.
There are at least two reasons to expect that contractors working in teams will exhibit comparatively higher levels of cultural integration in organizations with stronger norms. First, these
contractors’ cultural preferences should, over time, come to more closely resemble those of their
peers in the organization. Contractors working in teams have more frequent and intense social
interactions with other organizational members – since enculturation occurs in part through peer
influence (Harrison and Carroll, 2006; Carley, 1991), these contractors’ cultural beliefs and attitudes should gradually be shaped by regular employees’ preferences. Second, contractors who sort
into jobs requiring teamwork might have more similar cultural preferences as regular employees.
Workers select into contracting for many reasons (Bidwell and Briscoe, 2009), not all stemming
from a desire to distance oneself from day-to-day organizational life. Compared to contractors
attracted to jobs featuring primarily independent work, those in teamwork-intensive positions may
have cultural preferences that more comport with norms catering to regular employees, such as
deeper commitments to coworkers.

Hypothesis 1a (H1a): The association between norm strength and cultural integration is stronger
for contractors in jobs involving more teamwork.

9

How Particular Types of Strong Norms Relate to Contractors’ Cultural Integration
So far, we have argued that stronger, more intense cultural environments facilitate cultural
integration for regular workers, yet inhibit integration among contractors, especially those doing
independent work. This raises the possibility that strong-norm organizations face an inherent
trade-off between culturally integrating regular employees versus integrating contractors, which
could limit their ability to effectively use a workforce comprised of both types of workers.
A question that naturally follows is: do some types of strong norms exacerbate this cultural
integration gap more than others? Two organizational cultures can feature distinct sets of norms
that, while equally strong in the extent to which those norms motivate work, meaningfully differ
in their content, or the types of behaviors that they prescribe. Are some strong norms perhaps
conducive to integrating both contractors and regular employees? We consider how two types of
norms found in many organizations, collaborative norms and hierarchical norms, relate to contractors’ and regular employees’ cultural integration.

Strong Collaborative Norms
We define collaborative norms as patterns of thought or behavior that emphasize working in conjunction with others to accomplish tasks, whether through direct teamwork, knowledge seeking and
sharing, or other means. Collaborative norms are likely prevalent in many kinds of organizations
– many widely-used organizational culture typologies include dimensions related to collaboration
(Cameron and Quinn, 2011; O’Reilly et al., 1991). For example, the Organizational Culture Profile
asks respondents about several values pertaining to collaboration, such as “working in collaboration with others” and “Being team oriented,” and responses to the survey often load onto a
“collaborative” dimension (O’Reilly et al., 2014).
By increasing the frequency and intensity of social interactions, and thus exposing contractors
to peer influence, strong collaborative norms have the potential to increase cultural integration for
contractors and regular employees alike. Collaborative norms could lead to more social interac10

tions between contractors and regular employees by encouraging knowledge sharing, even between
actors that vary in power or status (Srivastava and Banaji, 2011). To the extent that these social
interactions extend to contractors, collaborative environments might facilitate cultural integration
for both classes of workers.
On the other hand, strong collaborative norms might be particularly at odds with contractors’
cultural preferences or predispositions, because some contractors prefer psychological and social
distance from their client organizations (Van Dyne and Ang, 1998; Barley and Kunda, 2004). In
this way, collaborative environments may be somewhat antithetical to the “transactional” mindset
that we typically ascribe to contractors, especially contractors doing more independent jobs.
For these reasons, we anticipate that the association between strong collaborative norms and
cultural integration will be weaker for contractors than for regular employees. Again, though, we
expect that this association will attenuate for contractors working in teams, who should exhibit
higher cultural integration because their cultural preferences are likely more congruent with collaborative ways of working.

Hypothesis 2 (H2): The association between strong collaborative norms and cultural integration
is weaker for contractors than for regular employees.

Hypothesis 2a (H2a): The association between strong collaborative norms and cultural integration is stronger for contractors in jobs involving more teamwork.

Strong Hierarchical Norms
Like collaborative norms, hierarchical norms are present across many organizations. We define
hierarchical norms as thoughts or behaviors that reinforce the legitimacy of the unequal distribution
of power, roles, and resources (Schwartz, 1999). Such norms often manifest in formal organizations
as an emphasis on managerial hierarchy, whereby those in management roles are seen as having
11

authority to direct work (Lee and Edmondson, 2017). The Competing Values Framework, one of
the most influential cultural typologies, regards hierarchical values and behaviors as a fundamental
dimension characterizing a culture’s orientation with respect to internal organization (Denison
et al., 1991).
We argue that strong hierarchical norms will be particularly conducive to contractors’ cultural
integration. At first glance, one may suspect that contractors’ cultural preferences are incompatible
with more hierarchical cultures because of the emphasis that hierarchical norms place on managerial
authority. Prior work, mostly focused on high-skilled technical occupations, finds that contractors
often bemoan managerial interference (Kunda et al., 2002). Yet, contracting may help workers
sidestep such interference – after all, we tend to think that hierarchy is used to manage work
that cannot be effectively facilitated through contracts (Williamson, 1981; Mayer and Nickerson,
2005). Additionally, hierarchical cultures are thought to be more rigid and rule-based, and better
at supporting workers’ efforts to execute on known tasks rather than solve less structured problems
(Adler, 2001). As such, organizations with strong hierarchical norms might be a better cultural fit
for contractors accustomed to being hired to complete discrete tasks with clearly-defined objectives.
While we expect that the association between strong hierarchical norms and cultural integration
is, on average, stronger for contractors than for regular employees, we anticipate that this relationship will attenuate for contractors working in teams. As previously argued, contractors working in
teams should have cultural preferences that are more similar to regular employees, and hierarchical norms can depress employees’ satisfaction, motivation, and commitment (Lee and Edmondson,
2017). Additionally, contractors working in teams are likely to be managed similarly alongside
regular employees, which should make it difficult for them to sidestep burdensome management.

Hypothesis 3 (H3): The association between strong hierarchical norms and cultural integration
is stronger for contractors than for regular employees.

Hypothesis 3a (H3a): The association between strong hierarchical norms and cultural integra12

tion is weaker for contractors in jobs involving more teamwork.

METHOD

Data Sources and Sample
We analyze crowdsourced worker-level data from Glassdoor.com. Empirically testing how organizational culture relates to workers’ cultural integration is challenging using traditional surveys,
because doing so requires detailed data on both workers and firms across a large, diverse set of
organizations. We overcome this challenge by analyzing the organization evaluations and descriptions that workers contribute on Glassdoor, a leading employer review website with approximately
17 million users. The site is used by workers primarily to learn about the cultures of different companies. Authenticated workers are incentivized to anonymously provide information about their
organizations in exchange for unlocking full access to other organizations’ ratings and reviews.
Accordingly, nearly all workers provide only one organizational evaluation or review.
Crowdsourced data from online platforms is increasingly being used in management and sociology research to study individuals and organizations (Goldberg et al., 2016; Kovács et al., 2013; Hsu
et al., 2009). We follow Corritore et al. (2019) in measuring organizational culture using Glassdoor
data and largely the same method.
However, these data differ from those collected via random sampling in that workers self-select
into providing information about their organizations. It is important that we consider how this
could bias the analysis.
One concern is that workers who are either particularly strong or particularly poor cultural fits
could be most likely to evaluate their organizations. Glassdoor mitigates this problem by using a
“give to get” model, whereby users are prompted to contribute employer information in exchange
for full site access, which research shows reduces the incidence of extremely positive and negative
ratings (Marinescu et al., 2018). In other words, most workers use the site first and foremost to

13

gain information about organizations, not to provide ratings and reviews.
Another concern is that contractors who use the site could have incentives to report higher
evaluations, on average, than regular employees. For example, it is plausible that employers,
despite the anonymity of the evaluations, might coerce contractors to submit positive evaluations in
exchange for renewing their contracts. We do not find supporting evidence. We report a robustness
check in Table A1 that tests whether workers’ evaluations of current versus former employers differs
by worker status. If contractors are being coerced to provide positive evaluations, then we should
observe contractors providing higher ratings of current clients relative to regular employees. To
the contrary, we find that contractors evaluating their current jobs provide comparatively lower
ratings.
A related concern is that contractors who use the site are more engaged and committed, on
average, than the regular employees contributing on the site. First, we do not think that this
is obviously true. Glassdoor freely allows workers across different employment arrangements to
evaluate their organizations, and the site is widely known as a general information source about
organizational culture and worker attitudes. We acknowledge, though, the possibility that more
proactive contractors use the site, the “hired guns” as opposed to the “warm bodies,” in Barley and
Kunda’s (2004) parlance. This would be particularly problematic if we were interested in making
absolute claims about how integrated contractors are compared to regular employees. Instead, we
focus on comparing how worker integration varies across both organizations with different cultural
characteristics and workers in different occupations. These moderation tests should be less sensitive
to this type of selection bias stemming from non-random sampling.
Our analytical sample consists of workers who self-report between 2008 and 2015 as either
contractors or regular, full-time employees. Contractors comprise approximately 3.5% percent of
the nearly 69,000 workers we observe across almost 4,000 organizations. We observe an average
of 35 workers in each firm, though the distribution is skewed – there are a few organizations
with many ratings and many organizations with few ratings. The median number of workers
observed in a firm is 13. While the data do not delineate between independent contractors and

14

contractors brokered through a staffing agency, the percentage of contractors that we observe is
comparable to recent survey evidence (Cappelli and Keller, 2013b). We dropped evaluations linked
to firms in the “Staffing and Outsourcing” industry because contractors associated with these firms
disproportionately rate their staffing firm rather than their client firm. As expected, contractors
are more likely than regular employees to have less than a year of tenure in the firm. We see no
significant differences between contractors and regular employees in gender, age, and educational
attainment, however.
Workers can evaluate both current and former employers, with ratings of former employers
overwhelmingly from workers who departed in the last several months. Among evaluations from
regular employees in our analytical sample, approximately 77 percent are of the current employer,
as compared to 65 percent among contractors, which is unsurprising given contractors generally
exhibit more labor market mobility. We control for whether the evaluation is of a current or
former employer in all models. Table A1 in Appendix A includes a robustness check in which we
amend our main models by including a term interacting worker status and the current employer
indicator. The term is negative and significant only for the culture evaluation outcome, meaning
that contractors exhibit lower cultural integration than regular employees when rating their current
firm. Its inclusion does not substantively alter any of the results.
Workers in our analytical sample also provided their job titles, which allows us to account for
occupational heterogeneity. We linked these job titles to over 220 broad occupational categories in
the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Standard Occupational Classification (SOC) system. To do this, we
linked job titles to SOC occupation codes using a mapping developed by Liu et al. (2019). Multiple
research assistants developed the mapping, and collectively discussed and came to agreement about
how to code ambiguous cases.
Figure 1 compares the distributions of contractors versus regular workers across major occupation for our analytical sample. We observe broad coverage across occupation, although regular
workers are more highly concentrated in management and sales occupations, while contractors
are more highly concentrated in occupational classes such as computers/mathematics, arts and

15

entertainment, and education.
All of our models include at least broad occupation fixed effects, meaning we compare outcomes
within rather than between these occupational categories. Figure 2 compares the distributions of
contractors versus regular workers by firm sector. Both types of workers are broadly represented
across sectors, though with some notable differences. Regular workers are more highly represented
in retail and food services, while contractors more highly represented in information technology
and education sectors. We include detailed industry fixed effects in all models.

MEASURES-DEPENDENT VARIABLES

We measure a worker’s cultural integration with her organization using two measures: her overall
rating of the organization, and her rating of the organization’s culture and values.2 Glassdoor
prompts workers to provide an “overall rating” of the organization, as well as a rating of the
organization’s “culture and values,” both on a 1-5 scale, where 5 is the highest rating. The website
is broadly known for capturing workers’ assessments of organizational culture. Accordingly, these
two measures are highly correlated, with a correlation coefficient of 0.76.
Figure 3 shows frequency plots of the overall and culture ratings. The overall rating has a slight
left skew, with a modal rating of 4, but neither the lowest (1) nor highest (5) ratings are disproportionately represented. The culture rating is more highly clustered around ratings of one and five.

MEASURES-INDEPENDENT VARIABLES

Contractor Status
We set a dummy variable to 1 if the worker is working on contract, or 0 if the worker is a regular
employee.

Norm Strength
2

The culture rating is only available for 2012 to 2015.

16

We adopt an organization-level measure of norm strength developed by Corritore et al. (2019), which
they calculated using Glassdoor data from the same time period. The premise of the measure is
that one can detect the linguistic signatures of cultural norms in the language that workers use
when describing their organizations to others, in this case when they write free text pro and con
Glassdoor reviews of their organizations. Once we have detected the norms in each review, we
can assess to what degree all reviewers within a given organization/year describe the organization
with reference to the same norms. More agreement indicates that the set of norms is stronger, in
the sense that they are more widely shared among workers. While our analytical sample includes
approximately 70,000 worker evaluations with a complete set of worker characteristics, we create
our organizational culture measures using a much larger set of approximately 1.5 million free text
reviews.
We follow Corritore et al. (2019) in training a Latent Dirichlet Allocation topic model on
phrases that make explicit references to the word culture or a synonym across all reviews on the
site, producing a set of cultural topics (ex. collaboration, entrepreneurial, meritocratic, etc.).
Appendix B includes more details on topic modeling and the procedure used. We then fit this
model to reviews of the organizations that appear in our analytic sample, identifying the cultural
topics that workers mention in each review.
We operationalize norm strength as the similarity of cultural topics that workers mention across
reviews, with similarity measured as one minus the average pairwise Jensen-Shannon distance
between the cultural topic vectors for all reviews in a given firm/year. The measure is only computed
for firms with at least 25 reviews in a given year. For illustration, a firm with strong norms might
feature most workers talking about the culture’s emphasis on teamwork, or aggressiveness, or some
combination of other topics. We expect norm strength to exhibit high persistence year-to-year, and
indeed the within-firm t − 1 lag measure is correlated with the measure at time t at 0.72. Corritore
et al. (2019) provide several other measure validity checks. It is important to emphasize that the
cultural dimensions produced by the topic model are trained on and applied to both the pro and
con review text. Consequently, the topics are relatively agnostic with respect to the valence of the

17

review, in that they do not simply capture the sentiments of reviewers who either strongly approve
or disapprove of a particular norm.
We decided to use all available text reviews of the organizations in our analytical sample in
calculating our culture measures. This includes review text from some of the workers that also
provide overall and culture/values ratings used in our analysis. Approximately 81 percent of the
regular employee and 74 percent of the contractors in our analytical sample also contributed written
comments used to calculate the organizational level culture measures. However, these observations
represent on average only 4.1 percent (s.d. 4.5 percent) of the total text reviews across organization/year spells used to calculate the organizational culture measures. Nevertheless, we checked
whether variance in the overlap between ratings and text comments is distorting the norm strength
measure for some organization/years in ways that could impact our estimates, by including a measure of the overlap as a control in all models in Table A1. The coefficient is positive but insignificant
for the overall rating, but positive and significant (at p < 0.05) for the culture and values rating in
some models. However, all the models produce substantively identical results including this control,
giving us confidence that our findings are not being driven by this potential distortion.

Strong Collaborative Norms
We identified organization/years with strong collaborative norms using a variant of our topic modeling approach. We started with a 65 topic solution manually pruned by Corritore et al. (2019)
to combine redundant topics and to remove topics that were difficult to interpret. The highest
weighted words for each of the 65 topics are listed in Table C1. Among those 65 topics is one that
Corritore et al. (2019) labeled “teamwork,” which most closely describes collaborative norms, with
stems for words like team, support, collaborate, and cooperate.
We coded a given organization/year observation as having strong collaborative norms if this
topic was frequently and consistently discussed across reviews, consistent with the idea that these
norms are intensely held and widely shared. Formally, a strong collaboration firm is one in which
the probability weight devoted to the “teamwork” topic is above the median among all organi-

18

zation/year observations, and the coefficient of variation (the standard deviation relative to the
mean) across the reviews is below the median among all organization/year observations.

Strong Hierarchical Norms
We identified organization/years with strong hierarchical norms using the same procedure as for
strong collaborative norms, except using the topic that Corritore et al. (2019) labeled “hierarchy,”
with highly weighted stems for words such as manage, level, upper, senior, execute, lower, and
direct. The collaborative and hierarchical indicators show less persistence over time than the norm
strength measure, both correlated within firm from t − 1 to t at 0.34. In Table A2, we tested our
main models using culture measures averaged over all available years for each organization, and
find largely identical results.

Teamwork
We measure whether workers’ jobs tend to feature teamwork using an occupational level measure
provided by the Occupational Information Network (O*NET), the leading source of information
about occupations in the United States. The O*NET teamwork measure asks “How important is it
to work with others in a group or team in this job?,” rated on a 1-7 scale. The ratings were initially
based on responses from subject matter experts within each occupation, but are regularly updated
via worker surveys. We delineated between high and low teamwork occupations using a median
split. In our analytical sample, approximately 80 percent of regular employees and 60 percent of
contractors are in high teamwork occupations.

ANALYTICAL STRATEGY AND ESTIMATION

Our worker level data contain workers within occupations and organizations. In our tests of the
association between norm strength and our outcomes, we include some 220 detailed occupation fixed
effects at the 5 digit SOC code level, allowing us to compare contractors and regular employees doing
ostensibly the same work. In our tests comparing workers in high and low teamwork occupations,
19

we instead include 23 broad occupational classes at the 2 digit SOC code level. These models allow
us to compare detailed occupations within these broad classes that vary in the amount of teamwork
required.
We include a number of worker, occupational, and organizational controls. Only a small minority of workers are observed more than once in the data, so we rely on individual covariates to
partially account for meaningful differences across workers, namely age, gender, educational attainment, tenure in the organization, the log of their earnings, and whether the worker is rating a
current or former job. Beyond the occupational fixed effects previously discussed, we also control
for O*NET ratings of the technical, cognitive, social, and manual skills required in each occupation,
as well as indicators based on the O*NET ratings of whether the occupation requires unstructured
versus structured work, and whether work involves high levels of coordination and leadership. At
the organizational level, we control for firm size using the log of the number of employees, the
log of the number of Glassdoor reviews used to calculate the organizational culture measures, and
include 141 industry fixed effects using Glassdoor’s industry taxonomy. All models include year
fixed effects, all standard errors are clustered by organization, and we estimate all models using OLS.

RESULTS

Table 1 provides summary statistics, which reflect the sample’s skew towards more educated
workers in higher skilled occupations. 63 percent of the evaluations are from workers whose highest
educational attainment is a bachelor’s degree, and the mean occupation requires above average
levels of technical, cognitive, and social skill, and below average level of manual skill.
Table 2 shows bivariate correlations (educational attainment, tenure, and age are excluded
for readability). The overall rating and the culture and values rating are highly correlated at
0.76, suggesting that workers’ overall evaluations are strongly related to their assessments of the
organization’s culture. Reported earnings has a modest positive correlation with both outcome
measures. The current job indicator is correlated at 0.25 and 0.21 with the overall and culture
ratings, respectively. Unsurprisingly, contractors have less tenure in the organization, and are less
20

likely to be in occupations involving teamwork or coordinating and leading others.
Among the occupational level variables, the unstructured work and coordinating/leading others
indicators have a high positive correlation. High coordination and high teamwork also have a moderate positive correlation. Finally, the unstructured work, coordination, and teamwork indicators
are each positively correlated with the cognitive and social skill measures, and negative correlated
with the manual skill measure.
Among the organizational level variables, norm strength has little correlation with the outcomes,
but the strong collaborative norms measure is positively associated with and the strong hierarchical
norms measure negatively associated with both outcome measures.
The models in Table 3 test hypothesis 1, that, compared to regular employees, the association
between norm strength and cultural integration is less positive (i.e. more negative) for contractors.
All the models in Table 3 include 5 digit SOC code occupation fixed effects. In model 1, contractors
provide higher overall ratings, and there is a positive but marginally significant norm strength effect.
Among the controls, ratings are lower in larger organizations, women provide lower ratings, and
those evaluating their current organization provide higher ratings. Model 2 replaces the overall
rating outcome with the culture rating. As might be expected, norm strength has a stronger
association with the culture rating.
Models 3 and 4 interact the contractor indicator and the norm strength measure for the overall
and culture rating outcomes, respectively. In both models, the interaction term is negative and
significant. In model 3, the norm strength effect is negative and marginally significant for contractors (−0.09, p = 0.052), while positive and significant for regular employees (0.03, p = 0.036),
and these two estimates are statistically different from each other. In model 4, the norm strength
effect is negative but insignificant for contractors (−0.03, p = 0.558), while positive and significant
for regular employees (0.10, p = 0.000), and again these estimates are statistically different from
each other. We plot the predicted outcomes for models 3 and 4 in Panel A and B, respectively, in
Figure 4. Both models predict that the association between norm strength and cultural integration
is weaker for contractors than for regular employees as norm strength increases. Together, these

21

results provide support for hypothesis 1.
In Table 4, we test how these norm strength effects vary across occupations involving more or
less teamwork. To do so, we replace the finer grained occupation fixed effects with major occupation
fixed effects at the two digit SOC code level, and compare fine grained occupations within these
major categories. Since we shift from within to between occupation models, we add controls for the
level of technical, cognitive, social, and manual skill characteristic of each occupation, as well as
indicators denoting occupations featuring more unstructured work, and work involving coordination
and/or leadership duties. Since workers with technical skills may prefer contracting as a way to
avoid burdensome management (Barley and Kunda, 2004), we also interact the contract indicator
with the technical skills rating.
Models 1 and 2 replicate models 3 and 4 in Table 3 using this between occupation framework. Models 1 and 2 again provide support for hypothesis 1 – contractors provide lower relative
evaluations as a function of increasing norm strength. Among the control variables, unstructured
work is associated with higher evaluations, and high teamwork occupations are associated with
lower evaluations. Additionally, more manual skill requirements predict lower evaluations in some
specifications.
Since teamwork is likely more conducive to collaborative cultures, we add our indicator measure
of strong collaborative norms in Models 3 and 4, as well as an interaction term between collaborative norms and high teamwork occupations. Collaborative norms are associated with higher
evaluations, with some evidence that collaborative norms boost evaluations for those in high teamwork occupations.
Finally, models 5 and 6 test H1a, that the association between norm strength and contractors’
cultural integration is more positive (i.e. less negative) for contractors in jobs involving teamwork.
If so, we would expect a positive coefficient for the three way interaction between contractor status,
norm strength, and high teamwork. The interaction term is positive and significant for the overall
outcome in model 7. The norm strength effect is negative and significant for contractors in low
teamwork occupations (−0.31, p = 0.000), while indistinguishable from zero for the other groups

22

(and the estimate for low teamwork contractors is statistically different from the estimates for the
other three groups).
We plot the predicted outcomes for contractors versus regular employees in both high and low
teamwork occupations in Figure 5, panel A. The norm strength effect is relatively flat for contractors
in high teamwork occupations and for regular employees in low and high teamwork occupations.
However, the norm strength effect is negative for contractors in low teamwork occupations. Turning
to the culture rating outcome in model 8, the three way interaction is positive but insignificant. The
norm strength effect is negative and marginally significant for low teamwork contractors (−0.19,
p = 0.065), but positive for high teamwork regular workers (0.09, p = 0.000), and these estimates
are significantly different from each other. We plot the predicted outcomes for this model in panel
B of Figure 5. Together, these results provide some support for hypothesis H1a.
In table 5, we test hypothesis 2, that the association between strong collaborative norms and
cultural integration is weaker for contractors than for regular employees. Models 1 and 2 interact
collaborative norms with contract status. The positive effect of strong collaborative norms is not
moderated by contract status, providing no support for hypothesis 2. Models 3 and 4 add an
interaction between strong collaborative norms and teamwork. Consistent with prior models, we
find some evidence that collaborative norms boost ratings for workers in high teamwork occupations. Finally, models 5 and 6 include the three-way interaction between collaborative norms, high
teamwork occupations, and contract status, which is insignificant in both models.
We plot predicted outcomes for these models in Figure 6. We find some positive and significant effects of strong collaborative norms for workers in teams. However, we find no support for
hypotheses 2 or 2a – we do not find that the association between strong collaborative norms and
cultural integration is weaker for regular employees, and this association is not anymore stronger
for contractors doing teamwork than it is for regular workers in teams.
One possible reason for these null results is that the effect of collaborative norms on contractors’
cultural integration could operate through two channels, each with opposite effects that cancel the
other out. Contractors working more independently may not fit as well a priori in cultures with

23

strong collaborative norms. Nonetheless, they may become more enculturated over time as they
have more frequent peer interactions in such organizations.
In table 6, we test hypothesis 3, that compared to regular employees, contractors in organizations with strong hierarchical norms exhibit higher cultural integration than those in organizations
lacking such norms. Models 1 and 2 show that strong hierarchical norms are associated with less
integration overall. Models 3 and 4 interact the hierarchical norms indicator with worker status.
In support of hypothesis 3, we find that contractors provide higher, and regular employees lower,
evaluations in organizations with more hierarchical cultures, although the interaction term is only
marginally significant for the culture rating. In models 5 and 6, we test hypothesis 3a, that the association between strong hierarchical norms and cultural integration is less positive for contractors in
jobs involving more teamwork. We find strong support, as indicated by the positive and significant
three-way interaction terms between worker status, hierarchical norms, and high teamwork. The
effect of hierarchical norms for contractors in low teamwork occupations is positive and significant
for both outcomes, while negative and significant for all other groups.
We plot the predicted outcomes for the overall and culture outcomes in Panels A and B in
Figure 6. The clear pattern is that contractors doing more independent work respond favorably to
more hierarchical norms, while regular employees and contractors in high team occupations respond
negatively.

Robustness Checks
We report robustness checks in Appendix A. In Table A1, we rerun our focal models including
two additional controls. First, we interact contract status with the current job indicator to account
for any differing incentives that current contractors may face to contribute an evaluation. For
example, employers might pressure contractors to provide favorable evaluations in exchange for
contract renewal. We also control for a variable measuring the percentage of the workers in our
analytical sample within the organization that also provide text reviews used in calculating the
organizational culture measures, to check whether workers providing both evaluations and reporting
24

on the norms in the organization is biasing the results. The contractor X current job interaction
term is negative and significant in some models, meaning that current contractors tend to provide
lower evaluations. The percentage workers with text reviews variable is positive and significant in
some specifications. However, the results are substantively identical with inclusion of these controls.
In Table A2, we checked whether temporal instability in the organization level culture measures
is driving the results. We generally expect organizational culture to be highly persistent over time.
Our norm strength measure at time t is highly correlated at time t − 1 within organization at 0.72.
However, our collaborative and hierarchical norms indicators show less persistence over time, with
correlations between t and t − 1 of 0.34 for both measures. We created pooled versions of these
measures by averaging their values within organization across time. The results are substantively
identical using these pooled measures, giving us confidence that, while noisy, our measures are
capturing the presence of cultural norms.
In Table A3, we rerun the collaborative norm models in Table 5 using an alternative measure of
collaboration based on the ”team excellence” topic in the LDA models instead of the ”teamwork”
topic. The results are largely substantively identical, giving us confidence that any idiosyncrasies
of the teamwork topic are not driving the results.
Lastly, we rerun the core models in Table A4, but this time excluding evaluations from workers
in management occupations. We do so for two reasons. First, managers are highly overrepresented
in the data for regular employees as compared to contractors. Second, contractors with management responsibilities may be more integrated in the firm in ways that could be driving the results.
The results are substantively identical.

DISCUSSION

How do strong cultural norms in organizations relate to contractors’ cultural integration relative to regular employees? Given mounting evidence that organizations often use contract workers
and traditional employees in similar ways, it is natural to wonder whether cultures thought to promote workforce integration among standard employees are also conducive to culturally integrating
25

contractors. The answer could further our understanding of when contracting distances workers
from cultural life inside organizations, a core unresolved issue in contracting research. We find that
strong workplace norms, which many organizations strive to cultivate to enhance coordination and
performance, are associated with higher cultural integration among regular employees but lower
cultural integration among contractors, particularly for contractors doing more independent work.
Additionally, while we find no evidence that strong collaborative norms inhibit integration for contractors, we find that they are only associated with enhanced integration for workers in teams.
Finally, strong hierarchical norms are conducive to cultural integration for more independent contractors, although they are associated with reduced cultural integration for both contractors doing
teamwork and regular employees.
The findings show that the cultural context, together with the nature of the work performed, are
important for predicting whether these nonstandard workers will exhibit the ability to culturally
integrate with their client organizations. Since culturally integrated workers tend to experience
higher welfare, the findings highlight cultural factors that help predict when workers experience
positive returns from nonstandard work arrangements, versus when workers in such arrangements
might experience alienation and estrangement at work. Moreover, the results also underscore a tension between, on one hand, contractors’ technical integration into core work routines and processes,
and on the other, organizations’ ability to culturally integrate some nonstandard workers alongside
traditional members. Organizations may struggle to leverage a mixed workforce of standard and
nonstandard workers if they face difficulty fostering high levels of cultural integration across workers.

Contract Workers’ Cultural Integration and Welfare
Our study contributes to the contracting literature by showing that contractors can vary in
how culturally integrated they are with their client organizations, in part due to differences in
organizational culture and the type of work that they perform. A recurring theme in this literature,
based on evidence primarily from highly skilled information technology contractors, is that contract
workers, as provisional members, can face challenges interfacing with social and cultural life inside
26

organizations (Barley and Kunda, 2004; Van Dyne and Ang, 1998). Observing contractors across a
diverse array of occupations and organizations, we show that contractors’ cultural experiences vary
significantly with the strength and content of an organization’s prevailing cultural norms, and that
these relationships are moderated by whether contractors work in teams. Despite our expanding
awareness that organizations often broadly rely on contractors to complete central tasks, contractors
can experience varying levels of cultural integration with client firms as a function of organizational
culture.
An obvious implication is that contract workers and organizations could benefit from attending to how organizational culture impacts contractors’ cultural experiences on the job. Contract
workers doing more independent jobs, for example, might generally avoid organizations with particularly strong cultures, unless those organizations feature strong hierarchical norms. In contrast,
contractors’ doing teamwork might seek out cultures with strong norms more generally, especially
those emphasizing collaboration. Likewise, organizations might put more emphasis on cultural fit
when hiring contract workers and assigning them to tasks and teams, especially if they rely on
these nonstandard workers to perform core tasks that require higher degrees of coordination with
other members.
Another important theoretical implication is that contracting, and likely the kinds of workers
who select into such arrangements, might in some ways be less compatible with strong culture workplaces. We show that contractors, particularly those doing more independent work, exhibit lower
cultural integration as a function of increasing norm strength. While we can only speculate in this
paper about the underlying mechanisms, future research could pinpoint precisely why contracting
arrangements or contract workers might be at odds with strong culture organizations. Workers
who select into contracting to do more independent work could fit poorly with strong cultures,
cultures which on average might emphasize less mechanistic or procedural behaviors in favor of
more interpersonal, idiosyncratic, or extrarole ones. Or contractors working independently might
be more alienated or socially ostracized in strong cultures that draw starker distinctions between
insiders and outsiders.

27

Regardless of the underlying mechanisms, this study helps us better understand the consequences of organizations integrating contract labor into their core work routines and processes
(Bidwell, 2009, 2010; Davis-Blake et al., 2003). Organizations might benefit from outsourcing important tasks to independent contractors, but companies with stronger cultures might not realize
these benefits if those contractors struggle to coordinate with other members and perform well
due to cultural integration challenges. However, we also show that not all types of strong norms
depress cultural integration for these more independent contractors – they exhibit more integration
in organizations with strong hierarchical norms, although all other workers exhibit less integration.
The clear implication is that organizations with hierarchical cultures might have an advantage in
effectively using more independent contractors.
Our finding that contractors doing teamwork respond more positively to strong norms also has
implications for contracting research. It may be difficult for firms to use contract labor for work
done in teams, given the complexity involved in monitoring and verifying individual contractors’
performance when completing interdependent tasks (Mayer and Nickerson, 2005). Nevertheless, we
know that many contractors are managed in teams alongside regular employees (Ashford et al., 2007;
Davis-Blake et al., 2003), and Cappelli and Keller (2013b) were surprised to find that organizations
with more team-based jobs also use more nonstandard workers. Our results suggest that, rather
than being excluded from cultural life (Barley and Kunda, 2004), contractors doing teamwork are
able to culturally integrate in strong-culture organizations. Again, we cannot pinpoint whether this
is due to worker-organization fit or other processes, such as enhanced enculturation through peer
influence. Nonetheless, future research should examine whether these cultural integration benefits
outweigh any costs of using contract labor to complete more interdependent tasks. If there are
net benefits, then organizations with strong-norm cultures might focus on using contractors for
team-based tasks, while organizations with weaker norms might effectively use more independent
contractors.
Our study also demonstrates that non-pecuniary job rewards can vary for contractors doing
different kinds of work inside different types of organizations. We observe that contractors derive

28

different levels of value depending on the nature of the work they perform in different types of
organizational cultures. The results suggest that the mixed findings in prior work comparing
contractors and regular employees along related outcomes, such as organizational commitment,
may be in part attributable to between-firm differences in contractors’ experiences (Kalleberg and
Reynolds, 2003; Thorsteinson, 2003; Pearce, 1993; Guest, 2004; Cappelli and Keller, 2013b). A
continued focus on examining differences in the ways that firms use nonstandard workers, and any
impacts on workers themselves, is a promising avenue for future research (Bidwell et al., 2013).
We also contribute to the broader literature on nonstandard workers’ welfare by showing that
contractors’ cultural integration, which is linked to broader well-being, varies by occupational and
organizational cultural characteristics (Kalleberg, 2000; Spreitzer et al., 2017; Broschak et al., 2008;
Briscoe et al., 2011). We build on prior work that highlights differences in workers’ skills and job
autonomy to explain when nonstandard work arrangements are more or less conducive to worker
welfare (Spreitzer et al., 2017; Kalleberg, 2003). Comparing workers using similar skills in the same
occupations, we show that organizational culture helps explain variance in contractors’ cultural integration, echoing recent calls for more attention on how firm-level factors shape nonstandard work
outcomes (Cappelli and Keller, 2013b; Bidwell et al., 2013). Our results imply that practitioners
concerned about nonstandard workers’ inclusion inside organizations should worry less about those
contractors embedded within teams, and more about those working in relative isolation.

Organizational Culture and Nonstandard Work
Our study also demonstrates that there is fertile ground for advances at the intersection of work
on organizational culture and employment research examining firms’ use of nonstandard workers.
Foundational theories of organizational culture were developed largely with standard employees in
mind, and perhaps for good reason – strong cultures are often associated with a high degree of buyin and commitment from members, characteristics which we do not typically ascribe to contractors
and other nonstandard workers. However, many organizations with strong cultures also rely on
a mixed workforce composed of standard and nonstandard workers, calling into question whether
29

these cultural influences are conducive to fostering integration for all members.
Google is a salient example. In late 2018, over 20,000 Google workers participated in a mass
walkout, in part to protest the company’s handling of sexual harassment allegations against top
executives.3 Contract workers and other nonstandard workers, who purportedly comprise more
than half of Google’s workforce, and often work alongside regular employees on similar tasks,
participated in the protests.4 One of the protesters’ demands was an end to a “two-tier system”
that they claim privileges regular employees as cultural insiders, but treats contract and temporary
workers as cultural outsiders who are denied access to the many formal and informal benefits of
standard employment.5
We suspect that this example is not an outlier, given our sense that many companies known for
their strong cultures also outsource many tasks to nonstandard workers. And our study potentially
corroborates this account by showing a wide divergence between contractors’ and regular employees’
cultural integration in cultures with stronger norms. To the extent that strong norms at Google are
impeding some nonstandard workers from integrating, or are in some way less congruent with these
workers’ cultural preferences, then the relationships that we uncover could help explain the Google
case. A promising avenue for future research is to use finer-grained case comparison methods to
investigate how and why nonstandard workers’ cultural experiences vary across organizations with
different cultural orientations.
Our study also contributes to the strong culture literature by suggesting that it might be difficult
for organizations with strong norms to effectively use workers spanning different employment arrangements. Prior work asks whether strong cultures, which tend to feature less diversity in norms,
values, and beliefs, facilitate coordination and productivity at the expense of creativity, innovation,
and adaptability (Sørensen, 2002; Kotrba et al., 2012; Corritore et al., 2019). Our study suggests
that one downside of less-diverse strong norm environments is that they can restrict the kinds of
workers who fit and/or amplify status distinctions between perceived insiders and outsiders, which
3

https://www.theverge.com/2018/11/2/18057716/google-walkout-20-thousand-employees-ceo-sundar-pichai-meeting
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/05/28/technology/google-temp-workers.html
5
https://twitter.com/GoogleWalkout/status/1110990194390589442?s=20
4

30

can undermine an organization’s ability to leverage a mixed workforce of standard and nonstandard
workers. Future work might examine whether cultural strength has implications for diversity along
other important dimensions, such as gender, race, or functional background.
By showing that collaborative and hierarchical norms have varying relationships with cultural
integration across different sets of workers, our study also builds on work exploring how particular
types of norms and beliefs impact workers’ experiences (Nishii, 2013; Schneider et al., 2013). Future
research could investigate how other types of norms, or particular combinations of norms, relate
to the level of cultural integration exhibited by standard versus nonstandard workers. Our results
suggest that combining elements of both collaborative and hierarchical norms can foster integration
for both contractors working in teams and contractors working more independently. However, none
of the norms we examined boosted cultural integration for all types of workers in our study. There
may be some norms that help integrate a wide variety of workers. For example, to the extent that
status disparities are driving some of the divergence we observe between contractors and regular
employees, norms surrounding inclusive behaviors and attitudes might help integrate workers from
different employment arrangements (Nishii, 2013).

Limitations and Future Directions
This study has a number of limitations that suggest opportunities for future research. First,
we rely on workers’ self reported ratings of the organization and its culture as cultural integration
measures. While a worker’s evaluation of the culture likely reflects her fit with it, these measures
limit our ability to identify the precise mechanisms driving the relationships that we show. Is
low cultural integration being driven by a mismatch between the worker’s cultural preferences
and the organization’s prevailing cultural norms? Or are other factors, such as status differences
between standard and nonstandard workers that are magnified in strong cultures, driving some
of the divergence we observe between regular employees and contractors? Our results suggest
that status differences are not impeding cultural integration for all contractors, but rather that
some contractors have different cultural preferences than regular employees. For instance, we
31

find that contractors working in teams respond to cultural norms similarly to regular employees,
despite their contractor status. Moreover, more independent contractors report higher cultural
integration than contractors doing teamwork in organizations with strong hierarchical norms, which
is more consistent with variance in cultural preferences. Future work could directly measure how
contractors’ cultural preferences differ from other workers using tools such as the Organizational
Culture Profile (O’Reilly et al., 1991). There is also a promising opportunity for researchers to use
qualitative methods to identify the precise mechanisms driving the differences between contractors’
and regular employees’ cultural experiences inside firms.
Second and related, we only observe the outcome of a labor market matching process between
workers and organizations. Consequently, we cannot disentangle to what degree our results are
driven by workers and organizations selecting one another, versus caused by interpersonal dynamics within organizations. Nor can we attribute the results to some causal effect of contracting,
independent of the preferences and predispositions of the workers who selected into these work
arrangements. Regardless, our observations that some types of contractors exhibit comparably
low cultural integration in particular cultures highlight the contexts in which scholars might be
particularly concerned about the potentially substandard returns to contracting (Kalleberg et al.,
2000). Moreover, the outcomes of these person-organization matching processes are central to the
development and maintenance of organizational culture (Harrison and Carroll, 2006). Future research could begin to assess whether these workers might be better off in another job, organization,
or work arrangement by analyzing data that follows workers over time as they transition between
arrangements.
Third, we rely on workers self-selecting into providing ratings and reviews on the Glassdoor website to generate the data that we both analyze and use for calculating our organizational culture
measures. We control for a detailed set of worker characteristics in an effort to partially account
for worker selection into providing an evaluation, and we do not find evidence that contractors’
motivation to evaluate differs meaningfully from regular employees’. Additionally, our measures
of strong norms are relatively stable over time, consistent with our theoretical expectation that

32

organizational culture is highly time-persistent, which bolsters our confidence in the measures
(Corritore et al., 2019). Nonetheless, we cannot completely reject the possibility that non-random
selection is biasing our estimates of the associations between worker status, organizational culture
characteristics, and cultural integration. Future research might replicate and extend these results
using a random sample of workers, or leverage longitudinal data to conduct within-worker analyses.

CONCLUSION

When contract workers are cultural insiders versus outsiders inside their client organizations is
a core issue in contracting research, and important for understanding nonstandard work’s impact
on worker welfare. This study finds that key characteristics of an organization’s culture, namely
the strength and content of prevailing norms, are important predictors of contractors’ cultural integration vis-à-vis regular employees. It can be difficult for a given organizational culture to facilitate
cultural integration for both contract workers and regular employees, even though organizations
often use standard and nonstandard workers in similar ways to do comparable work. Future work
should continue investigating how the differences between standard and nonstandard workers pose
a challenge for organizations seeking gains from a blended workforce.

33

FIGURES

Figure 1: Frequency Distributions of Contractors and Regular Employees by Major Occupation

34

Figure 2: Frequency Distributions of Contractors and Regular Employees by Sector

Information Technology
Education
Manufacturing
Business Services
Finance
Government
Retail
Media
Insurance
Telecommunications
Health Care
Biotech & Pharmaceuticals
Oil, Gas, Energy & Utilities
Aerospace & Defense
Accounting & Legal
Travel & Tourism
Transportation & Logistics
Restaurants, Bars & Food Services
Real Estate
Construction, Repair & Maintenance
Consumer Services
Arts, Entertainment & Recreation
Agriculture & Forestry
Non-Profit
Mining & Metals

0

.05

.1
percent
contract

.15

.2
regular

Figure 3: Distributions of Cultural Integration Measures

35

Figure 4: Predicted Cultural Integration by Norm Strength and Worker Status

Notes. Predicted overall rating from Table 3, Model 3. Predicted culture rating from Table 3, Model 4. Interaction
effect estimates and standard errors are calculated using Stata’s margins command.
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001

Figure 5: Predicted Cultural Integration by Norm Strength and Worker Status/Teamwork

Notes. Predicted overall rating from Table 4, Model 5. Predicted culture rating from Table 4, Model 6. Interaction
effect estimates and standard errors are calculated using Stata’s margins command.
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001

36

Figure 6: Predicted Cultural Integration by Collaborative Norms and Worker Status/Teamwork

Notes. Predicted overall rating from Table 5, Model 5. Predicted culture rating from Table 5, Model 6. Interaction
effect estimates and standard errors are calculated using Stata’s margins command.
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001

Figure 7: Predicted Cultural Integration by Hierarchical Norms and Worker Status/Teamwork

Notes. Predicted overall rating from Table 6, Model 5. Predicted culture rating from Table 6, Model 6. Interaction
effect estimates and standard errors are calculated using Stata’s margins command.
+ p < 0.10, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001

37

TABLES

Table 1: Summary Statistics

Overall Rating
Culture Rating
Contractor
Norm Strength
Collaborative Norms
Hierarchical Norms
Log of Number Reviews
Log of Number Employees
Unstructured Occ.
High Coordination Occ.
High Teamwork Occ.
Technical Skills
Cognitive Skills
Social Skills
Manual Skills
Female
Log Wage
High School
Associates
Bachelors
MBA
PhD/MD
Tenure: < 1
Tenure: 1-2
Tenure: 3-4
Tenure: 5-7
Tenure: 8-10
Tenure: 10+
Age
Current Job
Observations

mean
3.28
3.29
0.02
-0.26
0.16
0.20
5.35
9.98
0.65
0.55
0.80
0.52
0.49
0.87
-0.59
0.37
10.76
0.13
0.03
0.63
0.02
0.01
0.14
0.25
0.19
0.14
0.06
0.10
34.77
0.75
47157

38

sd
1.23
1.37
0.15
0.69
0.36
0.40
1.34
2.01
0.48
0.50
0.40
1.10
0.73
0.92
0.59
0.48
0.65
0.34
0.17
0.48
0.13
0.10
0.35
0.44
0.39
0.35
0.24
0.30
10.80
0.43

min
1.00
1.00
0.00
-2.45
0.00
0.00
3.22
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
-2.49
-2.74
-2.09
-1.55
0.00
-0.09
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
13.00
0.00

max
5.00
5.00
1.00
11.37
1.00
1.00
8.17
14.60
1.00
1.00
1.00
2.65
1.85
2.32
3.03
1.00
13.19
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
113.00
1.00

39

Notes. N = 47157

1. Overall Rating
2. Culture Rating
3. Contractor
4. Norm Strength
5. Hierarchical Norms
6. Collaborative Norms
7. Log of # Reviews
8. Log of # Employees
9. High Autonomy Occ.
10. High Coordination Occ.
11. High Teamwork Occ.
12. Technical Skills
13. Cognitive Skills
14. Social Skills
15. Manual Skills
16. Female
17. Log Wage
18. Current Job
19. Year

(1)
1
0.76
0.020
-0.017
-0.12
0.034
0.051
-0.00074
-0.0040
-0.051
-0.037
0.086
0.0077
-0.061
0.021
-0.066
0.13
0.24
-0.023
1
0.013
0.020
-0.11
0.049
0.039
-0.016
0.0027
-0.045
-0.033
0.059
0.0072
-0.039
0.0025
-0.047
0.080
0.21
-0.013

(2)

1
-0.030
-0.022
-0.00028
-0.022
-0.018
-0.031
-0.058
-0.076
0.013
-0.027
-0.077
0.056
0.0056
0.00081
-0.038
0.018

(3)

1
0.14
0.15
-0.17
-0.36
0.052
0.051
0.096
-0.0034
0.017
0.047
-0.038
0.044
-0.11
-0.023
-0.0081

(4)

1
0.074
-0.28
-0.17
0.052
0.055
0.047
0.0024
0.045
0.054
-0.0072
0.012
-0.0067
-0.027
-0.12

(5)

1
-0.20
-0.27
-0.013
-0.022
0.060
0.076
0.019
0.011
-0.0045
0.0046
0.10
-0.0057
0.039

(6)

1
0.72
-0.065
-0.0082
0.031
0.019
-0.034
-0.020
-0.013
-0.062
0.055
0.045
0.010

(7)

1
-0.061
0.034
-0.0065
-0.023
-0.038
-0.041
0.010
-0.045
0.037
0.039
-0.100

(8)

Table 2: Correlations

1
0.49
0.13
-0.020
0.56
0.50
-0.12
0.064
0.063
-0.027
0.0054

(9)

(1)

1
0.37
0.074
0.68
0.58
-0.13
0.062
0.079
-0.036
0.00028

(10)

1
0.27
0.29
0.35
-0.092
-0.041
0.18
-0.027
-0.025

(11)

1
0.44
-0.15
0.34
-0.24
0.48
0.057
-0.063

(12)

1
0.65
-0.0060
-0.034
0.30
-0.0026
-0.029

(13)

1
-0.37
0.080
0.035
-0.051
-0.0037

(14)

1
-0.13
0.080
0.020
-0.0019

(15)

1
-0.20
-0.046
0.058

(16)

1
0.086
-0.14

(17)

1
-0.069

(18)

Table 3: Predicting Cultural Integration by Contracting and Norm Strength

Contractor
Norm Strength

(1)
Overall Rating
0.091∗
(2.50)
0.033+
(1.88)

(2)
Culture Rating
0.0058
(0.14)
0.10∗∗∗
(4.69)

-0.028∗∗∗
(3.37)
0.072∗∗∗
(4.97)
0.26∗∗∗
(13.76)
-0.051∗∗∗
(4.33)
0.047∗
(2.27)
0.0067
(0.26)
0.018
(1.37)
-0.11∗∗∗
(3.67)
-0.020
(0.53)
0.032+
(1.75)
0.021
(1.07)
0.032
(1.43)
0.024
(0.89)
0.12∗∗∗
(4.29)
-0.011∗∗∗
(14.79)
0.57∗∗∗
(34.99)
0.24
(0.88)
68602

-0.027∗∗
(2.85)
0.075∗∗∗
(4.58)
0.18∗∗∗
(8.52)
-0.062∗∗∗
(4.37)
-0.031
(1.22)
-0.041
(1.02)
0.011
(0.65)
-0.13∗∗
(3.08)
-0.025
(0.49)
0.015
(0.66)
0.010
(0.43)
0.0029
(0.11)
-0.018
(0.55)
0.052
(1.60)
-0.011∗∗∗
(13.76)
0.59∗∗∗
(33.48)
1.28∗∗∗
(4.10)
55715

Contractor × Strength
Log of Number Employees
Log of Number Reviews
Log Wage
Female
High School
Associates
Bachelors
MBA
PhD/MD
Tenure: 1-2
Tenure: 3-4
Tenure: 5-7
Tenure: 8-10
Tenure: 10+
Age
Current Job
Constant
N

(3)
Overall Rating
0.047
(1.14)
0.037∗
(2.10)
-0.13∗∗
(2.69)
-0.028∗∗∗
(3.41)
0.073∗∗∗
(5.02)
0.26∗∗∗
(13.76)
-0.051∗∗∗
(4.32)
0.046∗
(2.25)
0.0059
(0.23)
0.018
(1.35)
-0.11∗∗∗
(3.67)
-0.019
(0.51)
0.031+
(1.70)
0.021
(1.07)
0.032
(1.43)
0.025
(0.90)
0.12∗∗∗
(4.32)
-0.011∗∗∗
(14.80)
0.57∗∗∗
(35.00)
0.25
(0.91)
68602

(4)
Culture Rating
-0.049
(1.04)
0.11∗∗∗
(4.84)
-0.14∗
(2.51)
-0.027∗∗
(2.89)
0.075∗∗∗
(4.62)
0.18∗∗∗
(8.51)
-0.062∗∗∗
(4.37)
-0.031
(1.24)
-0.042
(1.04)
0.011
(0.63)
-0.13∗∗
(3.08)
-0.025
(0.48)
0.014
(0.61)
0.0098
(0.41)
0.0025
(0.09)
-0.018
(0.55)
0.052
(1.61)
-0.011∗∗∗
(13.77)
0.59∗∗∗
(33.50)
1.28∗∗∗
(4.12)
55715

Notes. Absolute t statistics are in parentheses. All models include detailed occupation, industry, and year fixed
effects. Standard errors are clustered by organization.
+
p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

40

Table 4: OLS Models Predicting Cultural Integration by Contracting, Norm Strength, and Teamwork

Contractor
Norm Strength
Contract × Strength

(1)
Overall
0.12∗
(1.98)
0.014
(0.70)
-0.14∗
(2.00)

(2)
Culture
0.044
(0.65)
0.081∗∗
(3.26)
-0.16∗
(2.31)

(3)
Overall
0.12∗
(2.00)
0.011
(0.60)
-0.13∗
(1.97)
0.029
(0.61)
0.096∗
(1.99)

(4)
Culture
0.046
(0.68)
0.078∗∗
(3.18)
-0.16∗
(2.29)
0.080
(1.38)
0.069
(1.20)

-0.033∗∗∗
(3.58)
0.080∗∗∗
(4.82)
-0.091∗∗∗
(3.75)
0.086∗∗∗
(4.55)
0.018
(0.72)
0.012
(0.58)
-0.050
(1.58)
0.040+
(1.67)
-0.037∗
(2.23)
-0.029
(0.82)
0.30
(1.31)
57562

-0.034∗∗
(3.01)
0.087∗∗∗
(4.48)
-0.11∗∗∗
(4.10)
0.086∗∗∗
(3.44)
-0.014
(0.51)
0.010
(0.38)
-0.012
(0.29)
0.051
(1.61)
-0.027
(1.21)
-0.042
(0.96)
1.21∗∗∗
(4.55)
47157

-0.031∗∗∗
(3.31)
0.084∗∗∗
(5.21)
-0.10∗∗∗
(4.11)
0.089∗∗∗
(4.69)
0.020
(0.80)
0.011
(0.55)
-0.049
(1.57)
0.038
(1.58)
-0.038∗
(2.29)
-0.030
(0.84)
0.33
(1.42)
57562

-0.031∗∗
(2.73)
0.092∗∗∗
(4.87)
-0.12∗∗∗
(4.21)
0.089∗∗∗
(3.58)
-0.013
(0.45)
0.0090
(0.34)
-0.010
(0.26)
0.048
(1.52)
-0.028
(1.27)
-0.043
(0.98)
1.23∗∗∗
(4.63)
47157

Collaborative Norms
Teamwork × Collaborative
Contract × Teamwork
Teamwork × Strength
Contract × Teamwork × Strength
Log of Number Employees
Log of Number Reviews
High Teamwork Occ.
Unstructured Occ.
High Coordination Occ.
Technical Skills
Cognitive Skills
Social Skills
Manual Skills
Contract × Technical Skills
Constant
N

(5)
Overall
-0.050
(0.67)
-0.013
(0.47)
-0.29∗∗∗
(3.64)
0.034
(0.73)
0.088+
(1.83)
0.32∗∗∗
(3.41)
0.030
(1.24)
0.27∗
(2.52)
-0.032∗∗∗
(3.42)
0.085∗∗∗
(5.29)
-0.10∗∗∗
(3.84)
0.089∗∗∗
(4.72)
0.019
(0.79)
0.012
(0.60)
-0.051
(1.63)
0.038
(1.58)
-0.037∗
(2.23)
-0.068+
(1.96)
0.33
(1.44)
57562

(6)
Culture
-0.014
(0.15)
0.026
(0.72)
-0.22∗
(2.22)
0.094
(1.63)
0.052
(0.89)
0.13
(1.15)
0.063+
(1.89)
0.13
(1.01)
-0.031∗∗
(2.77)
0.093∗∗∗
(4.92)
-0.10∗∗
(2.97)
0.089∗∗∗
(3.59)
-0.013
(0.45)
0.0086
(0.33)
-0.013
(0.32)
0.047
(1.50)
-0.027
(1.24)
-0.058
(1.33)
1.21∗∗∗
(4.58)
47157

Notes. Absolute t statistics are in parentheses. All models include all individual controls, as well as major occupation,
industry, and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by organization.
+
p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

41

Table 5: OLS Models Predicting Cultural Integration by Contracting, Collaborative Norms, and
Teamwork

Contractor
Collaborative Norms
Hierarchical Norms
Contract × Collaborative

(1)
Overall
0.15∗∗
(2.66)
0.12∗∗∗
(4.52)
-0.24∗∗∗
(11.33)
0.047
(0.43)

(2)
Culture
0.091
(1.47)
0.15∗∗∗
(4.84)
-0.29∗∗∗
(10.80)
0.019
(0.14)

(3)
Overall
0.15∗∗
(2.62)
0.033
(0.70)
-0.24∗∗∗
(11.32)
0.060
(0.55)
0.097∗
(2.01)

(4)
Culture
0.089
(1.45)
0.087
(1.56)
-0.29∗∗∗
(10.80)
0.028
(0.21)
0.073
(1.26)

-0.027∗∗
(3.15)
0.056∗∗∗
(3.45)
-0.087∗∗∗
(3.67)
0.089∗∗∗
(4.73)
0.014
(0.58)
0.013
(0.64)
-0.044
(1.41)
0.032
(1.35)
-0.038∗
(2.30)
-0.024
(0.64)
0.60∗∗
(2.68)
57562

-0.037∗∗∗
(3.43)
0.059∗∗
(3.12)
-0.10∗∗∗
(3.85)
0.091∗∗∗
(3.71)
-0.019
(0.66)
0.0098
(0.38)
-0.0014
(0.04)
0.033
(1.06)
-0.029
(1.33)
-0.034
(0.76)
1.59∗∗∗
(6.12)
47157

-0.027∗∗
(3.15)
0.056∗∗∗
(3.47)
-0.100∗∗∗
(4.02)
0.089∗∗∗
(4.73)
0.015
(0.62)
0.013
(0.62)
-0.044
(1.41)
0.032
(1.35)
-0.038∗
(2.29)
-0.024
(0.64)
0.61∗∗
(2.72)
57562

-0.037∗∗∗
(3.43)
0.059∗∗
(3.13)
-0.11∗∗∗
(3.97)
0.091∗∗∗
(3.71)
-0.018
(0.64)
0.0094
(0.36)
-0.0014
(0.03)
0.033
(1.06)
-0.029
(1.32)
-0.034
(0.76)
1.60∗∗∗
(6.15)
47157

Collaborative × Teamwork
Teamwork × Contract
Collaborative × Teamwork × Contract
Log of Number Employees
Log of Number Reviews
High Teamwork Occ.
Unstructured Occ.
High Coordination Occ.
Technical Skills
Cognitive Skills
Social Skills
Manual Skills
Contract × Technical Skills
Constant
N

(5)
Overall
0.040
(0.50)
0.035
(0.74)
-0.24∗∗∗
(11.32)
-0.012
(0.05)
0.095+
(1.95)
0.21∗
(2.20)
0.059
(0.22)
-0.028∗∗
(3.19)
0.056∗∗∗
(3.49)
-0.11∗∗∗
(4.30)
0.089∗∗∗
(4.73)
0.015
(0.64)
0.014
(0.69)
-0.044
(1.43)
0.033
(1.38)
-0.037∗
(2.25)
-0.049
(1.37)
0.62∗∗
(2.77)
57562

(6)
Culture
0.040
(0.43)
0.082
(1.44)
-0.29∗∗∗
(10.80)
0.14
(0.50)
0.079
(1.34)
0.093
(0.84)
-0.17
(0.54)
-0.037∗∗∗
(3.44)
0.059∗∗
(3.13)
-0.12∗∗∗
(4.06)
0.091∗∗∗
(3.71)
-0.018
(0.63)
0.0100
(0.38)
-0.0016
(0.04)
0.033
(1.07)
-0.029
(1.31)
-0.042
(0.96)
1.60∗∗∗
(6.17)
47157

Notes. Absolute t statistics are in parentheses. All models include all individual controls, as well as major occupation,
industry, and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by organization.
+
p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

42

Table 6: OLS Models Predicting Cultural Integration by Contracting, Hierarchical Norms, and
Teamwork

Contract
Hierarchical Norms
Collaborative Norms
Collaborative × Teamwork

(1)
Overall
0.15∗∗
(2.88)
-0.24∗∗∗
(11.33)
0.035
(0.75)
0.096∗
(1.99)

(2)
Culture
0.094
(1.55)
-0.29∗∗∗
(10.80)
0.088
(1.59)
0.072
(1.25)

(3)
Overall
0.12∗
(2.10)
-0.25∗∗∗
(11.45)
0.034
(0.73)
0.097∗
(2.02)
0.21∗
(2.20)

(4)
Culture
0.059
(0.94)
-0.29∗∗∗
(10.90)
0.087
(1.57)
0.073
(1.27)
0.24+
(1.77)

-0.027∗∗
(3.14)
0.056∗∗∗
(3.47)
-0.099∗∗∗
(4.01)
0.089∗∗∗
(4.73)
0.015
(0.62)
0.012
(0.62)
-0.044
(1.41)
0.032
(1.34)
-0.038∗
(2.30)
-0.023
(0.62)
0.61∗∗
(2.72)
57562

-0.037∗∗∗
(3.43)
0.059∗∗
(3.13)
-0.11∗∗∗
(3.96)
0.091∗∗∗
(3.71)
-0.018
(0.64)
0.0094
(0.36)
-0.0013
(0.03)
0.033
(1.06)
-0.029
(1.33)
-0.034
(0.75)
1.60∗∗∗
(6.15)
47157

-0.027∗∗
(3.14)
0.056∗∗∗
(3.47)
-0.099∗∗∗
(4.01)
0.089∗∗∗
(4.75)
0.015
(0.62)
0.013
(0.65)
-0.044
(1.43)
0.032
(1.34)
-0.038∗
(2.29)
-0.027
(0.74)
0.61∗∗
(2.73)
57562

-0.037∗∗∗
(3.43)
0.059∗∗
(3.12)
-0.11∗∗∗
(3.96)
0.091∗∗∗
(3.72)
-0.018
(0.64)
0.0100
(0.38)
-0.0022
(0.06)
0.033
(1.05)
-0.029
(1.33)
-0.035
(0.79)
1.60∗∗∗
(6.17)
47157

Contract × Hierarchical
Contract × Teamwork
Hierarchical × Teamwork
Contract × Hierarchical × Teamwork
Log of Number Employees
Log of Number Reviews
High Teamwork Occ.
Unstructured Occ.
High Coordination Occ.
Technical Skills
Cognitive Skills
Social Skills
Manual Skills
Contract × Technical Skills
Constant
N

(5)
Overall
-0.059
(0.74)
-0.22∗∗∗
(6.45)
0.028
(0.60)
0.10∗
(2.14)
0.64∗∗∗
(3.97)
0.32∗∗∗
(3.56)
-0.028
(0.84)
-0.68∗∗∗
(3.33)
-0.028∗∗
(3.19)
0.056∗∗∗
(3.48)
-0.10∗∗∗
(3.86)
0.089∗∗∗
(4.76)
0.016
(0.65)
0.014
(0.70)
-0.045
(1.46)
0.032
(1.38)
-0.038∗
(2.30)
-0.053
(1.53)
0.63∗∗
(2.81)
57562

(6)
Culture
-0.056
(0.62)
-0.26∗∗∗
(5.23)
0.080
(1.42)
0.081
(1.40)
0.86∗∗∗
(4.12)
0.21∗
(1.99)
-0.040
(0.82)
-0.99∗∗∗
(3.68)
-0.037∗∗∗
(3.43)
0.059∗∗
(3.11)
-0.11∗∗∗
(3.66)
0.092∗∗∗
(3.75)
-0.018
(0.63)
0.010
(0.40)
-0.0026
(0.07)
0.033
(1.05)
-0.030
(1.35)
-0.049
(1.17)
1.61∗∗∗
(6.20)
47157

Notes. Absolute t statistics are in parentheses. All models include all individual controls, as well as major occupation,
industry, and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by organization.
+
p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

43

Appendix A

Table A1: Cultural Integration Models with Additional Controls

Contractor
Current Job
Contract × Current Job
% Workers w Text Reviews
Norm Strength

(T3.3)
Overall
0.13∗
(2.10)
0.57∗∗∗
(34.90)
-0.12+
(1.83)
0.54+
(1.92)
0.035∗
(2.00)

(T3.4)
Culture
0.11
(1.46)
0.60∗∗∗
(33.74)
-0.24∗∗
(2.83)
0.39
(1.09)
0.11∗∗∗
(4.78)

(T4.5)
Overall
0.014
(0.14)
0.58∗∗∗
(32.87)
-0.092
(1.11)
0.36
(1.18)
-0.015
(0.56)

(T4.6)
Culture
0.18
(1.41)
0.60∗∗∗
(31.73)
-0.28∗∗
(2.78)
0.27
(0.68)
0.026
(0.71)

-0.091∗∗∗
(3.57)
-0.29∗∗∗
(3.53)
0.32∗∗∗
(3.36)
0.034
(1.42)
0.26∗
(2.43)

-0.092∗∗
(2.95)
-0.20∗
(2.00)
0.12
(1.00)
0.066∗
(2.03)
0.11
(0.81)

Collaborative Norms
Hierarchical Norms
High Teamwork Occ.
Contract × Strength

-0.13∗∗
(2.60)

-0.13∗
(2.41)

Contract× Teamwork
Teamwork × Strength
Contract × Teamwork × Strength
Contract × Collaborative
Collaborative × Teamwork
Contract × Collaborative × Teamwork

(T5.5)
Overall
0.073
(0.69)
0.58∗∗∗
(32.97)
-0.12
(1.40)
0.59∗
(2.13)
0.021
(1.14)
0.035
(0.73)
-0.25∗∗∗
(11.49)
-0.11∗∗∗
(4.47)
-0.14∗
(2.12)
0.20∗
(2.21)

(T5.6)
Culture
0.18
(1.41)
0.60∗∗∗
(31.93)
-0.30∗∗
(2.96)
0.55
(1.49)
0.090∗∗∗
(3.78)
0.078
(1.34)
-0.30∗∗∗
(11.11)
-0.12∗∗∗
(4.30)
-0.16∗
(2.28)
0.082
(0.75)

0.0057
(0.02)
0.094+
(1.93)
0.083
(0.31)

0.17
(0.64)
0.077
(1.31)
-0.14
(0.47)

Contract× Hierarchical
Hierarchical × Teamwork
Contract × Hierarchical × Teamwork
Constant
N

0.19
(0.69)
68602

1.24∗∗∗
(3.95)
55715

0.26
(1.15)
57562

1.16∗∗∗
(4.36)
47157

0.51∗
(2.25)
57562

1.40∗∗∗
(5.33)
47157

(T6.5)
Overall
-0.033
(0.32)
0.58∗∗∗
(32.94)
-0.10
(1.25)
0.59∗
(2.13)
0.022
(1.18)
0.12∗∗∗
(4.56)
-0.23∗∗∗
(6.73)
-0.093∗∗∗
(3.68)
-0.14∗
(2.23)
0.32∗∗∗
(3.57)

(T6.6)
Culture
0.082
(0.66)
0.60∗∗∗
(31.89)
-0.28∗∗
(2.84)
0.55
(1.50)
0.090∗∗∗
(3.80)
0.14∗∗∗
(4.74)
-0.27∗∗∗
(5.55)
-0.11∗∗∗
(3.74)
-0.15∗
(2.28)
0.20+
(1.91)

0.64∗∗∗
(4.05)
-0.023
(0.69)
-0.64∗∗
(3.11)
0.51∗
(2.26)
57562

0.84∗∗∗
(4.22)
-0.036
(0.73)
-0.96∗∗∗
(3.63)
1.40∗∗∗
(5.33)
47157

Notes. Each model is an alternate specification of a model in Tables 3-6: TX.Y refers to Table X, Model Y. Absolute
t statistics are in parentheses. All models include all individual controls, as well as occupation, industry, and year
fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by organization.
+
p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

44

Table A2: Cultural Integration Models with Culture Measures Averaged Over All Years

Contractor
Norm Strength (mean)

(T3.3)
Overall
0.063
(1.62)
0.072∗∗
(3.19)

(T3.4)
Culture
-0.021
(0.49)
0.14∗∗∗
(5.16)

(T4.5)
Overall
-0.018
(0.25)
-0.019
(0.53)

(T4.6)
Culture
0.013
(0.15)
0.047
(1.08)

-0.092∗∗∗
(3.64)
-0.35∗∗∗
(3.40)
0.29∗∗
(3.23)
0.068∗
(2.09)
0.28∗
(2.12)

-0.11∗∗∗
(3.73)
-0.28∗
(2.18)
0.13
(1.21)
0.065+
(1.66)
0.20
(1.28)

Collaborative Norms (mean)
Hierarchical Norms (mean)
High Teamwork Occ.
Contract × Strength

-0.19∗∗
(3.18)

-0.18∗∗
(2.82)

Contract × Teamwork
Teamwork × Strength
Contract × Teamwork × Strength
Contract × Collaborative
Collaborative × Teamwork
Contract × Collaborative × Teamwork

(T5.5)
Overall
-0.041
(0.48)
0.049∗
(2.16)
0.076
(1.19)
-0.54∗∗∗
(13.15)
-0.12∗∗∗
(4.61)
-0.21∗∗
(2.62)
0.24∗
(2.47)

(T5.6)
Culture
-0.012
(0.11)
0.11∗∗∗
(3.91)
0.17∗
(2.35)
-0.59∗∗∗
(11.81)
-0.13∗∗∗
(4.19)
-0.18∗
(2.04)
0.11
(0.96)

0.31
(0.95)
0.17∗
(2.35)
-0.23
(0.66)

0.26
(0.70)
0.11
(1.41)
-0.29
(0.71)

Contract × Hierarchical
Hierarchical × Teamwork
Contract × Hierarchical × Teamwork
Constant
N

0.25
(0.93)
68602

1.30∗∗∗
(4.16)
55715

0.29
(1.28)
57562

1.21∗∗∗
(4.59)
47157

0.45∗
(2.07)
57562

1.37∗∗∗
(5.23)
47157

(T6.5)
Overall
-0.13
(1.45)
0.049∗
(2.14)
0.22∗∗∗
(5.74)
-0.58∗∗∗
(9.46)
-0.11∗∗∗
(3.52)
-0.20∗∗
(2.65)
0.43∗∗∗
(3.99)

(T6.6)
Culture
-0.14
(1.39)
0.11∗∗∗
(3.90)
0.27∗∗∗
(5.62)
-0.66∗∗∗
(8.89)
-0.13∗∗∗
(3.92)
-0.17∗
(2.07)
0.34∗∗
(2.72)

0.56∗
(2.45)
0.042
(0.71)
-0.84∗∗
(2.95)
0.44∗
(2.05)
57562

0.72∗∗
(2.69)
0.083
(1.16)
-1.06∗∗
(3.11)
1.38∗∗∗
(5.25)
47157

Notes. Each model is an alternate specification of a model in Tables 3-6: TX.Y refers to Table X, Model Y. Absolute
t statistics are in parentheses. All models include all individual controls, as well as occupation, industry, and year
fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by organization.
+
p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

45

Table A3: Cultural Integration Models with Alternate Strong Collaborative Norm Measure

Contractor
Collaborative Norms (alt)
Hierarchical Norms
Norm Strength
High Autonomy Occ.
High Teamwork Occ.
High Coordination Occ.
Technical Skills
Cognitive Skills
Social Skills
Manual Skills
Log of Number Employees
Log of Number Reviews
Contract × Technical Skills
Contract × Strength

(T5.1)
Overall
0.11+
(1.88)
0.20∗∗∗
(8.35)
-0.24∗∗∗
(11.11)
0.021
(1.13)
0.088∗∗∗
(4.72)
-0.086∗∗∗
(3.62)
0.014
(0.57)
0.015
(0.77)
-0.049
(1.59)
0.036
(1.55)
-0.037∗
(2.25)
-0.029∗∗
(3.26)
0.063∗∗∗
(3.93)
-0.027
(0.75)
-0.14∗
(2.03)

(T5.2)
Culture
0.038
(0.55)
0.26∗∗∗
(7.58)
-0.29∗∗∗
(10.69)
0.090∗∗∗
(3.77)
0.089∗∗∗
(3.62)
-0.11∗∗∗
(3.88)
-0.019
(0.70)
0.013
(0.52)
-0.0097
(0.24)
0.043
(1.42)
-0.026
(1.20)
-0.028∗
(2.56)
0.064∗∗∗
(3.38)
-0.036
(0.82)
-0.16∗
(2.27)

(T5.3)
Overall
-0.0057
(0.07)
0.14∗∗∗
(3.51)
-0.24∗∗∗
(11.12)
0.021
(1.14)
0.088∗∗∗
(4.75)
-0.10∗∗∗
(4.20)
0.016
(0.64)
0.017
(0.83)
-0.049
(1.61)
0.038
(1.63)
-0.037∗
(2.25)
-0.029∗∗
(3.28)
0.063∗∗∗
(3.94)
-0.054
(1.55)
-0.14∗
(2.21)
-0.020
(0.18)
0.22∗∗
(2.59)
0.076+
(1.73)

(T5.4)
Culture
0.012
(0.12)
0.23∗∗∗
(4.50)
-0.29∗∗∗
(10.70)
0.090∗∗∗
(3.78)
0.089∗∗∗
(3.63)
-0.11∗∗∗
(4.07)
-0.019
(0.67)
0.014
(0.54)
-0.0096
(0.24)
0.044
(1.44)
-0.026
(1.21)
-0.028∗
(2.55)
0.064∗∗∗
(3.37)
-0.048
(1.09)
-0.16∗
(2.35)
-0.12
(0.89)
0.079
(0.77)
0.042
(0.75)

0.54∗
(2.42)
57562

1.43∗∗∗
(5.56)
47157

0.55∗
(2.50)
57562

1.44∗∗∗
(5.60)
47157

Contract × Collaborative
Contract × Teamwork
Teamwork × Collaborative
Contract × Collaborative × Teamwork
Constant
N

(T5.5)
Overall
-0.015
(0.18)
0.14∗∗∗
(3.40)
-0.24∗∗∗
(11.12)
0.021
(1.14)
0.089∗∗∗
(4.75)
-0.11∗∗∗
(4.21)
0.016
(0.64)
0.017
(0.83)
-0.049
(1.61)
0.038
(1.63)
-0.037∗
(2.25)
-0.029∗∗
(3.28)
0.063∗∗∗
(3.94)
-0.055
(1.57)
-0.14∗
(2.20)
0.047
(0.30)
0.24∗
(2.51)
0.080+
(1.78)
-0.12
(0.56)
0.55∗
(2.50)
57562

(T5.6)
Culture
-0.016
(0.16)
0.22∗∗∗
(4.26)
-0.29∗∗∗
(10.70)
0.090∗∗∗
(3.78)
0.089∗∗∗
(3.64)
-0.12∗∗∗
(4.12)
-0.019
(0.67)
0.014
(0.54)
-0.0095
(0.24)
0.044
(1.43)
-0.026
(1.21)
-0.028∗
(2.55)
0.064∗∗∗
(3.37)
-0.050
(1.15)
-0.16∗
(2.34)
0.056
(0.28)
0.13
(1.13)
0.054
(0.94)
-0.33
(1.21)
1.44∗∗∗
(5.60)
47157

Notes. Each model is an alternate specification of a model in Table 5: T5.Y refers to Table 5, Model Y. Absolute
t statistics are in parentheses. All models include all individual controls, as well as occupation, industry, and year
fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by organization.
+
p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

46

Table A4: Cultural Integration Models Excluding Management Occupations

Contractor

(T3.3)
Overall
0.049
(1.15)

(T3.4)
Culture
-0.062
(1.22)

(T4.5)
Overall
-0.046
(0.62)

(T4.6)
Culture
-0.019
(0.21)

0.038+
(1.86)
-0.11∗
(2.12)

0.098∗∗∗
(3.87)
-0.13∗
(2.19)

-0.019
(0.69)
-0.26∗∗∗
(3.30)
-0.061∗
(2.38)
0.32∗∗
(3.26)
0.034
(1.33)
0.30∗∗
(2.72)

-0.0019
(0.05)
-0.19+
(1.94)
-0.061+
(1.92)
0.081
(0.67)
0.083∗
(2.38)
0.10
(0.77)

Collaborative Norms
Hierarchical Norms
Norm Strength
Contract × Strength
High Teamwork Occ.
Contract × Teamwork
Teamwork × Strength
Contract × Teamwork × Strength
Contract × Collaborative
Collaborative × Teamwork
Contract × Collaborative × Teamwork

(T5.5)
Overall
0.00074
(0.01)
0.029
(0.59)
-0.23∗∗∗
(9.19)
0.0080
(0.36)
-0.10
(1.50)
-0.080∗∗
(3.24)
0.19∗
(1.99)

(T5.6)
Culture
-0.034
(0.36)
0.062
(1.07)
-0.27∗∗∗
(8.35)
0.060∗
(2.12)
-0.15∗
(2.12)
-0.097∗∗∗
(3.36)
0.047
(0.41)

0.013
(0.06)
0.081
(1.48)
0.082
(0.30)

0.20
(0.72)
0.057
(0.92)
-0.14
(0.44)

Contract × Hierarchical
Hierarchical × Teamwork
Contract × Hierarchical × Teamwork
Constant
Other Controls
Occupation FEs
Industry FEs
Year FEs
N

0.12
(0.28)
yes
yes
yes
yes
45128

1.34∗∗∗
(3.72)
yes
yes
yes
yes
36404

0.14
(0.46)
yes
yes
yes
yes
35682

1.13∗∗∗
(3.44)
yes
yes
yes
yes
29133

0.34
(1.13)
yes
yes
yes
yes
35682

1.32∗∗∗
(4.09)
yes
yes
yes
yes
29133

(T6.5)
Overall
-0.100
(1.26)
0.092∗∗∗
(3.35)
-0.22∗∗∗
(6.13)
0.0089
(0.40)
-0.11
(1.63)
-0.063∗
(2.45)
0.31∗∗
(3.25)

(T6.6)
Culture
-0.13
(1.43)
0.11∗∗
(3.09)
-0.28∗∗∗
(5.41)
0.061∗
(2.14)
-0.15∗
(2.12)
-0.088∗∗
(3.06)
0.18+
(1.65)

0.66∗∗∗
(4.11)
-0.028
(0.75)
-0.61∗∗
(2.86)
0.35
(1.15)
yes
yes
yes
yes
35682

0.92∗∗∗
(4.51)
-0.0078
(0.15)
-1.03∗∗∗
(3.77)
1.33∗∗∗
(4.13)
yes
yes
yes
yes
29133

Notes. Each model is an alternate specification of a model in Tables 3-6: TX.Y refers to Table X, Model Y. Absolute
t statistics are in parentheses. All models include all individual controls, as well as occupation, industry, and year
fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by organization.
+
p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

47

Appendix B

Detecting Cultural Topics Using Latent Dirichlet Allocation
Constructing a measure of norm strength involves three steps: 1) training a topic model to
identify a set of cultural topics across all reviews on the site, 2) fitting that model to reviews in
the analytical sample to identify which cultural topics a worker is discussing in each review, and
3) measuring norm strength for each firm/period by calculating the similarity of cultural topics
mentioned across workers.
A challenge in analyzing this type of free response text is identifying which content is germane
to organizational culture. The goal is to identify the linguistic signatures of cultural norms that
characterize work within an organization. For example, an organization may emphasize deliberateness, caution, and precision over speed, autonomy, and a willingness to make mistakes. Employees
describing such an organization are expected to use words and phrases that describe and expound
upon these normative conventions.
Many prior methods of measuring organizational culture require researchers to a priori define
a general set of cultural dimensions that are purportedly inclusive of the cultures of many firms
(O’Reilly et al., 1991). In contrast, this method uses an inductive approach to identify those topics
that workers across all firms in the data collectively consider germane to organizational culture.
The key assumption made is that when workers write about corporate culture, they sometimes
explicitly use the word “culture” or a synonym, and sometimes do not. Regardless, the presence of
a culture synonym is a label that indicates a given phrase contains content relevant to culture.
First, a training dataset is constructed of the nearly one million sentences or phrases that contain
the word “culture” or a synonym across all reviews on the Glassdoor website .6 Each phrase is
treated as a vector of unigram counts, or a “bag of words,” which assumes that topical content can
be identified from word frequencies regardless of word order (Blei et al., 2003).
A Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) topic model is then used to identify a set of cultural topics
observed in the text. The intuition behind LDA is that it identifies clusters of words that tend to co6

The synonyms are environment, atmosphere, attitude, climate, value, philosophy, and belief.

48

occur in the same phrase across many different phrases, such that semantically meaningful cultural
topics are identified based on the frequent co-occurrence of these word clusters. In accordance with
Corritore et al. (2019), the LDA model is tuned to identify a set of 500 culture topics. Outputting
a large number of topics ensures that conceptually meaningful distinctions between cultural topics
are teased apart.7
Next, the trained LDA model is fit to reviews in the analytic sample to identify the cultural
topics that workers discuss. Based on unigram counts, each review is assigned a topic probability
distribution that denotes the distribution of the cultural topics mentioned in the review. Figure
8 is a stylized illustration of this process. The LDA model predicts that two reviews with similar
topic probability distributions contain similar cultural content.
Lastly, the similarity of the cultural topics mentioned across workers for a given firm/period
is assessed. Each review i is represented as a probability distribution p indicating the relative
proportion of each cultural topic c estimated as present in the review text. Norm strength for a
given firm/period is defined as one minus the mean Jensen-Shannon (JS) divergence between the
LDA probability distributions for all unordered pairs of reviews i, j for that firm/period, formally:

P
A=1−

i,j

JS(pi , pj )
P
, for all {i, j | i < j}

(1)

i,j

where the JS-divergence between the two probability distributions is defined as:

1
1
JS(pi , pj ) = KL(pi , M ) + KL(pj , M )
2
2
7

(2)

Leading research on LDA models finds that, after some point, adding additional topics merely “nibbles away” at
existing topics rather than fundamentally altering the topic distribution. Consequently, it is common practice to
use more topics rather than fewer when identifying all relevant topics in a text corpus (Wallach et al., 2009, p. 8).

49

and where M = 21 (pi + pj ) and KL(pi , M ) is the Kullback-Leibler divergence of M from pi :

KL(pi , M ) =

X

pi (c) log2

c∈C

pi (c)
M (c)

(3)

JS-divergence is an entropy based measure that is particularly well-suited for measuring the distance between the sparse, power-law distributions that are typically observed in natural language
processing (Corritore et al., 2019; Goldberg et al., 2016; Srivastava et al., 2017). The resulting
norm strength measure is roughly normally distributed.
Figure 8

50

Appendix C

Measuring Particular Types of Norms
We identified organization/years with strong collaborative and hierarchical norms using a variant of the topic modeling approach. We adopt a 65 topic solution manually pruned by Corritore
et al. (2019) to both remove difficult to interpret topics and combine seemingly redundant topics.
The highest weighted words for each of the 65 topics are listed in Table C1.
Corritore et al. (2019) first began with a 100 topic model to make the task of manual coding
more tractable. Second, they (the three co-authors) independently reviewed the top 25 word stems
associated with each topic to determine: (1) which topics to drop because they seemed to lack
coherence; (2) which topics to combine because they seemed redundant; and (3) what semantic
label to assign to the remaining topics. Disagreements were reconciled by: (1) discarding topics
that at least two coders identified as lacking coherence (20 topics were so identified); and (2) of the
remaining 80 topics, combining topics when at least two coders had independently combined them.
After coming to agreement about a handful of additional cases, this process left 65 topics.

51

Table C1: 65 Culture Topics
Topic #
49

Label
teamwork

41, 80

hierarchy

38

aggressive

11

poor leadership

71

hostile
ment

84

blame culture

manage-

24, 76

work life balance

51

fair compensation

58

competitive compensation

78

benefits

29

bureaucracy

Top 25 Words
team member support orient collabor strong
manag work build spirit posit leadership player
leader encourag excel foster true promot execut
cohes mate cooper focus
manag level upper senior micro employe middl
staff support posit style entri understand execut
poor higher approach lower direct director touch
top care mid listen
top compani line bank aggress corpor manag
bottom start firm invest notch employe privat
passiv financi industri front busi heavi public account gener client
lack manag leadership commun poor direct clear
senior vision plan strategi account execut lead
due depart process busi weak structur organ top
chaotic reactiv
manag employe hostil unprofession abus favorit
hr behavior bulli bad horribl rude disrespect neg
treat staff lie harass supervisor practic uneth
toxic yell creat
problem issu manag point blame review solv employe thing neg person fix address respons finger
wrong mistak pass real account hr find understand deal
work life balanc good healthi excel flexibl person compens maintain brown perfect nose home
worklif emphasi sheet compens superb strike
conduc workahol memori emphas basic
good benefit pay decent great compens work
fair packag salari competit excel locat perk train
stabl offer cowork gener adequ fairli pto master
descent
salari benefit competit pay averag compens
good industri compar low standard market lower
packag offer work fair similar competitor par
higher slightli area scale
benefit health great insur plan employe medic
pay vacat paid offer match excel packag gener
includ care time compens program stock bonu
reimburs retir
make decis slow process thing risk difficult lot
made move busi red polit corpor tape bureaucrat improv conserv bureaucraci progress impact
frustrat lead avers

52

3

caring
ment

environ-

20

challenge

22

dynamism

91

fast pace

60

community

28

performance

79

cut-throat

15

safety

33

procedural

88

creative

75

consultative

employe care treat manag famili staff compani
patient genuin hospit nurs health owner equal
number resid gener employ clinic children show
import understand treatment
difficult work time make challeng move thing
hard find tough deal person peopl adjust face
type bit quickli understand job adapt thrive
statu busi
work challeng project interest client dynam excit lot stimul divers intellectu technic technolog
engag reward assign task team varieti involv intern great collabor offer
fast pace challeng grow dynam move excit slow
face learn quickli enjoy fun bore quick thrive demand extrem day constantli adapt handl toe intens
strong compani sens commun ethic employe
teamwork integr corpor leadership focu excel
safeti posit divers commit collabor promot pride
profession core emphasi organ famili
perform base polit promot highli competit reward review system driven recognit rank manag
intern merit compens top individu compet peer
talent result evalu process
cut technolog edg throat due cost constant layoff
busi lead econom compani budget year unstabl
competit creat recent frequent result continu reduc futur increas
work control condit shop clean equip manag
safeti air plant hot physic dirti system build area
poor cold run qualiti floor manufactur mental
offic
corpor polici govern rule union contract employe
agenc due state standard oper employ time issu
strict contractor procedur polit regul public organ militari ad
creativ innov collabor encourag entrepreneuri
support foster freedom challeng idea highli dynam motiv product independ talent individu inspir initi creat spirit teamwork design reward
busi firm client consult model market oper real
practic partner unit run success understand side
strong strategi focu develop area focus invest industri aspect

53

4

customer focus

95

brand focus

35, 19

54, 56, 21

learning
training

and

development and
growth

77

growth oriented

72

gender diversity

66

engineering

57

team excellence

37

family oriented

14, 61

flexible

50

demanding schedule

55

serenity

custom servic product qualiti employe client focus focu compani base care deliv satisfact excel relationship experi improv result serv centric
happi sale interact creat
compani industri product market brand strong
leader mobil innov great reput global world big
upward excit media lead competit interest digit
field financi stabl
experi train learn program skill support knowledg resourc gain manag technic profession opportun develop lot excel improv intern set human abil mentor share job industri
career opportun profession advanc growth limit
room person develop lot learn progress great
grow path compani support skill potenti plenti
excel start move challeng promot
compani grow continu improv growth busi start
challeng maintain quickli pain rapidli constantli
startup evolv success move thing excit expand
organ small rapid process
divers boy women club group promot corpor
school cliqu domin male bit femal network type
mental age social men part conserv inclus polit
workplac
technolog develop product engin softwar system
design process tool project latest tech technic
agil date test innov comput market outdat practic learn data exposur
great work excel team benefit support fantast colleagu worker train outstand leadership
peer superb solid compens terrif enviro brilliant
teamwork postiv ambienc rough etho
famili orient friendli close team feel small type
compani knit busi tight group part warm worker
care friend commun cowork run felt owner home
work flexibl home schedul hour friendli time
great abil relax option fun remot pay casual easi
independ benefit good cowork comfort decent
freedom telecommut worker
hour work long time flexibl stress expect pay
week weekend day retail overtim requir shift season lot job demand holiday busi night hard extra
work nice good friendli clean comfort pleasant
worker safe facil profession peopl physic healthi
campu modern quiet workplac peac calm neat
cowork beauti condit

54

16, 74

friendly

52, 30

collegial

2, 17, 25, 42, 45

fun

10

pet friendly

43

party

53

youth/energy

8, 39

68, 70, 97

global

laid back

92

exploration

0

location

40

low pay

83

merger

work good friendli nice posit colleagu gener
peopl profession boss enjoy cooper pleasant collegu relax salari worker helpful support payment
upbeat workmat workplac relationship comfort
staff nice friendli good work peopl support
offic profession gener colleagu relax member locat warm worker excel pleasant collegi cowork
cooper pretti experienc ambianc knowledg
great make peopl work love benefit feel lot fun
amaz team enjoy smart worker awesom fantast
day meet friendli absolut thou friend nice cowork
product
great work friendli worker fun peopl dog amaz
eat love offic team famili cowork posit workplac
super bring pet kind beat camaraderi anim bee
fun activ event compani lot social team employe parti offic sport commun happi build involv meet celebr perk outing regular includ engag holiday monthli
fun young work peopl energet lot profession excit dynam offic vibrant creativ upbeat energi age
youth cool enthusiast colleg start motiv workforc
make love
opportun compani intern corpor divers local experi offic world american travel busi exposur
countri global japanes wide understand multi india client bank project speak learn
back casual work laid relax friendli pretti dress
easi offic code fun stab wear nice fairli busi cool
gener comfort cowork peopl watch jean worker
learn lot great opportun thing experi work intern respons curv challeng freedom hand stuff
exposur network alot resum chanc quickli scope
teach steep travel
offic locat beauti area citi campu live great build
park conveni downtown commut facil close site
central easi san view access work small town
pay low salari rais wage benefit job increas decent promot stress minimum year bonus bonu
rate start poor hourli paid averag base worker
expect
compani year past recent corpor improv start
acquisit made lost ago shift employe merger wors
coupl acquir continu move major due left declin
complet

55

32

sharing

65

open door

81

open space

64

work
hard

86

perks

87

politics

36

profit

46

stable

13

size

94, 82

hard/play

stress

85

supportive

6

selection,
turnover,
promotion

and

idea open share employe encourag manag improv collabor opinion inform feedback listen innov heard suggest knowledg voic freedom express creativ team implement discuss posit
open manag polici door friendli employe commun mind transpar hr approach compani honest support collabor close access revolv senior
feedback easili easi leadership inform
offic work open space quiet cubicl bore dull bit
build moment distract wall floor desk comfort
cool small modern cube light depress loud area
work hard play reward fun game enjoy mental
harder find recogn dedic type favorit worker beat
recognit role prepar push notic music acknowledg parti
free food lunch fun perk coffe snack gym drink
game offic friday beer room break lot park tabl
kitchen site cafeteria event parti cater
corpor structur organ polit process flat larg hierarchi highli organiz compani intern bit rigid
extrem organis hierarch lack bureaucrat system
conserv defin big tradit
sale commiss sell competit product make custom base goal train pressur market potenti earn
money driven hit manag rep number target push
retail incent
job work secur stabl easi posit stabil stress safe
employ satisfact bore enjoy steadi duti task respons find descript repetit part titl fairli comfort
compani small big larg corpor feel size famili
firm smaller startup larger town part start organ
busi group bigger number agenc compar typic
resourc
expect high work stress time pressur demand
turnov meet low task school deadlin rate workload energi project level manag perform complet
employe posit compani creat support manag encourag care healthi promot relationship build
engag happi maintain trust foster motiv workplac strive teamwork success genuin fellow
hire peopl compani fit posit job process promot
recruit interview person talent find intern experi
role candid type qualifi bring skill fire fill hr

56

67

individual excellence

62

goal oriented

1, 59

hostility

93

fear

99

gossip

26

vacation

12

vision

peopl smart talent great work intellig motiv collabor passion incred colleagu group surround
amaz highli interest individu dedic driven bright
creativ hardwork young fantast
team goal success result achiev driven individu
orient motiv focus posit set common organ drive
succeed perform compani win person reward
competit collabor creat
poor work manag creat employe stress moral
hostil low neg bad extrem lack toxic terribl make
pay tens commun made staff uncomfort horribl
unhappi leadership
fear creat manag employe toxic ceo neg constant
fire lead intimid blame hostil leadership micromanag distrust base staff bulli trust run senior
presid top
polit offic manag corpor extrem toxic bad horribl terribl neg unprofession gossip drama workplac boss backstab micromanag complet ego immatur charg petti worst run
day time hour week work paid vacat shift leav
holiday year month sick night earli break end
start weekend home overtim schedul pm expect
compani leadership team strong mission ceo vision leader execut organ product creat posit
amaz core great solid senior inspir driven passion commit focus live

57

References

Adler, P. S. (2001). Market, hierarchy, and trust: The knowledge economy and the future of
capitalism. Organization science, 12(2):215–234.
Anderson, T. and Bidwell, M. (2019). Outside insiders: Understanding the role of contracting in
the careers of managerial workers. Organization Science.
Ashford, S. J., George, E., and Blatt, R. (2007). 2 old assumptions, new work: The opportunities
and challenges of research on nonstandard employment. The Academy of Management Annals,
1(1):65–117.
Barley, S. S. and Kunda, G. (2004). Gurus, warm bodies and hired guns: Itinerant experts in the
knowledge economy.
Bidwell, M. (2009). Do peripheral workers do peripheral work? comparing the use of highly skilled
contractors and regular employees. ILR Review, 62(2):200–225.
Bidwell, M. (2010). Problems deciding: how the structure of make-or-buy decisions leads to transaction misalignment. Organization Science, 21(2):362–379.
Bidwell, M., Briscoe, F., Fernandez-Mateo, I., and Sterling, A. (2013). The employment relationship and inequality: How and why changes in employment practices are reshaping rewards in
organizations. Academy of Management Annals, 7(1):61–121.
Bidwell, M. J. and Briscoe, F. (2009). Who contracts? determinants of the decision to work as an
independent contractor among information technology workers. Academy of Management Journal,
52(6):1148–1168.
Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., and Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent dirichlet allocation. Journal of machine
Learning research, 3(Jan):993–1022.
Briscoe, F., Wardell, M., and Sawyer, S. (2011). Membership has its privileges? contracting and
access to jobs that accommodate work-life needs. ILR Review, 64(2):258–282.
Broschak, J. P., Davis-Blake, A., and Block, E. S. (2008). Nonstandard, not substandard: The relationship among work arrangements, work attitudes, and job performance. Work and Occupations,
35(1):3–43.
Cameron, K. S. and Quinn, R. E. (2011). Diagnosing and changing organizational culture: Based
on the competing values framework. John Wiley & Sons.
Cappelli, P. and Keller, J. R. (2013a). Classifying work in the new economy. Academy of Management Review, 38(4):575–596.
Cappelli, P. H. and Keller, J. R. (2013b). A study of the extent and potential causes of alternative
employment arrangements. ILR Review, 66(4):874–901.
58

Carley, K. (1991). A theory of group stability. American Sociological Review, 56:331–354.
Chatman, J. A. and O’Reilly, C. A. (2016). Paradigm lost: Reinvigorating the study of organizational culture. Research in Organizational Behavior, 36:199–224.
Corritore, M., Goldberg, A., and Srivastava, S. B. (2019). Duality in diversity: How intrapersonal and interpersonal cultural heterogeneity relate to firm performance. Administrative Science
Quarterly, page 0001839219844175.
Davis-Blake, A., Broschak, J. P., and George, E. (2003). Happy together? how using nonstandard workers affects exit, voice, and loyalty among standard employees. Academy of Management
Journal, 46(4):475–485.
Deal, T. E. and Kennedy, A. A. (1982). Corporate cultures. Addison Wesley Reading, MA.
Denison, D. R. and Mishra, A. K. (1995). Toward a theory of organizational culture and effectiveness. Organization Science, 6:204–223.
Denison, D. R., Spreitzer, G. M., et al. (1991). Organizational culture and organizational development: A competing values approach. Research in organizational change and development,
5(1):1–21.
Eliasoph, N. and Lichterman, P. (2003). Culture in interaction. American Journal of Sociology,
108(4):735–794.
Goldberg, A., Hannan, M. T., and Kovács, B. (2016). What does it mean to span cultural boundaries? variety and atypicality in cultural consumption. American Sociological Review, 81(2):215–
241.
Gordon, G. G. and DiTomaso, N. (1992). Predicting corporate performance from organizational
culture. Journal of Management Studies, 29:783–798
Guest, D. (2004). Flexible employment contracts, the psychological contract and employee outcomes: an analysis and review of the evidence. International Journal of Management Reviews,
5(1):1–19.
Harrison, J. R. and Carroll, G. (2006). Culture and demography in organizations. Princeton
University Press.
Hsu, G., Hannan, M. T., and Koçak, Ö. (2009). Multiple category memberships in markets: An
integrative theory and two empirical tests. American Sociological Review, 74(1):150–169.
Kalleberg, A. L. (2000). Nonstandard employment relations: Part-time, temporary and contract
work. Annual review of sociology, 26(1):341–365.
Kalleberg, A. L. (2003). Flexible firms and labor market segmentation: Effects of workplace restructuring on jobs and workers. Work and occupations, 30(2):154–175.
59

Kalleberg, A. L., Reskin, B. F., and Hudson, K. (2000). Bad jobs in america: Standard and
nonstandard employment relations and job quality in the united states. American sociological
review, pages 256–278.
Kalleberg, A. L. and Reynolds, J. (2003). Work attitudes and nonstandard work arrangements
in the united states, japan, and europe. Nonstandard work in developed economies: Causes and
consequences, pages 423–76.
Kotrba, L. M., Gillespie, M. A., Schmidt, A. M., Smerek, R. E., Ritchie, S. A., and Denison,
D. R. (2012). Do consistent corporate cultures have better business performance? exploring the
interaction effects. Human Relations, 65:241–262.
Kotter, J. P. and Heskett, J. L. (1992). Corporate Culture and Performance. Free Press, New York.
Kovács, B., Carroll, G. R., and Lehman, D. W. (2013). Authenticity and consumer value ratings:
Empirical tests from the restaurant domain. Organization science, 25(2):458–478.
Kreps, D. M. (1996). Corporate culture and economic theory, pages 221–275. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Kristof-Brown, A. L., Zimmerman, R. D., and Johnson, E. C. (2005). Consequences of individuals’fit
at work: A meta-analysis of person–job, person–organization, person–group, and person–supervisor
fit. Personnel psychology, 58(2):281–342.
Kunda, G., Barley, S. R., and Evans, J. (2002). Why do contractors contract? the experience of
highly skilled technical professionals in a contingent labor market. ILR Review, 55(2):234–261.
Lamont, M. and Molnár, V. (2002). The study of boundaries in the social sciences. Annual review
of sociology, 28(1):167–195.
Lee, M. Y. and Edmondson, A. C. (2017). Self-managing organizations: Exploring the limits of
less-hierarchical organizing. Research in organizational behavior, 37:35–58.
Liu, T., Makridis, C. A., Ouimet, P., and Simintzi, E. (2019). The distribution of non-wage benefits:
Maternity benefits and gender diversity. Review of Financial Studies, R&R.
Marinescu, I., Klein, N., Chamberlain, A., and Smart, M. (2018). Incentives can reduce bias in
online reviews. NBER Working Paper.
Masten, S. E. (1988). A legal basis for the firm. Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization,
4(1):181–198.
Mayer, K. J. and Nickerson, J. A. (2005). Antecedents and performance implications of contracting
for knowledge workers: Evidence from information technology services. Organization Science,
16(3):225–242.

60

Mobasseri, S., Goldberg, A., and Srivastava, S. B. (2019). What is cultural fit?

The Oxford

Handbook of Cognitive Sociology, page 305.
Morris, M. W., Chiu, C.-y., and Liu, Z. (2015). Polycultural psychology. Annual Review of Psychology, 66:631–659.
Nishii, L. H. (2013). The benefits of climate for inclusion for gender-diverse groups. Academy of
Management Journal, 56(6):1754–1774.
O’Reilly, C. A., Caldwell, D. F., Chatman, J. A., and Doerr, B. (2014). The promise and problems
of organizational culture: Ceo personality, culture, and firm performance. Group & Organization
Management, 39(6):595–625.
O’Reilly, C. A., Chatman, J., and Caldwell, D. F. (1991). People and organizational culture: A
profile comparison approach to assessing person-organization fit. Academy of Management Journal,
34:487–516.
O’Reilly, C. A. and Chatman, J. A. (1996). Culture as social control: Corporations, culture, and
commitment. Research in organizational behavior, 18:157–200.
Pearce, J. L. (1993). Toward an organizational behavior of contract laborers: their psychological
involvement and effects on employee co-workers. Academy of Management journal.
Pfeffer, J. and Baron, J. N. (1988). Taking the workers back out: Recent trends in the structuring
of employment. Research in organizational behavior, 10(1988):257–303.
Rivera, L. A. (2012). Hiring as cultural matching: The case of elite professional service firms.
American Sociological Review, 77:999–1022.
Rousseau, D. (1995). Psychological contracts in organizations: Understanding written and unwritten
agreements. Sage publications.
Schneider, B., Ehrhart, M. G., and Macey, W. H. (2013). Organizational climate and culture.
Annual Review of Psychology, 64:361–388.
Schwartz, S. H. (1999). A theory of cultural values and some implications for work. Applied
psychology, 48(1):23–47.
Sørensen, J. B. (2002). The strength of corporate culture and the reliability of firm performance.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 47:70–91.
Spreitzer, G. M., Cameron, L., and Garrett, L. (2017). Alternative work arrangements: Two
images of the new world of work. Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organizational
Behavior, 4:473–499.
Srivastava, S. B. and Banaji, M. R. (2011). Culture, cognition, and collaborative networks in
organizations. American Sociological Review, 76:207–233.
61

Srivastava, S. B., Goldberg, A., Manian, V. G., and Potts, C. (2017). Enculturation trajectories:
Language, cultural adaptation, and individual outcomes in organizations. Management Science,
64(3):1348–1364.
Thorsteinson, T. J. (2003). Job attitudes of part-time vs. full-time workers: a meta-analytic review.
Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 76(2):151–177.
Van Dyne, L. and Ang, S. (1998). Organizational citizenship behavior of contingent workers in
singapore. Academy of management Journal, 41(6):692–703.
Williamson, O. E. (1981). The economics of organization: The transaction cost approach. American
journal of sociology, 87(3):548–577.

62

