"x"
"1" "Implementation of Self-Directed Supports for People with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities in the United States"
"2" "Corresponding Author:"
"3" "DeCarlo,  M. P. PhD,   Radford University School of Social Work, mdecarlo1@radford.edu, Waldron Hall 223, PO Box 6958, Radford, VA 24142"
"4" "Additional Authors:"
"5" "Bogenschutz,  M. D. PhD, Virginia Commonwealth University School of Social Work, mdbogenschut@vcu.edu, 1000 Floyd Ave PO Box 842027, Richmond, VA 23284"
"6" "Hall-Lande , J. A. PhD, Institute on Community Integration,  hall0440@umn.edu ,  150 Pillsbury Dr SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455"
"7" "Hewitt , A. S. PhD, Institute on Community  Integration,  hewit005@umn.edu ,  150 Pillsbury Dr SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455"
"8" "Acknowledgments:"
"9" "Development of this  manuscript  was supported by Grant #90RT5019-01-01 to the Research and Training Center for Community Living from the National Institute on Disability Independent  Living and  Rehabilitation Research, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Grantees undertaking projects under government sponsorship are encouraged to express freely their findings and conclusions. Points of view or opinions do not therefore necessarily represent official NIDILRR policy."
"10" "We are also grateful to  The National Association of State Directors of Developmental Disabilities Services  for their support and consultation on this research study."
"11" "Disclosures:"
"12" "The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare."
"13" "Published  version:"
"14" "DeCarlo, M. P., Bogenschutz, M. D., Hall-Lande, J. A., & Hewitt, A. S. (2019). Implementation of self-directed supports for people with intellectual and developmental disabilities in the United States.   Journal of Disability Policy Studies ,  30 (1) ,  11–21.   https://doi.org/10.1177/1044207318790061"
"15" "Sage Publications owns the copyright to the article above, and we are grateful to the ability to share our postprint under the policies set out by their open access policy."
"16" "Abstract"
"17" "Self-direction is an approach to human service delivery  within long term services and supports  that  aims to  provide   greater  control   for   individuals with disabilities  and their closest supporters .  The purpose of this study was to   understand the  implementation  of self-directed supports for individuals with IDD .  Researchers interviewed  state  developmental disabilities administrators in 3 4  of  42  states that currently operate self-directed service options and used  qualitative  analysis to arrive at a thematic map  of the strengths and challenges currently experienced by state administrators .  Common strengths identified by  state  administrators were increased opportunities for parti cipant  self-determination and improved relationships  with support staff .  Common challenges  included   restructuring case management relationships as well as rulemaking and enforcement .  Administrators ’ suggestions for the future of  self-direction  focused on   increasing program size  and  streamlining  services using  technology ."
"18" "Keywords: self-direction; consumer direction; intellectual and developmental disability; HCBS waiver services; qualitative research"
"19" "Implementation of Self-Directed Supports for People with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities in the United States"
"20" "Individuals with  intellectual and developmental disabilities   ( IDD )   often require an  individualized   approach to human service delivery.  It is  estimate d that  there are approximately 4.7 million people with IDD living in  the United  States ( Larson  et al. ,  2017 ) .  Of  these individuals, roughly 29% (1.4 million)  are   known to and served by state  I DD agencies (Larson et al, 2017), the others live with families in the community and receive no support .   People with intellectual disability (ID)  have significant  and lasting mental or physical impairments that are  often identified  at birth or in early  development  and require assistance and support in  many  areas  such as:  learning, language, self-care, making decisions, independent living and finding and keeping employment.   Developmental disability (DD)  is a broad er diagnostic category of conditions  that includes most people with ID but also individuals with substantial limitations that may derive from conditions other than ID (e.g., autism, cerebral palsy and others ). Typically, p eople with ID and people with DD receive the same types of services ."
"21" "Since the 1980s, s tates  have  mov ed  away from providing  most  services in large public  funded  institutions towards  community living through a variety of options such as Intermediate Care Facilities, in-home personal assistance and home health (often funded through  Medicaid  state plan services) as well as  H ome and  C ommunity- B ased  S ervices (HCBS) .  In 2012, approximately 70% of Long-Term Support Services (LTSS) for individuals with IDD were provided in community-based setting s   ( Eiken, Sredl, Gold, Kasten, Burwell &  Saucier, 2014) .  In 1995, that figure was   30% .  This dramatic expansion of community  options  for individuals with IDD contributes to the growth of general HCBS spending by state and federal governments to $53 billion, a 49% increase in since 2005 (Ng et al., 2015) ."
"22" "What is Self-Direction ?"
"23" "Self-direction upends the traditional paradigm of service provision by centering services around the  person  with IDD  and their family,  facilitating   individual  self-determination and  shifting control over the  decision-making process   away from   provider agencies and the state .  Beginning with the Cash and Counseling  and Robert Wood Johnson Self-Determination  demonstration project s  in the 1990s, policy experts and disability advocates deconstructed specific parts of traditional or “agency-directed” supports and created a robust system of policy innovations .  In agency-directed supports, an eligible individual with IDD  is served by   an agency  who is reimbursed by the government program for providing services to the participant.  Self-direction breaks this service role into its component parts and centers planning and  control  over those components with the  person with a disability   and their family , as described in  Table  1 .  These innovations were codified into standalone self-directed programs or more commonly as service options within 1115 or 1915 Medicaid waivers.   Self-direction is responsive to the  ideas of the  self-determination movement  that  participants  should have the right to control their daily life activities  are  often  the best monitors of service quality ,  particularly when they  receive training to do so  (Nadash, 1998 ; Nadash & Crisp, 2005 ) ."
"24" "[Table 1 around here]"
"25" "An essential  purpose  of  self-direction is  facilitating the expression of  self-determination.  S elf-determination speaks to the deeper goals of living a meaningful life  and  self-realization that  are   impacted  when  individuals with disabilities  engage  in self-direction (Wehmeyer, 1999).  Self-determination is expressed through individual actions within ecosystem s  (Abery & Stancliffe,  2003 ) .  For example, self-determination can be facilitated through  a person’s drive for  self-knowledge  (micro) , supportive interpersonal relationships  (meso) , legislation and court decisions   (exo) , and cultural beliefs about people with disabilities  (macro) .  S elf-directio n  facilitates self-determination through programmatic features that provide  individuals with opportunities  to  control the aspects of their lives they consider to be importan t ."
"26" "National S elf- D irection  R esearch"
"27" "As self-direction has spread across the country, the national picture of self-direction has come into focus. The National Core Indicators (NCI) program gathers information from a sample of 11,569 individuals who receive developmental disability services through state systems in 26 states. In 2011, NCI reported  that of the 10,722 individuals  reporting ,  95.8% (N=10,274) used traditional options  and  4 .2% (N=448) used self-directed supports  (the reported range was between 0% and 12.5% of individuals using this service model).  Although not limited to individuals with IDD,  Sciegaj and colleagues’ (2016)  national survey of self-directed programs presents the most comprehensive national study of self-direction, though it includes non-IDD populations. In this review, self-directed programs usually contained few participants and adhered closely to the textbook model of self-direction, with limitations on employer and budget authority. Walker, Hewitt, Bogenschutz, and Hall-Lande (2009) found significant variation across programs regarding target population, geographic scope, waiting lists, support brokerage, budget caps, funding source, and employment of family members. These conclusions are in accord with more recent policy reviews of self-directed programs (DeCarlo, Bogenschutz, Hall-Lande, & Walker, 2017). The present study seeks to contribute to the study of self-direction in the United States by examining how program administrations experience implementation."
"28" "Outcomes  of  Self-Direction"
"29" "For individuals with IDD, there are many studies demonstrating positive outcomes for people who participate in self-direction.  People with IDD  report greater satisfaction  and safety  with in  support relationships   (Matthias & Benjamin, 2008) .  In part, these outcomes are the result of the person with IDD knowing the direct support worker prior to their hire  (Bogenschutz, et al, 2010) .  Self-direction also promotes community integration , including  less out-of-home placement, attend ing  more clubs and community events,  and  retain ing  employment  when compared with individuals using traditional supports  ( Caldwell, 2007;  Caldwell & Heller, 2007; Gross, Wallace, Blue-Banning, Summers & Turnbull, 201 3 ;  Heller & Caldwell, 2005 ; Vinton, 2010).   Individuals participating in self-directed programs have consistently demonstrated improved  physical and mental health  when compared to individuals in  agency-directed  programs  (Caldwell & Heller, 2007; Gross et al., 2013; Heller , Arnold, van Heumen, McBride & Factor , 2012; Matthias & Benjamin, 2008)."
"30" "Self-direction  also  influences  the entire family system .  Families of  people   with IDD report high satisfaction with self-directed services, likely the result of greater flexibility and control (Caldwell & Heller, 2003;  Gross et al., 2013 ;  Heller et al., 2012; Vinton, 2010) .  Moreover, families report paid caregivers  in self-directed systems  are more responsive to the care recipient’s needs and listen to their wants and desires (Timberlake, Leutz, Warfield & Chiri, 2014) .  Many families  describe  experiences with agency-directed  direct support workers   who were incompetent and unreliable and used self-direction to hire family members, friends, or paid caregivers who viewed  support  work  as “more than just a job” (Gross et al., 2013 p. 94; Vinton, 2010) .  Family members report lower parenting stress,  higher  self-efficacy in caring for their child,  improvements in  overall family functioning, and  are better able to  cop e  with stressful issues as a family ( Timberlake  et al. , 2014) ."
"31" "Research questions"
"32" "The authors used an inclusive definition of self-direction: a statewide program, waiver, or service option in which individuals could exercise employer or budgetary authority for at least one support.  The study  had  three  primary  research questions:  ( 1 )  How do program administrators describe  implementation  successes  of  self-direct ion ? , ( 2 )   How do program administrators describe the  implementation  challenges of self-direct ion ? , and ( 3 )   What do administrators perceive as future directions  and innovations  for   self-direct ion ?"
"33" "M ethod"
"34" "A qualitative research methodology was used for this study, following a thematic analysis approach .  Thematic analysis provides researchers with a flexible yet structured method  for finding “repeated patterns of meaning” across the data set (Braun & Clarke, 2006, p. 15) .  The authors approache d  the thematic analysis from a realist method, reporting the meanings and experiences of participants without delving into the deeper social structures that inform those experiences .  Furthermore, thematic analysis facilitates the inductive derivation of themes across many participants in a large data set while maintaining the thick description necessary for rigorous qualitative analysis .  All procedures used in conducting this study were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Boards a t  each author’s affiliated university."
"35" "Sample"
"36" "The sample was drawn from a publicly available list of developmental disabilities program directors and  HCBS  administrators on the website of  the  National Association of Directors of Developmental Disabilities Services (NASD D DS) .  Researchers began by contacting each state’s director via email and phone, requesting information from the person or people most  knowledgeable about  implementation of  self-direction  in that state.  If communication with the director was unsuccessful, the researchers contacted the  HCBS  administrators via  email and phone.  Interviews included disability services directors, deputy directors, state Medicaid agency coordinators, waiver administrators, self-direction administrators, and state policy analysts, representing a wide variety of administrators with a direct knowledge of how states are experiencing self-direction,  The majority of the interviews conducted were one-on-one, though some states offered access to multiple individuals .  In 18 states, interviews were conducted one-on-one, in eight states two individuals participated in the interview, and there were three participants from eight of the states.  In total, interviews included 58  individuals."
"37" "As a first stage in data gathering, a  document review  was  conducted . The authors searched the database of Medicaid waiver applications available through the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) for all approved Home and Community Based Service plans (also known as waivers) that included a self-direction option. The authors also searched each state’s disability services website to corroborate information from the CMS document review and to seek further information. The document review  revealed  42  states provid ed  self-directed service options for individuals with IDD and a  total of 102 specific self-direction   programs  or service options  nationwide . The information from this document review was used to provide the researchers with basic information about each state’s approach to self-direction before initiating the interview phase of the project, as described below."
"38" "Interviews were conducted with participants from 3 4  of the  42  states that have implemented self-directed service options .  Programs varied to a wide degree in size, years of operation, monetary allocations  per individual , regulations on services and supports, and restrictions on participation  (DeCarlo, Bogenschutz, Hall-Lande, & Walker, 2017)."
"39" "Data Collection"
"40" "Semi-Structured Interviews.  The semi-structured interview protocol was based on  the results of the document review, an  extensive review of the literature as well as previous investigations of county-level administrators (see  Hall-Lande, Bogenschutz, & LaLiberte, 2012 ) .  The interview protocol was developed by members of the research team and was reviewed and revised based on feedback from researchers at another university as well  as  an expert review panel of staff  from   NASD D DS .  Five  state IDD system  administrators participated in a pilot of the interview protocol .  R evisions were made based on  feedback from the pilot participants, clarifying question wording and removing questions  deemed unnecessary ."
"41" "There were 16 core questions in the finalized interview protocol, each with potential follow up questions that the interviewer could pursue as appropriate.  Questions included ,  “how did you make the determination to include particular goods and services ? ” and “What is working well with self-directed supports in your state ?”   Phone interviews ranged from approximately 25  to 90  minutes .  A description of the study, consent form, pre-interview questionnaire, and copy of interview questions were  e-mailed  to the interview participant prior to the interview .  One member of the research team conducted all the interviews ,  reviewing consent information, reading  each  interview  question verbatim ,  and ask ing  follow-up prompts based on participant responses .  The interviews were audio recorded, transcribed  by a professional transcription service , and  a five-minute segment of each transcript was  checked against the audio recording  to ensure  validity  of transcription. The final transcripts became the texts for analysis."
"42" "Data Analysis"
"43" "Transcribed interviews were analyzed using Atlas.ti 7.5  ( 2014)  qualitative data analysis software , a commonly used program in  qualitative  social science .  The researchers approached data analysis from an inductive perspective, allowing themes to emerge from the data .  As described by Braun and Clark e  (2006), the thematic analysis proceeded along six sequential  phases : (a)   familiarizing with the data set,  (b)  generating initial codes,  (c)  searching for themes,  (d)  reviewing themes,  (e)  defining and naming themes,  (f)  and reporting data .  One member of the research team conducted the coding and  thematic analysis, consulting with a peer reviewer at the end of each of the three passes of coding and the entire research team after the coding process was complete .  The peer reviewer reviewed each phase of coding for consistency, and worked with the primary coder to identify, review, and name themes. At the end of coding, the entire research team reviewed the themes and established a shared meaning that best reflected the narratives of participants, based on a series of  dialogues.  The  themes were organized into a thematic map which was refined through consultation with the research team to ensure homogeneity within  each  theme and heterogeneity between themes .  The analysis contained within this paper used co-occurrence counts as a  guideline for the  prevalence  of  themes within the data set .  Thus, the analysis is limited to the most prevalent themes that answer each  research question, while attending to exceptional or divergent cases .  Methodological journaling  related to coding  and peer review helped to ensure the dependability, confirmability, and trustworthiness of the final  research product ."
"44" "Results"
"45" "Results are reported based on our three research questions, as noted above. We begin with an examination of the strengths of self-direction, as perceived by the state IDD  program   administrators, followed by results related to perceived challenges and future opportunities.  A graphical overview of the main findings may be viewed in  Table  2 ."
"46" "[ Table  2  about here]"
"47" "Strengths of  E xisting  P rograms"
"48" "Opportunities for self-determination .  A successful program,  reported by  p rogram administrators , was  a program whose components were functioning in the  way  they were designed .  Primary among these components was the opportunity for individuals with IDD and their  family  members to express  self-determination .  Opportunities for self-determination was a  multi faceted  construct with multiple subdomains, including flexibility, individualization, decision-making or choice, and  personal  responsibility ."
"49" "Compared with traditional supports,  self-direction was viewed as providing “flexibility for consumers to meet their changing needs.”  Self-direction “really opens the door to that menu of choices, [so] it’s really very comprehensive” in how individuals can meet their support needs .  This flexibility was also indicative to administrators of another important aspect of self-determination ,  the individualization of supports ,  wherein broad classes of service types are personalized into the things individuals need or would like to  do to  meet their support needs .  In this way, o pportunities for self-determination  are  facilitated by people with IDD en gag ing  in choice and decision-making   in employer  and budget authority .  Administrators spoke positively of the “quality of life” improvements that individuals experience when they “ control who provides the service ,  when they provide it , and  how it ’ s provided to them .”   The importan ce  of providing “as much choice as you can” to individuals was  emphasized across state administrators ."
"50" "Within the administrator   interviews , choice was often mentioned alongside control ;  in  particular,  control over “who comes into their home” was  seen as  a vital component of self-direction .  HCBS services were conceptualized as a “continuum of choices,” ranging from full self-direction to agency-direction .  Administrators emphasized the importance  of   choosing to engage in  self-direction, as  even for current participants  “there will always be a time where [self-direction] will no longer work for a family.”  The option for self-direction, however, create d  “more of a systems change” even for “ people who may be in traditional services knowing that they do have a choice…[that they] should have the right to say when they eat, who they live with…even if they are in traditional services , ”  according to an administrator in the Northeast ."
"51" "Opportunities for self-determination   were  often  described as contingent on the  responsibility  demonstrated by  people  with IDD  and their family members .  An administrator from the Southwest  reported having to emphasize “ what self-direction means [to families] that with a lot of choice, a lot of freedom, a lot of flexibility comes responsibility. ”   Being an  “ employer of reco rd,” for an administrator in the Midwest, “ requires somebody who’s well-organized, able to submit timesheets, track down r esources, those kinds of things . ”    Ultimately, “a lot is i n the hands of our participants. ”  A dministrators   were   partially ceding their   planning and management authority  as well as  the authority  of the “contracted entities providing traditional services”  to  individuals and families  participati ng  in self-direction .  Administrators emphasized  that their experiences with  people with IDD  had been positive, as  an administrator from the Southeast said,  “ the more responsibility and ownership on individuals …  the less issues you seem to have .”"
"52" "Improved  support relationships .  A dministrators report ed  that relationships between  paid direct support workers   and  people with IDD   became   stronger  and  fostered   greater  satisfaction  in self-direction .  P eople with IDD   derived satisfaction from the hiring process itself, being able to control who comes into their intimate environment ,  and finding a support worker who truly knows them .  The process of hiring a family member or friend as a support worker was described  by an administrator in the Northwest  as  bringing “f olks that they’re familiar with and who are familiar with them…into their circle of support.”   Moreover, administrators reported that  people with IDD   derive d  satisfaction from providing payment for support work that family members or friends would otherwise have provided for free .  An administrator in the Midwest note d   people with IDD   were   “more apt to ask for help when they needed the help than they did before when [the family member] wasn’t a paid provider.”   Even when agency support workers  were  hired, the ability to build “a longstanding relationship with a traditional provider”  was   viewed   as a significant benefit because of the extensive knowledge the support worker  acquires  about the  participant over time ."
"53" "When  individuals  exert ed  control over the employment process, administrators reported they  were   also able to bring greater consistency into the support relationship .  Many contrasted the support relationships in self-direction with unsatisfactory relationships within traditional supports .  P eople with IDD   value d   being “less at the whims of an external agency ,” according to an administrator in the Southwest .  Another administrator in the Midwest noted  that  in many rural areas   there are “ not qualified providers … that can meet that level of need better than what the parents and families can provide.”    For administrators,  people with IDD   who “ were fairly difficult in the traditional environment” or “who’ve had real trouble getting along with their staff in the past, we’ve seen that flip around now that they…   control the recruitment and hiring process , ”  in the words of an administrator from the Northeast ."
"54" "Administrators displayed high sensitivity to the negative support relationships reported by  people with IDD .   State administrators solicited feedback through formal surveys of participants, meetings with disability advocates, fielding individual complaints  during  phone calls or training sessions, as well as interacting with case managers and providers.  When administrators  interfaced with  people with IDD  and  their  families , participants  who  were   satisfied with self-direction state d  that  “traditional supports [were] just not cutting it for us  [due to] low quality, high turn over rate, whatever it may be ,” described an administrator from the Midwest .  F or new participants,  multiple  administrator s   often  reported that younger families  preferred self-direction and   were   not interested in traditional supports because of  “more bureaucracy, you don’t control staffing, you don’t control scheduling, you have to compromise more things in life , ”  in the words of an administrator from the Northeast ."
"55" "Challenges in  S elf- D irection"
"56" "Restructuring  c ase  m anager  r elationships .  S elf-direction restructures the relationships   between people with IDD and the people who support them  in the service delivery system ;   as such,  administrators “ don’t have the same level of oversight that we would ”  working with an agency  in traditional supports .  In the words of  an administrator in the Southeast:"
"57" "I n a traditiona l model service delivery system…  if we purchase an hour of in home services and an agency delivers that hour of in home services ,  we  [can]  go into the agency's office and monitor the documentation, see that the goals of the  [individual support plan]  were maintained, make sure that the intent of the service had integrity ."
"58" "In self-direction,  administrators  relied  more heavily on the  people with IDD  and their family members to engage in administrative tasks tha t  had previously been assigned to formal  provider agencies and state administrators .  Moreover ,  administrators have had to adapt to prevent  improper spending and threats to health and safety .  Bringing family members “on board , ”  according to administrators,  involve d  emphasizing to family members that  the autonomy and  choice in   self-direction entails “ responsibility and accountability [which has] been a challenge for some of our participants , ”  according to an administrator in the Southwest .  Administrators often emphasized that although fraud was rare in self-direction,   as reported by an administrator in the Southeast,"
"59" "S ometimes families will do things because they don't understand the  program … Medicaid has rules and regulations that we have  to  follow and that they have to follow. Sometimes …  the bigger picture ...   [is]  difficult to impress upon people ."
"60" "Documentation of service by the family members was identified as a solution; however, administrators described family members becoming overwhelmed by difficult ,   time-consuming,   and  cumbersome   documentation requirements .  The “volume of paperwork” that accompanies self-direction was described as a barrier by administrators, as it “takes away from other things that people wo uld like to spend their time on, ”  as  stated by an  administrator from the Northeast ."
"61" "Administrators identified the  individualized  nature of service delivery in self-direction as a challenge that well-trained case managers could mitigate through monitoring and quality assurance . However,  self-direction  requires that case managers  “rethink how they approach work” with  individuals with IDD .  Alongside philosophical changes  of self-determination , the  complexity of the self-directed model of service  for case managers  was  also identified as a challenge .  Complexity was   mitigated by having a case management staff that  was  experienced in self-direction, a resource that takes time to develop .  The lack of an adequate number of well- trained case managers was a challenge  mentioned   by many  state administrators , in some places because demand for self-direction has outpaced supply of case management ."
"62" "Public  s tewardship .  A nother consistent theme in the experiences of administrators  was   the view that self-direction has transformed from a  flexible , open   program to one  with an increasing number of rules and regulations .  Some administrators described a reactionary process by which rules were created as problems with incorrect spending arose, or a s one administrator  from the Northwest  put it, “it’s like we opened the barn door before the fence was up.”   Other administrators described rulemaking a “balancing act…in order to maintain flexibility and self-determination” and “get people the breadth of services [they] require” while staying “within those federal rules.”   When determining which supports were  allowed , administrators   often  mentioned the relationship of the support to the individual’s plan of care  or medical necessity ."
"63" "The  clarity that administrators  reported achieving  in  rulemaking  varied widely .  Some administrators spoke of being so prescriptive with rules that “put in place higher standards than we need…making things more inflexible than they need to be” for  participants .  Many administrators related stories of perceived egregious spending ,  including the “Cadillac” of ski passes, a trip to Europe, new televisions—that at the time were either not prohibited by existing rules or the existing rules were ambiguous .  Ambiguous cases were  particularly  challenging for administrators, as  laborious  decisions contributed to overwork of public administrators and difficulty achieving consistent enforcement across the entire state .  Even in states where regulations were not identified as challenges, families were reported as less likely to “wade around provider manuals” where regulatio ns  were   explicated ."
"64" "Administrators across states were largely in agreement that while fraud did occur in self-direction, the rate at which it occurred was no different than traditional supports  or other social  welfare programs  more broadly .  The perception that fraud is rampant or at least more likely in self-direction was one that administrators descr ibed having to battle in their interactions with family members, providers, and other state administrators .  As one administrator  in the Northeast  describe d :"
"65" "T his widespread belief, for which I've never seen any actual supporting evidence, that fraud is  rampant  in participant direction …w e hear that all the time…  I think it's almost offensive…the idea that if it's not provider or government controlled, that people will steal from you. It's just, to me, that's reprehensible ."
"66" "Future Directions"
"67" "Increasing program size .  A dministrators  consistently reported the desire to increase program siz e .  I n multiple  states,  they  described the importance of having specific staff on the regional level to promote self-direction and increase adoption during the early stages .  Because self-direction is described as a “cultural shift,” administrators   had  to  engage  with providers and show  how self-direction was “different from the way we did business previously.”"
"68" "Another administrator  from the Southwest  used  positive financial rewards to incentivize area agencies to promote self-direction  and grow the size of the program :"
"69" "I f agencies had traditional services for individuals and those families converted to [self-direction] and those budgets were lower, we allow ed  the area agency to use the gaps in funding .  S o if the traditional service say costs $75,000 ,  but then a family went into a [self-directed] arrangement and it cost $50,000 that $25,000 ,  we allowed them to assign to other people that maybe needed additional service or services that were being provided  that an agency wasn't able to bill on .. . We really created these financial incentives for the agencies to be able to really help promote [self-direction] ."
"70" "Using new technology .  While  many   administrators reported working on electronic billing,  only  a few administrators  describe d   currently operating systems  and the coordinating  effect  electronic billing   had   on service delivery .  Because authorizations for budgetary decisions often need ed  to be approved by the case manager or regional authority, electronic budgeting  allowed   administrators in these states  to do so with a minimum of paperwork .  “When [the case manager] hits the submit button, that should go through automatically, without review from anybody .  The computer system already knows they’re within budget ,” reported an administrator from the Southeast .  Another administrator  in the Midwest  described that “a case manager can …  bring up all of the expenditures, the employees, how many hours they worked, what they were paid, any goods and services that were purchased, anything that was placed into savings. It's real time.”  When a n individual with IDD   desired   to purchase an unusual good or service, case managers  could   provide the necessary information for the  p erson   to make an informed decision based on the  present status  of their budget ."
"71" "In addition to approving budget changes during the service year, electronic budgeting also assist ed  with the annual budgetary review process .  Case managers , according to an administrator in the Midwest,"
"72" "…  click on a button and say, ‘ You only used 20 hours last month when you were authorized for 100. What's going on? ’  Or, they can look at it historically because all the historical information is held   [and]  say, ‘ We had you authorized for 100 hours of service last year but you were consistently only using 50. Maybe we drop that down to 50? ’"
"73" "After the participant and case manager agree d  on the budget for the next year, electronic billing systems allow ed  regional and state authorities to approve budgets automatically, reducing the overwork that comes with manually processing “thousands”  of  paper applications ."
"74" "Another trend in the interviews of administrators  was   the increased adoption of  budget algorithms and standardized assessment protocols like the  Support Intensity Scale ( SIS )  or  Inventory for Client and Agency Planning ( ICAP ) .  While  only  a few administrators reported using the SIS on a statewide basis, many others report ed  piloting its use in self-directed programs  or creating  their own s tandardized assessment protocol .  Administrators described the SIS and ICAP   standardized assessment s  as helping to making sure “we have…the right services at the right time, because right now we have people who are…their needs are low and they have high budgets and some people whose needs are high and they have low budgets ,” according to an administrator from the Southeast .  Alongside standardized assessments, the use of regression-based budget algorithms   contributed  to the predictability of budgets .  They  help ed  with cost containment, but also potentially  led   to  counter-advocacy and  lawsuits from advocates ."
"75" "Discussion"
"76" "Strengths of Self-Direction"
"77" "The primacy of opportunities for self-determination  in the responses of administrators was unsurprising, given the  improvements in self-determination, autonomy, and choice  demonstrated in the self-direction evidence base  ( Caldwell, 2007;  Gross  et al., 2013 ;  Vinton, 2010 ) .  Administrators conceptualized self-determination , similar to Abery and Stancliffe  (2003) ,  as having the flexibility to meet life’s changing needs ,  the ability to engage in decision-making and choice , as well as the individualization of supports .  S elf-determination  was also defined  by administrators , in part,  a s requiring  responsibility  by   people with IDD   and their  family members .  The importance of accountability or responsibility in self-direction is well-grounded in  previous studies of program administrators on the sta te and county level (Hall-Lande  et al.,   2012; Wal ker et al., 2009 ) .  Furthermore ,  Nerney’s (2005) values-based definition of self-determination includes  responsibility as a core value of self-determination, alongside freedom, authority, support, and confirmation ."
"78" "Increased individual and family satisfaction with supports is  also  a commonly  reported  outcome of engaging in self-direction (e.g. Caldwell & Heller, 2007; Mirza & Hammel, 2009) .  Additionally, h iring f amily  or friend s as   direct support workers   is  associated in the literature with greater satisfaction with the support relationship  and the supports received  ( Bogenschutz , Hewitt, Hall-Lande & LaLiberte , 2010) .  Caregivers and guardians report that a common challenge in HCBS  programs  is finding a consistent, responsive, and caring provider, particularly for the intimate task of in-h ome supports ,  an issue that is mitigated by employer authority in self- direction  (Gross et al., 2013 ;  Timberlak e, Leutz, Warfield & Chiri, 2014 ) .  It is telling that these effects are reported  by administrators  to be  instrumental  to the success of self-direction ."
"79" "Challenges in Self-Direction"
"80" "W hile self-direction was  viewed as providing consistency and satisfaction, administrators  also  emphasized the importance  of  oversight of family and participant spending .  This theme is consistent with previous studies of administrator experiences with self-direction that highlight a concern for potential  fraud or misuse of funds and the desire to avoid public scandal (Infield, 2005;  Simon-Rusinowitz et al.,  2009) .  Program administrators may fear tha t  greater flexibility  may tempt  people with IDD  to divert money away from necessary  supports   (Sciegaj et al., 2008) .  As  Simon-Rusinowitz et al. (2002) state d , “even  if fraud and abuse are very rare, one single case can cause so much damage” (p. 108) .  As a result, administrators create documentation  and  planning  requirements  that  people with IDD  describe  as challenging  (Gross et al., 2013) .  Notably, the results of this study demonstrate that  the challenges of engaging in self- direction  are  well-known among administrators ."
"81" "Many administrators understood the barrier that documentation  pos ed  and demonstrated multiple unique approaches to this administrative burden .  Administrators in the present study emphasized how critical well-trained and engaged case managers were to successful implementation to self-direction .  C ase managers were often tasked  to recruit new program participants , consistent with the model  of self-direction (Crisp, Doty, Smith & Flanagan ,  2010 ) .  Across all states, administrators   described  a desir e  to increase program size,  and as a result,  th e recruiting component  of the case manager relationship took on  added  significance .  Studies  of both county-level (Hall-Lande et al., 2012) and state-level (Walker et al., 2009) administrators echo the importance of having  “buy-in” from  case managers  and   that  dissatisfied or negatively disposed case managers can limit access to self-direction by simply not mentioning it  to potential participants .  Moreover, c ase managers who harbor concerns or misconceptions about self-direction may not present accurate information out of fear for their clients’ safety (Crisp et al.,  2010 ) .  While states varied in their approach to  building a competent case management network ,  administrators were clear in the centrality of case managers to successful implementation ."
"82" "Administrators emphasized the importance of rulemaking in the process of implementation, particularly as program size increased .  This result mirrors that of the previous nationwide study of self-direction  administrators  which found that programs decreased in flexibility as they transitioned from pilot projects to state-wide impl ementations (Walker et al., 2009 ) .  Additionally, the reactive process of rulemaking described  in the present study is similar to the process described  by Walker and colleagues as  creating  the “rules of the road [when] there  weren’t too many” (p. 8) .  Co nsistency is a challenge in the dynamic environment of a nascent program , and this study demonstrates that the administrative  challenges in rulemaking, education, and enforcement  contin ue  well after the initial rollout to state-wide implementation ."
"83" "The challenges highlighted in this study may help to explain the lack of growth in the number of people with IDD  engaging in self-direction .  In 2006, 5.4% of people with IDD  receiving HCBS services  were engaging in self-direction (Prouty, Smith & Lakin, 2007) ,  and  that number   remained  relatively unchanged in 2011   (National Core Indicators, 2011) .  The stasis in self-direction persists despite increased adoption of self-direction by states  (Walker et al., 2009) .  The challenges that administrators proposed  offer  a partial explanation for the lack of growth .  Individuals with IDD may not choose self-direction if the rules are cumbersome and inconsistent ly applied , the documentation is overwhelming, and case managers are not recruit ing  new participants .  Future directions for self-direction research should seek further explanation on  why more individuals with IDD are not choosing self-direction and what policy innovations states  can  use to engage more people in self-directed supports ."
"84" "Future Directions for  Self-Direction"
"85" "While only a handful of states  were   using the SIS  statewide  to evaluate participant need in self-directed programs, more administrators reported that the SIS was in use for other populations or  that  the state was piloting the SIS for eventual statewide implementation .  The SIS has been validate d across multiple studies ( Wehmeyer, Chapman, Little, Thomspon, Schalock & Tasse, 2009; Weiss, Lunsky, Tasse & Durbin, 2009) and presents ad ministrators with a standard  way of assessing participant needs designed to dovetail with a person-centered planning process (A merican Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities , 2008) ."
"86" "The use of the SIS is associated with the  utilization  of budget algorithms in the literature, and there were some states that conformed to this  approach  (Smith & Fortune, 2008) .  However, given that many states are still working on adopting the SIS on a statewide basis, budget algorithms were often used with other assessment tools .  Budget algorithms reflect a focus on individualization of supports that is important in self-determination theory and the best practices literature .  Severance and Campbell (2008)  argue that the use of budget algorithms helps to ensure fair and equitable distribution of support dollars .  H owever, the use of  budget algorithms  may make the system resis tant to change, reducing the likelihood of expanding opportunities for  self-determination  (Crisp et al., 2010; Moseley, Gettings, & Cooper, 2003) ."
"87" "The  relatively small group of states identified as  using electronic  billing represents  a slower implementation than recommended by previous studies of self-direction, in which information technology systems were seen as critical to best pr actices (Walker et al., 2009 ) .  Electronic billing considered  best practice for participant-direction with populations other than IDD, including veterans ( Schoeps, 2015 ),  and  the use of electronic billing in Medicaid services has a strong evidentiary basis (Dennis & Blanchard, 2013) ."
"88" "Limitations and Conclusions"
"89" "Although  implementations of self-direction  dif fer significantly  from state to state,  the experiences of administrators coalesced around a set of common themes .  Strengths of self-direction derive from increased opportunities to express self-determination and improvements in support relationships .  Challenges of administering self-directed programs derived from documentation, quality assurance and recruitment via case managers, and rulemaking and enforcement that balanced individual medical needs  against administrative stri ctures .  Future directions pointed towards the use of  technology to streamline services ."
"90" "Because administrators are central to the processes of program  implementation , their experiences represent an insider’s perspective of  the implementation of  self-direction .  It is important to note that this  study  did  not compare administrator perspectives on implementation with those of  people with IDD , families, or service providers,  and thus  re present s   only a partial understanding of  self-direction .  Moreover, administrators may have focus ed  on program strengths or  goals  and minimized issues that may reflect poorly on the state .  While the sample  included  80% of the states that have implemented self-direction for individuals with IDD, administrators that elected to participate may hold different views of self-direction from  administrators  that declined to participate .  Most importantly, the Medicaid policy landscape is always evolving, and  t he present study should be understood as a snapshot in time ."
"91" "T he incredible diversity in program design between states represents a  fundamental  challenge for future investigations of self-direction .  As the national picture of self-direction comes into focus, more complex research questions can be answered that extend  existing  best practices  by comparing program designs across states   and across other nations’ self-directed programs .  Furthermore, studying states that have not implemented self-direction may provide information on what environmental factors facilitate and inhibit the growth of self-direction ."
"92" "References"
"93" "Abery, B. & Stancliffe, R. (2003). An ecological theory of self-determination: Theoretical foundations. In M.L. Wehmeyer, B.H. Abery, D.E. Mithaug, & R.J. Stancliffe’s (Eds.),  Theory in self-determination: Foundations for educational practice  (pp. 25-42). Springfield, Illinois: Charles C. Thomas Publisher."
"94" "American Association on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities (2008).  Supports Intensity Scale information . Retrieved from: https://aaidd.org/docs/default-source/sis-docs/latestsispresentation.pdf?sfvrsn=2 ."
"95" "Atlas.ti. Version 7.5. [Computer software] (2014). Scientific Software Development GmbH."
"96" "Bogenschutz, M., Hewitt, A., Hall-Lande, J., & LaLiberte, T. (2010). Status and trends in the direct support workforce in self-directed supports.  Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities ,  48 , 345-360.   d oi:  10.1352/1934-9556-48.5.345"
"97" "Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology.  Qualitative  R esearch in  P sychology , 3, 77-101.  d oi: 10.1191/1478088706qp063oa"
"98" "Caldwell, J. (2007). Experiences of families with relatives with intellectual and developmental disabilities in a consumer ‐ directed support program.  Disability & Society ,  22 , 549-562.  doi: 10.1080/09687590701560139"
"99" "Caldwell, J., & Heller, T. (2007). Longitudinal outcomes of a consumer-directed program supporting adults with developmental disabilities and their families.  Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities ,  45 , 161-173.  doi:  10.1352/1934-9556(2007)45[161:LOOACP]2.0.CO;2"
"100" "Crisp, S., Doty, P., Smith, G., & Flanagan, S. (2010).  Developing and implementing self-direction programs and policies: A handbook.  Boston, MA: National Resource Center for Participant-Directed Services .  Retrieved from http://www.bc.edu/schools/gssw/nrcpds/tools/handbook.html"
"101" "DeCarlo, M., Hall-Lande, J. Bogenschutz, M. ,  & Hewitt, A. (2017).  State of the states in self-direction for individuals with intellectual and developmental disabilities   (P olicy research brief  26,   1 ) .  Minneapolis, MN:   Research and Training Center on Community Living at the University of Minnesota."
"102" "Dennis, A., & Blanchard, K. (2013). Abortion providers' experiences with Medicaid abortion coverage policies: A qualitative multistate study.  Health Services Research ,  48 , 236-252.  doi:  10.1111/j.1475-6773.2012.01443.x"
"103" "Eiken, S., Sredl, K., Gold, L., Kasten, J., Burwell, B. & Saucier, P. (2014).  Medicaid expenditures for long-term services and supports in FY 2012 . Retrieved from: http://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid-chip-program-information/by-topics/long-term-services-and-supports/downloads/ltss-expenditures-2012.pdf"
"104" "Gross, J. M., Wallace, L., Blue-Banning, M., Summers, J. A., & Turnbull, A. (2013). Examining the experiences and decisions of parents/guardians participant directing the supports and services of adults with significant Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities.  Journal of Disability Policy Studies ,  24 , 88-101.  doi: 10.1177/1044207312439102"
"105" "Gross, J. M., Blue-Banning, M., Turnbull, H. R., & Francis, G. L. (2015). Identifying and defining the activities of participant direction programs: A document analysis.  Journal of Disability Policy Studies ,  25 , 220-232.  doi: 10.1177/1044207313502538"
"106" "Hall-Lande, J., Hewitt, A., Bogenschutz, M., & LaLiberte, T. (2012). County administrator perspectives on the implementation of self-directed supports.  Journal of Disability Policy Studies ,  22 , 247-256.  doi: 10.1177/1044207311416595"
"107" "Heller, T., & Caldwell, J. (2005). Impact of a consumer ‐ directed family support program on reduced out ‐ of ‐ home institutional placement.   Journal of Policy and Practice in Intellectual Disabilities ,   2 , 63-65.  doi:  10.1111/j.1741-1130.2005.00010.x"
"108" "Heller, T., Arnold, C. K., van Heumen, L., McBride, E. L., & Factor, A. (2012). Self-directed support: Impact of hiring practices on adults with intellectual and developmental disabilities and families.  American  J ournal on  I ntellectual and  D evelopmental  D isabilities ,  117 , 464-477.  doi:  10.1352/1944-7558-117.6.464"
"109" "Infield, D. L. (2005).  States’ experiences implementing consumer-directed home and community services: Results of the 2004 survey of state administrators, opinion survey & telephone interviews .  Washington, DC: National Association of State Units on Aging ."
"110" "Larson, S.A., Eschenbacher, H.J., Anderson, L.L., Taylor, B., Pettingell, S., Hewitt, A., Sowers, M., & Fay, M.L. (2017).  In-home and residential long-term supports and services for persons with intellectual or developmental disabilities: Status and trends through 2014 . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, Research and Training Center on Community Living, Institute on Community Integration."
"111" "Matthias, R. E., & Benjamin, A. E. (2008). Paying friends, family members, or strangers to be home-based personal assistants: How satisfied are consumers?.  Journal of Disability Policy Studies , 18 , 205-218.  doi: 10.1177/1044207307311526"
"112" "Mirza, M., & Hammel, J. (2009). Consumer ‐ d irected goal planning in the delivery of assistive technology services for people who are ageing with intellectual disabilities.  Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual Disabilities ,  22 , 445-457.  d oi:  10.1111/j.1468-3148.2009.00495.x"
"113" "Moseley, C., Gettings, R., & Cooper, R. (2003).  Having it your way: Understanding state individual budgeting strategies . Alexandria, VA: National Association of State Directors of Developmental Disabilities Services."
"114" "Nadash, P. (1998).  Independent choices: Enhancing consumer direction for people with disabilities. Retrieved from: https://www.independentliving.org/docs4/ar3983.html."
"115" "Nadash, P., & Crisp, S. (2005).  Best practices in consumer direction .  Washington, DC: Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services .  Retrieved from http://www.cmshhs.gov/DemoProjectsEvalRpts/downloads/ Section648_Report.pdf ."
"116" "National Core Indicators (2011).  What does NCI tell us about people who self-direct?  (NCI Data Brief No.1) .  Retrieved from: https://www.nationalcoreindicators.org/upload/core-indicators/Data_Brief_--_self_direction_--_Issue_1--_April_4_2011_1.pdf"
"117" "Nerney, T. (2005). Self-determination after a decade.  TASH Connections ,  31 , 3-4."
"118" "Ng, T., Stone, J., & Harrington, C. (2015). Medicaid home and community-based services: How consumer access is restricted by state policies.  Journal of  A ging &  S ocial  P olicy ,  27 , 21-46.  doi:  10.1080/08959420.2015.969078"
"119" "Prouty, R., Smith, G., & Lakin, K. C. (Eds). (2007).  Residential services for persons with developmental disabilities: Status and trends through 2006 . Minneapolis, MN:  University of Minnesota, Institute on Community Integration, Research and Training Center   on Community Living."
"120" "Putnam, M., & Frieden, L. (2014). Sharpening the aim of long-term services and supports policy.  Public Policy & Aging Report ,  24 , 60-64.  doi:  10.1093/ppar/pru013"
"121" "Schoeps, D. (2015).  Veteran-directed home and community-based services (VD-HCBS) payment procedures  [PowerPoint slides]. Retrieved from: https://nrcpds.bc.edu/downloadfile.php? filename=1328890819_Billing_and_Invoicing_-_AoA_VDHCBS_Training.pdf"
"122" "Sciegaj, M., Mahoney, K., & Simone, K. (2008). State experiences with implementing the Cash and Counseling Demonstration and Evaluation Project.  Journal of  A ging &  S ocial  P olicy ,  20 , 81-98.  doi: 10.1300/J031v20n01_05"
"123" "Sciegaj, M., Mahoney, K. J., Schwartz, A. J., Simon-Rusinowitz, L., Selkow, I., & Loughlin, D. M. (2016). An inventory of publicly funded participant-directed long-term services and supports programs in the United States.  Journal of  D isability  P olicy  S tudies ,  26 , 245-251.  doi: 10.1177/1044207314555810"
"124" "Severance, D. D. & Campbell, E. M. (2008).  What is a funding formula?  Retrieved from: https://aaidd.org/docs/default-source/sis-docs/siswpresourceallocation.pdf?sfvrsn=0"
"125" "Simon-Rusinowitz, L., Garcia, G. M., Martin, D., Sadler, M. D., Tilly, J., Marks, L. N., ... & Mahoney, K. J. (2009). Hiring relatives as caregivers in two states: Developing an education and research agenda for policy makers.  Social  W ork in  P ublic  H ealth ,  25 , 17-41.   d oi:  10.1080/19371910802678970"
"126" "Simon-Rusinowitz, L., Marks, L. N., Loughlin, D. M., Desmond, S. M., Mahoney, K. J., Zacharias, B. L., ... & Allison, A. M. (2002). Implementation issues for consumer-directed programs: Comparing views of policy experts, consumers, and representatives.  Journal of  A ging &  S ocial  P olicy ,  14 , 95-118.  doi:  10.4324/9780203049723"
"127" "Smith, G. & Fortune, J (2008).  The Supports Intensity Scale and resource allocation . Retrieved from: https://aaidd.org/docs/default-source/sis-ocs/siswpresourceallocation.pdf?sfvrsn=0"
"128" "Timberlake, M. T., Leutz, W. N., Warfield, M. E., & Chiri, G. (2014). “In the driver’s seat”: Parent perceptions of choice in a participant-directed Medicaid waiver program for young children with Autism.  Journal of  A utism and  D evelopmental  D isorders ,  44 , 903-914.  doi:  10.1007/s10803-013-1942-4"
"129" "Vinton, L. (2010). Caregivers' perceptions of a consumer-directed care program for adults with developmental disabilities.  Journal of Family Social Work ,  13 , 208-226.  doi 10.1080/10522151003756052"
"130" "Walker, P., Hewitt, A., Bogenschutz, M., & Hall-Lande, J. (2009) .  Implementation of consumer-directed services for persons with intellectual and developmental disabilities:  A national study   ( Policy Research Br ief  20 , 1) . Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota, Institute on Community Integration, Research and Training Center on Community Living."
"131" "Wehmeyer, M. L. (1999). A functional model of self-determination describing development and implementing instruction.  Focus on  A utism and other Developmental  D isabilities ,  14 , 53-61.  doi: 10.1177/108835769901400107"
"132" "Wehmeyer, M., Chapman, T. E., Little, T. D., Thompson, J. R., Schalock, R., & Tasse, M. J. (2009). Efficacy of the Supports Intensity Scale (SIS) to predict extraordinary support  needs.  American  J ournal on  I ntellectual and  D evelopmental  D isabilities ,  114 , 3-14.  doi:  10.1352/2009.114:3-14"
"133" "Weiss, J. A., Lunsky, Y., Tassé, M. J., & Durbin, J. (2009). Support for the construct validity of the Supports Intensity Scale based on clinician rankings of need.  Research in  D evelopmental  D isabilities ,  30 , 933-941.  doi:  10.1016/j.ridd.2009.01.007"
"134" "Tables"
"135" "Table 1"
"136" "Core Components of Self-Direction"
"137" "Individual Budgeting"
"138" "Allocations from the funding authority that are based on individually assessed support needs."
"139" "Person-Centered Planning"
"140" "Process in which participant, natural supports, and case manager understand the participant’s life goals, support needs and actions that will be taken by various people to meet those things that are important to and for the individual."
"141" "Employer Authority"
"142" "Authority to hire, train, maintain, and dismiss support workers as well as choose from different provider agencies"
"143" "Budget Authority"
"144" "Authority to make decisions on what supports will be purchased and how much money to allocate to each support need."
"145" "Support Broker"
"146" "An employee of the participant who assists them with employer and budget authority and interfaces with providers and state officials."
"147" "Fiscal Intermediary (FMS)"
"148" "Private entities such as non-profit, for-profit companies, or service agencies that assist the participant in complying with labor and tax laws and track spending for the implementing department."
"149" "Representative"
"150" "A person, usually a family member, the participant authorizes to make decisions on their behalf (or in a collaborative supported decision making manner)."
"151" "Table 2"
"152" "Themes and Subthemes in Administrator Interviews"
"153" "Research Question"
"154" "Themes"
"155" "Subthemes"
"156" "Strengths"
"157" "Opportunities for Self-Determination"
"158" "Flexibility, individualization, decision-making, responsibility"
"159" "Improved Support Relationships"
"160" "Controlling who comes in the home, consistency of support relationships"
"161" "Challenges"
"162" "Restructuring Case Manager Relationships"
"163" "Oversight of participant spending, documentation, recruitment"
"164" "Public Stewardship"
"165" "Rulemaking and enforcement, public perception of fraud"
"166" "Future Directions"
"167" "Increasing Program Size"
"168" "Administrator as change agents, selective incentives"
"169" "Using New Technology"
"170" "Electronic billing and records, Supports Intensity Scale, budget algorithms"
