DIVERSITY MANAGEMENT AS A HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
STRATEGY TO COMPETE IN ORDER ERA INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION 4.0
Ade. Parlaungan Nasution 1, Ramdani2
1

Sekolah Tinggi Ilmu Ekonomi Labuhan Batu, adenasution@gmail.com
2
University of Riau Islands, ramdanidani146@gmail.com

ABSTRACT
Development of the rapidly growing business and with the emergence of new
competitors requires companies to invest by the development and regeneration of the
employees. Management of human resources management requires diversity as one of the
keys to win the competition. Diversity is one of the factors that strengthen the company's
position as a company. However, the permasalahaan is not all companies, even though
multinational companies can implement diversity management in human resources
management. It is therefore necessaryanalytical explanation of the concept of diversity
management that can be applied within a company, It manages well with the diversity that
exists within a company, is expected to prevent conflicts and to maximize the achievement of
the ability to compete with the advantages that can be gained from the diversity of existing
human resources.
Keywords: Diversity Management, Human Resources
PRELIMINARY
The development of technology and the ease of accessing information in the era of
industrial revolution 4.0 makes the world gets smaller and making the business activities
carried on like without any geographical limitation. As a consequence the company or
organization has to deal with different people and different perspectives, as well as the need
to prepare for what should be done to manage the business, both local and global businesses.
According beck (2016) in the era of industrialization, new technology has turned the previous
technology quickly. In line with this, the adoption of Internet-based technology and artificial
artificer has been used as a component of formation of the competitive ability of the company
by various business sectors. Roaman (2017).
A company is said to have the ability to compete is when the company has something
that is not or something better than other companies and do something that is not able to be
done by other firms (Susanto, 2015). Increasingly diverse business challenges forcing
companies to transform in order to maintain the existence and improve competitiveness
(Mey, 2016). Efficiency and productivity as a way to maintain the existence can be achieved
through the quality of human resources.

Development of the rapidly growing business and with the advent of new competitors
such as requiring companies to invest in the development and regeneration of the human
resources. Regeneration employee needs to be done by the company to create a healthy
corporate environment in terms of the composition of age or position (Vin, 2014).
Management of human resources management requires a so-called diversity management as
one of the keys to win the competition (Rey, 2016). Diversity is one of the factors that
strengthen the company's position as a company (Tang & Khy, 2017). This diversity provides
a different view to expanding the knowledge and approach to the industry, as well as
enterprise customers are also diverse.
Although it can not be denied that the increasing diversity of human resources in a
company also has a negative side, but the company could benefit from diversity through
strategic management of the diversity of the human resources (Mathis and Jackson, 2010). Of
course, the expected benefits are not automatically acquired the company, it takes an
understanding and proper management with regard to the diversity of human resources,
particularly in the industrial era 4.0 this.
But the problem is that not all companies, even though multinational companies can
implement diversity management in human resources management. This is ultimately the
company's inability to manage diversity in the workplace / enterprise can lead to various
problems in the future (Solvy, 2012). For example, the conflict in the location of the power
plant project Java 7 due to the beating of a local worker sparked riots on 9 September 2018
(www.news.detik.com, 2018). The next conflict between the management of PT Garuda
Indonesia and Garuda Pilots Association pilots strike that sparked a Garuda Indonesia
Airways on July 28, 2011 (www.kompasiana.com 2011). Both cases show the diversity is not
managed by the existing workforce at both companies.
Referring to both the above cases, the implementation of diversity management
(diversity) in Indonesia, it is very necessary, not only caused by the increasing number of
multinational companies in Indonesia, also due to the diversity that comes from Indonesia
itself. Through this article will explain theoretically the concept of diversity management and
how it is applied in the management of human resources in a company. It manages well with
the diversity that exists in a company, is expected to prevent conflicts and to maximize the
achievement of competitive ability of the company through the advantages that can be gained
from the diversity of existing human resources.

METHODOLOGY

This study is a research library (Library R engine) or Reader Review. Library Research
by Kartini Kartono (1996) is a study of some of the literature in the form of books,
magazines, bulletins, newspapers, the internet, the results of seminars and other resources
related to the problem are formulated. In this literature study presented issues related to
diversity management within a company as well as analytical exposure of the concept of
diversity management that can be applied in a company. The data were derived from
theoretical literature study, in association with the title raised in the study. In this case,
DISCUSSION
Competing Ability Achievement Through Corporate Human Resources Management
Diversity Management Uses
The competitive ability of the company to appear when a company can produce the
same product with the resulting competitors with lower costs (cost advantage), or products /
services that are different and better than that produced by its competitors (differentation
advantage) (Porter, 2012). The ability to compete will enable the company has more value
can earn higher profits.
Diversity As A Human Resource Management Perspective
Diversity can be defined literally as the difference. The differences are often
discussed meruapakan differences in terms of ethnicity, skin color, gender differences, and
many more. Allard (2002), confirms in a very broad sense that includes within it is the level
of social, cultural, physical, and environmental differences among many people that will
affect the way they think and act or behave. Thomas and Ely (1996), provide affirmative
view of diversity as a variety of perspectives and approaches to work are taken of each
individual in the identity and group shows. It is by Allard (2002), said about the complexities
of the culture that can increase the difficulty in processing the difference (diversity) in the
company.
Implementation of diversity management by companies should begin with the culture
and values that need to be understood by all members in the company. Companies should be
able to care and give great attention to human resources owned by observing and devise
strategies for developing and managing human resources (Robert, 2015). Human resources
management strategy adopted by the company should also be aligned to the vision and
mission, strategy and corporate culture (Boney, 2014). One form of diversity management
that can be applied, namely a culture of active involvement of employees.

Implementation of Diversity Management in Human Resource Management
Globlisasi era characterized by increasingly competitive business environment,
therefore we need a proper business strategy that has the ability to compete so that the
company can survive in the competition. Human resource management broadly faced with
two kinds of diversity (cultural and personal) is requested to take a strategic decision
(Brickson, 2010).
The company will benefit from having diversity manajmen namely creativity and
innovation, as people from different backgrounds will have different viewpoints on an issue.
Diverse groups would have broader experience base in the pass approach a problem (Born
2011). When managed effectively, they will generate more solutions than a homogeneous
group so that the company can achieve competitive advantages (Neny, 2015). Companies that
provide opportunities for diverse employees will have a competitive advantages and
attractive to employees who have the highest qualifications. When employees believe that
their differences are not only tolerated, but rewarded, they will be more loyal, productive, and
committed (Subhan, 2016). This is consistent with the statement Knouse et al (2012) that the
implementation of diversity management company can improve problem solving through
knowledge resources because with the diversity of the members can provide more
information, new approaches, perspectives richer on solving the problem of the organizations
and other benefits that create.
In this regard, the main priorities of a company in achieving its ability to compete is
to develop human resources with superior skills. This process began with an innovative
recruitment with extensive coverage to be able to recruit individuals who have qualities and
abilities suitable to be placed in the position being offered (Alen, 2014). The company seeks
to recruit qualified individuals from many different backgrounds to join the company.
Bleijenbergh, Peters and Poutsma (2010) mengemukan that diversity management is an
inclusive approach that begins with the recruit or attract different people into the company,
then propose and establish a broader understanding of the different individuals.
Furthermore, in application of the principle of diversity management, selection is
done by the company after the stage of recruiting candidates. In this event, prospective
employees can be taken into a mentoring program that apprenticeship in accordance with the
educational background to then be taken into the evaluation process of the experiment
(Melani 2013). When employees have passed the stage of the selection and evaluation of the

employees had the opportunity to become permanent employees (Melani, 2013). Through
this process, the company has provided career opportunities as possible to employees without
discrimination by considering the competence, performance, and corporate needs.
Further, in the management of human resources using the principles of diversity
management, companies can conduct education and training that can be tailored to the needs
and conditions of each company. This is according to Wheeler (2014) which states that the
definition of diversity training varies from one organization to another and often how
organizations define diversity training is strongly influenced by the diversity that is
understood within the organization.
Furthermore prusahaan need to set the policy on the promotion and compensation to
employees. Bateman (2007) stated that managing diversity requires a firm commitment to
regularly review the policies and practices related to recruitment, career development,
promotion and remuneration to ensure that all employees and prospective employees have
access to opportunities and equal treatment, without gender discrimination, ethnic, religious
or social status.
Possible Obstacles and Solutions Guide In the Implementation of Diversity
Management in Human Resource Management
In applying diversity management companies to be able to achieve a competitive edge
sometimes encounter some obstacles or problems, whether it came from within and outside
the company. The obstacles prusahaan should become a reference for evaluating policies
related to human resource management using the concept of diversity management.
Ultimately any problems can be resolved so that the constraints in the implementation of the
concept of diversity management in human resources management can be overcome. The
obstacles are as follows.
The failure of the implementation of diversity policies can be caused by the
unpreparedness of the members organiasasi sehigga failed in making the transition or the
transition from monolothic organizational framework leading to the risk associated with
serious public and financial implications of a negative basis (Allen and Montgomery, 2001).
Furthermore, kOLICY often planned incomplete and unsustainable in its
implementation.Then the emergence of an imbalance between the ratio of female workers
and male then the gap between employees out (retired) and entered in the company as well as
facilities for pumping. Furthermore, government policies and the establishment of the

ASEAN Free Trade with the increasingly fierce competition and the economic situation
changes very quickly is one of the challenges.
To resolve the problems, should the company can start by adjusting the ratio of
employment in the company and provides the opportunity for women to occupy a position /
positions in particular. For the company's current facilities themselves have started to prepare
a budget to build a room for pumping. Further, the company also had to put respect for the
welfare of employees in a high position by providing medical facilities for employees and
their families and paskakerja program that can give peace in the future. Human Resources
Management System in the company can be based on the competence and the need for
personnel in all work units.

CONCLUSION
The increasing diversity of human resources in a company brings a positive side and
has a negative side. Companies can benefit from diversity through strategic management of
human resources diversity. But the problem is that not all companies, even multinationals
seklipun can implement diversity management in human resources management. This is
ultimately the company's inability to manage diversity in the workplace / enterprise can lead
to various problems in the future. The company will benefit from having diversity manajmen
namely creativity and innovation, as people from different backgrounds will have different
viewpoints on an issue. In applying diversity management companies to be able to achieve a
competitive edge sometimes encounter some obstacles or problems, whether it came from
within and outside the company. Various constraints should become a reference company to
evaluate policies related to human resource management using the concept of diversity
management.
LITERATURE
https://news.detik.com/berita/d-4204418/pukul-pekerja-lokal-tka-asal-china-diamankan-polisi

