Crafting Mosaics:
Person-Centered Religious Influence and Selection in Adolescent Friendships*
jimi adams (jimi.adams@ucdenver.edu)
University of Colorado Denver
Department of Health & Behavioral Sciences
David R. Schaefer (drschaef@uci.edu)
University of California Irvine
Department of Sociology
Andrea Vest Ettekal (andrea.ettekal@tamu.edu)
Texas A&M University
Department of Recreation, Park, and Tourism Sciences
2018-03-31
Word Count: 8,602 (main body text only)
Abstract:
This research addresses the intersection of two key domains of adolescents' lives: religion and peer
networks. Religion scholars have argued that religion is multi-faceted and hence better understood by
focusing on combinations of indicators (i.e. mosaics), versus a more traditional variable-centered
approach. We adopt this framework and investigate the interplay between religion and peer networks,
both in how religious mosaics are shaped by friends and how profiles affect friend selection dynamics.
With data from two schools in the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health, we estimate
these religious mosaics using latent class analysis (LCA) to identify profiles consisting of combinations
of commonly available survey-based measures of religious attitudes, behaviors and identities. Finding
evidence of theoretically-expected profiles, our second step is to use stochastic actor based models
(SABMs) to investigate network dynamics for these LCA-based religious profiles. We demonstrate how
the distinct structure of profile data can be integrated within the SABM framework to evaluate
processes of friend selection and influence. Results show evidence of adolescents influencing one
another’s religious mosaics, but not selecting friends on that basis.

Please direct any correspondence to jimi adams (jimi.adams@ucdenver.edu). We thank participants at the 2014 Sunbelt
meetings for comments on a previous version of this paper. We used data from Add Health, a project directed by Kathleen
Mullan Harris and designed by J. Richard Udry, Peter S. Bearman, and Kathleen Mullan Harris at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill and funded by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development (grant P01-HD31921), with cooperative funding from 23 other federal agencies and foundations. Information
about how to obtain the Add Health data files is available on the Add Health website (http://www.cpc.unc.edu/addhealth).
*

Introduction
Adolescence and early adulthood are key moments in the life course where religious attitudes,
behaviors, and identities change (Pearce and Denton 2011; Smith and Denton 2005; Smith and
Snell 2009). During adolescence, individuals increasingly take control over decisions about their
religiosity, which is reflected in substantial shifts in their religious identities, behaviors, and the
primary influences of those changes. For example, adolescents' religiosity has shown substantial
declines (Regnerus and Uecker 2006; Uecker, Regnerus and Vaaler 2007), other less linear
changes (Pearce and Denton 2011), and the capacity to establish or alter the trajectories of other
domains of life—e.g., health (Ellison and Levin 1998; George, Ellison and Larson 2002;
Trinitapoli and Weinreb 2012), educational performance (Lehrer 1999; Regnerus 2000), and
delinquency (Pearce and Haynie 2004). Adolescence is also a time when peers take on an
increasingly central role in both influencing important behavioral and identity changes (Steglich,
Snijders, and Pearson 2010; Veenstra et al., 2013), and providing the primary social groups
wherein such changes manifest (Schaefer et al., 2011; Ueno et al., 2012). Given the intersection
of religious changes and heightened importance of peers during the adolescent period in the life
course, there is ample reason to expect that peer processes and religious changes shape one
another in adolescents' lives (Cheadle and Schwadel 2012; Cook et al., 2017; Sepulvado et al.,
2015).
Research on social networks has consistently found elevated similarity among peers on a
wide range of behavioral and identity dimensions (McPherson, Smith-Lovin and Cook 2001)—
including religiosity (Cheadle and Schwadel 2012). This similarity can arise from a variety of
social processes; here we focus especially on peer influence, wherein adolescents adopt
behaviors similar to those of their friends (Haas and Schaefer 2014; de la Haye et al., 2013), and
homophilous selection, a process whereby friendships are more likely to form between similar
2

vs. dissimilar peers (Schaefer, Kornienko, and Fox 2011). In light of the long-standing
observation of such similarities, and the potential for similarity to arise through multiple social
processes (Kandel 1978; Marsden 1988), scholars have sought to theoretically,
methodologically, and empirically disentangle influence and selection processes from one
another (Kossinets and Watts 2009; Steglich et al., 2010; Van Zalk et al., 2010). While others
have examined selection and influence on adolescents’ religiosity (Cheadle and Schwadel 2012;
Cook et al., 2017), we extend this by incorporating a recent fundamental re-conceptualization of
adolescent religiosity into this research.
Given the importance of religion in social life, researchers have devoted considerable
attention to identifying the most appropriate way(s) of conceptualizing how religion matters in
people's lives. Here, we follow the tradition initially developed in qualitative studies that aimed
to capture how experiences of "lived religion" reflect the important dimensions of religion more
faithfully than can strategies that conceptualize religion in terms of single variables (Ammerman
2007; McGuire 2008). Stemming from this literature, Lisa Pearce and colleagues demonstrated
the capacity of in-depth religious surveys to capture some of religion’s multidimensionality
highlighted in the lived religion approach, by identifying what they label as religious “mosaics”
(Pearce and Denton 2011; Pearce et al., 2013). In brief, mosaics capture the ways individuals
combine various religious behaviors and attitudes in patterned ways. We draw on this approach
to use religious mosaics as the key conceptualization of religion when examining adolescents’
peer influence and friend selection patterns.
In this paper, we begin by providing an overview of network research on selection and
peer influence. We then discuss the motivation for conceptualizing adolescent religion as
mosaics, and how selection and influence may play out for religious mosaics. We make the case

3

that it is advantageous to combine these perspectives and illustrate their integration through a
dynamic network model. Our data come from two large schools in the National Longitudinal
Study of Adolescent Health ("Add Health"; Bearman, Jones and Udry 1997). We follow the
mosaic approach by identifying adolescents’ religious profiles, then estimate models of network
and behavioral change (Snijders, van de Bunt, and Steglich 2010), to disentangle the effects of
profile-based religious friend selection from influence. We discuss the implications of our
findings for religious scholarship and identify pathways for advancing research on religion,
networks, and their intersection using a mosaic-based approach.
Background
Adolescence and young adulthood is a time of rapid development, including changes in the ways
individuals engage with and express their religious identities (Trinitapoli and Vaisey 2009;
Uecker, Regnerus and Vaaler 2007). Given this dynamism, and the wide range of domains to
which religion is salient, researchers have devoted considerable time to explaining the sources of
religious identification, behavior, and change during adolescence (Smith and Denton 2005). In
particular, Cheadle and Schwadel (2012) combine this focus on adolescent religious change with
recent advances in the statistical modeling of social network data to show how adolescent
friendships reflect both religious influence between friends and friend selection based on
religious similarities for a range of common religion variables. Our focus here is similar: we
investigate how networks contribute to religious identity, but demonstrate how the assessment of
this question can benefit from incorporating the perspective of religious mosaics (Pearce and
Denton 2011; Pearce et al., 2013).
Network Processes in Adolescent Friendships
Few findings in the social sciences are as consistent as people’s social contacts being highly
structured to include others like themselves on a wide range of characteristics (McPherson,

4

Smith-Lovin and Cook 2001). This pattern of assortativity has been documented for
relationships ranging from strong close personal connections (e.g., marital homogamy and best
friends) to weaker ties, including infrequent acquaintances. In fact, it is now hard to find
examples of behaviors or attributes for which this pattern does not hold (though marital
relationships are more often heterogamous on one dimension—gender). As a small sampling
from the vast range of relationship assortativity documented in the literature: friendships are
similar on demographic attributes such as race (Moody 2001; Goodreau et al. 2009), gender
(Ridgeway and Smith-Lovin 1999), and age (Kossinets and Watts 2009); behaviors including
substance use (Kirke 2004; Mercken et al. 2010), physical activity (de la Haye et al. 2011),
aggression/prosociality (Dijkstra et al. 2012); psychological states such as depression (Schaefer
et al., 2011), or attitudes such as school attachment (Paxton and Moody 2002), antipathy (Berger
and Dijkstra 2013), identities including school “crowds” (Brown, Von Bank and Steinberg
2008), ethnic identity (Kornienko, Santos and Updegraff 2014), sexual identity (Ueno et al.
2012), and religion (Cheadle and Schwadel 2012; Cook et al., 2017) and the list could go on; for
a review see McPherson, Smith-Lovin and Cook (2001).
Given the pervasiveness of assortativity, social scientists have long theorized its possible
origins (Kandel 1978). When investigating the mechanisms responsible for assortativity, it is first
necessary to take account of chance expectations. In particular, with any characteristic that is not
equally distributed within a population, some level of relational homophily is to be expected
simply by chance, which is known as baseline homophily (Blau 1977; Marsden 1988;
McPherson, Smith-Lovin and Cook 2001). The goal of network studies is often to measure and
identify the processes responsible for observed levels of homophily that exceed these baseline
levels (Kandel 1978). In general, behavioral similarity can arise via two distinct processes:

5

individuals can adopt the behaviors of their peers—for instance, through peer influence—and/or
friendships can form and dissolve in ways that maximize behavioral similarities—homophilous
selection (Steglich et al., 2010; Kandel 1978). Here, we first show that adolescent networks show
assortativity on religion in excess of baseline expectations, then assess what processes account
for the observed pattern.
Homophilous friend selection occurs when people form connections with others like
themselves at rates greater than expected by chance (Kandel 1978). Homophilous selection can
arise via numerous distinct mechanisms. For instance, McPherson and Smith-Lovin (1987)
employ the notion of foci (Feld 1981) to explain how organizations such as voluntary
associations or clubs can constrain relationship opportunities to others like oneself (Schaefer,
Simpkins and Ettekal 2018). Alternatively, preferences for similar peers may lead people to
select friends like themselves or, over time, dissolve friendships with dissimilar others (Van Zalk
et al. 2010). Finally, network-based processes—e.g., transitivity (the tendency of two individuals
who share a friend in common to themselves form a friendship)—can amplify homophily by
reinforcing relationships and friendship groupings (Snijders 2011; Wimmer and Lewis 2011).
The nature of adolescent religiosity—as a collective and often organization-based activity (i.e.,
foci)—makes these processes relevant and suggests a high likelihood of observing adolescents
selecting friends or maintaining friendships with those who are religiously similar to themselves.
Friendship assortativity also arises via peer influence, wherein over time individuals
increasingly adopt behaviors or attitudes similar to those of their friends (Snijders 2011; Kandel
1978). Scholars have theorized the importance of peer influence for adolescents' behavioral
change for decades on a wide range of outcomes (Kirke 2004; Van Zalk et al., 2010). Such
influence can occur in many ways, often unintentionally, in light of adolescents’ basic

6

psychological need for relatedness (Deci & Ryan 2011). Over time, adolescents imitate their
friends as they learn to relate with one another (i.e., social learning). Adolescents may also seek
to be like their friends as a way of exploring their identities and “trying on” different roles, which
may receive reinforcement from friends. Our interest is not so much in discerning how peer
influence occurs, but rather, whether peer influence processes are also at work in the realm of
religious mosaics. Early peer influence research has been criticized for focusing too heavily on
problem behaviors and negative outcomes, while paying inadequate regard to peer influences on
prosocial outcomes (Brechwald and Prinstein 2011). Recent studies have begun to address this
limitation and offer evidence of peer influence on a broader set of outcomes, including emotions
(van Workum et al 2013), culture (Lewis and Kaufman 2018), and, most important for our
purposes, identity (Kornienko et al., 2016; Rivas-Drake, et al., 2017).
Combined, this literature leads us to expect that over time we should also see adolescents
becoming increasingly similar to their friends in the domain of religion. This could occur
through selection, peer influence processes, or both. Recent developments in the statistical
modeling of network data (e.g., Snijders 2011; Snijders et al., 2010; Steglich et al., 2010) allow
researchers to empirically disentangle the relative importance of influence versus selection.
Religion scholars have applied these models to adolescents’ religion (Cheadle and Schwadel
2012; Cook et al., 2017), finding evidence to support selection and influence. In light of these
results, it is worth reconsidering how religiosity has been conceptualized in these studies and
how well its measurement aligns with contemporary theorizing of adolescent religion.
Adolescents' Religious Mosaics
Before modeling network selection and influence, it is important to conceptualize and measure
religion in a way that best reflects recent literature on adolescent religion. Previous network
scholarship demonstrates that measurement choices can substantially alter the capacity to
7

identify and distinguish selection from influence effects. For example, in testing selection,
Wimmer and Lewis (2011) demonstrate how homophily on race is better explained by using
more precise measures of ethnicity versus broad racial categorizations. More pertinent here,
studies of religion have found different selection and influence processes in operation depending
upon whether attitudinal, behavioral or identity aspects of religion were measured (Cheadle and
Schwadel 2012). While different variables may in fact exhibit different selection and influence
patterns, recent scholarship on adolescents’ lived religious experiences suggest such variableoriented approaches may not accurately capture the way religion is perceived and practiced. We
therefore draw on Pearce and colleagues’ application of these ideas in the concept of religious
“mosaics” to reframe how adolescent religiosity should be incorporated into studies of religious
selection and influence processes.
A growing body of literature advocates for a reconceptualization of religiosity away from
variable-oriented notions, which have traditionally sought to succinctly capture the salient
dimensions of people’s religion with a single variable (or some limited set of variables). The
weakness of such “variable centered” approaches, as documented in qualitative work focusing on
“lived” or “everyday” religion, is that it doesn’t reflect the ways that people experience and enact
their religious identities to construct their own religious experience. As an alternative, the “lived
religion” approach advocates that a more “person-centered” conceptualization of religion be used
in research designs (Ammerman 2007; McGuire 2008). That is, for researchers to accurately
capture religion as it is actually experienced requires describing the unique combinations of
attitudes, behaviors, and identities in the way that individuals piece them together individually.
In turn, once such profiles can be identified, the influence of religion on other aspects of one’s

8

life should be examined in relation to those combinations, rather than focusing on particular
religious variables (Pearce et al., 2013).
Survey researchers have subsequently attempted to leverage these theoretical insights
about combinatorial conceptualizations of individuals’ religious experiences in ways that scale
up for application to larger, more representative samples (Pearce and Denton 2011; Pearce et al.,
2013). Descriptively, Pearce and colleagues use Latent Class Analysis to inductively estimate
mosaics of religious profiles. Mosaics reflect the patchwork way that individuals combine varied
religious dimensions into observable clusters. This work has then gone on to demonstrate how
these mosaics provide additional leverage for explaining a range of behavioral outcomes (e.g.,
delinquency and academic performance), above and beyond the explanatory power available
from the individual variables from which the mosaics were constructed (Pearce and Denton
2011). Here, we extend this approach further, by estimating profiles and examining their role in
adolescent friendship dynamics.
Selection & Influence of Religious Mosaics
Our conceptualization of religious identity follows the religious mosaic approach described
above. This approach moves beyond focusing on behaviors or attitudes singularly, given we have
little reason to expect that individual variables form the basis on which peer influence and
homophilous selection processes actually operate. In addition to the consistency with the
conceptualization of religious mosaics, this shift to considering multiple measures in
combination is also consistent with recent developments in network studies of selection and
influence as well. These alterations have incorporated the recognition that behaviors and other
attributes may operate in conjunction (Brechwald and Prinstein 2011: 168).
For example, Strang and Soule argue that diffusion actually entails individuals
"translat[ing] concrete practices into abstractions for export and then unpack [t]he abstraction
9

into a (suitably modified) concrete practice upon arrival” (1998:277). In other words, this
perspective suggests that people don’t directly mimic the behaviors of their peers, even when
influenced by them. Instead, an abstraction actually diffuses, and is interpreted—by the person
being influenced—at both the sending and receiving ends. This perspective is consistent with
making religious mosaics the focus of investigating the way adolescents’ religiosity and peer
network processes are interrelated. To illustrate, it may be that while one adolescent’s frequent
religious attendance may not directly influence the attendance of their peers, by signaling an
identity of “highly religious” it may increase their peers’ reported religious salience (or other
dimensions). Lewis and Kaufman (2018) make similar claims about how homophilous selection
operates not on individual traits, but on clusters of cultural tastes.
In sum, religious mosaics are more consistent with recent developments in
conceptualizing and measuring religion, and therefore the estimation of network selection and
influence processes should incorporate this approach into how they are modeled, rather than only
testing them with variable-centered approaches. Thus, while prior studies of religiosity and
network dynamics have separately examined variables such as denominational affiliation,
importance of religion, service attendance, and prayer frequency, among others (Cheadle and
Schwadel 2012; Cook et al. 2017), a mosaic-based conceptualization of adolescents’ religion is
readily adaptable into re-theorized accounts of how selection and influence operates in dynamic
peer networks. We therefore assert that mosaics represent a more theoretically-grounded means
to capture adolescent religious experience and therefore are the focus when evaluating network
selection and influence processes. Thus, our primary research question is whether religious
mosaics provide a basis for adolescents' friend selection and peer influence processes.

10

Data
We use data from the Wave I in-home, and Wave II in-home surveys from the National
Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health ("Add Health", Bearman, Jones and Udry 1997). Add
Health contains information on complete networks for more than 100 schools at 1 wave, and 16
schools at 3 waves. Here, we focus on the two largest “saturated” schools with longitudinal
complete network data. 1 These schools are of sufficient size to model friendship dynamics, while
also reliably estimating school-specific religious profiles. The schools we use (frequently
referred to by the pseudonyms “Jefferson” and “Sunshine” High School) represent two different
social contexts. “Jefferson” is a mostly white school in the Midwest and “Sunshine” is a much
larger, ethnically diverse school in the West; Table 1 provides descriptive overviews for each of
these schools on key study and contextual variables.2 These schools have become common for
benchmarking social network change estimation (Green et al. 2013; Haas and Schaefer 2014), in
part because they represent such different contexts.
[Insert Table 1 about here]
Measures
We construct religious profiles from measures in Add Health that (a) are commonly available
across a variety of national surveys, and (b) capture the domains that provide the theoretical basis
for religious mosaics as developed by Pearce and colleagues. This results in our profiles being
constructed from three variables in Add Health—frequency of religious attendance (i.e.,

1

Cheadle and Schwadel (2012) used network models with data from seven small Add Health schools to examine
how readily adolescents influence and homophilously select friends separately for seven variables of religious
identity (operationalized as affiliation, religious nones, and "born again" status), participation (prayer, service, and
youth group attendance), and salience. They found evidence for selection and influence on each of these variables
within their sample.
2

Because of the needs of the SAB models described below, seniors at Wave I are excluded from our analyses since
they are not observed at Wave II; this is best practice according to Ripley et al (2013). The model imputes data for
anyone else missing from our wave II (i.e., those lost through attrition).

11

behavior),3 religious salience (i.e., attitude), asked, “How important is religion to you?” (with
Likert-scale response categories), and prayer frequency; descriptive statistics for these variables
are included from Wave 1 for each school in Table 1. Given that the aim for including these
indicators in our analysis is to mimic the theoretical motivation of Pearce and colleagues’
approach as closely as is possible with Add Health data, we label it the “replicate” strategy. In
addition to this replicate approach, we use two alternative specifications to fit religious mosaics
(described below).
We construct friendship networks from the nominations respondents provided for up to
five male and five female friends within the school at each wave (Bearman et al., 1997). This
contrasts with many studies that use proxy reports of alter behavior, which tend to suffer from
self-projection bias (Vaisey and Lizardo 2010). In addition to the study’s focal variables, we
include a standard set of self-reported controls: gender (male is the reference category), age (in
years at wave 1), race (non-Hispanic white=reference, non-Hispanic black, Hispanic, Asian,
other),4 GPA, and parent’s highest level of completed education. Jefferson is a smaller school,
where adolescents nominated more friends than in the larger Sunshine, resulting in networks of
much higher density. Over time, students in each school each nominated fewer friends (a
common observation in longitudinal network studies; adams 2019). Transitivity did not change
appreciably between waves, while Sunshine students seem to have reduced their nominations to
exclude less-close ties--as indicated by the increase in the reciprocity rate there across waves.
The Jaccard index shows that these data are sufficiently stable for estimation with an SABM.
[Insert Table 2 about here]

3

As with the measure used here, this is commonly limited only to attendance at weekend services.

4

Race is only included in models for “Sunshine HS” because “Jefferson HS” is highly racially homogenous (see
Table 1).

12

Methods
We follow (Pearce et al., 2013) by modeling religious mosaics with Latent Class Analysis (LCA)
to identify the profiles of combinations observed across the three primary religious variables
described above. LCA is a person-centered approach to identifying subgroups in a population
who combine behaviors/attributes in common ways. LCA is particularly appropriate here in that
it allows for multiple dimensions of variation across the religious indicators included. This stands
in contrast to approaches that would treat each variable individually (for the reasons described
above), or an index that would require assuming uniformity in how individuals combine these
indicators (e.g., that increases/decreases in one component variable are equally likely or
correlated with increases/decreases in another). This profile approach is consistent with the
theoretical bases underpinning the search for religious mosaics (Pearce et al., 2013; Pearce and
Denton 2011).
The basic form of the LCA model is:
𝑃 (𝑌𝑖 = 𝑦 | 𝑋𝑖 = 𝑥) = ∑

𝑛𝑐
𝑙=1

𝑟𝑀
γl ∏𝑀
𝑚=1 ∏𝑘=1 𝜌

𝐼 (𝑦𝑚 = 𝑘)
𝑚𝑘 | 𝑙

Equation 1.

which estimates the probabilistic class membership for each individual i, based on ρ (the
probability of item response conditional on latent class) and γ (the probabilities of class
membership). The first summation is over the number of classes, nc. The first product is across
question items M (here 3) and rm, the number of possible responses for each item (5 our
attendance and importance measures, and 6 for the prayer measure). That is, class membership is
conditional on the probability of combining values across each included indicator in similar
ways.

13

We use standard Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and Bayesian Information Criterion
(BIC) criteria to identify the best fitting number of classes (Linzer and Lewis 2011; McCutcheon
1987; Vermut and Magidson 2002). It is increasingly common to fold the identification of LCA
classes and estimation of those classes association with outcome variables into a single modelfitting approach, rather than a “classify-analyze” approach that splits these into two separate
modeling steps (Bray et al 2015). However, we use the classify-analyze approach here for two
reasons. First, no modeling approach akin to the stochastic actor-based model for network
dynamics that we employ (described below) is available to combine the LCA fitting into a single
model. Second, the classify-analyze approach is an acceptable procedure when class probabilities
are high (e.g., >.80) (Jung and Wickrama 2008). 5 We use this classify-analyze approach to assign
individuals to the class with the largest posterior probability, Pr(Ci= k|Yi), and then estimate
network models using this nominal variable. Note especially that each indicator (M) can vary
independently from the others, in a way consistent with the person-centered multidimensionality
of religion as conceptualized by the mosaic approach. In practice, this allows for an exploratory
analysis of the myriad possible combinations between these variables’ response categories,
reducing the sets in the output classes to correspond only with the prevalent combinations
observed within the population.
We estimate a series of nested LCA solutions using the poLCA package in R (Linzer and
Lewis, 2014). We use a variety of model fit indices to determine which model best replicates the
data (i.e., G2 likelihood ratio, AIC and BIC), which aligns with Pearce and colleagues’ method.

5

The recommended strategy for including covariates in mixture models is to include covariates directly in the
model, or in cases where this is not appropriate (e.g., the covariates produce substantial model instability), to use the
class probabilities in subsequent models (Jung and Wickrama 2008). We were unable to estimate both the LCA and
the subsequent models simultaneously, therefore, we estimated a parallel series of models using the class
probabilities, but were unable to achieve convergence. We proceeded using the most likely class membership in
subsequent models.

14

Our model uses the “replicate” set of variables described above: religious importance, religious
attendance, and prayer frequency. With these variables, we estimate LCA solutions for two
through six class solutions to empirically identify best-fitting class solutions. We estimate each
LCA model separately at Wave I and Wave II for each school.
Alternate LCA Specifications
In addition to the replicate strategy described above, we also fit two alternative specifications for
the LCA-model estimation of religious profiles. The first alternative replaces the measure of
prayer frequency with a measure that asks individuals to report on their denominational
affiliation (“What religion are you?”). 6 This variable—and the alternative specification using it—
are important for three reasons. First, for studies not focused on religion, it is among the most
common questions asked, and therefore among the most widely available variables on religion in
social science research. Social scientific studies of religion frequently focus on measuring some
combination of three dimensions: religious identity, behavior, and attitudes (Cornwall et al.
1986; Smith and Denton 2005). Furthermore, in practice these dimensions have most often been
operationalized respectively with single variables: religious affiliation (i.e., denomination type),
frequency of religious attendance (e.g., at weekly services), and self-identified importance (e.g.,
by asking how important one’s religion is when making daily or important decisions – on a
Likert scale). Only the first of these differs from the replicate approach described above. Despite
some critiques of this variable-centered approach to measuring religion (Hadaway, Marler and
Chaves 1993; 1998; Steensland et al. 2000), 7 the ubiquity of this approach to conceptualizing key

6

We recode the denomination variable into the “religious tradition” (reltrad) summary categories that have become
common practice in the religion literature (Steensland et al. 2000). We also fit the profile results using the raw
denomination variable, and found similar results to those produced with reltrad. Given the lack of difference, we
opted to follow the literature standard for this measure.
7

The lived religion approach described above was developed in part as a means to overcome some of these very
critiques.

15

measures of religion has led researchers to frequently incorporate measures reflecting these
dimensions into a wide range of surveys, even when religion is not the project’s focus. 8 As such,
this specification addresses how readily this approach might be adaptable into other survey data
where religion captures these more common dimensions.
Second, by substituting religious affiliation for prayer frequency, the combination of
variables used to construct religious profiles brings the included variables more directly in line
with the three dimensions of religion most commonly identified as important (Cornwall et al.,
1987); religious affiliation aligns with the notion of religious "identity" not represented in any of
the other variables described above. Drawing on these motivations, we label this first alternative
LCA specification as the "canonical" approach. Specifically, this variable set adds religious
affiliation to variables of service attendance and reported religious salience. We follow all other
steps in the analytic approach exactly as described above, for this canonical LCA profile
specification. The canonical profiles provide a comparison to the replicate approach allowing us
to ask how readily religious mosaic profiles are estimable from limited religious information,
particularly the variables most commonly available in studies not focused on religion.
Comparing the network results across these two strategies also addresses how similarly the
approach developed here could be expected to operate similarly in other research where only one
or the other combination of variables are possible.
The third importance of the religious affiliation variable is that, unfortunately, Add
Health employed a skip pattern wherein anyone who reported no religious affiliation was not
subsequently asked the rest of the religious questions. This constrains our ability to capture as

8

In addition to the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health that is our focus, similar variables are
available in the National Survey of Family Growth, National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, and the Health and
Retirement Survey, and numerous others.

16

full a range of profiles as would be available from more complete data. We discuss the
implications of this limitation in the Results section when comparing our LCA classes to those of
Pearce and colleagues. Moreover, because of this skip pattern, we knew in advance that we
would not be able to fully replicate the class solutions identified by Pearce and colleagues. That
is, while Pearce and colleagues find five-class solutions, one of theirs was not identifiable with
Add Health data.9 As such, to draw—somewhat a priori—on their findings (while above we
follow their methods), we also extract the 4-class solution using the “replicate” variables that
conceptually align with Pearce and colleagues.10 We label this second alternative specification
as the Rep4 (4-class replicate LCA solution).
Fitting the LCA Solutions in a Stochastic Actor-Based Model
Once class assignments have been made, we use these to examine religion-friendship dynamics.
We use a stochastic actor-based model (SABM), with religious selection and influence on latent
class membership as the key parameters of interest. An SABM allows for the simultaneous
modeling of changes in network and attribute data. These models can address the central aim
here—separating peer influence from homophilous selection, while also properly accounting for
the interdependence between network observations (which would not be possible with e.g.,
logistic regression), and controlling for endogenous network processes (e.g., tendencies towards
reciprocity and triadic closure, described in more detail below). The SABM involves
maximization over two separate functions representing network selection and behavior change

9

The “Avoider” class includes individuals who do not strongly identify with (a single) religious tradition, but
nonetheless are not irreligious (Pearce and Denton 2011; Pearce et al., 2013). Given that unaffiliated individuals
were not asked the other religion questions in Add Health, this class is unidentifiable in our data. However, all four
of the other classes could potentially be identified from the Add Health variables.
10

This particular solution differs from the procedure described above in that we ignore the fit statistics for
determining the optimal number of classes identified in the data. Instead we force a four-class solution to see if the
four classes that would have been identified correspond to the set from Pearce et al.’s findings that are available to
us, given the limitations available in these data.

17

(i.e. religious measures). First, the network function estimates effects that shape the likelihood of
tie presence or absence, and takes the form:
𝑓𝑖 (𝛽, 𝑥) = ∑𝑘 𝛽𝑘 𝑠𝑘𝑖 (𝑥) + 𝜀(𝑥, 𝑧, 𝑡, 𝑗)

Equation 2.

where fi(β,x) is the value of the network function for actor (i) with respect to all potential alters
(j), given: the current set of parameter estimates (β), and state of the network (x), for k effects,
represented as ski, which may be based on the network (x) and individual attributes (z). In
addition, the model incorporates some random disturbance (ε) associated with each of x, z, t, and
j. The key effect of interest in the network function here is homophily on religion. Homophily
effects estimate how likely individuals are to nominate someone who is more similar on
religiosity versus someone who is more dissimilar. For the categorical measures (e.g., LCA
class) we use the same effect, which codes dyads as 1 if their scores match, and 0 otherwise. For
the continuous indicators (prayer, attendance, and importance) we use the similarity effect,
which is a transformation of the absolute value between scores for two dyad members. This
effect ranges from 0 (greatest dissimilarity) to 1 (identical scores) across dyads. For the
continuous measures, we also included related effects for how religiosity affects the tendency to
send (ego effects) and receive (alter effects) ties.
Several other effects were included in the model to control for selection based on other
individual attributes (i.e., sex, grade, SES), dyadic attributes (extracurricular activity and course
overlaps), and network processes. Important network processes to include as controls in these
models are reciprocity (the tendency for individuals to send ties to those who they currently
receive ties from), transitivity (the tendency for individuals who share a friend in common to
have an elevated chance of themselves becoming friends), and popularity effects (the “Matthew
effect” of disproportionately connecting to those already having higher numbers of friends). A

18

final set of controls capture the “foci” of opportunities for friendship formation described above-those indicating which adolescents participated in the same extracurricular activities and courses
(Schaefer et al., 2011). In combination, these effects represent how likely i is to select j (i.e., add
a new tie to j or maintain an existing tie to j).
Second, the behavior objective function takes a similar form:
𝑧
(𝑥, 𝑧) + 𝜀(𝑥, 𝑧, 𝑡, 𝛿)
𝑓𝑖𝑧 (𝛽, 𝑥, 𝑧) = ∑𝑘 𝛽𝑘𝑧 𝑠𝑘𝑖

Equation 3.

where fiz (𝛽, x, z) is the value of the behavioral objective function for actor (i) for behavior (z),
and all other elements are as in Equation 2, with the exception of δ which is the error associated
with behavior change.11 The key effect here is peer influence on religion, which captures
whether friends are more likely to become (or remain) more religiously similar over time than
adolescents who are not friends. Additional effects in these models controlled for the effects of
race, sex, age, SES, parent’s religiosity, and two-parent family on level of religion.
Estimating the peer influence effect in the behavior function requires a different
specification for continuous versus categorical religion measures. For continuous religion
measures, we use the behavior function shown in Equation 3 and measured peer influence with
the total similarity effect. Total similarity was calculated as the sum of the absolute differences
between ego’s score and the scores of the friends nominated by ego. The sum was reverse-coded
and centered based on the average level of similarity across all dyads (Ripley et al. 2013).
For categorical religion profiles that result from LCA, we specify religious classes in the
behavior function using a two-mode network (Snijders, Lomi and Torló 2013). In the two-mode
representation adolescents have a score for each class (or category of affiliation), with a “1”

11

We should note that the language of “behavior function” is that of the general SABM approach. Here, we are not
modeling a “behavior” but a cluster of religious indicators. We maintain the language of “behavior” here in the
methods section merely for consistency with the SABM literature.

19

coded for the class they were assigned to, and a “0” coded for all other classes. The key predictor
in this part of the function is the number of friends who belong to each category or class of
religion. Thus, the likelihood of choosing each category of the religious profiles is determined by
the number of friends who made that same choice. We controlled for how youths’
sociodemographic characteristics affected their religious choice by including interactions
between dummy variables representing classes and each sociodemographic control variable. We
also included dummy variables for all classes except one in order to control for the overall
probability of belonging to each class.
In addition to the effects described above, models also include a series of standard
network structural controls: reciprocity, transitivity, an interaction between reciprocity and
transitivity, 3-cycles (non-hierarchical triad closure), actors at distance-2 (an indicator of the lack
of triad closure), indegree – popularity (how number of incoming ties affects the likelihood of
receiving future ties), outdegree – popularity (how number of outgoing ties affects the likelihood
of receiving future ties), and indegree – activity (how number of incoming ties affect the
likelihood of sending future ties. These latter three measures were transformed using a squareroot function to give greater weight to differences at lower levels of degree.
Alternate SABM Specifications
While our focus is on the SAB models that allow us to estimate mosaic-based religious
selection/influence, we also estimate a series of preliminary models examining the same patterns
for each of the individual variables with which the LCA profiles are constructed. These allow us
to (1) be sure our models are properly calibrated to reproduce similar results on this set of
variables in previous work (Cheadle and Schwadel 2012; Cook et al., 2017), and to show where
their results diverge from those in our proposed approach. Those preliminary models include: (1)
four separate SABM specifications, one for each of the individual variables used across the
20

replicate and canonical LCA estimations, and (2) a single composite model including all four
variables into a single model. In addition to these preliminary models and the SABM of primary
interest—using the best fitting LCA solution from the replicate class variable—we also specify
SABMs for each of the alternate LCA specifications described above (the canonical variable set
and the 4-class solution with the replicate variable set).
Results
Identifying Latent Classes of Religiosity Among Adolescents
We estimated a total of four separate LCA models (two schools, by two waves of data) for the
replicate and each alternative specification. All model fit statistics are shown in Table 3. When
using the replicate variables, in each school, across both wayves, the three-class solution had the
lowest BIC (Nagin 2005). 12 Thus, we examined the class probabilities to determine whether the
class probabilities were high enough to proceed using the classify-analyze approach for these
three classes. All class probabilities were > .80 for the three class solutions, but fell below this
cut-off when adding additional classes. Therefore, we chose the three-class solution to interpret
as the model demonstrating best fit to the data. In what follows, we discuss the findings primarily
only as they relate to this three-class replicate LCA solution, and mention the alternate
specifications only where they differ substantially from those.
[Insert Table 3 about here]

Three Classes of Religiosity

12

However, using the replicate variables, it is worth noting that the three-class solution had better fit over the fourclass solution by only a small margin.

21

Table 4 shows the posterior response probabilities statistics for each school, by class solutions,
for each set of variables at Wave 1. 13 Using the replicate set of variables (i.e., attendance,
importance, prayer), the three classes were qualitatively and quantitatively distinct, following a
similar pattern across schools and waves. The smallest class in both schools (i.e., Class 1)
comprised adolescents who were not religious, that is, did not identify with any religious
tradition. As noted above, because of Add Health skip patterns, these individuals were assumed
to not attend religious services, pray, or attribute any importance to religion. The other two
classes were quantitatively distinct. Adolescents in Class 2, the largest class in Sunshine High
School (79.1% of the sample), were highly religious (i.e., attended services and prayed
frequently and rated religiosity as fairly important), whereas adolescents in Class 3, the largest
class in Jefferson High School (54.9% of the sample), were moderately religious (i.e., attended
services and prayed fairly infrequently and rated the importance of religiosity as neutral).
[Insert Table 4 about here]
Using the alternative specification with the “canonical” set of variables (i.e., importance,
attendance, affiliation), the best-fitting model was also a three-class solution. The three classes
included adolescents who: (1) had no religious affiliation, (2) were very religious--about equally
divided across religious affiliation (but, notably more Evangelical Protestants than the third
class), rated religiosity as very important, and attended services frequently, or (3) were
moderately religious (largely Mainline Protestant or Roman Catholic), rated religiosity as fairly
important, but attended services comparatively infrequently.

13

While we estimated LCA solutions separately for Wave 2, the substantive interpretations did not differ
appreciably from those for Wave 1. As such, for clarity we discuss only Wave 1 LCA solutions. Comparable results
for Wave 2 are available from the third author upon request.

22

In the second alternative specifications, we examined the four-class solution using the
replicate variables to determine whether Pearce and colleagues’ classes could be replicated. As
noted above, this was not the best-fitting solution for the “replicate” set of variables, so these
results should only be interpreted in light of how they align with Pearce and colleagues’ findings,
and not as a primary assessment of our research questions here. The four-class solution included
the same not-at-all and highly- religious classes as identified in the three-class solutions. But
how the “moderate” classes differed from those extremes varied across the schools. First, there
was a moderate class identified in each class that was relatively consistent across all indicators.
However, in Jefferson this class reported only slightly higher importance, prayer, and attendance
than the irreligious group (akin to the “Avoider” class identified by Pearce and colleagues). In
Sunshine, the overall level of religiosity is higher than in Jefferson, and this “consistently
moderate” class is much closer to the highly religious class, lagging only slightly behind them
across all three indicators. The fourth class in each school combines reporting religion as
relatively important and relatively frequent prayer, but reports only modest participation in
religious services. This final class, while not exactly matching the distributions, approximates
some characteristics of the “Adapters” class identified by Pearce et al. (2013)—those combining
differing levels of religiosity across indicators. This suggests that while this solution is not the
best fit to Add Health data, the substantive patterns here are suggestive that combinations here,
as in Pearce et al. (2013), are not simply coordinated levels of religiosity that operate in lock-step
across each indicator.
Network Dynamics
Estimating network selection and influence effects assumes the presence of network assortativity
to be explained. Since religious mosaics are categorical, we estimated the observed level of

23

assortativity using the α segregation index (Moody 2001) for each school and wave. 14 The
resulting odds ratios (see bottom row, Table 2) indicate that in each school, at both waves, ties
are significantly more likely to form between two adolescents in the same LCA class compared
to friendships between pairs with different LCA classes.
`

As described above, we ran a series of SAB models to test selection and influence on

religion, while controlling for a range of potential confounding factors. Across models, estimates
of our controls were as expected and consistent with prior studies using these data. For the sake
of brevity, Figure 1 presents only the SAB model estimates for the parameters of selection and
influence on the corresponding religion measures (results with full controls are provided in
Supplementary Tables A1 and A2). Of greatest interest for the present purpose is Model C1,
Panel C of Figure 1. These models correspond to our primary research question—how religious
mosaics exert selection and/or influence effects—as modeled with the best fitting three-class
LCA solution using the replicate set of variables. Panels A and B present the preliminary models
described above for each of the included religion indicators from a model specifying their effects
in separate models (A1-4) and a single composite model (B).
[Insert Figure 1 about here]
Model C1 shows that peer influence operates on replicate-variable derived religious
profiles. For example, in Jefferson HS the influence estimate of 0.26 indicates that for each
additional friend an adolescent has in a particular LCA class, the odds of choosing that class
increase by 30% (exp[0.26]), all else being equal. This effect is stronger in Sunshine HS, with a
139% increase (exp[0.87]) in selecting a specified LCA class from each additional friend the

14

This index provides the properly conditioned form for asking how assortative ties are, given the
general tendency for ties to form (Bojanowski and Corten 2014).
24

adolescent has in that class. Thus, in both schools we see that adolescents are more likely to
adopt an LCA class over time when they have more friends in that class, relative to other classes.
These same models also tested for whether adolescents select friends with the same
religious class assignment as themselves. The results indicate that in neither school was selection
based on common class membership significant. Thus, we have no evidence that adolescents
choose friends with the same religious identity as themselves. Instead, observed assortativity on
religious class can be attributed to interpersonal influence processes, or is accounted for by the
other effects controlled in the model.
SAB models relying on the alternate LCA specifications show similar results. The
canonical three-class solution (Model C2) pattern is the same as Model C1 across both schools.
The four-class solution (Model C3) also shows influence but not selection on class membership;
however, the effect of peer influence in Jefferson High School did not reach the conventional
level of significance (two-tailed p=.07). In combination, the results for the class profile models
suggest that adolescents are increasingly likely to adopt the latent religious class memberships of
their friends over time, but do not select friends based on those classes.
Discussion and Conclusions
Our aim was to determine whether religious mosaics provide a basis for peer influence and/or
homophilous friend selection. To address this question we first estimate LCA solutions using the
“replicate” variables that most closely resemble the behavioral orientation employed by Pearce et
al (2013). This model identified three classes, which roughly correspond to adolescents with no,
high, and moderate levels of religion. These results suggest it is worthwhile for survey
researchers to continue exploring additional empirical and theoretically oriented strategies for
incorporating these notions of religious mosaics into future research. Even in the face of limited

25

religious measures, there may be added value to exploring the mosaic conceptualization of
religion.
With these religious profiles in hand, we found evidence that religious mosaics are
intertwined with adolescents’ friendship processes. In particular, we found evidence for peer
influence effects, but not selection, related to religious mosaics.15 Over time, adolescents tended
to become more like their friends on the ways their religious attributes clustered together. Thus,
we found evidence of the expected pattern of peer influence on religious mosaics. The absence of
selection effects here could suggest that religious selection genuinely does not operate among
adolescents, works in other ways (e.g., only on individual variables; see Panels A/B of Figure 1),
or could reflect the imperfect measures (especially due to the skip patterns) available in Add
Health. In the remainder of the paper, we discuss the implications of these findings for future
studies of adolescent religion and peer networks.
For conceptualizing and measuring religion, our LCA results suggest that it is possible to
incorporate the theoretical aims that correspond with the “lived religion” orientation into studies
even where religion isn’t the focus and only limited information on religion is available. While
Pearce et al. (2013) demonstrate the robustness of their approach when using a portion of the
variables available in NSYR, our approach provides additional support that mosaics are broadly
usable for conceptualizing and modeling adolescent religion. Perhaps future work can resolve
some of the misalignment between our identified classes and those from the NSYR (e.g., how
much these differences were simply driven by Add Health’s unfortunate skip pattern).
Additionally, it is important to consider whether mosaics change as populations age, and how the

15

Influence mechanisms have recently been shown to vary considerably as well. For example, Haas and Schaefer
(2014) found influence processes to be stronger for smoking initiation than for smoking cessation. Moreover, both
selection and influence effects can vary over time (de la Haye et al. 2013; Schaefer et al. 2010). While such
differentiations are theoretically and empirically possible here, we leave that to future extensions of our work.

26

peer-based religious effects identified here (i.e., influence but not selection on mosaics) may shift
across stages of the life course.
While not our focus here, the empirical cases we drew on also suggest future research
should investigate whether and how the modeled effects differ across contexts. We observed
large differences in the distribution of classes between the two schools examined—the highly
religious class was by far the largest in Sunshine HS, while the more moderately religious class
was the majority in Jefferson HS. Despite this discrepancy, the composition of classes differed
only modestly between the schools. Namely, the four-class solution identified a group of
religious “Adapters” in each school who attended services infrequently and who indicated
religion was either fairly important (Sunshine High School) or less important (Jefferson High
School). Perhaps most striking is that religious profiles showed consistent network patterns
across schools, variables used, and number of classes identified—a consistent pattern of religious
peer influence but not religion-based friend selection. There is accumulating evidence in
religious (Ammerman 1997) and network (adams and Schaefer 2016) scholarship suggesting that
an important avenue for future research is to more carefully consider how such contextual
differences may alter what we know from studies of single cases, or models that assume similar
patterns across entire populations.
One such possibility for network scholarship would be to consider whether influence
and/or selection processes may differ across groups. For example, in highly religious schools
(like Sunshine), the salience of religion for selection may be stronger for the less religious (who
are the numeric minority), or vice versa in less religious schools. Such a result may explain the
lack of selection effects observed here—if, in effect a strong religious selection process among
the highly religious class and a true absence of effect among the irreligious canceled each other

27

out. Heterogenous effects, either by group or context, are not frequently considered in networks
research. For one exception, Goodreau et al (2009) found that racial friendship homophily was
stronger for those groups that were numeric minorities within their schools. Unfortunately,
estimating such contextual differences likely requires many more schools than are currently
available in Add Health, but would be a fruitful avenue for future research.
In summary, religion is a multidimensional construct that cannot simply be reduced to
individual and/or variable level assessment. People combine various aspects of religion into
unique constellations, which are shaped by others in their contexts. We demonstrated how to
employ recent methodological advances in the modeling of categorical variables as two-mode
networks (Snijders et al 2013) to investigate how peers are involved in developing these norms
(e.g., potentially through influence and selection). We found suggestive empirical evidence for
how these play out in two different school contexts. We encourage future research to further
elaborate whether and how adolescents’ religious mosaics shape and are shaped by their
friendship networks.

28

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics for Sample School Participants
Jefferson HS Sunshine HS
N=502
N=891
Demographics
Gender (% female)
Race (%)
White
African American
Hispanic
Asian American
Other
Age in Years
Grade Level
Religion
Service Attendance
(1-5)
Importance (1-5)
Prayer (1-6)
Religious Tradition
(%)
Evangelical
Protestant
Mainline
Protestant
Black Protestant
Roman Catholic
Other
None

47.2

50.3

94.4
0
0.8
0.6
4.2
15.4 (0.99)
9.9 (0.78)

3.8
21.6
39.2
23.9
6.1
15.7 (0.81)
10.5 (0.50)

3.2 (1.44)

4.0 (1.19)

3.5 (1.35)
3.9 (1.84)

4.3 (0.98)
5.1 (1.42)

16.7

9.2

32.2

16.8

0
29.6
3.6
17.9

16.1
47.1
5.8
5.1

NOTE: Unless otherwise noted, figures presented are means and (standard deviations).

29

Table 2. Network Descriptive Statistics

# of ties
Density
Outdegree mean (sd)
Jaccard
Reciprocity
Transitivity
LCA-Class Assortativity (OR)

Jefferson HS
Wave I
Wave II

Sunshine HS
Wave I
Wave II

1721
1345
0.007
0.006
3.43 (2.21)
2.67 (2.18)
0.269
0.446
0.457
0.207
0.214
1.32***
1.25***

1381
1014
0.002
0.002
1.55 (1.66)
1.14 (1.51)
0.240
0.354
0.411
0.232
0.263
1.16***
1.20***

*** p<0.001
NOTE: Numbers are for the specified network, except outdegree (which are the mean and standard
deviation across individuals in the network), and assortativity (Odds-ratio).

30

Table 3. Fit Statistics for LCA Models
Wave 1
G2
Replicate Variablesa
Two Classes
423.95
Three Classes
131.26
Four Classes
47.27
Five Classes
26.31
Six Classes
12.96
Canonical Variables b
Two Classes
218.40
Three Classes
85.05
Four Classes
57.98
Five Classes
44.03
Six Classes
35.78
Replicate Variablesa
Two Classes
541.36
Three Classes
125.05
Four Classes
56.33
Five Classes
33.99
Six Classes
21.23
Canonical Variablesb
Two Classes
297.52
Three Classes
104.05
Four Classes
54.30
Five Classes
37.58
Six Classes
22.36

Wave 2
Range of
Avg. Class
G2
Probabilities
Jefferson High School

BIC

AIC

Range of
Avg. Class
Probabilities

3731.59
3563.29
3585.56
3637.52
3723.78

3619.24
3392.68
3356.69
3350.40
3378.40

1.00 – 1.00
.42 – 1.00
.56 – 1.00
.46 – 1.00
.38 – 1.00

1.00 – 1.00
180.41
.81 – 1.00
80.76
.63 – 1.00
45.50
.57 – 1.00
29.66
.45 – 1.00
19.69
Sunshine High School

3487.77
3474.37
3525.37
3595.79
3672.07

3375.42
3303.76
3296.50
3308.67
3326.69

1.00 – 1.00
.73 – 1.00
.55 – 1.00
.54 – 1.00
.44 – 1.00

8200.93
7812.61
7771.89
7777.55
7792.79

1.00 – 1.00
.85 – 1.00
.71 – 1.00
.62 – 1.00
.56 – 1.00

468.86
143.65
57.46
44.21
25.09

5919.74
5688.69
5696.68
5777.59
5852.64

5792.13
5494.92
5436.74
5451.48
5460.37

.88 – .97
.79 – 1.00
.61 – 1.00
.56 – 1.00
.44 – 1.00

8585.12
8419.64
8397.90
8409.18
8421.95

1.00 – 1.00
.80 – 1.00
.62 – 1.00
.49 – 1.00
.41 – 1.00

299.24
120.43
68.16
51.89
37.93

6179.74
6097.00
6138.95
6216.88
6297.12

6052.07
5903.15
5878.88
5890.61
5904.64

1.00 – 1.00
.77 – 1.00
.64 – 1.00
.61 – 1.00
.50 – 1.00

BIC

AIC

4693.47
4494.74
4502.42
4559.36
4635.82

4568.48
4303.79
4247.80
4254.84
4269.50

1.00 – 1.00
.84 – 1.00
.69 – 1.00
.55 – 1.00
.42 – 1.00

4388.20
4344.65
4407.36
4483.20
4564.74

4269.04
4163.69
4164.62
4178.67
4198.42

8339.11
8022.45
8053.38
8130.69
8217.59
8723.31
8629.48
8679.39
8762.32
8846.75

397.70
143.14
79.15
44.86
44.85

NOTE. Bolded indicates best-fitting model. G2 = Likelihood ratio test statistic. BIC = Bayesian
Information Criterion. AIC = Akaike Information Criterion.

a

“Replicate Variables” indicates the solutions using variables consistent with the conceptual model employed by
Pearce and colleagues—i.e., limited to behavioral and attitudinal variables. Here that includes religious importance,
religious attendance and prayer frequency.
b

“Canonical Variables” replaces prayer frequency in the “replicate” set with religious affiliation to match the
limited set of variables most often available in surveys not primarily concerned with religion.

31

Table 3. Posterior Response Probabilities (rhos) for LCA Class Solutions at Wave 1
Affiliation (%)a
Attendance
M(SD)b
NR
EP
MP
BP
RC
OT
Jefferson High School (N=502)
Total
17.91 16.70 32.19 0.00 29.58 3.62
3.20(1.44)
3-Class LCA, Replicate Variables e
I
1.00(0.00)
II
4.55(0.73)
III
2.92(0.76)
3-Class LCA, Canonical Variables f
I
100.0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00 0.00
1.00(0.00)
II
0.00 32.26 32.90
0.00 31.61 3.23
4.83(0.37)
III
0.00 13.04 43.08
0.00 38.74 5.14
2.98(0.76)
4-Class LCA, Replicate Variablese
I
1.00(0.00)
II
4.66(0.77)
III
2.70(0.73)
IV
3.27(0.85)
Sunshine High School (N=891)
Total
5.10
9.17 16.76 16.08 47.11 5.78
4.02(1.19)
3-Class LCA, Replicate Variablesa
I
1.00(0.00)
II
4.51(0.78)
III
3.07(0.81)
3-Class LCA, Canonical Variablesc
I
100.0
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00 0.00
1.00(0.00)
II
0.00 10.57 17.79 18.62 46.48 6.54
4.57(0.78)
III
0.00
7.44 17.36 12.81 57.44 4.95
3.23(0.79)
4-Class LCA, Replicate Variablese
I
1.00(0.00)
II
4.61(0.74)
III
3.58(0.61)
IV
2.41(0.66)
a

Importance
M(SD)a

Prayer
M(SD)c

3.46(1.35)

3.94(1.85)

1.00(0.00)
4.52(0.50)
3.54(0.70)

1.00(0.00)
5.46(0.64)
3.81(1.36)

1.00(0.00)
4.54(0.50)
3.66(0.74)

15.32
29.72
54.95
15.32
24.97
59.71

1.00(0.00)
4.65(0.48)
2.80(0.72)
3.89(0.38)

1.00(0.00)
5.58(0.53)
2.38(0.70)
4.54(1.06)

4.32(0.98)

5.05(1.42)

1.00(0.00)
4.69(0.47)
3.82(0.63)

1.00(0.00)
5.67(0.65)
3.92(1.21)

1.00(0.00)
4.78(0.41)
3.79(0.49)
1.00(0.00)
4.78(0.42)
4.01(0.29)
3.55(0.86)

% of
Sampled

15.32
23.91
9.91
50.86

3.59
79.14
17.27
3.59
74.36
22.06

1.00(0.00)
5.66(0.65)
4.78(1.11)
3.52(1.52)

3.59
72.38
17.69
6.34

NR = no religious affiliation. EP = Evangelical Protestant. MP = Mainline Protestant. BP = Black Protestant. RC = Roman Catholic. OT = Other.
Range = 1-5
c
Range = 1-6
d
Sample percentages based on predicted class membership by modal posterior probability.
e
“Replicate Variables” indicates the solutions using variables consistent with the conceptual model employed by Pearce and colleagues—i.e., limited to
behavioral and attitudinal variables. Here that includes religious importance, religious attendance and prayer frequency.
f
“Canonical Variables” replaces prayer frequency in the “replicate” set with religious affiliation to match the limited set of variables most often available in
surveys not primarily concerned with religion.
b

Figure 1. Religious Selection & Influence Parameters from Stochastic Actor Based Models

NOTE: The letters indicate SAB model estimates for friend selection (S) and peer influence (I)
effects respectively for the specified religion measures, with error bars providing the 95% confidence
intervals. Models in Panel A were estimated for each individual measure separately. The model in
Panel B included all 4 religion indicators in a single estimation. The three models in Panel C were
estimated separately for each latent class specification: 3-class replicate (Rep3), 3-class canonical
(Can3), and 4-class replicate (Rep4).

33

References
adams, jimi. 2019. Gathering Social Network Data. SAGE.
adams, jimi and David R. Schaefer. 2016. “How Initial Prevalence Moderates Network-Based
Smoking Change: Estimating Contextual Effects with Stochastic Actor Based Models."
Journal of Health and Social Behavior 57(1): 22-36.
Ammerman, Nancy T. 1997. Congregation and Community. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University Press.
—. 2007. Everyday Religion: Observing Modern Religious Lives. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Bearman, Peter S., Jo Jones, and J. Richard Udry. 1997. "The National Longitudinal Study of
Adolescent Health: Research Design."
Berger, Christian, and Jan Kornelis Dijkstra. 2013. "Competition, Envy, or Snobbism? How
Popularity and Friendships Shape Antipathy Networks of Adolescents." Journal of
Research on Adolescence 23(3):586-95.
Blau, Peter M. 1977. Inequality and Heterogeneity: A Primitive Theory of Social Structure. New
York: Free Press.
Bojanowski, Michał and Rense Corten. 2014. "Measuring Segregation in Social Networks."
Social Networks 39:14-32.
Bray, Bethany C., Lanza Stephanie T., and Tan Xianming. 2015. “Eliminating Bias in ClassifyAnalyze Approaches for Latent Class Analysis.” Structural Equation Modeling 22(1):1–
11.
Brechwald, Whitney A., and Mitchell J. Prinstein. 2011. "Beyond homophily: A decade of
advances in understanding peer influence processes." Journal of Research on
Adolescence 21: 166-179.
34

Brown, B. Bradford, Heather Von Bank, and Laurence Steinberg. 2008. "Smoke in the Looking
Glass: Effects of Discordance between Self- and Peer Rated Crowd Affiliation on
Adolescent Anxiety, Depression and Self-feelings." Journal of Youth and Adolescence
37:1163-77.
Cheadle, Jacob E., and Philip Schwadel. 2012. "The 'Friendship Dynamics of Religion,' or the
'Religious Dynamics of Friendship'? A Social Network Analysis of Adolescents who
Attend Small Schools." Social Science Research 41:1198-212.
Cook, J. Benjamin, Philip Schwadel, and Jacob E. Cheadle. 2017. “The Origins of Religious
Homophily in a Medium and Large School.” Review of Religious Research 59:65-80.
Cornwall, Marie, Stan L. Albrecht, Perry H. Cunningham, and Brian L. Pitcher. 1986. "The
Dimensions of Religiosity: A Conceptual Model and an Empirical Test." Review of
Religious Research 27(3):226-44.
de la Haye, Kayla, Harold D. Green, David R. Kennedy, Michael Pollard, and Joan S. Tucker.
2013. "Selection and Influence Mechanisms Associated with Marijuana Initiation and
Use in Adolescent Friendship Networks." Journal of Research on Adolescence 23:47486.
de la Haye, Kayla, Garry Robins, Philip Mohr, and Carlene Wilson. 2011. "How Physical
Activity Shapes and is Shaped by, Adolescent Friendships." Social Science and Medicine
73(5):719-28.
Deci, Edward L. and Richard M. Ryan. 2011. “Levels of Analysis, Regnant Causes of Behavior
and Well-Being: The Role of Psychological Needs.” Psychological Inquiry 22: 17-22.
Dijkstra, Jan Kornelis, Scott D. Gest, Siegwart Lindenberg, Rene Veenstra, and Antonius H. N.
Cillessen. 2012. "Testing Three Explanations of the Emergence of Weapon Carrying in

35

Peer Context: The Roles of Aggression, Victimization, and the Social Network." Journal
of Adolescent Health 50(4):371-76.
Ellison, Christopher G., and Jeffrey S. Levin. 1998. "The Religion-Health Connection: Evidence,
Theory, and Future Directions." Health Education & Behavior 25(6):700-20.
Feld, Scott L. 1981. "The Focused Organization of Social Ties." American Journal of Sociology
86:1015-35.
George, Linda K., Christopher G. Ellison, and David B. Larson. 2002. "Explaining the
Relationships Between Religious Involvement and Health." Psychological Inquiry
13(3):190-200.
Goodreau, Steven M., James A. Kitts, and Martina Morris. 2009. "Birds of a Feather or Friend of
a Friend? Using Exponential Random Graph Models to Investigate Adolescent Social
Networks." Demography 46(1):103-25.
Green, Harold D., Mariana Horta, Kayla de la Haye, Joan S. Tucker, David R. Kennedy, and
Michael Pollard. 2013. "Peer Influence and Selection Processes in Adolescent Smoking
Behavior: A Comparative Study." Nicotine & Tobacco Research 15(2):534-41.
Haas, Steven A., and David R. Schaefer. 2014. "With a Little Help from my Friends:
Asymmetrical Social Influence on Adolescent Smoking Initiation and Cessation."
Journal of Health and Social Behavior 55(2):126-43.
Hadaway, C. K., P. L. Marler, and M. Chaves. 1993. "What The Polls Don't Show - A Closer
Look At United-States Church Attendance." American Sociological Review 58(6):74152.

36

Hadaway, C. Kirk, Penny Long Marler, and Mark Chaves. 1998. "Overreporting Church
Attendance in America: Evidence That Demands the Same Verdict." American
Sociological Review 63(1):122-30.
Jung, Tony, and K. A. S. Wickrama. 2008. "An Introduction to Latent Class Growth Analysis
and Growth Mixture Modeling." Social and Personality Psychology Compass 2(1):30217.
Kandel, D. B. 1978. "Homophily, Selection, and Socialization in Adolescent Friendships."
American Journal of Sociology 84:427-36.
Kirke, Deirdre M. 2004. "Chain Reactions in Adolescents' Cigarette, Alcohol and Drug Use:
Similarity Through Peer Influence or the Patterning of Ties in Peer Networks." Social
Networks 26:3-28.
Kornienko, Olga, Carlos E. Santos, and Kim Updegraff. 2014. "Friendship Networks and Ethnic
Identity Development: Contributions from Social Network Analysis." in Studying Ethnic
Identity: Methodological Advances and Considerations for Future Research, edited by
Carlos E. Santos and Adrianna Umaña-Taylor. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Kornienko, Olga, Carlos E. Santos, Carol Lynn Martin, and Kristen L. Granger. 2016. "Peer
influence on gender identity development in adolescence." Developmental psychology
52: 1578-1592.
Kossinets, Gueorgi, and Duncan J. Watts. 2009. "Origins of Homophily in an Evolving Social
Network." American Journal of Sociology 115(2):405-50.
Lehrer, Evelyn L. 1999. "Religion as a Determinant of Educational Attainment: An Economic
Perspective." Social Science Research 28:358-79.

37

Lewis, Kevin and Jason Kaufman. 2018. “The Conversion of Cultural Tastes into Social
Network Ties.” American Journal of Sociology 123(6): 1684-1742.
Linzer, Drew, and Jeffrey Lewis. 2011. "poLCA: An R Package for Polytomous Variable Latent
Class Analysis." Journal of Statistical Software 42(10):1-29.
Marsden, Peter V. 1988. "Homogeneity in Confiding Relations." Social Networks 10:57-76.
McCutcheon, Allen L. 1987. Latent Class Analysis: SAGE.
McGuire, Meredith. 2008. Lived Religion: Faith and Practice in Everyday Life. New York:
Oxford University Press.
McPherson, J. Miller, and Lynn Smith-Lovin. 1987. "Homophily in Voluntary Organizations:
Status Distance and the Composition of Face-to-Face Groups."
McPherson, Miller, Lynn Smith-Lovin, and James M. Cook. 2001. "Birds of a Feather:
Homophily in Social Networks." Annual Review of Sociology 27:415-44.
Mercken, L, Tom A. B. Snijders, Christian E. G. Steglich, E. Vartiainen, and H. de Vries. 2010.
"Dynamics of Adolescent Friendship Networks and Smoking Behavior." Social Networks
32:72-81.
Moody, James. 2001. "Race, school integration, and friendship segregation in America."
American Journal of Sociology 107(3):679-716.
Nagin, Daniel S. 2005. Group-based Modeling of Development over the Life Course. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Paxton, Pamela, and James Moody. 2002. "Structure and Sentiment: Explaining Emotional
Attachment to Group." Social Psychology Quarterly 66:34-47.
Pearce, Lisa D., and Melinda Lundquist Denton. 2011. A Faith of Their Own: Stability and
Change in the Religiosity of America's Adolescents: Oxford University Press.

38

Pearce, Lisa D., Jessica Halliday Hardie, and E. Michael Foster. 2013. "A Person-Centered
Examination of Adolescent Religiosity using Latent Class Analysis." Journal for the
Scientific Study of Religion 52(1):57-79.
Pearce, Lisa D., and Dana L. Haynie. 2004. "Intergenerational Religious Dynamics and
Adolescent Delinquency." Social Forces 82(4):1553-72.
Regnerus, Mark D. 2000. "Shaping schooling success: Religious socialization and educational
outcomes in metropolitan public schools." Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion
39(3):363-70.
Regnerus, Mark D., and J. E. Uecker. 2006. "Finding faith, losing faith: The prevalence and
context of religious transformations during adolescence." Review of Religious Research
47(3):217-37.
Ridgeway, Cecilia L., and Lynn Smith-Lovin. 1999. "The Gender System and Interaction."
Annual Review of Sociology 25:191-216.
Ripley, Ruth M, Tom AB Snijders, Z. Boda, A. Voros, and Paulina Preciado. 2013. "Manual for
RSIENA." University of Oxford: Department of Statistics, Nuffield College.
Rivas-Drake, Deborah, Adriana Umaña-Taylor, David R. Schaefer, and Michael Medina. 2017.
“Ethnic-Racial Identity and Friendships in Early Adolescence.” Child Development. 88:
710-724.
Schaefer, David R., Olga Kornienko, and Andrew M. Fox. 2011. "Misery Does Not Love
Company: Network Selection Mechanisms and Depression Homophily." American
Sociological Review 75(5):764-85.
Schaefer, David R., Sandra D. Simpkins, and Andrea Vest Ettekal. 2018. “Can Extracurricular
Activities Reduce Adolescent Race/Ethnic Friendship Segregation?” In D. Alwin, D.

39

Felmlee, & D. Kreager (Eds.), Social networks and the life course (pp. 315-339). New
York, NY: Springer.
Schaefer, David R., Sandra R. Simpkins, Andrea E. Vest, and Chara D. Price. 2011. "The
Contribution of Extracurricular Activities to Adolescent Friendships: New Insights
through Social Network Analysis." Developmental Psychology 47(4):1141-52.
Sepulvado, Brandon, David Hachen, Michael Penta, and Omar Lizardo. 2015. "Social Affiliation
from Religious Disaffiliation: Evidence of Selective Mixing Among Youth with No
Religious Preference During the Transition to College." Journal for the Scientific Study
of Religion 54(4):833-41.
Smith, Christian, and Melinda Lundquist Denton. 2005. Soul Searching: The Religious and
Spiritual Lives of American Teenagers. New York: Oxford University Press.
Smith, Christian, and Patricia Snell. 2009. Souls in Transition: The Religious Lives of Emerging
Adults in America. New York: Oxford University Press.
Snijders, Tom A. B. 2011. "Statistical Models for Social Networks." Annual Review of Sociology
37:129-51.
Snijders, Tom A. B., Alessandro Lomi, and Vanina Jasmine Torló. 2013. "A model for the
multiplex dynamics of two-mode and one-mode networks, with an application to
employment preference, friendship, and advice." Social Networks 35(2):265-76.
Snijders, Tom A. B., Gerhard van de Bunt, and Christian E. G. Steglich. 2010. "Introduction to
Stochastic Actor-Based Models for Network Dynamics." Social Networks 32:44-60.
Steensland, B., J. Z. Park, M. D. Regnerus, L. D. Robinson, W. B. Wilcox, and R. D.
Woodberry. 2000. "The measure of American religion: Toward improving the state of the
art." Social Forces 79(1):291-318.

40

Steglich, Christian, Tom A. B. Snijders, and Michael Pearson. 2010. "Dynamic Networks and
Behavior: Separating Selection from Influence." Sociological Methodology 40(1):329-93.
Strang, David and Sarah A. Soule. 1998. “Diffusion in Organizations and Social Movements:
From Hybrid Corn to Poison Pills.” Annual Review of Sociology 24: 265-290.
Trinitapoli, Jenny, and Stephen Vaisey. 2009. "The Transformative Role of Religious
Experience: The Case of Short-Term Missions." Social Forces 88(1):121-46.
Trinitapoli, Jenny, and Alexander A. Weinreb. 2012. Religion and AIDS in Africa: Oxford
University Press.
Uecker, Jeremy, Mark D. Regnerus, and Margaret L. Vaaler. 2007. "Losing My Religion: The
Social Sources of Religious Decline in Early Adulthood." Social Forces 85(4):1667-92.
Ueno, Koji, Eric R. Wright, Mathew D. Gayman, and Janice M. McCabe. 2012. "Segregation in
Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Youth's Personal Networks: Testing Structural Constraint,
Choice Homophily and Compartmentalization Hypotheses." Social Forces 90(3):971-91.
Vaisey, Stephen and Omar Lizardo. 2010. “Can Cultural Worldviews Influence Network
Composition?” Social Forces 4(1): 1595-1618.
van Workum, Nicole, Ron HJ Scholte, Antonius HN Cillessen, Gerine Lodder, and Matteo
Giletta. 2013. "Selection, deselection, and socialization processes of happiness in
adolescent friendship networks." Journal of Research on Adolescence 23: 563-573.
Van Zalk, Maarten H. W., Margaret Kerr, Susan J. T. Branjie, Hakan Stattin, and Wim H. J.
Meeus. 2010. "It Takes Three: Selection, Influence, and De-Selection Processes of
Depression in Adolescent Friendship Networks." Developmental Psychology 46(4):92738.

41

Veenstra, Rene, Jan Kornelis Dijkstra, Christian E. G. Steglich, and Maarten H. W. Van Zalk.
2013. "Network-Behavior Dynamics." Journal of Research on Adolescents 23(3):399412.
Vermut, Jeroen K., and Jay Magidson. 2002. "Latent Cluster Analysis." Pp. 89-106 in Applied
Latent Class Analysis, edited by Jacques A. Hagenaars and Allen L McCutcheon. New
York: Cambridge.
Wimmer, Andreas, and Kevin Lewis. 2010. "Beyond and Below Racial Homophily: ERG
Models of a Friendship Network Documented on Facebook." American Journal of
Sociology 116(2):583-642.

42

Table A1. Full SABM Results for Jefferson HS
A1. Affiliation
b SE

A2. Attendance
b SE

Friendship Function
Rate
11.29 .76 *** 11.38 1.01 ***
Truncated outdegree on rate
-1.32 .59 *
-1.34 .51 ***
Outdegree
-3.94 .19 *** -3.93 .38 ***
Reciprocity
2.31 .12 *** 2.31 .15 ***
Transitive triplets
.29 .08 ***
.29 .09 ***
Transitive recipr. triplets
-.74 .11 ***
-.74 .14 ***
3-cycles
.25 .12 *
.23 .15
Number of actors at dist 2
-.51 .07 ***
-.51 .08 ***
Indegree - popularity (sqrt)
.20 .10 *
.19 .35
Outdegree - popularity (sqrt)
1.14 .21 *** 1.16 .63 †
Indegree - activity (sqrt)
-.16 .09 †
-.18 .41
Course overlap
.07 .02 ***
.07 .02 ***
Extracurric. activity overlap
.33 .06 ***
.32 .06 ***
Female similarity
.13 .05 ***
.14 .05 ***
Parent education alter
.13 .03 ***
.13 .03 ***
Parent education similarity
.34 .13 ***
.34 .14 **
Grade alter
.13 .04 ***
.13 .03 ***
Grade similarity
.56 .09 ***
.56 .09 ***
Service alter
-.02 .02
Service ego
.04 .02 †
Service similarityS
.09 .11
Importance alter
Importance ego
Importance similarityS
Prayer alter
Prayer ego
Prayer similarityS
Religion cat/class agreementS
-.14 .11
S
indicates homophilous selection on religion.

A3. Importance
b SE
11.37
-1.33
-3.92
2.31
.29
-.74
.24
-.51
.18
1.15
-.18
.07
.32
.14
.13
.33
.13
.56

.00
.04
-.03

A4. Prayer
b SE

.69 *** 11.38
.65 *
-1.28
.17 *** -3.91
.15 *** 2.31
.10 ***
.29
.11 ***
-.74
.11 *
.23
.08 ***
-.51
.14
.18
.39 *** 1.15
.15
-.19
.02 ***
.07
.06 ***
.32
.05 ***
.14
.03 ***
.13
.13 **
.33
.04 ***
.13
.09 ***
.56

.75 ***
.52 **
.18 ***
.13 ***
.09 ***
.10 ***
.11 *
.08 ***
.12
.31 ***
.10 †
.02 ***
.05 ***
.05 **
.03 ***
.13 **
.04 ***
.10 ***

.03
.03
.14
.01
.04
-.07

.02
.02 *
.13

B. Combination
b SE
11.25
-1.32
-3.90
2.32
.30
-.75
.23
-.51
.17
1.18
-.19
.06
.33
.14
.13
.34
.13
.56
-.04
.05
.19
.00
-.04
.00
.03
.04
-.11
-.17

.76 ***
.65 *
.25 ***
.14 ***
.10 ***
.12 ***
.13 †
.10 ***
.15
.29 ***
.16
.02 ***
.06 ***
.07 *
.03 ***
.14 **
.05 ***
.10 ***
.05
.04
.16
.05
.05
.23
.04
.04
.20
.13

C1. Rep3
b SE
11.38
-1.33
-3.95
2.31
.29
-.74
.24
-.51
.19
1.14
-.17
.07
.33
.14
.13
.34
.13
.56

.04

C2. Can3
b SE

.81 *** 11.36
.57 *
-1.31
.19 *** -3.96
.12 *** 2.30
.09 ***
.29
.11 ***
-.74
.10 **
.24
.07 ***
-.51
.09 *
.20
.20 *** 1.14
.09 †
-.16
.02 ***
.07
.06 ***
.33
.06 **
.13
.03 ***
.13
.14 **
.33
.04 ***
.13
.09 ***
.56

.60 ***
.57 *
.18 ***
.14 ***
.09 ***
.13 ***
.12 *
.08 ***
.11 †
.28 ***
.09 †
.02 ***
.06 ***
.05 ***
.03 ***
.14 **
.03 ***
.09 ***

.10

.10

.02

C3. Rep4
b SE
11.35
-1.33
-3.97
2.30
.28
-.73
.24
-.51
.19
1.15
-.17
.07
.33
.13
.13
.33
.13
.56

.07

.74 ***
.73 †
.22 ***
.13 ***
.10 ***
.11 ***
.13 †
.08 ***
.12
.24 ***
.11
.02 ***
.06 ***
.05 **
.03 ***
.13 **
.04 ***
.09 ***

.11

Table A1. Full SABM Results for Jefferson HS, Continued
A1. Affiliation
b SE
Religion Function (ordinal)
Rate
Linear shape
Quadratic shape
Total similarityI
Female
Age
Parent education
Parent religion
Two parents
Rate
Linear shape
Quadratic shape
Total similarityI
Female
Age
Parent education
Parent religion
Two parents
Rate
Linear shape
Quadratic shape
Total similarityI
Female
Age
Parent education
Parent religion
Two parents
I
indicates influence on religion.

A2. Attendance
b SE
1.39
-.32
.15
.55
.12
-.09
.04
.08
.03

A3. Importance
b SE

A4. Prayer
b SE

.14 ***
.08 ***
.06 **
.30 †
.16
.08
.08
.03 **
.22
1.68
-.33
.21
.75
.24
.05
.01
.10
.05

.16 ***
.08 ***
.06 ***
.26 ***
.14 †
.08
.08
.03 ***
.17
3.69
-.10
.14
.48
.05
-.02
-.01
.05
.15

.36 ***
.05 *
.02 ***
.20 **
.10
.05
.05
.02 ***
.12

B. Combination
b SE
1.38
-.32
.15
.55
.12
-.10
.04
.08
.03
1.68
-.34
.21
.75
.25
.04
.01
.10
.04
3.69
-.10
.14
.48
.05
-.02
-.01
.05
.15

.15 ***
.08 ***
.06 **
.32 †
.16
.08
.09
.04 *
.19
.18 ***
.09 ***
.06 ***
.29 **
.15
.08
.08
.03 ***
.21
.47 ***
.05 †
.03 ***
.25 †
.11
.05
.05
.02 ***
.18

C1. Rep3
b SE

C2. Can3
b SE

C3. Rep4
b SE

Table A1. Full SABM Results for Jefferson HS, Continued
A1. Affiliation
b SE

A2. Attendance
b SE

A3. Importance
b SE

A4. Prayer
b SE

B. Combination
b SE

C1. Rep3
b SE

C2. Can3
b SE

C3. Rep4
b SE

Religion Function
(categorical)
Rate
.85 .06 ***
.85 .07 ***
1.01 .08 ***
.80 .08 ***
1.27 .10 ***
Outdegree
-1.31 .13 ***
-1.31 .14 ***
-.85 .17 ***
-.81 .17 ***
-.95 .12 ***
Friendship agreementI
.45 .13 ***
.46 .12 ***
.26 .11 *
.29 .11 **
.18 .10 †
Female x Category 1
.16 .69
.16 .69
.10 .16
.07 .17
.02 .14
Female x Category 2
.26 .67
.27 .68
.58 .48
.44 .52
.48 .49
Female x Category 3
.61 .66
.61 .70
-.27 .48
-.16 .61
-.40 .46
Female x Category 4
.38 .68
.38 .71
.16 .50
Female x Category 5
.61 .72
.61 .67
Female x Category 6
-.02 .16
-.02 .18
Age x Category 1
.34 .33
.34 .36
.04 .08
.04 .09
.02 .07
Age x Category 2
-.39 .34
-.39 .35
-.41 .25
-.38 .28
-.41 .24 †
Age x Category 3
.38 .33
.38 .35
-.23 .26
-.26 .31
-.24 .24
Age x Category 4
.07 .35
.07 .37
-.20 .25
Age x Category 5
-.13 .33
-.13 .34
Age x Category 6
.00 .08
.00 .11
Parent educ x Category 1
-.02 .38
-.02 .41
-.06 .09
-.01 .09
-.05 .07
Parent educ x Category 2
-.18 .35
-.17 .35
-.26 .26
.09 .30
-.24 .25
Parent educ x Category 3
-.23 .34
-.23 .36
.05 .27
-.29 .36
-.29 .25
Parent educ x Category 4
-.14 .37
-.14 .42
.27 .26
Parent educ x Category 5
-.14 .34
-.14 .36
Parent educ x Category 6
-.02 .09
-.03 .10
Parent relig x Category 1
-.15 .09 †
-.15 .10
.05 .03
.00 .03
.03 .02
Parent relig x Category 2
.07 .09
.07 .09
.54 .12 ***
.31 .10 ***
.48 .09 ***
Parent relig x Category 3
.20 .09 *
.19 .11 †
.07 .08
.18 .09 *
.10 .06 †
Parent relig x Category 4
.04 .09
.04 .09
.16 .07 *
Parent relig x Category 5
.10 .10
.10 .09
Parent relig x Category 6
.01 .02
.01 .03
Two parent x Category 1
-1.94 .87 *
-1.95 .96 *
-.09 .20
-.15 .20
-.03 .16
Two parent x Category 2
-1.42 .91
-1.44 1.02
.54 .59
.12 .66
1.26 .62 *
Two parent x Category 3
-.56 .92
-.58 .99
1.16 .58 *
1.91 .78 **
.57 .52
Two parent x Category 4
-1.04 .96
-1.05 1.05
.65 .53
Two parent x Category 5
-1.14 .95
-1.16 1.05
Two parent x Category 6
.02 .22
.02 .23
Note. “cat/class” refers to the levels of the categorical religion variable estimated in the respective model (affiliation, Rep3, Can3, Rep4). In the friendship function, cat/class
agreement is a selection effect capturing whether each pair of students matched categories or classes. In the categorical religion function, “friendship agreement” captures the
likelihood of choosing a category based on how many friends are in the category. The “attribute by Category #” effects capture how the attribute affects the likelihood of choosing
each category. These were estimated using a series of dummy variables. The reference category is no religion, which is category 6 for affiliation and category 1 for the class
variables. Interactions for other levels represent deviations from the no religion group.

Table A2. Full SABM Results for Sunshine HS
A1. Affiliation
b SE
Friendship Function
Rate
6.18 .55 ***
Truncated outdegree on rate
-.23 .61
Outdegree
-5.92 .95 ***
Reciprocity
3.29 .15 ***
Transitive triplets
.93 .14 ***
Transitive recipr. triplets
-1.35 .17 ***
Number of actors at dist 2
-.67 .24 ***
Indegree - popularity (sqrt)
.62 .35 †
Indegree - activity (sqrt)
.57 .44
Course overlap
.19 .02 ***
Extracurric. activity overlap
.48 .10 ***
Female similarity
.43 .09 ***
Parent education alter
.03 .05
Parent education similarity
.33 .29
Race same
2.21 .24 ***
Grade alter
.24 .08 ***
Grade similarity
.39 .08 ***
Service alter
Service ego
Service similarityS
Importance alter
Importance ego
Importance similarityS
Prayer alter
Prayer ego
Prayer similarityS
Religion cat/class agreementS .75 .15 ***
S
indicates homophilous selection on religion.

A2. Attendance
b SE

A3. Importance
b SE

6.18
-.22
-6.23
3.26
.93
-1.34
-.64
.67
.64
.19
.44
.43
.02
.27
1.19
.26
.39
-.08
-.21
.80

6.30
-.20
-6.16
3.23
.93
-1.33
-.63
.66
.62
.18
.44
.43
.01
.26
1.17
.24
.39

.99 ***
.55
.98 ***
.28 ***
.13 ***
.17 ***
.26 **
.33 *
.37 †
.03 ***
.09 ***
.07 ***
.04
.25
.13 ***
.10 **
.10 ***
.08
.07 ***
.37 *

2.08 ***
1.22
2.85 *
.65 ***
.24 ***
.35 ***
.90
.73
1.55
.12
.21 *
.08 ***
.18
1.19
.10 ***
.08 ***
.17 *

A4. Prayer
b SE

B. Combination
b SE

6.33 .76 ***
-.17 .67
-6.14 1.02 ***
3.23 .33 ***
.93 .10 ***
-1.32 .29 ***
-.62 .34 †
.66 .25 ***
.61 .57
.18 .03 ***
.43 .10 ***
.42 .07 ***
.01 .04
.28 .36
1.17 .08 ***
.25 .07 ***
.39 .09 ***

6.02 1.05 ***
-.27 .44
-6.04 .92 ***
3.34 .32 ***
.95 .17 ***
-1.37 .20 ***
-.66 .22 ***
.63 .33 †
.58 .40
.19 .03 ***
.50 .12 ***
.43 .08 ***
.04 .05
.34 .24
2.25 .28 ***
.24 .11 *
.40 .10 ***
-.12 .09
-.31 .23
.50 .51
.08 .12
.02 .25
.04 .66
-.06 .10
.09 .12
.35 .55
.73 .16 ***

-.06 .16
-.12 .11
.80 1.04
-.08
-.05
.66

.04 †
.08
.31 *

C1. Rep3
b SE
6.26
-.20
-6.11
3.25
.93
-1.34
-.62
.66
.63
.18
.43
.43
.02
.27
1.19
.25
.39

-.13

.56 ***
.48
.68 ***
.24 ***
.11 ***
.20 ***
.22 ***
.30 *
.28 *
.03 ***
.10 ***
.09 ***
.04
.23
.11 ***
.08 ***
.08 ***

.22

C2. Can3
b SE
6.32 1.47 ***
-.17 1.77
-6.14 1.15 ***
3.25 .24 ***
.93 .09 ***
-1.33 .25 ***
-.63 .33 †
.67 .21 ***
.62 .72
.18 .03 ***
.43 .12 ***
.43 .08 ***
.02 .05
.26 .21
1.18 .12 ***
.25 .08 ***
.39 .08 ***

-.02

.19

C3. Rep4
b SE
6.30
-.20
-6.11
3.24
.93
-1.33
-.62
.66
.62
.18
.43
.43
.02
.26
1.18
.25
.39

-.08

.52 ***
.71
.49 ***
.22 ***
.11 ***
.17 ***
.20 ***
.18 ***
.31 *
.03 ***
.10 ***
.07 ***
.04
.26
.09 ***
.07 ***
.08 ***

.20

Table A2. Full SABM Results for Sunshine HS, continued
A1. Affiliation
b SE
Religion Function (ordinal)
Rate
Linear shape
Quadratic shape
Total similarityI
Female
Age
Parent education
Hispanic
Black
Asian
Parent religion
Two parents
Rate
Linear shape
Quadratic shape
Total similarityI
Female
Age
Parent education
Hispanic
Black
Asian
Parent religion
Two parents
Rate
Linear shape
Quadratic shape
Total similarityI
Female
Age
Parent education
Hispanic
Black
Asian
Parent religion
Two parents
I
indicates influence on religion.

A2. Attendance
b SE
3.05
.52
.10
.19
-.08
-.01
.10
-.32
-.08
-.20
.03
.20

A3. Importance
b SE

A4. Prayer
b SE

.32 ***
.05 ***
.03 ***
.23
.08
.06
.05 *
.18 †
.16
.18
.02 †
.09 *
2.04 .97 *
.56 .22 ***
.13 .20
2.59 1.93
-.05 .18
.09 .09
.05 .13
-.61 .45
-.12 .72
-.19 .42
.05 .03 *
.16 .26
4.43
.70
.13
.17
.06
.04
-.01
-.22
-.01
.03
.03
.13

.72 ***
.05 ***
.02 ***
.28
.07
.05
.05
.19
.15
.19
.01 †
.09

B. Combination
b SE
3.07 .34 ***
.52 .07 ***
.10 .04 ***
.18 .28
-.08 .09
-.01 .06
.10 .07
-.32 .24
-.08 .17
-.20 .21
.03 .02
.20 .15
2.02 .22 ***
.55 .09 ***
.12 .06 *
2.63 1.12 **
-.05 .16
.09 .10
.05 .08
-.62 .26 **
-.15 .31
-.18 .29
.05 .03 *
.16 .18
4.43 .53 ***
.71 .05 ***
.13 .02 ***
.17 .33
.07 .09
.04 .06
-.01 .05
-.22 .16
-.02 .16
.03 .18
.03 .02
.13 .11

C1. Rep3
b SE

C2. Can3
b SE

C3. Rep4
b SE

Table A2. Full SABM Results for Sunshine HS, continued
A1. Affiliation
b SE

A2. Attendance
b SE

A3. Importance
b SE

A4. Prayer
b SE

B. Combination
b SE

C1. Rep3
b SE

C2. Can3
b SE

C3. Rep4
b SE

Religion Function
(categorical)
Rate
1.28 .08 ***
1.28 .10 ***
.87 .06 ***
1.03 .07 ***
1.49 .09 ***
Outdegree
-2.27 .22 ***
-2.28 .28 ***
-.89 .12 ***
-.84 .20 ***
-.96 .09 ***
Friendship agreementI
.63 .17 ***
.63 .20 ***
.87 .21 ***
.75 .28 ***
.60 .13 ***
Female
.38 .57
.38 .70
-.05 .14
-.04 .29
-.07 .10
Female x Category 2
-.49 .53
-.49 .65
-.44 .46
-.45 .58
.06 .35
Female x Category 3
-.91 .60
-.90 .65
-.32 .44
-.17 .43
-.27 .34
Female x Category 4
-1.53 1.02
-1.55 1.19
-.36 .32
Female x Category 5
.85 .53
.85 .64
Female x Category 6
-.31 .19
-.31 .20
Age
-.17 .38
-.17 .50
.05 .09
.07 .12
.05 .07
Age x Category 2
-.30 .37
-.30 .37
.39 .30
.06 .27
.13 .22
Age x Category 3
-.04 .33
-.04 .49
-.10 .27
.11 .24
-.13 .20
Age x Category 4
-.55 .63
-.55 .69
.16 .24
Age x Category 5
.10 .35
.10 .42
Age x Category 6
-.05 .12
-.05 .14
Parent education
.07 .33
.07 .34
-.04 .08
-.02 .10
-.04 .07
Parent educ x Category 2
-.09 .28
-.08 .38
.51 .26 *
.37 .29
.39 .19 *
Parent educ x Category 3
-.12 .31
-.12 .32
-.49 .32
-.38 .20 †
-.36 .19 †
Parent educ x Category 4
-.36 .56
-.36 .56
-.18 .18
Parent educ x Category 5
-.14 .27
-.14 .30
Parent educ x Category 6
.00 .09
.00 .10
Parent religion
-.03 .11
-.03 .09
.00 .03
.00 .02
.00 .02
Parent relig x Category 2
.17 .12
.17 .12
.09 .10
.13 .09
.19 .08 **
Parent relig x Category 3
.06 .10
.06 .10
.03 .10
.01 .09
.05 .06
Parent relig x Category 4
.12 .16
.12 .17
-.01 .08
Parent relig x Category 5
.19 .11 †
.20 .11 †
Parent relig x Category 6
.00 .04
.01 .04
Two parents
-.07 .64
-.07 .65
-.10 .15
-.09 .20
-.06 .12
Two parent x Category 2
.12 .58
.11 .65
.38 .58
.55 .44
.28 .36
Two parent x Category 3
.97 .64
.97 .57 †
.20 .45
.00 .40
.42 .38
Two parent x Category 4
2.24 1.43
2.24 1.88
.05 .35
Two parent x Category 5
.56 .63
.56 .72
Two parent x Category 6
.02 .20
.02 .26
Note. “cat/class” refers to the levels of the categorical religion variable estimated in the respective model (affiliation, Rep3, Can3, Rep4). In the friendship function, cat/class
agreement is a selection effect capturing whether each pair of students matched categories or classes. In the categorical religion function, “friendship agreement” captures the
likelihood of choosing a category based on how many friends are in the category. The “attribute by Category #” effects capture how the attribute affects the likelihood of choosing
each category. These were estimated using a series of dummy variables. The reference category is no religion, which is category 6 for affiliation and category 1 for the class
variables. Interactions for other levels represent deviations from the no religion group.

Table A2. Full SABM Results for Sunshine HS, continued
Hispanic
Hispanic x Category 2
Hispanic x Category 3
Hispanic x Category 4
Hispanic x Category 5
Hispanic x Category 6
Black
Black x Category 2
Black x Category 3
Black x Category 4
Black x Category 5
Black x Category 6
Asian
Asian x Category 2
Asian x Category 3
Asian x Category 4
Asian x Category 5
Asian x Category 6

A1. Affiliation
b SE
1.71 .98 †
.10 .89
-.74 .84
.37 1.55
2.56 1.05 **
-.41 .31
.43 1.08
-2.43 1.15 *
-4.20 1.17 ***
8.49 2.46 ***
-5.73 1.61 ***
-2.33 .50 ***
.17 .98
-.67 .97
-.87 .83
-.15 1.62
.86 1.06
-.26 .34

A2. Attendance
b SE

A3. Importance
b SE

A4. Prayer
b SE

B. Combination
C1. Rep3
b SE
b SE
1.73 1.25
-.14 .24
.12 .82
-1.54 .87 †
-.73 .92
-.95 .85
.39 2.15
2.56 .89 ***
-.41 .42
.43 1.14
-.05 .25
-2.43 2.03
-.37 .88
-4.20 1.90 *
-.12 .76
8.54 2.20 ***
-5.73 2.22 ***
-2.34 1.01 *
.19 1.01
-.28 .25
-.65 .76
-.94 .89
-.86 .81
-.62 .71
-.13 2.44
.87 .82
-.26 .52

C2. Can3
b SE
-.15 .24
-1.22 .78
-.67 .67

C3. Rep4
b SE
-.14 .18
-.12 .64
-1.16 .56 *
-.47 .54

-.06
-.33
.04

.22
.84
.66

-.07
.36
-.23
-.13

.21
.64
.54
.56

-.26
-.62
-.47

.23
.79
.66

-.24
.13
-.40
-.44

.23
.61
.62
.61

