Nordic Journal of African Studies 26(3): 231–250 (2017)

Role of Trade and the Media in Minority
Language Maintenance: The Case of ciNsenga
in Central Western Malawi
Victor CHIKAIPA
University of Malawi, Chancellor College, Malawi
and
Pascal KISHINDO
University of Malawi, Chancellor College,Malawi

ABSTRACT
Malawi has more than 14 languages but only a few of these, including ciCewa, ciYao and
ciTumbuka, have a significant number of active speakers. This article examines the retention
of ciNsenga, a minority indigenous language, which provides a different picture. Speakers of
ciNsenga straddle the border between Central Western Malawi and Eastern Zambia. Although
ciNsenga has a comparatively small number of speakers, the language is actively maintained.
Within this paper, ethnolinguistic vitality, domain analysis and social network theories are
applied to explore the factors fostering the retention of ciNsenga among the Ngoni, who
settled within a predominantly ciCewa speaking area. This study finds that both the media and
cross-border trade have greatly supported the retention of ciNsenga, despite years of
prolonged contact with ciCewa. It is hoped the case of ciNsenga may illustrate a path that
other Malawian languages could follow, in the interest of language preservation.
Keywords: language retention, minority language maintenance, national language, crossborder language, ethnolinguistic vitality.

1. INTRODUCTION
In the wake of globalisation most minority languages have found themselves
regarded as inimical to development, and various institutions have opted for the
international working languages that apparently promise enviable, profitable
returns. Many minority languages continue to be overlooked and bypassed in the
global scientific technological advancement that favours the use of majority
languages for purposes of mutual intelligibility and wider application (Ehala
2009: 37). However, some indigenous minority languages have defied the odds
and continue to be recognised and used, irrespective of the global world
perception. A good case in point is ciNsenga, a minority language, spoken by
the Mpezeni Ngoni amidst a predominantly ciCewa speaking population in

Nordic Journal of African Studies
Mchinji (Central Western Malawi) and Chipata (Eastern Zambia).1 This area is
dominated by many ciCewa speakers, a majority language in Malawi. It is
against this background that this study investigates the specific factors that have
governed the retention of the ciNsenga language within this area, to the present
time.

2. SOCIO-HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
Drawing from the existing literature, ciNsenga is widely spoken by the Mpezeni
Ngoni, who migrated to the area presently known as Mchinji from the Luangwa
River Valley in Zambia more than a century ago (Barnes 1959, William 1974
and Isichei 1997). Studies by Read (1936), William (1974) and Kishindo (2003)
also note that the Nsenga native speakers of ciNsenga, were absorbed into the
conquering Mpezeni Ngoni ethnic group who settled in this central western
region of Malawi under the latter’s banner. A similar claim was made by Pachai
(1973:31) who observed that the Ngoni migrants had few pure, bona fide
members because they incorporated large numbers of indigenous tribes through
conquests, marriages, and political over-lordship. Hence, the Nsenga ethnic
group ceased to operate as a separate entity and realigned themselves with the
Ngoni leadership. They became fully integrated into Ngoni society and some of
the members were elected to important positions; for example, Chiwere
Ndhlovu was appointed as a military leader in the Mpezeni Ngoni Kingdom
(Barnes, 1959). Thus, according to Read (1936) and William (1974) several
conquered tribes renounced their local origin, as either Nsenga or Cewa, and
adopted the Ngoni identity for fear of political reprisals.
However, despite the Ngoni political strength in the region, linguistically it is
observable that those who have settled in Mchinji use ciNsenga, the language of
the people who were conquered, married and incorporated. This linguistic
“misfortune” of the all-conquering Ngoni has also repeated among the Maseko
Ngoni, who adopted the language of the Cewa, and among the Zwangendaba
Ngoni, who adopted the language of the Tumbuka. It is noted by Pachai (1973)
that the Ngoni ethnic group living in the traditional authorities (TAs) of Zulu
and Mlonyeni, use ciNsenga and not ciCewa, the language of the surrounding
majority. More recently, Miti (2001) and Kadenge and Simango (2014: 107)
similarly observe that ciNsenga is spoken by the Ngoni people who occupy the
territory surrounding the Zambia-Malawi border, around Chipata in Zambia and
Mchinji in Malawi. These previous sociolinguistic studies have established that
ciNgoni, if there is any, is restricted to a few ritual contexts and that many of
those who consider themselves ethnically “Ngoni” are in fact linguistically
1

ciCewa is a Bantu language spoken by almost 60% of the Malawi population. It was at
one point declared a national language until the dawn of democracy when it lost this status.
However, it is still considered one of the most widely spoken languages with 75% of the
population in Malawi able to understand it. (Scannell, K. 2011).
232

Role of Trade and the Media in Minority Language Maintenance
bilingual: they speak both ciCewa and ciNsenga. The understanding of this
study is that linguistically the Ngoni in this area are known to be ciNsenga
speakers, but they are culturally defined otherwise; thus, the Ngoni are identified
with ciNsenga in their language use and as Ngoni in their cultural identity.

3. CONTEMPORARY LANGUAGE USE PATTERNS IN MCHINJI:
AREA OF STUDY
The Malawi language mapping report by the Centre for Language Studies
(University of Malawi, 2006) shows a contemporary geographic distribution of
languages in Mchinji, a district in Central Western Malawi that borders with
Eastern Zambia. The map below illustrates that two predominant languages are
utilized in the district, namely ciCewa and ciNsenga. The latter is spoken in
some of the areas surrounding the borders of Malawi and Zambia, shown by the
brighter circular areas on the map. It is important to note that the area of
research is within the district of Mchinji, Malawi; however, this study also notes
the Malawian respondents’ reports of language use that include their neighbours
and associates’ language experiences, interactions, and broadcasting media
around the border, and in Zambia.
Despite this contemporary mapping of language use patterns in Mchinji,
there are no previous detailed studies on the current status of ciNsenga, among
other languages, specifically in this central western region of Malawi. However,
some scarce information on the status of languages spoken in this area is
documented in the 1998 national population census report, which agrees that
most of the population in Mchinji District use ciCewa as an everyday household
language, compared to those who use ciNsenga for the same (MNSO, 1998).2

2

This study uses the 1998 census report because the recent 2008 census report did not
include data concerning the status of languages in all districts of Malawi.
233

Nordic Journal of African Studies
Figure 1. Language Mapping of Traditional Authorities (TAs) in Mchinji District.

Source: Centre for Language Studies, University of Malawi (2006).

At national level ciNsenga is spoken by 0.2% of the total population, out of
which a larger proportion (81.3% of the people) are from Mchinji (MNSO,
1998). In tandem with the census figures, the national language mapping survey
conducted by the Centre for Language Studies, University of Malawi, shows
that ciNsenga, alongside ciCewa, is largely spoken in Mchinji, with the former
specifically used in the villages of Traditional Authority (TA), Mduwa, Zulu and
Mlonyeni. However, the map and census report, by their nature, do not provide
sociolinguistic explanations as to the reasons why ciNsenga, although a minority
language, continues to flourish in an area dominated by ciCewa, the language of
majority in Malawi. Thus, these two documents overlook the maintenance
factors and the application of the ciNsenga language outside the home domain.
There is some literature on the status of minority languages in Malawi, as
follows: Kayambazinthu (1989/90) and Matiki (1996) on Ellomwe in Southern
Malawi; Kamanga (1999) and Kishindo (2003) on ciNgoni in various parts of
Malawi; Matewere (1999) on Yao in Balaka, Southern Malawi; Zimpita (2003)
on Asian language maintenance in Lilongwe; and also, Lora-Kayambazinthu
(2011) on ciTumbuka in Dowa, Central Malawi. However, the findings of these
studies cannot explain the current status and maintenance of ciNsenga.
Therefore, this research article explores factors additional to home language use,
and objectively focuses on the role of trade and the broadcast media, particularly
community radio, in the maintenance of ciNsenga. Thus, this article presents an
in-depth picture of the sociolinguistic situation in Mchinji and the surrounding
border area.
As mentioned, the status of ciNsenga cannot be determined by the findings
of the studies mentioned above because of the variation in their historical
234

Role of Trade and the Media in Minority Language Maintenance
background; this observation was also made by Lora-Kayambazinthu (2003:
146) in studies of other minority languages in Malawi. Differences in historical,
cultural and natural backgrounds have resulted in the variable factors that
perpetuate the maintenance of minority languages. Therefore, it is impossible to
predict with absolute certainty the factors that will induce speakers to either
maintain their language use, or shift to another language. However, based on
insights from the above literature and from research fieldwork, this study
explores how ciNsenga has been maintained by the Ngoni, and presents the
findings.

4. INTEGRATED THEORETICAL APPROACH
This study is informed by three theories: ethnolinguistic vitality theory (EV),
which is the overarching approach in this study, developed by Giles, Bourhis
and Taylor (1977); domain analysis theory (DA) by Fishman (1972); and social
network theory (SN) by Milroy and Milroy (1997). These three theories have
been identified to account for the conditions that promote the retention of the
ciNsenga language because, individually, these theories do not have the
capability to adequately or fully predict changes in language behaviour at times
of contact and power imbalance. Kulbrandstad (2001) and Myers-Scotton
(2006), among other scholars, have argued that where language is maintained,
individual and group societal factors interact and work together to influence the
process. Therefore, the scope of this study applies three theories in an integrated
approach to address the shortcomings of ethnolinguistic vitality theory as a sole
approach.
However, ethnolinguistic vitality theory does inform this study in terms of
the significance of assessing socio-cultural linguistic variables in language
retention. According to Rasinger (2004) and Myers-Scotton (2006) this theory
states that an ethnic group’s ability to overcome language change in contact
situations with other ethnic groups, is determined by its strength in a catalogue
of objective socio-cultural factors that include the following.
•
•
•

Demographic factors: relates to the distribution pattern and number of
ethnic members throughout a particular region or territory.
Status factors: the status of the language in economic, social and
historical aspects contributes greatly to the existence of the
ethnolinguistic group as an entity (Yagmur and Akinci, 2003)
Institutional support factors: comprise the direct or indirect, formal and
informal, support which an ethnolinguistic group receives from various
institutions, such as, the mass media, education, government, industry,
religion, politics and cultural groups (Kulbrandstad, 2001).

235

Nordic Journal of African Studies
The strengths and weaknesses of an ethnolinguistic group in each of these
factors roughly determine the classification of a group as having a low, medium
or high capacity for vernacular language retention among other groups in a
contact situation (Yagmur and Akinci, 2003). Any ethnic group rating highly in
all three socio-cultural factors will almost inevitably retain their language,
whereas a group with low strengths in these factors will be susceptible to a
language shift process and the prevalence of the dominant language.
This study also applies Milroy & Milroy’s (1997) social network theory to
address subjective explanations on the variables that concern individual
relations, an area not covered by ethnolinguistic vitality theory. According to
Hamers and Blanc (2000), social network theory focuses on the significance of
assessing interpersonal linkage or network ties among individuals within society
in order to establish the chances of language maintenance. This theory postulates
that interpersonal interactions take place within domains of language use, such
as family life, neighbourhoods, market places, and schools. Hence, this theory
works on the understanding that different types of social contact establish
linkage, which accounts for behaviour then exhibited by individuals (Gibbons
and Ramirez, 2004). The implication is that, at community level the close-knit
ties among members ensures solidarity, which underpins the retention of any
vernacular that flourishes despite persistent contact with national and dominant
languages (Kayambazinthu, 2000). Thus, social network theory assists in the
analysis of the type of network ties that exist amongst the speakers of ciNsenga,
and also with outside/other communities, in different domains.
Finally, this study employs Fishman’s (1972) domain analysis theory to
examine the formal and informal domains of language use in Mchinji. Garcia
(2003) notes that both formality domains are important in a survey of language
retention, constituting areas both of the intergenerational use and the
transmission of ethnic languages. Domain analysis theory argues that language
use in various domains is either instituted through policies and laws, or chosen
randomly. Therefore, this study offers respondents the opportunity to report on
ciNsenga language use, vitality and retention, in various institutions, formal and
informal, and the resultant analysis of findings is achieved according to the
domain analysis model.
Domain analysis theory complements ethnolinguistic vitality theory because,
arguably, the latter concentrates on objective factors but disregards group
members’ perceptions of the vitality of the group (Kulbrandstand 2001). As a
supplementary model, DA offers insight into group members’ general,
subjective beliefs regarding group vitality and also, information about the
respondents’ own desire to behave in certain ways with regard to key aspects of
their group vitality. This utilization of both ethnolinguistic vitality and domain
analysis theories, complemented by social network analysis, enables a thorough
review of the study data concerning the current status of ciNsenga in Mchinji.

236

Role of Trade and the Media in Minority Language Maintenance

5. METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH
This study utilizes both qualitative and quantitative methods in a ‘mixed
method’ approach. (Cresswell, 1994). The study focus is on language attitudes,
or behaviour, towards the retention of ciNsenga among ethnolinguistic group
members. Using this approach, the researchers present the study within a single
dominant approach (qualitative), but elements of the other approach
(quantitative) are also adopted in order to answer certain questions (Cresswell,
1994).
Data was collected using three techniques: survey, interview and participant
observations. A questionnaire was the main data collection tool of the survey
and targeted 150 respondents, a third from each of three villages, namely, Nyoka
in TA Nyoka, Menyani in TA Mlonyeni and Kayesa in TA Zulu. 3 The
questionnaire gathered data on issues including, demographic information;
linguistic repertoires; patterns of language acquisition; domains of use; language
identity; and language maintenance. There were more closed than open
questions in order to avoid unnecessary variations on the status of the data for
ciNsenga in the area. However, a few open questions were incorporated, and
respondents expressed their views freely but without unnecessary variations.
In addition, a key informants interview schedule was utilized in order to ask
general questions, and gather data, on themes of historical, economic and sociocultural background, migration, and other issues related to the ciNsenga
language and the Ngoni people. Specific questions on the study themes were
then asked to the key informants, who included leaders of the villages – the
chiefs’ elders, village headmen, business people – and the Mudziwathu
Community Radio Station manager, that their opinions could be learned.
Apart from the questionnaire and interview, this study also relied on
participant observations in order to gather data on certain behaviour patterns,
and on the overall sociolinguistic situation. A writing pad and tape recorder
were used to record some patterned forms of cultural behaviours and the overall
sociolinguistic situation.
This study utilized Microsoft Excel in the analysis of the quantitative data to
compute the tables and frequencies which depict the validity and reliability of
the results on ciNsenga language retention. The qualitative data was categorised
and patterns for interpreting language revitalisation were noted.

3

Traditional Authority. There were roughly 50 respondents from each village: 49 from
Menyani, 51 from Kayesa and 50 from Nyoka.
237

Nordic Journal of African Studies

6. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
6.1 GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF RESPONDENTS
6.1.1 Demographic Characteristics of ciNsenga Speakers
The survey questionnaire analysis began with the compilation and demographic
summary of respondents’ characteristics as these would directly impact upon the
interpretation of results regarding language retention. General characteristics of
age groups indicate whether the older generations have managed or failed to
pass on the language to younger generations. Data on marital status determines
the actual number of ciNsenga speakers who are either single or married to
fellow ciNsenga speakers (endogamous marriages) and live together, with
relevance to the languages taught to children at home and in terms of
intergenerational switching4. Information about the place of birth of the
respondent shows physical proximity to their original homes, and concentration
of residential pattern. Table 1 below presents the detailed demographic
characteristics of the respondents.
Table 1. Demographic Summary of Respondents’ Age, Marital Status and Birthplace.
Village
Menyani
Generation/Age Number %
13–35 years
36–55 years
56+ years
Total/Aggregate
Marital Status
Never Married
Married
Separated
Divorced
Widowed
Total/Aggregate
Birthplace
Malawi
Zambia
Total/Aggregate

Kayesa
Number %

Nyoka
Number %

Total Aggregate
Number %

16
17
16
49

33
34
33
100%

20
21
10
51

39
41
20
100%

16
16
18
50

32
32
36
100%

52
54
44
150

35
36
29
100%

14
27
3
1
4
49

29
55
6
2
8
100%

20
31

39
61

51

100%

12
29
5
1
3
50

24
58
10
2
6
100%

46
87
8
2
7
150

31
58
5
1
5
100%

39
10
49

80
20
100%

44
7
51

86
14
100%

29
21
50

58
42
100%

112
38
150

75
25
100%

The 150 study respondents are aged from 13 to 84 years. The highest proportion
of respondents are in the age range 36–55 years (36%), closely followed by the
4

Intergenerational switching is the successful transmission of language from one
generation to the other, particularly from old to young.
238

Role of Trade and the Media in Minority Language Maintenance
13–35 years of age group (35%), and then those aged 56 years and older (29%).
There are slightly more males than females, representing 52% (Number, N =78
and 48% (N=72) of the total respondents in the study respectively. The survey
data further shows that the majority of respondents, 58% (N=87), are married,
whereas 31% (N=46) have never been married; 5% (N=7) are widowed, 1%
(N=2) divorced and 5% (N=8) separated. In the findings, the age range of 36–55
years has the most subjects because these respondents were readily available and
the most active in the village during the time of study.

6.1.2 Linguistic Background of the Respondents
This study finds the linguistic backgrounds of the respondents to be of key
interest; therefore, information regarding first, second and, where applicable,
third language usage, has been obtained by questionnaire. Table 2 below
presents a summary of this data.
Table 2. Summary of Respondents’ Linguistic Backgrounds.
Village
Category
Language
1st Lang.
2nd Lang.
ciNsenga
3rd Lang.
Total
st
1 Lang.
2nd Lang.
ciCewa
3rd Lang.
Total
Nonspeak
2nd Lang.
English
3rd Lang.
Total

Menyani
N
%
49
100

Kayesa
N
%
49
96
2
4

Nyoka
N
%
50
100

Aggregate
N
%
148
99
2
1

49

100%

100%

96
4
100%
35

100%
4
90
6
100%
24

50

47
2
49
17

51
2
46
3
51
12

48
2
50
26

96
4
100%
52

150
2
141
7
150
55

100%
1
94
5
100%
37

32
49

65
100%

39
51

76
100%

24
50

48
100%

95
150

63
100%

Table 2 shows that the vast majority of respondents, 99% (N=148), acquired
ciNsenga as their first language against 1% (N=2) for ciCewa. Data further
reveals that 94% (N=141) of respondents acquired ciCewa as their second
language compared to 1% (N=2) for ciNsenga. The data also shows that 63%
(N=93) of respondents regard English as their third language, whereas 37%
(N=55) are non-speakers; and the great majority of respondents, 94% (N=141),
are bilingual in ciNsenga and ciCewa.
For all three villages of the study, the dominant first language in use is
ciNsenga, with ciCewa being used as a second language in certain other
domains. The respondents acknowledge that their knowledge of ciCewa may be
due to influences such as education and occupation. Most respondents claim to
239

Nordic Journal of African Studies
have learned sufficient ciCewa to communicate where needed, while avoiding
other (non-education and non-work) forms of social interactions with the host
Ngoni ethnic members. Interestingly, respondents report that their schooling was
in the ciCewa and English languages while ciNsenga was spoken at home.
Therefore, the study findings show bilingualism as a common feature of the
respondents’ linguistic background because not one respondent identifies as
being monolingual in only ciNsenga.
The study’s key informants highlight that ciNsenga is maintained as the first
language in the area because it is part of them; part of their identity. This
corroborates with Swilla’s (2005: 3) argument that ethnic members are expected
to acquire the native language when it is often closely linked to their ethnicity.
Similarly, the Ngoni expect ethnic members living in these study areas to
acquire ciNsenga as their first language. This also agrees with Smolicz (1981)
that when language is regarded as a core cultural value, people are likely to
maintain it for longer despite pressure from other majority groups. Therefore,
the fact that the Ngoni are oriented to ciNsenga as their first language indicates
that they live as a distinct cultural group, despite accommodating the
language(s) of the host ciCewa oriented community.

6.2 FACTORS ENHANCING THE RETENTION OF CINSENGA
6.2.1 Cross-Border Trade
It is established by this study that long-term cross-border trade between
residents of Malawi and Zambia has positively influenced the maintenance of
ciNsenga, while respondents’ occupations are also pertinent to language
maintenance. Table 3 below shows the occupations of the survey respondents.
The survey data establishes that 41% (N= 62) of the respondents are
subsistence farmers, followed by 31% (N=46), who are business entrepreneurs,
and then 26% (N=39) are students. Of those who are business entrepreneurs,
24% (N= 11) have a Junior Secondary Certificate of Education (JSCE) and 28%
(N= 13) have a Primary School Leaving Certificate (PSLC). The data also
reveals that, regardless of achievement in formal education, most of the
respondents’ occupations were fairly homogenous as farmer or business
entrepreneur, with the future occupations of the students being unknown.
This research has found that most residents in the study area earn their
livelihoods through small-scale trade, mainly with the people of Zambia, across
the border, who are also predominantly ciNsenga speakers. The researcher was
informed that there is a lot of significant trading of goods, particularly
agricultural commodities, between the residents of the two countries, via
uncharted routes, which makes ciNsenga a cross-border language. Respondents
reported that Mchinji’s immediate neighbours and trading partners from Zambia
are typical ciNsenga speakers, who were originally Ngoni but became somewhat
240

Role of Trade and the Media in Minority Language Maintenance
alienated from their Malawian counterparts (and relatives) due to national
boundaries. As such, trading interactions have positively reinforced the retention
of ciNsenga.
Table 3. Summary of Respondents’ Occupations in the Study Area.
Qualification
Occupation
Student
Pastor
Farmer
Business

None
N
%

33
22

53
48

PSLC
N
%
21
54
1
2
20
32
13
28

Retired
Aggregate

55

37

55

37

JSCE
N
%
18
46
1
2
9
15
11
24

Aggregate
N
%
39
26
2
1
62
41
46
31

1

100

1

1

40

27

150

100

Apart from the cross-border trade, open day market activities were also reported
as taking place in Nyoka, Kaigwazanga and Mwami (all on the Malawi-Zambia
border), where ciNsenga prevails as the dominant trade language, rather than
ciCewa (in Malawi) or ciNyanja (in Eastern Zambia)5. Applying an
understanding of ethnolinguistic vitality theory, ciNsenga has the highest trade
value in this central western region of Malawi, so much so that this has greatly
contributed to the retention and maintenance of this language. Regardless of
other languages used within the border areas, this study establishes that a large
number of those respondents working in small-scale businesses prefer to use
ciNsenga: they belong to the Nsenga ethnic group and this language easily
accommodates speakers of other varieties.
The Malawian subsistence farmers and business entrepreneurs, who
comprise most of the respondents in this study, explicated that ciNsenga is the
common and important language for interactions with fellow traders from
Zambia. In consensus, key informants reported that ciNsenga has a strong
bargaining power because it allows traders from both countries to understand
one another easily. A notable experience of the researcher in Mchinji, was that
each time a taxi arrived, the taxi tout or driver would greet potential customers
in ciNsenga, for example asking, “Muli tyani mweo, manje muyenda boda?”
(This translates as, ‘How are you…? Are you going to the border now?). This
language choice assumes customers’ knowledge of ciNsenga, and does not place
significance on establishing a person’s possible ethnic background, or possible
different language preference. Therefore, such ciNsenga welcome greetings, or
remarks, also demonstrate the extent of this language’s bargaining power in the
area, and provides a further example of its status value in trading activities.
ciNyanja is spoken in Zambia’s Eastern Province and also in the capital, Lusaka. It is
similar to the ciCewa that is spoken in Malawi.
241
5

Nordic Journal of African Studies
Thus, despite a public perception that certain languages are better than others in
the economic globalisation process, the language experience in this region of
Malawi provides evidence that minority languages can still be retained and
thrive if they are valuable for trade, amongst other key factors.
As previously mentioned, this study notes a high concentration of ciNsenga
speakers in the research areas. They almost entirely outnumber the first language
speakers of ciCewa, and reports indicate that this ethnolinguistic group are also
the area’s most enterprising, dominant and effective traders. Though higher
overall speaker demographics are not necessarily a reliable marker for language
maintenance, these factors do increase the opportunities for ciNsenga use
amongst ethnic members in the different domains of interaction. Therefore, the
speakers of ciNsenga find it feasible to use their own language in the activities
that they dominate. In terms of SN theory, ciNsenga speakers are in a business
social network, which they dominate, using their mother tongue. This has
compelled native speakers of other languages to learn ciNsenga for the purposes
of easy communication in various activities, including trade. Therefore, it is the
perception of this study that the ethnic demographics and language status of
ciNsenga in trade has effectively enhanced the retention of ciNsenga, while
concurrently overshadowing the use of ciCewa, in certain domains of language
use.
However, it is appropriate to acknowledge that the Ngoni ethnics are in some
places a smaller community as compared to first language ciCewa speakers.
This higher number of ciCewa speakers, however, has no great bearing,
particularly in specific domains, such as trade and home, because of the
respective distribution and significance attached to these languages. In addition,
factors such as the intermarriage and socialisation of the Ngoni ethnics, have
influenced the bilingual, or multilingual, status of the people in the Mchinji area;
hence, they are able to switch their mother tongue language use, depending on
the context. Nevertheless, the fact that ciNsenga is prioritised in trade aligns
with EV theory that the economic status of a language contributes to the
ongoing existence of an ethnic group. Thus, the use and retention of ciNsenga
absolutely does not dispute the existence of a polyglottic situation in which the
people of the area switch languages according to domain of use.
Other studies on different languages report similar findings. For instance,
Whiteley (1974) found that Swahili, a national language, dominated the Kenyan
market places, but its status gradually faded away in areas that were located
along the border. Whiteley claims that the dominance of a Luo trading group at
the Sondu border effectively influenced the retention of the Luo language over
Swahili. Therefore, ciNsenga draws parallels with Luo: a higher ethnolinguistic
trade status, coupled with the large demographic prevalence of Ngoni ethnic
members along the border, promotes the retention of their language, and has
resulted in the fading away of ciCewa in Mchinji and its environs.
This study, therefore, asserts that cross-border languages, which are in a
minority state, can effectively be retained and promoted through trade activities,
242

Role of Trade and the Media in Minority Language Maintenance
provided mutually intelligible forms are in use, with ciNsenga being a case in
point.

6.2.2 Institutional Support from Broadcast Media
In Malawi nationally, minority languages have received very little or no formal
recognition in terms of institutional support from schools, churches, workplaces
and the media. The absence of working policies to allow the use of minority
languages as a medium in such formal institutions has left these languages in an
endangered position. However, the recent establishment of community radio
stations, centred on local or community development, has created an opportunity
for the promotion and survival of minority languages, as spoken by people in
those local areas particular to the radio stations.
The Mchinji and surrounding areas have access to public, private and
religious radio stations, from both Malawi and Zambia, which include:
Mudziwathu (Our village) Community Radio Station; Malawi Broadcasting
Corporation (MBC); Zodiak Broadcasting Station (ZBS); Breeze FM; Zambia
National Broadcasting Corporation (ZNBC) and Radio Maria. This study
collected data on the frequency with which respondents tune in to these radio
stations, and the reasons for their choices. Figure 2 below presents the
respondents’ radio listenership rates for the different stations.
Figure 2. Radio Listenership Rate (%) in ciNsenga Speaking Areas.

The above graph shows that there is a high listenership rate, amongst
respondents, for Mudziwathu Radio (57%), as compared to the other stations;
namely, ZNBC and MBC (10% each), Breeze FM (8%), Radio Maria (7%) and
ZBS (5%). The feedback from those respondents who are also local radio
listeners, is that, for example, they often tune in to Mudziwathu Community
Radio Station because it is situated within the locality and integrates ciNsenga
243

Nordic Journal of African Studies
into many of its cultural, entertainment and development programmes, which
include, Katani Kambwiri (Take a hoe), Muli tyani? (How are you?), and
Mwachoma tyani? (Good afternoon?). During the fieldwork, it was learned that
listeners would freely articulate their views in ciNsenga through the radio
phone-in programmes, such as Katani Kambwiri.
The study respondents reported that some of the actual names of the
development and cultural programmes for Mudziwathu Radio were chosen from
suggestions by local residents, after the community radio station requested also
that listeners suggest which programmes they would prefer to listen to. Through
various community gatherings, such as radio listening clubs and organisations
affiliated to various non-governmental organisations, the local residents
suggested programmes that had ciNsenga names, which is, arguably,
emblematic of their identity and preferred language use. Some local inhabitants
of the study areas have used ciNsenga in participatory development programmes
on Mudziwathu Radio, for instance, during phone-in or round-table discussions
– because their preference is to express themselves in their first language.
Though Mudziwathu and other radio stations around the study area do not
entirely broadcast in ciNsenga as the medium for their programmes, these
stations have been applauded for embracing and using some of the local
languages. Ultimately, this has improved people’s participation and contribution
towards the various radio development programmes on the community projects
that take place in the area, and has also promoted the retention of the ciNsenga
minority language.
With the advent of globalisation, it is quite unusual, in Malawi, for
institutions to use minority languages at the expense of the recognised official
languages, such as ciCewa and English. However, media institutions, especially
the newly established community radio stations of different rural areas, are
attracting large audiences when, and only when, the respective languages of
these areas are acknowledged and used, as demonstrated by Mudziwathu Radio
in Mchinji and its environs. The use of ciNsenga in some Mudziwathu Radio
programmes, demonstrates the potential that community broadcast media, and
other organisations, can contribute towards the revitalization of minority
languages, thus helping to keep them from extinction. Furthermore, this study
asserts that the non-governmental organisations (NGOs) that are based in rural
areas and regularly work with minority language speakers on various
development projects, should strive to encourage the use of such minority
languages in order to contribute to their retention. This is because minority
language use can simplify the understanding of information, and encourage the
participation of speakers who may otherwise be excluded due to avoidable
language difficulties. Hence, minority languages should be regarded as
significant tools towards development in rural areas.
In consensus with Giles, Bourhis and Taylor’s (1977) ethnolinguistic vitality
theory, formal institutional support in Mchinji has revitalised and necessitated
the retention of the minority language parallel to ciCewa, a predominant
244

Role of Trade and the Media in Minority Language Maintenance
language in Malawi. As shown in Figure 2, study respondents also prefer
listening to national radio stations that include MBC and ZBS, where ciCewa is
the official language of broadcast. The respondents justify this action as crucial
because these stations keep them updated on what is happening within and
outside of Malawi. They acknowledge their bilingual approach, but remain
unworried as to the impact of these stations on their ciNsenga retention, since
this language is their mother tongue: they prefer to use it in the home domain
language, where they also tune in to Mudziwathu Radio Station. Partially, this
pattern of language use and radio choices, particularly in the home domain,
agrees with Fishman’s (1972) domain analysis theory. Therefore, it is important
to stress that Mudziwathu Radio is a new institutional factor in strengthening the
retention of ciNsenga.
Apart from Mudziwathu and other Malawian radio stations, community
radio stations from neighbouring Zambia reportedly broadcast some
programmes in both ciNsenga and ciNyanja. As reflected in Figure 2, some
respondents prefer to listen to Zambian radio stations, such as Radio Maria
(Zambia) and Breeze FM radio station. The study respondents choose to listen to
these private and faith-based community stations because most of them
broadcast in ciNsenga and ciNyanja (similar to ciCewa), while Mchinji receives
a readily available, powerful radio signal from Eastern Zambia. Similarly,
people in this area watch the Muvi Television Station from Zambia because it
integrates ciNsenga into some of its programmes. Therefore, this study notes
that Mudziwathu and other media institutions that use ciNsenga in their
programmes, have effectively and positively impacted upon the use and
retention of ciNsenga through the introduction of cultural, musical and
development programmes, in Central Western Malawi, and in Mchinji in
particular.
These findings corroborate Peterson’s (1997) observations of the KTNN
Radio Station in America, which helps to keep the Navajo minority language
alive in many domains with news, sports and public broadcasting. From a
theoretical perspective, Giles et al.’s (1977) ethno-linguistic vitality approach
may be considered to confirm that both official and unofficial decisions to use a
particular language, in an institutional setting, greatly impacts upon language
retention in certain communities.

7. CONCLUSION
The findings of this study have shown the complete spectrum of ciNsenga
maintenance in Mchinji District. This language has received much support from
the surrounding media institutions, mainly through the integration of ciNsenga
in the presentation of radio programmes. The use and retention of this language,
in some domains, particularly home and trade, has greatly enhanced its status.
Though, it is not normally expected for such minority languages to receive much
245

Nordic Journal of African Studies
support from institutions, the Ngoni ethnics have been privileged with the
Mudziwathu Community Radio Station, which focuses on development related
activities taking place in the area. This radio station, others in the surrounding
area, and also Muvi television, have together greatly contributed to the retention
of ciNsenga, partly due to this language being used for disseminating
information about development activities taking place within the study area.
Therefore, the use of respective existing languages in the areas where the
community radio operates, as observed in Mchinji, has increased people’s
participation in programmes, resulting in a large audience.
The study findings have also demonstrated the vital role that cross-border
trade plays in the retention of the ciNsenga language. Respondents claim that
cross-border trade between the people of Malawi and Zambia is the overarching
factor in language maintenance because it recognizes ciNsenga as the mutual
trade language. Thus, it is the prominent language used to get maximum returns,
and this status has necessitated its maintenance amongst speakers and
neighbours. This study has found that cross-border trade and the integration of
ciNsenga in the broadcasting media, have necessitated the use of ciNsenga.
Thus, with regard to the main objective of this study, the conclusion drawn is
that the retention of ciNsenga is the result of an interplay of varied factors;
however, trade and media play a great role. This study also acknowledges the
role of home and intergenerational interactions for the successful transmission of
the language to the younger generation.
The findings of this study have potentially profound implications for the
practice of language retention, particularly for minority languages. The fact that
minority languages are, comparatively, spoken by a smaller number of people
poses a great challenge for their maintenance. However, this study on ciNsenga
has several implications for other languages of the same category. The
significant implication is that contemporary language planners should avoid
viewing minority languages as unfavourable in terms of development. These
languages should rather be considered as a resource for development, trade and
community-based development in their respective areas of use.
In practical terms, indigenous minority languages should be maintained
because they are tools for development or social transformation in the areas in
which they are spoken. NGOs and other institutions, that have activities
occurring in rural areas that involve speakers of minority languages, can yield
positive results where these languages are used. Similarly, under circumstances
where the economy continues to be, or becomes, more integrated along the
borders, a common tongue clearly promotes commerce; therefore, minority
languages should not be downplayed where they may be useful for trade.
This study would also strongly suggest that media language policies need to
consider the maximum use of minority languages in order to enhance their
maintenance. In fact, recently there are several non-governmental community
radio stations that have been established to disseminate developmental
246

Role of Trade and the Media in Minority Language Maintenance
information within Malawi.6 These include: Dzimwe (in Mangochi, a Yao
speaking district); Mzimba Community Radio (in Mzimba, a Tumbuka speaking
district); Nkhotakota Community Radio (in Nkhotakota, a Yao and ciCewa
speaking district); Usisya Community Radio (in Nkhatabay, a Tonga speaking
district); and, Karonga Diocese, Tuntufye FM (in Karonga, a Tumbuka speaking
district). Since these stations are situated in localities known to use different
indigenous languages, it is important that these are adopted as working and
broadcasting languages. Finally, it is important that government, together with
NGOs, should consider implementing policies in favour of the retention, and
increased usage, of indigenous languages, with more time allocated for this
purpose.

REFERENCES
Barnes, J.A. 1959.
The Fort Jameson Ngoni. In: E. Colson and M. Gluckman (eds.),
Seven Tribes of British Central Africa, pp. 236–237. Cape Town:
Oxford University Press.
Centre for Language Studies, University of Malawi. 2006.
Language mapping of different Traditional Authorities (TA’s) in
Mchinji district. Zomba: Centre for Language Studies, University of
Malawi.
Cresswell, J.W. 1994.
Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods
Approaches. London: SAGE Publications.
Ehala, M. 2009.
Ethnolinguistic Vitality and Minority Education. JoLIE 2(1): 37–48.
Fishman, J.A. 1972.
The Sociology of Language. Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Garcia, M. 2003.
Recent Research on Language Maintenance. Annual Review of
Applied Linguistics 23: 22–43.
Gibbons, J. and Ramirez, E. 2004.
Maintaining a Minority Language: a case of Hispanic teenagers.
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Giles, H., Bourhis, R. and Taylor, D.M. 1977.
Towards a theory of language in ethnic group relations. In: H. Giles
(ed.), Language, ethnicity and intergroup relations, pp. 307–349.
London: Academic Press.
6

Examples are from a list of public, community, private, and religious radio stations,
available from the Malawi Communications Regulatory Authority (MACRA) website
(MACRA, 2014).
247

Nordic Journal of African Studies
Hamers, J.F. and Blanc, M.H.A. 2000.
Bilinguality and Bilingualism. 2nd edn. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Isichei, E. 1997.
A History of African Societies to 1870. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Kadenge, M. and Simango, R.S. 2014.
Comparing vowel hiatus resolution in ciNsenga and chiShona: An
Optimality Theory analysis. Stellenbosch Papers in Linguistics 44:
105–127.
Kamanga, C. 1999.
Language maintenance among the Ngoni. Unpublished English
Department Long Essay. Zomba. Chancellor College, University of
Malawi.
Kayambazinthu, E. 1989/90.
Patterns of Language use in Malawi: A sociolinguistic investigation in
Domasi and Malindi areas of southern Malawi. Journal of
Contemporary African Studies 8/9(1/2): 109–131.
2000
Sociolinguistic Theories: Some implications from Malawian data.
Journal of Humanities 14: 9–47.
Kishindo, P.J. 2003.
‘Flogging a Dead Cow?’ The Revival of Malawian Chingoni. Nordic
Journal of African Studies 11(2): 206–233.
Kulbrandstad, L.A. 2001.
Maintenance, Loss and Revitalisation of Minority Languages.
Unpublished paper. Inland Norway University of Applied Sciences.
Norway.
Lora-Kayambazinthu, E. 2003.
Language Rights and the Role of Minority Languages in National
Development in Malawi. Current Issues in Language Planning
4(2): 146–159.
2011
Language Maintenance and Ethnic Identity in a Migrant Context: The
Case of Citumbuka in Dowa District of Central Malawi. Addis Ababa:
Organization for Social Science Research in Eastern and Southern
Africa (OSSREA).
Malawi Communications Regulatory Authority (MACRA). 2014.
List of Broadcasting Licensees (2014). MACRA website. Available at:
http://www.macra.org.mw/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/MACRABroadcasting-Licensees-Updated-March-2015.pdf . (Accessed 13 June
2015).

248

Role of Trade and the Media in Minority Language Maintenance
Malawi National Statistical Office (MNSO), 1998.
Malawi Population Census. Report of final Census results. Zomba:
Government Printer.
Matewere, O.S. 1999.
Language maintenance: the case of Yao of Balaka. Unpublished
English Department Long Essay. Zomba: Chancellor College,
University of Malawi.
Matiki, A.J.I. 1996.
Language shift and language maintenance: social determinants of
language change among the Lomwe people. Journal of Humanities
10/11: 1–25.
Milroy, J. and Milroy, L. 1997.
Network Structure and Linguistic Change. In: N. Coupland and A.
Jaworski (eds.), Sociolinguistics: A Reader and Course Book, pp.
199–211. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Miti, L. 2001.
Linguistic Analysis of Cisenga: A Bantu language spoken in Zambia
and Malawi. Cape Town: The Centre of Advanced Studies of African
Society (CASAS).
Myers-Scotton, C. 2006.
Multiple Voices: An Introduction to Bilingualism. Oxford: Blackwell.
Pachai, B. 1973.
Malawi: The History of the Nation. London: Longman.
Peterson, L.C. 1997.
Tuning in to Navajo. The Role of Radio in Native Language
Maintenance. In: J. Reyhner (ed.), Teaching Indigenous Languages,
pp. 214–221. Flagstaff, AZ: Northern Arizona University.
Rasinger, S. 2004.
Language Shift in Banglatown? Evaluating Ethnolinguistic Vitality in
East London. University of Sussex website. Available at:
https://www.sussex.ac.uk/webteam/gateway/file.php?name=lxwp2.pdf
&site=1. (Accessed 9 June 2017).
Read, M. 1936.
Tradition and Prestige among the Ngoni. Africa 9: 435–483.
Scannell, K. 2011.
Languages: Tweeting in Chichewa in Southern Africa. In: Rising
Voices. Available at:
https://rising.globalvoices.org/blog/2011/07/27/languages-tweeting-inchichewa-in-southern-africa/ (Accessed 11 January 2017).
Smolicz, J.J. 1981.
Core Values and Cultural Identity. Ethnic and Racial Studies 4(1):
75–90.

249

Nordic Journal of African Studies
Swilla, I.N. 2005.
The dynamics of language maintenance among speakers of Chindali
in Mbozi District, Tanzania. Journal of Asian and Africa Studies
70: 23–32.
Whiteley, W.H. 1974.
Some Patterns of Language use in the Rural Areas of Kenya.
In: W.H. Whiteley (ed.), Language in Kenya, pp. 319–350.
London: Oxford University Press.
William, R. 1974.
Mpezeni Ngoni of Eastern Zambia 1870–1920. Unpublished Doctoral
Thesis. Ann-Arbor Michigan: University of Microfilms.
Yagmur, K. and Akinci, M.A. 2003.
Language use, choice, maintenance and ethnolinguistic vitality of
Turkish speakers in France: intergenerational differences.
International Journal for Sociology of Language 164 (1): 107–128.
Zimpita, V. 2003.
Language maintenance among the Asians in Malawi. Unpublished
English Department Long Essay. Zomba. Chancellor College,
University of Malawi.

About the authors: Victor Chikaipa is currently a doctoral student at
Stellenbosch University in the Faculty of Arts and Social Sciences, South
Africa. He also lectures in the department of African Languages and Linguistics
at Chancellor College in Malawi. Victor holds a Master of Arts in Applied
Linguistics from the University of Malawi, Chancellor College, and his research
interests are in the fields of media culture, political economy in communication,
environmental communication, critical discourse analysis, and sociolinguistics.
Victor can be contacted by email at vchikaipa@gmail.com.
Pascal Kishindo is a Professor of African Languages and Linguistics, and
currently the Director for the Centre for Language Studies, University of
Malawi. His articles have appeared in a variety of journals and books, including
the Journal of Contemporary African Studies, Journal of Humanities, Journal of
Asian and African Studies, Nordic Journal of African Studies, Ufahamu, and
Language Reform: History and Future: Vol 5, edited by I. Fodor and C. Hagege.
His area of interest is Syntax and Sociolinguistics of African Languages, and
Literature written in African Languages. He also edits the University of
Malawi's Journal of Humanities. Pascal can be contacted by email at
pjkishindo@yahoo.co.uk.

250

