"x"
"1" "The Politics of Correctional Privatization in the United States"
"2" "Brett Burkhardt"
"3" "School of Public Policy"
"4" "Oregon State University"
"5" "brett.burkhardt@oregonstate.edu"
"6" "Published in  Criminology & Public Policy , May 2019, Volume 18, Issue 2, Pages 401-418, DOI  10.1111/1745-9133.12431 ."
"7" "Available at:  https://doi.org/10.1111/1745-9133.12431"
"8" "The Politics of Correctional Privatization in the United States"
"9" "Abstract"
"10" "Research Summary :  P rivate correctional  firms  are political actors . They work to create  favorable   conditions  to  market their services. At the same time, they  are  constrained  by external political forces, including  political parties , social movements, and public opinion.  This article  revie ws what we know about  the  reciprocal relationship between  the  private corrections industry and politics."
"11" "Policy Implications :  The review of  extant research  yields  several  implications for practi ti oners and policymakers. First, corr ectional  privatization is not  uniformly  accepted,  a fact that presents  challenges for the industry and opportunities for critics. Second,  punitive  policies that appear benef ic i al  to industry  ( particularly , those related to tough immigration policy)  may in fact  pose  real reputational  risks .  Third, new forms of privatization —namely, social impact bonds— may   prove more  tolerable  to  the  general   public . Finally,  consideration of political activity by private industry should not distract from political a ctivity by public sector actors (e.g.,  prison guard unions ) ."
"12" "Keywords : privatization; private prisons; politics; immigration; public policy"
"13" "Intro duction"
"14" "In the  United States ,  private corrections  is   a multi-faceted, multi- b illion dollar market.  In this market, government authorities at all levels—federal, state, and local—contract with private firms, which perform a variety of correctional duties: incarceration, supervision, drug testing, electronic monitoring, counseling,  immigrant detention, prisoner transportation,  and  more .  Privatization of criminal justice functions is not new—there are historical precursors in the United States and elsewhere   (Feeley, 2002; Hallett, 2006) . But what is perhaps unique about the present era is that a market has sprung up to address a  set of services  that is so central to governance. In an era of mass imprisonment  (and  mass probation ),  the administration of criminal justice has come to take on a significant share of what it means to govern   (Soss & Weaver, 2017; Weaver, Hacker, & Wildeman, 2013) ."
"15" "T he modern  private  corrections  industry began to take form in the 1980s, in an era of economic conservatism and expanded criminal justice punishment. In the early years of the industry, many companies vied for a limited number of contracts.  Today, t he industry is dominated by two firms: GEO Group  (formerly Wackenhut Corrections Corporation)  and  CoreCivic  (previously Corrections Corporation of America, or CCA) .  These companies have moved beyond  their early role of jailers for hire, and they now  deliver a variety of services to individuals involved in the criminal justice ( and  immigration) system on behalf of governments in the US and beyond."
"16" "As with all markets, politics matter in the modern private corrections market.  The  private  companies are political actors. They seek to influence legislation, regulation, and public opinion, all of which have implications for the  firms’   financial success . At the same time,  political parties, social movements, and other interested groups shape the contours of the correctional marketplace and corrections generally.  Therefore , this article conceives of the public political sphere and the private corrections industry as engaging in a dynamic, reciprocal process of influence."
"17" "The article unfolds as follows. The first section considers how politics influence correctional privatization, looking at the role of party politics, public opinion, and social movements. The second section then  examines  how the private corrections industry affects politics  through several channels:  campaign contributions, lobbying, and ties  to  government  officials .  Although these two sections present politics as a cause and an effect of industry success, respectively, these relatio nships should be thought of as  being part of a reciprocal system. A third section describes several gaps in existing knowledge of the politics of correctional privatization .  A fourth section identifies implications for the policy and practice of correctional privatization.   Throughout, the focus is on private prisons, with consideration of related private domains as appropriate."
"18" "Politics  I nfluence  P rivatization"
"19" "Politics permeate punishment  (Campbell & Schoenfeld, 2013; Gottschalk, 2015; Jacobs & Jackson, 2010) . This fact is no less true when it comes to privatized forms of punishment. Party politics, public opinion, and social movements all influence the fortunes of the private corrections industry."
"20" "Parties and  P oliticians"
"21" "At present, p rison privatization is an issue that divides Democrats and Republicans. This was apparent in the 2016 presidential election season. The two major Democratic contenders, Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton, both took public stances opposing the practice. Sanders called private prisons  “disgraceful” and “morally repugnant,\"  and   introduced a  (failed)  Senate  bill that would require  that prisons be government-run  (Jackson, 2015) . Clinton endorsed the Obama administration's move  (in August, 2016)  to phase out private prison contracts in the Bureau of Prisons  (Monica, 2016) . By the fall of 2015, both Sanders and Clinton had announced they would no longer accept campaign donations from the private prison industry  (Eisen, 2018) . The main Republican contender and eventual  victor , Donald Trump, took a different stance during the campaign: \"I do think we can do a lot of privatizations and private prisons. It seems to work a lot better\"  (Mark, 2016) . He and his allied political action committees received hundreds of thousands of dollars from the industry  (Eisen, 2018) ."
"22" "Yet  q uantitative analyses of state-level prison privatization have generally failed to find a relationship between party control of government and prison privatization  (Burkhardt, 2017; Price & Riccucci, 2005) .  O ther factors  closely  associated with partisan politics , however,   are  important.  Numerous  studies  link  political ideology (liberalism) of a state  to  its  privatization policy   (Burkhardt, 2017; Jing, 2010; Nicholson-Crotty, 2004) . Others have shown a negative relationship between union membership (itself a historical force in Democratic politics) and prison privatization  (Burkhardt, 2017; Gunderson, 2017) . Thus, while recent history has seen a clear partisan divide on the issue of prison privatization, partisan politics have not been a consistent or direct determinant of privatization."
"23" "The election of  pro-privatization  candidates can influence future public policy ,  but it can also immediately impact the valuation of private corrections firms.  Recent research offers some evidence that  knowledgeable investors recognize a favorable electoral outcome and bid up the prices of private prison stock on the secondary market  (Gunderson, 2018) .  The election of President Donald Trump  serves as an exemplar . On the first day after the election, share prices for  CoreCivic  and GEO ( both  listed on the New York Stock Exchange) jumped 34% and 18%, respectively, within the first two hours of trading  (Kozlowska & Karaian, 2016) . Thus, while enacted  criminal justice  policies certainly affect the viability of a private corrections firm, the  anticipated  policy actions signaled by an election can also have  immediate  consequences for investors and owners."
"24" "Public  O pinion"
"25" "We know surprisingly little about what the public thinks of correctional privatization   (Frost, Trapassi, & Heinz, 2019) .  Overall, support for prison privatization appears mixed. Recent work asked a nationally representative sample of American adults about their level of support for pri vate \"operation of prisons . \"  More respondents opposed private operation of prisons  (41%)  than supported (36%)   (Enns & Ramirez, 2018) .  The same study found greater opposition   to  private \"detention of illegal immigrants\" , with 51%  opposed  and only 28%  in support   (Enns & Ramirez, 2018) . This  latter  finding speaks to  a  disconnect between public sentiment and public policy.  Despite tepid support for privat ized  immigrant detention, the federal government has become increasingly reliant on private industry.  By one estimate,  private firms hold roughly  70 % of immigrant detainees  (Jordan, 2016) ."
"26" "Among the  general public ,  there is some evidence that support for privatization of corrections is partially guided  by  partisan identity. Self-reported Republicans are more likely than unaffiliated or independent citizens to endorse prison privatization, net of other factors  (Enns & Ramirez, 2018) .  However, there is no partisan difference when it comes to endorsing private immigrant detention centers. Perhaps surprisingly,   the same study found self-identified political ideology to be unrelated to support for private prisons or private detention centers , a fact that is at odds with macro-level studies linking liberalism with privatization policy ."
"27" "Private prison companies recognize the lingering public apprehension about privatization. In a 2016 SEC filing, CCA wrote: \" Resistance to privatization of correc tional and detention facilities… could result in our inability to obtain new contracts, the loss of existing contracts, or other unforeseen consequences.  The operation of correctional and detention facilities by private entities has not achieved complete acceptance by e ither governments or the public \"  (CCA, 2016, emphasis added) . This vulnerability has prompted many critical voices to organize resistance to further privatization."
"28" "Movements  O pposing  P rivatization"
"29" "C itizens have organized campaigns to resist prison privatization for decades  (Culp, 2005; Hallett, 2006) .    Today, there are numerous local  protests  to oppose the siting of private prison or detention facilities . Some occur at existing or potential sites of facilities . For example, activists continue to wage a public relations battle with  Management and Training Corporation  (MTC)  and  Immigration and Customs Enforcement ( ICE )   over a proposed private immigrant detention center in  Uinta County ,  Wyoming   (Wyoming New Exchange, 2018) .  Other  protests target corporate headquarters, including  CoreCivic   (Herrera, 2018)  and MTC  (Pierce, 2018) .  CCA disclosed their concerns  about such activity  in a 2015 SEC filing, stating: \" We may face community opposition to facility location, which may adversely affect our ability to obtain new contracts \"  (CCA, 2016) ."
"30" "Historically, several  types of  groups  have mobilized against prison privatization .  Students have been one source of opposition.  Student groups on numerous campuses urged universities to  end  contracts with food provider Sodexho Marriott, which at the time invested in CCA  (Culp, 2005) .  And s tudent activism forced Florida Atlantic University to reverse a decision to sell the naming rights for its football stadium to GEO Group  (Allen, 2013) .   Labor unions have also  attacked   prison privatization , using lawsuits, campaign contributions, and lobbying   (Schartmueller, 2014) . This is especially the case where public sector prison guards, who stand to lose union jobs, are strong  (as in California; see Page, 2011b) . Additionally, a  number of religious organizations have declared their opposition to prison privatization, including the American Friends Service Committee (Quaker), the United Methodist Church,  and  the Presbyterian Church USA  (Black, 2012) ."
"31" "Anti-privatization groups have  recently adopted  a new tactic in the fight against private prisons: divestment. Because the two largest private prison companies ( CoreCivic  and GEO Group) are publicly traded entities,  their market value relies on investor demand.  In 2015, s tudent s at Columbia University   and the University of California   successfully press ur ed their universities  to  remove   these companies from their investment portfolios  (Chan, 2015; Eisen, 2018; Song, 2015) . In 2017, the New  York City pension fund became the first in the country to divest from the private prison industry  (Goldman, 2017) . The Chicago Teachers’ Pension Fund followed suit, shortly after the American Federation of Teachers called  on pension funds to divest from the industry  (Herbst-Bayliss, 2018; Kearney, 2018) . Other government pension  funds   and  philanthropic funds  are planning similar divestment efforts  (Stringer & Valdés, 2018; Wallace, 2015) . Most observers see these actions as largely  symbolic ,  since  these investors held small fractions of the total market value of  the  companies. Yet they call attention to the issue and help to mobi lize opponents."
"32" "Another market-based approach involves shareholder activism.  Alex Friedmann, editor of Prison Legal News,  used his nominal ownership in CCA to introduce a resolution forcing the company to increase its efforts to reduce rape and sexual abuse in CCA prisons  (Ridgeway, 2012) .   And the  Institute of Sisters of Mercy of the Americas , an international religious order, has a campaign to buy up shares of private prison companies in order to  address alleged  human rights  violations  of prisoners  (Blanco, 2015) ."
"33" "Private  I ndustry  I nfluence s   P olitics"
"34" "It is common practice for profit-seeking companies to seek to influence politicians and policies—through lobbying, campaign spending, and other channels. Such practices may raise concerns about the role of money in democracy. In the context of corrections, these influence operations become perhaps even more  disconcerting .  Critics allege that private firms distort  the  policymaking  process  for the purpose of  exposing more people to criminal punishment.  This section reviews evidence of private distortions of democratic policies and politics."
"35" "Campaign  C ontributions"
"36" "One mechanism for influenc ing  democratic politics is contributions to candidates'  electoral  campaigns. There are several reasons a firm might  offer targeted campaign contributions   (Collingwood, Morin, & El-Khatib, 2018) .  First, the firm may be offering a quid pro quo, in which the candidate receives campaign funds in exchange for taking a favored position on a policy matter. Second, the firm may attempt to use the campaign donations  as a way to  secure future access to the official once in office. Third, the firm may use campaign donations to ensure that candidates who  already  support the firm's agenda are successful in winning office."
"37" "In recent years, private prison firms have donated considerable amounts to electoral candidates.  GEO Group and  CoreCivic  have given nearly $9 million over the past fifteen years to state candidates and parties across  the US  (Williams & Oppel Jr., 2018) .  The private prison  industry is  risk averse  in its donation strategy,  with most  donations go ing  to the eventual winners,  and  nearly one-third going to unopposed candidates  (Gunderson, 2018) .  Republicans have historically received about 80% of campaign donations  (Pauly, 2018) . D onations are concentrated in a relatively small number of Sun Belt states :  California, Texas, Florida, and Georgia  (Gunderson, 2018) ."
"38" "What has the industry gotten for  its generosity ?  Perhaps not much, according to recent research.  Collingwood and colleagues consider US House members' sponsorship of federal anti-immigrant legislation, which  is  presumed to increase demand for private detention facilities. They find that campaign donations are  not  associated with subsequent support for anti-immigrant legislation  (Collingwood et al., 2018) ."
"39" "Yet  one can point  to  patterns that reinforce the notion that private firms are rewarded for their  campaign  largesse. Consider the GEO Group's experiences during and after the 2016 presidential campaign.  GEO and its subsidiaries donated more than  $ 2 00,000 to the pro-Trump PAC Rebuilding America Now ,  $200,000 to the Senate Leadership Fund  ( a Republican PAC ) , and $250,000 for Trump's inauguration celebration.   In April, 2017,  ICE  awarded GEO a $110 million contract to design, finance, build, and operate a 1,000-bed detention center in Texas   (GEO Group, 2017; Gidda, 2017) ."
"40" "Recently, campaign contributions themselves have become a partisan issue. At the time of writing, several Democrats in Congress  and state Democratic party organizations in California and Florida have chosen to refuse donations from the private corrections industry  (Pauly, 2018) . This portends a campaign environment even more one-sided, in which private prison firms funnel nearly all campaign funds to Republican candidates."
"41" "Lobbying"
"42" "The industry also lobbies elected officials.  GEO  Group and  CoreCivic   spend  between $3 million and $4 million annually on lobbying, according to data from the nonprofit Center for Responsive Politics   (Williams & Oppel Jr., 2018) .   What does the industry lobby for? There are three broad possibilities. First,  a lobbyist may advocate for the client company to receive more (or more favorable) contracts from a fixed pool of all contracts.  In essence, this   firm-specific lobbying   is a form of inter-firm competition, in which one  private  firm's win is another  private  firm's loss. Second, a lobbyist may advocate for more correctional privatization to serve a fixed population of sentenced or incarcerated people. This  sector-specific lobbying  involves  competition  between the public and private sectors .  E very additional private contract  is one lost by the public sector.  Finally, a lobbyist may advocate for more punishmen t —for enlarging the population of people under correctional control  by modifying existing crime policy .  In this  policy-specific lobbying ,  both private firms and public agencies increase the number of people under their control, although the relative gains are indeterminate."
"43" "This last form of lobbying is most  insidious, as it  aims to adopt  tougher enforcement and punishment  for reasons of private self-inter e st  rather than public safety .  But do private firms really have an incentive to advocate for tougher crime policies?  Alexander   Volokh   (2008)  lays out an argument that casts doubt on this narrative. First, Volokh notes that  public  sector interests —especially public prison guard unions— already   advocate for tough-on-crime laws  (Page, 2011b; Pfaff, 2016) . Second, diversification in the imprisonment market reduces the incentive to advocate for harsher policies. The reason is that the benefits of those policies (i.e., a larger supply of prisoners) redound to all providers in the market and cannot be fully captured by those investing in the advocacy. In brief,  then,  advocacy for harsh punishment in a non-monopolistic incarceration market presents a collective action problem, in which each firm (public or private) has some incentive to freeride on the actions of other firms   (Volokh, 2008) ."
"44" "It is worth noting that private corrections firms engaged in  policy-specific lobbying  need not lobby for harsher punishment. Because modern corrections firms have expanded their portfolios to include “softer” forms of corrections (e.g., re-entry programming, drug treatment), it may benefit them to advocate for placing more people into these forms of correctional supervision. One notable example of this occurred when GEO and  CoreCivic  publicly voiced their support for the federal  FIRST STEP Act , signed into law in 2018   (Contorno, 2018) .  The Act  includes sentencing reforms that will result in reduced prison terms for thousands of federal inmates. But it also expands re-entry programming, which represents an increasingly important slice of the firms’ portfolios."
"45" "For its part, the private corrections industry  claims  that  it lobbies  for greater use of privatization but not greater use of incarceration. GEO spokesperson Pablo  Paez  said  in 2017,  “Our company’s political activities focus entirely on promoting the use of public-private partnerships”   (Reinhard, 2017) .  And  CCA , in  an  annual  10-K  report to the SEC, declare s that, \" Our company does not, under longstanding policy, lobby for or against policies or legislation that would determine the basis for, or duration of, an individual’s incarceration or detention\"   (CCA, 2016, p. 31) .   Nonetheless , it remains th e  case that private firms do stand to gain from a more punitive environment (and they stand to lose in a lenient environment) .   While the firms may not engage in lobbying of elected officials, they remain free to assist the campaigns of candidates  who hold  punitive policy positions, as described above."
"46" "Network  T ies between  G overnment and  I ndustry"
"47" "Another way in which the private sector enhances its influence is by incorporating former government officials into positions of corporate management or ownership. Private corrections firms  have long  recruit ed  former government officials.  A  found ing   partner  of CCA, Don Hutto, had previously served as director of corrections in Virginia and Arkansas  (Bauer, 2018) . Norman Carlson  directed  the s  Federal Bureau of Prison s  from 1970-1987   before becoming a  member of the Wackenhut (and later GEO Group) board of directors.   Michael Quinlan went from directing BOP to becoming a CCA executive  in 199 3 . Harley Lappin  directed  BOP  from 2003-2001 before becoming  CCA's chief corrections officer in 2011  (Ridgeway, 2011) , and later serving on  CoreCivic's  board of directors  (CoreCivic, n.d.-b) .  David  Venturella  served as  Director for the Office of Enforcement and Removal Operations  at ICE  and later became  a senior vice president at GEO Group  (GEO Group, n.d.) . Stacia  Hylton  served as Director of the US Marshalls Service before joining the  CoreCivic  board of directors.  These officials bring intimate knowledge of  decision making  processes and structures, which may help to inform corporate strategies."
"48" "The line between industry and government  is  blurred in the case of the American Legislative Exchange Council , or ALEC .   Formed in 1973 ,   ALEC brings together state legislators and representatives from private industry. The group bills itself as \" America’s largest nonpartisan, voluntary membership organization of state legislators dedicated to the principles of limited government, free markets and federalism \"  (ALEC, n.d.) . Given these guiding principles, most of ALEC's legislative members are Republicans   (SourceWatch, 2014) .  ALEC  claims \"nearly one quarter\" of state legislators are members , although current membership rolls are not made public .  The group is funded largely by corporations, trade associations, and private foundations  (Cooper, Heldman, Ackerman, & Farrar-Meyers, 2016) .  ALEC draft model bills that can be introduced in state legislatures;  educates  legislators on  issues ; and provides talking points on pending legislation  (Cooper et al., 2016; Sullivan, 2010b) ."
"49" "ALEC has a long history of addressing criminal justice issues , and Wackenhut and CCA were once dues-paying members  (SourceWatch, 2018) .   ALEC  has  drafted model bills  to  expand the use of imprisonment, as well as bills that explicitly call ed  for  greater  use of private prisons  (Cooper et al., 2016) .  But they have been particularly active on matters of immigration law enforcement  (e.g., Collingwood, El-Khatib, & O’Brien, forthcoming) .  The highest profile instance  involved a state legislator from Arizona."
"50" "In 2009,  Arizona state Senator  Russel Pearce brought  his  idea for increased enforcement of the southern border and detention of immigrants to  a meeting with  select  ALEC  members , including CCA representatives .   ALEC's Public Safety  T ask  F orce subsequently produced m odel legislation  requiring police officers to arrest anyone  unable to provide  documentation of legal residency .  Pearce introduced it  to the legislature  in Jan uary  2010  (SB   1070, commonly known as the \"show me your papers\" bill) . Most  of the bill ' s  co-sponsors had received donations from private prison companies or their lobbyists.  Two-thirds  of co-sponsors were ALEC members or had attended a meeting of the Public Safety  T ask  F orce.   The bill was s igned into law in April by Gov ernor  Jan Brewer, whose staff include d  two former lobbyists for private prison companies."
"51" "For their part, CCA  said  the company , \"unequivocally has not at any time lobbied — nor have we had any outside consult ants lobby – on immigration law \"   (Sullivan, 2010a) .   And  ALEC asserts that it  does not lobby or advocate for passage of  its  bills; it merely drafts them   (Sullivan, 2010b) .  SB1070 remains on the books, but litigation has restrict ed  its  scope , with requests for documentation  now  being discretionary, not mandatory   (Duara, 2016) ."
"52" "Gaps in K nowledge"
"53" "This section lays out several gaps in the existing literature on the politics of correctional privatization.  These gaps represent promising avenues for future research."
"54" "The Limits of C orrectional  P rivatization"
"55" "Despite the growth in the private corrections industry, an important question remains:  Why has privatization been so limited?   In particular, why   is privatization limited to relatively low-risk, mundane programs and facilities? Consider this:  in 2005, the private sector held 25% of all prisoners in low security facilities ,  but only 5% of all prisoners in medium or maximum security facilities  and none of the prisoners in super-maximum security facilities   (Burkhardt, 2017) .   There are two general explanations for the scarcity of private contracts for  high  security prisons: supply-side and demand-side."
"56" "The first explanation focuses on the (lack of) supply of private firms to operate maximum security facilities. According to this view,  private prison firms prefer lower security facilities because they are less expensive to run.  They  hold lower-risk prisoners with fewer physical and mental health needs, and they consequently spend less on  security and  rehabilitative services .  In contrast , higher security facilities hold higher-risk and higher-need (i.e., expensive) prisoners  (Gottschalk, 2015, p. 70) .  Yet  with  higher costs  comes  the potential for higher profits.  P rivate prison contracts  must offer the possibility of profit for the firm; otherwise, no firms would  accept  the contract.  Contracts involving more expensive se rvices should, in theory, offer the same (if not greater) opportunities for profit.  Thus, expense does not seem a  plausible  barrier to privatizing higher security prisons."
"57" "An  alternative explanation is that there is a lack of demand  from policymakers and/or citizens to have  private firms operate  more secure  facilities.  From the perspective of policymakers, privatization of  facilities for higher-risk inmates presents  risks: of escapes, violence,  and riots .  In 1999,  several inmates and one guard were killed at private prisons in New Mexico .  In response, New Mexico’s head of corrections proposed a two-tiered prison system in which private companies could manage facilities for low-risk inmates while state  prisons  would be used for higher-risk inmates (“the tougher guys”)   (AP, 2000, p. A8) .  Risk-averse politicians do not want to be blamed for turning over the safety and security of the public, prison staff, and (perhaps) prisoners to a self-interested private company."
"58" "Citizens, too, may  doubt that  private  companies can  safely hold high-risk prisoners.  But  they may also have other concerns.  For example, r ecent research has found that citizens are less likely to sup port prison privatization when they believe that corporations prioritize profits over the public interest  or that  government contracting produces higher costs  (Enns & Ramirez, 2018) .  Further p ublic opinion research on private corrections is necessary to  better understand public reluctance to high-risk privatization."
"59" "C ultural  A spects of  C orrectional  P rivatization"
"60" "Beyond public opinion research , res e archers should  also  grapple with the cultural aspects of privatized punishment. A great deal of  criminological  work has considered  the symbolic and emotional aspects of punishment   (Durkheim, 1997; Garland, 1990; Smith, 2008) .  This work attempts to show how culture—as distinguished from political and material institutions—serves to independently facilitate or limit the scope or  style  of punishment  in particular historical  contexts.  Such an approach can be fruitful when considering private corrections."
"61" "As an illustration, one recent paper extended Emile Durkheim's classical  thesis that punishment serves as a manifestation of public  revulsion  toward socially offensive (criminal) acts. With this insight, the authors  hypothesize that citizens will demand that the state  (not private actors)  deliver punishment to offenders who violate sacred codes of society.  Some unknown and variable fraction of the populace still views punishment as a fundamental responsibility of government, one that should not be delegated to private actors. These c itizens may feel that  \"the worst of the worst\" offenders,  those  who have violated the most sacred conventions in society , must be punished by the state .  As a representative of the people (at least notionally),  the state may be  better suited than a private firm to  deliver a  satisfying  form of punishment   (Burkhardt & Connor, 2016) ."
"62" "Deeply felt sentiments about  how   to punish lead us to consider the absence of privatization in other correctional (or strictly punitive) practices. Two examples illustrate the point.    First, no entity (government or industry) has  sought  to privatize executions.  The prospect of such an execution industry seems absurd. In fact, it was the subject of a satirical  New York Times  opinion piece by playwright Arthur Miller in 1992. He  wrote : \"The time has come to consider the privatization of executions. There can no longer be any doubt that government -- society itself -- is incapable of doing anything right, and this certainly applies to the executions of convicted criminals. At present, the thing is a total loss, to the convicted person, to his family and to society. It need not be so. People can be executed in places like Shea Stadium before immense paying audiences. The income from the spectacle could be distributed to the prison that fed and housed him or to a trust fund for prisoner rehabilitation and his own family and/or girlfriend, as he himself chose. The condemned would of course get a percentage of the gate, to be negotiated by his agent or a promoter, if he so desired\"  (Miller, 1992) .  The very absurdity of  a  privatized  and monetized  execution industry signals that there are limits to what types of privatization that citizens would deem legitimate."
"63" "D etention of international terrorists  presents another  example  of  the  cultural  limit s   of privatization .  The 9/11 attacks left a profound imprint on the national consciousness, with ma n y commentators comparing the event s  to the bombing of Pearl  Harbor in 1941   (Connor, 2012) .  The attack set in motion what would come to be known as the War on Terror, which resulted in the capture and indefinite detention of  hundreds of  people in  the US  prison  complex  at Guantanamo Bay military base.  T he federal government has never sought proposals to bring in private management, and no private firm has public ly  floated the idea.  Following  Durkheim ,   it is reasonable to hypothesize  that citizens will demand that the state deliver punishment to offenders who violate sacred codes of society.  Terrorist acts that strike at core symbols of the nation  violate such codes, and thus  cannot be adequately punished by self-inter e sted, private actors. Instead, the state must punish these sacred transgressions on behalf of  an  offended public  (Burkhardt & Connor, 2016) ."
"64" "These examples suggest that, in part, cultural notions of punishment have shaped (and will continue to shape) the contours of privatized corrections  (Garland, 1990; Smith, 2008) .  To the extent that this cultural dynamic applies, it suggests that relatively mundane correctional practices—e.g., fine collection, electronic monitoring—applied to  quotidian  offenses should be ripe for future privatization, as they are unlikely to produce cultural dissonance.  Future research should explore these cultural aspects of correctional privatization  through close qualitative readings of  discourse s and narratives  in political, legal, and civic forums."
"65" "I ndust ry  Self-Presentation and Marketing"
"66" "Illegitimate industries face challenges in convincing consumers to tolerate their practices   (Quinn, 2008) . How will the  private corrections  industry  present itself to a still-skeptical public in the coming years and decades? Throughout the years, advocates have adopted  a number of  rhetorical approaches to soften the image of the industry. Early debates focused heavily on the potential financial benefits of privatization  (Burkhardt, 2014; Dolovich, 2009; Logan, 1990, p. 76) .  But  after private prisons came on line and began to experience the challenges associated with incarceration , the industry began to emphasize  \"public-private partnerships . \"  This rhetorical move was an attempt to align the industry  with the public interest . Additionally, the partnership language  implicitly shift ed   some  responsibility for industry shortcomings  onto government partners  (Selman & Leighton, 2010, pp. 109, 125) ."
"67" "More recent years have seen  the industry present itself as true public servants . For example,  CoreCivic's  core mission, as stated on its home webpage, is to \"better the public good\"  (CoreCivic, n.d.-a) . GEO Group, on its home page, says: \"GEO believes we can and should have a positive impact on the communities we serve\"  (GEO Group, 2018b) . On its homepage, MTC prominently declares itself \"a leader in social impact\"  (MTC, n.d.) . Both  CoreCivic  and GEO   have reorganized and re-branded in ways to  emphasize their public mission, with divisions dedicated to  \" Community, Safety, and Properties \"   (CoreCivic, n.d.-a)  and  \" GEO Care \"   (GEO Group, 2018b) , respectively ."
"68" "Cultivating a public image of beneficence and public-mindedness may mollify some citizens' concerns about the industry, thereby expanding the base of public support (or reducing the  basis  for organized public opposition ) .  Future work should examine the industry's self-presentation as it appears in press releases, web pages, SEC filings, and other industry material using either close qualitative reading or quantitative content analysis."
"69" "L obby ing   on  I mmigration  P olicy"
"70" "Researchers (and journalists) should scrutinize  industry support for harsh immigration policies. Immigrant detention has been a windfall for the industry.  In recent years, contracts with ICE have accounted for roughly one quarter of revenues for GEO and  CoreCivic   (CCA, 2016; GEO Group, 2018a) .   The industry’s reliance on immigration-related contracts  may have implications for how  it  lobbies  lawmakers . Recall Volokh's   (2008)  argument regarding diminishing returns to pro-punishment advocacy  in the face of market diversification .  W hen private firms constitute a small fraction of providers in a market (as is the case with prisons), then the optimal lobbying strategy is to freeride  on  public sector actors ’  advocacy for harsher punishments.  But i n the case of immigration, private firms hold the majority of immigrant detainees— roughly 60-   70 %, depending on the estimate  (Homeland Security Advisory Council, 2016; Jordan, 2016) . With the market dominated by the private sector, private firms can no longer assume that public sector  actors  (e.g., the National ICE Council [ http://iceunion.org/ ])  will advocate for harsher immigrant detention policies. Instead, the optimal strategy for private firms may now be to  lobby for harsh immigration policies that are likely to result in more immigrant detainees and therefore more business."
"71" "Has  the  private sector reached  a  critical mass  in immigrant detention? Have private firms changed their lobbying practices to focus on immigration matters? If so, is there evidence of advocacy for tougher immigrant detention policies? These questions can be investigated via c ase studies , perhaps incorporating interviews with industry representatives,  archival research  into corporate documents, and statistical analysis of  proposals on  immigra nt detention   policies  (e.g., Collingwood et al., 2018) ."
"72" "Implications for  P olicy and  P ractice"
"73" "The foregoing  sections have  discussed the reciprocal relationship between politics and correctional privatization and pointed to gaps in knowledge. Where does this leave policymakers and practitioners?  T his section recommends paying  increased  attention to  the  risks of further privatization efforts; the negative fallout from unpopular immigration policies; the use of social impact bonds; and  advocacy by  public sector guard unions."
"74" "Risks of  F uture  P rivatization   E fforts"
"75" "Correctional privatization occurs across the country and in many spheres of corrections. Yet it remains a practice that is not wholly legitimate. We see this in the (limited) public opinion data on support for prison privatization, as well as the lack of privatization in certain (more severe) correctional practices. This incomplete legitimation has implications for supporters and opponents of privatization."
"76" "Privatization  supporters —in industry and in government-- must be attentive to potential resistance. Since the 2016 election,  and during more recent skirmishes over immigration policies  (discussed further below) , private corrections  have been the subject of public critique by  prominent politicians,  reporters , and anti-privatization activists.  The optimal strategy for the industry is perhaps to fly under the radar and avoid making any audacious attempts at large scale privatization or  expansion  into more provocative forms of punishment (e.g., death penalty, terrorist detention).  Doing  so  c ould risk bad  publicity  and declining stock prices. Additionally,  the  private prison industry is operating  in the midst of  a growing justice reform movement, which questions the need for such a massive prison population. In this context, the industry may find it  especially  unwise to  advocate for more incarceration  ( i.e.,  policy-specific lobbying) .  To do so risks negative  attention  and further question s   about  the motives of private correctional firms."
"77" "The existence of a justice reform movement also matters for opponents of privatization, who are presented with a dilemma. How much of their efforts should target correctional  privatization , and how much should target  mass imprisonment  per se?  While private firms hold more than 100,000  state and federal  prisoners, the private prison population is a fraction of the total prison population   (Pfaff, 2017) . Justice reformers who  focus on combatting  privatization run the risk of allowing the larger practice of mass imprisonment to continue  largely  unabated.  A similar lesson holds for immigrant detention. There, private industry holds a  substantially  larger share of the immigrant detainee population. While examples of abuse and deprivation in private facilities are abundant   (Childress, 2015; Wofford, 2014) , does focusing on  private   immigration  facilities implicitly assent to harsh immigration enforcement policies and a massive government-run detention apparatus?  Anti-privatization activists will have to make strategic decisions that will balance their opposition to privatization and their (presumed) opposition to larger punitive structure s  on which privatization depends."
"78" "Negative  C onsequences of  I mmigration  P olic ies"
"79" "Recent immigration  controversies  suggest  policies that may  benefit industry on a superficial level may in fact  present  deeper  problems .  Exceptionally harsh immigration policies provide an immediate example.  The Trump administration has  sought  to  make  immigration enforcement more stringent.  It introduced  a  \"zero tolerance\" policy on illegal immigration , which requires immigrants to be detained while awaiting a hearing on their status,  and  a (short lived) policy to separate  immigrant children from their parents while in detention. On the surface, these policies have the potential to increase demand for (private) detention beds.  But the policies themselves have proven to be  exceedingly  unpopular , with  nearly two-thirds of respondents opposed  to  family separation s   (Mehta, 2018) .  A torrent of negative media coverage   (e.g., Rosenberg, 2018; Thompson, 2018)  forced the administration to rescind the family separation policy after  less than two months ."
"80" "E xceptionally harsh immigration policies  have  created a climate in which private operators may balk at the prospect of taking on a contract. For example, two Texas non-profit firms declined to produce proposals for a no-bid contract to expand detention camps for migrant children, despite the prospect of generating nearly $1 billion in revenue  (Romero, 2018) .  And private corrections firms have felt compelled to issue public statements denying their involvement in these policies.   For example, MTC’s website offers this  disclaimer : “Based on recent news of immigrant families detained and separated at the border, MTC feels it’s necessary to provide information about the facilities we operate for Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE)…MTC does not house any children or minors at these ICE facilities…While MTC operates three detention centers for ICE, MTC has no involvement in the Administration’s immigration policies”  (MTC, 2018) ."
"81" "Private firms will need to walk a fine line. Immigrant detention is manifestly good for the bottom line, but public disapproval over certain forms of immigration enforcement may taint the private corrections industry in the minds of the public. Additionally, the unpopularity of family separation policies provides a disc ursive opportunity for activist  groups opposed to prison privatization. The existence of such an unpopular policy  allows  activists to equate family separation with private prisons, thereby chipping away at public support for the  latter ."
"82" "Social Impact Bonds"
"83" "As correctional privatization remains controversial, t he industry may  adopt new  forms  in order to  become more palatable to citizens and politicians who question whether private corrections firms can ever provide a public good.   To that end,  social impact bonds   (SIBs)  may become more common .  A n   SIB   operates  a \"pay for success\" principle, in which  a  private corrections provider is only paid if it delivers on measurable outcomes  deemed to be  socially  beneficial  (e.g., reduced recidivism) .  The classic typical SIB involves  a number of  parties: private investors  to  finance  the  correctional  service; a private firm to deliver the service; a private firm to  evaluate the program ;  and a government authority to reimburse private investors if the program meets the designated benchmarks."
"84" "In the US, t he first  criminal justice-related  SIB  was implemented in 2012  in  New York City  (NYC) . The specified goal was to reduce recidivism  by at least 10%  among juveniles released from the Rikers Island jail.  Many organizations were involved  in this SIB . The investment  bank  Goldman Sachs provided nearly $10 million  to fund  the program. (Bloomberg Philanthropies guaranteed more than $7 million of the Goldman loan, thereby substantially reducing Goldman's risk.)  A social policy research organization,  MDRC ,  managed the program and contracted with a third party (Osborne Association & Friends of Island Academy) to implement  Adolescent Behavioral Learning Experience   (ABLE)  programs in  the jail . Vera Institute of Justice   independently  evaluate d  the  recidivism  effects of the program. In the event of program success  (defined as at least a 10% reduction in jail readmissions for new offenses) ,  the city  would pay MDRC,  which in turn  would repay  Goldman .  (New York City Office of the Mayor, 2012; Parsons, Weiss, & Wei, 2016) .  In this case,  Vera concluded that the program failed to meet the recidivism reduction target   and NYC did not pay  (Myers & Goddard, 2018; Parsons et al., 2016) ."
"85" "At first glance,  a n  SIB has  several  features that may make it palatable to skeptical citizens and policymakers.  I t is low risk for government (and taxpayers) ; private investors provide the  initial investment , and government only pays if the program achieves the desired goals .  And ,  in specifying benchmarks in advance, government ensures  that private service providers  will (attempt to) deliver  a socially  desirable  service.  This contractually obligated public - mindedness has the potential to soften the image of private corrections and reduce public opposition."
"86" "But critics have  proffered several critiques of  SIBs . First ,   SIBs may  divert philanthropic support  away from direct program delivery and toward financial institutions.  Traditional investors may be reluctant to invest without financial guarantees provided by philanthropies  (as in the Rikers example above) . In effect, philanthropic dollars are  then  used to mitigate risks for private investors rather than  to fund program delivery directly  (Nonprofit Quarterly, 2015) .  Second, while advocates claim that SIBs reduce costs to government, it is also the case that SIBs come with new expenses. SIBs  require  support staff, including lawyers, consultants, and accountants  (Gottschalk, 2015) . These new expenses may  also  divert money  away  from direct program delivery. Third , there is a potential for investors to distort  SIB  priorities  or benchmarks . The SIB model  assume s  that investors are motivated by  potential returns on investment  and thus will fund anything that \"works\"  (i.e., satisfies the benchmark criteria).  But  investors  may prioritize funding SIBs that are compatible with a relatively narrow political agenda  (e.g., prioritizing programs for white collar offenders rather than at-risk youth) .  I t is plausible to think that  ideologically motivated  lenders could use SIB investment as  a  means of influencing criminal justice policy,  even  if only at the margins.  These issues  deserve continued attention  as more  jurisdic tions experiment with  SIBs."
"87" "Advocacy by  P ublic  S ector  P rison  G uard  U nions"
"88" "Finally, it is worth remembering that public sector actors also attempt to influence criminal justice policy.  Critics decry the perverse role of  private industry  money in shaping  criminal justice  policies to increase the use of prisons (preferably private ones).  But  public sector unions also have incentives to increase the use of imprisonment, and they also have political agency.  As of 2011, public prison guards were unionized in 38 states  (Page, 2011a) . As  Joshua  Page   (2011a, p. 758)  notes, \"a fundamental purpose of unions is to promote job security . \" In the context of imprisonment, t hat job security can be achieved by  (1)   increasing  the prison population,  (2)  maintaining employment levels,  even in the face of declining prison pop ulation s, and  (3)  ensuring that jobs are not transferred to the private sector.  There are historical examples of all three dynamics ."
"89" "The California Correctional Peace Officers Association (CCPOA)  is  likely  the strongest  prison  guard union in the country.  Historically, it has lobbied hard for tough-on-crime policies . For example, it  sponsored legislation and ballot initiatives  to increase the severity of punishment  (e.g., truth-in-sentencing legislation and Proposition 184, instituting a harsh \"three strikes\" law)  and to oppose measures that would grant leniency (e.g., 2004's Proposition 66, which would limit the scope of the \" t hree  s trikes\" law). In part, it has done  this  by funding and collaborating  with crime victims' rights groups, who serve as the public face of these \"get   tough\" efforts  (Page, 2011b) ."
"90" "Public sector guard unions can also work to maintain employment at artificially high levels. This occurred in N ew York S tate, which  saw its prison population decline 20% from roughly 73,000 in 1999 to roughly 58,000 in 2009 .  Former governor  David  Paterson proposed closing three prisons and eliminating over 600 staff positions. In response, the New York State Correctional Officers & Police Benevolent Association (NYSCOPBA) unleashed a lobbying and media campaign to  protect the existing guard jobs . The campaign claimed that the prison closures (and job losses) would threaten public safety , and that any cuts should come from prison management, not line staff .  The Paterson administration delayed closing two of the prisons  it had  deemed excess to requirements  (Page, 2011a) ."
"91" "Finally, public sector unions can work to prevent the loss of public sector jobs to the private sector. In 1988, labor unions in Tennessee successfully beat back an attempt to place all of the state's prison under CCA management  (Pfaff, 2017) .  In 2000, NYSCOPBA backed a new law banning private prisons in New York State  (Eisen, 2018) .   And  the Teamsters Union, representing Florida D OC  workers, successfully challenged a 2011 proposal to shift 27 correctional faci lities to private management  (Schartmueller, 2014) ."
"92" "Conclusion"
"93" "The p rivate corrections industry has come a long way in the last 40 years.  Its reach has expanded into new  jurisdictions  and new services. The industry has also consolidated and is now dominated by a few dominant firms.  Those firms work  to shape politics and policies, and in turn  they are  affected by ongoing political  battles . The  private corrections  industry  is now in a somewhat precarious position.  Certain  social and political  conditions  are   favorable :  state and federal prison populations are enormous; detained immigrant populations are growing; the population of parolees and probationers is massive; and the current federal administration supports privatization.  Yet other factors threaten the future viability of the industry:  ongoing  criminal justice reform , especially in the states;   (slightly)  declining prison populations ;  negative  publicity  related to  harsh immigration policies ; and continued mobilization by oppositional activists .  The industry's  future  success will  be influenced by  support from  political  officials ,  the efforts of  critical  social movements, and shifts in public opinion regarding privatization."
"94" "T he industry is  only  one of many players who have sought to influence  US  corrections  in recent decades . Politicians, public citizens, prison guards, crime victim rights groups, and others have  played   pivotal  roles  as well   (Goodman, Page, & Phelps, 2017) .  How the  private corrections  industry develops from here will be the result of ongoing political contestation  among these actors   as they attempt to shape the delivery of  punishment and rehabilitation to people  suspected and  convicted of crimes."
"95" "References"
"96" "ALEC. (n.d.). About ALEC. Retrieved August 13, 2018, from https://www.alec.org/about/"
"97" "Allen, G. (2013). FAU’s Stadium Naming Deal Turns Into PR Disaster. Retrieved from http://www.npr.org/2013/04/03/176104596/company-withdraws-naming-rights-offer-for-fau-stadium"
"98" "AP. (2000, March 17). Perry wants to keep violent cons out of state’s privately run prisons.  Roswell Daily Record , p. A8."
"99" "Bauer, S. (2018).  American Prison: A Reporter’s Undercover Journey into the Business of Punishment . New York: Penguin Press."
"100" "Black, C. F. (2012). Grassroots Efforts against Private Prisons. In Byron Eugene Price & J. C. Morris (Eds.),  Prison Privatization: The Many Facets of a Controversial Industry  (Vol. III, pp. 127–148). Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger."
"101" "Blanco, O. (2015, March 28). The activist nun reforming profit-prisons. Retrieved July 24, 2018, from https://money.cnn.com/2015/03/28/investing/for-profit-prison-investing/index.html"
"102" "Burkhardt, B. C. (2014). Private prisons in public discourse: Measuring moral legitimacy.  Sociological Focus ,  47 (4), 279–298. https://doi.org/10.1080/00380237.2014.940264"
"103" "Burkhardt, B. C. (2017). Who punishes whom? Bifurcation of private and public responsibilities in criminal punishment.  Journal of Crime and Justice ,  40 (4), 512–527. https://doi.org/10.1080/0735648X.2016.1174619"
"104" "Burkhardt, B. C., & Connor, B. T. (2016). Durkheim, punishment, and prison privatization.  Social Currents ,  3 (1), 84–99. https://doi.org/10.1177/2329496515604641"
"105" "Campbell, M. C., & Schoenfeld, H. (2013). The Transformation of America’s Penal Order: A Historicized Political Sociology of Punishment.  American Journal of Sociology ,  118 (5), 1375–1423."
"106" "CCA. (2016).  Form 10-K  (Securities and Exchange Commission Form 10-K). Retrieved from http://ir.corecivic.com/node/18011/html"
"107" "Chan, W. (2015). Columbia is first U.S. university to divest from prisons. Retrieved July 20, 2018, from https://www.cnn.com/2015/06/23/us/columbia-university-prison-divest/index.html"
"108" "Childress, S. (2015). “Predictable” Riot at Texas Prison Followed Years of Complaints. Retrieved March 4, 2015, from http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/race-multicultural/lost-in-detention/predictable-riot-texas-prison-willacy-years-complaints/"
"109" "Collingwood, L., El-Khatib, S. O., & O’Brien, G. (forthcoming). Sustained Organizational Inﬂuence: American Legislative Exchange Council and the Diffusion of Anti-Sanctuary Policy.  Policy Studies Journal , 62."
"110" "Collingwood, L., Morin, J. L., & El-Khatib, S. O. (2018). Expanding Carceral Markets: Detention Facilities, ICE Contracts, and the Financial Interests of Punitive Immigration Policy.  Race and Social Problems . https://doi.org/10.1007/s12552-018-9241-5"
"111" "Connor, B. T. (2012). 9/11 - A New Pearl Harbor? Analogies, Narratives, and Meanings of 9/11 in Civil Society.  Cultural Sociology ,  6 (1), 3–25. https://doi.org/10.1177/1749975511427809"
"112" "Contorno, S. (2018). Why is a Florida for-profit prison company backing bipartisan criminal justice reform? | Tampa Bay Times. Retrieved January 9, 2019, from https://www.tampabay.com/florida-politics/buzz/2018/12/07/why-is-a-florida-for-profit-prison-company-backing-bipartisan-criminal-justice-reform/"
"113" "Cooper, R., Heldman, C., Ackerman, A. R., & Farrar-Meyers, V. A. (2016). Hidden corporate profits in the U.S. prison system: the unorthodox policy-making of the American Legislative Exchange Council.  Contemporary Justice Review ,  19 (3), 380–400. https://doi.org/10.1080/10282580.2016.1185949"
"114" "CoreCivic. (n.d.-a). CoreCivic: Better the Public Good. Retrieved July 25, 2018, from http://www.corecivic.com"
"115" "CoreCivic. (n.d.-b). Executive Leadership. Retrieved August 1, 2018, from http://www.corecivic.com/about/executive-leadership"
"116" "Culp, R. F. (2005). The rise and stall of prison privatization: An integration of policy analysis perspectives.  Criminal Justice Policy Review ,  16 (4), 412–442."
"117" "Dolovich, S. (2009). How privatization thinks: The case of prisons. In J. Freeman & M. Minnow (Eds.),  Government by contract: Outsourcing and American democracy  (pp. 128–152). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press."
"118" "Duara, N. (2016). Arizona’s once-feared immigration law, SB 1070, loses most of its power in settlement. Retrieved August 27, 2018, from http://www.latimes.com/nation/la-na-arizona-law-20160915-snap-story.html"
"119" "Durkheim, E. (1997).  The Division of Labor in Society . (W. D. Halls, Trans.). New York: The Free Press."
"120" "Eisen, L.-B. (2018).  Inside Private Prisons: An American Dilemma in the Age of Mass Incarceration . New York: Columbia University Press."
"121" "Enns, P. K., & Ramirez, M. D. (2018). Privatizing Punishment: Testing Theories of Public Support for Private Prison and Immigration Detention Facilities.  Criminology . https://doi.org/10.1111/1745-9125.12178"
"122" "Feeley, M. M. (2002). Entrepreneurs of Punishment: The Legacy of Privatization.  Punishment & Society ,  4 (3), 321–344."
"123" "Frost, N. A., Trapassi, J., & Heinz, S. (2019). Public Opinion and Correctional Privatization.  Criminology & Public Policy ."
"124" "Garland, D. (1990).  Punishment and modern society: A study in social theory . Chicago: University of Chicago Press."
"125" "GEO Group. (2017, April 13). The GEO Group Awarded Contract for the Development and Operation of a New Company-Owned 1,000-Bed Detention Facility in Texas. Retrieved September 10, 2018, from http://investors.geogroup.com/file/Index?KeyFile=2000088787"
"126" "GEO Group. (2018a). Document Details: 10-K. Retrieved October 26, 2018, from http://investors.geogroup.com/Doc/Index?did=43680540"
"127" "GEO Group. (2018b). The GEO Group - Official Website. Retrieved July 25, 2018, from https://www.geogroup.com/"
"128" "GEO Group. (n.d.). Management Team. Retrieved August 1, 2018, from https://www.geogroup.com/management_team"
"129" "Gidda, M. (2017, May 11). Private Prison Company Geo Group Gave Generously to Trump and Now Has Lucrative Contract. Retrieved September 10, 2018, from https://www.newsweek.com/geo-group-private-prisons-immigration-detention-trump-596505"
"130" "Goldman, H. (2017). NYC Pension Funds Withdraw Investments From Private Prisons. Retrieved July 20, 2018, from https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-06-08/nyc-pension-funds-to-divest-private-prison-company-stocks-bonds"
"131" "Goodman, P., Page, J., & Phelps, M. (2017).  Breaking the pendulum: The long struggle over criminal justice . New York: Oxford University Press."
"132" "Gottschalk, M. (2015).  Caught: The prison state and the lockdown of American politics . Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press."
"133" "Gunderson, A. (2017). The Political and Economic Determinants of the American States’ Reliance on Private Prisons. Retrieved August 8, 2018, from http://www.annagunderson.com/research.html"
"134" "Gunderson, A. (2018). Do Private Prison Companies Beneﬁt from Electoral Victories? Retrieved August 8, 2018, from http://www.annagunderson.com/research.html"
"135" "Hallett, M. A. (2006).  Private Prisons in America: A Critical Race Perspective . Urbana: University of Illinois Press."
"136" "Herbst-Bayliss, S. (2018, August 10). U.S. teachers’ union urges pensions to cut investment in private prisons. Retrieved August 27, 2018, from https://www.reuters.com/article/us-education-pensions-investment/u-s-teachers-union-urges-pensions-to-cut-investment-in-private-prisons-idUSKBN1KV2E5"
"137" "Herrera, J. (2018). Protesters Occupy the Entrance to a Private Prison Company’s Headquarters in Tennessee. Retrieved September 12, 2018, from https://psmag.com/social-justice/protesters-occupy-the-entrance-to-a-private-prison-companys-headquarters-in-tennessee"
"138" "Homeland Security Advisory Council. (2016). Report of the subcommittee on privatized immigration detention facilities. Retrieved October 23, 2018, from https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/DHS%20HSAC%20PIDF%20Final%20Report.pdf"
"139" "Jackson, M. (2015). Bernie Sanders on private prisons: “Justice is not for sale.” Retrieved September 22, 2015, from http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/Justice/2015/0917/Bernie-Sanders-on-private-prisons-Justice-is-not-for-sale-video"
"140" "Jacobs, D., & Jackson, A. L. (2010). On the Politics of Imprisonments: A Review of Systematic Findings.  Annual Review of Law and Social Science ,  6 (1), 129–149. https://doi.org/doi:10.1146/annurev-lawsocsci-102209-152933"
"141" "Jing, Y. (2010). Prison privatization: a perspective on core governmental functions.  Crime, Law and Social Change ,  54 (3–4), 263–278. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10611-010-9254-5"
"142" "Jordan, M. (2016, September 27). Immigrant Detention System Could Be in Line for an Overhaul.  Wall Street Journal . Retrieved from https://www.wsj.com/articles/immigrant-detention-system-could-be-in-line-for-an-overhaul-1475004244"
"143" "Kearney, L. (2018, August 17). Chicago teachers pension fund divesting from private prisons. Retrieved August 27, 2018, from https://www.reuters.com/article/us-education-pensions-chicago/chicago-teachers-pension-fund-divesting-from-private-prisons-idUSKBN1L229H"
"144" "Kozlowska, H., & Karaian, J. (2016). The first big winners of Donald Trump’s victory are private prison companies, whose stocks are soaring. Retrieved September 21, 2018, from https://qz.com/832775/"
"145" "Logan, C. H. (1990).  Private Prisons: Cons and Pros . New York: Oxford University Press."
"146" "Mark, M. (2016). Where Donald Trump stands on criminal justice. Retrieved July 24, 2018, from https://www.businessinsider.com/where-donald-trump-stands-on-criminal-justice-2016-10"
"147" "Mehta, D. (2018, June 19). Separating Families At The Border Is Really Unpopular. Retrieved September 25, 2018, from https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/separating-families-at-the-border-is-really-unpopular/"
"148" "Miller, A. (1992). Get It Right. Privatize Executions. Retrieved April 30, 2015, from https://www.nytimes.com/books/00/11/12/specials/miller-executions.html"
"149" "Monica, P. R. L. (2016, September 27). Clinton call for end of private prisons sinks jail stocks. Retrieved July 24, 2018, from https://money.cnn.com/2016/09/27/investing/prison-stocks-hillary-clinton-debate-corrections-corporation-america-geo-group/index.html"
"150" "MTC. (2018, July 15). MTC’s Involvement in Operating ICE Detention Centers. Retrieved October 29, 2018, from https://www.mtctrains.com/mtcs-involvement-in-operating-ice-detention-centers/"
"151" "MTC. (n.d.). Home. Retrieved August 1, 2018, from http://www.mtctrains.com/"
"152" "Myers, R. R., & Goddard, T. (2018). Virtuous profits: Pay for success arrangements and the future of recidivism reduction.  Punishment & Society ,  20 (2), 155–173. https://doi.org/10.1177/1462474516680209"
"153" "New York City Office of the Mayor. (2012). Fact sheet: The NYC ABLE project for incarcerated youth. Retrieved August 13, 2018, from http://www.nyc.gov/html/om/pdf/2012/sib_fact_sheet.pdf"
"154" "Nicholson-Crotty, S. (2004). The Politics and Administration of Privatization: Contracting Out for Corrections Management in the United States.  Policy Studies Journal ,  32 (1), 41–57. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0190-292X.2004.00052.x"
"155" "Nonprofit Quarterly. (2015). What We Learned from the Failure of the Rikers Island Social Impact Bond. Retrieved August 11, 2015, from https://nonprofitquarterly.org/2015/08/07/what-we-learned-from-the-failure-of-the-rikers-island-social-impact-bond/"
"156" "Page, J. (2011a). Prison officer unions and the perpetuation of the penal status quo.  Criminology & Public Policy ,  10 (3), 735–770. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-9133.2011.00737.x"
"157" "Page, J. (2011b).  The toughest beat: Politics, punishment, and the prison officers’ union in California . New York: Oxford University Press."
"158" "Parsons, J., Weiss, C., & Wei, Q. (2016).  Impact Evaluation of the Adolescent Behavioral Learning Experience (ABLE) Program . Vera Institute of Justice."
"159" "Pauly, M. (2018). Thanks to Trump’s family separations, Democrats are in the hot seat for taking private prison cash. Retrieved August 1, 2018, from https://www.motherjones.com/politics/2018/07/thanks-to-trumps-family-separations-democrats-are-in-the-hot-seat-for-taking-private-prison-cash/"
"160" "Pfaff, J. F. (2016). The complicated economics of prison reform.  Michigan Law Review ,  114 , 951–981."
"161" "Pfaff, J. F. (2017).  Locked in: The true causes of mass incarceration and how to achieve real reform . New York: Basic Books."
"162" "Pierce, S. D. (2018). 8 protesters arrested at Utah office of private prison company with contracts to hold undocumented immigrants. Retrieved September 12, 2018, from https://www.sltrib.com/news/2018/07/12/protesters-disrupt-utah/"
"163" "Price, Byron E., & Riccucci, N. M. (2005). Exploring the Determinants of Decisions to Privatize State Prisons.  The American Review of Public Administration ,  35 (3), 223–235."
"164" "Quinn, S. (2008). The Transformation of Morals in Markets: Death, Benefits, and the Exchange of Life Insurance Policies.  American Journal of Sociology ,  114 (3), 738–780."
"165" "Reinhard, B. (2017, January 17). Trump’s Election Victory Gives Private Prisons a Boost.  Wall Street Journal . Retrieved from https://www.wsj.com/articles/trumps-election-victory-gives-private-prisons-a-boost-1484693381"
"166" "Ridgeway, J. (2011, June 4). Federal Prison Director Defects to Private Prison Company. Retrieved October 26, 2018, from https://www.motherjones.com/crime-justice/2011/06/federal-prison-director-takes-job-private-prison-company/"
"167" "Ridgeway, J. (2012, May 10). Ex-Con Shareholder Goes after World’s Biggest Prison Corporation. Retrieved September 25, 2018, from https://www.motherjones.com/politics/2012/05/ex-con-alex-friedmann-cca-private-prison-rape/"
"168" "Romero, S. (2018, June 29). All Over U.S., Local Officials Cancel Deals to Detain Immigrants.  The New York Times . Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/28/us/migrant-shelters-ice-contracts-counties.html"
"169" "Rosenberg, E. (2018, June 22). Time and New Yorker covers make powerful statements about the border crisis. Retrieved October 29, 2018, from https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2018/06/21/times-and-new-yorkers-powerful-covers-make-a-statement-on-family-separation/"
"170" "Schartmueller, D. (2014). People matter more than numbers: organized efforts against prison privatization in Florida.  Contemporary Justice Review ,  17 (2), 233–249. https://doi.org/10.1080/10282580.2014.915142"
"171" "Selman, D., & Leighton, P. (2010).  Punishment for Sale: Private Prisons, Big Business, and the Incarceration Binge . Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers."
"172" "Smith, P. (2008).  Punishment and Culture . Chicago: University of Chicago Press."
"173" "Song, J. (2015). UC system divests $30 million in prison holdings amid student pressure. Retrieved July 20, 2018, from http://www.latimes.com/local/education/la-me-uc-divestment-prisons-20151226-story.html"
"174" "Soss, J., & Weaver, V. (2017). Police Are Our Government: Politics, Political Science, and the Policing of Race–Class Subjugated Communities.  Annual Review of Political Science ,  20 (1), 565–591. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-polisci-060415-093825"
"175" "SourceWatch. (2014). ALEC Politicians. Retrieved September 11, 2018, from http://web.archive.org/web/20110407110654/http://www.alec.org/am/pdf/InsideALEC/InsideALECApril2009.pdf"
"176" "SourceWatch. (2018). ALEC Corporations. Retrieved September 11, 2018, from https://www.sourcewatch.org/index.php/ALEC_Corporations"
"177" "Stringer, S. M., & Valdés, J. H. (2018, July 31). More Cities and States Should Divest From Private Prisons.  The New York Times . Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2018/07/30/opinion/private-prisons-immigration-divest.html"
"178" "Sullivan, L. (2010a). Prison Economics Help Drive Arizona Immigration Law. Retrieved from http://www.npr.org/2010/10/28/130833741/prison-economics-help-drive-ariz-immigration-law"
"179" "Sullivan, L. (2010b). Shaping State Laws With Little Scrutiny. Retrieved August 27, 2018, from https://www.npr.org/2010/10/29/130891396/shaping-state-laws-with-little-scrutiny"
"180" "Thompson, G. (2018, June 18). Listen to Children Who’ve Just Been Separated From Their Parents at the Border. Retrieved October 29, 2018, from https://www.propublica.org/article/children-separated-from-parents-border-patrol-cbp-trump-immigration-policy"
"181" "Volokh, A. (2008). Privatization and the law and economics of political advocacy.  Stanford Law Review ,  60 (4), 1197–1254."
"182" "Wallace, N. (2015, December 9). California Endowment Spurns Investment in Private Prisons. Retrieved July 20, 2018, from https://www.philanthropy.com/article/California-Endowment-Spurns/234533/"
"183" "Weaver, V. M., Hacker, J. S., & Wildeman, C. (2013). Detaining Democracy? Criminal Justice and American Civic Life.  The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science ,  651 (1), 6–21. https://doi.org/10.1177/0002716213504729"
"184" "Williams, T., & Oppel Jr., R. A. (2018, April 11). Escapes, Riots and Beatings. But States Can’t Seem to Ditch Private Prisons.  The New York Times . Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/10/us/private-prisons-escapes-riots.html"
"185" "Wofford, T. (2014). The Operators of America’s Largest Immigrant Detention Center Have A History of Inmate Abuse. Retrieved December 31, 2014, from http://www.newsweek.com/operators-americas-largest-immigrant-detention-center-have-history-inmate-293632"
"186" "Wyoming New Exchange. (2018, July 30). Gillette residents protest Evanston ICE facility. Retrieved August 2, 2018, from http://newslj.com/gillette-residents-protest-evanston-ice-facility/"
"187" "Author Bio"
"188" "Brett C. Burkhardt is an  Associate  Professor of Sociology in the School of Public Policy at Oregon State University. His research examines the exercise of coercive power by legal and quasi-legal authorities.  The work engages the fields of sociology, law & society, and criminology.   He is currently involved in four projects: (1) prison privatization, ( 2 ) policing  public disorder , ( 3 ) police militarization , and (4) police use of social media .  He holds a Ph.D. in sociology from the University of Wisconsin-Madison."
